THE EIGHTH BOOK OF MR Jeremiah Buroughs.

Being a Treatise of the EVIL of EVILS, OR THE Exceeding Sinfulness OF SIN.

Wherein is showed,
1 There is more Evil in the least Sin, than there is in the greatest
Affliction. 2 Sin is most opposite to God. 3 Sin is most opposite to Man's Good.
4 Sin is opposite to all Good* in general. 5 Sin is the Poison, or Evil of all
other Evils. 6 Sin has a kind of Infiniteness in it. 7 Sin makes a man
conformable to the Devil.
All these several Heads are branched out into very many Particulars.

Published by
Thomas Goodwyn, William Bridge, Sydrach Sympson, William Adderly, William
Greenhil, Philip Nigh. John Yates.
London, Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden Hall, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the Sign of the Printing Press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1654.

MR Buroughs on the Evil of Sin.

A TESTIMONY TO THE WORLD, Concerning Several Books of MR Jeremiah Buroughs,
that are Printing, and will shortly be Published.
WHAT we have by way of Preface set before the several Books already published
of this Reverend Author, Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs, may sufficiently serve for all
that are come forth: So that we only need now, to give Letters Testimonial to
the World, that these (viz. The Sermons on Job, 36. chapt. 21. verse: The
Second Epistle of Peter, the 1. chapter, the 1. verse: The First Epistle of
John, the 3. chap. 3. verse: The Second Epistle to the Corinthians, the 5.
chapter, 7. verse: Matthew, the 11. chapter, 28, 29, and 30. verses: The Second
Epistle to the Corinthians, the 5. chapter, the 18, 19, and 20. verses, which
are, or will shortly be Printed) We avouch likewise to be the painful and
profitable Labors of the same Author, and published by the best and most
Authentic Copies.

Thomas Goodwin, William Greenbil, William Bridge, Sydrach Simpson, Philip Nigh,
John Yates, William Adderley.


To the Reader.
READER,
THE Creatures vanity and emptiness, the abounding Sinfulness of Sin, and
Christ's All Sufficiency and Fullness, and how to live the life of Faith in
Christ, are Subjects containing the Sum and Substance of Religion, and much
treated on promiscuously amongst Divines. And I think amongst all the Treatises
of this blessed man, Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs (now triumphing in glory above all
sin and sorrow) which have been received with so much acceptance amongst the
Saints, there has not been presented to thy view a more Practical Piece than
this now under thy hands: And though diverse Divines have written and spoken
much concerning this Subject, yet in my poor Judgment, this out-goes all of
this Nature, that ever my eyes beheld, setting forth with life and spirit the
Subject in hand, and bringing it down powerfully in a practical way to convince
the Judgment, and work upon the affections of the weakest Reader. That which is
the undoing of those who think themselves no small Christians, is resting in a
bare notion of the Creatures emptiness, Sins filthiness, Christ's Fullness, and
having some high towering speculations concerning the Nature and Object of
Faith: and to be able to discourse of these things in company, and upon
occasion, is the Religion of the World, and more especially of our Formal
Professors. Now the reality of these confessed Principles are not made powerful
upon the conscience by the cleerest natural aquired light in the World: but
when the Lord is pleased to set home those over-awing, soul ballasting-thoughts
of Eternity, then, and never till then, shall we live, act, and walk as a
people who acknowledge these Principles of Christianity to be true: Whilst the
things of Religion, and thoughts of Eternity lie swimming only in our Brains,
they never conquer, command, and subdue the heart in a way of Practical
Obedience. Many men's thoughts language, and lives are such, that if they were
certain there is no God, no Sin, no Hell, no wrath to be feared, no Grace to be
minded and attained, no Judgment day when they must give an account, they could
not be worse than they are, nor do worse than theydo; Oh the horrid Athiesm
bound up in men's hearts, and they see it not, how else durst men be so profane
in their lives under Gospel light? how durst they sit so stupidly under the
powerful awaking means of Grace? how else could such vile thoughts be
cherished, and such cursed practices and principles maintained? how else durst
men chule sin rather than affliction when they are brought into streights? how
otherwise are men more afraid of open shame than of secret sins? In a word, how
durst men walk without God in the world, at least without secret prayer and
communing with their own hearts, days, weeks, months, years together? I am
persuaded more souls drop down to Hell in our days under the abuse os Gospel
Light, than ever did in the gross darkness of Popery; they then better improved
their Talents according to the light afforded, and walked better and more
sutably to the light they received; whereas these Gospel truths which now shines
more fully and clearly in the faces of so many thousands, are not so much
improved in a more circumspect, holy, and humble walking, but rather abused to
a more loose and wanton carriage and censorious judging of one another, men
sinning the more because grace so much abounds; how could the Saints then love
and embrace with singleness of heart? but now the foundations of love are
shaken, and a perverse spirit is mingled amongst us; Oh how heavily does the
wrath of God lie upon the Professors of our Age for the abuse of Gospel light,
and they feel it not; Gods Administrations in this latter Age of the World,
being more subtle and Spiritual, and therefore more undiscernable than in
former Ages: Oh how many have we now adays, who think they walk clearly in the
midst of Gospel Light, magnifying and exalting free Grace, triumphing in their
Christian liberty, looking upon others as kept in bondage, who come not up to
their pitch and practice, and yet are no better than Solomon's fools, who make a
mock of sin, being conceitedly set at liberty, but really sin and Satan's bond
slaves: Certainly, till men's consciences be made tender and fearful of the
least touches and appearances of evil, they have good cause to suspect, not
only the strength, but the soundness of their hearts in Grace: Whilst men are
bold with sin, and can put it off at an easy rate of sorrow, let their
seize seem never so high in understanding the Mysteries of the Gospel,
they never yet knew truly what it is to exalt Christ and free Grace, for look
in what measure we slight Sin, in the same measure we slight God himself in his
Persons and Attributes; And how can that great Gospel Duty of walking humbly
with God, be expressed? how can Christ be rightly lifted up and advanced in our
souls without a right sight and sense of sin? Never will Christ be wonderful
Christ, and Grace wonderful Grace, till sin be wonderful sin, and
experimentally apprehended as out of measure sinful; never till sin be seen and
sorrowed for as the greatest evil, will Christ be seen and rejoiced in as the
greatest good; were we once thoroughly convinced of the infinite evil in sin, as
containing in it the Evil of all Evils (nothing being an evil indeed properly,
but as it has the bitter ingredient and cursed sting of sin in it) how would
sin be hated and shunned more than the most deadly poison, and feared more than
the Devil, more than Hell it self? seeing nothing has made and founded Hell but
sin, nor made the Devil such a black feind but sin; nay, nothing is so much a
Hell, I mean a Torment, as sin it self; nothing binds the Creature in such
chains of misery as when it is held in the cords of its own sin, Prove. 5. 22.
Men look upon sin through false Mediums, and believe the reports and
interpretations which the world and the flesh gives of sin, and thus are
cheated to their own destruction: Could we but a little lay our Ears to Hell
and hear the howlings and yellings of those damned spirits aggravating sin, we
should then have a true Comment upon the Subject in hand: Afflictions in this
world now and then awaken the conscience, reviving the sight and sense of sin
by some grievous pains; but one half hour in Hell, being separated from the
comfortable presence of all good and blessed^ will make the evil of sin rightly
understood. Certainly there is an evil in sin beyond what the largest Created
Understanding is able to fadam, sin being one of those things which can never
be punished enough, which appears in that all those unspeakable, unsufferable
torments inflicted upon the damned through all Eternity, is but a continual
paying this sad debt, and giving satisfaction to Divine Justice for the wrong
which sin has done, in regard Divine Justice shall not otherwise sufficiently
in time have taken it is due out of the sinner. Now the Judge of all the world
who is the Standard of Justice it self, neither can, nor will do any wrong to
his Creature in punishing it more than it is iniquity deserves.

Reader, I shall say no more now, but beseech the Lord to carry home these
Truths by his Spirit into thy bosom, that there may be a Divine Impression made
upon thy heart in reading, suitable to the Authors in preaching, and that thou
may (out of love to Holiness) so fear and hate sin now, that thou may
never suffer the vengeance of Eternal Fire (the wages of sin) hereafter: Which
is the unfeigned and earnest desire of

Thy Souls Well-wisher in Christ Jesus, John Yates.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. 1 That it is a very Evil Choice, To Choose Sin, rather than Affliction.
Page 1 Chap. 2 The Servants of God, have Chose the most dreadful Afflictions,
rather than the least Sin. 5 Chap. 3 There is some good in affliction, but none
in sin: First, No good of Entitie: Secondly, No good of Causalitie: Thirdly, No
good Principle from whence sin can come: Fourthly, No good anexed as is to
afflictions, viz. 1 Of Promise. 2 Of Evidence. 3 Of Blessing. Also Five
different workings of the hearts of the Saints under sin, and under affliction.
Fifthly, It Is not capable of any Good, 1 Add all the good to sin that all the
Creatures in heaven and earth have, yet it cannot make sin good. 2 Good ends,
though 1 To help against temptation, 2 To do good to others, 3 To glorify God,
cannot make sin good, 4 God cannot make sin good. Sixthly, It Is not
comparatively good. 10 Chap. 4 Uses: And Nine Consectories of excellent use,
viz. 1 Sin is not the work of God. 2 Sins promises are all Delusions. 3 Sin
cannot be the Object of a rational Creature. 4 Nothing that is good should be
ventured for sin. 5 Nothing that is good to be made serviceable to sin. 6 The
mistake of making sin the chiefest good. 7 Time spent in sin, lost. 8 The
wicked, useless members. 9 Sin needs no debate whether to be done, or not. 23
Chap. 5 There is more Evil in the least sin, than in the greatest affliction;
Opened in six Particulars, being the General Scope of the whole Treatise. 30
Chap. 6 Sin most opposite to God the chiefest Good, Opened in Four Heads: 1 Sin
most opposite to Gods Nature. 2 Sin opposite in its working against God. 3 Sin
wrongs God more than any thing else. 4 Sin strikes at Gods Being. 33 Chap. 7
Sin in it self opposite to God, showed in five things: 1 Nothing directly
contrary to God but sin: 2 God would cease to be God, if but one drop of sin in
him: 3 Sin so opposite to God, that he cease to be God, if He did but cause sin
to be in another: 4 He should cease to be God, (...) he did but approve it in
others: 5 Sin would cause God to cease to be, if he did not hate sin as much as
he does. 35 Chap. 8 The workings of sin is always against God. The Scripture
calls it, 1 Enmity. 2 Walking contrary. 3 Fighting. 4 Resisting. 5 Striving. 6
Rising against God. 41 Chap. 9 How sin resist God: 1 It Is a hating of God. 2
It Is rebellion against God. 3 It Is a despising of God. 42 Chap. 10 Sin is a
striking against God. 1 The sinner wishes God were not so Holy, etc. 2 It seek
the destruction of God. Also sin is a wronging of God. 50 Chap. 11 How sin
wrong God: 1 In his Attributes. 2 Relation of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. 3
His Counsels. 4 In the End for which God has done all he has done. And First,
Sin wrong Gods Attributes: 1 His All Sufficiency, showed in Two Particulars. 2
It wrong his Omnipresence, and Omnisciency. 3 Sin wrong his Wisdom. 4 Wrong his
Holiness. 5 Sin wrong-God, in setting man's Will above Gods. 6 Sin wrong Gods
Dominion. 7 Sin wrong Gods Justice. 8 Sin wrong God in his Truth. 57 Chap. 12.
How sin wrongs God in his personal Relations. 1 The Father. 2 The Son. 3 The
Spirit. 69 Chap. 13 Sin wrong the Counsels of God in setting that Order in the
world that he has set. 72 Chap. 14. Sin wrong God in the End for which he has
made all things. 75 Chap. 15 The First Corollary.] It appears by this, That but
few men know what they do, when they sin against God. 80 Chap. 16 The Second
Corollary.] The necessity of our Mediators being God and Man. 82 Chap. 17 The
Third Corollary.] That but few are humbled as they should for sin. 1 It will
not be deep enough, except it be for sin as it is against God. 2 It will not
Sanctify the Name of God. 3 It will not be lasting. 4 Else it will never make
a devorce between sin and the soul. 84 Chap. 18 The Fourth Corollary.] Admire
the Patience of God, in seeing so much sin in the world, and yet bear it. 92
Chap. 19 The Fifth Corollary.] Hence see a way to break your hearts for sin:
And also to keep you from Temptation. 96 Chap. 20 A Sixth Corollary.] If sin be
thus sinful, it should teach us not only to be troubled for our own sins, but
the sins of others. 103 Chap. 21 A Seventh Corollary.] If sin has done thus
much against God, then all that are now converted had need do much for God. 109
Chap. 22 The Eight Corollary.] If sin does so much against God, hence see why
God manifest such sore displeasure against sin as he does: 1 Against the Angels
that sinned. 2 Against all Adams Posterity. 3 See it in Gods giving the Law
against sin. 4 See it in Gods punishing sins that are accounted small. 5 See it
in Gods destroying all the world for sin. 6 See his displeasure in punishing
sin eternally. 112 Chap. 23 A Seventh Discovery of Gods displeasure against
sin, opened from the sufferings of Christ. First, See the several expressions
of Scripture: 1 He was sorrowful to death. 2 He began to be amazed. 3 He began
to be in an Agony. Secondly, See the effects of Christ's being in an Agony: 1 He
fell grovelling on the ground. 2 He swet drops of Blood. 3 He cries to God, if
it be possible to let this cup pass from me. Thirdly, There is eight
Considerations of Christ's sufferings. 123
THE SECOND PART.
Sin is most opposite to Man's Good; and far more opposite to the Good of man
than Affliction.
Chap. 24 First, Sin make a man evil, but no affliction can make him so: 1
Those that are in affliction are not the worse, 2 But those that are wicked,
are vile persons, though they be the greatest Princes. 140 Chap. 25 Secondly,
Sin is more opposite to the good of man than Afflictions, because most opposite
to the Image of God in man: Three Particulars instanced, and a Question
resolved. 145 Chap. 26 Thirdly, Sin is opposite to the Life of God in Man. 151
Chap. 27 Fourthly, Sin is opposite to man's good, because it is most opposite to
the last End for which man was made. 258 Chap. 28 Fifthly, Sin is more opposite
to man's good than Affliction, because it is a defilement of the Soul. 1 It
defiles all a man medleth with. 2 Sin is the matter the worm shall gnaw upon to
all Eternity. 262 Chap. 29 Sixthly, Sin is more opposite to man's good than
affliction, because sin is the object of Gods hatred; but God hates not any
for affliction. 265 Chap. 30 Seventhly, Sin is more opposite to man's good than
affliction, because sin brings guilt upon the soul. 269 Chap. 31 Eighthly, Sin
is a greater evil to man than Affliction, because it is that which put the
Creature under the Sentence of Condemnation. 277 Chap 32 Ninthly, Sin is a
greater evil to man than affliction, because it breaks the Union between God
and the Soul. 282 Chap. 33 Tenthly, Sin is more against man's good than
Affliction, for that it stirs up all in God to come against a sinner in way of
enmity. 285 Chap 34 XI. Sin is more opposite to man's good than affliction, for
that sin makes all the Creatures of God at enmity with a sinner. 288 Chap. 35
XII. Sin is a greater evil to man than affliction, because it puts a man under
the Curse of God. 291 Chap. 36 XIII. Sin is the Seed of Eternal Evil, therefore
more hurtful to man than affliction. An Use thereof, Then see that those men
are deceived that think to provide well for themselves by sin. Use 2 The
Ministry of the Word is for our good, as well as Gods Glory. 293 Chap. 37 XIV.
Sin is worse than affliction, because it hardens the heart against God, and the
means of Grace. 297 Chap. 38 XV. Sin is worse to us than affliction, because
sin brings more shame than affliction* 303 Chap. 39 He that sins, wrongeth,
despises, and hates his own Soul. Use 1 Then see the maliciousness that is in
sin. Use 2 To pity those that go on in sinful ways. Use 3 Let sin be dealt
hardly with. 308
THE THIRD PART.
Chap. 40 Sin is opposite to all good, and therefore a greater evil than any
affliction, opened in five things: 1 Sin take away the excellency of all
things: 2 It brings a Curse upon all: 3 Sin is a burden to Heaven and Earth,
and all Creatures: 4 Sin turn the greatest Good into the greatest Evil: 5 Sin
(if let alone) would bring all things to confusion. 319
THE FOURTH PART.
Chap. 41 That Sin is the Evil and Poison of all other Evils, showed in several
Particulars: First, It Is the strength of all Evils. Secondly, It Is the sting of
Affliction. Thirdly, It Is the Curse of all Evils, opened in Five Particulars.
Fourthly, Sin is the shame of all Evils. Fifthly, The Eternity of all Evil
comes from Sin. 327
THE FIFTH PART.
Chap. 42 Sin has a kind of Infiniteness in it: Opened in Seven Particulars.
First, Because nothing but an Infinite Power can overcome it. Secondly, Sin
has a kind of infinitness, because it has an infinite desert in it, expressed
in Three Particulars: 1 The desert of the loss of an infinite Good. 2 It
deserves to put an infinite distance between God and thee. 3 It deserves
infinite misery. Thirdly, Sin has a kind of infinite Evil, because there is
required an infinite Price to make an Atonement between God and Man. Fourthly,
There is a kind of infinite Evil in Sin, because we must hate it infinitely.
Fifthly, Sin is an infinite Evil, because it is the Universal Cause of all
Evil. Sixthly, The Scripture make use of Evil things, to set out the Evil of
Sin. Seventhly, There Is an infiniteness in Sin, because the Scripture set out
Sin, by Sin it self. 344
THE SIXTH PART.
Chap. 43 Sin makes a man conformable to the Devil, opened in Six Particulars.
First, Sin is of the same Nature with the Devil. Secondly, Sin is from the
Devil. Thirdly, Sin is a furtherance of the Devils Kingdom in the World: For 1
By Sin we oppose Christ's destroying the Devils Kingdom in the World. 2 By Sin
thou opposest thy prayers when thou prayest, Thy Kingdom come. 3 By going on in
a way of sin, thou becomest guilty of all the sin in the World. Fourthly,
Sinning is a fulfilling the will of the Devil. Fifthly, Sin sells the Soul to
the Devil. Sixthly, Sin, it turns the Soul into a Devil. 357
Corollaries and Consequences from all the former Particulars.
Chap. 44 The First Corollary.] It Is worse for a man to be sinful, than to be
turned into a Beast 370 Chap. 45 The Second Corollary.] It Is worse to be
sinful, than to be afflicted with Temptation from the Devil. 372 Chap. 46 The
Third Corollary.] It Is worse to be under sin, than to be haunted by the Devil.
374 Chap. 47 The Fourth Corollary.] It Is worse to be given up to any way of
sin, than to be given up to the Devil. Quest. How the delivering up to Satan
can be for the saving of the Soul. 376 Chap. 48 The Fifth Corollary.] It is
worse to be given up to one sin, than to be actually possessed by the Devil.
379 Chap. 49 The Sixth Corollary.] Sin brings to wicked men, the same Portion
the Devils have 383 Chap. 50 Use 1. Show that trouble of Conscience for sin, is
another manner of business than melancholy, or ^merousness. 385 Chap. 51 The
former Use further prosecuted. First, Against those that have slight thoughts
of trouble of Conscience, which arises either from gross Ignorance, or
Atheism, or desperate slighting of God. Secondly, Trouble of Conscience is the
beginning of eternal death. Thirdly, Those that have slight thoughts of trouble
of Conscience, can never prise Christ. Fourthly, Those that have slight
thoughts of trouble of Conscience now, shall one day alter their opinion.
Fifthly, It were just with God to let those sinkunder the burden of Conscience
that have slight thoughts of it now. Sixthly, Those that have slight thoughts of
trouble of Conscience, those very thoughts do take away a chief restraint from
sin. Seventhly, Slight thoughts of trouble of Conscience for sin, are, 1 A high
degree of Blasphemy. 2 And a degree toward the unpardonable sin. 394 Chap. 52
Six Differences between Melancholy and Trouble of Conscience. Diff. 1
Melancholy may be in those that are most grossly ignorant; but trouble of
Conscience comes with some enlightening work. Diff. 2. Melancholy prevails on
men by degrees, but trouble of Conscience many times comes suddenly, as
lightening. Diff. 3 Melancholy trouble is exceeding confused, but troubles of
Conscience are more distinct. Diff. 4. The more Melancholy any has, the less
able are they to bear outward affliction; but the more trouble of Conscience,
the more able to bear outward afflictions. Diff. 5. Melancholy puts a dullness
upon the spirits of men, but trouble of Conscience for sin puts a mighty
activity upon men's spirits. Diff. 6. Trouble of Conscience cannot be cured the
ways melancholy may. 414 Chap. 53 A Second USE from the whole Treatise,
showing that a man may be in a most miserable condition, though he be delivered
from outward affliction. First, If a man be prosperous by sin, if a man raise
himself to a prosperous condition by any sinful way, let such men consider
three things: 1 What is got by sin, it cost dear. 2 What is got by sin is
accursed to thee. 3 What is got by sin, must he cast away, or thy soul is cast
away. Secondly, When men come to be more sinful by their prosperity: explained
in three Particulars: 1 When prosperity is fuel for their sin. 2 When it gives
men further liberty to sin. 3 When it hardens in sin. 425 CHAP. LIVE. Use 3. If
there be so much Evil in sin, then it is a mighty mercy to get the pardon of
sin. 445 CHAP. LV. Use 4. If there be so much Evil in sin, this justify the
strictness and care of Gods People against sin. Two Directions to those that
make conscience of small sins. First, Be even in your ways, strict against all
sin. Secondly, Be very yiedling in all Lawful things. 448 CHAP. LVI. Use 5. If
there be so much Evil in Sin, hence then is justified the dreadful things
spoken in the Word against sinners. 455 CHAP. LVII. Use 6. If there be so much
Evil in sin, it show the miserable condition of those whose hearts and lives
are filled with sin. 458 CHAP. LVIII. Use 7. If there be so much Evil in sin,
how dreadful a thing it is for men or women to delight in sin. 462 CHAP. LIX
Use 8. If there be so much Evil in sin, then every soul is to be humbled for
sin. 471 CHAP. LX. Use 9. If there be so much Evil in sin, this should be a
loud cry to stop men, and turn them from sin. 476 CHAP. LXI Use 10, and 11. If
there be so much Evil in sin, then turn to Christ, and bless God for Christ.
482 CHAP. LXII. Use 12. If there be so much Evil in sin, then it is of great
concernment to be Religious betimes, and thereby prevent much sin. 488 CHAP.
LXIII. Use 13. If there be so much Evil in sin, then it is a fearful thing for
any to be instrumental to draw others to sin. 491 CHAP. LXIV. Use 14. If there
be so much Evil in sin, then there ought to be no pleading for sin. 500 CHAP.
LXV. Use 15. If there be so much Evil in sin, then of all JVDGMENTS, spiritual
Judgments are the greatest. 502 CHAP. LXVI. Use 16. If there be more Evil in
sin than in affliction, then when sin and affliction meet they make a man most
miserable. 504 CHAP. LXVII. Use 17. Being of Reprehension to six sorts of
People. First, It reprehends those that are more afraid of Affliction than Sin.
Secondly, It reprehendeth those that are careful to keep themselves from sin,
but it is merely for fear of affliction. For 1 This may be without change of
Nature. 2 Thy obedience is forced. 3 Thou art not unbottomed from thy self. 4
Thou art not like to hold out. Also two Answers to an Objection of those that
think they avoid sin for fear of Hell: 1. Thy Sensitive part may be most
stirred up by fear; but yet thy Rational part may be most carried against sin
as sin. 2. Those that avoid sin merely for fear, never come to love the Command
that forbid the sin. 3. They are willingly ignorant of many sins. 4. Those that
avoid sin, and not out of fear; even when they fear, God will destroy them;
then they desire God may be glorified. 5. Those that avoid sin out of fear, do
not see the excellency of Godliness, so as to be inamored with it. Thirdly, It
reprehends those that will sin to avoid affliction. Fourthly, It rebukes such,
as when they are under affliction, they be more sensible of affliction than of
sin. Also there is five Discoveries whether men's affliction or sin trouble
them. Fifthly, It reprehends those that get out of affliction by sinful
courses, and yet think they do well. Sixthly, It reprehends those, that after
deliverance from affliction, can bless themselves in their sins. 517
THE EVIL of EVILS: OR, The Exceeding Sinfulness OF Reader, ^is Trea^ise was
first Preached at Stepney, near London, on the Lordsday mornings ^t was begun
Nov. 29. 1641 and finished Feb. 27 1641. It is thought good ^o give the Reader
Notice hereof, in espect to ^ome Expressions ^d in (...) Trea^e.
SIN.
JOB. 36. 21. later part. -- For this have thou Chosen rather than Affliction.


CHAP. I.
That it is a very evil Choice, to choose Sin rather than Affliction.

IN these words is drawn up Elihues false Charge against holy Job wherein he did
shamefully scan dalize this man of God, concerning whom the Lord himsel gives
in this Letter testimonial That he was perfect and upright, one that se^e^ God
a^ schewed Evil, Job 1. 1. And yet Elihue speaks here to this effect against
him, That he chose Iniquity rather than Affliction; that he should see less
Evil in Sin, then he did in Affliction: that for his Affliction he was troubled
but for his Sin he was not Afflicted; that the burden of his Affliction lay
heavy as a talent of ^ead upon him, but his Sin was lighter than a Feather. Or
thus, Thou have Chosen Iniquity, rather than Affliction; whereas God requires
of thee to give him glory in thy humble submission unto him in thy Patience,
under his mighty hand, thou have behaved thy self stubbornly and stoutly, and
have denied to give God the glory of his Sovereignty, Majesty, Holiness,
Justice, and Purity; and this thou have Chosen rather than to be content to lie
under the Afflicting hand of God: which way so ever it be taken, it was a
heavy Charge had it been true; So for it to be alleged against any Souls,
That they Choose Iniquity rather than Affliction, is a great and heavy Charge.

The Doctrinal truth which arises from the Doct.
words thus opened, is this, That it is a very ^v^ Choice for any soul under
heaven, to choose the least Sin, rather then the greatest Affliction. Better be
under the greatest Affliction then be under the guilt or power of any Sin: it
is true, that neither Sin, nor Affliction is to be Chosen: Affliction in it
self is an Evil, and Sin is an Evil, but the object of the Will is good, and
choice is of the Will, therefore neither (barely considered as in themselves)
can be chosen; but because of some Evils, the less in comparison of the
greater, may come under a notion of good, and so may be sometimes chosen the
Will cannot choose any thing but under the notion of good, either real, or in
appearance: and though Affliction be in it self an evil, yet in regard of Sin,
it may come under the notion of good, and that is to be chosen rather than Sin:
Now this is the work I have to do, to make out this Conclusion to you, That any
Affliction is to be chosen rather than any Sin; that there is more evil in any
Sin, the least sin, than in the greatest Affliction.

My principal business is, To charge men's Consciences with the evil of their
sin, and show to them how much evil there is in sin: all men are a raid of
afflictions, and troubled at affliction, but where is the man or woman that fears
sin, and ^^yes from it as from a Ser^ent, and is troubled at sin more then any
affliction? That there is more vil in sin than in affliction, in the General (I
suppose is granted of all, none dare deny it; but because they do not see how
this is, they have not convincing Arguments to bring this truth with power unto
their Souls: but I hope before I have done with this Point, that I shall make it
clear to every ones Conscience, That there is more evil in sin, than in
affliction; not only more evil in sin, than in outward trouble in the world but
more evil in sin, than in all the miseries and torments of Hell it self: Suppose
that God should bring any of you to the very brink of that bottomless Gulf and
open it to you, and there you should see those damned Creatures lie sweltring
under the wrath of the infinite God, and there you should hear the dreadful and
hideous cries and shreeks of those that are under such soul amazing, and
soul-sinking torments through the wrath of the Almighty; yet I say there is
more evil in one sinful thought, than there is in all these everlasting
burnings: and that is that which I shall endeavor to clear and prove to every
man's Conscience, that we shall not only see it an ill Choice that we choose sin
rather than affliction, but (if it come in competition) to choose sin rather
than all the tortures and torments of Hell, howsoever many of you admit of sin
upon very easy terms; yet the truth is, That if it should come into
competition whether we would endure all the torments that there are in Hell to
all eternity rather than to commit one sin, I say, if our Spirits were as they
should be, we would rather be willing to endure al these torments, than commit
the least sin. And Brethren do not think this is a high strain, for that com to
speak in the Name of God come not to speak Hyperbollically, to raise
Expressions higher than the things are in their reality; no, I come not for
that end, and I should take the Name of God in vain if I should do so, therefore
I dare not raise things beyond that which they are in reality in themselves:
Therefore know, Whatsoever I shall say unto you in this thing, that they are not
Words or Expressions, but I speak as in the name of God as I would take it upon
mine own Conscience, having to deal between God and you in this great work, and
in this place to deliver this truth, That there is more evil in the least Sin,
than in all the miseries that possible a Creature is capable of, either here or
in Hell besides: I hope if I shall make out this to you, you will then believe
that sure you have not yet understood the sinfulness of Sin, that yet the
burden of Sin has not lain upon you to be felt as the burden of sin* Now
then that I may fully convince you, That there is more Evil in the least Sin,
than in any Affliction.

CHAP. II.
The Servants of God, have Chose the most dreadful Afflictions rather than the
least Sin.

FIrst, Those Servants of God that have been guided by the Wisdom of God, to
make their Choice, they have rather chose the sorest and most dreadful
Afflictions in this world than willingly to commit the least sin: as now, if
you would but turn your thoughts to what you have read or heard of the Martyrs,
what hideous, and grievous torments did they suffer; the boiling of their
bodies in scalding Lead, laying of their naked backs upon hot Gridirons, and
^ending and tearing their Members a pieces with Horses, the pulling of their
flesh off from their Bodies with Pinchers, and others by red hot burning Tongs,
their enduring their flesh to be scorched with broyling of it, first on the one
side, and afterward on the other side; Yea, weak Women have endured this, To
have their flesh harrowed with stones and sharp irons, to have their bodies
flayed, and then thrown into rivers of cold ice; and a thousand more whatsoever
Hell and wicked men could devise: they were content to endure all this, and
certainly could they have devised ten thousand times more exquisite torments
then they did, they would have been content to have endured that, and
whatsoever else, rather than to act against their Consciences the least sin,
and they accounted this to be a good Choice, when as they saw Sin against their
Consciences on the one hand, and al their torments on the other, they did
rather embrace these tortures, then embrace that sin; and for this their Choice
they are renowned in the hearts of the Saints to al generations: yea, the holy
Ghost does witness, That they have a good Report, Heb. 11. Those that suffered
sawing asunder, and scourging, and went up and down in Sheeps-skins and Goats
skins, in leather Breeches and Doublets, and suffered the spoiling of their
goods and of all that they had, these had a good Report, and the Holy Ghost
commends them for their Choice. Many of you when it comes to it will be loather
to loose a groat than commit a sin, loather to endure the least shame or a
nickname, than to commit a sin: Are there not many Servants here, or Children,
will tell a Lie (when they have done an evil) rather than suffer a little shame
in the Family from their Parents, or Masters, or fellow Servants, and Children.
What a difference is there between thy heart, and the heart of the Martyrs?
they could endure al tortures on their Bodies that could be devised, rather than
to commit any known sin against their Consciences; and thou will venture to
commit a known sin against thy Conscience, rather than to be found out in some
fault, and have an angry word, or a little shame: If it be but to gain two
pence they will tell a Lie, and are willing to choose sin rather than endure the
least trouble; a mighty difference between thee and them. You know how it was
with Paul, when he speaks of Afflictions these be his Expressions, but light
and momentary, but for a moment, but they work an exceeding weight of Glory:
(mark) light Afflictions, what were they? you would account them heavy if they
were upon you. Blessed Paul (that great vessel to bear the name of God as great
an instrument of Gods glory as any in the world except Christ himself, and yet
this Paul) was whipped up and down as if he had been a Rogue, put into the
Stocks, had not Clothes to cover his nakedness, had not Bread to eat, and was
accounted the off scouring of the world; and yet he accounts all this but
Light: But when he comes to Sin, that is heavy, Oh wretched man that I am!
Thus he gives a dreadful shreek at sin; see what a difference he makes between
Affliction and Sin, and accounts it abundantly more evil to be in sin, than in
affliction. And so Christ himself* that is the Wisdom of the Father, and
therefore could not choose but judge right, and yet he was content for the sake
of poor Souls, to come and under go al kind of Affliction, and Pain, and
Sorrow, so as to be made a man of Sorrows, according as the Scripture speaks;
How was he content to have his Body whipped and scourged, was laughed at and
scorned, and though he was possessor of Heaven and Earth, yet had not a house
to put his head in; yea, to bear the wrath of God for the Sin of man, to be
made a Curse for man, under the Curse of ^he Law, and to be under that pain and
extremity through the wrath of his Father, when he sweat great drops of Blood?
all this Christ would endure: But now if it had been to have committed the
least sin to have saved all the World, Christ would never have done it: though
Christ could be content to suffer all kind of Miseries, yea, the wrath of his
Father; yet had it been to have committed the least sin, Christ would have let
all the World be Damned eternally rather than he would have done that, there is
so much evil in it. Afflictions taken in the strength and latitude of them, yet
they have no greater evil in them then Christ is capable of. I say, take them
in the strength and latitude of them, certainly there was never any Affliction
since the world began endured like Christ's, and yet these be no other than
Christ, God and Man, is capable of; and it may stand with the blessedness of
his Divinity, That that person, both God and Man, could be under such
Afflictions: Christ was content with these, He made his Soul an offering for
Sin: But sin is so great an evil, that Christ is not capable of it; Christ
never entertained the least thought of it, but cast it off if it came to him:
therefore certainly there is more evil in the least Sin, than there is in the
greatest Affliction: The Afflictions that Christ endured, though they were not
every way the same with the damned in hell, yet certainly there was the wrath
of God as really and truly upon Christ, as truly as upon the damned in hell, as
really though I say not in every kind in the same way and manner; and therefore
see, Christ was Capable of that evil, of the wrath of the Almighty upon his
Soul, and yet not capable of Sin, he was willing to undergo that, and yet not
to have the least guilt of Sin applied to him; and therefore certainly there is
more evil in the least Sin, than in the greatest Affliction.

CHAP. III.
There is some good in Affliction, but none in Sin: First, no good of Entitie:
Secondly, No good of Causality: Thirdly, No good principle from whence Sin can
come: Fourthly, No Good anexed as is to Afflictions, viz. 1 Of Promise. 2 Of
Evid^nce. 3 Of Blessing. Also Five different workings of the hearts of the
Saints under Sin and under Affliction: Fifthly, It Is not capable of any Good, 1
Add all the good to sin that all the Creatures in heaven and earth have, yet
it cannot make sin good. 2 Good ends though 1. to help against temptation, 2.
to do good to others, 3. to glorify God cannot make sin good. 4 God can not
make sin good. Sixthly, It Is not comparitively good.

WELL, for further Arguments, though this one thing were enough to stop all
mouths in the world, and make every Soul subscribe and acknowledge that there is
greater Evil in the least Sin, than in any Affliction: I shall be large in this
Argument, because it is of wonderful Concernment, to stop men in their course
of Sin, and to humble them for sin, and make them resolve against sin, and to
see their miserable estate in sin, and so see their need of Christ.

First, I shall fully make it out, That Affliction is to be chosen rather than
sin.

1 First, Because there is some good in Affliction, but none in Sin. 2 Because
Sin has more Evil in it, than Affliction.
This Second I shall show in the following Chapters.

First, Affliction has some good in it, but sin has none: You know what David
says, Ps. 119 71. It is good for me that I have been Afflicted; thus he spoke
of Affliction: But when St. Paul speaks of Sin, he says, In me (that is in my
flesh) dwells no good, Romans 7. as if he should say, So far as I am
Unregenerate, in my Unregenerate part there is no good at all; he calls sin by
the name of flesh; there is no good at all in Sin.

First, There is no good of Entity or Being; all things that have a Being,
there is some good in them; for God has a Being, and every thing that has a
being has some good in it, because it is of God; but Sin is a Non Entity, a no
being: Its rather the deprivation of a Being then any being at al; and here is
a great mystery of Iniquity, That that which is a Nonentity in it self, yet
should have such a mighty efficacy to trouble heaven and earth. This is a great
Mystery.

Secondly, It has no good of Causallity: that is, Sin is so evil, as it can
bring forth no good: Afflictions bring forth good: Sin is such an evil as it
cannot be made good: not an instrument for good: Afflictions are made
instrumental for good.

Object. No, will you say, Cannot God bring good out of sin? And does not God
bring good out of sin?

Answ. To this I Answer, True, God brings good out of sin, that is
Occasionally, but not Instrumentally: He may take occasion to bring good out of
sin committed: but (mark) God never makes sin an instrument for good; for an
instrument comes under somewhat as an Efficiency: for an instrument gives some
power toward the Effect; but thus God never uses sin, God never made sin an
instrument of any good; that is, that sin should have any power any influence
into that good effect that God brings out of it as Afflictions have; God does
not only take occasion by Afflictions to do his people good, but he makes them
Channels to convey the Mercies to their Souls: And thus Afflictions have an
instrumental efficacy in them, to do men good: Therefore says the Holy Ghost
in Heb. 12. He Chastens them for their profit, that they might be partakers of
his holiness: The greatest good the Creature is capable of, Affliction is made
oftentimes the instrument to convey: And in Isa. 27. By this the iniquity of
Jacob shall be purged: That is, by this as an instrument; but sin is never thus:
Sin is never sanctified by God to do good to any Soul: Afflictions are
sanctified by God to do good; therefore sin is a greater evil than affliction:
sin is so evil that it is not capable of any work of God to sanctify it for
good; but no Afflictions are so evil but that they are capable of a work of God
to sanctify the^r abundance of good. This is the Second.

Thirdly, Sin has greater evil than Affliction in the rise of it; there is no
good principle whence sin comes, but there are good principles from whence
Afflictions arise: as thus, Whom he loves he chastens, he chastens every Son
whom he receives; so that Chastisement has a principle of Love, but it cannot
be said whom God Loves he suffers to fall into Sin, that this can be a fruit of
his Love: it can never be said that it is a fruit of Gods love that such a man
or woman commits sin; but it may be said it is a fruit of Gods Love that such a
man or woman is afflicted, therefore there is more good in Afflictions than
there is in Sin. Nay, observe this, Many times God does not afflict a man or
woman because he does not Love them, but it can never be said God suffers not a
man or woman to sin because he does not love them: I say, There is many a man
or woman goes on in a prosperous Condition, and they meet not with such
Afflictions as others meet withal; and the Reason is, Because God has not such
a love to them as to other men, but it cannot be said thus, That there be such
men that keep them selves from such sins that others do wallow in, and therefore
they do it because God has not such a love to them as to others, it cannot be
said so; but it may be said such be not afflicted so much as others because God
does not love them as well as others: It is a dreadful fruit of Gods hatred
that he does not afflict them, but it is not a fruit of his hatred ^ot to let
them fall into sin. I remember a Speech an Ancient has upon that place of
Hosea, I will not punish their Daughters when they commit Adultery, Hos. 4. 14.
says he, Oh dismal wrath of God that God will not afflict them and punish
them! But now if this be so that want of afflictions may come from Gods wrath
and the being put into affliction may come from Gods love, certainly then there
is not so much evil in affliction as is in sin; for it can never be said so of
sin.

Fourthly, There is no good anexed to sin as is to affliction: as thus, 1 Not
the good of promise: 2ly Not the good of Evidence: 3ly Not the good of Blessing
anexed to Sin as is to Affliction.

1. As now Afflictions has abundance of Promises, I will be with you in the
Fire and in the Water: And by this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged: and I
could spend the remainder of the Book to open the many great Promises God has
annexed to Afflictions: but God has not annexed any Promise of good to Sin;
when God afflicts then you may challenge Gods Promise, Psalm. 119. 75. says
David, In very faithfulness have thou afflicted me, O Lord: this is but a fruit
of thy Promise Afflictions: and thou art faithful in Afflicting, but sin has
no Promise annexed to it: Yet it may be you will say that all shall work together
for the good of them that love God: But this does not go in way of a Promise;
this Scripture will not beat it, though it be true God may occasionally work
good to his people by Sin; but this Scripture cannot bear it, that there is any
Promise for it in that place: For, First it is against the Scope of that Text,
for the Scope of that place is to uphold the hearts of Gods people in
Afflictions: For he says, All things: but Sin is no thing; and all things work
together: and so he speaks of that which has an Efficacy in it, that will
together with God, work for good; but sin has not any Efficacy to work on, for
God will not work by that. That is one thing then, Affliction has the good of
Promise annexed to it, but so has not Sin: therefore there is some good in
Affliction, but none in Sin.

2ly. Affliction has the good of Evidence: God makes our Afflictions signs of
our Son ship and Adoption; If you be not afflicted then are you Bastards, and
not Sons: And Phil. 1. Be not troubled, or terrified: trouble of the Saints is
an evidence of Salvation to them, but a token of their perdition who are the
terrifiers or troublers of them, but a sign of your Salvation: But it is not so
of sin.

3ly. Further, There is a Blessing propounded to Afflictions, Blessed be those
that mourn, and blessed be the man whom thou Chastisest and teach in thy
Law; but there is no blessing allowed to Sin, it is not capable of it: there is
not that good annexed to sin that is to affliction; and therefore Affliction is
to be Chosen rather than Sin.

And from hence see the different working of the hearts of the Saints under
their Sin, and under their Affliction; That follows from this Head, That there
is some good annexed to Affliction that is not to Sin.

1. First, Hence it follows, That the Saints can Cry to God with Liberty of
Spirit under Affliction, but they cannot under Sin: They can go to God, and
tell God their Afflictions, and Challenge God with a holy boldness in
Afflictions; but who can go to God and Challenge God because he has told a
Lie, or the like? Does this make them go with a holy boldness to God, and
Challenge Gods Promise, because I have committed such and such a sin?

Secondly, When Affliction does come, a gracious heart can kiss the rod and
accept of the punishment of his sin, but now a gracious heart can never be well
pleased with his sin, can never accept of sin, though God punish one sin with
another sometimes, yet I say, there cannot be a well pleasedness with sin, and
a kissing of that.

Thirdly, A gracious heart may rejoice in Affliction, and have abundance of
comfort in Afflictions, account it all joy (says the Holy Ghost) when you fall
into trials and afflictions, but now he can never rejoice in sin, no man can
rejoice in sin though God should turn sin to never so much good: one cannot
rejoice in sin, and have that comfort he may in affliction.

Fourthly, A gracious heart may bless God for Afflictions, bless God that ever
he did Cast him into an afflicted estate; but he can never bless God for
putting him into a sinful estate, though God do work good out of it: Nay
further, That good a gracious heart has sometimes by afflictions may encourage
him to be more willing to go into affliction again when God calls him to it,
but if a gracious heart should get good occasionally by sin, yet this good
cannot encourage him to fall into sin again, this were a desperate wickedness
if he should.

Fifthly, A gracious heart may desire of God that he would not take away
Affliction till it be sanctified, and that he would continue it till it be
sanctified; but no man may or ought to pray thus, Lord, continue me in this sin
till I am humbled: therefore you see there is abundance of difference between
affliction and sin, one has a great deal of good annexed to it, and the other
has none at all.

5. Sin it is so evil that it is not capable of any good at all; the air though
it be dark, yet it is capable of light; that were a dismal darkness that were
not capable of light to come to it: and that which is bitter, though never so
bitter, yet it is capable of receiving that which will sweeten it: that which
is never so venomous, yet is capable of such things as will make it wholesome;
but sin is so dark that it is incapable of light; so bitter, as there is no way
to make it sweet; so venomous as it is no way capable of any wholsomness: now
for the clearing of this, consider these three Things:

1. Put all the good in heaven and earth, and in all the Creatures in heaven
and earth together: Suppose the quintiscence of all the good of all the
Creatures of heaven and earth were put together, and bring that to sin, and ad
it to it, it would not make it good: no, sin would remain still as evil as
before it was. Now that must needs be poison indeed, that bring all the
sovereign things in the world and put to it, yet there would not be a
deminishion of the least strength of that poison, and so it is with sin:
Therefore (I beseech you Brethren observe it) those men and women be mightily
mistaken, that think (I have been a sinful creature indeed, but now I will amend
and reform and be better) that by adding some good to their former sinful
Lives, it will make all good: Oh! know that there is so much evil in sin, that
the addition of all the good of all the creatures in heaven and earth cannot
make it less evil than before; so that you must not only now think to live
better and ad good unto your former evil, but you must take a course for the
taking away of the former evil, for the delivering you from the guilt and stain
and filth of your former sin.

2. Sin is not capable of good; All those good ends that any men have in the
Commission of sin, yet do not make their sin the better: that cannot make sin
good, because they have good ends: as thus,

There may be Three good ends some may think they have in the Commission of sin.

1 They may perhaps think that by Commission of some sin they may further some
grace, do good to others, or glorify God; there may be such deceit in the
heart: as thus,

1 They may think such a sin will help such a Grace, and help against such a
temptation, and such a sin may help my humility; and it is ordinary this
temptation (when in trouble of Conscience) make away thy self, and then thou will sin no more; for so long as I live I shall sin against God, and therefore
make away thy self and so cease to sin: But know, if thou lay violent hands
upon thy self, and think thou shall have this good by it to sin no more; yet
thy sin is wicked and abominable, though thou put this good end upon it, though
it were possible to in crease Grace never so much by the least sinful thought,
we must not commit this least sinful thought for never so good an end, as to
help forward such a Grace.

2 A Second end may be to do good to others, and I say if it were possible, if
a man might be a means to save the whole world if he would commit one sin, if
he could save the whole world from eternal Torments by the Commission of one
sin, you should suffer the whole world to perish rather than commit one sin,
there is so much evil in sin. It is the expression of Augustine in a Tractate
of his concerning an officious Lie, a friend of his wrote to him to Answer this
Question about telling of a Lie, Whether he might not tell a Lie, to do good to
another man? Many think, What though I do tell a Lie so I do another good;
indeed if I may do hurt then I must not, but if I may do good, may I not tell a
Lie, (well) this Question was brought to Augustine, and says he, Thou must not
tell a Lie to save the whole world: this was his Answer. Suppose that the Soul
of thy Father, Mother, or Child, (this is but a supposition) or the like,
should lie upon it to be saved, or damned if thou will commit one sin, suppose
such a temptation should come, thou must not commit one sin, though the soul of
thy father or mother, or all the world lay upon it; now it is another manner of
thing to commit a sin to gain a groat; Oh now by a deceitful word I may have
this gain, if it were twenty shillings, thou must not venture upon sin to save
the world; therefore not to gain six pence or a shilling: Certainly these be
the truths of God, and for one to come and speak these things in a solemn
manner in the presence of God if it were not upon deliberation and good search,
it were a great boldness; and therefore certainly believe there is such evil in
Sin: and though you pass by a thousand idle thoughts and evil actions and they
be gone with you and you make little of them: but if you did know what the evil
of Sin were, you would look upon them with amazement, and cry out, Lord what
have I done! Men and women go abroad, and before they come home meet with
Company, and there swear many Oaths commit lewdness, have told lies, and done
wickedness; Oh did they but know what they have done that day, they would come
home wringing their hands and ready to tear their hair, and lie tumbling upon
the very ground for the evil that they have done.

3. Further, We must not commit sin though for the glory of God: for many put
this end upon it: as the Papists, this is their Principle, To advance the
Catholic Cause they think they may do any wickedness, murder Princes, blow up
Parliaments, keep no Faith, Promises, Oaths: take liberty to rise in
Rebellion, to commit all outrages, and cut all the Protestants throats; and to
advance the Catholic Cause take the Sacrament upon it, and yet think because
it is for so good an end (as they conceive) therefore they may commit any
wickedness. It is certain God needs not the Devil to help his Cause: but
suppose by sin Gods glory might be furthered in some particular, yet we must
not commit the least sin for the greatest glory of God that can be imagined: so
much evil there is in sin. And therefore, for such that many times strain their
Conscience to do that which their Consciences have regreet upon, and their
Conscience told them they should not do it, yet merely upon this pretense, that
they might do service in the Church, Oh their Ministry is dear, to do good to
Souls, to preach to so many Souls, by this means God may have glory, and
hereupon they venture to strain their Consciences to have liberty to Preach;
this certainly is a great evil, we must not strain our Consciences in any thing
to commit the least sin upon imagination of the greatest glory that can be
brought to God. Good ends put upon sins, cannot make them better. This is the
Second thing.

Fourthly, All the good that God himself can bring from sin, can never make sin
good: such evil there is in it, that the infinite power and goodness of God can
never make sin good: true, God may destroy Sin, Yet that which is Sin all the
power of God cannot make that good: Such evil there is in Sin. This is a Fifth
thing.

6. There is no good in Sin, not Comparatively. That is, Though it be true one
Sin is less than another; yet no sin is good in comparison of another. In
Affliction, as one affliction is less than another, so one affliction is good
in comparison of another: a less affliction is good in comparison of a greater;
and all affliction is good in comparison of Sin. But in Sin, though one Sin be
less than another, yet the least Sin is not good in comparison of the greatest:
and take the least Sin of all it is not good in comparison of any Affliction.
And you shall see how this is Useful to us.

CHAP. IV.
Uses: And Nine Consectories of excellent use, viz 1. Sin is not the Work of
God. 2. Sins promises are all Delusions. 3. Sin cannot be the Object of a
rational Creature. 4. Nothing that's good should be ventured for Sin. 5. Nothing
that's good to be made serviceable to Sin. 6. The mistake of making Sin the
chiefest good. 7. Time spent in Sin lost. 8. The wicked, useless members. 9.
Sin need no debate whether to be done, or not.

HEnce we see for our Instruction, that that maxim many have, has nothing to
do in point of sin; to wit, of two evils you must choose the least: True, in
regard of the evil of Affliction, comparing one Affliction with another, so we
may choose the least; but this cannot have truth in matter of Sin, that of two
Sins we may choose the least; because though one Sin be less than another, yet
the least Sin can never come under the notion of good comparitively. As all
other evils be good comparatively, though never so great evils, yet
comparatively they may be good. Yet Sin can have no goodness any way
comparatively. Therefore of two evils we must not choose the least, in this
sense.

1 Because Sin in it self is sinful: And

2 Because, Choosing the least can never be a means to prevent the greater, but
rather to make way for the greater. And Brethren obseive it, (for it may be
useful in the course of our lives) God never brings any man or woman to such
straits, that of necessity they must choose one Sin, choose this or the other
Sin. When two Sins shall stand in competition, we may conceit such straits to
our selves, yet there is no such real straits. Though God does bring men into
such straits that of necessity they must choose one affliction, either this or
that affliction: So David was brought into such a strait, that he must choose
Famine, Sword, or Pestilence; yea, God does never bring men into such straits,
that of necessity they must choose this or that Sin; thou deceivest thine own
heart if thou think thou art brought into such a strait. Therefore this is a
vain thing, and savors of an exceeding carnal heart, when men are doing that
which is evil, for them to say, I were as good do this as worse: As for
instance now, Suppose some keep at home upon the Lords day and mend their
Clothes, if any rebuke them, they will say, Better do this than worse; better
do this than go to the Alehouse: this is true, but this savors of a carnal
heart, to think that you must choose one Sin rather than another; thou must not
choose any of them, both of these are evil, though one may be less evil than the
other. Or if some spend their time in Play, when they are rebuked, they put it
off with this shift, Better do this than worse: and so they go abroad and spend
their time in seeing Plays; and say, Better do this then worse; it is yet true
though this be not so great a sin as others, if it be a sin it must not be done
upon any terms; and thou deceivest thine own heart in this conceit, that thou
were better do this than worse, for sin cannot be good, and so not to be chosen
at any time. Thus we see there is no good in sin, and a great deal of good in
affliction.

Hence there follows these Nine Consectorys, of exlent use for us.

First Consectory.
If there be no good in sin; then certainly sin is not the work of God, for God
saw all his works and they where very good, but sin has no goodness in it,
therefore not of God. God disclaims it.

The Second Consectory.
If this be so, then hence whatsoever promises sin do make to any people,
Certainly they be al but delusions. Why? Because sin is not good in any kind:
Sin can bring no good to any soul If any one say; Oh but sin bring pleasure;
and does it not bring profit, and honors in the world? do not many live in high
esteem in the World by sinful courses? have they not pleasures and delights in
sinful Courses; But cursed be the Pleasures, Honors, Profits that come in by
sin. Certainly if sin promise any good, it deludes you, and thy seduced heart
deceives thee, and thou do feed upon ashes: for there is no good in sin.

The Third Consectory.
Hence it follows, That no sin can be the object of the will of a Rational
creature; because the true object of the will, for it to close withal, is good.
Oh the desperate deceit in the hearts of men in the world, that whereas God has
made the will, (and put it into a rational soul) to be of that nature, that the
only object of it, is good one way or other, yet they are so miserably mistaken
that they choose sin under color of good: certainly there is no good in sin.

The Fourth Consectory.
Hence it follows, that nothing that is good should be ventured for sin, why?
because sin has no good: and will you venture the loss of good to get that
which has no good; sure if sin have no good in it, then there should not be
the loss of any good ventured for it. You would not venture at Sea or Land, any
good for that which has no good. Oh how infinitely be men deoeived, that
venture the loss of God, peace of conscience; loss of Credit, health, estate,
loss of all for their lusts. Oh this is a mighty mistake, thou have ventured
the loss of a great deal of good, for that which has no good at all. Know this
day God presents to thy soul the desperate delusions of it, what? will thou
lose God, Heaven, and Christ, and al for that which has no good? but thus do
many venture all the good in God, in Christ, in Heaven, in eternal life; they
are laid on the one side as it were, and their lusts on the other; and they
will venture the loss of all that good that they may attain the supposed good
in sin. What have thou done Oh Man or Woman; that have vetured the loss of all
good for that which has no good at all, nay all evil in it?

The Fifth consectory
It follows, if there be no good at all in sin, then we ought to make nothing
that is good to be any way serviceable to our sin; as thus we must not take the
good creatures of God and make them serviceable to our lusts that have no good
at all; take not the faculties of your souls and members of your bodies to make
them serviceable to your lusts. Oh how do Men and Women abuse the good things
of God to make them serve their corruptions. Yea Brethren, there be many that
abuse the ordinances of God, the duties of Gods worship, the graces of Gods
spirit, to make them serviceable to their lusts; to serve their pride, and self
ends, and self seekings. Do but think of it, if it be a great wickedness to
take meat and drink, any of Gods good Creatures and make them serviceable to
thy lusts, Oh how great a wickedness is it to take the graces of Gods spirit,
working of Gods spirit, enlargment in prayer, and following of sermons, and
profession of Religion, to make these serve thy lusts that have no good at all
in them?

The Sixth Consectory.
Hence (if sin have no good at all in it) follows this; How be they mi^taken
that make sin their Chiefest good as thousand thousands in the world, their
chief good that their hearts are set upon, is, satisfying themselves in some
base lust. I put it to your souls this day as in the name of God, what is it
that thy heart is set upon as thy chiefest Good? is it not that height of
wickedness that I speak of? Such a secret lust thou live in? that thou
venturest thy eternal estate upon? Oh wickedness above measure.

The Seventh Consectory.
Hence follows this then, That all the time that we spend in a sinful estate
is all lost time. Oh look to this you young ones, all the time that you spend in
the vanity of your youth is all lost time; and you that have lived til you are
old, and a long time in a sinful estate, you have lost all your time. Oh the
time upon which Eternity depends is all lost; for you have spent it in the
ways of sin, that has no good in it.

The Eight Consectory
If sin have no good in it, then all wicked men that live in the ways of sin,
are useless members in the world; burdens upon the earth; unprofitable
members, that go on in the ways of sin, that neither have nor can have any
good.

The Ninth Consectory.
Lastly, if sin have no good at all in it; hence then when there is a temptation
to sin there needs no deliberation about it, whether it should be admited or
not; if once thou know it to be a sin, thou need not Reason the condtion
of admition or not, or what will follow, but presently reject it, without
deliberation. Why? because there is no good in it; any thing that has but a
little good, we may (though a greater good be offered) deliberate the business
before we accept of the one, and cast off the other, but if there be no good
there needs no deliberation, if any thing be pronounced to be sin, to be
prejudicial to the estate of thy soul, This must not be deliberated upon.
Therefore this is a vain plea that men have, what kind of This was written in
the Year 1641.
Government must we have if this be taken away? First examine if this be evil
or not evil that we have, if evil, it must be rejected without deliberation
what we must have in the stead. Indeed if it* were good we might deliberate,
but if be it evil and a sin, it must be cast off without deliberation.
Brethren, it is of great use this I speak of, because that strength sin has
usually got, is from deliberation about it. I beseech you observe this; Take
heed for ever of reasoning with Temptation, of consulting and casting about in
your thoughts, what will become of it? what trouble may come by this if I
hearken not to this? Take heed of reasoning, if the Devil do but get you to
reason about it, he has got it half granted already: you need not reason with
any temptation, but cast it off presently, because sin has no good in it. Oh
that God would convince al our hearts of these things.

CHAP. V.
There is more Evil in the least Sin, than in the greatest Affliction, Opened
in six Particulars, being the General Scope of the whole Treatise.

TO go on to that which remains. I am yet further to make out to you, That Sin
is worse than Affliction. First I have showed, that there is no good at all in
Sin; and there is good in Affliction.

Now Secondly, There is more Evil in the least Sin, than there is in the
greatest Affliction.

This I am now to make out unto you in these Six Particulars.

First, Sin is most opposite unto God himself, the chiefest Good. Secondly, Sin
is most opposite unto Man's good: Affliction is not so opposite to the good of
the Creature as Sin is. Thirdly, Sin is opposite unto all Good in General; and
so will be discovered to be an Universal Evil. Fourthly, Sin, it is the Evil of
all other Evils; it is that which is the very venom and poison of all other
Evils whatsoever, therefore greatest. Fifthly, There is a kind of Infinitness
in sin, though not properly Infinite, it cannot be so, yet in the Nature of it,
it has a kind of infinitness. Sixthly, The Evil of it is discovered, In the
conformity sin has with the Devil; there is no Creature that conspires against
God, but only Devils and Sinful Men.
These be the Six things to be opened, for the discovery of the evil of sin:
And I beseech you seriously attend to what shall be delivered in these, for I
hope before I have done to make it appear to every ones Conscience that shall
vouchsafe to read, attend, and consider what I say, that sin is another manner
of business than the World thinks it to be. Oh that your hearts might come to
see your selves to be as you are, in an ill Case, in a worse condition than you
imagine: and (...) beseech you give way to this, and be willing to hear it, for
though it seem a hard Doctrine, yet it is a Soul saving Doctrine; and for want
of this, many thousand thousands of Souls perish, because they never understood
what sin meant: Many thousands in ^ell if they had known what sin had been, it
might have delivered them from everla^^ing flames. God has reserved you alive,
and who knows but for this end, To understand what sin is, that so your hearts
may be humbled, and so everlastingly saved through Christ. Brethren, but that
the way to understand sin, is the way to be humbled for sin; and to be humbled
for sin, is the way to have sin pardoned, and the Soul saved, I should never
treat upon such a Doctrine as this is: therefore I beseech you mark what I say,
and see whether I do not make out these things I undertake.

CHAP. VI.
Sin most opposite to God the chiefest Good, opened in four Heads: 1. Sin most
opposite to Gods Nature 2. Sin opposite in its working against God. 3. Sin
wrong God more than any thing else. 4. Sin strikes at Gods Being.

FIrst, It is most opposite to God who is the chiefest Good. The meanest
Capacity may easily understand, That which is most opposite to the chiefest
good, that must needs be the chiefest evil: I suppose the weakest in this
Congregation will understand this way of Reasoning, that evil that is most
opposite to the chiefest good, that must needs be the chiefest evil; but sin is
that which is most opposite to God, who is the chiefest good, and therefore must
needs be the chiefest evil. That then is that I must make good.

Quest. How does it appear that sin is most opposite to the chiefest good?

Answ. Brethren, When I have made out this, I shall show sin to be very sinful,
and the greatest venom of sin lies in this one thing I am now opening. Should I
tell you never so much of the evil of sin, in the danger that comes by it, Hell
that follows it: should I write a Book about Hell and Damnation for sin, it has
not so much to humble the Soul in a saving manner, as this I now treat about:
perhaps I might scare you in preaching of Hell and Damnation, but discovering
this I now speak of, the opposition sin has unto God; it has more in it to
humble the Soul in a saving manner, and to cause the Soul to feel sin to be
most evil where it is most evil; to be the greatest burden where it is most
weighty. This Point I say has more power in it than any other; therefore let
me set upon this, and see how I make this good, That sin is most opposite to
God the chiefest good. There be these four things discover the truth of this.

First, Sin in its own Nature, is most opposite to the Nature of God. Secondly,
Sin in the Working of it, is a continual working against God. The Nature of sin
is opposite to Gods Nature, and the working of sin is most opposite to God.
Thirdly, Sin, it does wrong God more than any thing else. Fourthly, Yea, Sin
strikes at the very Being of God so far as it can do.
So then let us sum it up again: That which in its own Nature is most opposite
to God, 2ly That which in its working, is continually working against God, 3ly
That which does most wrong God, and 4ly That which strikes at the very Being of
God Himself, that must needs be the greatest evil: but so does sin.

CHAP. VII.
Sin in it self opposite to God, showed in five things, 1. Nothing directly
contrary to God but sin: 2. God would cease to be God if but one drop of sin in
Him: 3. Sin so opposite to God that he cease to be God if He did but cause sin
to be in another: 4. He should cease to be God if he should but approve it in
others: 5. Sin would cause God to cease to be, if he did not hate sin as much
as he does.

FIrst, That sin in it self is most opposite to God. To understand this, take
these five things; and they rightly understood will make it as clear as the Sun
at noon day.

1 The Nature of sin is so opposite to God, that there is nothing so contrary
to Him as sin God has nothing but sin contrary to him (take it so^) therefore
it must needs be opposite; for God has nothing contrary to His own Nature but
sin, it is the only contrary, the only opposite to God. There is nothing
perfectly contrary to another, but it is so contrary as there is nothing but
that which is so contrary as that is; for that is the rule of Contraries, that
there must be one to one: there may be diversity and difference of many things
to one; but an absolute perfect Contrariety, can be only of one to one. Now
there is nothing contrary to Gods Nature but only sin; God has no object that
he can look upon contrary to himself in all the World, but only sin: For there
is nothing else except sin, but it is from God, and by God, and for God: Now
that which is from Him, and by Him, and for Him, cannot have contrarity to Him:
but Sin is neither from Him, nor by Him, nor for Him; but that is directly
contrary unto Him: therefore there is more evil in Sin than in any other thing.
It is not so with Affliction, Affliction is from God, and by God, and for God,
and is not contrary unto God, because it is from Himself.

2 Sin is so opposite to God, that if it were possible that the least drop of
it could get into Gods Nature, God would instantly cease to be a God, He could
not continue one moment to be a God any longer; such evil there is in sin. If
there should be such a Poison, that if one drop of it should come into the
Ocean, all the whole Ocean would be at an instant poisoned; yea, all destroyed
and anihilated in one instant; you would say that were a very fearful Poison.
If a drop of Poison should be so poysonful, that if one drop of it got into
Heaven, that then presently the Sun, Moon, and Stars would fall down, and be
anihilated; you would say this were a venomous Poison. Certainly if but one
drop of sin should get into God, the infinite Being of God would instantly
cease to be. The Sea, though vast, is not infinite; the Heaven, though vast, is
not infinite; the infinite God would have no Being at all if sin should get
into God; therefore it is very evil: Therefore (also) we ought to have holy
thoughts of God, seeing sin is so infinitely contrary to his Nature.

3. So opposite is sin to God, that if God should be but the cause of any sin in
any other; He would instantly Cease to be a God. It strikes at the very life of
God, He would cease to be God, he could be God no longer if he should be the
Cause of any sin in any other. We had need take heed therefore how we father
sin upon God, that he should be the cause of sin, for such is the evil of sin
that God must cease to be, if he should be but any cause to give any efficacy
to sin in us. Indeed for Afflictions God will own that, he says in Amos 3. 6.
Is there any evil in a City and the Lord has not done it? and in Mich. (...).
3. it is said there that God devises evil: If there be no evil in the City but
God does it, yea (says the Prophet) God devises evil; there is no evil of
punishment, but God devises it, God will be content to own it, to be the
Author of all the torments, of the damned in hell, God will own; God will say I
have done it, and I am the Author of all the torments of all the damned in hell;
but such is the evil of sin, if God were the Author of that, He could not be
God any longer but would cease to be God.

4. Such is the evil of sin, that if God should but approve of it and like it,
if he should but like it when another have committed it, even that would cause
him to cease to be God. Wicked men be ready to think because God is patient and
long suffering, that God is of the same judgment with themselves, Psalm. 50. 21.
Because I held my Peace thou thoughst that I was altogether such an one as
thyself; but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes; it
is the just temper and frame of wicked and ungodly men to this day; because God
holds his peace, and comes not upon them to revenge sin presently; they be
ready to think that God approves sin, and is of their judgment.

Indeed (says a wicked man) many Ministers cry out of sin that it is very
grievous, but I hope God will give liberty to my ways and walkings, sure God is
not against them, he approves of them; otherwise why should God suffer me in
them, and be so patient toward me in them? Oh! know when thou have any such
thought of God as this, thou blasphemest God: If that were true that thou
think, That God did approve of thy wicked ways, God must cease to be God,
God would be God no longer.

Quest. Why? How does this appear?

Answ. This is the Reason of it: Because then God were not infinitely holy, and
holiness is Gods Being; and if God be not infinitely holy, he is not God at
all, but cease to be presently. Which is impossible, and blasphemous to think.

5. Such is the evil of sin, so opposite to Gods Nature, that if God did not
hate sin as much as he does, he would cease to be a God, not only if he did
allow of it, and like of it; for he may permit it in his Creature and not like
of it: But I say, If God did not hate sin so much as he does hate it, if it
could be conceived that God could but hate sin somewhat less than he does (I
say) he would instantly cease to be a God; he could not remain to be God one
moment if he did cease to hate sin in any degree less than he does.

Quest. Why? How does this appear?

Answ. Thus; If God cease to hate sin (I do not speak of the manifesting of his
hatred, but that which is his nature, that is proportionable to hatred, as we
say) if God did not hate it so much as he does, then he did not hate sin
infinitely, for there cannot be any infinite and less than infinite stand
together, these two cannot ever stand, that it should be infinite and less then
so and remain infinite, if it be infinite it remains so; if there should be a
degree under that, it must be finite: Now if Gods hatred to sin were less than
it is, it would be but a finite hatred, and if it were a finite hatred, then
God could not be infinitely holy; for infinite holiness must needs have
infinite hatred against sin. I beseech you observe this, for you are ready to
think, Though God be against sin, and hate it, yet I hope God hates it not so
much as many Ministers make of it, tush God is not so much against sin as they
speak of; though its true when we do a miss we must cry God mercy, and pray God
to forgive us; yet to make so much of sin as they do; and that God sets himself
so much against it as they say; this is but their opinion; and he hops God
does not hate it so much as they say. Oh! Brethren take heed of this opinion,
for if God should hate sin less then he does, he should cease to be; either he
must hate sin with infinite hatred, or he cease to be God: So evil and
opposite is sin to Gods Nature.

And if these things be true, there is a great deal of evil in sin. If there be
nothing so opposite to God as Sin; and if but the least drop of sin should get
into God, it would make God cease to be God; and if he should be but the cause
of any sin in his Creature he would cease to be God; and if he should but like
it in his Creature, he would cease to be God; and if he should but hate it less
then he does, he could not be God: but all this is true; Then we had need take
heed to our selves, and think certainly there is more evil in my heart, more
opposition in my heart against God than I have been aware of. What say you now?
Will you venture to commit sin for a groat or six pence, if there be so much
opposition against God in it? Were it not better to be under any Affliction
than under the guilt of Sin, if there be in it such opposition to God? This is
the First general Head, nothing is so opposite to God as Sin: I say Sin is most
opposite to God.

CHAP. VIII.
The workings of Sin is always against God. The Scripture calls it, 1 Enmity.
2 Walking contrary 3 Fighting. 4 Resisting. 5 Striving. 6 Rising against God.

SEcondly, As the nature of Sin is opposite to God; so in the workings of Sin
there is a continual working against God; A sinful heart that is always
stirring and working, is always working againk God: And therefore you shall
observe these several Expressions the Holy Ghost has concerning Sin.

1 The holy Ghost calls it, Enmity to God, Romans 8. 7. The wisdom of the flesh
(the best part the flesh has) is enmity against God.

2 Yea, The holy Ghost says it is a walking contrary unto God, Levit. 26. you
shall have it there in many places If you walk contrary unto me: 21. and 28.
verse and diverse others.

3 It is a fighting against God, Acts 5. 39. and Acts 23. 9. in these two
places rejecting of the Gospel is called a fighting against God.

4 And in Acts 7. 51. You do always resist the holy Ghost; there is a company
of men naturally walk contrary; resisting, and fighting against God. We see we
had need take heed of opposing the Ministry of the Gospel, for while you do
that, you fight against God. You think you do but oppose such and such men, but
half a dozen in the parish that you oppose but certainly the opposing the
Golpel is not a fighting against us men, but against God: you may turn it off
with what names you will, and put what pretenses you will upon it, let me tell
you, They that strike upon the lanthorn, offer violence to the Candle therein.

5 Sin, in Scripture is called striving against God, Isa. 45. 9. Woe unto him
that striveth with his Maker: Let the potsheard strive with the potsheards of
the earth: So far as Sin does prevail in thy heart, or in thy life, so far thou
art guilty of striving with thy Maker.

6 A rising against God: By Sin the Soul does rise against God. And for that
you have an Expression in the 2. Micah, 8. Even my people of late are risen up
as an Enemy. these be strange expressions; enmity, walking contrary, striving,
fighting, resisting, rising against God; and yet this is in Sin. But that I may
open it further, I shall show how sin does fight, strive, and rise against God.

CHAP. IX.
How sin resist God: 1 It Is a hating of God. 2 It Is rebellion against God. 3
It Is a despising of God.

FIrst, Sin does resist God in his Authority; in his Sovereignty, in his
Dominion over the Creature; the language of Sin is, God shall not reign. It is
the setting of the Will of a base wretched Creature, against the will of the
infinite, eternal, glorious God. And is there not evil in this? though it may
be thou do not on purpose do so, set thy will against God, yet it is so in
sin, there is the setting of thy will against the will of the infinite eternal
God: resisting the Sovereignty, and Majesty, and Dominion of the infinite God.
Yea, thou do resist-God in his Law, thou resists and opposes God in that
righteous Law of his, which he gave thee to obey.

Quest. But how is this in every Sin? It may be in some great and notorious
sins this may be, but is this fighting against God, striving, and rising, and
walking contrary to him, (and so of the rest) is this in every sin?

Answ. For that I Answer, 1 That every Sin comes from the same root, and look
what venom there is in any one sin, for the nature of it, it is in every sin,
though not for its degree: It Is true, one sin may have a higher degree of evil
in it than another, but every sin is invenomed with the same evil: That which
is the venom of any one sin, is the venom of all; all comes from the same root.
As in a Tree, there is more Sap in an Arm of the Tree, than in a little Sprig;
but the Sprig has the same Sap for kind that the Arm of the Tree has, and it
al comes from the same root. So though there be more venom in some gross,
crying sins, than in some others; yet there is no sin but has the same Sap,
and the same venom, for the kind, that every sin has, that the worst sin has.

2 Yea, Consider further, That God does not account sin only according to man's
intentions in sinning; what man intends, but what the nature of the sin tends
unto, not what I do aim at in my sinning, but what my sin does aim at. There is
the end of the agent, and the end of the act, now it is true though the end of a
Sinner be not always to strive against God, and f^ght with God, yet the end of
his Sin is so, though not of the Sinner; I beseech you observe how God may lay
grievous Sins to their charge, and that he does not account of a man's Sins
according to his intentions, but according to that which is in the nature of
his Sin as now, you would think it a strange Sin, to charge any man in the
world with hating of God, come to any man though the greatest Sinner in the
world, the most notorious villain, and charge him thus, Thou art a vile wretch
thou hate the living God; he would revile you and be ready to to spit in your
face: and yet it is said, He hates God: In the 1 Romans the Apostle in the
catalogue of Sins (when he would show the state of all men by Nature, for the
first Seven Chapters of the Epistle to the Romans are to show the nature of the
Jews and Gentiles) and among others, he tells them there were those that were
haters of God, among other notorious Sins haters of God is one: But I will show
it in a more plainer wav, in the Second Commandment; the veriest villain in
the Nation would spit in vour face if you should say he hates God: What say you
to him that will seem devoute, and worship God in a more glorious way then he
has appointed; the Scripture says, he hates God: See the Second Commandment,
Thou shall not make unto thy self an, graven image, nor etc. Thou shall not bow
down thy self to them, nor worship them, etc. for I will visit the Sin of the
Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that
HATE me: Why is this set in the Second Commandment rather than any other? That
God will visit the sins of them that hate him, those that sin against the
Second Commandment seem to honor God, and to love God more than any other,
they be not only content to worship God in that ordinary way others do, but in
a more glorious, and pompeous way; well, it may be the breaker of the second
Commandment pretends more love to God than any, and yet there God says they
be those that hate him, so that you see God does not reek on Sin according to
man's intentions. Certainly the worshippers of Images do not intend to hate God,
but God accounts of Sin what it is in its own nature, it is as if God should
say, If you will not worship me according to my way of worship, will not be
content with that, but will set up a new devised worship of your own, do you
call it what you will, I account it hatred of me.

Secondly, Sin is Rebellion: What man in the world will be convinced that he
does any thing in way of Rebellion against God, and yet mark, God charge Sin
with Rebellion even in that which they pretend they do all for Gods glory; See
in that Example of Saul, 1 Samuel 15. you shall find there, when Saul did but
spare ^gag and the fat of the Cattle, and pretends to offer Sacrifice to God;
Samuel comes to him in the name of God, and says he, Rebellion is as the Sin
of Witchcraft. Why (might Saul say) Lord, have mercy upon me, is this such
rebellion? I did it for the honor of God, I did it to sacrifice to God; and yet
the Prophet of God in Gods Name charge Saul with rebellion. Now Brethren, Sin
you see has that in its own Nature that is not intended by men in their
sinning: Therefore while I speak of the Nature of sin, some may say, Indeed this
my be true of sinful, wicked, notorious wretches; but is this true of me? Yea,
it may be true of the most civil man or woman in Gods presence this day; God
may charge them with hatred and rebellion.

Thirdly, Sin is a dispising of God. Who would acknowledge in the way of sin
they despise God? Scarce any in the world is so wicked as to acknowledge they
despise God. And yet mark, God charge David with this for the commission of
that one sin: see the 2 Samuel 12. 9. David did despise God. Well, if hatred, and
rebellion, and despising of God, though neither of them all be in the intention
of the man in committing of them, yet God sees it in the Nature of them. So
then if sin be a despising of God, rebellion against God, walking contrary, and
enmity, etc. if there be all this in sin, though in every sin the Creature
intend not this, but God sees this in the root of every sin, in the venom of
every sin: Therefore then, you that have gone on in the course of sin, lay but
this second thing to heart, That you are those, who have walked in the course
of your lives in an opposition against the infinite dreadful God of all the
World; against the infinite God, this has been the course of your life. Truly
Brethren, it is enough, this that I speak of, to pluck down the stoutest heart,
the wickedest and wretchedest hard heart in the world; for a Minister of God to
come and charge them in Gods Name, Thou have gone on in all thy life hitherto,
ever since thou wast born, in a continual opposition to God Himself, unto the
infinite Lord, the Eternal first being of all the World; thy life has been
nothing but enmity to this God: thou have as directly opposed, and striven
against, and resisted Him, as ever man did oppose, and resist, and strive with
another man, and this thou have done in the whole course of thy life: Certainly
there is more in this to humble a man than any thing that can be spoken to show
him the evil of sin. When Christ would humble Saul's heart, what does he do? he
comes and says, Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me? Alas, thou think thou
have to deal with these poor Creatures, who are not able to right themselves:
but be it known to thee, thou have to deal with Me, the ever living, Eternal
God. Why persecutest thou Me? Who art thou Lord? as if he had said, Lord, I did
not think I had to deal with thee, who art thou Lord? I am He whom thou
persecutest. He said no more, but as if should have said thus, Look upon me, I
am that great and glorious God that has thee at an advantage, and can tread
thee under My feet: presently Saul falls down (the text says) trembling, and
astonished, and says, Lord what will thou have me to do? Oh that it might be
so this day, that some heart might fall down trembling, and astonished: and
when you get alone, and think on what has been declared, say, Lord, in the
ways of sin have opposed, resisted, and been an Enemy to thee; Oh Lord never
thought it, Oh now Lord forgive. It is time, it is time Brethren, to cease
resisting of God, and walking contrary to God; for he is above you, and will
have the Victory and the glory over all Creatures Oh perhaps thou have been an
old Enemy, an old Sinner, that all thy days have walked on in a course of sin;
yea, perhaps thy Father has been an Enemy, thou his Enemy, and thy Father his
Enemy; an old Adulterer, a Swearer, a wicked opposite to God; and perhaps thou
nourishest up Children to be Enemies to God; thou nourishest and breedest up a
company of Brats to be Enemies to God; thou breedest them in the ways of sin
and wickedness, and so there is a generation of Enemies against God Oh
Brethren, that God would but stir your hearts and make you fall down before Him,
and see your selves guilty of so great an enmity. Many be ready to excuse
themselves and others thus; He is no bodies Enemy but his own, a good natured
man, and I am no bodies Enemy but my own: Yes, besides thy own, thou art an
Enemy to the Eternal God; and thy ways has been a way quite contrary to the
Eternal God, and this thou art guilty of, and the Lord charge thee with it
this day. I remember when Daniel comes to Belshezzar, he comes to him, and
thinks he has enough to humble that proud King Belshezzar, when he says thus
to him: That God in whose hands the breath of thy Nostrils, and al thy ways
are, that God thou have not glorified: And it has a mighty deal of power to
bring down the proudest and stoutest spirit upon the Earth; when God shall give
commission to conscience to come and charge him and say; Oh thou wicked wretch,
remember that, that God in whose hands all thy ways, and the Breath of thy
Nostrils are, that God thou have not glorified: and suppose Conscience has
commission to come thus, and say, That God in whose hands the breath of thy
nostrils and all thy ways are, that God in all thy life thou have walked quite
cross unto, in all thy life. I say it would have a great deal of power in it to
humble the proudest heart in the world. And this is the second particular of
the operations of sins workings; it is a going cross to God.

There are two more in this Branch, how sin is opposite to God. Sin wrongs God,
and sin is a striking at God. But because the fourth is shorter than the third,
I shall begin with the fourth, and make the third last. I said before, sin was
continually working against God; but now I say,

CHAP. X.
Sin is a striking against God. 1 The sinner wishes God were not so Holy, etc.
2 It seek the destruction of God. Also sin is a wronging of God.

THirdly, Sin is a striking against God. I told you sin was an opposing of God,
and all his ways: but now I say, Sin is a striking at God; at the very life of
God. A man may fight with another, and yet not seek to take away his life, to
destroy him; but sin strikes at the very Being of God. I remember an expression
in the 24 of Levit. 16. speaking of the Blasphemer that blasphemed the Name of
God; the words are translated in the Latin, He did strike through the Name of
God: Certainly Sin is a striking of God. Indeed God is not a Body that we can
strike through him with our hands; but God is a Spirit, and so the Spirits of
men may by their sins strike through God Himself: so strike at God (observe it)
as for the maintenance of thy sin, thou do wish God might cease to be God;
this is horrible wickedness you will say indeed What will you say to such a
wickedness as this, that it should enter into the heart of any Creature, Oh
that I might have my lust, and rather than I will part with my lust, I had
rather God should cease to be God; rather than I would leave my lust, I had
rather God should be no more; this is horrible wickedness. But what will you say
if I convince your consciences that this is in your bosoms, that you have been
guilty of this sin? yea in some measure, every sin may justly be charged with
this, that rather than the sin should not be committed, thou would rather
have God to cease to be. You will say, Lord, have mercy upon us, though you
have told us some other things hard, and strict, and yet they seem to be true;
but you shall never make me believe this, all the men in the world shall never
make me to believe this; that I should be guilty of so much wickedness, as to
be set upon my lusts so, as to desire rather God not to be God at all, rather
than I lose my lust; I hope there is not such wickedness in me. I beseech you
hearken, and I hope to convince you that there is so much wickedness in the
heart of man; that they be set upon their sins so, that they had rather God
were not God at all, than they lose their lusts; and to this end, observe these
two things.

1. First, Do you not think it in the nature of a sinner, so far as sin
prevails in his heart, to come to this (so far as sin prevails I say) that he
could wish God were not so holy as he is: hated not sin so much as he does;
that he were not so just, and so strict, and severe against sin as he is: Is
not this in every sinners heart in the world' Certainly you deceive your selves
if you do not own this; I say so far as sin prevails in your hearts, could not
you wish that God were not so holy, to hate those sins you love, and not so
just, to be so severe against sin as he is, is not this in your hearts? It is
impossible for any Creature to love any thing, and yet not wish that another
did not hate it so much as he does. Well, if there be this in thee, that thou
love such a sin, that thou could wish God did not hate it so much as he
does, that he were not so just, holy, and severe against sin as he is; this is
to wish in thy heart that God were no God at al, that the Life of God, and
Being of God were gone: so that thy heart in this sinful frame and disposition
of it, it is no other but to strike at the very Being of God: For it is the
work of the heart wishing that God were not God, for if he did not (as I told
you) hate sin as much as he does, he could not be a God at al. Now this is
plain, and there is scarce any one bosom, but is guilty of this, scarce any of
you, but may lay your hand upon your hearts and say, This Breast of mine is
guilty of this, that when my heart is set upon any evil way, I could wish that
God were not so holy to hate this; I had rather God should like of this: I hear
of Gods Justice, but does not my heart rise against Gods Justice? and I could
wish that God were not so just as he is: Certainly there is this in some degree
or other; therefore charge your hearts with this; and know, That so far as you
have been guilty of this, you have struck at the Being of God; and this
horrible wickedness is charged upon you, That your hearts have been set so far
upon sin, that you could wish God had not been God rather than you lose your
sin. You would think it a horrible wickedness for any man to be so far in lust
with another woman, as to wish his Wife dead, that he might have his fill of
lust with that woman; this were a horrible wickedness; and yet this is in your
hearts, to wish God had no Being, so that you might have your sin: especially
those that be profane ones, they, if they could have their wish, would desire
there were no God at al. The Scripture says, That the fool says in his heart,
that there is no God at all. That man or woman that could wish that there were
no God at all, so he might have his lust; and to wish God were not so holy, and
did not hate sin so much as he does, so he might have his lust; this is a
horrible wickedness. Oh that God would make thee fall down and think, Oh the
horrible wickedness and abomination of my heart, that I should be set so far
upon any base lust, as to wish that God were not God rather than I not be
satisfied with my lust; and yet this is in sin, I and in every sin, so far as
it prevails in thy heart.

Secondly, It must needs be thus, because it it is the nature of Contraries, to
seek the destruction of one another, as it is the nature of fire to seek the
destruction of water; so of any thing contrary to another it is the Nature of
it to seek the destruction of the contrary. But now you have heard there is
nothing contrary to God (to speak properly) but only sin; and if sin be the
only contrary that God has, then certainly sin does seek the destruction of
God, so much as it can: though it be true, a sinner can never do God hurt, nor
cannot hinder Gods working, or Being at al: whatsoever become of this wretch,
though he be destroyed, and perish to al Eternity, God will remain blessed for
ever. But this is the Nature of sin, to seek the destruction of the Eternal God
of glory. Oh charge your hearts with this; do not stay till God come at the day
of Judgment to charge you with this; for many poor sinners that went on
blindfold all their days, and never saw sin what it was, then comes God upon
their death bed, and charge them with this, and then their hearts are full of
horror. And so at the day of Judgment, when God comes to charge them with this,
then they will be amazed, and will see the truth of this. Therefore, seeing God
does it now before the day of Judgment, do you now charge it upon your own
hearts, that so you may be humbled. This is the Third Particular, It strikes at
God.

Fourthly, Sin wrongs God exceedingly. It does that wrong unto God, that all
the Angels in Heaven, and men in the world cannot make up again. Any one sin,
take but the least sin that thou do commit, I say it does that wrong unto
God, that all the Angels in Heaven, and Men in the World can never make up
again: if all the Angels in Heaven, and Men in the world, should come and say,
Lord God, this poor wretched Creature has committed this sin this day, O Lord
we are content to suffer ten thousand years torment in Hell, to satisfy for
that wrong that is done to thee by this man or woman's sin; God would say, it
cannot be done by all Men and Angels, they can never make up this wrong: and
yet (as I shall show hereafter) God will have this wrong made up, or thou must
perish Eternally. Many men plead thus, Who can challenge me and say, I have
wronged them in all my life; they think this enough: well, suppose thou have
lived so, that thou have not wronged man, either in word or deed; Oh but thou
have wronged God, the Living Eternal God can charge thee (though man cannot)
that thou have done him that wrong that all the Creatures in the world cannot
make it good. It were a sad thing if a man had done that wrong to a Kingdom,
that all the Blood in his Veins, and in ten thousand generations more could not
make up again, he would be weary of his life. You have done that wrong to the
God of Heaven, that all the Angels in Heaven, and Men in the World can never
make up again. Well, to conclude, Though the things be hard, and sad to think
on, God knows I treat in tender bowels and compassion to you: and I do not know
that ever I spoke to any people in the world with more compassion, and that in
this particular: And know, though I speak of these things now, yet if God give
liberty, I shall be as glad and willing to be large in showing you the riches
of the grace of the Gospel in Christ: and Gods mercy in Christ. And I hope your
hearts will be as free and large in this, as I am in speaking of this. And if I
were now treating never so much of the riches of Gods mercy in Christ, I could
not do it with more Bowels of Compassion than I do this: but I do this that you
may come to know your selves; that you may come to know Christ; that Christ may
be precious in your thoughts: For the special end of Christ's coming was, To
take away sin, to deliver from sin; therefore we must know sin, and charge our
souls with sin, that Christ may be precious. Therefore if any soul shall go away
and say, Woe to me what have I done? yea then, such a soul is fit to hear of the
Doctrine of grace and mercy in Christ, and that in due time (if God give
liberty) may be declared to such a soul. But now for the present I believe this
is a necessary point for you to know; and this is that (though some may perhaps
rise against it) that thousand thousands will have cause to bless God for to all
eternity when it is preached home upon their Consciences by the Spirit of the
Lord which convinces of the sinfulness of sin.

CHAP. XI.
How sin wrong God: 1 In his Attributes. 2 Relation of Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost. 3 His Counsels. 4 In the End for which God has done all he has done.
And First, Sin wrong Gods Attributes: 1 His All Sufficiency, showed in two
particulars. 2 It wrong his Omnipresence, and Omnisciency. 3 Sin wrong his
Wisdom. 4 Wrong his Holiness. 5 Sin wrong God in setting man's will above Gods.
6 Sin wrong Gods Dominion. 7 Sin wrong Gods Justice. 8 Sin wrong God in his
Truth.

THis was that which we proposed in the third place; but we shall handle it in
this fourth place, that we may enlarge upon it. But how does sin wrong God? The
wrong you do to God by sin, is such wrong, that if all the Angels in Heaven,
and Men in the World, would be content to endure thousands of years of torment
in Hell to make up that wrong, it could not be; any one sin that you commit
does such wrong to God. How does this appear? To make it out, I shall show unto
you four things.

1 How sin does wrong God in all his Attributes. 2 How it wrongs God in his
Personal Relations, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. 3 How it wrongs him in his
Counsels, in that order he has set in the World in all Creatures. 4 How it
wrongs God in the very End for which he has done all that he has done, in the
end of all his Works, even his Glory.
First, Sin wrongs God in his Attributes: As thus,

First, Sin does hold forth this, That there is not a sufficiency of good in
God, for the satisfying of a soul; this language is apparent in every sin, and
it holds this forth; so far as sin does appear, it holds this forth before all,
and speaks this language, That there is not enough good in God, That is, the
Blessed, Glorious, All-sufficient Eternal, Unchangable good and Fountain of all
good: yet sin makes this profession, That there is not enough good in God to
satisfy this soul: or else why does the soul depart from him in any sinful
way, and go to the Creature for any good, if there be enough in God himself?
Now there is great wrong done to that blessed God, who is goodness it self; for
any Creature to hold this forth, That there is not sufficient good there, but
that the Creature must be fain to seek for it elsewhere out of God. So long as
we seek comforts in the Creature in order to God, we seek for it in God, though
in the Creature, if in order unto God: but when we come to seek for any good,
any comfort in any way of sin (as no sin can be committed, but there is this in
it) Though deliberately you do not say, that you think there is not comfort
enough in God, but you will have it in this sinful way, you do not say so: but
there is this in thy walking in the way of sin, God sees this in the Nature of
every sin. Would not a Father think it a wrong to him, or a Master think it a
wrong, to have his Son, or his Servant, go and complain to his Neighbor and
say, he has not meat enough? That wrong you would think your Child does to
you, in going to shark at your Neighbors door for meat; this you do to God when
you go to sin: As if you should say, notwithstanding there is so much said of
the infinite goodness of God, and that infinite satisfaction in Him; for my part
I find not enough in Him, I must have it elsewhere. This is a wrong to Gods
Al-sufficiencie in this first regard.

Secondly, A sinner, going in ways of sin, wrongs God thus; he holds this
forth, That there is more good to be had in a sinful lust, than there is to be
had in all the glory and excellency in the infinite blessed God. This you
will say is a wrong, if this can be made out that there is this evil in sin,
holding this forth, That there is more good to be had in a base sinful lust,
than in all the glory in Heaven, and comfort in God. Certainly this is so, and
God sees it so; and except God be satisfied for this sin in Christ, God will
charge this upon thy soul another day, that have been guilty of this great sin.
And that I may clear it to your Conscience, That in every evil way there is
this: Thus it appears;

Because every sinful way is a departing from God, and all that good in God:
now this in the account of Reason may appear to the weakest capacity, That
where there stands two goods propounded, and I depart from one, and choose the
other; by my choosing, though I say nothing, when I choose the one, when I cannot
enjoy both together; I do thereby profess I account more good to be in that
other I choose, than in that former I parted from: Thus it is in the ways of
Sin, God sets forth himself to the Soul, and shows his goodness and
excellency, as appears in all his glorious works; and those that live under
the Gospel, as appears in his word to them; and God woes the Soul, My Son
give me thy heart, and here I am willing to communicate my self to thee, and
all that good in me to thy Soul; if I have any good, any thing in that
infinite Nature of mine, to comfort thy Soul, and make thee happy, here I am
willing to let it out and communicate it to thee: Thus God professes to all the
world, all the Children of men, to whom at least the Ministry of the Gospel
comes, if thy Soul will come in and close with him in that way he reveals to
thee, he is ready to communicate that goodness in him to thy Soul to make thee
blessed. But now any man or woman in any sinful way, though they do not say
so, yet they profess by their practice this, That though there be such goodness
in thee, yet here is such a sinful lust, I expect more goodness in this than in
thy blessed Majesty: Certainly there is this in every Sin, and God sees it,
and God will deal with a sinner according to this if he come to answer for his
sin himself. For (Brethren) thus it stands, we cannot enjoy God and sinful
ways both together; so far as any decline to sinful ways, so far they venture
the loss of God eternally, and all that good in God. It may be God may have
mercy upon thee, and bring thee into Christ; and Christ may satisfy God for
that wrong thou did to him, this is nothing to thee, but there is this evil
in thee, there is not one sinful way that thou closest with, but thou venturest
the loss of all that infinite good to be enjoyed in the blessed God, in that
sin: here is the evil of sin: And is not this a wrong to God? what is God, if
not better than a base lust? The Devil himself is better than a base lust, that
is, the Devil has an Entitie in him, he is of God, though he be a Devil by
sin, yet he is a being that is of God; but sin has no good, and therefore sin
is worse than the Devil: It is that which makes the Devil so evil as he is, and
yet thou in thy sinful way do profess, thou accountest more good to be in
sin than in all the good of God himself, as if sin were better than God
himself: For thou venturest the loss of God that thou may have thy sinful
way. Oh sinner! stop in thy way, and consider what thou do: and know all thy
life long which thou have lived, has been nothing else but a continual
profession before all the world by thy sinful life, That thou accountest more
good in a lust, than all the good in the blessed God to be enjoyed to al
Eternity.

II. Thou wrongest God in the way of thy sin thus, in his Omnipresence, and
Omnisciency: to put them both together.

1 In that thou dare do that before the very face of God, that God infinitely
hates: Is it not a wrong to any King, yea, to your selves though mean, for
those that are your inferiors to do that before your face that you hate above
all things in the world? thus a Sinner does, all the ways of thy Sin are before
the very face of God, and they are such things as God infinitely hates, yet
thou dare do that before the face of God in some Sin, that thou dare not do
before the meanest boy or girl in thy house. What a wrong is this to Gods
Omnisciency and Omnipresence! Nay, perhaps thou dare not do it before a Child
of six years old, and yet dare do it before the face of the infinite blessed
God, if a man should be afraid to do a thing before any Servant in his house,
the very Scullion of the Kitchen, and yet when he comes before the King, does
it there; were not this a wrong to his Majesty, that any dare be so bold before
him?

2 Again, Thou wrongest his Omnipresence in this, in that thou dare to cast
that which is filthy before his presence, to cast Carrion, a dead Dog, before a
Prince, is a wrong: men in sinful ways do nothing but cast vomit and filth
before the presence of a most holy* God: thus thou wrongest God in his
Omnipresence and Omnisciency.

Thirdly, Thou wrongest God in his way of Wisdom, because in Sin thou
professest Gods ways are not ways of Wisdom, but thou know better to
provide for thy self, than in that way God has set thee; how do thou cast
folly on the ways of God, and set thy shallow way and heart of thine
before Gods, as if thou could provide for thy self and thy own good more
wisely than God has set thee in a way to do; The Word of God and that revealed
in the light of Nature, is nothing else but several beams of the infinite
Wisdom of God for the guiding of manking unto happiness and glory; the light of
Nature helps somewhat, though it reach not far enough, yet I say, the light of
Nature is made up of several beams of Gods Wisdom, but the light of the Word is
made up of beams of Wisdom, a great deal more bright than the beams of Nature,
now any Sinner that forsakes the ways of God, rejects these beams of Wisdom as
if they were dark, and does as if he should say, I know how better to provide
by this way. Hence carnal men account the ways of God foolishness, and
preaching of the Word foolishness, and the usual title that they give to those
that walk more strict than others, is this, What fools they are, nothing but a
company of fools that keep such a stir: And it is an ordinary thing in the
world for carnal hearts to cast folly upon the ways of God; and for
themselves, they can sit at home and applaud themselves in their Wisdom, as if
they go in a nearer way than others; and why should they be such fools as
others? And it is usual for Parents that be carnal, to come to their Children
and cast folly upon them when they look after the ways of God, some do it
openly, but every sin does cast folly upon God and his blessed way; and in
every sin thou set thy wisdom above Gods Wisdom.

Fourthly, In Sin thou do cast dirt on the Holiness of God. Holiness is the
brightness of of Gods glory, and in the ways of Sin thou castest dirt upon the
face of Holiness it self: Gods Nature is pure, thy Sin is filthy and vile, and
contrary to him, and does what it can to darken the brightness of the infinite
Holiness of God.

Fifthly, Thou wrongest God in this, That thou set up thy Will above the
Will of God; Gods Will is to be the rule of all the actions and ways of the
Creature, but thou come and set up thy Will above Gods; there is this
hidious wickedness in every sin, at least in every wilful Sin when it comes
into the will, then the will of man is set up above the will of the infinite
and glorious God: do not you account your selves wronged when you will have
your will, and a poor boy says he will have it otherwise? do not you account
your selves wronged when he dares set his will before yours? Oh consider this
you that are wilful, you cannot bear to have your will crossed, to have an
inferior, or a Child set their will against yours, you are not able to bear it:
Oh consider what you do when you set your will against the will of the infinite
God: nay, above it in two regards.

1 Because when Gods will is one way, and yours another, you will rather have
yours, than God shall have his.

2 Though God does only will that which is right and good, and is content to
have his will satisfied in nothing but in things good, you will have yours
right or wrong, good or bad; God will have his in only that which is righteous
and good, if you were set upon your will in that which were good, it were
another matter; but in that you will have your will right or wrong, good or
bad, as come to men in their passion, and reason with them, why this is not
well, yet say they, I will; and this carries it: what a proud Spirit is this that
dares set up his will against Gods will; good or bad, right or wrong I must
have it, and this is in sin.

Sixthly, Sin wrongs God in the Dominion and Power, and Soveraigntie of God,
which with men is a very tender thing, where there is Sovereigntie, there
cannot be endured the least wrong. Men be mighty tender of Power and
Sovereigntie; sure if they be so, God may much more be tender of his, which is
as the apple of his eye. Let me suggest one Consideration to you, which should
make any man's heart to bleed to consider how God is wronged in the world; and
that is this, You shall have poor men and servants, that dare not do any thing
to displease those that have power over them, if but a Master, or Landlord, or
Justice of the Peace (especially if it come higher) Oh how they shake and
tremble if they be displeased, and if any thing go against their mind they
dare not do it; but there is not the basest fellow, the vilest wretch that
lives, the poorest worm, but he dares venture to sin against God, blaspheme the
Name of God, shakes at the word of a man of power, or a man but a little above
him; but he dares fill his mouth with Oaths even in the face of God himself,
there he has courage and valor, and he scorns to be afraid, what to fear an
Oath! he has too brave a Spirit to be afraid of that: Oh horrible wrong to the
infinite God! What is any Superiority in man so great that men dare not
offend them, and yet the poorest Spirit that is, dares wrong and blaspheme the
Name of God.

Seventhly, There is a wrong to God in his Justice: Sin wrongs God in his
infinite Justice.

1 In that it is not afraid of God; God expects all Creatures should fear him
because of his Justice.

2 Thou do wrong to his Justice, in that by ways of Sin, thou do as much
as in thee lies even accuse the ways of God for unjust-waies, and not equal,
but that your ways be more just and equal than Gods. Therefore God in
Scripture reasons the Case with his People, What are not my ways equal, are
not your ways unequal? Ezekiel. 18. 29. Certainly there is this in sin, for if
you account not your ways more equal, why choose you them?

Eighthly, You wrong God in his Truth: As if all Gods threatenings against the
ways of Sin you walk in were nothing but a Tale and a Lie, as if all the
Promises God has made in his word of grace and mercy to poor Sinners that will
come in and repent, they were all but a Lie: thus Sin wrongs God in his Truth,
Hence it is that a Sinner is in a woeful estate, because he has thus wronged
God; he has therefore all the Attributes of God pleading against him, yea,
they are continually against thee. Therefore look to it, till your Sins be
done away in Christ, and your Souls cleansed in him, both night and day all the
Attributes of God are pleading against thee for to require that wrong you have
done to them may be righted upon thee. A man is in a sad condition if he have
but diverse thousands of men come to plead against him, and these cry out for
Justice, justice, upon him! but if a man have a whole Kingdom, and every one
comes and cries Justice! Justice! upon this man that has wronged this Kingdom,
this man is in a woeful estate, but I speak of every Sinner before God, if that
thy sins be not done away in Christ, know it is not a whole Kingdom speaks
against thee, but all the divine Attributes, all the Attributes of God be
continually before the Lord, crying out against thee, Justice against this
sin; he has wronged me says one, and me says another, and me says another,
and thus, and thus, and thus, and therefore thou art in an evil condition, and
it is much that thou should sleep quietly when all Gods Attributes plead
against thee, it is a hard case when the Devil pleads against a man, and but
accuse him, and plead against him before God, but when all the Attributes of
God plead against him (as I might show you more at large) how woeful is his
condition.

Object. But you will say, though all the other Attributes plead against me,
yet I hope Mercy will plead for me

Answ. But that pleads against thee too, for thou wrongest his Mercy also.
Indeed there is no Attribute more wronged by Sinners ordinarily than the Mercy
of God is. The Mercy of God, do thou think that shall plead for thee? That
is wronged especially: Why? Because there is no Attribute abused to be an
Abettor to Sin, more than the Mercy of God is; and its abused and made to
harden the hearts of men and women in Sin, no Attribute so much abused. The
Justice of God thou think that pleads against thee, but Mercy thou think
pleads for thee; Justice is not so much wronged by Sin as Mercy is: The
Justice of God is not made an Abettor of Sin: Now that is the greatest wrong
that can be for Gods Mercy to be made a means to abet Sin, and to harden men's
hearts in Sin. It is a great wrong to make use of any Creature to be
serviceable to our Sin; if a man make Meat, or Drink, or Clothes, or any
Creature serviceable to his Lust, it is a wrong to that Creature and to God the
Creator of that Creature that thou make serviceable to thy lust: but if it be
a wrong to the Creature, what is it to make the Mercy of God serviceable to
your lusts? and who is there almost but makes the mercy of God in some degree
or other Serviceable to his lusts? It is a horrible thing thus to abuse mercy:
how do thou think the mercy of God should plead for thee when thou do it
such infinite wrong? when thou venturest upon sin because God is a merciful
God. Thus you wrong the Attributes of God by sin.

CHAP. XII.
How sin wrongs God in his personal Relations. 1 The Father. 2 The Son. 3 The
Spirit.

SEcondly, Now for the Personal Relations of God; Father, Son, and holy Ghost;
how they be wronged in way of sin.

First, God the Father. Consider of these in those operations most proper, and
especially attributed to them. As now, that attributed to the Father, is the
work of Creation: now thou wrongest God the Father in this especial operation,
In that thou abusest the gifts God has given thee; that Body and Soul God has
made, thou abusest it to Gods dishonor; abusest his Creatures; take Gods own
Creatures, and abusest them to his dishonor: yea, thy own Members that God made
thee to honor him withal, thou take them, and with his own weapons fightest
against himself: not only fightest against him, but with his own weapons,
faculties and gifts he has given thee, thou fightest against him. Thus thou
wrongest God the Father in his work of Creation.

Secondly, Thou wrongest Christ in the Work of Redemption.

1 Because the least sin thou committest (if ever it be pardoned) it is that
which stabbed Jesus Christ to the very heart: I say, thy sin was that which
pierced Christ, and brought forth blood and water from him; it was that which
whipped Christ; it was that which put Christ to death, that shed the blood of
Christ, that crucified Christ. I may say to every sinner that expects to be
saved by Christ, as Peter in the 2. Acts said to those Jews, Whom you have
crucified, and the text says, that then they were pricked to their hearts.
Certain it is, thou sinner (man or woman, whosoever thou art) that do expect
to have part in the blood of Christ, Thy sin crucified Christ, made Christ cry
out upon the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? What do thou
think of thy sins now? And if thou be such an one as has never been affected
with the Blood of Christ that was shed for thy sins, then thou wrongest the
Blood of Christ more, for then thou do trample the Blood of the everlasting
Covenant under thy feet, and accountest it a common thing. Most men and women
be such that live under the light of the Gospel, that like Swine trample the
very blood of Christ under their feet, and make nothing of the Blood of Christ,
go to the Sacrament hand over head unpreparedly, and so come to be guilty of
the Body and Blood of Christ. Certainly these be not strains of wit above the
truth and reality of things; there is a reality in it, that thy soul is charged
from God this day of wronging Christ the second Person.

Thirdly, Thou wrongest the Spirit of God, in defacing of the work of
Sanctification (what in thee lies) in opposing the work of Gods Spirit in thy
soul, in resisting the motions of Gods Spirit. Who is there but is guilty of
resisting the motions of the Holy Ghost? Who is there but at some time or other
when they have been at the Word, but they have had some stirrings of the Spirit
of God within them, when they have heard such and such truths of God? But they
have gone to company, and laughed it away, drunk, and played it away talked it
away. What a wrong is this to the Holy Ghost? thou wrongest the Holy Ghost by
defiling thy Body, which should be the Temple of the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. XIII.
Sin wrong the Counsels of God in setting that Order in the World that he has
set.

THirdly, Thou wrongest the Counsels of God in setting that order in the world
which he has set. To understand it know this, God in his Eternal Counsel has
set a due order in all his Creatures, they walk in an orderly way to fetch
about that end that he himself did intend. As a Workman that makes a curious
work, puts every wheel and piece in a right frame, and due order, that so by
that order his Art has placed in the work, the work may attain unto that end
he made it for: So God has done, he has made all things by weight and measure
in due order. God made all things good, very good, and all that one Creature
might be serviceable to another; as one wheel to a curious Watch is serviceable
to another, and all to bring about the end of the Workman; so God in his
eternal Will and Counsel has set all things in that proportion and order that
he may fetch about his own end. But sin is the thing, and the only thing that
break the order of God in the world, and strikes at Gods Work to break it al to
pieces what lies in the sinner. If we should suppose that all the cunning
Artificers in the whole Nation, nay in all the world, should join together to
make a curious work in a curious frame, perhaps they have been seven years in
making of it, and at length bring it to perfection, and things be made in that
order and exactness, that it is to admiration, so that this work is worth more
than can be imagined, because of the curious art and order in this work: But
suppose now, one should come, and (through ignorance, much more if knowinglie)
give it a blow and strike it al to pieces; what a mischievous thing were this?
Certainly there is this in sin, for there is infinite depth of Counsel and
Wisdom of God in setting all things in frame, that one thing should be
serviceable to another; and at length all should come to be for Gods glory.
Now there is no Creature can break the order God has made but Men and Angels,
none but those Creatures that are capable of Sin. And certainly Sin does not
only aim to break Gods order, but does it actuallie; Sin brings disorder, and
does break the order God has set: Only God by his mighty Power knows how to
bring Sin it self to that, that he will have his glory from it, to take
occasion at least by it to bring things into their right order again. But were
it not that God were of infinite Wisdom and Power, Sin would break all that
curious work God has made, and bring it all to confusion. Now we know Art and
Wisdom ads to any thing; as suppose some curious Building were all beaten too
pieces and Rubbish, there were no Material less in the Rubbish than in the
Building, only the art of the workman, the art and the order that makes the
Beauty of the work, and the difference in Excellency from a heap of Rubbish.
So it is the Order God has set in the World that makes the Beauty of Gods
Work, and Sin does do all it can to make all the Work of God to be a heap of
Rubbish, a mere Confusion. Indeed when there is such a curious piece of work of
a workman broke all in pieces on a sudden, if he had so much skill and power
instantly to put it in frame again, his art would exceedingly be admired and
wondered at. Thus it is with God; Certainly were it not for Gods infinite
Wisdom and Power, whereby he can bring all in Order again, sin would bring all
to Rubbish; and know thou have a hand in this that have a hand in Sin.

CHAP. XIV.
Sin wrong God in the End for which he has made all things.

FOurthly, Sin wrongs God in the End for which he has made all things, which
is his own Glory. Now we know that of all things a man cannot endure to be
wronged in his End, when he has an End to such and such a thing, and aims to
bring such and such a thing to pass, though he should be frustrated in regard
of some means, this troubles him not, but when he comes to lose his End, this
troubles him exceedingly. Thus it is with a sinner, he sets himself against God
to do what lies in him that God should lose his End of all that ever he has
done: and if so be God were not Almighty to over power things, certainly sin
would quite frustrate God of his End of his Works, for which he did make all
things, to wit, his Glory. Now a sinner does what he can to darken the glory of
God, does in effect stand up and say, if I can help it, God shall have no glory
in the world. I say, you that walk on in ways of sin, this you are charged
with in the name of God this day, that you are guilty of this, you have in
effect stood up, and as it were said, If I can help it God shall have no glory
in the world: and yet it was for his glory that God made all things. Truly
Brethren, it cannot but be a soul-piercing Consideration for any stout stubborn
sinner in the world for to have this one thought (take it with you, and work it
upon your hearts, see what it will do) to think thus, Had I never been born,
God had never been so much dishonored: this one thought has a mighty power to
pierce the stoutest hearted sinner in the world. Oh! is not God infinitely
worthy of all glory and honor in the world? has he not made all Creatures for
his glory? and if I had never been born, and never had had a being, God should
never have been so dishonored, he would have had more glory if I had never
been. If God had made me a Dog or a Toad, a Snake or a Serpent, God should have
had more glory than by making me a Man. True, God will bring about his glory,
and have more glory from thee another way, than if thou had been made a Dog
or a Toad; but no thanks to thee, thou do what thou can in way of sin to
hinder his glory, Gods Almighty Power brings this to pass. But if thou go
on in ways of sin, it may be said of thee, that if thou hadest been made a Dog
or Toad, God would have had more glory in the world than now he has in making
thee a Man: yea, thou art so far from bringing God glory that thou dishonor'st
God as much as in thee lies. And this, if it lies upon the heart as it should
is a sad Consideration to humble the proudest heart in the world; to think that
thou live, and God has no glory by thee, though this be the End for which
God made the world. Think thus, suppose God should have no more glory by all
the world, than by me, to what end were the world made? Suppose one that lives
in a mere Atheistical way, and takes no notice of the Majesty and Glory of
God, but lives only to eat and drink, and play and swear, and the like; now if
his conscience tell him this has been his way, I speak to such a one in these
words, suppose God had never had more glory from any Creature than from thee?
to what purpose had the world been made? For God that has wrought so
wonderfully and gloriously in raising such a glorious Edifice and Frame,
certainly it was, that he might have some glory from what he has done. No man
works any thing but for some end, and Wisdom directs every man that his end be
worth his Labor, that, that which he aims at shall be worth all his work. Now
God had some end therefore in making thee, and he must needs have some
excellent end; but now, what do I think in my conscience was the End of God in
making of the World and me? what was it for no other end but that men and women
might live and eat and drink, and lie, and swear, and commit such wickedness?
was this Gods end? I put it to your conscience every sinful man or woman; think
how have thou lived? what have thou done in all thy life? look back to thy
former life, and think how have thou spent it? I have gotten money, and what to
do? is it only to eat and drink, and the like? and thou have lived in a Course
of Nature thy Conscience tells thee thus, now I put this to thee, Do thou
think in thy conscience this is the end thou live in the world for? Did God
(when from all Eternity he intended to make such a Creature as thou art, to
live in such a time in such a place, and preserved thee all this while from
such dangers at Sea, or at Land) I say, did God aim at no other end but this
that thou should live to do thus? Certainly thy Conscience will condemn thee
if thou have but a heart for to think of it. Thou were upon thy sick bed, and
then thou cryedst to God to spare thee; well, thou did escape, now I put
this to thee, Do thou think God spared thee, and gave thee thy life, to live
to no other end but this? do thou think this was the only end? Take heed thou
do not go on in ways of crossing God in his end, for God will have his end
one way or other. If a man have been at a great deal of cost to deliver another
man from misery, redeemed him from Captivity, and when he has brought him
home, he rails at him that did this for him, and does him all the mischief he
can: And in any man's account he is exceedingly wronged that has done thus and
thus for one that is thereby as it were his Creature, and yet he live and do
thus and thus wrong and abuse him. Certainly then, God is wronged when he has
given thee a Body, delivered thee from such and such dangers, and thou live
to no other end but to satisfy thy lust; thou exceedingly wrongest God. This
is so clear, that a man would wonder where men's consciences are, that they live
quietly, and that their consciences flies not in their faces continually.

Certainly, when God shall enlighten the Conscience, and bring these things
with power to their Souls, then Sinners will stand amazed and wonder they saw
not this before: These things be so clear, that its a wonder I was so blind,
that I had not eyes to see these before, and yet who lays these things to
heart? And thus we have done with this First thing in the Explanation, the
wrong Sin does to God in his Nature, working against, and striking at God, and
in his Relations, etc. Now there are, I confess, those things I most aimed at
in this work behind, therefore I will wind up in a word or two, in some
Corollaries, and Consequences, to be drawn from hence: Only thus much, when I
have told you Sin is a greater evil than Affliction; yea, a greater evil than
all the torments of Hell, as I said in the beginning. Then you may see by what
I have said, how this Truth results out of these Consequences, because it
wrongs God, and God is so infinitely good. If any man be afflicted, or perish
in Hell eternally, it is but the good of a Creature, and the comfort of a
Creature crossed in this, but in Sin there is the crossing of the good of an
infinite God, and of his glory; and there is more good in Gods glory, than in
all the Peace and Comfort of all Creatures in the world: and if so, then
certainly there must be more evil in Sin that is cross to Gods glory, than in
all pains and torments that are but only cross to the Peace and Comforts that
are in the Creature: I say, Hence follows these Corollaries.

CHAP. XV.
The First Corollarie.] It appears by this, That but few men know what they do
when they Sin against GOD.

FIRST from this, Certainly it does evidently appear that there are but few men
that know what they do in sinning against God, nor have not known all this
while. It was the Complaint of the Prophet Jeremiah, No man says, What have I
done? Certainly men in ways of sin never say, Oh Lord, what have I done? Give
me but that man or woman that have gone on in ways of sin, that have imagined
they have wronged God so much; that they have done so much against the infinite
eternal glorious God. They think indeed they have done amiss, what they should
not do; but it is another manner of matter, it is not only doing what you
should not do, but it is a wrong to the infinite glorious God, and therefore
certainly it appears but few men know God, or know Sin; neither know what that
God is with whom they have to deal; neither know what sin is, and how it makes
against that God with whom they have to deal; if men did only know God, it were
enough to keep them from sin. And there is a notable place in the 1 John 2. He
that says I know him and keeps not his Commandments is a liar, and the
truth is not in him. If there be any man in the Congregation that says he
knows God, and keeps not his Commandments, he lies says the Holy Ghost.
What, do thou know God, man or woman? Sinner, Man or woman do thou know
God, that infinite glorious eternal God, with whom thou have to do? and not to
keep his Commandments, but go on in ways of sin? Certainly thou art a
Liar. It may be many of you are apt to say, We know God, what need we have so
much of God Preached? If you say you know God and keep not his Commandments,
you are a Liar. But now join these together, To know what a glorious God this
is, and how sin works against this God. Some knows somewhat of Gods Attributes,
and can discourse of him, yet perhaps never knew before how sin made against
this God, this is that people fail in; certainly both together has not been
known by most people. I remember a Speech I have read of a German Divine upon
his sick Bed; he cries out thus, In this Disease I have learned what Sin is,
and how great the Majesty of God is: These together. We cannot know what sin
is, except we know how great the Majesty of God is; put these together, and
these Two together, will make men understand that they did never consider of
before, what their lives are, and how people go on in a resolute, inconsiderate
way, and know not what they do, and what God is. Therefore we may pray as
Christ in another case, Father forgive them they know not what they do: poor
Creatures they know not what they do; they never imagined what the greatness of
the glory of God is.

CHAP. XVI.
The Second Corollarie.] The Necessity of our Mediators being God and Man.

SEcondly, Hence appears, The Necessity that our Mediator between God and us,
must be God as well as Man: great is the mystery of godliness that God is
manifest in the flesh. Well, but what is the reason of this Mystery of
godliness? How comes it to pass that there is a necessity of such a mystery of
godliness for saving of poor Souls? That God must be manifested in the flesh?
That God must be Man? That all the Angels in Heaven, and men in the World,
could not be a Mediator between God and us, but our Mediator must be truly and
verily God as well as man? What is the reason of this? That that I have been
speaking of gives a full reason of it, our sins have so wronged God, has been
so much against God, that it is only God can make up the wrong, only such a
Mediator as Christ that is both God and Man, that can make it up. I suppose
most of you know so far in your Catechism, That Christ is God and Man; but
suppose I should put this Question to you, you say Christ is God and Man; but
give me a sound Reason, Why it is necessary that Christ must be God and Man?
Why cannot man be saved by any Savior but such a one as must be verily and
truly God and man? I suppose you will give a sound substantial Reason, and say,
God Appointed and has Ordained it should be so: but though it be Gods will,
and God has ordained it, yet there is another Reason, and this it is; You may
say (when you hear Christ was God and Man that mighty Savior) here is the
Reason of all that, Because sin does so wrong and strike at God, and oppose
God, that of necessity whosoever comes to be a Mediator between God and us,
must be God as well as man. Therefore the Scripture says of Christ, his Name
shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God. Isa. 9. 6. Christ is the
mighty God, and the mighty God in the work of Reconciliation, in reconciling
God and us together, then he shows himself mighty. Because if all the world had
undertaken to meditate between God and us, such is the breach between God and
us, that all the men in the world could have done no more than if so be you had
gone and put a picec of paper to a mighty flame, as if one had a mighty flame
coming upon him, and he puts a piece of paper to keep it off; we know that will
quickly burn it; he must put some Brass or Iron. So that wrong is done to God
by the sin of man, That if all the men in world, all the Created Powers in
Heaven and Earth, had come to have stood between God and us, to have satisfied
God for that wrong sin did to him, it had been but just like a piece of brown
paper against a mighty flame. But whosoever comes to stand between God and us,
must be one infinite, as well as that Person is infinite against whom we have
offended, and that is Christ the Mediator, the mighty God, God and Man. Oh know
the Mediator by which you must be saved must be very God; and the Reason is,
Because sin has done such infinite wrong to God.

CHAP. XVII.
The Third Corollarie.] That but few are humbled as they should for Sin. 1 It
will not be deep enough except it be for Sin as its against God. 2. It will not
Sanctify the Name of God. 3 It will not be lasting. 4 Else it will never make
a divorce between Sin and the Soul.

THirdly, That which follows hence, That Sin is so much against God as has
been showed, We see that there are but very few that are humbled for sin
aright: It will follow from hence, I shall make it out from the Point, That if
Sin be of this nature so much against God as you have heard, certainly there
are few people in the world are humbled for sin aright. There are many people
that are troubled for sin, and will cry out of their sin, are struken with many
fears and terrors for sin, and yet never humbled for sin aright, and it is
clear from that you have heard out of this Point. Why? Because that Humiliation
for sin that is aright, it must needs be an humiliation for it as it is the
greatest evil of all; and it is the greatest evil as it is against God himself.
Now the humiliation of most in the world it is not so much for this, because
sin is so much against God, because it opposes God, strikes at God, and wrongs
God so much: This is not the thing that does usually take the hearts of men and
women* in their trouble for sin; but for the fear of the wrath of God, and of
Hell, and an accusing Conscience that does flash the very fire of Hell in their
faces; this troubles them. And well were it for many that they were but
troubled so far; true, this trouble is that which God does many times bless,
and there is great use of it, but this is not all; no nor the chief trouble of
the Soul for sin. These fears and horrors (I say) are not the chief; the chief
of all is the humiliation of the soul for sin, as it is against God; then is
the heart humbled aright for sin, when it apprehends how by sin the soul has
been against the infinite glorious first-Being of all things. All other
humiliations in the world is not sufficient without this. For,

1 It is not deep enough, there can be no humiliation deep enough, except the
soul be humbled for sin, as it has sinned against God: yea, though the heart
be so burdened with fears and horrors as to be sunk down into despair, yet I do
not call that a depth of humiliation, it is not from the depth of humiliation
that the soul despairs, for certainly (consider what I say Brethren) there is a
mistake in this, to think that those that despair are humbled too much: no,
despair is for want of humiliation, for despair and pride may stand both
together; for the Devil is proud; you will say as proud as Lucifer; The Devils
despair, they be the most despairing Creatures in the world, and yet the most
proud Creatures in the world; therefore despair does not come from the depth of
humiliation, but rather from the want of humiliation. Certainly the hearts of
men and women in despair fly against God, many times flies most desperately and
proudly against God: in despair therefore the heart is not humbled enough when
it has only terrors and fears, except it be humbled for sin when it sees it
against the Majesty of God as here has been opened to you: nothing does cast
down the soul so low in true humiliation as the sight of sin against God. Oh
what have I done against God? what has my life been against that infinite,
glorious, eternal first-Being of all things? When the soul comes to see that
effectually, then it falls down, and falls down low too. Certainly Brethren,
the heart is never humbled thoroughly till it come to feel the burden of sin to
be heaviest there where it is heaviest; mark, I say, till the heart feel the
burden of sin to be heaviest where it is heaviest, it is not brought low
enough: but the burden of sin it is heaviest as it is against God, rather than
as it is against the good of the Creature; that though it be a wonderful
burden, yea (if God put not under his hand) an intolerable burden if the
Conscience only apprehend sin as against the good of the Creature; but the
apprehension of sin as against God is a great deal more, it does show the
burden of sin, and make the burden of sin to be far more weighty than the other
can possibly be.

2 The Apprehensions of sin any other way but this, it does not so sanctify
the Name of God as this does. When the soul shall be cast down before the Lord
for sin, as it is against himself, as it is against his glory, as it has
wronged him; I say, that this does sanctify the Name of God a great deal more
than any other humiliation does: for other humiliation, other trouble for sin
(for I will rather call it trouble for sin than humiliation) if this be not in
it, there may appear in it much self-love, and a forced perplexity of spirit:
But now the Name of God is not sanctified so as when the heart shall fall down
and be humbled because that God has been wronged, his Attributes wronged,
because he has been opposed in his glory. Now this humiliation does especially
lift up the Name of God, and sanctify the Name of God.

3 Take any other humiliation, and it is not such an abiding humiliation as
this is; this humiliation for sin will more abide upon the Spirit than any
other does, many are troubled for sin, have a great deal of horror and
perplexity of Spirit in some fits, in some moods, at some times; but this their
trouble is but for a flash, and it goes away, vanishes and comes to nothing:
when trouble is only from the apprehension of danger and misery in it felf, I
say it usually vanishes and comes to nothing; why? Because when there comes
but any thing to make you to think that this danger may be in any degree over,
or that things are not so bad as I was afraid, now the trouble presently
vanishes upon that. In times of sickness, the soul apprehends it self in
danger of perishing, I am now going, I see my self at the brink of the Pit; now
the soul is troubled for sin, but when the danger appears to be a little
over, the trouble for sin cease. But when the soul is troubled for sin as
against God, this trouble cannot but abide, though afflictions be gone, yet my
trouble abide. What Is the reason many people upon their sick beds be so
troubled for sin (as they think) and cry out, Oh! if God ever restore them,
they will never do as they have done, and yet as soon as they are well they
fall to their sin again: here is the reason, Because only their danger troubled
them. But now let the soul be kindly humbled for sin as against God, Oh I have
wronged God that infinite Deity, that infinite glorious First Being of all
things; let such an one be in sickness or in health, whatsoever condition such
an one is in, the trouble abides upon the spirit, yea Brethren it abides upon
the spirit even then when the soul has hope sin shall be pardoned, yea when the
soul knows certainly sin shall be pardoned, yet will the humiliation abide upon
the heart of such a man or woman There Is a great mistake in the world in the
matter of trouble for sin; they think Repentance or mourning for sin, is but
one act, that if once they have been troubled for sin, they need never be
troubled any more It is a dangerous mistake, for we are to know, true sorrow
for sin, true repentance, is a continual act that must abide all our lives: and
it is not only at that time when we are afraid that God will not pardon our
sins, when we be afraid we shall be damned for our sins, but when we come to
hope that God will, yea when we come to know that God has pardoned our sins,
yet then it will abide, only working in another manner, and it must needs be so
if the heart be humbled for sin thus against God, for suppose God come in and
graciously tell the soul, though thou have wronged me, yet through the
Mediation of my Son, I will forgive thee; will this quiet the soul so as it
will be no more troubled and sorry for sin? No. Now the sorrow comes in
another way: And is this the God I have wronged, the gracious merciful God I
have wronged, that notwithstanding all the wrong I have done him, that when he
had my soul at an advantage, and might justly have sent me down to the
nethermost Hell, and will he yet pardon though no goodness in me? and yet will
he have such thoughts of mercy, as to send his own Son to make up that wrong,
and satisfy for the evil I have done? Oh now the heart bleed afresh upon this,
and mourns more than ever it did before. Many can say of this, that after they
have apprehended their sin to be pardoned, then their souls have mourned and
melted more than ever they did before in the apprehension of horror and fear of
Gods wrath; and all upon this, because they did not see sin to be an evil only
as it brings danger of punishment, but they did see the evil of sin as against
a God, as I have wronged God, stroke at the infinite glorious first-Being of
all things; and this will abide upon the heart: therefore this is another
manner of trouble for sin than the other; and because this trouble for sin is
so effectual, and so good, therefore it is that I have endeavored the more to
open unto you how sin is against God: Therefore when I come to the other to
show how it is against our selves, I shall be but brief in that because I know
that this is the Principal.

4 The trouble for sin if it be apprehended evil any other way but this (or if
this be not chief) cannot be so good, because there is no trouble for sin but
this that ever will make a devorce between sin and the soul; all other trouble
will not do it unless this come in. And indeed it is to admiration to consider
how strong the union between sin and the soul is, and how hard to make the
devorce; that take a man or a woman that apprehends never so much the wrath of
God against sin; take a man that lies as it were scalding in Gods wrath, his
conscience burning and bringing even Hell to him, that he cries, and roars, in
the anguish of his soul for sin; one would think certainly this man will never
have to do more with sin, that is in this horror and anguish, and trouble for
sin, certainly he will never keep company, be drunk, be unclean, or cozen any
more: But this may be to the admiration of Men and Angels, to see how men and
women's hearts are set upon sin, that notwithstanding all that anguish and
horror, that they have many times for it, yet they will to it again, and that
as greedily as ever; yea, and sometimes more greedily: for if once a man
(consider I beseech you what I say) has overcome the trouble of conscience for
Sin, and fallen to it again, he will then be more greedy; he will slight
conscience then, and scorn at conscience then, and make nothing of it if once
he have out stood conscience. As an unruly horse, if he have but once cast his
Rider, then let him come on his back he cares not for him, he contemns him, he
will quickly throw him off again: So when the stubborn unruly lusts of a man's
heart have once cast off conscience, that a man or woman have been once under
terrors of conscience for sin, and yet fall to it again, such a man's condition
is very lamentable; I^ say not wholly desperate, I dare not say so, for Gods
thoughts are higher than ours as high as the Heaven is above the Earth: but
this man's condition is very lamentable: there is this strength in sin in the
soul, that all the terrors in the world will not breed a devorce between sin
and the soul. But when once the soul can come to say with David, Against thee,
against thee only have I sinned; in my Sins I have gone against that God who is
so infinitely above all praise and glory: This is the humiliation; if any
thing make a devorce between Sin and the Soul this will do it. This is the
third Corollarie, That therefore there be very few humbled for Sin aright,
because not thus humbled.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Fourth Corollarie.] Admire the Patience of God in seeing so much Sin in
the World, and yet bear it.

FOurthly, If this be so, that sin is so much against God, does so much wrong
God, Hence then we have all cause to stand and admire at the infinite patience
of the great God that shall behold so much sin in the world from such poor
wretched vile Creatures, and yet shall bear it: It Is true, those that do not
know how sin does make against God, strikes at him, and wrongs him; they are
not so much taken with the patience of God, and with the long suffering of God:
But now that man or woman that comes to know how sin wrongs God, and comes to
understand this, such a one cannot but to amazment stand and wonder at Gods
infinite patience; that such a great God who sees himself so struck at, fought
against, opposed, and wronged by such wretched Creatures, that yet he does
forbear crushing them too pieces presently. I beseech you Brethren consider, do
but take along with you what I have said about Sin, how it is against God, and
then consider, how all sins that are committed, God is present at it, stands
and looks upon it. Do but think sometimes with your selves, when you are among a
great concourse of people, among a company of profane wretched people, as in
Markets, Fairs, Taverns, Inns, and Alehouses, how is Gods Name blasphemed
there? What daring of the blessed God? what scorning and contemning of his Word
and Sacraments and Ordinances? well, and now carry along that thought, how God
is wronged in all these, struck at in all this, and what an infinite God this
is; and then think how God stands by them, hears every Oath, sees every
filthy act of Uncleanness, sees every Drunkard, and yet when the least word of
his mouth were enough to sink them to the bottomless-pit; yet God is patient
the first, second, and third time; yea, a hundred times: Perhaps thou have been
a Blasphemer twenty years; forty years a Swearer: and when thou come in
company, Oh the wicked Oaths that come from thee! and hidious Uncleanness, and
abominable wickedness! and yet God stands by, and looks upon the Swearer, and
is patient all the while. Certainly Brethren, there is no man in all the world
that is wronged as God is, and yet man is not able to bear wrong from his equal
if he have power in his hand to prevent it. What! Shall he wrong me? I will
make him know what it is to wrong me. You cannot bear any wrong from your
fellow Creature; Oh consider what wrong God has born from you and others,
stand and admire at the infinite patience and long-suffering of the Lord! Truly
Brethren, when any man's Conscience comes to be enlightened and awakened, then
the greatest wonder in the world to such a Conscience is the Patience and
long-suffering of God. Oh! that God should be so patient and long-suffering
unto me all this time of my life that I am out of Hell, he stands and wonders
that he is out of Hell, and wonders at others, that others should not be
affected with the patience of God. Certainly brethren, that wrong is done unto
God by sin, as that if any one man that had all the patience of all the men and
women in the world, put into his heart; all the patience and meekness that ever
was in all the Saints, since the beginning of the world, if it were all
distilled into the heart of one man or woman, and suppose that this man or
woman were but wronged as God is, it were impossible but that that man or woman
should break forth with revenge against those wrongs done to him or her; it
were impossible for such an one to bear, so far as he can see himself able (I
mean) to right himself, so far he could not bear the wrongs done to him: But
now God shows himself here to be infinite in patience and long-suffering, as
well as infinite in any other Attribute of his. Brethren it will be an especial
part of the glory of the great day of Judgment, that when all the wrong that
ever was done to God from the beginning of the world by sinners, shall then be
opened at the day of Judgment: Alas, we see but little wrong done to God now;
we look upon notorious wretches and think they wrong God; now we see but
little, but at the day of Judgment, then all the secret villainies and
wickedness that ever was committed in secret places, since the beginning of the
world, in all places of the world; then shall it all appear: And then how will
it appear to Men and Angels how God was wronged by his Creature? and then there
will be the patience of God seen that he should be so patient so many thousand
years together, notwithstanding there was so much wrong done to God and never
discovered to man, but God sees it all this while this will be a great part of
the glory of the day or Judgment. If our hearts were e^ed we would begin now
to give God the glory of (...) Patience which we shall see at that day.

CHAP. XIX.
A Fifth Corollarie.] Hencesie a way to break your hearts for Sin. And also to
keep you from Temptation.

FIfthly, A fifth Corallarie. Hence is this, If Sin be so much against God as
you have heard, then here you may find a means and way both how to break your
hearts for sin, and how to keep your selves against temptation for the time to
come: I put them both together for brevitie. This is the strongest way and
means I can show you to break your hearts. Would you fain break your hearts for
sin? Oh says some, what a hard heart have I? Many put up papers complaining of
the hardness of their hearts, and desire the Minister and Congregation to seek
God to break their hearts: well, Would you fain have broken hearts? have your
hearts troubled in such a manner as you may give glory to God? This is the
way. There is two ways to humble the heart for sin, There is looking upward
unto God, and seeing whom it is thou have sinned against: And looking downward
to thine own misery, and what thou have deserved by sin. Now many altogether
pore downward, and look nothing but downward to sin, and what is the desert,
and punishment, and misery; but their hearts though they be troubled and
vexed, yet they are not kindly broken (as I showed before) but now if you would
have your hearts kindly broken for sin (for this is one use of Direction, that
we may get our hearts broken for sin) look upwards and behold him whom you have
pierced: That is, behold,

1 God in his infinite Glory, and what an infinite blessed Being God is, and
how worthy of all the honor the Creature can give: set this before your Eyes in
a fixed and settled way.

2 Look upon God, in all the relations God has to you, as your Creator from
whom you had your being; as he that preserves your being every moment; look
upon him as your Lord, infinitlie above you, at whose mercy you wholly lie:
Thus view God, and see him in his glory, and the relations he has to you; and
thus by beholding God in such a manner is an especial way to work strongly
upon the heart. For hereby I come to see, as it were, the present evil of Sin;
the other is but only a sight of the evil of Sin to come; as when a man or
woman looks upon Sin as bringing Hell, that is but only to look upon that evil
of Sin that is to come hereafter. But we know that present things do most
affect; as now any good thing, if it be to come, it does not take the heart so
much as a present good. As when the soul makes the good of the Promises to be
present, then they affect the soul; but if the soul look upon them as to come,
they do not so much affect: So if the evil of Sin be looked upon as bringing
Hell and misery, this is looked upon as to come hereafter, so that it may be
avoided; but if I look upon Sin as against God, then I look upon Sin as a
present evil upon me, that flows from the very nature of sin, and cannot be
avoided, and this evil is even now upon me, and does as immediately flow from
the Nature of Sin, as light does from the Sun it self: And now looking thus
upon Sin, is a mighty means to break the heart.

And then for avoiding sin for the time to come; when Temptation come, you say
it is strong, and overcomes me: Now would you avoid Sin for the time to come in
temptations? then do as we read of Joseph; you know how he beat off the
strength of the temptation, and when he might have done the evil in secret; see
what prevails with him, Oh how shall I do this great wickedness and sin against
God? not, How shall I do this great wickedness, and bring danger and misery
upon me? but, How shall I do this and sin against God? So if you can have your
Eye upon sin, and remember what especial things you have heard of the evil of
Sin, and when temptations come, you can say, how shall I do this, and sin
against God? Oh remember this you Servants that have opportunity in secret to
do evil. Josepth was a Servant, and yet this kept off that temptation from him,
when he was a young man, that is the honor of Joseph, a young man and a Servant,
when the temptation comes, Oh this breaks his heart, How shall I do this and
sin against God? So you young ones and Servants go away with this lesson, when
any temptations to sin comes, think, Oh! I have heard in such a Point, and out
of such a Text, how Sin makes against God, strikes at him, wrongs him, How
shall I do this and sin against God? impossible, unreasonable it should be done
upon any terms. Set but this one Argument against the most powerful temptation,
and certainly it will prevail. Psalm. 97. 10. Ye that love the Lord hate evil:
What! do ye hear how sin is against God, strikes at God! that it is evil, not
only against you, and indangers you, but strikes at God. Oh all you that love
God, hate sin; let your hearts be set against sin, because so much against God.
Oh Brethren, there be many people do indeed avoid sin, but it is upon poor low
grounds, very low and mean be the grounds of many people upon which they avoid
sin: There be many, Oh they will not do such and such evils, they will resist a
temptation to such and such a sin, why? mark the ground, according as the
grounds of men and women are, upon which they do, or stay from doing of a
thing; so judge of your hearts; if the grounds be high and raised, then their
spirits are high and raised; if their grounds be but low and mean, then their
spirits be low and mean: As thus, many abstain from such and such sins, why? Oh
if I do it, it will be known, and I shall be made ashamed, therefore I will not
do it: It is good to resist Sin upon any terms, but if this be the chief cause,
it is a poor low base thing, and argues a great deal of lowness in the heart,
to resist sin upon this, Oh if I do this, I shall be known, and incur the
displeasure of my Father, or Master, or such a dear Friend; it may incur
punishment, or it may be I shall be turned out of the Family, and such like
Arguments. I say it is true, it is good to bring in all the Arguments we can to
oppose sin withal, but when these be the chief things, when these be the only
Grounds, that keeps thee from such wickedness that thy heart is set upon; and
thou would be glad to tamper withal: could thou be sure it should not be
known, and thou should not be brought to shame for it, and have the
displeasure of such a friend, thou could find in thy heart to be meddling
with it; Could thou? Oh! know thou have a base heart that have no other
grounds to keep thee from Sin withal. Whereas know if thou be a Christian
indeed, and that God has aright made known sin to thee, thou would rise
higher, Oh I am to deal with God, an infinite glorious first-Being, and if it
be sin only that strikes at this infinite glorious eternal first-Being of all
things, Then I will avoid sin whatsoever become of me; yea, whatsoever I suffer
I will not have to do with it: this is a raised Spirit; this heart is like to
stand out against sin: Alas! those poor low grounds upon which many resist sin;
though they may stand out against sin a little, against a weak temptation, yet
if there come a strong temptation, will quickly break through the hedge: Al
those poor low grounds and Arguments, temptation will quickly break through
them. But when the heart is raised to oppose sin, upon such high grounds as
this is, Certainly this notes a true raised heart by God, and such an one is
like to stand out against temptations, in another manner than others do. And
truly when the heart is possessed with this thought, it cannot perhaps parley
and reason with the temptation as others can; yea, this one principle of
sinning against God, will so fill the heart of a man or woman, that though it
does not stand reasoning and answering every thing, yet it will even burst out,
either in tears, and fall a lamenting that it should be pestered with
temptation; or burst out into Resolution against it. I remember an excellent
Story reported in the Book of Martyrs, you may find it in King Edwards life;
that young Prince, that died at some fifteen years of age, in his time, there
were two Bishops (otherwise good, and proved Martyrs, and yet you may see what
the best of them were in those times) they came to persuade the King to yield
to a Tolleration of the Mass, and it was but for his Sister neither, not for
the whole Kingdom, but merely for his own Sister, to yield to a Tolleration of
it in her Chapel, he stood out against it though young, thought it a dishonor
to God; well, they plead and Reason with him, telling him it was best in State
Policy, and other grounds they use to persuade a Tolleration of Popery, (thus
you see what kind of men these in these ways are, and if you do not know, yet
you are like to know more in this kind about these ways) but this I bring it
for, when the poor King, though young, having his heart possessed with this
principle, That he should not do any thing against God, he could not answer the
Bishops that came so subtly; but instead of Answering their Reasons, he burst
out with tears, and then they were convinced, and confessed the King had more
divinity in his little finger than they had in all their bodies. So I apply it
to you young ones, perhaps temptations to that which is a sin against God, comes
subtly, strengthened with this Argument, and the other Argument; but if you
have your hearts possessed with this truth, it is a Sin against God; Oh when
you cannot Answer the particulars of temptation, burst out and weep, and cry
either for your condition, or that you should be pestered with that you know is
a sin against God, and say, I had rather lose my life, suffer any thing in the
world, than sin against God. If your hearts be filled with this Principle, when
temptation to sin comes, you will be ready to burst out and weep before the
Lord; and this will be as strong an Answer to temptation as can be, and Satan
will quickly avoid, if you can when you find your selves pestered with
temptation, and it follows and dogs and pursues you, if you can being filled
with this Principle, That sin is against God, if you can get alone, and fall a
weeping, and lamenting, that your hearts are even ready to break, from the
consideration of this Principle, this will be the strongest way and means to
resist temptation that can be.

CHAP. XX.
A Sixth Corollarie.] If sin be thus sinful, it should teach us not only to be
troubled for our own sins, but the sins of others.

Sixthly, A Sixth Corollarie, If Sin be so much against God, and wrong God so,
Hence it should teach all those that know God, and have any love to God, to be
troubled, not only for their own sins, but for the sins of others, for sin
wheresoever they see it. Oh I see the blessed God wronged, fought against,
stroke at; and this should go near the heart of all those that have any love to
God at all: As with David in the 119. Psalm, 136. Rivers of water run down mine
eyes because they keep not thy Laws: it is true, every man and woman should
especially look to themselves, and their hearts should especially be troubled
for their own sins; but mark the Saints that know how sin is against God, their
hearts cannot but be wonderfully troubled when they see that God, so dear and
precious to them, thus wronged; Rivers of water run down mine eyes because they
keep not thy Law. Oh when (I put it to thee in the Name of the Lord) in all thy
life did thou shed one tear for the sins of those among whom you live? for
the sins of thy Family? And verse. 158. I beheld the transgressors, and was
grieved: Oh I was grieved and pained at my heart; yea, thus it will be with
thee if thou love God. When thou in the Family, may be thou art a Child,
when thou beholdest thy Father or Mother Carnal, and spending all their lives
without the knowledge of God, and in ways of sinning against God, thou
should get alone, and mourn and lament for it: Oh it is that, if any thing
in the world, that would break a Parents heart, if there be a young Child, a
Youth, or a Maid, that God begins to reveal himself unto them, and the Parent
speaks, may be against them, and Gods people, and swear, or profane Gods Day,
or speak against his Ordinances, though it may be it do not become thee to
speak to them; but if thou can before them, let tears drop from thine eyes;
or get alone, and fall down and lament before God, if thou can by lamenting
reprove their sins; that they shall see thee lament for them, this may break
their hearts it may be: notwithstanding if it do not break their hearts, it
has this in it; Certainly, if any thing in the world will stir us and break
our own hearts, this should be it, To see God dishonored in the world as he is,
though our hearts be never so much hardened otherwise. There is a Story of a
Child of Cressus that was born dumb, he seeing a Soldier ready to strike at
his Father and kill him, the affection to his Father brake the bars of his
Tongue, and he cried out, Oh why will you kill the King? Then he cried out thus
though he never spoke before; but the stroke against his Father made him speak.
So thou man or woman, should have thy heart dead in other things, and have
no mind to speak, yet when you see wretched men and women strike at God, (as
they do, as I have showed in their sin) if thou have any heart in the world;
any life in the world, when thou see this stroke at God, now speak; Oh that
should burst all bars asunder. Though thou be never so meek in thy Family,
and can bear other things, yet thou should show that thou can not bear
sin against God. Oh I beseech you consider this, and see how near this comes to
you; How many if any thing be done in your Family against you, or among your
neighbors that is against you, you cannot bear it; but you can bear that which
is done against God, and never be troubled at it. As many a Master, let the
Servant neglect his work, and displease him, he cannot bear it; but let his
Servant be wicked, and break the Sabbath, deny God his time, let his Servant
perhaps swear, or do such wickedness, he goes away and says it may be, Why do
you so? or, you should not do so; or it may be, takes no notice of it:
Certainly that man knows neither God nor sin, or has little relation to God
that takes so little notice of that done against God; and yet that done against
himself, he cannot bear it. Take this along with you, If you have any relation
to God, your hearts will be more troubled for the wrong done to God by your
Children and Servants, than when your selves are wronged by your Servants or
Children. Oh how many men and women would go and wring their hands to their
neighbors and friends, Oh! never man or woman so miserable as I! my own Child
out of my bowels wrongs me, and does what hurt he can to me! this is accounted
matter of bitter lamentation: But now why should not thy heart melt and lament
when thou can say, Oh the Child out of my Loins and Bowels, how does he wrong
the blessed God of all the world? Oh that I should be so miserable to bear in
my Bowels one an Enemy to the infinite blessed God! Oh that an Enemy to God
should ever come out of my Loins! My thinks this should move tender hearted
Mothers, to see that they should bring forth such that should go on in ways of
enmity against God himself. Suppose one out of your Bowels should be a Traitor
to the Parliament, and do mischief to the State, would not this trouble you,
that one out of your Bowels should be a Traitor to the Commonwealth? this would
be a grievous vexation. Now is it not more if that thou have a wicked Child,
one out of thy Bowels that strikes at God, and is a Traitor to the God of
Heaven? these do more mischief than to destroy a whole Nation; I say, if a man
should live to destroy, to undo a whole Land for their outward estate, there
were not so much evil in it, as in one sin against God. You would say, that
were a Misereant that should be born to undo a whole Nation, and woe to me that I
should bear one that should live to do such mischief to undo a State: Now if
thou bear one that strikes against God, and wrongs God in ways of sin, this
should trouble thee as much as the other: therefore never be at quiet till thou
see some work of grace, till thou see the heart of thy Child called in. I
remember Augustine says this of his Mother, and I propound this for Mothers
example, he being very wicked a while, and his Mother godly; Oh it grieved
her heart that she should have a Child go on in such wickedness against God,
and she praid and wept, so that Augustine says of her, after God had
enlightened his eyes to consider what she did for him, says he, I persuade my
self my Mother did as much labor, and endure as much pain for my second Birth,
as ever for my first Birth: this is his testimony of her, that by her prayers
and tears for her Child's Salvation that was wicked, he did verily believe it
cost her as much labor for the second Birth, as for the first: upon which, when
she comes and complains to Ambrose of her Child, well says he, Be of good
comfort, surely a Son of so many prayers and tears can hardly perish; and he
did not indeed, for he proved a worthy Instrument of Gods Glory afterward in
the Church. Now is there any Mother in this Congregation that can say, I have
labored as much, and it has cost me as much pain for the second Birth of my
Child, as ever it did for the first? Certainly did you know what sin were, and
how against God, it would cost you a great deal of travail when you see your
Children wicked, and much prayer and cost, that you might not have a Child an
Enemy to God, a Traitor to the Crown, Scepter, and Dignity of Jesus Christ.
Oh Brethren, does it not pity your souls to see that infinite, blessed, holy,
dreadful God so much wronged in the world as he is. It should move us to pity
to see any Saint, a man or a woman of an excellent gracious Spirit, to see such
a soul abused and wronged; as Solomon says, there was a wise man in the City
and not regarded, though he delivered the City; to see but one man of wisdom
that has but any excellency in his Spirit to be wronged, it should trouble
any ingenious heart. But then I reason thus, if it would be, and should be such
a trouble to any ingenious heart to see any one man of a gracious Spirit
wronged and abused, then how should it trouble any ingenious, any gracious
heart in the world to see the infinite blessed glorious God to be wronged in
the world by sin, as I have already showed he is in every sin, when I
discovered to you how sin is against God that I might possess your hearts with
this Principle, for I know no Principle of greater power through the strength
of Christ to do good upon your Spirits than this.

CHAP. XXI.
A Seventh Corollarie.] If Sin has done thus much against God, then all that
are now converted had need do much for God.

SEventhly, Another is this, If Sin have done so much against God, and so much
wronged God, hence it follows, That all those that have heretofore lived in a
sinful way, and God has now been pleased to enlighten them, and work upon
their hearts, had need now do much for God: This follows clearly, thou did
heretofore live in ways of sin, and what did thou do in all this? Nothing
but strike at God, and wrong God all that time of thy Natural Estate, till God
opened thine eyes, and awakened thy conscience: Oh think now what a deal of
wrong have I done to God all my life, if I have done nothing else? well, now
God opens thine eyes, Oh now thou had need to do much for God. If God have
showed himself, and given hopes of mercy, and that he has pardoned me; this
will certainly prevail with any heart that God has turned: What! have I done
so much against God heretofore! Oh I have cause to seek the honor of God upon
my hands and feet all my days, that if I can do any thing for God: What! I
such a vile wretch, and yet out of Hell! yea, and hope to be pardoned! Oh any
thing I can do for him, though to creep upon my hands and feet all my days in
this world, to suffer all the hardships in the world, shame, loss of estate,
any thing in the world; no matter how great and hard the suffering be that God
calls for. There is infinite Reason I should do and suffer all for God, for I
have wronged God by sin, and thus we shall turn sin to grace as it were, and of
Poison make an Antidote against poison, by taking advantage by sin to be more
obedient unto God. You that have been swearers and wronged God that way, now
sanctify Gods Name the other way: You that have broken so many Sabbaths, now
sanctify Sabbaths: true, all that you can do cannot make up the wrong, but
that will show thy good will, that thou will do what thou can, and manifest
to God and all the world, That if thou had ten thousand times more strength
than thou have thou could lay it out for God; and certainly any man or woman
that have been great sinners, if God have humbled them and pardoned them, they
will be great Saints for the time to come: Carry this home with you, any that
have been vile, perhaps you think you have grace because you are not so vile as
heretofore you have been; but certainly if you have grace, there will be a
proportionableness between the holiness of your lives now, and your wicked life
before; you will take advantage, I have wronged God so before, now I must live
thus and thus: It will be so between man and man, if one have wronged you, and
you have pardoned him, you expect he should do, what he can for you: Thus it
should be with God and you, you have wronged God, others have sinned as well as
you, and others sins have been furthered by you; this now should inflame your
hearts, I have sin enough in my self, and I have been the cause of it in
thousand thousand sins in others, my sins strike against God, yea, and I have
caused others to sin and strike against God: now if I could draw some from sin,
I should think it the happiest thing in the world; I would creep upon my hands
and knees to draw others from sin to God, to be in love with the ways of God,
and of Religion. Oh you that have been forward in sin, don't think it enough
that now you be troubled for your sins and leave them; but know, you must do
for God now as much as you have done against him; he requires it of you: Oh go
to your friends, and acquaintance, and kindred, and labor to draw them off from
sin; tell your kindred, and friends, and acquaintance, Oh Brother, that you did
but know what sin means; Oh Sister, that you did but understand what it is to
sin against God: God has showed me in some measure; yea, I that went on in
such and such sins; Oh I see how I struck at God, and what an evil this is; Oh
that God would enlighten your eyes: Come and hear the Word, I thought lightly
of sin before, now I have gone and heard, and God has showed me what it was;
Oh that God would make you see: And pray for them, and take no nay, but to them
again and again, that so you may do somewhat for God as you have done abundance
of wrong against God.

CHAP. XXII.
The Eight Corollarie.] If Sin does so much against God, hence see why God
manifest such sore displeasure against sin as he does: 1 Against the Angels
that sinned. 2 Against all Adams Posterity. 3 See it in Gods giving the Law
against sin. 4 See it in Gods punishing sins that are accounted small. 5 See it
in Gods destroying all the world for sin. 6 See his displeasure in punishing
sin eternally.

Eighthly, This is one Consequence follows, If sin be so great an evil as you
have heard, so much against God, wrongs God so much as it does, and strikes at
God; Hence then we see the reason why God manifests such sore displeasure
against sin. We find (Brethren) most dreadful manifestations of Gods
displeasure against sin, and the ground and bottom of them is in these things
which you have heard opened unto you. And indeed did you understand and believe
what has been opened unto you concerning sins opposition of God, you could not
then wonder at Gods manifestation of his displeasure against sin. There are
manifold Manifestations of Gods displeasure against sin, which when they be
spoken of, and opened unto people that do not understand the dreadful evil that
is in sin, they stand and wonder at it, and think, Oh they be hard and severe
things. When Ministers reveal the threatenings of God against sin, Oh say they,
God forbid, we hope God is more merciful than so; and all because they
apprehend not what dreadful evil there is in sin. That soul that apprehends and
believes these particulars that have been opened unto you, cannot but justify
God when they hear the revelation, and the manifestation of the displeasure of
God against sin. As now in these Particulars: That which has been delivered is
the bottom and ground of these that we shall mention, and we see the reason of
all these. As

First, That dreadful manifestation of the displeasure of God against the
Angels that sinned against him: there is that revelation of the displeasure of
God against the Angels, that might cause all our hearts to tremble before the
Lord at the very thought and hearing of it. I beseech you consider, you who
think that God is only a God of Mercy, and God is not so severe against sin as
many Ministers would make him; do but attend to what I shall say unto you, how
God has manifested his displeasure against sin in the Angels: Consider of
these five or six Particulars, I will but only mention them.

1 That God should cast so many glorious Creatures as the Angels are, for ever
from himself, considering the Excellency of their Nature.

2 Consider their Multitude.

3 Consider, That the Chains of darkness that they be cast into, are eternal
Miseries.

4 Consider, That this was but for one sin.

5 And consider, That this was but the first sin that ever they committed.

6 Lastly, consider, That God should not now enter so much as into any parley
with them about any terms of peace; nor never would, nor never will: This is
the sore displeasure of God against them, that God (I say) should not look upon
the Angels that he has made glorious Creatures, the most excellent of all the
work of his hands: And when there were many thousand millions of them, for so
the Scripture speaks of Legions, even in one man Legions of Devils: though
there were thousands and millions of such glorious Creatures that God made; and
these were in Heaven about his Throne, beholding his glory, and when these
committed but one sin against him, never but one before their Fall, and the
first that ever was committed; they had no example before them of Gods wrath,
but upon the very first sin, though it were but one that all these glorious
Creatures committed, they were presently cast down from Heaven, and of Angels
made Devils, and reserved in Chains of eternal darkness: And so is God set
against them all for that one first sin, that he would never enter into any
parley with them, to be reconciled upon any terms; never to consider of any
terms of peace, but cast them away from him unto eternal torments without any
recoverie; this is the dreasul displeasure of God against sin. Now Brethren,
this I speak of, is that which there is no doubting or controversy about; any
one that knows the Scripture knows this. In some things there may be
controversies about them; but no Divine that has knowledge of any thing of
Scripture, but will confess this that I speak of; and if you know not this,
certainly you were never acquainted with the Scripture: Though other Points be
controverted, yet none that know Gods Word make question of this, this is
cleerlie granted of all. And the consideration of this might strike abundance
of fear and terror into the hearts of wicked and ungodlie men and women, to
think, Lord, how have I thought of thee all this while, and have looked upon God
as a merciful God, that though I have sinned, I have thought things would not
be with me as I have heard by such and such Ministers; but this day I have
heard, such was the sore displeasure of the infinite God against Sin, that when
he had to deal with those glorious Angels for one sin, he cast thousands of
them into eternal Misery, and upon no terms will be reconciled, nor never
will. You think if you sin against God, you will cry God mercy, and so hope
God will pardon: true, there is a difference between Mankind and the Angels,
because we have a Mediator, and they have not; but most people that speak of
crying to God for mercy, they look upon God, as Gods Nature meerlie being
merciful, and not through a Mediator; they do not understand the necessity of
a Mediator between God and them, but they apprehend that that God that made
them will hear their cry: Now God made the Angels and they were more noble
Creatures than you abundantly; now the Angels that sinned but once, for that
one sin are cast for ever, and God resolves, though they should cry and
shreek, and shed thousands of tears for sin, God will never hear them; Gods
displeasure against sin is so great: certainly then sin is a dreadful evil.
Suppose a Prince were so wrath with a great company of his Nobles, that he
casts a great multitude of them into a Dungeon, and there they endure torment,
and the King would not vouchsafe so much as to enter into a parley, to be
reconciled upon any terms; every one would say, surely it is some great matter
that has provoked the King: if they understand this Prince is very Just, and
withal very merciful; to be sure he would do none any wrong, but were very
merciful above al men in the world; and yet for but one offense he should cast
these his Nobles down into a Dungeon to be tormented, and would by no means be
reconciled: every one would conclude, certainly there was much evil in that
offense if it deserved thus much; and certainly for the Prince to deal thus
with them there was much in it: Would you not make such a conclusion from
thence? then learn to make such a conclusion from Gods dealing with the Angels;
That seeing God is Just, and can do no Creature wrong; yea, God is infinitely
merciful, and yet he does cast his noble Creatures, those Creatures that were
the highest that ever he made any Creature, for one sin without any means of
Reconciliation: Certainly Sin has more evil in it than men are aware of, for
though God has not dealt thus with Mankind, yet he might; there is so much
evil in sin that God might have done thus with any of us; and had it not been
for the Mediation of his Son, we had been thus irrecoverably miserable to all
eternity.

Secondly, Consider, That for one sin in our first Parents (and not in our own
persons) that all the Children of men by Nature are put in such an estate to be
Children of wrath, and liable to eternal misery, and that for the sin of our
Parents: that will show the wonderful Justice of God: How unsearchable are his
Judgments, and his ways past finding out! Certainly God is infinitely
displeased with Sin, that when the first Parents of Mankind did offend, then
upon that all their Posterity to the end of the world are put into a damnable
condition, all of them are children of wrath, and heirs of eternal perdition as
in themselves. Certainly my Brethren, this is a truth, and none can deny it
that understand Scripture, and if you do not understand this, you have not
understood a great and necessary Truth of the Word of God, that is necessary
to eternal life, That all Mankind are by the sin of their first Parents put
into a condemned estate, so as they are all the children of wrath by nature as
the Scripture says: so that we are not only in danger of Gods eternal wrath
through the sin that we in our own persons do actually commit, but though we
had never committed any actual sin in our own persons, yet the sin of our first
Parents is enough to make us children of wrath, and be our eternal ruin.
Certainly there is a great deal of evil in sin more than the world thinks of,
when it shall so provoke God as that he shall have such displeasure to put all
Mankind to be in the state of Children of wrath for the sin of our first
Parents. This is a second Manifestation of Gods displeasure against sin.

Thirdly, A third Manifestation of Gods displeasure against sin is in that
fiery Law (as the Scripture calls it) that God has given for forbidding and
threatening of sin. Consider the dreadful manner of Gods giving the Law, that it
was with Fire, Lightning, Thunderings, and Earthquakes, and Smoke, so as the
Scripture says Moses did shake and tremble at the very sight of the
dreadfulness of the Law when it was first given. That was only to set forth
thus much to us, That if the Law that God gave be broken, that then God will be
very dreadful to those that break it; therefore he gives it at first in such a
dreadful manner. It may be many bold presumptuous sinners think it nothing to
break the Law of the infinite eternal God; but in that God gives the Law in
such a dreadful manner as you may read in the 19. of Exodus, how dreadfully God
gave the Law; God does thereby declare to all the world, how dreadful sinners
are to expect him to be, if they do break the Law. But especially consider that
dreadful Curse annexed to the Law, Cursed is every one that abides not in every
thing that is written in the Law; to do that which the Law of God pronounces to
be done: a curse to every one that does any thing at any time that shall break
it. That there should be such a dreadful Curse annexed; this manifests the sore
displeasure of God against sin.

Fourthly, A fourth Manifestation of the sore displeasure of God against sin
(all this but to show you further how Sin is a greater evil than Affliction)
the Manifestation I say of Gods displeasure against sin is seen, in that we
find in Gods word God has so severely pun^sh'd some sins that do appear to us
to be very small, little sins: and yet God has been exceedingly severe against
those sins which appear to us to be exceeding small: To instance in three.

1 In 1 Samuel 6. 19. there you have this example, that the men of Beth-sh^^esh,
when the Ark came to them they did but look into the Ark out of curiosity, for
ought we know for no other end but merely out of curiosity: Now because the
Ark was a holy thing, and none but the Priests of God were to meddle with it,
God did presently at an instant slay fifty thousand, and three score and ten
men of them: Upon this the text says, these men beholding this severitie of
God for this offense, they all said, Oh! who shall stand before the holy God!
If God be so holy that he cannot bear so small a sin as this did appear to men,
that but for looking into the Ark so many thousands shall be slain presently:
who can stand before the holy Lord! Many of you have slight thoughts of the
Lord and his Holiness, and think you may be bold and presumptuous, you venture
upon greater offenses than this was; but these men upon the venturing upon this
one thing, above fifty thousand are slain presently: This is the displeasure
of God against sin, though very small to our thoughts.

2 Again, A second example you have in Uzzah that did but touch the Ark out of
a good intention, as being ready to fall, yet that not being according to the
Law, God struck him with death presently; it cost him his life, he was struck
with sudden death. We are terrified when we see one fall down suddenly: now
upon that offense, though he had a good meaning, and good intention, yet God
brake in upon him with his wrath, and struck him dead presently. Consider this
you that think you have good meanings, and good intentions, yet not doing
according to the Law; the least breach of the Law, though we have a good
meaning, does provoke the wrath of God, and God when he pleases lets out this
his wrath.

3 A third example you have in that poor man that we read of, who did but
gather sticks upon the Lords day, and by the Command of God from Heaven this
man must be stoned to death: You would think these things little matters. Alas
poor man, he might have need of them: How many of you venture upon other manner
of things upon the Lords Day, profaning of it? and yet God speaks from Heaven,
and gives command to have this man stoned to death. Now Brethren, though it be
true, that God does not always come upon men for such little sins, it may be
to make known his Patience and long-suffering. Perhaps the Lord does let others
go on for a long time in greater sins: but yet God by a few such examples does
declare to all the world what the evil of the least sin is, and how his
displeasure is out against the least sin. If he do forbear, that is to be
attributed to his patience and long-suffering, but not to the littleness of the
sin, or the littleness of the evil that is in that sin. This is a Fourth.

Fifthly, A fifth thing wherein God manifests his displeasure against sin, is
in those dreadful and hidious Judgments that the Lord executes abroad in the
world that we have the stories of in the Scripture, and all Ages: As that God
should come and drown a whole world except eight persons, all the whole world
swept away and drowned. And so that God should command fire and Brimstone to
come down from Heaven, and burn and consume whole Cities, Sodom and Gomorrah,
and the Cities adjoining; yea, and all the men, women, and children, but only
Lot, and those few with him. And so the fire to come down upon those Captains
and their Fifties, 2 Kings, 1. And the Earth swallowing up Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram. There is no Age but has some one or other dreadful example of His
Judgments against Sin. The wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all
unrighteousness. Now Brethren, though some people have escaped, and these
manifestations of Gods Judgments are not so general and ordinary; yet when they
are but now and then, God manifests what his displeasure is against Sin, and
what might be to all that Sin against him.

Sixthly, A sixth manifestation of Gods displeasure against Sin, is in those
eternal torments and miseries in Hell that the Scripture speaks of: the worm
that never dies, and the fire that never goes out: when you hear Ministers
speak of fire that never is quenched; for poor people to lie burning in fire
thousands of thousands of years in eternal flames, scalding under the wrath of
God; you stand aghast at the dreadfulness of these expressions. Certainly these
are only to reveal the displeasure of God against sin, because there is no
finite time can be sufficient to manifest to the full the displeasure of God
against sin: therefore those that perish, must perish eternally.

CHAP. XXIII.
A Seventh discovery of Gods displeasure against sin, opened from the
sufferings of Christ. First, See the several expressions of Scripture: 1 He was
sorrowful to death, 2 He began to be amazed, 3 He began to be in an Agony.
Secondly, See the effects of Christ's being in an Agony, 1 He fell grovelling on
the ground, 2 He swet drops of blood, 3 He cries to God if it be possible to
let this cup pass from me. Thirdly, There is eight Considerations of Christ's
sufferings.

SEventhly, And that is greater than all that has been said: Put all the
former six together; His dealings with the Angels, and with Mankind; The
dreadful giving of the Law; His dreadful Judgments for small sins; And examples
of his wrath abroad in the world; And the eternal torments in Hell: Put all
these six together, and yet I say all these six is not so much to manifest the
displeasure of God against sin as this one that now I shall tell you of: and if
there be any thing in the world that should make us to see the evil of sin, it
should be this; if any thing make our hearts to shake and tremble at the evil
of that sin of which it is so much guilty, then this I say that now I speak of
should do it; and that is this, The dealings of God the Father with his Son:
when Jesus Christ that was the second Person of the Trinity, God blessed for
ever, came to be our Mediator, and to have but our sins imputed unto him; and
according to Scripturs phrase, to be made sin: Do but then take notice how God
deals with him, how God manifests himself to his own Son, when his own Son did
but take man's sin upon him, to answer for it: do but then consider how God the
Father did deal with him. The Scripture says, he did not spare his Son, but
let out the vials of his wrath upon him in a most dreadful manner. If we do but
consider,

First, that Christ God blessed for ever should come and be in the form of a
Servant, should be a man of sorrows as the Scripture speaks, that in the whole
course of his life should live a contemptible life before men, and undergo
grievous sufferings. But because I must hasten, do but look upon Christ in his
Agony, and upon the Cross at his death, and there you will see the dreadful
displeasure of God against sin, and in nothing more than that. True, there is
the bright glass of the Law wherein we may see the evil of sin: but there is
the red glass of the sufferings of Christ, and in that we may see more of the
evil of sin than if God should let us down to Hell, and if there we should see
all the tortures and torments of the damned in Hell, see them how they lie
sweltring under Gods wrath there; it were not so much as beholding sin through
the red glass of the sufferings of Jesus Christ, and that of his Agony. And
give me leave a little to show to you how God let out himself against his Son
when he came into the Garden; and a little before when he was to die and suffer
upon the Cross. And for this consider these two things:

First, The several Expressions the holy Ghost uses in the several Evangelists
for the setting out of those dreadful things Christ suffered as a fruit of Gods
displeasure upon him.

1 One Evangelist says that Christ was very (...) Praepositio (...), auget
significationem, declarat animum undique maerora obsessu^ and circum vallatum.
sorrowful even to the death, Mat. 26. 38. he began to be (the word in the
Original signifies) compassed about with sorrows, to have sorrows round about
him, and as it were beset and besieged with grief; and it was to the very
death, usque ad mortem, sorrowful to the very death: What was it for? upon the
apprehension of the wrath of his Father, which he was to endure for the sin of
man: he was sorrowful to the death in the apprehension of it. You it may be
upon the sight of sin content your selves with some slight little sorrow. You
will it may be, when (...) significat attonitum esse ex significationem auget,
ita ut sit animo and corpore per horrescere. Medici v^cant horripilationem.
Gerrh. in Harm.
you are told of sin, cry, Lord have mercy upon me, I am sorry for it, and so
pass it away. But Christ when God comes to deal with him, he makes his soul to
be compassed about with sorrows, sorrowful to the death for our sins.

2 Another Evangelist tells us he began to be amazed, Mark, 14. 33. that is,
when Christ came to drink the Cup of the wrath of his Father, due for our sins,
he stood amazed at the sight of the dreadfulness of that Cup he was to drink
of; because he knew what Gods wrath was, he understood what it was before he
drunk of it; and this made him stand amazed at it. Many sinners hear Gods
wrath, and this makes them fear, but they be not amazed at it, they can pass it
away and they be not affected with it afterward; because they understand it
not, they know not what it is for a Creature to stand before the wrath of an
infinite Deity: Who knows the power of thy wrath? says the Scripture: therefore
they be not amazed. But Christ that knew full well what the wrath of God was,
and saw to the bottom of it, he understood to the dregs what that Cup was; and
he stood amazed at the sight of it when he was to drink it.

3 Another Evangelist has this Expression, (...), of (...). Beza Hesychius
dicit significare palaestrum and bellum proprle est timor quo corripi solent in
certamen descensury. Stephan. in These.
('it is in Luke 22. 44.) Christ began to be in an Agony: Now the word Agony,
signifies a strife, a combat; it is taken from the word that stgnifies a
combat in Battle. Christ was in an Agony, in a Combat: Combat, with what?
with whom? With the Wrath of God, he saw coming out upon him to sink him; he
saw the Curse of the Law come out upon him; he saw the infinite Justice of God,
of the infinite Deity come out upon him: and he was in an Agony, in combat
with the infinite Justice and wrath of God, and the dreadful Curse of the Law,
and so Christ came to be in an Agony. These be the three Expressions of the
Evangelists.

Secondly, Consider the Effects of Christ's being in an Agony, and apprehending
the wrath of his Father for sin.

1 One Effect was this, you shall find it in the story of the Gospel, that the
text says, he fell grovelling upon the ground upon the apprehension of Gods
wrath and displevsure upon him for sin, which he was to suffer: he fell down
grovelling upon the ground. When he that upholds the Heavens and the Earth by
his Power, now falls grovelling upon the Earth, having the weight and burden of
man's Sin upon him he falls upon his face, he falls to the ground. Certainly
Brethren, Christ had that weight and burden upon him, that would have pressed all
the Angels in Heaven, and Men in the World down to the bottomless gulf of
despair: If all the strength of all the men that ever were since the beginning
of the world, and all the Angels in Heaven were put into one, and he had but
that weight upon him that Christ had, it would have made him sink down into
eternal despair: for had not Christ been God as well as Man, he could never
have born it, but would have sunk down eternally: But the burden and weight was
so great that he sinks down to the ground.

2 A second effect of Christ's bearing the wrath of God for Sin is this, He
sweat great drops of blood; the word in the Original is Clodders of Blood;
Blood thickened into Clods. Never was there such a sweat; it was in the Winters
night, a cold night, abroad upon the ground in a cold Winters night, and he had
nothing else upon him to make him sweat but the burden of sin, and the weight
of the wrath of God being upon him, he being under that burden sweat, and such
a sweat as made the very blood break through his very Veins and run to
Clodders, and so run down upon the ground Clodders of Blood: and all this but
upon the apprehension of the wrath of God his Father against him for our Sin.
Now you know when Porters be under great Burdens, sometimes they sweat; but
never did any sweat like this sweat of Christ, being under the weight of man's
Sin, sweat so as Clodders of Blood should fall from him: One would think fear
should rather draw in the Blood; fear naturally draws in the blood to the
heart: therefore it is that men and women when they are skar'd, and are afraid,
they are so pale in their Countenance; fear causes paleness in the outward
parts, because the blood retires to the heart when they be afraid. But such was
the amazement upon Christ, upon the apprehension of the wrath of his Father for
Sin, that it sends out blood in Clodders trickling down his sides.

3 And then a third expression which show the effect of Gods wrath on Christ,
is the Prayer of Christ; Christ does as it were shrink under this weight and
burden of sin, and cries to God, if it be possible let this Cup pass from me.
When we cry with vehemence, we say, if it be possible let it be thus or thus;
but Christ cries out so three times. We may apprehend Christ taking as it were
the Cup of the wrath of his Father in his hand, and because he knew it was the
end wherefore he came into the world, that he must drink of it for satisfaction
for man's Sin; and being willing to save Mankind, that he knew could not be
saved but he must drink the Cup, he takes it in his hand ready to drink it;
but beholding the hidiousness and dreadfulness of this Cup, and knowing what
was in it, he puts it away, and cries, Father if it be possible, let this Cup
pass: but now he sees if he did not drink it, all the Children of men must be
eternally damned; for such was our misery, if Christ had not drunk this Cup,
we had all eternally perish't; therefore Christ puts it to his mouth again (as
it were) the second time; but yet seeing what dreadfulness was in this Cup, and
he knowing it, he takes it away again, and cries, If it be possible, let this
Cup pass: but yet having love to Mankind, being loath to see so many thousands
of poor Creatures perish eternally, he puts it to his mouth again a third time;
and yet seeing the dreadfulness of it, puts it away again, and yet says, If it
be possible let it pass. This might make a man tremble to think that he shall
(as Job says 21. Job) drink of the wrath of God: Thus it was with Christ, and
all this while he did not drink it: But afterward when he comes to the Cross,
there he drunk the Cup of Gods wrath, and there he cries out with another cry
more bitter than all the other, and that is, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? so that he apprehends himself forsaken. Oh the wrath of the
Almighty that then was upon the Spirit of Jesus Christ at that time: What! for
the son of God blessed for evermore thus to cry out, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me! Oh you Heavens how could you be able to behold such a
Spectacle as this was, or the Earth be able to bear it! Truly, neither Heaven
nor Earth were able; for the Scripture says, that the Sun withdrew his light,
and was darkened so many hours; it was from twelve to three, that the Sun
withdrew his light and did not shine, but there was dismal darkness in the
world as not being able to behold such a Spectacle as this: and the Earth shook
and trembled, and the Graves opened, and the Rocks clove in sunder, the very
stones themselves were affected with such a work as this; and the vale of the
Temple rent asunder: these things were done upon Christ's bearing of the Wrath
of his Father for Sin. Here you have the fruits of Gods displeasure for sin,
and in this you may see, surely sin must needs be a vile thing that causes God
the Father thus to deal with his own Son, when he had man's sin upon him.

Thirdly, Consider yet further, for there is much in it, and if this do not
show the evil of sin, and cause you to fear and tremble, those that be guilty
of sin, and their consciences tell them so; if their hearts tremble not,
certainly their hearts be hard, and their minds be blinded, and little hopes
can they have for the present of ever having their parts in these sufferings of
Christ; what shall Christ suffer such sufferings, and will thou go away and
have slight thoughts of sin? shall sin be so great a burden to Christ, and will thou be so merry under it? Certainly you see it is more than you were aware of:
for you to say, I trust in Jesus Christ, and hope to be saved by Jesus Christ;
you see how Christ felt sin, the Scripture says he was made a Curse: Were it
not we had it from the holy Ghost, no man or Angel durst say so, that Christ
should be made a Curse; in the abstract, not Cursed, but made a Curse: What! he
that was God and Man, by the sin of man was made a Curse! Oh the displeasure of
God against sin! But yet to give it you a little more fully, see these
Aggravations, and you will say, certainly the displeasure of God was great
against his Son.

1 As first, All that Christ suffered he perfectly knew it long before he
suffered, and yet it was so dreadful unto him. Oh Brethren, there be many men
and women understand nothing at all of the wrath of God against sin, these
think there is no great matter in it: Of all the men and women in the world,
when they come to suffer this wrath, it will be dreadful to them, because it
come unexpectedly; they that went on merrily and cheerfully in the ways of
sin, and for the wrath of God, never thought of it; now then when the wrath of
God comes on them, it will be more dangerous and intolerable: This is the
reason why many people when their consciences are awakened upon their sick
Beds, then they despair, crying and roaring under Gods wrath and rage with
despair: Why? Because they never in their lives came to understand the danger
of sin, and of Gods wrath for sin; and because it comes now suddenly upon them,
they be not able to bear it. But it was not so with Christ, Christ understood
this long before; he knew what it would be before he took our Nature, and he
knew what it would be when he came in humane Nature to undertake it. Those men
and women that know not what storms and tempests are, it is grievous to them
when they come to know them suddenly; when they are in the midst of a storm or
tempest at Sea, Oh they are grievous: but Mariners that know beforehand what
they are like to meet withal, it is not grievous to them. But Christ though he
knew it beforehand, yet how dreadful was it to him when it came?

2 Consider, Christ had no sin in himself to weaken his strength, and take away
his strength, and so make the burden greater; he had no sin but only by
imputation. But now when the wrath of God comes upon us, we having so much sin
in our Natures, this weakens us, and will therefore make the burden of Divine
wrath so much the more intolerable to us: For as it is with a sound man, If a
great weight be laid upon a man healthful and strong, he feels not the burden
of it; but if you lay the same weight upon a man very sick and weak through
distemper of body, it is grievous to him: So here, If the weight of Sin were so
grievous to Christ that had no distemper of weakness, how grievous will it be
to a sinner that is distempered, and so weakened with sin? If the shoulders of
a Porter be sore, and all the Skin off, and a boil upon his shoulder, how
grievous would the burden be then? So it is with us, when God comes to lay the
burden of his Wrath upon us, we be but weak Creatures at the best, but through
the distemper of sin in our hearts we are more weak and more unable to bear:
because we be sore, and have boyls of sin; this makes Gods wrath much more
dreadful; but it was not so with Christ.

3 Christ had absolute perfect Patience, there was not the least impatiency in
Christ: therefore when Christ that had perfect Patience, and yet did thus cry
out and sweat, and was thus sorrowful under it, surely there was some fearful
burden in this. Some men and women will lie and roar out under some pains, and
it may be it is great, but had they perfect patience, they would not make such
dolor and outcries: it is through the weakness of their Patience that they
make such outcries, and manifest such sense of their affliction. But Christ
made not such outcries through impatiency.

4 Consider, Christ had the strength of an infinite Deity to support him: He
had the strength of God, he was God and Man, he had the strength of the Divine
Nature to support the Humane Nature which no Creature can have as Christ had;
for there was an Hypostatical union between the Divine and Humane Nature at
that time, and yet notwithstanding the Hypostatical union of both Natures, yet
Christ expresses himself thus, and is thus sensible of the Wrath upon him for
the sin of Man.

5 Consider, Christ was the Captain of all that were to suffer hereafter: and
therefore he would if he had had no more upon him than that which the humane
Nature could have born, have manifested (one would think) abundance of
Resolution and Magnanimity, and not have cried out so: and surely had there not
been the suffering of the Wrath of the Deity, and the Curse of the Law in it;
certainly he that was the Captain of all that were to suffer, he would have
manifested it to be a light burden he met withal; for there be many Martyrs
have suffered outwardly as great Extremities as ever Christ did, for outward
torture, and born them with joy; therefore seeing the Martyrs many of them
suffering greater tortures to their bodies, and have born them with Joy; no
sorrow, nor crying out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? nor, If it
be possible, let this cup pass, but endured them with a great deal of Joy. Now
how comes it to pass that the Martyrs did bear them with such joy, and Christ
the Captain of them all falls to the Earth, and cries out so? Certainly there
was more in Christ's sufferings than in all the sufferings in the world, more of
the displeasure of God.

6 Consider, That it was through the strength of Christ that all that ever did
suffer were enabled to suffer what they did undergo. Now if Christ had that
strength, that through him all the Martyrs were enabled to suffer what they
did; certainly Christ had abundance of strength in himself to suffer when he
came to it: How comes it to pass then that the strength whereby they were
enabled to suffer being from Christ, they manifested not that horror and
trouble that Christ himself did? Certainly therefore Christ suffered other
manner of things than they did.

7 Consider this, Christ did know what an infinite good his sufferings would do:
that by suffering he should save so many thousands, reconcile God and man,
glorify his Father, that he should do the greatest work for God and his Father
that ever was; that by his sufferings there should be that work done that
should be matter of eternal praise, and Hallelujahs of the Saints and Angels
eternally in the Heavens: And yet though Christ knew and understood what good
should be done by his sufferings, yet see how sensible he was of the greatness
of it. One would have thought the good he saw to be done should much have
lightened it; and so certainly it did.

8 Consider, Christ did know his sufferings were to continue but a little while;
though they were extreme, yet that they should last but for a few hours, and
then he should be glorified. And yet though he did understand his sufferings
were to last but a few hours, and then himself should come to glory; yet for
all this they were thus hidious and dreadful to him. Oh Lord, then how hidious
shall the sufferings of the damned be to them, when as every damned soul that
goes to Hell, knows certainly how he must lie to all eternity; after thousands
of thousands, and ten thousand millions of years; after so many thousands of
years as there be drops in those mighty Waters which you sail over; yet the
time is no more expired than the very first moment they entered into those
miserable torments.

Consider of this thus you that have to do in the great Waters, consider how
many drops there might be in the Sea, as big as the bill of a Bird could carry,
and that this Bird should be supposed once in a thousand years to carry away
one drop, yet this Bird would sooner empty that mighty Sea than the torments of
the damned should be at an end. Oh how dreadful will it be to them when as
Christ's tortures which he did endure but a little while, made him to cry out
so. Oh Brethren, put all these together and then know the evil of sin. Oh that
we could apprehend it now before we come to feel it. For this is the end for
which I speak of these things and present them before you, that you may now
know them, and never come to feel experimentally what they be. Blessed be those
that in hearing tremble and believe, and do not come to know by experience that
dreadful evil in them. If God should in his infinite wisdom have studied (as
one may so speak) from all Eternity to have found out a way to have presented
sin to be dreadful to the Children of men, we could not conceive how infinite
Wisdom should from all eternity have found out an Argument to manifest the evil
of sin more, or so much as in the sufferings of Jesus Christ: So that in them
God does as it were say, Well, I see wretched Men and Women will not believe the
evil of sin; well, among other Arguments, I will have one, that if possible,
shall Convince all wicked hard hearts in the world to make them see what sin
is, and that is in my Son, in my dealings with my Son; and that wrath of mine I
shall lay upon my Son; this shall make it appear to them what sin is. Now if
God have done this on purpose to render Sin odious and abominable, and a most
dreadful Evil; Oh woe then to that Soul, that after all this shall go on in
ways of Sin pleasingly and delightfully, and easily entertain Sin.

THE SECOND PART OF THIS TREATISE.
Sin is most opposite to Man's Good; and far more opposite to the Good of man
than Affliction.

IT may be by all that has been said of Sins being against God, the hearts of
some (at least) may not be so much as turned: therefore now we come to show how
sin is against the Good of Man; not only against God, but against our selves.
Certainly Brethren, Sin makes the Sinner to be in an evil case: from that which
has been said we may conclude, That of a truth a sinner, a wicked man or woman
must needs be in an evil case. This is the Subject which I am to open, What an
evil case sin brings our selves into: and thereby we shall see that sin is a
greater Evil than Affliction. Though we have spent diverse Exercises upon this,
yet it is as various as if we had several Texts. Now this is the Argument to
demonstrate, That a sinner does not only dishonor and strike at God; but sin is
against his own soul, against his own life, against his own peace and comfort,
against his own happiness; he does undo himself by sin. This is that which I am
now to declare to you; and for the opening of this, diverse Particulars offer
themselves to be handled.

CHAP. XXIV.
First, Sin make a man evil, but no affliction can make him so: 1 Those that
are in affliction are not the worse, 2 But those that are wicked are vile
persons, though they be the greatest Princes.

FIrst, more Generally thus, Sin is against Man more than any Affliction. For,

First, Sin makes a man to be evil: no Affliction makes him to be evil but only
Sin: I beseech you observe it, a man or woman is not a worse man or woman
because afflicted, not worse than they were before; but sin makes the man or
the woman to be worse: and there is a great deal in this to show the evil of
sin to be beyond the evil of affliction. Take a man that is never so sorely
afflicted, suppose the affliction to be as grievous as the afflictions of Job,
suppose a man scraping off his Sores upon the dunghill as Job did, this
Affliction makes him not a worse man than he was before; only it may occasion
sin sometimes, and so make him worse: but take Job, considered in his
afflictions only, and he was not a worse man than in the greatest prosperity,
when the Candle of the Lord shined upon him, and all his parts, only it
occasioned some sin in Job, otherwise he had not been the worse; and in
conclusion he was not the worse, for as it occasioned some sin, so it stirred
up a great deal of grace; as the Apostle says 1 Cor. 8. 8, 9. For neither if
we eat, are we the better; neither if we eat not, are we the worse: So I may
say of all outward things in the world: If a man have riches, it makes him not
the better; if he be in poverty, it makes him not the worse: if he have honor,
he is not better; if disgrace, he is not worse, his condition may be worse, but
himself not at all the worse: Therefore you shall observe it, that when the
Scriptures speaks of Gods people afflicted, yet it speaks of them as most
honorable, and in a most excellent condition notwithstanding their afflictions:
but when it speaks of some in great prosperity, but wicked, it speaks of them
as most contemptible and vile. I will give you an example of each, the most
remarkable in all the Book of God.

1 Those that are most sorely afflicted, yet to show that they are not the
worse for their afflictions, see the 11. Heb. 36, 37, 38. verses; I suppose you
that are acquainted with the Word of God, know the story, that the Christians
went up and down the world in Sheep Skins and Goats Skins, Persecuted and
afflicted, and dwelling in the Caves of the Earth; they had trials of cruel
mockings, and scourgings; yea, moreover, of bands, and imprisonment: they were
stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword; they
wandered about in sheep skins and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted,
tormented. What can be said be more of affliction? if affliction can make a man
miserable, surely these must needs be miserable: They were mocked and slouted,
and made the offscouring of the World; driven from house and home, and went in
sheep skins and goat skins: many think themselves miserable if they cannot go
fine and brave; these went in sheep skins and goat skins, and were sawen
asunder, miserably tormented and afflicted: It may be some will say, certainly
these were in a most miserable condition: now mark the next words of the holy
Ghost, Of whom the world was not worthy: they were under such sore afflictions,
and yet they were such excellent persons as the world was not worthy of them in
their worst condition, they were so excellent that the world was not worthy of
them: They were thought to be such as were not worthy to live in the world,
thus the evil world thought of them; but mark the difference of the Judgment of
God from the Judgment of the World; the World thinks they are so vile that they
are not worthy to live in the World; and God thinks they are so excellent that
the World is not worthy that they should live amongst them. I remember
Chrysostom has this upon it, That they were so excellent, as all the men in
the world were not worth one of them; put all the other men in the world
together, and they were not worth so much as (at least) a few of these
afflicted, persecuted, tormented Christians: as if he should say, do you see a
company of poor Creatures walking in sheep skins and goat skins, and live in
caves and dens of the Earth; look upon them, and take all the men of the World,
Kings, Princes, and Monarchs, rich men, and mighty Captains of the World, all
other men, and put them all together, they are not all worth these few poor
Creatures that go up and down in sheep skins and goat skins. Thus afflictions
make not a man a pin the worse: Man he is exceeding glorious in Gods eyes
notwithstanding Afflictions.

2 But now secondly, Come to Sin, let there be Sin, although a man have never
so much outward prosterity and glory in the world, he is a most vile abominable
Creature, when sinful. See one famous example for this parallel to this on the
other side, in the Prophecy of Daniel, 11. Dan. verse 2. And there shall stand
up a VILE Person: Now who is this Vile Person that the holy Ghost speaks of? It
is according to Interpreters Antiochus Epiphanus, the great King of Assyria;
and his very name signifies Illustrious, so the word Epiphanus signifies,
Illustrious, Famous, Glorious; so that he has these two Titles, the great King
of Assyria, and the great King, Famous, Illustrious, Glorious. And Josephus
writing of this man, has this story, That the Samaritans when they saw how he
persecuted the Jews, they sought his favor, and would not own themselves Jews;
and they writ to Antiochus the mighty God, this was their Title in a Letter
they sent to him, Antiochus the mighty God: Well, now see here is one that has
outward glory enough; the great King of Assyria; Antiochus, Famous,
Illustrious, that has the Title of the mighty God; but now because he is a
wicked man, the Scripture says, there shall a vile Person arise; a vile Person
notwithstanding his greatness; let him be never so glorious a King, and called
the mighty God, yet a vile Person. I beseech you in your thoughts put these two
Scriptures together, these that go up and down in sheep skins and goat skins,
are such that the World is not worthy of; and Antiochus the gloriousest King in
the World, in Gods Judgment is a vile Person. Thus you see Afflictions make not
a man worse, but under them he may be as good as he was before; and prosperity
makes not a man better, but he may be as vile in prosperity as he was before:
therefore though a man may have his Estate increase, and his Estate bettered,
yet he is not better: We speak of such or such, Oh he is the best man in the
Parish, or the best man in the Town: What do you mean by that? Oh he has so
much by the year, and so great a stock at Sea, he is Owner of Ships, and has
part of so many Ships; and he is a great man, worth so much: true, his Estate
is worth something, but he (if he be a wicked man) is worth nothing: In the mean
time, Oh he is worth so much: Yea, but you are deceived, his Money or his Land
is worth so much, or his Ships are worth so much, but he is worth nothing
himself: therefore the Scripture speaks of the wicked, Prove, 10. 20. The heart
of the wicked is little worth: Now the Heart of a man, that is his Soul, and
that is the man; the Mind of a man, is the man; the Spirit, that is the man:
now the heart of the wicked is little worth; his house and his Land may be
worth something, but the heart of the wicked, he himself, is worth nothing. So
that Sin makes a man an evil man, but Afflictions does not make him Evil:
therefore Sin is more against the good of a Man, than Afflictions possibly can
be. This is the first.

CHAP. XXV.
Secondly, Sin is more opposite to the Good of man than Afflictions, because
most opposite to the Image of God in man: three Particulars instanced, and a
Question resolved.

SEecondly, This will come more close, and particularly to demonstrate it more
plainly to you, how that Sin is more against the good of a man, than ever
Afflictions and troubles can be; Because sin is most against the Image of God
in man, most opposite unto the Image of God in man, it defaceth that Image:
therefore it must needs be a greater evil than Afflictions: For Brethren, of
all Creatures in the world that God made, Angels and Men were the only
Creatures that God stamped his Image upon; for as it is with Princes, they use
not to stamp their Image (if they be glorious magnificent Princes they use not
to stamp their Image) upon Brass, or Copper, or Leather, upon base Metals, but
upon pure Metals, Gold or Silver; and it is a sign the State grows low, when
the Kings Image must be stamped upon lower Metals: So here, God would have his
Image stamped upon some of his Creatures; now he would not take the lowest
meanest Creatures, but God takes the most excellent Creatures, as I may so say,
Gold and Silver; the Angels I may compare to Gold, and the Children of Men to
Silver; and God makes the same Image (as the same Image that is upon the Gold,
is upon the Silver) God makes the same upon Man that is upon the Angels: the
same Image of God that makes the Angels glorious Creatures, does make Man kind
to be glorious too in the same Image; and our Natures be capable of the very
same Image of God that the Angels themselves have; and this is the excellency
of Mankind. Now it is needful to show the excellency of Gods Image in man,
that so I may show you the evil of Sin; in that it defaceth such an excellency
of man, and therefore it is more against the good of man than any affliction can
be.

1 Now the Image of God in Man is a glorious excellency, for it is that whereby
men come to resemble God in his highest excellency; it is not a likeness unto
God in some inferior thing; for though it be true, all in God is alike
glorious, yet to our apprehensions some things appear more glorious than other:
now the Image of God in Man, is that whereby Man resembles God in that which
does appear to be the highest Excellency in God himself. For as in an Image or
Picture of a Man; when I draw the Image of a Man, I draw not the resemblance of
a Man in in some inferior thing, but I labor to draw the lively countenance; in
that is the greatest excellency of a man. And so in the Image of God, now the
Image of God is the Holiness of God, and so in man's soul the impression of Gods
own Holiness, that is the Image of God in man; and by that, man comes to
resemble God in the top of his glory and excellency. Now this must needs be
glorious for the Creature to come so near unto God as is possible for the
Creature; for there is no excellency any Creature is capable of, higher than
the Image of God, only that Hypostatical union of the two Natures.

2 Upon this God must needs take an infinite delight in looking upon the souls
of the Children of men; as you know a man takes delight in looking upon his own
Image where ever he sees it: so God takes delight in looking upon his own
Image; there is nothing in all the world can take the Eye of God so much as
looking upon Angels and the Souls of men, and God sees the very same thing in
the souls of men as he did in his Angels. The most glorious object God has to
behold, is to behold himself in the Creature; the more God sees of himself in
any Creature, the more delight must he needs take in viewing and looking upon
that Creature. Now no Creature in this inferior world had so much of Gods work
in it as Mankind had, having the Image of God.

3 Hence it follows, That all the Creatures in the world were brought under the
Dominion of Man to be serviceable unto Man; why? Because he had so much of the
Image of God in him: upon that all Creatures in the world were to lie under his
feet, to be perfectly subject to the Dominion of Man. Now if the Image of God
be such a glorious thing as it is, then what would you say of that which does
deface this Image? that must needs be an evil thing, and do much to the hurt of
man that shall deface such an ezcellency as this is. Now certainly sin does so;
sin does cast dirt into this Image of God, and does deface it: and therefore in
the 3. Col 10. the Apostle there speaking of renewing grace, sanctifying grace,
it is said, by it we come to have the Image of God renewed: by grace; then it
is apparent, by sin the Image of God is defaced. Now Prethren, if a man did
take delight in a curious piece, as there be some men that will give five
hundred pounds, a thousand pounds for some curious thing drawn with Art:
suppose such a one that prizeth such a piece, and there should come one and
quite deface it; would he not account this a great evil, and his heart rise
against him? Thus it is in this case, the Image of God in the soul of man, is
the curiousest piece that ever was drawn in the world by the finger of Gods
Spirit; all Creatures in Heaven and Earth could never draw such a piece, but
sin defaceth it; nay, such is the evil of sin, that one sin is enough quite to
deface, and take away the Image of God: As we know in Adam, that was made
according to the Image of God, one sin quite defaced the Image of God: As we
account a House quite defaced and demolished, though here and there a little
rubbish and stones remain: as in your Monasteries or Abbeys that are
demolished, though there be a few stones and rubbish left, yet the House is
demolished. So all that is left in Man of Gods Image, is but as the little
rubbish of such a house left after its demolishing; yea, that which is left,
according to the Opinion of many of the Learned, is not a remainder of the
Image of God in man that he had at first Creation; but rather a small pittance
of some common gifts of Gods Spirit: For many wise and godly men hold that the
remainders of that which we usually conceive to be the ruins and remainders of
Gods Image since the Fall, is not the remainders of what is left, but that
which God (for society sake in the world, and that he may have a Church in the
world) was pleased by some givings out of his Spirit to renew somewhat in those
that shall not be saved; and so they come to have some light of knowledge even
by Jesus Christ himself, Christ enlightens every man that comes* into the
world, says the Scripture; that is, if a man have common light, Christ
enlightens that man; if a man have saving light, Christ enlightens that man
with saving light: so that the Image of God was quite defaced by one sin. Oh
the evil and venom of sin, that one sin quite takes away the Image of God.

Quest. But you will say, Why is it not so now, for in the Regenerate, there is
the Image of God in part renewed in them, and yet they commit many sins? how
comes it to pass sin quite defaceth not the Image of God in those Regenerate,
that have it not perfectly, as well as the Image of God in man that had it
perfectly at first?

Answ. To this I answer: This is not from a any reason of want of malignity in
sin, for sin would do it; but because of the strength that is in the Covenant
of Grace, that God has made in Christ, hence God preserves his Image in those
that be Regenerate, notwithstanding they commit many sins: and it is a
demonstration of the infinite power of God, that notwithstanding there is so
many sins in those Regenerate, that yet there should be preserved the Image of
God in man, which was not in Adam: Because God entered not into such a gracious
Covenant with Adam to preserve him, therefore God leaving Adam to a common
course of Providence, and had to do with him in a Covenant of works, therefore
God leaves that for sin to do in him, that it should not in us. But now there is
more strength in the Covenant of Grace, and therefore it is, that it is not
every sin we commit that does deface the Image of God: but this is no thank to
sin, nor does it argue the less evil in sin. But be it known unto you that be
sanctified, when you give liberty to sin, there is this in it, that in its own
Nature it would quite take away all the Image of God renewed in you: And
certainly thofe that understand what a blessing there is in this, to have Gods
Image renewed in them, cannot but see that there is greater evil in sin than in
any thing in the world; that I should commit that which in its own Nature would
quite deface the whole Image of God in me. And this is the second Argument to
declare the evil of sin against man's good.

CHAP. XXVI.
Thirdly, Sin is opposite to the Life of God in Man.

A Third Particular to discover the evil of Sin as opposite to man's good is
this, Because sin is opposite to the Life of God in Man. Before I showed sin
strikes at the Life of God in Himself: now I am to show you how sin strikes at
the Life of God in Man's Soul: For Brethren, certainly this is the happiness of
the Children of men above other Creatures, that God did make them to be of such
a Nature that they should live that life the Lord himself lived, in a kind; and
so the Scripture is very plain, Ephesians. 4. 18 the text says there, That they
were alienated from the life of God through the darkness of their minds: it was
the sinfulness of their hearts that did alienate them from the life of God;
therefore it is apparent that they were capable of the life of God; and the
life of God is the excellency of the Children of men: now the sin of their
hearts alienated them from the life of God.

Quest. Now you will say, What do you mean when you speak of the Life of God,
and that the Soul of Man is capable of the Life of God, and show how sin is
opposite to God? Certainly if I should come and tell you of the flames of Hell,
and torments of Hell due to sin, perhaps I might scare some more that way: but
for those that have any understanding, and truly know the excellency of man,
their hearts will more rise upon the opening of this, than if I should spend
many Sermons to open the torments of Hell to you: well then, what is this Life
of God?

Answ. 1. That everlasting Principle of grace in the souls of men united unto
Christ by his Spirit, whereby men come to act and work as God does act, and as
God does work for his own glory as the utmost end. As life is a Principle
whereby the Creature moves within himself unto perfection, unto that which
tends to perfection; an active Principle within it self to move toward
perfection, that we account life. Now that Principle whereby a man shall come
to move and work just as God moves and works (still speaking after the manner
of man) that is, to have the likeness of God; not in the very same thing, but
the same in proportion of likeness, as the Creature is capable of: How is that
you will say? Thus; This is the Life of God (so far as we can conceive of him)
that God is a continual act always working for himself, and willing of himself
as the last end of all: the very Life of God consists in that, and in that
consists the nature of Holiness. Now then when a man has such a Principle
within him as that he can work unto God, as his last and highest end, and obey
God as his chiefest good, he works as God himself does. Now Brethren, this is
the Life of God that the Children of men be capable of above all other
Creatures; and it is this that makes them fit to converse with God himself; I
say, it is that which makes the children of men to be fit to converse with that
infinite, glorious, eternal first-Being of all things: and here is the
happiness of man, That he is of that Nature that he is capable of this
excellency, to have to do with the infinite eternal first-Being: For many know
no more excellency than to converse with meat and drink; that Swine, and Dogs,
and other Peasts do: but know, you be of more Noble Natures than so; God has
made the meanest and poorest in this Congregation, God has made you of so
Noble a Nature, that you may come to converse with the infinite, glorious,
first-Being of all things. As we know the excellency of men, that which puts a
difference between man and man is this; that this man that lives in a mean
condition, their meanness consists in this, that they spend all their days in
converse with bruit Beasts, and turning the clods of the Earth; but Noble and
great men are busied in State Affairs, they be raised higher because they
converse with Princes, and great Affairs of State; the things they converse
about are higher, and therefore they are more noble and higher than other men.
As some children of men know no other excellency than to eat and drink, and
play, and be filthy, and have nothing but that which the Beasts have: but
others, to whom God has revealed himself, and has made them of such a noble
Nature, that when others be in base acts of uncleanness, that know no other way
of rejoicing in time of Joy, but laughing, and eating and drinking, and
filthiness: but others can get alone, and there contemplate of the glory of the
great God, and their souls be opened to God, and God lets in beams of himself
to them, and they let out beams of their love to God, and their desires to God,
there is an intercourse between Heaven and them; God opens himself to them, and
they open their souls to God, and so enjoy communion from God; and they because
they have the Life of God in them, they be fit to converse with God: For mark,
those things that converse one with another, they be such things that must live
the same life; as now, man can converse with man; why? because he lives the
same life that man lives: but man is not so fit to converse with beasts,
because they live not the same life; though some men live even the very life of
beasts: as a beast cannot converse with plants (but only devours them) because
they live not the same life; but those that live the same life be fittest for
converse. So if man did not live the same life God does, he could not converse
with God: Hence wicked and ungodly men cannot converse with God, because they
live not the same life of God: When you talk of conversing with God, it is a
riddle to many men; why? because they are strangers to the Life of God, they
have nothing of the Life of God in them, but it is strange to them; therefore
they cannot converse with God. But now that which strikes at this Life, and is
the death of the soul, is sin (for sin is the death of the Soul) therefore
Ephesians. 2. beginning, You be dead in trespasses and sins, sin brings death; he
means not a bodily death, though that be a truth, but there is this death, the
Life of God is gone: all men by nature have the Life of God gone; and if ever
it be renewed, it is by a mighty work of Gods Spirit: but sin strikes at the
Life of God in us, at this Candle of the Lord in this Earthen Pitcher.

2 Again, The excellency of the Life of God will consist in this, as to make a
man converse with him, so in this, That God must needs take infinite delight in
the souls of those that live his life: as before in looking upon his Image, now
much more when he can see his Creatures work as he himself works: this is the
delight of God to see his Creatures work just as himself. As a man takes
delight to see his Pictute, but abundantly more to look upon himself in his
Child, and to see his life in his Child that comes from him, to see it able to
work as he works. As suppose any Artificer, or one skilled in Navigation,
suppose he see a Picture drawn of Navigation, he takes delight in that because
there is something of himself in it; but now suppose he has a Child, and he
puts skill into him and he sees him work as he works, and discourse about
Naval Affairs as he discourses; this is wonderfully delightful to him. So when
God shall see the same life in his Creature that is in himself, that he works
and wills as he does, this takes the very heart of God; and this shows the
excellency of grace. But sin is that which strikes at this Life of God, and
brings death to the soul, wholly takes away this life: and were it not for the
Covenant of grace even one sin would take away this Image of God; for sin did
it in Adam, and so would in the Regenerate, if it were not for the Covenant of
grace. My Brethren, Life is the most excellent of any thing: as Augustine
says, The life of a Fly is more excellent than the Sun (it is his expression,
not mine) because the Sun though an excellent Creature, has not life, but a
Fly, though little, yet it has life; though we know little of it* yet it shows
the excellency of God to make a living Creature: but if the life of a Fly, or a
Beast be so excellent, much more the life of Man. Now then, what is the life of
God! now if that be evil which strikes at the natural life of the Body, the
life of Man; we account those Diseases most grievous that are mortal; as if a
man have a Disease only painful, this is not so much if they be painful if not
mortal, as those that be mortal. If a Physician come and tell one, you must
endure pain, but be of good cheer, your life is sure; this comforts him: but
take a Disease that he feels no pain of, it may be the sense of pain is gone,
but if the Physician come and tell him, Oh you be dangerously ill, because your
distemper is like to prove mortal: we account that without pain that strikes at
life, more than that with a great deal of pain that does not strike at life:
Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life. Now that
which strikes at the highest life, even the life of God, and makes the Creature
appear so vile before God, as certainly sin makes the Creature more vile than
any dead Carrion that lies stinking in a ditch; sin is more vile in Gods eyes
than any dead Dog on the Dunghill is in your Eyes. This is the third Particular,
How sin is most opposite to man's good more than affliction; therefore a man
were better bear the greatest affliction, than commit the least sin, because
affliction never strikes at the life of God: nay, many live not the life of God
so gloriously as they do in affliction; many seem to have their hearts dead in
times of prosperity, but when afflictions come then they manifest a glorious
life of God.

CHAP. XXVII.
Fourthly, Sin is opposite to man's good, because it is most opposite to the
last end for which man was made.

A Fourth thing wherein the evil of sin consists as most opposite to man's good
is this, Because it lies most opposite to the last end for which man was made.
In that other passage I opened before, I showed how sin opposes God in his own
end, and therefore there was a great deal of evil in sin: But now I must show
how sin opposes Man in that end God made man for. I am afraid some of these
things are such that some cannot go along with me in them; it is my endeavor to
make things (though spiritual, and above our natural reach, to make them) as
low as I can: but if there be some that do not understand, I hope others do,
and such (I hope) will make use of what I speak. For certainly these things I
speak of do more declare the evil of sin, and will keep an ingenuous spirit
more from sin, than all the evils and torments of Hell. It is more against man's
last End. Now we use to say the end and the good of a thing is the same: That
which is the last end is better than the thing it self, therefore whatsoever
strikes at the last end is the greatest evil of all. That is the happiness of
any Creature to enjoy its last end: As thus, The greatest good or the last end
of a Plant or a Tree is to flourish and bear fruit, and be sitted for the
service of man, this is its end. And what is the evil of a Tree? When it comes
to flourish, and when fruit hangs full upon it, if it be blasted, and never
come to attain to its utmost end, to be serviceable for that for which it was
appointed; that is the evil of it. And we account it a great evil if we see
this flourishing Tree when it is full of fruit, if before it come to maturity
it be blasted. So look upon man's end, and if that be blasted, that is his great
evil. Now the end of man is this, To live to the eternal praise of God, in the
everlasting enjoyment of him. God made the Children of men for this end, That
they might eternally live to his praise in the eternal enjoyment of himself.
Now if man be blasted in this, there is his great evil, to blast man in this
end for which he was made. Now no Affliction does it, all the Afflictions in
the world does not hinder man from the attaining to his end. But Sin comes, and
directly opposes that end for which man was made, and crosses him in this
Excelleney of his, in living to the praise of the infinite eternal first-Being
of al things. Now before, I could not show you the evil of Sin, but by showing
you the Excellency of the Image and Life of God: So here I cannot show the evil
of Sin, being opposite to man's last end, but by showing you the Excellency of
man's last end. Now the Excellency of man's last end, I mean the good God has
made man for, it appears in this.

1 It is such a kind of Excellency as is worthy of all the good that there is
in man's Nature, or that man's Nature is capable of. For the end and happiness of
any thing, must be that that must have as much excellency in it, that all in
the thing must tend to the making of him happy. Man's nature is capable of the
Image and life of God. Now that which must be the happiness of such a Creature
must be worthy of such an Excellency as the Image of God, and the life of God
in man; therefore it must be a very high and glorious Excellency.

2 That which is man's happiness and end is that which is worthy of all the ways
of God toward mankind. Now I beseech you observe this thing, The ways of God
toward the Children of Men in bringing them to his last end, be the most
glorious of all Gods ways to any Creature; God did never manifest so much
glory in all the world, nor never will manifest so much glory to al eternity in
any thing, as he has manifested in these ways of his to bring mankind to the
attaining his last end, for which he made him. Now if God be so glorious in
that way of his concerning his working, in bringing man to his last end, then
certainly that end of man, that happiness man was made for must be very
glorious: because it must have so much glory and excellency in it as must be
worthy all the glorious ways of Gods working toward him. It Is thus with man.
There is no wise man that does any great work, manifests any great skill, or
lays out great cost, but will do it for such an end, as that end, if ever it
be attained, shall be worth all his cost, and skill, and pains. For a wise man
to bestow much cost, skill, and pains upon a mean thing, is absurd and
ridiculous; And no wise man but if he bestow much cost and pains, and manifest
much skill, but he will be sure it shall be for that, which if he attain to
that he aims at, it shall be worth all. If a man be at a great deal of Charge
in a Voyage, he aims at such an end as may be worth his Charge: So when God
above all things lays out his wisdom, power, and mercy, and goodness, and
faithfulness; and sets at work all his Counsels to be laid out upon such a
business, as to get man to attain to his last end; then certainly man's end and
happiness must be worth it all. And it must needs be a glorious thing, God
intends for the Children of men to make them happy withal, when the great
Counsels of God, and ways of Gods wisdom and power be so about this business
of bringing man to happiness. Now if there be such a glorious happiness for
mankind, then that which is most opposite to this great happiness, must be very
evil. Now sin directly opposes man's happiness, the end man was made for: and
thus you see the evil of sin. When God comes to awaken man's Conscience, and
inlighten man's Soul to see how sin crosses their happiness more than any
affliction, they will choose rather to be under the greatest affliction, than
the least sin.

Object. I but it may be you will say it does not s^ cross man's happiness, but
that he may come to be happy for all sin?

Answ. I Answer, Of its own nature it directly crosses man's happiness; quite
undoes man; and if God by his Power fetch it about another way, this is no
thank to sin, but to God.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Fifthly, Sin is more opposite to man's good than Affliction because it is a
defilement of the Soul. 1 It defiles all a man medleth with. 2 Sin is the
matter the worm shall gnaw upon to all eternity.

FIfthly, The evil of Sin against a man's good appears in this, In that it is
the defilement and corruption of the Soul, a rottenness in the Soul. Affliction
is not the filth and corruption of the Soul, the Soul may be as clear from
filth and corruption, notwithstanding Affliction, as it was before man sinned.
Sin, it is the rottenness of the Soul, and therefore such a kind of defilement,
As,

1 It defiles all things a man medles withal, and al his actions; it makes a
man vile, and defiles every thing that comes from him. To the unclean all
things are unclean and impure, Tit. 1. 15. It defiles the Creature and every
thing he has to do withal, and every thing he medles withal.

2 And especially it appears in this, That it is no other than the matter for
the worm to breed in that shall gnaw upon the Soul of the wicked to all
eternity. You read in Scripture, That the damned shall be punished with fire
that shall never go out; and the worm that shall never dye. What is that worm
that shall never dye? The worm of Conscience that shall gnaw upon their Spirits
to all eternity. Now, what breeds this worm, and supplies it with matter? No
other but the corruption of sin in the soul. For as with worms (as the Holy
Ghost makes use of that Meatopher) that breed in the corruption and filth in a
man's body, there are some worms that breed in the body which are deadly. But
out of what do those worms breed? Out of the filth and corruption of the Body,
and the corruption of the body supplies matter for the worm to gnaw upon. And
so in Trees, and Timber, there breeds worms; upon what do they breed but upon
the corruption of the Timber when it begins to rot. So then worms breed out of
corruption, and live upon Corruption; so that worm of Conscience that shall lie
gnawing upon the souls of those that perish to al eternity, is nothing else but
that which breeds from the filth of their hearts while they live here the worm
breeds: Therefore you that live a long time in sin, old sinners, gray headed
sinners, though you do not feel the worm gnaw for the present; yet ever since
you were born the worm was breeding, and it will be a great and a dreadful worm
hereafter: and know you supply abundance of Corruption for to feed that worm
that will gnaw another day: You feel it not now, but the longer you be before
you feel it, the dreadfuller will it be then. All those that have corrupt
hearts, and have this worm breed, if God would make the worm gnaw now, it would
be well for them; for there be ways to kill it here, to kill the worm of
Conscience. If it gnaw, there is a Sovereign Medicine, the blood of Christ: And
certainly there is no Medicine in the world to kill this worm but the blood of
Christ, and those that God does intend to kill this worm in, and those that
shall not have it gnaw to all eternity, God lets it gnaw now, the Ministry of
the Word makes it gnaw and pain them, and they feel such pain that wheresoever
they go, or whatsoever they do yet the worm lies gnawing upon their hearts,
they cannot sleep, or eat their meat: Alas! what should I eat, and have my
worm gnaw there! And they can never be at rest till God apply the blood of
Christ, and then they void the worm as it were. How will you rejoice when your
Children, if the worms be great and put them to pain, if the Physician give
them that which makes them void them, how do you rejoice to see the worm that
would have been the death of your Child? It might have grown bigger and bigger,
if it had not been taken away. So I dare say there is never a Soul here before
the Lord, but has, or had a worm in their breasts, I say, There was a time you
had this worm in your breasts, that without it were cured, would lie gnawing to
all eternity, it is that which breeds of the filth and corruption of your
hearts. Suppose a man had a little dirt on his face, this endangers not the
life of the body, but when there is corruption within, and defilement of the
Body within, that breeds diseases, and will breed worms, it may be it will breed
the wolf that lies gnawing at their breasts; many women have had it in their
breasts that lies gnawing upon their flesh: but know, your sins breed another
manner of worm or wolf that will gnaw worse than ever that did. And this is the
evil of sin, it is not only the defilement of the soul, but such a defilement
that breeds such a worm that will gnaw upon conscience to all eternity.

CHAP. XXIX.
Sixthly, Sin is more opposite to man's good than affliction, because sin is the
object of Gods hatred; but God hates not any for affliction.

Sixthly, Sin is the only object of the hatred of God, nothing is the object of
Gods hatred but sin: God does not hate a man or a woman because they are poor,
God may love them as well as any Monarch or Prince in the world, though they be
poor: God hates not a man because he is sick, you hate not your Children
because they be sick or weak: all the afflictions in the world make not a man
an object of Gods hatred, but sin does: mark that expression in Scripture,
Psalm, 5. 5. The Fool shall not stand in thy sight, thou hate all workers of
iniquity; so that sin makes the Creature the object of Gods hatred: God says
not (mark) he hates the work of iniquity only; but the worker of iniquity: God
hates not the Creature as he made them, but through sin the Creature come^ to
be hated; even the workers of iniquity. Now observe the strength of the Reason,
That which makes a man the object of Gods hatred, must needs be a greater evil
than that which can stand with Gods everlasting love: for afflictions in the
strength of them, and bitterness of them, may stand with Gods eternal love; nay
observe, they may stand with the same love wherwithal God the Father loved his
Son Jesus Christ; for so in the 17. of John, latter end; there Christ prays to
the Father, that thou may love them with the very same love with which thou
love me: Now God the Father loved Christ, and yet God the Father afflicted
Christ, and Christ was under sore afflictions, and yet at that very time God
the Father loved him: So a man or a woman afflicted, notwithstanding all their
afflictions, they may have the very same love of God the Father that Jesus
Christ himself had, in a manner the very same: And my thinks this might be a
mighty encouragement to afflicted souls; are you afflicted with poverty, bodily
sickness, persecution, any thing? Know, for all this affliction, God may love
you with the same love he loved his Son: but sin makes the Creature the object
of the hatred of God. But you will say, Gods Children have sin. Of its own
nature, it would make them objects of Gods hatred, but there comes in the blood
of Christ, and the purchase of his blood procures peace between God and man;
but I speak of it in its own Nature; and those that God looks upon in a sinful
condition, he cannot look upon them but he hates them. Now that which makes a
man the object of Gods hatred, must needs be very evil; as thus, when any
affection runs in one Current, it must needs run very strongly; as in the Sea,
suppose there were many Arms and Rivers to break the strength of the Current,
it would not run so powerfully; but when there is but one Current, the Current
of the Ocean there runs very strongly. So in the Affections, when the
Affections be only set upon one object, then they be strong: when Love is
scattered upon this and the other thing, then it is not strong, but when it is
upon one, then it is strong. When Parents have many Children, and they love
this, and this, then it may be they love not any so strongly; but when they
have but one there is great love. So in hatred, where there is a hatred of
many, there is not so much hatred against one; but where it runs in one Current
only, there it is strong. So here, there is no object that Gods hatred runs out
against but only sin, therefore the hatred mustneeds be very powerful. Oh for a
man or woman to live to be the object of the hatred of the eternal God, how
dreadful an evil is this! We desire to be beloved where we are, of every one;
what a sad thing is it to live in a Family, or a Town, and no body love them:
men desire to be beloved though it be of a dog, and they will boast sometimes,
such a dog, or a horse loved such an one, loved his Master; when he does but
come home, they will leap, and skip, and faun on him. Do we take delight to
have our neighbors, or the family love us? nay, for the dog to love us? Oh what
is the love of an infinite, eternal, glorious God! A man accounts it an evil if
the dog only snarl and bark at him, this we account an evil: Oh what an evil is
it then, to have the infinite, eternal, only wise God to be an enemy, and I the
object of his hatred! Oh think of these things. And Brethren, in these times it
is to be feared you contract abundance of sin; you will have more to answer for
before these This was preached on the 2. of January
twelve days be gone, than you had before. Oh let this stop the course of some
sin, that otherwise might be committed in these times of sensuallity; therefore
when you see some go on in sinful ways, do you stop and say, God forbid I
should do as they do; I have been in such a place, and heard what sin is, heard
how it is against God, and this might stop me; but this day I have heard how it
is against me and my own soul, and how it destroys my own soul, therefore I
will hate sin everlastingly.

CHAP. XXX.
Seventhly, Sin is more opposite to man's good than Affliction, because sin
brings guilt upon the soul.

SEventhly, There is more evil in sin than in affliction, Because sin is more
opposite against our own good than affliction, and that in this seventh
respect, Sin brings guilt upon the soul, it makes the Creature stand guilty in
the presence of God: Now guilt upon the soul is a greater evil than any
affliction can be: that is the thing I am now to open. Guilt, what is that? it
is the binding over of the sinner to Gods Justice, and to the Law, to answer,
and be liable unto what the Law requires as punishment due to the sinner: so
that then for a Creature to stand bound over to Gods infinite Justice, and the
Law, has more evil in it against man's good than all the afflictions and
miseries in the world; this is the thing I am to make good. A sinner goes up
and down with the chains of guilt upon him; Iron chains grating upon the sore
flesh of a man, is not so tedious and grievous as the chains of guilt upon
conseience. Certainly this is one especial reason why many wicked men and women
are so froward as they are, because they have much guilt upon their spirits,
that as Iron ch^ins would grate the raw flesh, so does that guilt lie upon
Conscience, and that makes them so froward and peevish as they are; froward
against God, and against man. Many men that you are to deal withal, you shall
find them against the Word extreme froward, and pervers against their
acquaintance, neighbors, and family, and nearest friends, and we cannot imagine
sometimes what is the reason: Certainly this is one especial reason, there is
much guilt upon their consciences, and spirits; and this does so disquiet and
vex them, that they fling out at God, and his Word, and every one; they can
have no quiet they be so vexed and gauled with that guilt upon their spirits:
there is a great deal of cause to suspect much guilt to be upon those that be
so outrageous, and can bear nothing; that have their hearts rise against the
Word especially. Brethren, if you see any one that has any light of
Conscience, and has made profession heretofore, if such an one shall frowardly
fly out against the Word, and those that be godly, you may conclude there is
some woeful guilt upon that man's spirit, he is so froward, and peevish, and
disquiet as he is: And so we find it in Saul, he was a man at first of a very
quiet spirit, and very moderate; but after, Saul being a man much enlightened,
and had forsaken God, and had contracted abundance of guilt upon his soul, he
was a most froward perverse spirit as any we read of in the Book of God; then
how froward was he with David, and the Priests of God, and so outrageous as
that he slaies them all; a bloody man after he had contracted much guilt. Do
you see men so froward, and outrageous, and bloody? Oh there is much guilt
within upon their spirits, great breaches between God and their souls, and the
guilt of sin within grates upon their hearts, and that makes them so outrageous
as they are: if guilt be upon the soul, it takes away all the comfort of every
thing; that man or woman that has an enlightened conscience, and has guilt
upon them, there is little comfort such a one can take in any thing they enjoy.
No affliction in the world can take away the comfort of what we enjoy, as guilt
can do; if you have afflictions one way, you have comforts another: if a man go
abroad and meet with hard dealings, he comes home and has comfort it may be in
his wife, a comfortable yoke fellow, this rejoices him; or may be he has
comfort in his Children, or in such or such a friend: But now let a man or a
woman have guilt upon conscience, abroad he has no comfort, at home he has no
comfort; yea, the more comfortable things he does enjoy, the more trouble there
is in his spirit: As thus, Take a guilty conscience, and when he comes and
looks upon a comfortable family, comfortable estate, means coming in, a sweet
yoke fellow, good friends; Oh but if I had not some guilt upon my soul, I could
rejoice in these; but that guilt that lies upon his conscience take away all
the comfort of these; and if he sees others that enjoy these, Oh says he, this
man may have comfort in a comfortable yoke fellow, children, or friends, and a
good estate; but he has not guilt upon his spirit, and that breach between his
God and he as I have. May be the world knows not where his ^hoo pincheth him,
and what sadens his spirit: many men that have comforts about them (though they
cannot be said to enjoy them) yet their hearts be troubled and disquieted, and
no body knows the matter; Oh there is guilt upon their spirits: they think
within themselves, Oh, if it were with me as it is with such a one, it would be
well, sure they have not that guilt I have, if they had they could not but be
disquieted as I am.

Again, Guilt brings woeful fear upon the Conscience; no affliction can bring
such fear upon the Conscience. Though there should be never such troubles and
fears, and confusions in the world, alas this is not so terrible and fearful as
that fear the guilty conscience has. Take a man or woman whose conscience is
delivered from the guilt of sin, such a one, though Heaven and Earth should
meet, is not so much troubled. Certainly Brethren, in these great fears amongst
us, that you be skar'd at everything, it is partly because you have not
thoroughly made up your peace between God and your souls, and some guilt lies
upon your spirits and consciences; and this indeed will make every thing
terrible to you, if that lie there: Guilt upon the conscience makes God, the
thoughts of God seem terrible. Now it is a greater evil for the creature not to
be able to look upon God, and to have thoughts of God without being pierced
with terror, than to be under any affliction in the world; sorrows, fears, and
disgrace and persecutions are not so terrible as this, that I am in such a
condition that I cannot look up to God, nor think upon God without having the
thoughts of his Majesty to be terrible to me A guilty Conscience cannot endure
to have a thought of God, it is terrible to him, and therefore he labors by
going into company, and sports, and business in the world, to take off the
thoughts of God, because the thoughts of God pierce his heart. And so the
presence of God is very terrible where guilt is upon the Conscience, and the
Conscience of such a one cannot endure to come into Gods presence; nor into the
Communion of Saints where Gods presence is. And he cannot endure to pray, the
thoughts of that strike his heart; to go alone to pray, the presence of God
when alone is extreme terrible. And this is a sader condition than to be under
any affliction: better be under any affliction than in such a case, as that the
presence of God is terrible: the presence of God in Prayer, and so the presence
of God in his Word; Oh the Word is terrible to such a one, the Word of God
speaks nothing but terror so long as guilt remains upon the Conscience. This is
worse than Affliction that that Word which is a treasure of sweetness, and
goodness, and comfort to those that are gracious and godly, should be filled
with terror to the soul of one that is full of guilt. Yea, to such a one all
the ways of Gods Providence are full of terror; if there be any Judgment of
God abroad, Oh the terror that this brings upon his foul. Brethren, Sin is
committed quickly, you have a temptation comes, and you fall upon the Sin and
act it; the Sin, the act of it, is transient and quickly gone; the guilt that
sticks to you. When a man or woman has satisfied their Just in a sinful way,
the guilt sticks behind: may be the time is gone for the pleasure of it; it was
perhaps yesterday, or such a night or time thou hadest the pleasure of it, but
now the sin is gone the pleasure of it, but the guilt sticks, and that abides
upon thy Spirit to all eternity if thou look not to it. Nay, certainly it must
stick upon the Spirit, it is not in the power of any Creature in heaven or in
earth to deliver thee from it: yea the guilt so remains, that though thou feel
it not now for the present, it may stick terriblely many years after. But
Affliction is terrible only for the present, not for afterward; but guilt and
sin lays a foundation of Mis^ for many years after. Nay, many times it is
grievous painful to the Soul long after it is committed: as it was in Joseph's
Brethren, we read of them that they committed that great Sin against their
Brother, and it troubled them not a great while; but twenty two years after
when they were in an affliction, then the guilt of their sin comes a fresh, Oh
then we sinned against our Brother; when they were in prison there: now it was
twenty two years from the time they committed that sin to that time when they
were in trouble there. So you that have committed sin and think some slight
sorrow may wash it away, know the guilt may abide upon your spirits perhaps
twenty, may be forty years after. And you that are young take heed and know that
sin is more evil than any affliction, for the sin that you commit when you are
young in your Masters Families, the guilt may abide upon you, and youthful sins
may prove ages terror. It may be with you as with a man that gets a bruis, when
he is young he feels it not, but when he is old than it ach in his bones, and
puts him to terrible pain many times; so many young people feel not sin when
their blood is hot, but afterward, the guilt of sin abides upon them, and is
the torment of their souls when their blood is cold. Now what evil is there in
sin that may do a man mischief perhaps twenty or forty years hence. As it is
with some poison, there are some poisons men have skill in, that they can give
poison shall not work in three or four, perhaps not till seven years afterward,
and yet they know certainly, That if that man be not cut off before (except God
work extraordinarily) he shall dye at the seven years end of that poison he
took seven years before. So sin is such a thing that it will do a man a mischief
many years after.

Again, The guilt of sin has this evil further in it, which appears in that
difference between men that come to suffer with guilt, and those that come to
suffer without guilt: Take them that have come to the most grievous sufferings
in the world, and had not the guilt of sin upon their Consciences, who had all
clear between God and their souls; their sufferings be joyful, and they can
rejoice in tribulation and troubles, as the Martyrs in Persecution, how did
they rejoice and glory in their sufferings? with what a Spirit of magnanimity
did they come to their sufferings? But take those who suffer through guilt, as
Malefactors, when they come to suffer, what shame and confusion is upon them!
Thus Affliction is nothing to them that have no guilt, but those that have the
guilt of sin upon them when they come to suffer their guilt is a thousand times
more than their affliction. There is a great deal of difference between a man
guilty of treason when he come to suffer for it, there is shame and confusion,
and dismal darkness in the spirit where there is guilt: but let one be accused
for treason, or any such horrible crime, and no guilt upon the spirit, such a
one can go on with joy, and comfort, and peace; whatsoever can be done to him
is very little or nothing when guilt is removed. The truth is, there is no
suffering can countervail the suffering that guilt makes. The guilt makes the
suffering evil, otherwise not. If one man come upon another man with suffering,
it is nothing without guilt; so it is true, when God comes it is nothing if God
and we be at peace: but now when God comes with any such affliction as the very
affliction shall have the mark of the sin upon it, and so shall stir up
Conscience to accuse you for it, then the heart is ready to sink when the
affliction shall bear the name of the sin together with it. I remember the
difference of David's Spirit at several times; one time, Though an Host incampe
about me, yet will I not fear, and though I walk in the valley of the shadow of
death, I will fear no evil; Psalm. 23. Another time he is afraid when he flies
from Absolon; and when there was a breach between God and his soul, when he had
brought guilt upon his spirit, then David was quickly cooled; and upon any
occasion of trouble, David was quickly frightened. This is a seventh thing
wherein sin appears to be a greater and more evil thing than Affliction,
because it makes the soul guilty before God.

CHAP. XXXI.
Eighthly, Sin is a greater evil to man than affliction, because it is that
which put the Creature under the Sentence of Condemnation.

EIghthly, Sin is a greater evil than Affliction, Because it is that which puts
the Creature under the Sentence of Condemnation, and so makes more against the
good of man than any affliction can do. For a poor Creature to see himself
stand before the great Judge of all the World, and have the Sentence of
Condemnation come out against him; this is a greater evil than to have any
affliction that all the Creatures of Heaven and Earth could bring upon him. As
now, take a Malefactor that is to stand before Man's Judgment Seat, and to
receive Sentence of Condemnation; is not this a greater evil unto him than if
he should hear of loss in his estate, than if he had sickness in his body, any
pain in his limbs; to stand thus to receive the Sentence, he looks upon it as a
greater evil than possibly can befall him in this world otherwise. But then,
when the soul shall see it self stand before the infinite glorious, eternal
first-Being of all things, and looks upon God sitting upon his Tribunal passing
Sentence of Eternal Death upon him; this is another manner of evil than any
affliction and suffering that can befall him. But now, know there is not any one
sin that thou committest (but if you look upon it as in it self) God sits, I
say, upon his Trone, and passes Sentence of death upon thee for it as really
as ever he will do at the great day of Judgment; it is done now as really and
as truly in this world as ever it shall be at the day of Judgment, only here is
the difference, then it is irrecoverable; nay, shall I say it cannot be
recalled here; no certainly it shall not, only it may be transmitted to Christ,
he must bear it, he must have the sentence; so that it is not properly
recalled, God does not as a Judge that passes Sentence, and afterward nullifies
it: no, but God passes Sentence and condemns the sinner; only Christ comes in
and takes the Sentence upon himself; so that the Sentence goes on still, only
it is transferred from one person to another; Christ comes in, and he puts on
the Sentence of Condemnation for thee that have it passed against thee, so that
the Sentence is not properly nullified, but transferred to Christ: Eccles. 8.
11. says the text there, Because Sentence against an evil Work is not speedily
executed, therefore the heart of the sons of men are fully set in them to do
evil. (Mark) the Sentence against an evil work is not speedily executed: so
that it appears there is a Sentence against every evil work: The Sentence is
out Brethren; thou go and art drunk, or to the commission of such a sin, I
say, presently the Sentence of death is clapped upon thee, the Sentence is out
against all sinners: You see men go on and live in prosperity a great while in
the world; but they be under the Sentence all the while, sin is not removed by
the blood of Christ, and all the comforts (I beseech you observe that) that any
man or woman have in the world that are in their natural condition, and are not
delivered from Condemnation by Christ, they are all but just as meat and drink,
and some refreshments that are grantnd to a condemned Malefactor before
Execution. Suppose a Malefactor is condemned, but now Execution is not till two
or three days after; in that space of time he has granted unto him liberty
to have meat and drink, and friends come to him, and he may refresh himself in
those two or three days; but he has forfeited all his Estate, and the tenure
now upon which he holds any comfort, it is not the same which he had before,
but merely through the bounty of the Prince it is that he has comforts. So
here, wicked men have committed sin, and the Sentence of death is out against
them, and they have forfeited all the comforts of their estates, and of their
lives, only God in patience grants unto them some outward comforts here a few
days before Execution; and upon this tenure do all wicked men hold their
Estates: I will not say that every wicked man is an Usurper of their Estates,
as some perhaps have held, that they have no right at all before God; some
right he has, as you cannot say a Malefactor has no right (when he is
condemned) to meat and drink before Execution; he has right to what is given
to him of Donation and Bounty, but not that right which he had before: So I
say, for wicked men that have Estates in this world, they have a kind of right
to that they have; but how? Just that right that a condemned man has to his
dinner or supper before Execution; this is the right of wicked men to their
Estates; that is, God of his bounty grants a little while before Execution
they shall have a few comforts to them in this world: And this is the evil of
sin, and the least sin, there is not any one sin, but the fruit of it is
Condemnation. And Brethren, you must not mistake, to think that wicked men are
never condemned until they come before God in the day of Judgment; they be
condemned here, mark that, John, 3. 18. He that believes not is condemned
already: now condemned, not hereafter, but a condemned man already: this is a
sad condition indeed. If a man had the Sentence of death so past that the whole
Parliament could not help him, you would think that man in a sad condition. Now
let me speak it, and God speaks it to the conscience of every sinner; I say,
thou that stand before God in any one sin, and not delivered through the
blood of his Son Christ, thou stand so under the Sentence of condemnation,
as all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth cannot help and deliver thee, thou
must have some help beyond the help of all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth to
deliver thee: When Paul would comfort the Saints against all troubles and
afflictions they meet withal, Romans 8. he begins thus, There is no condemnation
to them in Christ Jesus: as if he should say, this is the comfort, no
Condemnation. If I know I am delivered from the Sentence of Condemnation, let
what will fall out I am well enough; but this be sure of, there is Condemnation
to those that are not in Christ. I remember Luther had this Speech when he had
got assurance of pardon of sin, that he was freed and absolved by God; he cries
out, Lord strike, Lord, now strike, for I am absolved from my sins, thou have
delivered me from sin; now strike, now let any affliction befall that possibly
can; let never so much trouble attend I am absolved from sin; now Lord strike.
This is the Eighth, Sin is more opposite against the good of man than
Affliction, for it brings them under the Sentence of Condemnation.

CHAP. XXXII.
Ninthly, Sin is a greater Evil to man than Affliction, because it breaks the
Union between God and the Soul.

NInthly, Sin is a greater evil than Affliction in this, In that it is the very
thing that breaks the Union between God and the Soul: It is that does it, and
no Affliction does it. Now Brethren, this I confess might seem to be less than
that of Hatred, and might have come before it; but now I bring it in here, That
it breaks the Union between God and the Soul, Isa. 59. 2. Your Sins have
separated between you and your God! We are to know, The Souls of men are
capable of a very near and high Union between God and them; the more spiritual
any thing is, the more power has it to Unite, and the more near the Union: As
thus, The beams of the Sun because they be very spiritual, they can Unite a
thousand of them into one Point as it were; but grosser things cannot so Unite
themselves together. So Brethren, God being a Spirit, and our Souls being
Spirits, they come to be capable of a most near Communion one with another. And
the Souls of men are nearer a glorious Union with God, in this regard more near
than any Creature but the Angels. Because the Object of man's Understanding is
not any particular truth, but Veritas, truth in general, truth it self in the
whole latitude is the Object of man's Understanding. So the Object of man's Will,
Is not this good, or that good in particular; but Bonitas, good in general, in
the full latitude of it. It is not so with other Creatures, they have their
Objects in some particular thing, in such a limit and compass, and they can
work no further, nor higher. But it is otherwise with man's Soul, God has made
man in such a kind, that the Object of his Soul should be Truth and Goodness in
the full latitude, in the infinitness of it, take it in the utmost extent that
can be, yet still it is the Object of the Soul of man. Now hence it is that the
Soul of man is of such a wonderful larg extent, even capable of God himself, of
enjoyment of Union and Communion with God himself, which otherwise could not
be. No other Creature has to do with infiniteness, nor can have to do with it
but men and Angels, and upon that ground, because God has made them of such a
nature so large that their Faculties should be of so large a nature. Now hence
it is that man being capable of the enjoyment of God in such a glorious manner:
We have these Expressions in Scripture, He that is joined to the Lord, is one
Spirit: 1 Cor. 6. 17. Made one Spirit with God. A most strange expression that
the soul of a poor Creature should be made one Spirit with God, and yet so it
is. And so John 17. 21. we have two or three notable expressions, That they may
be all one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, and that they may be one
in us. Christ prays that the Saints may be one in him, and in the Father, as
the Father is in him, and he in the Father: so they may be one with them. And
Verse. 22. And the glory which thou gave me, I have given them: that they may
be one, even as we are one. Christ has given the Saints the same glory God the
Father gave him. And to what end? what was the effect of that glory Christ gave
to the Saints? It was that they may be one with the Father and one with the
Son. So that you see mankind is capable of a wonderful near Union with God; Oh
consider this to raise your spirits. You that look after such low things and
think there is no higher good than to eat, and drink, and to have your
pleasures in the Flesh: know that the meanest and poorest in the Congregation,
are capable to receive that glory God gave his Son Christ; that you may be one
with God the Father and the Son, as God the Father and the Son are one; not
every way: but know there is a likeness, Christ himself has expressed it.
Therefore you that have your hearts so low, that mind nothing but these things
below, know that you have more noble things to mind if your hearts consider it.
But here is the evil of Sin; Sin breaks the union between God and the soul; it
separates between God and the Soul, it keeps off God that infinite, eternal,
glorious fountain of all good; it keeps him off from you; it makes you lose
God, and all the good in God: By Sin you depart from God, which is the Curse of
the Damned at the day of Judgment, Depart from me you Cursed: you here, for the
present, in every sin, do begin to have that dreadful Sentence executed on you:
Depart from me ye Cursed. You do it your selves while you live in sinful ways,
there is a real actual departing from God, and executing of that dreadful
Sentence, Depart you Cursed. You think there is little evil in sin; but if you
knew that God is an infinite Good, and then knew the Union you are capable of
with God, and then see sin break this Union; this would make you see sin the
greatest evil in the world.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Tenthly, Sin is more against man's good than Affliction, for that it stirs up
all in God to come against a sinner in way of Enmity.

TEnthly, The Evil of sin as against our good, consists in this, It stirs up
all in God to come in way of Enmity against a sinner: and this is another
manner of business than to suffer affliction. A most dreadful place of
Scripture we have for this, Levit. 26. verse 24. 28. If you walk contrary to
me, I will walk contrary unto you: What is that? All my glorious Attributes
shall work against you; as if God should say, Is there any thing in me can make
you miserable? you have it? if all my Power or Wisdom can bring evil upon you,
you shall have it: I will walk contrary in all the working of my Attributes,
and ways of my Providence* And a most dreadful place we have, Psalm, 34. 16.
there God says, The face of the Lord is against them that do evil: Mark, the
face of the Lord: What is Gods face? The manifestation of himself, and his
glorious Attributes; the face of the Lord is against them that do evil. Oh that
thou would consider this thou that do evil, whose conscience cannot but
tell thee thou do evil; know, the face of God is against thee: and is this
nothing to have the face of God against thee? The face of God is terrible in
the world when he meets with a sinner; one sight of the face of God against a
soul, cannot but overwhelm the soul and sink it down to the bottomless Gulf of
eternal despair, if God hold him not by his mighty hand, there is so much
terror in it: and yet the Scripture says, the face of God is against them that
do evil. Another Text very remarkable we have in the 2 Samuel 22. 27. With the
pure thou will show thy self pure, and with the froward thou will show thy self
froward; or unsavory: But it may be translated, With the perverse thou will
wrestle: so that those that be froward and perverse, and will walk on in a
sinful way, God wrastles it out with them; God puts forth his Power to wrestle,
and certainly if God wrestle with thee, he will lay thee upon thy back. It is a
dreadful thing that God should use such a speech, that he will wrestle with
man; for all men in sin, as I showed before, they wrestle with God, as if they
would have the day; God will have his will, and thou shall have the fall; thou
wrastlest, and God wrestle: you know Wrastlers put forth all their strength
against one another, and know, God puts forth all his strength against every
sinner. And that I may bring it more full to your senses, consider this, From
whence has any Creature power to bring evil upon thee, or to torment thee?
Surely it has somewhat of God in it: as thus, Fire has power to torment the
Body, and it is only one spark of God let out through the power of that
Creature, otherwise it had no power. And again, another Creature, Swords and
Weapons, they have power to gash and wound the Body; whence have these
Instruments their power? it is but some drop of Gods power through these
Instruments. So one Disease has power to torment one way, and another, another
way; whence has any Disease power to torment? only there is some little of
Gods power let out through that Disease. Now if all Creatures tormenting has
only power through Gods letting out his power, then what a dreadful thing will
it be when Gods Power shall be infinitely let out against the Creature? so that
take all Creatures in their several powers to torment, and put them all
together, one Creature in one kind, and another in another, and put them all
together, this would be great torture: Now all the Power of God is the several
powers of all the Creatures put together in one, and infinitely more; and when
that comes against the Creature, it must needs make them miserable: its another
manner of matter than afflictions, when all in God comes out against the soul;
and there is not any one sin but endangers this.

CHAP. XXXIV.
XI. Sin is more opposite to man's good than affliction, for that sin make all
the Creatures of God at enmity with a sinner.

XI. FUrther, in the next place, The evil that sin has beyond all the evil of
Affliction is this: That sin, it does make all the Creatures of God to be at an
enmity with a sinner: I say, sin puts a sinner in this condition, that all the
Creatures of God are Enemies unto the sinner; they be all as the Host of God
that come out against a sinner, ready armed with Gods wrath, ready bent to
execute the wrath of God against a sinner: the Creatures of God are called Gods
Host, not only because they be armed with Gods wrath, but because there is in
them a propencity to destroy those sinners that sin against the God of their
Being. Every Creature is ready and does as it were cry to God, Oh Lord, when
will thou give me commission to take away such a wretch, Lord, such a one is a
filthy, wretched Blasphemer, a Sabbath breaker, a drunkard, and thou live all
this while, and have been at peace, and yet they are still crying, Lord, shall
I go and take him away, and send him to his own place? If thou could hear
it, all the Creatures in the world cry thus, and they be all desirous to send
thee to thy own place, and take thee away. My thinks when I see a sinner, I
hear all the Creatures cry as he in the (...) Sam. 16. 9. Abishai the son of
Zerviah; Abishai was one of David's Soldiers, when Shimei cursed David: Shall I
go and cut off this dead Dogs neck? So he says concerning Shimei, Let me go
over I pray thee, and take off his head; why should this dead Dog curse my
Lord? So when thou art blaspheming God, the Creatures look upon thee with
disdain, and they rise against thee, and all the Creatures say, Oh this dead
Dog, this wretched Creature, how long shall he live to blaspheme God? shall I
cut off his head? shall I go and send him down to his own place? It would
terrify thy heart if thou should hear every Creature crying to God to be
thy Executioner from him. And certainly when God gives commission, and God
falls upon thee, every Creature will fall upon thee: As you read in the 2 Samuel
18. when Joab fell upon Absalom, presently the ten men fell upon him, and slew
him too, as soon as Joab gave the stroke. So, as soon as God gives the stroke
against the sinner, certainly all other Creatures be ready to fall upon the
sinner also: so that sin brings a man to such a condition that all Creatures
are at enmity with him; whereas when once the soul is reconciled to God, and
sin pardoned, all Creatures be at Peace with you, you are then in League with
all the Creatures. We should account it an evil condition to be in such a place
where all the men in the Nation are our Enemies, and stand ready to murder us:
Certainly all the sinners in the world are in the midst of the Creatures of
God that stand ready armed with GODS wrath against them. Hence it is, That when
once God inlightens (I beseech you observe it) the Conscience of a sinner, he
fears every thing; The wicked fly, when none pursues them. It is very
observable of Cain, after he had committed that sin of slaying his Brother,
then says Cain, Every one that meets me, will slay me: Who was there then in
the world? No body but his Father and Mother: and yet every one that meets him
will slay him, he was afraid of every thing, and every one, because he had
sinned against the Lord. So every enlightened Conscience that knows what sin
means, when he comes to have Conscience awakened, they be afraid of every
thing: If there be thundrings, and lightenings, and storms, and tempests, it
sees the wrath of God in this Storm and Tempest, Thunder and Lightening; any
stirs abroad in the world be but as Messengers of Gods wrath against me, says
the awakened Conscience: This is the misery of a sinner; and then how much is
the evil of Sin greater than Affliction!

CHAP. XXXV.
XII. Sin is a greater Evil to man than Affliction, because it puts a man under
the Curse of God.

XII. NAy further, It puts the Creature under the Curse of God: it does
separate the Creature for evil. Psalm. 4. 3. It is said, God separates the
righteous man for himself. So sin separates the Creature for evil, and makes
him Anathema, accursed: For God in Deuteronomy. 27 26. says, Cursed is every one that
abides not in every thing that is written in the Law to do it; he is accursed
in all that he has and does: The Curse of God is against him. And here
observe, sin does not only deserve a Curse, that the Creature should be
accursed, but of its own nature it is a Curse, and makes the Creature accursed
in its own nature. As thus, you may see the evil of sin by the excellency of
Grace: Thus Grace does not only bring excellency upon the Creature, and brings
a blessing, but of it self it separates the Creature for a blessing. For what
is holiness but grace? they be usually expressed for one and the same; now what
is Holiness but the Consecration of a thing for God; so that when Holiness
comes into the heart, that is nothing else but that gracious Principle whereby
the soul of a man or woman, before common to Lust and sin, is now come to be
separated from al these things and to be consecrated and given up to God
himself, that is Holiness. Now sin must needs be contrary unto holiness. As
holiness is a separation of the Creature from other things, and a consecration
of it unto God; so sin is a separation of the Creature from God and all good,
and devoting of it up unto wrath, and misery, and a curse, and al evil
whatsoever in its own nature; it is not in the desert only. Many men think sin
in its desert deserves a Curse, but they understand not how sin in its own
nature separates the heart from God, and so gives it up to al evil, and all
misery, as grace does to all good. This is the evil of sin, and therefore
another manner of evil than there is in Affliction.

CHAP. XXXVI.
XIII. Sin is the seed of Eternal evil, therefore more hurtful to man than
Affliction. An Use thereof, Then see that those men are deceived that think to
provide well for themselves by Sin. Use. 2. The Ministry of the Word is for our
good, as well as Gods glory.

XIII. FUrther, Sin it is a principal evil; so I call it, because it is a
principal of Eternal evil to the Creature, (I beseech you observe what I mean)
I do not mean that it deserves eternal evil only, but of it self it is eternal
evil. As thus, Grace does not only deserve eternal happiness, but it is the
seed of eternal happiness, it is that principle, that if let alone will grow to
eternal happiness. So sin does not only deserve eternal misery, but it is the
seed of eternal evil, and sin it self will be executioner upon the soul, and
will prove an intolerable misery to the soul. Though sin be the very element
in which many men and women live and so delight themselves: yet be it known,
That this sin does not only deserve that God should bring his wrath upon thee
for it, but that sin will prove eternal torment to thee. As thus, The Fish that
plays and leaps in the water, the water is the element to the Fish that it
delights in; but if you put fire under this water if in a vessel, then that
water that was the element in which the Fish skipt, and played, and delighted it
self, that water will be torture and torment to the Fish boiling hot: So sin is
the element where men play, and delight in sinful ways, as the Fish in the
water, but when God comes and mingles wrath with sin, then that very sin which
was thy delight, shall be torture and torment, and so a principle of eternal
evil it shall be to you. Thus sin is another manner of evil than affliction; as
thus, Afflictions though in Diseases they bring pains and sorrows to the Body,
the matter of this will wear out in time, and so the Disease will fall; but sin
is such a principal evil and misery to the Creature, as it will never go out,
but continues a principal of eternal misery. Thus you have seen how sin is
against our own good. Somewhat I would fain say by way of APPLICATION in this
work.

Use 1. Sin is against our own good: Hence all those promises that any sinful
way has to you, to provide for your own selves in, and your own good, they be
all deceitful, and will deceive you The way of the wicked deceives them.
Certainly thou art mistaken, if thou think to make any provision for thy
self in sinful ways. And the best way for any man or woman to provide for
themselves, is to abandon sin: Would thou provide for thy self, for thy own
good, and be a true self-lover, abandon sin, for sin is against thy own good.

Use 2. Again, Hence you see, That the Minestry of the Word is that that is for
our good, and that that makes for your good, as well as for Gods glory. God in
sending the Ministry of the Word, sends it for your own good as well as his own
glory. Why what does it do? Only seeks to get away your sins, and make them
bitter and grievous unto you. I have in many particulars opened the nature of
sin, and how grievous and evil it is: now what is the intendment of this, but to
get the Serpent out of your bosoms, that which will do you mischief, and all
for your own good Certainly if ever God open your eyes, you will then desire,
with your faces upon the ground, to bless God that ever he sent his Ministers
to show you what sin is. Many times men's spirits rise against the Word, and
they take the Ministers as enemies, Oh he speaks against me: No it is not
against any ones person, but against thy sin, man or woman, that which will do
thee mischief, and undo thee. Again, many cry out against the Minister as that
man against Christ, He comes to torment us before the time. No it is against
thy sin man, it is to take away that which will undo thee. Many are ready to
say of the Minister as he to the Prophet Elijah, What have thou met me, Oh my
ennemy! But as the Prophet says, Does not my words do you good? Certainly that
which makes sin grievous to you, does you as much good as Creatures can be done
to for the present. Many have sin in their stomachs, that rise against the
Minister and the Word, as the sick man's stomach against the glass or the pot in
which the Physic is, but when for that evil grief within, he takes a vomit, it
makes him sick it may be for a while, and the man casts up many filthy things
and noysom stuff; and then he cries out, Oh! blessed be God, though I had
pain, yet this takes away a great deal of that bad stuff that would have bred
Diseases. So though our Ministry may put you to pain, yet you will bless God
when that is cast out that it has to deal withal. Many when they hear the
Word, their spirits rise against it; but when it has pleased God to get away
their sins, though upon hard terms, they have blessed God that ever they heard
the Word that did trouble them, or ever saw such a man's face. I remember an
expression of one to my self, That when he sat and heard me, he was persuaded
every thing I spoke was against himself, though a stranger whom I never knew,
and he professed his spirit rose both against the Word and the Speaker, going
home, and the Word working, and working out sin, he comes not long after and
blessed God that ever he heard that Sermon: And so certainly it will be.

I have showed you in these thirteen Particulars how evil Sin is against your
own souls; know then, if the Minister by the Word can but get away your sin, Oh
you will see it above the greatest good and happiness that ever you had in all
your lives, that ever you did understand that which would do you so much hurt:
Alas you will say, I did not see sin would do me so much hurt; woe to me if I
had not heard the evil of sin; if I had known the evil of sin by feeling, what
had become of me? You have heard and read much of the evil of sin; now think,
if these things be so grievous in the hearing or reading, what a woeful
condition will that soul be in that must feel it? that must have every one of
these Particulars made good to the full? Certainly such a soul must needs be in
a woeful condition. Now the Lord so sanctify and bless unto you the reading or
hearing of all these evils, that none of your souls may ever come to feel them.

CHAP. XXXVII.
XIV. Sin is worse than affliction, because it hardens the heart against God
and the means of Grace.

THe opposition Sin has to our own good, It has more evil against our selves
than any Affliction; and for the manifesting that we have opened Thirteen
Particulars: Thus far we have gone. There is two Particulars more to discover
the evil of sin as against our good more than afflictions.

XIV. Sin is worse than Affliction as against our selves, For it is that which
hardens the heart against God, and the means of Grace more than any Affliction.
I do not speak now of hardening the heart against God in opposition to him; but
as in opposition to our own good that we should receive from God, in the use of
the means of grace; and so Sin is more opposite to our good than Afflictions*
Affliction rather, usually, does further the means of grace, and prepare the
heart for the entertaining of the means of grace; affliction does: But Sin
hardens the heart against it, and hinders the efficacy of the means of grace
upon the souls of men and women; Hosea, 5. and the last, In their afflictions
they will seek me early: then the more afflictions are upon them, the more
ready are they to seek me; Isay, 26. 16. When thy chastening was upon them,
they powered forth their prayer. Many men and women that never knew how to pray,
that would say they could not pray in their families, that they could not pray
in secret, any otherwise than to say a prayer, or that they had learned when
they were children to say so many words; they could not pray otherwise: But
when their Afflictions are upon them, then their hearts could be driven to God,
and they could find how to pray otherwise. There is a speech concerning
Mariners, He that knows not how to pray, let him go to Sea: noting, that when
he comes into the waves, and tempests, and storms, that would teach him to
pray: You Mariners, consider if ever it have taught you to pray: my thinks, of
any sort of men in the world, Mariners should have the gift of prayer, because
so often in affliction, and in danger of their lives; and many times they find,
though they know not how to use their mouths, to fashion their tongues to any
thing but oaths at other times; yet when in danger of their lives, they can
fall to prayer, and power forth their prayer; when thy chastening is upon them,
they power forth their prayer: and that word there translated Prayer, in the
Original is a word that signifies to Inchant; and the reason comes from hence,
because Inchanters did put a great deal of efficacy in a few words, closed
their Sentences in a few words, and thought there was much efficacy in them:
So the prayers that comes from men and women in Affliction has much efficacy
in them, they be not vain light words, but have abundance of efficacy: so that
Afflictions further the means of grace in the hearts of men and women; it
brings them to the Word, and furthers that also; it is as the rain that softens
the Earth, and fits it for the Plow; Plow up the fallo^ ground of your hearts,
says the Lord: the Word of God is as the Plow, to plow up the fallow ground of
your heart* Now Husbandmen know when the Earth is dr^e and hard they cannot
plow, their plows are kept out; but when Rain comes and softens the Earth, then
their Plows can go. Many times it is so with the hearts of many men and women
when they are in prosperity, the Sunshine of prosperity being upon them, the
Plow of the Word cannot get into their hearts; but when afflictions or sickness
comes, then the Plow of the Word can get in, and cast up the fallow ground of
their hearts: times of Affliction do bring men and women to the Word. Therefore
I remember I have read of Chrysostom, in a Sermon of hi to the people of
Antioch, where he preached, he tells them, When they were in trouble, then
their Congregations were thrust and filled: It was at such a time when
Theodocius the Emperor by the Instigation of the Empress, his Wife, was angry
with the City, and threatened to come against it and destroy it in a Warlike
manner: then all the people got together, and the Congregations were thrust;
and then they prayed and sighed, and great and much prayer there was, when they
were afraid the King would come in anger against the City to destroy it: So
that afflictions and troubles, and fears, they do bring men and women to the
means of grace, and they do further the means of grace, and make the means to
be profitable many times: As it is with the Seed that is sown, if there be a
dry hot time after the sowing, it lies under the clods, and comes not up; but
if there come rain, then that which was sown diverse weeks before, springs up.
So we sow the Word of God in your hearts, but the Seed lies under the clods so
long as there is the hot Sunshine of prosperity, till afflictions come, and
the rain of affliction brings the Word out, and then somewhat appears. We have
known men that never seemed to be wrought on by the Word, yet when God has
laid his hand upon them in some affliction, then there has been brought to
their remembrance such a Truth that they heard such a time, and then they have
acknowledged the power of the Word, and Conscience has then been awakened, and
not before. I remember it is reported of Beza, that famous Instrument of God in
the Church, That being a Papist, and living in Paris, and in great Honor, as he
was there, being a man of great Esteem, and good Birth, and had Preferments
there; yet he had often times misgiving thoughts that he was not right, that
the Popish Religion was not right, and that the Protestants were in the right,
because he had read the Scriptures and compared the Controversy; yet because
of his great Honors and preferments in Paris, all went away and could not
prevail: but God laid upon him a great sickness, and great afflictions, and
then that which he had but overly upon his spirit before, now sunk into his
heart more deeply, that as soon as he began to recover, he left Paris, and all
his Preferments, and got to Genevah, and there made public profession of the
Truth. Thus Afflictions further the means of grace; but it is otherwise with
Sin, that, if let alone, hardens the heart desperately against all the means of
grace: Though it be true, God may sometimes put forth his Almighty Power, and
notwithstanding all the sin in the soul of a man or woman, he may make the
means of grace effectual; though man's heart be never so stout and stubborn in
their ways of sin, yet God may please to come by his Almighty Power, and over
power the heart, as he does many times; yea, God sometimes lets men go on in
horrible wickedness, to manifest his power the more: As the Prophet Elijah;
when he would have fire come to devour the Sacrifice, he poured much water upon
it, that so the Power of God might the more be manifested: so God suffers
deluges of sin to be sometimes in men and women, that he might magnify his
Power so much the more in the efficacy of the means of grace: But yet we are
to know that sin, and every sin of its own Nature, does harden the heart
against God in the use of all the means of grace; yea, and so hardens the
heart, that if men and women live any long time under the means of grace, and
continue in the ways of sin, it is a thousand to one whether ever they be
wrought upon afterward: usually we find where the means of grace comes to any
place, it works for the most part at the first; I do not, nor will not limit
God, but for the most part at first it works upon men and women, before they
have by sin hardened themselves against it; if once they have continued some
little time under it, and their hearts have followed their sin, and so come to
be hardened, it is I say a most dangerous thing, and many times God for ever
leaves them to their hardness; yea, such evil there may be in sin, as if a man
or woman has an enlightened conscience, and shall go against the light of their
conscience, when they live under the means of grace, any one sin against the
light of conscience may for ever harden them. Thou that have come to the Word
and have heard, these things thou know has come near to thy soul, and yet
there has been that violence of corruption to go against the light of thy
conscience, and that particular truth that has been made known unto thee from
God, that one sin may be enough evil to harden thy heart, that the means shall
never do thee good; therefore there is a great, deal more evil in sin than in
any affliction. I beseech you consider of this one note further in it; God
comes many times, yea, usually with abundance of grace to the souls of men and
women in their affliction, and that in the continuance of their afflictions,
and in the increase of their afflictions, yet the means of grace work; but God
can never come with grace while they sin, except sin be decreased; I say, God
never comes to make any means of grace effectual, but it must be with the
decrease, and with the taking away of sin; the means of grace may be effectual
with the increase of affliction, but the means of grace can never be effectual
but with the decrease of sin: therefore there is more evil in sin than in
affliction, as against our selves.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
XV. Sin is worse to us than Affliction, because Sin brings more shame than
Affliction.

XV. THere is more evil in Sin than in Affliction as against our selves, In
regard of the shame that it does bring; Sin brings more shame than any
Affliction brings, Romans 6. 20. What profit, or what fruit had you in those
things whereof you be now ashamed? Sin, it is that which brings shame, not only
to a man or woman in particular, but likewise to a whole Nation, when sin
prevails. Prove. 14. 34. Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a reproach
to any People. Afflictions are not a reproach any further than as they be the
fruit of sin, and then there is shame in them (but this we shall speak of
afterward) but sin is the proper cause of any reproach and shame: and certainly
this Scripture has been fulfilled concerning us; our sin has been a reproach
to this Nation: there was a time, this Nation was honored among other Nations,
and a terror to them; but of late since we have sinned and grown Superstitious,
and come nearer unto Popery, since there has been more wickedness among us.
This Nation has been an exceeding reproach: we may apply for that, that in the
13, of Hosea, according to the Interpretation of most, When Ephraim spoke,
trembling, he exalted himself in Israel; but when he offended in Baal, he died;
thus Interpreters carry it: There was a time when Ephraim spoke, then was
trembling in all Nations about him, and he exalted himself above other Nations:
but when he sinned in Baal, then he died, his Honor died, he was a dead Nation,
and no body regarded him. True, time was, when England spoke, there was
trembling, and England exalted himself above other Nations; but since we sinned
in Baal, and there has been so much Idolatry and Superstition, we have been a
dead Nation in respect of what we have been before. Sin is a reproach, to any
Nation a shame: There is no such shame in Affliction as there is in sin; that
brings shame. That which argues worthlesness in any, that which argues there is
little good or worth in any: or if any one should do any thing unbeseeming
either his own excellency, or that supposed to be in him; as to lie in the
mire, or to go naked, or in their carriage, or by any deportment, to behave
themselves besides that excellency supposed to be in him, this brings shame.
Job 30. 7. Those that went up and down braying among the bushes, it was
contemptible, and it was a shame: So for any man to do any thing beneath the
excellency of a man, is a shame. Now there is nothing so below the excellency
of a man as sin, no Affliction brings a man under his excellency as sin does,
therefore no Affliction can be such a shame to man as sin.

Now the Rational Creature that is guided by Counsel in his actions is the
proper subject of shame: Bruit beasts cannot be capable of shame, because they
have no Counsel to be the cause of their Actions, but the reasonable Creature
failing in that which is his aim, coming short of the rule of his work, through
his unskilfulness this causes shame. As now, Take any workman, if he do any
work beneath the rule of the work through unskilfulness, it causes shame, he
comes to be ashamed of it. Now sin must needs bring shame, because it comes
beneath the Rule of eternal Life, and therefore must needs cause shame. It is
true, in natural things to fail through ignorance is a greater shame than to
fail through wilfulness; but in spirituals, the greater shame is to fail
through wilfulness. And the greater the Art, the greater the shame to come
short of the Rule of that Art: As suppose a General; it is a greater shame for
him to fail, and come short of the Rules of Military Art, than for a
Countryman to come short of his Rules of Husbandry, because one is more noble
than the other. Now Brethren, The Art of Divinity to guide to eternal Life, is
the most Noble of any Art; and for any Creature to fail and come short of this
Art, is the greatest shame that can be. Though men be ashamed of any thing
else, take a Painter, or any Workman or a Husbandman, if he come short of the
Rule, he is ashamed, but if men fail of the Rule of eternal Life, they are not
ashamed then. I Remember Augustine has this Expression, says he, A Scholar
if he fail in pronouncing a word and pronounce it amiss, if he pronounce Omer
for Homer (he instanceth in that) he is ashamed of that; but men be not ashamed
of breaking the Rules of Divinity: And there is more failings in the Breach of
the Rule of Divinity and in failing there, than in any Art whatsoever. Now sin
is the greatest shame, and the Reason why sinners be not ashamed, is, Because
they know not the Excellency of man; they know not wherein the excellency of
the Rational Creature consists, and therefore they are not ashamed of that
which brings them under the excellency of the Rational Creature. Besides, They
know not Gods infinite Holiness, therefore are not ashamed; They be now among
other sinners, and they think though some seem to be Religious, yet they think
others are as bad as themselves in their hearts at least, though not in
Practice: As Nero, because he was bad, he thought others were as bad as
himself. So a wicked man, when he cannot see others break out in such great
sins as he does, yet he thinks they are as bad some other way, and have some
other sins as great. And because they live among them that are as bad as
themselves, and live in the same sins, therefore they are not ashamed: For as a
Collier living among Colliers is not ashamed, but if he lived among Princes and
Noblemen, he would be ashamed. So wicked men in this world because they live in
this world among sinners, they conceive to be sinners like themselves they be
not ashamed; but when God shall come to open what sin means, and what the
Holiness of God means, and they see themselves stand in the presence of the
holy God, then they will be ashamed. But certainly sin is a greater-shame than
Affliction; none need be ashamed of Affliction any further-than it has a
Connection to some great sin; but sin in the greatest prosperity has shame with
it.

CHAP. XXXIX.
He that Sins, wrongeth, dispiseth, and hates his own Soul. Use 1. Then see
the malitiousness that is in Sin. Use 2. To pity those that go on in sinful
ways. Use 3. Let Sin be dealt hardly with.

THus we have Discovered how Sin makes more against our good, than Affliction
does. Now there be diverse things which follow hence as Consequences: I spoke of
one or two before, I will name them no more: But only thus far, Hence we see
that sin makes more against our selves, than any thing else; Therefore it is
the worst way for any to provide for themselves by giving way to live in any
sinful course. And for this I shall ad Two or Three Scriptures I spoke not of
before, to show how men go against themselves, and those men that think to
provide best for themselves, the truth is in the ways of sin, they go most
against themselves: You have these Three notable Expressions for this in
Scripture:

First, That men by Sin, wrong their own Souls. Secondly, That they Despise
their own Souls. Thirdly, They Hate their own Souls.
If I should Charge these Three things upon the most vile sinner at this
present before the Lord; Oh thou do wrong thy own soul, Thou do despise thy
own soul, Thou hate thy own soul, he would be loath to yield to it; and yet
the Scripture charge this upon sinners, Prove. 8. 36. He that sins against me,
wrongs his own soul: he does not only wrong God, that was in the first thing we
opened; but by sin he wrongs his own soul: You will say sometimes, I do no body
wrong, I thank God none can say I wrong them; but thou wrongest thine own soul,
and certainly it is as great an evil to wrong thy own soul, as to wrong the
Body of another, and a great deal more. Nay further (mark) All they that hate
me (that is, Wisdom and Instruction, the Rule of Lise) they love death: It is a
strange expression; if any Minister should say thus to you, you love death, you
would think it a rash speech from us: the Holy Ghost says so of all that hate
Instruction; if there be any Truth of God revealed against sin, and thy heart
rise against it, thou love death, thy own ruin, and thy own destruction: And
what pity is it for men and women to die? who can pity them that die
eternally, when as they love death? if they love death, they must have it: So
the Holy Ghost says, they wrong their souls, and they love death; and Prove.
15. 32. He that refuses Instruction, destiseth his own soul: when you come and
hear any Instruction against any sinful way, and refuse it, you despise your
own souls; as if your own souls were worth little. Hence it is that men and
women, though they hear Sin tends to the death of their souls, to their eternal
ruin, yet if they have but any temptation, but to get a groat or sixpence,
they will venture upon it: what is this but to despise thy soul? that is to
despise a thing, to account it little worth: though thy soul be worth a whole
world. There is none so poor in this place, the meanest boy, servant; or girl,
but has a soul more worth than Heaven and Earth; but though the meanest here
has a soul more worth than the World, yet we see it ordinary, that to get
twopence or a groat, they will venture the ruin of their souls: Is not this to
despise their souls? as if they were not worth a groat or sixpence; and they
will lie or steal to get that which is less: Nay, not only so, but they are
haters of their own souls; and this you have Prove. 29. 24. He that is partner
with a Thief, hates his own soul: there is an instance in that one sin, but it
is true of every sin; for this must be taken as a rule to help you to
understand the evil of sin, Know what is said of any one sin, is vertually true
of all; that evil which is in any one sin, is vertually in any sin, he hates
his own soul that goes on in any one sin: therefore if you will provide for
your own good, you must abandon sin.

Object. But it may be said, Is that Lawful for a man to abstain from sin out
of self respects? for this I am upon, I am showing how sin is against our
selves, and therefore urge you to abandon, and take heed of sin as it is against
our selves; then this Question arises, What should we abstain from sin out of
self respects? what good is in this? is that from grace?

To that I answer three things.

Answ. 1. That at first when God does begin to work upon the soul, God does
usually move us from self most; and these self grounds works most to take men
and women off from the acts of their sin (from outward acts at least) and to
stop them from the commission of sin and bring them to the means of grace; self
motives God makes use of at first: but yet the work is not done till the soul
goes beyond these: it is good for men and women to abstain from sin upon any
grounds; there is so much evil in sin, that upon any grounds men and women
abstaining from sin, it is well, but only except it be such a ground, that the
ground it self be a greater sin than the sin I abstain from. But yet the work
is not done: Therefore

2. Know, That though when grace is come into the soul, God uses self
arguments, and self motives to further the abstaining from sin (and it is
Lawful to do so) yet self motives, and self arguments be not the chief and
highest of all. But

3. That which I most pitch upon, and most fully answers this Question is
this; That if we did but know wherein our self good consists, which is
certainly to live to God; our self good is in this, not only the glory of God,
but our own good and happiness; our self good is in our living to God, that
infinite first-Being of all things. Now if we understand this, I say, that
thing which is our self good, we may make to be our highest aim in abstaining
from sin, and in doing any good; that thing which is our self good: but we must
not make it our highest aim as it is our self good, we must look to God above
our selves; but still the same thing that is our self good, our own good, may
be made our highest aim of all, which is our living to God and his praise. Thus
God has connexed our good and his glory together, that the same thing which
is the highest end of all I must aim at, to wit, Gods glory and his praise,
that is also our highest good; and so we may aim at it in our chief aims.

Secondly, If sin make so against us, I shall give you Three uses of it.

Use 1. Then we from hence see the desperate maliciousness that is in sin. It
follows thus: What for a Creature to sin against the blessed God, and to get no
good to himself neither, yea, to do hurt to himself too; this is horrible
mischief and malice. We account it horrible malice against man, if any man be
so notoriously malicious, that he seeks to do mischief to another man though he
get no good, yea, though he hurt himself by it, yet he will do another man a
mischief: certainly if this be maliciousness against man, then there is
certainly malice in sin against God: for when thou sinnest against God; suppose
thou should get never so much good, suppose thou by sin, one sin, could
get the the greatest good that ever any Creature had, yet thou must not commit
it; it were wickedness to do it: But what say thou to this, that when thou
sinnest against God, thou mischiefest thy self; not only gettest no good, but
do that which is the greatest wrong and evil to thy self, and yet will thou
go on in sin against God? Oh what do thou think of God? and what hurt has
God done to thee that thou should be so malicious against him? that thou will dishonor him, and strike at him? though thou gettest nothing thy self,
nay, though thou do undo thy self by it: men will rather go on in that way
that is dishonorable to God though they venture their own damnation to do it.
It is one of the highest expressions we can have against our Enemies, I will be
even with him, I will have my mind of him, or I wilspend al I have to a groat;
this is desperate malice in man, we account it so. Thou do more against God,
though thou say not so, it may be, in word, yet God sees that there is this
language in it, well, I will do that which the Word forbids though I undo my
self, I will venture my own perishing, my own eternal destruction, rather than
that shall not be done that I hear God will not have done: there is this in
every Sin. Brethren, because we do not examine what is in sin, we think it but
a little, we see but the outside; but when God comes to unravle out Sin, and to
pick out all that his Omniscient eye sees in sin, then it will appear to be
evil, transcendantly evil.

Use 2. If Sin have so much evil in it more than Affliction as against our
selves, Then it should teach us all to look with pity, and abundance of
commisseration upon men and women that go on in ways of sin. Ah poor
Creatures, they undo themselves, their ways are against themselves, and they
will work their own ruin and misery by these ways of theirs: You that are
Tradesmen, if you see a man going on in way of Trading, so that you know
certainly that he will undo himself, you look upon him with pity; poor young
man, he goes on in such a way as he will undo himself; you pity him upon that
ground, because he undoes himself: the more hand a man has in doing himself
hurt, the more he is to be pitied: As you Mariners, if you see one at Sea, go
through ignorance, so that he will be by and by split into the Sea, or you know
he will be by and by upon the Rocks and Sands, and he is wilful in his way, you
pity him, he is an object of pity Do thou see any man or woman, thy father
or mother, brother or sister, husband or wife, or any thou love dearly, going
on in ways of sin, Oh pity them; let thy heart bleed over them poor wretches,
they will undo themselves, split themselves eternally. If thou should see a
Company of men stab and murder themselves, and lying dead in the streets, if it
should be asked how came they dead? and it should be answered every one of them
murdered himself; were it not an object of pity? if you see men and women go
on in sin, every one stabs, and murders, and mischiefs themselves, and cuts
their own throats, this is the way of sin: and though they do not see it
themselves, yet if God open their eyes they will see it; and certainly they
shall see it ere long, and they will be forced to cry out in the bitterness of
their souls, Woe to me, woe to me, I am lost and undone, and I have uddone my
self. Therefore Brethren we should not look upon sinners now as they are in the
height of their prosperity and the rufe of their pride, but look upon them as
within a little time they will be; look upon them in their end, and then learn
to pity them. Although sinners go on conceitedly, and boast themselves in their
evil ways for the present, pity them so much the more, for the more any sinner
is conceited and boasts in his way, the more dangerous is his condition, the
more dangerous sign the seal of God is upon him to seal him to destruction. The
more conceited any man is in any thing that will ruin him, the more lamentable
is the object therefore. Though we many times when we see men under grievous
Afflictions, you go to your neighbors and see them lie under Gods hand,
grievous pains and tortures of body, Crying out dolfully, it makes your hearts
bleed, and draws tears from your eyes; and you say, Oh the lamentable
condition this man or woman is in; you pity them in affliction, because they
are in such grievous pain. But now you have another neighbor by, and you hear
him swearing, certainly though you pity the other neighbor under affliction,
yet to hear him swear is more pitiful than to hear the other roar out in the
most grievous torture that any man or woman was ever in* When we hear them in
torture, we have our hearts bleed, and are not affected with their sinning,
this is a sign we know not the evil of sin. Further, if you should hear one in
the anguish of Conscience crying out, I am undone, I am damned, I am damned; in
the anguish of his Conscience thus crying out, of hell, and of the devil, you
look upon such with pity: Now this I say, Those that are in the greatest
torment of Conscience for their sin, they are in a better Case than those that
go on most conceitedly, and boasting in their sin. Do you see one that is your
neighbor, or in your family, or friend, when he is rebuked or reproved for any
sin, that is careless and hardened in sin; I say, This man or woman, servant or
child, is in a worse condition and a more lamentable object than if you should
see another in the greatest horror, and anguish, and trouble of Conscience,
crying out most bitterly of sin: For there is a great deal more hope of this
man or woman that cries out in anguish of Conscience for sin, he may be saved,
and not eternally ruined by sin, there is more hopes a great deal; therefore
learn who is to be pitied; for sin is more against our own good, than any
affliction.

Use 3. If Sin be so much against our selves, Then learn to have sin hardly
dealt withal: For thus it follows, That which we look upon as our own enemy, we
are willing should be hardly dealt withal: Now, nothing such an enemy to our
good, as sin is. If you apprehend any one has done you hurt, or intends to do
you hurt, you think you may take liberty to let out your self to the utmost to
revenge your self; but this is sinful, and the distemper of your hearts to do
so: But you men and women that have your hearts filled with revenge, because
you conceive others have done you hurt; here is an object God gives you leave
to let out your revenge to the full upon; other men do you hurt, therefore you
think you may let out revenge, that is your wickedness, for vengeance belongs
to God; but sin does you hurt more than any man can, and in this God lets you
have leave to revenge your selves upon sin. Revenge your selves as much as you
can; look upon it as most mischievous. There be some such spiteful and
revengful men, revengeful and spiteful dispositions that have it lie mouldring
at their hearts, because they cannot let it out upon objects, so much as they
would; now here is an object you may let it out as much as you can, to revenge
your selves, and to seek the ruin and destruction of sin; and to labor to use
it as hardly as possibly you can: yea, it is made in Scripture a sign of true
Repentance to be willing to revenge ones self upon sin, 2 Cor. 7. 11. when they
had committed sin, what revenge was there, says the Apostle; they manifested
their repentance by revenge upon sin: follow thy sin with a deadly hatred if
thou will; thou have a hateful disposition against others, follow sin with as
deadly a hatred as thou can. It was an Argument of David's heart cleaving to
Absalom when Joab was to go against him, Use the young man kindly for my sake,
says he; this was an argument David's heart was with him: So when you would
fain have sin used kindly, gently, it is an argument your hearts are not set
against sin so much as they should: No, you should not say, use sin kindly, but
roughly and hardly; as the Prophet said of one that came to destroy him, use
him roughly when he comes at the door: so when sin comes to the door, when
temptations be seeking to have entrance, use them roughly at the door, and say,
Let the righteous smiteme, Oh that the Word might come as a two edged Sword to
stab and slay my sin; Oh that when I go to hear the Word, I might meet with
some hard thing against sin. Thus we should come when we come to the Word, and
when sin has got a blow by the Word of God, bless God, and say, blessed be
God, my sins this day have got a blow; this sin of mine that has done me so
much hurt, and so pestered me, and so hindered my peace and comfort, blessed be
God this day it has got a blow: thus we should do because Sin makes so much
against our selves. And thus we have finished the Two First Heads of Sins being
against God, and against our selves. Now there be Four more.

THE THIRD PART OF THIS TREATISE.
CHAP. XL.
Sin is opposite to all Good, and therefore a greater evil than any Affliction,
opened in five things: 1 Sin take away the Excellency of all things: 2 It
brings a Curse upon all: 3 Sin is a burden to Heaven and Earth, and all
Creatures: 4 Sin turn the greatest Good into the greatest Evil: 5 Sin (if let
alone) would bring all things to confusion.

THirdly, Sin is opposite to all Good in General. Sin is opposite to God, and
to our selves; and I say in the third place, It Is against all kind of Good, and
therefore a greater evil than any affliction: Now for that there be five things
to be opened: only in the general, take this sure Rule, There must needs be
more evil in Sin than in any Affliction, because there is no other evil, but is
opposite to some particular good; an Affliction is opposite to the particular
good contrary to that affliction: but Sin is opposite to every good; not only
is Sin opposite to the contrary virtue, but it is opposite to every good, so
Divinity teaches us; though Heathens in Morality teaches, that one Sin is
opposite to the contrary virtue, but Divinity teaches, that one Sin is
opposite to every Virtue, and every Good: which appears in Five things.

First, Sin spoils all Good, takes away the Beauty and Excellency of all Good
whatsoever: It may be said of any thing that has an Excellency when Sin
comes, as its said of Reuben, Genesis 49. 4. His Excellency is gone, is departed,
he shall not excel: therefore Romans 8. 20. it is said (through the Sin of man)
All Creatures be subject to vanity, the whole world is put under vanity through
man's Sin. Now then it appears by that, that the Luster, and Beauty, and
Excellency of Glory of all things in this world, are spoiled by the Sin of
man, for all is put under vanity by Sin; and Sin not only makes the heart
vain, and so is against our selves, but all things in the world is put under
vanity by Sin; the Excellency of thy Estate, of thy Parts, the Excellency of
any Creature thou do enjoy, all is spoiled through Sin: therefore Tit. 1. 15.
it is said, All things be unclean to the sinner: says he, To him that is
unclean, al things are unclean. This is the first, Your Sin is opposite to al
Good, spoils al Good.

Secondly, Sin brings a Curse upon all: I opened before how it puts man under
a Curse; but now I am to show how it brings a Curse upon the whole World, Genesis
3. Cursed shall the Earth be for thy sake; and so by the same reason upon the
whole World that thou have to do withal: not only the Sinner, but through man's
sin the world is under a Curse; and therefore it is a most dangerous thing for
any man or woman to seek after happiness in the things of the world, when as
the whole world is under a Curse, and will thou seek thy happiness in that which
is under a Curse? no mervail though the Devil himself be called the god of this
World; why? because the world is accursed through the Sin of man: Sin brings a
Curse upon the whole World.

Thirdly, Sin is a burden to Heaven and Earth, to all Creatures: Romans 8. 22.
The whole Creation groans and travels in pain to be delivered, and that through
the Sin of man. Now what is the evil of Sin, when it is so weighty, that it
makes the whole frame of Heaven and Earth to groan to bear the burden of it? It
may be thy Sin is light to thy Soul, thou earriest it lightly, but as light as
it is to thee, it is such a heavy burden to Heaven and Earth, and the whole
Frame of the Creation, that if God did not hold it by his mighty Power, it
would make it not only shake, but fall down.

Fourthly, Sin turns the greatest Good into the greatest Evil, therefore
opposite to all Good. As thus, Take the greatest good of man in prosperity:
the more prosperity thou have, though a fruit of Gods Bounty, yet thy Sin
turns it to the greatest evil to thee: As if Poison get in Wine, it works more
strongly than in Water: so Sin in a prosperous Estate, usually works more
strongly to turn it to a greater evil, than Sin in a lower Estate. Poor men by
Sin, have their Water poisoned; and rich men by Sin, have their Wine poisoned:
Now poisoned Wine has more strength than poisoned Water. And it turns not only
prosperity, but the best means, not only the means of grace, but the better
any means is thou injoyest, the more evil it is turned into to thee, except the
means take away the sinfulness of thy heart: if thou retainest the sinfulness
of thy heart, the more powerful Sermons thou hear, and the more glorious
Truths laid open, the worse will be thy condition, and thou will one day curse
the time that ever thou had such means. Yea, Sin turns God to be the greatest
evil, and makes him the greatest evil in all his Attributes: And Christ himself
(though infinitely good) to be the greatest evil: Christ is a stumbling stone
to wicked men, and laid by God a stumbling stone: What! Christ the precious
Corner stone, that has infinite Treasures of all Excellency, in whom the
Fullness of the God head dwells bodily, yet this Christ a stumbling stone, and
the greatest evil through sin to wicked men; so that one day they will curse
the time that ever they heard of Christ. So Sin is opposite to all good,
because it turns the greatest good to the greatest evil.

Fifthly, and Lastly, Sin is the greatest evil, Because if let alone, it would
bring all things to Confusion: Therefore it is said, by Christ all things
subsists; were it not for Christ who sets himself against the evil of sin, al
things would be brought to Confusion: 1 John 5. 19. The whole world lies in
wickedness: Just as a Carrion lies in slime and filth, and there rots; so the
whole world would be in the same case that the Carrion is that lies in filth and
brought to confusion; were it not that God has his number of Elect, and they
keep the world from confusion. Now put all these together, sin spoils all,
brings a Curse upon all, is a burden to heaven and earth, turns the greatest
good to the greatest evil, and would bring all things to Confusion if let
alone: This is the evil of sin in Opposition to all good. There be but Three
more, and they be, 1 To show how sin is the evil of all evils whatsoever. 2
Has a kind of infiniteness in it. And, 3 It has Reference to the Devil: But
these I cannot come to in this Chapter, but shall in the following to conclude
all; much you have read of the evil of sin, and how it is above all
afflictions; afflictions are of a lower nature: Oh Brethren, This is that we
should seek for and prise, to enjoy those means, that may lessen sin, and
oppose wickedness among us: And of all others these be the two great means to
crush sin, and bring down, or make it less in all places; the great Ordinance
of the Magistracy, and the great Ordinance of the Ministry. Now (as I told you
before) Reproach has come to our Nation through sin, and from whence is it sin
has grown to that height it has, but because there has been corruption in
both, great Corruption in Magistracy, and Ministry, among us. As we read of
Dan and Bethel, two Calves set up there: Dan signifies Judgment; and Bethel
The house of God. So there was great Corruption in Dan and Bethel places of
Judgment Magistracy, and Bethel the house of God in the Ministry. Now it has
pleased God of late, to begin to be merciful to us, this way; through that
great Ordinance of good, he has appointed for us, The Assembly of Parliament,
to purge both Dan and Bethel, Magistracy, and Ministry, to cast out Corruption
from places of Judgment, and the House of God. And as we are to bless God for
this; so we are to further this work of theirs, and stand by them to the utmost
that we are able in all good ways those Worthies of God in that great Assembly
for the finishing of that Work which they have begun: and that our sins and
wickedness may be done away from among us. And for that which has been done,
certainly God has received much praise, and we have cause to bless God for it.
And those that have gone on in a good way according to what the Law does permit
them they are to be encouraged. And in a more especial manner, you that be the
especial means of good to this Land, I mean in regard of Safety, and your
employment; the Mariners, in whom much of the Strength of this Nation
consists, for our Walls be Water and Wooden Walls: Seas and Ships be the Walls
of this Land, and therefore much of the Good, and of the Safety, and Prosperity
of this State depends upon those. And if God stir up their hearts to the
maintenance of their Protestation, and Parliament, and Liberties, and to set
themselves against Popery and Superstition, and to encourage the Parliament in
their good way; this is that we be to bless God for, and encourage you in. We
read in Judges 5. several Tribes when the People of God were in straits, would
not go up but had many excuses: others did go to help in the Cause of God,
Judge. 5. 14. See how many excuse themselves, but especially in the 16. Verse.
Why abodest thou among the Sheep-folds to hear the bleatings of the ^locks? Oh
Ru^en said, We must not leave House and Cattle, we must not go out: And Giliad
abode beyond Jordan; and Dan abode in Ships; some think Dan did not live near
the Sea, but thought they ran to Ships and abode there: And Asher continued by
the Sea shore, and abode in his Breaches: He pleads thus, We must continue our
business, in making Fences against the Sea; we have many Breaches, and we must
continue there and look to our business. But Zebulon and Naphtali they
jeoparded their lives to the death in the high places of the field. Who be
those two Zebulon and Naphtali that were full of courage and zeal, when others
were-full of Pleas and would not venture their lives? Who be these that
ventured their lives? These two were the especial Tribes of Mariners that were
forward rather than others. That these were Mariners appears Matt. 4. 15. The
Land of Zebulon and Nephtali by the way of the Sea beyond Jordan these that
lived by the Sea. Others would not stir that lived by the Sea, but Zebulon and
Nephtali, these joparded their lives: Now mark, God seems to remember this:
they did not jeopard themselves in a good Cause in vain: God remembers it many
hundred years after. When Christ comes, the first Tribes that seem to be
enlightened were these; the people that sat in darkness saw a great light, and
to them that sat in the region and shadow of death, light is sprung up: they
sat in darkness, a company of poor Mariners, exceeding ignorant of the ways
of God; and Christ comes first to them, and brings light to them. It may be God
might aim to show Mercy to these Tribes the rather for this that they did in
appearing in a good Cause, though it were with jeopardy to themselves. So go
you on, and in a good Cause appear and venture your selves to assist these
Worthys of ours in whom so much of our good conssists, and God will remember
this in Spiritual Mercies. Would you have the means of Grace continued, and the
means of Light come to them that sit in darkness; if you would have the
blessing of Zebulon and Nephtali, then be Zebulons and Nephtalies to go out,
whatsoever excuses others have, and jeopard your selves for the good, of this
Commonwealth.

THE FOVRTH PART OF THIS TREATISE.
CHAP. XLI.
That Sin is the Evil and Poison of all other Evils, showed in several
Particulars: First, Its the strength of all Evils. Secondly, Its the sting of
Affliction. Thirdly, Its the Curse of all Evils, opened in Five Particulars.
Fourthly, Sin is the shame of all Evils. Fifthly, The eternity of all Evil
comes from Sin.

THere are Four Things, which except we be well instructed in, and know, we
know nothing to Purpose: Except we know God, and Sin, and Christ, and Eternity:
These are the Four great Things that you had need to be well instructed in: The
knowledge of Sin I have endeavored to set before you: In this Argument I have
showed you the evil of fin above al affliction. The next thing I am to Open to
you, is the Fourth General Head, Propounded in the Fifth Chapter.

Fourthly, Therefore, that Sin is the Evil of all other Evils.

It is the very pith of all other Evils; there is nothing that would be scarce
worthy the name of Evil, if Sin were not in it. That it is the evil of all
other evils, will appear in these Particulars:

First, It is the strength of all other Evils. The strength, the prevailing
strength that any evil has against man, it is from Sin. There is no Evil would
have any prevailing strength to do us any hurt were there not Sin in it. That
is certain, nothing in heaven, or earth, or hell, would do any of the Children
of men any hurt, were it not for Sin, if there were not Sin to give it
strength. The strength of any evil that can do us any hurt, is from Sin. Let
the evil be never so small, yet if it come armed with the strength of the guilt
of Sin, it is enough to undo any man or woman in the world. This is the Reason
of the difference of the power, the prevailing power, of any cross and
affliction in some more than in others; you shall have some, that let there be
but the least cross and affliction upon them, it sinks their hearts, they are
not able to stand under it; others that have a hundred times more upon them,
they go under it with joy: this is the especial difference, one having the
guilt of sin in ^he evil, and the other being delivered from it. It is a
Comparison I remember of a learned man, to express the difference of
afflictions; Afflictions are like water, and a little water upon a man's
shoulder in a Leaden vessel, is a great deal heavier than much more water in a
vessel of Leather or Wood; take a Leather Bucket filled with water, it is not
so heavy as a little water in a Leaden vessel; so a little affliction where
there is much guilt of sin is abundantly more heavy than a great deal of
affliction where there is not the guilt of sin. Haman could not stand before
such a petty Cross as that Mordacai would not bow his knee; being a wicked
man, that Cross being with sin, troubled him sore: and Achitaphel when he was
crossed in his way could not bear it. Therefore Brethren, if you would bear
afflictions, this is your way; your wisdom is to labor to know wherein the
strength of an affliction lies, if you would overcome it. As you know the
Philistims that desired to overcome Sampson, their great care was to know
wherein his strength lay, if they could by Dalilahs means find out the strength
of Sampson, they thought they might easily overcome him. So certainly if you
could but find out where the strength of your afflictions ^lie, it is easy
then for you to have fears and disquiets taken away: the reason why fears and
disquiets overcome you as they do, is, because you find not out the strength of
them; if that were found out and gotten away, you might quickly overcome
afflictions, and they would be light to you. The prevailing strength of all
afflictions is from sin: this is the first thing to show sin is the evil of all
evils.

Secondly, Not only the prevailing strength, But the bitterness, the sting of
Affliction, that which makes it bitter to the Spirit, is sin; Sin makes it come
like an Armed man with power: And besides, Sin makes it inwardly gaul at the
very heart, sting like a Serpent, as the Apostle 1 Cor. 15 56. says of death,
The sting of Death, is sin, says the Apostle: so that which he says of death,
it is true of all evils, of all afflictions, that are but makers of way to
death; the sting of a sickness, the sting of the loss of your estates, the
sting of discredit, the sting of imprisonment, the sting of all afflictions,
and that which makes them bitter to the soul is sin: you have a notable place;
Jer. 4. 18. Thy ways, and thy doings have procured these things unto thee,
this is thy wickedness, because it is bitter, because it reaches unto thy
heart: In the Greek it is, This is thy wickedness, and because it is bitter it
reaches unto thy heart, that interprets the word: says he, thy wickedness
has procured this, and the punishment to thy wickedness is bitter, and
reaches to thy heart; because it comes as a punishment of thy wickedness, so
it comes to be bitter, and reaches to thy very heart. Oh when sin is in
affliction, it comes to the heart, and is very bitter: were the guilt of sin
taken away in any affliction, the soul might be able to make use of that
expression of Agag in a better way than he did, and come joyfullie and
cheerfullie to look upon any affliction, and say, The bitterness of death is
past: So does God lay any affliction upon me, or my family, the bitterness of
death is gone; the bitterness is gone, because my sin is gone: Sin is as it
were the rotten Core in an Apple, or Fruit, it will make all the Fruit to be
bitter and rotten: And so sin, that is the rotten core, take away, cut out the
rotten core, and then you will not taste so much bitterness in the Fruit: So if
Sin, the rotten core be cut out, affliction will not be so bitter. This is the
Second, All the prevailing strength of affliction is from sin, and the
bitterness and anguish of spirit in affliction, is from sin.

Thirdly, The Curse of all evil is from sin (the strength of all evil, the
bitterness of all evil, and the curse of all evil) I have showed before, Sin
brings a Curse upon our selves, yea, how it brings a Curse upon all good. Now I
am to show you how sin brings a Curse upon all evil; it is that which makes the
affliction to be accursed: We have a most excellent Scripture for this, to show
the difference between Gods afflicting of his people whom he has pardoned,
when sin is pardoned and removed; and Gods afflicting of the wicked and
ungodly, whose sin is yet upon them: a most admirable Text for this, and the
difference between these two, that you may see what a difference sin puts upon
affliction when it is upon us; the Text is, Jer. 24. 5. compared with verse 9.
We have before (in the Chapter) Gods expression of the differing estate of his
people by the basket of good Figs, and evil Figs; those that were godly, like
good Figs, and the wicked by the evil Figs: Mark the different dealing of God
with both: both were in Captivity, both good and evil, they must both be
delivered into the hand of their Enemies; but see with what difference, verse.
5. like the good Figs, So will I acknowledge them whom I have carried away
Captive into the Land of the Caldeans for their good: Mark, they must go into
the Land of the Caldeans, but it must be for their good: says God, though I do
afflict them, yet because I have pardoned them, let them know I aim at nothing
but their good. Then he speaks of the bad Figs, the wicked men in Captivity,
verse. 9. I do deliver them to be removed into all Kingdoms of the Earth for
their hurt: I will send them, they shall go into Captivity, but I intend them
no good, it shall be for their hurt; to be a reproach, and a proverb, a tant
and a curse in all places, whither I shall deliver them. I beseech you keep
this Text by you, that which is said of this particular affliction is true of
every affliction: when God does bring any evil upon any wicked man or woman,
looking upon them, says he of such as are in their sins, God certainly intends
their hurt, he brings it for their hurt, even the same affliction that befalls
one whose sin is pardoned, and God intends for their good: so the privilege of
godly men that have their sins pardoned through Christ, how different that is
from the estate of wicked men that have the guilt of sin upon them: Sin is the
curse of all evils; I will deliver them for their hurt that it may be a curse
to them. Now this Argument would enlarge it self (but that I study brevitie)
to show how sin brings a Curse upon every affliction, and what that is; and
that thereby we shall make it appear, Sin is a greater evil than affliction,
because it brings a Curse upon affliction. I will but briefly name what might
more largely be insisted upon.

1 When there is sin and affliction, affliction comes out of Gods revenge for
sin: God looks upon the guilty Creature with indignation and wrath: Here Is a
wretch that has been bold, thus to sin against me, and now my hand shall be
upon him. And so when the sinner is under Gods hand, God is so far from looking
upon him with pity and compassion, that he looks upon him with indignation and
wrath, as an Enemy to him when he looks upon the sinner that is got under him:
and this is a sore evil, that when God, that is the God of all mercy, and of
infinite compassion, yet when he gets a wretched sinner under him, he shall
look upon him in the depth of his affliction, with indignation and wrath, as a
loathsome Creature, as loathing and abhorring this Creature under his wrath: he
shall be cast out in his wrath, God casts out a Sinner and curses him, when he
looks upon him in such a manner.

2 The Curse of afflictions when it comes in such a manner in way of sin is in
this, God regards neither the time, nor the manner, or the measure of the
affliction: whether it be a time sensonable for the Sinner or no, nor the
manner, nor the measure, whether it be such as the sinner can bear; no, let
that go, God minds not that. Indeed when God comes with his afflicting hand
upon those to whom sin is pardoned, whom he looks upon in Christ, he weighs out
their afflictions: God comes, and with his Wisdom does order it, for the due
time, and weighs it out for the due proportion, that there shall not be one
dram put into it; any further than their strength can bear; he does not tempt
us beyond our strength, he lays not upon us what we cannot be able to bear;
this is true of his People. But when God comes upon those that have the guilt
of sin lying on them, he will come at that time that is most unseasonable for
them, at the worst time that can be: As thus, when a Husbandman would cut a
Tree, to make it fruitful, he will observe his time, and lop his Tree in its
season, perhaps about this This was 23. of January.
time of the year, and then it will grow up; but if he mean to have it die he
lops it about Midsummer, when the Tree has sent forth his Sap, and then the
Tree dies. So God, when he comes to his Children with afflictions, he will come
in a seasonable time, such a time to lop when lopping may make them more
fruitful: But when he afflicts wicked men, he comes to them as to a Tree at
Midsummer, when as they be flourishing, and then cuts them down, and then they
perish; God regards not the time and season for their good when he comes in a
way of a Curse for sin.

And so for the manner and measure of Affliction: When God comes to his
Children when sin is pardoned, God weighs it out: As a skilful Physician weighs
out Physic, though that which the Patient takes, it may be is Poison in it
self, yet the Physician will be sure there shall not be one dram too much, and
there shall be enough mixed with it, that shall be proportionable to weaken the
strength of that poison, that it shall do no hurt, but good: but now if he give
poison to Vermin, he gives it without mixture, or weight, he never stands
weighing for them, let them eat and burst themselves, he will mix no help
there: when he gives Poison to Vermin, it is to destroy them. So all
Afflictions that come to wicked men, when God comes upon them in a way of a
Curse for sin, God gives it to them as we give Poison to Vermin to destroy
them: but the afflictions that come to Saints, when Sin is pardoned, God gives
that which indeed in its own Nature is Poison, but it is so weighed out, that
there is not one dram too much, and so mixed with Ingredients of the mercy and
goodness of God, as only it works good to them to work out corruption, and do
them no hurt at all: Here Is the difference of afflictions upon those whose sins
be pardoned, and those who have guilt upon them. Hearken to this you that have
the guilt of sin, when any evil comes to you, for ought you know it comes as
poison to Vermin to kill you; whereas if your hearts be humbled for sin, and
sin* pardoned, if you be under never so much affliction, it comes but as from a
skilful loving Physician, that weighs out the Physic, to do the Patient good.
This is the Second thing wherein the Curse of affliction consists when it comes
for sin.

3 The Curse of Afflictions when they come for Sin, is in this, That all
Afflictions that come merely for sin, they are but forerunners of the miseries
of Hell it self; I say they are the forerunners of the very forments of Hell:
Let the affliction be never so little in it self, yet it is the harbenger and
forerunner of those dreadful eternal torments that thou must bear; it is but a
Messenger from the Lord, whatsoever they are: What do thou feel them grievous
and tedious for the present? some grievous tedious distemper, trouble or
disease thou have; they are but a taste of that bitter Cup full of wrath, and
they do but give thee notice of what dreadful things thou art to endure when
time shall be no more.

4 Nay, they are not only forerunners to give notice of what is like to be, But
they be the very beginnings of the miseries of Hell: every evil a wicked man
does suffer, he may look upon it but as the beginnings of everlasting torments,
if he die so, if he be not delivered from the guilt of sin, and this is that
which makes it grievous: it is not so much the pain that lies upon a man for the
present, as that he by this pain is told what he shall have for ever; it is as
a summons of him to bear the wrath of God eternally; and this is that which is
the beginning of that everlasting torment he shall endure. Suppose there were
one to be executed, and he were to die some grievous and fearful death; well,
it may be when the Tormenter comes at first, he does but a litile pain his
hand, put his wrist to pain, ties his hands, and he cries out of the pain of
his wrist. Alas! what is this? Does he cry for this? What is this but a
preparation for those dreadful torments that are now about to be executed upon
him. So all men and women in the guilt of Sin, when they have any affliction,
sickness, or trouble, I say, so long as they be in that estate they may look
upon it but as the girting of their hands with the cords. A little pain they be
put to by the strictness of the cord that binds them, but this is but to the
body, and so prepares them to be cast out into utter darkness, as you know the
Phrase is, Take him that came without the wedding garment, and bind him hand
and foot and cast him into utter darkness. Thy Afflictions be but as bindings
of thee, they are but the beginnings of those everlasting pains thou art like
to have: and that should make the least Affliction of any ungodly man or woman
in the world exceeding dreadful to them; now I feel pain, but what is this but
the beginning of sorrows? I am now a sinking, but how far I shall sink, I do
not know.

5. Again, All Afflictions when they come in a way of a Cuase for Sin, they be
sent to ripen men and women for destruction, and therefore they harden their
hearts and make them often fly out against God. There is no affliction sent in
a way of a Curse, but does ripen any man or woman for eternal misery. Oh
consider this you that have been under great Afflictions, it may be you are
delivered from the pain, and you think your selves safe: examine, how is it?
are not your hearts more hard than before? are you not more greedy upon Sin
than before? know then that is a dangerous sign that that affliction was but
sent to ripen you for destruction and eternal misery; though you be escaped for
a time, yet they only were ripeners to hasten you to everlasting destruction.
And in these things consists the Curse of sin; in all evils that befall us. This
is the Third.

Fourthly, Sin is the Evil of all Evils, For it is the shame of all evils; it
is that which makes any affliction to be a shame to us: I remember before in
the opening the nature of Sin as it is against our own good, there I showed,
Sin was a shame to the Soul; whether there be affliction or no; but now I am to
show you how sin puts shame into other evils, not only brings shame to our
selves, but puts a shame upon the evils and afflictions that are or shall be
upon us: As thus, A Male factor is stigmatized, is branded; well, there is pain
to his body in the branding, and then there is the shame that is in the brand
that goes along with the pain; and therefore it is, that it might be a Note of
perpetual shame and reproach. So in Afflictions, there is the pain of the
Affliction, and then there is the shame that is upon men through the
affliction. Let men be branded, and if it be not for their sin, if it be for
Righteousness, then their brands are honorable, let them be stigmatized never
so much; let their Ears be cut off, and branded with an. S. or any other brand
in the cheeks, or foreheads; if it be for Righteousness; this is their honor
and glory. As the Apostle speaks in a Triumphing way, I bear about with me the
Marks of the Lord Jesus: and he glories in it. So for any man to be branded for
Christ, he bears the marks of Jesus Christ, though there be pain, there is no
shame. So in any Affliction God sends, if there be no sin, there may be pain
but no shame: but when God comes upon men for sin, and by the very affliction
God does as it were point out the sin of man; Oh! then it is not only painful,
but abundance of shame and confusion goes along with it. And therefore in that
Text, Jer. 24. 9. God says, He would cast them out for a reproach, and a
taunt, and a byword. For a reproach as well as trouble. The shame of
Affliction comes from Sin: This is the Fourth Thing.

Fifthly, The Eternity of all Evil comes, from Sin: I remember I showed before,
how Sin was a Principle of Eternal Evil; but this is in another regard. I speak
not of Sin now, as than; that was, as it is in its own nature, Sin it self was
a principal evil, and brought an eternal evil. But thus I say here, Sin puts an
Eternity upon that present evil thou do suffer, if the guilt be not taken
away. No Creatures but only the Reasonable Creatures, Men and Angels, be
subject to any eternity of evil. What ever evil is upon any other Creature it
cannot have that denomination of eternity; but the evils upon a sinner may have
a denomination of eternity upon them. For this, observe this one Note (though
it be high) as in Grace that is in it self (I told you) an eternal good, and
brought eternal good: But further, Grace is not only in it self a principle of
eternal good, and brings eternal good, but Grace does make that very good that
now we have, to have an eternity upon it. It dot^ not only procure that
hereafter it shall have eternity, but makes our present good to be eternal,
though it be conveyed in another way. As now, we have abundance of Comforts
from Creatures, and Gods Ordinances; it is true, we shall not have our Comforts
conveied to us from Creatures, and Ordinances, but those that have Grace shall
have the same comforts that now they have from the Creature, and the
Ordinances, conveyed immediately from God, as from the fountain: that which thou
now have from Cisterns and Conduits of conyeyance, thou shall come to enjoy the
same from God immediately, and really, another way. So that no man or woman in
Affliction (if gracious) need to be troubled for any thing. For this is a true
maxim in Divinity, A Christian may have many Crosses, but no Losses. A
Christian never lost any thing. How can that be? A Christian receives Good, in
husband, and wife, and Children, and estate, and they have losses in these as
well as others. No, they be crossed for the present, but never any Christian had
any loss: This we may (as a certain truth) assent to, never any godly man or
woman that had Sin pardoned, never had after that time, any loss. Grace (me
thinks) should be very precious in your thoughts if this be true, if I can make
this good; if I should come and tell you Mariners, or Merchant adventurers in
dangerous Seas, well, I will come and show you what Course you shall take, and
you shall never have loss more; you would think this good News, if it were not
a fancy, and deceit, if you found it so, you would account your time well spent
if you could but find this to be true, though you heard nothing but this.
Certainly I can tell you a way where you shall never have loss in the World;
the way of godliness. Get but Sin once pardoned in Christ, and you shall never
have any loss. Suppose I had a Pipe that were laid into a fountain of water
that brought water to me; well, afterward this pipe is stopped, and there comes
no more water through this pipe, but though this pipe be stoped, yet if I come
to enjoy the very fountain, I have no loss of Water, for I have it from the
fountain, though the pipe be stopped yet I have the same water I had before: So
it is with a Christian that have any loss in the Creature. For thus we are to
know, all Creatures be but as so many Pipes of conveyance of comfort, and good,
from God the fountain of all good in the Creature, and he is pleased with one
kind of Pipe, to convey comfort from one Creature, and from another another
way, some have greater, and some smaller Pipes, as God shall minister in his
Wisdom and Providence to his Servants. But now, one that is godly, though the
poorest man or woman in the world, has an interest in God himself, the
fountain of all good: And therefore if any Pipe be cut off and stopped, as
perhaps such a time thou did loose a thousand pound, perhaps three or four
thousand pound; there was three or four Pipes cut off, but still thou have a God
and an interest in him, and there all is made up. And there is this art in
godliness, and the skill, that still thou may come and enjoy that
immediately from God, and suck that from the fountain, that thou did from
the Pipes. So that a Christian may loose much of his estate, or comfort in
friends, so as he shall never receive it from them any more, but he goes to
God and injoyes it in God: So that that present good which he had here, he
makes it all up in God. Thus Grace makes that good and comfort you have here
now, an eternal good; only the conveyance is in another way, more immediately
from God, and therefore the sweeter and the fuller. So Sin puts an eternity, in
every evil; observe sin does not only deserve, that thou should have eternal
evil befall thee hereafter; but whatsoever evil thou have now, sorrows,
distresses, anguish, or troubles upon thee; Sin will make that sorrow, and
anguish, and distress, to be Eternal: though not perhaps conveyed that way, by
that channel, yet thou shall have that to be immediately let out through Gods
warth and Justice. All that evil that ever thou did bear here from any
Creature; here perhaps thou have a grievous disease; Oh! it does (it may be)
extremely afflict, and torment thee; perhaps thou die; the strength of that
evil is gone: but that torment upon thee by the disease was nothing else but
the wrath of God working through that channel; and let out through that; though
now thou die, and the matter of the disease be gone, yet when thou come to
hell, there thou shall meet with the same grievous pain; only in another way.
That is, The wrath of God shall let out this evil immediately, through his
wrath, which was mediately through the Creature before, and now it is
immediately from himself. And this meditation rightly considered, is enough to
bring down the proudest, stoutest sinner on the earth; to Consider how the
Wrath of God is all that evil to a sinner that all the Creatures in Heaven and
Earth are able to convey, and much more. And thus you have this opened how Sin
is the evil of all evils.

THE FIFTH PART OF THIS TREATISE.
CHAP. XLII.
Sin has a kind of Infiniteness in it: Opened in Seven Particulars. First,
Because nothing but an Infinite Power can overcome it. Secondly, Sin has a
kind of infiniteness, because it has an infinite desert in it, expressed in
Three Particulars: 1 The desert of the loss of an infinite Good. 2 It deserves
to put an infinite distance between God and thee. 3 It deserves infinite
misery. Thirdly, Sin has a kind of infinite Evil, because there is required an
infinite Price to make an Atonement between God and Man. Fourthly, There is a
kind of infinite Evil in Sin, because we must hate it infinitely. Fifthly, Sin
is an infinite Evil, because it is the Universal Cause of all Evil. Sixthly,
The Scripture make use of Evil things, to set out the Evil of Sin. Seventhly,
There Is an infiniteness in Sin, because the Scripture set out Sin, by Sin it
self.

A Fifth General Head that was Propounded in the beginning is this: Sin has a
kind of Infiniteness of Evil in it.

It is true, we must acknowledge that nothing but God can be properly said to be
infinite: There is not an infiniteness in a strict sense in sin, for then
certainly all the Mercy of God, and all the Power of God, could never overcome
it, if properly and absolutely sin had an infiniteness in it; therefore I do
not say it is properly infinite. Well, but there is a kind of infiniteness, it
comes exceeding near to infiniteness (if we may so speak, though it is somewhat
improper to say it comes near, but we must speak so as we can to our own
apprehensions, you shall see in the opening what I mean) As thus, There is a
kind of infiniteness of evil in sin beyond all bounds.

First, Because there is nothing but infinite Power can overcome it. Take the
least sin that any man or woman lies under the power of; nothing but the
infinite Power of God can overcome that sin: and this is the reason that many
that have had many convictions of conscience of the evil of sin, many
resolutions against sin, many Vows and Covenants, and Promises they have made
against sin: Oh when they are sick, now they see the evil of sin, now they
promise if God will restore them* they will never do the like; and they speak
from their hearts, they do not only dally, but they do verily think they will
never come in company more, and commit sin more because it is so evil: but
when they be well, they be under the power of sin as before, and al their
resolutions and experiences, and all their own strength and power, and all the
means they have, are nothing; though sin be opened to be never so vile, and
they be convinced thereof, yet al comes to nothing. Certainly there is more
dreadful evil in sin than we be aware of; and all the pleasure and profit we
have by sin can never countervail that evil that is in sin: and this they see,
and therefore promise and hope they shall never commit such sins again. Perhaps
there has been such thoughts in your hearts, may be God has had some
beginnings to come in by his Power into your souls: this is the way of Gods
coming in to the hearts of men and women, when he comes to convince and give
them such resolutions. But know, all thy resolutions cannot overcome sin;
perhaps you may forbear for the present, the acts of sin a while may be
restrained; but nothing but the infinite Power of an infinite God can overcome
any one sin, any one lust, Sin shall not have Dominion over you, Romans 6. 14.
for you are not under the Law, but under Grace, says the Holy Ghost: as if he
had said, if you be not now under the Grace of the Gospel, in which the infinite
Power of God comes upon the soul to deliver them from the Dominion of Sin, Sin
would for ever have Dominion over you; but sin shall not have Dominion over
you, because you be not under the Law, but under Grace: It is the Grace of the
Gospel through which this infinite Power of God comes upon your hearts, that
keeps sin from having Dominion over you. This is the first, there is a kind of
Infiniteness in it, because nothing but the infinite Power of God can overcome
it.

Secondly, There is a kind of Infiniteness in it, Because it has an infinite
desert, it does deserve that which is infinite: There is an infinite desert in
it, therefore a kind of infiniteness in it. As thus, the infinite desert of
Sin, may be set out in these three Particulars:

1 The desert of the loss of an infinite Good, all the good in God: By every
sin thou do deserve to be deprived of that good there is in God; that desert
comes upon thee, to lose all the good there is in the infinite God, not in this
or that particular good, but in the Infinite God, and all the good in him.

2 Every Sin does make an infinite breach between God and you; not only you do
deserve to lose all the good in God, but it puts an infinite distance between
God and thee. Abraham could say to Dives when Lazarus was in his bosom, there
is a great gulf between you and us: There is a great gulf between the sinner,
and those that are godly; but what a gulf is there between God himself and a
sinner? If there be such a gulf between Abraham and Dives, surely a greater
gulf between God himself, and a sinner.

3 The desert of Sin is Infinite, In regard of the Infiniteness of misery, and
pain, and tortures that sin deserves, which because they cannot possibly be
infinite in degree, for it is impossible for a finite Creature to bear any one
moment, pains infinite in degree: But because it deserves infinite torment, it
must therefore be infinite in time, because it cannot be infinite in degree:
and so it is infinite this way, in duration, because it cannot be infinite in
degree: thus sin is infinite. Certainly that which makes such an infinite loss,
and such an infinite breach, and brings such infinite tortures; this must be an
infinite evil in a kind.

Thirdly, Sin is a kind of infinite evil, Because there is required an infinite
price to make an atonement: nothing can make an atonement between God and a
sinner, but an infinite price paid. You may think when you have sinned, it may
quickly be made up again: Every Fool can sin, can be drunk, be unclean, and
wicked; but when you have sinned, how will you get it away? All the Angels in
Heaven, and Men in the world cannot do it; all the Creatures in Heaven and
Earth connot get away one sin: You let out your thoughts idly; take the guilt
of one sin, of an idle thought, I say, it is beyond the power of all the Angels
in Heaven, and Creatures in the World to get away that Sin: it must be an
infinite price; there must be more done for to get away the guilt of this sin,
than if God should say, here is a poor Creature has sinned, and is guilty, I
will make ten thousand worlds for his or her sake, and they shall be all given
that I may manifest my mercy toward them: Now if God do but deliver thee from
one Sin, he does more for thee, than if thou should hear him speak from
Heaven, and say, he would do all that for thee: for you know what the Apostle
says, 1 Pet. 1. 18. For as much as you know that you were not redeemed with
corruptible things, as Silver and Gold from your vain Conversation, received by
tradition from your Fathers, but with the precious Blood of Jesus Christ as of
a Lamb without spot or blemish* not with Gold and Silver* if it were Gold and
Silver, all the Gold and Silver in the world would not redeem one; but it was
with an infinite price with which you were redeemed: and mark, from your vain
Conversation; he does not say, your vain wicked, notorious Idolatry, but vain
Conversation; yea, and that vain Conversation which you might have some plea
for, received from the tradition of your fathers: you will keep your old
Customs you received from your Fathers, received a great while ago; you cry
out of new things, new kind of ways, now I am sure I have lived this thirty,
or this forty years, and I never knew such things, and heard of such things,
and so you will rest on the Traditions of your Fore fathers: Mark what the
Scripture says, speaking of those that were delivered from their vain
Conversation, and the vanities received by Tradition; these were redeemed by
the precious Blood of Jesus Christ, not with Gold and Silver: though you stick
to them as being such as you received from your Fathers, yet know all the world
cannot deliver you from the guilt of one of these vain Conversations: If you
knew all you would see there were so much evil in one sin, as required a price
to ransom you from it^ of more worth than Heaven and Earth, yea, than ten
thousand Heavens and Earths: there must be a price laid down of infinite worth:
And observe this before you go away; there may be a price laid down to ransom a
Captive, and this price may Note not so much the greatness of the deliverance,
as the worth of the person for whom this price is laid down; because the person
is worthy, not from the miserableness of the bondage, but the greatness of the
person: But it is not so here, the reason of the greatness of the price for
your ransom, is not from the worthiness of the person, we be poor, vile, dirt,
and dross, and filthy before God: what if you were all buried to all eternity,
what great matter were it? But God has paid a great price to note the
greatness of your misery, and evil you have brought upon your selves by reason
of sin, and therefore this is the price of our ransom. This is the third thing
wherein the infiniteness of sin appears.

A Fourth thing to discover a kind of infiniteness of evil in Sin is this, That
Sin, it is so evil, that let there be never so much hatred against it in thy
soul, let there be as much hatred against it as possibly can be; yet there is
enough evil in sin to raise this hatred higher and higher, if it were possible
to an infinite hatred: therefore there is a kind of infiniteness in it. If Sin
were but a mere finite Evil, then there might be some bounds and limits set to
the hatred of our sin; but that cannot be, there can be no bounds nor limits
set to the hatred of our sin, but we are to hate it more and more still, and if
we could, grow to an infinite hatred: therefore there must be some kind of
infinite Evil in it. Other things be not so; we may set bounds to our hatred in
other things: but when it comes to sin, there is no limits to be set to the
hatred of it. As Brethren thus, It does note the infiniteness of goodness that
there is in God, why? Because we are to love God, and our love to God must be
without any bounds at all: we love him thus much, and still our love is to go
further, and higher and higher, and if possible to raise our love to be
infinite, because he is an infinite good who is the object of our loves. So
hatred on the other side; we are to hate sin, we are to hate it more and more,
and still grow up in hatred, and never set bounds to our hatred: why does not
this as well argue a kind of infinitness in fin? And here then Brethren by the
way you may have a note of your true love to God, and true hatred against Sin,
whether it be right or no: as now, If you will know if you love God truly, then
you set no bounds to your love, not only to your love to him, but to your love
to his ways, and your love to Grace, and Christ, and the like, you set no
bounds: That man or woman that would be Religious but so far, and says, why
will you be so strict, and so hot? and sets bounds to the working of their
hearts in Religious ways; let such men and women know, their Religion is in
vain, it is but merely a Natural one. I remember a Speech Seneca a Heathen
has, though he applies it another way, yet he makes it appear, he had some
understanding of this Truth, says he, Would you know when desires be Natural,
and when not Natural? If they be Natural, then they be in bounds, and you set
limits to them; but when they break bounds, then they be no more Natural: But
he applies it to sinful desires (for he knew no better than desires at the
highest, as they had some Naturalness in them) and says he, speaking of sinful
desires so long as you keep your desires in certain bounds, they be Natural and
good, but when once you let them out beyond bounds, they be no more Natural. We
may very well apply it to speak of the Work of Nature, and the Work of Grace:
Would you know whether the ground of your desires, or work, be Natural, or
Supernatural? You may know them by this, If you propound limits, thus far you
will go; this certainly is a Natural work: But when the heart lets out it self
to God without any limits or bounds; this is a Supernatural work. So you
dislike sin, and Oh you would not commit it; but this is the Question, Whether
your dislike or hatred be Natural or Supernatural? If Natural, then there be
some limits and bounds you propound, that is, you will not commit such gross
sins, and live in such open sins; and upon such and such grounds, you will
abstain from such and such Sins: But if there be a Supernatural work, your
hearts are set against all sins with a kind of infiniteness, without any
bounds or terms, you will set no bounds to your hatred of any Sin: that man or
woman that so hates Sin, as to set no bounds at all unto their hatred, and will
admit it upon no terms; this is a Supernatural hatred. Many are against Sin
Naturally; but in that true hatred, it is so boundless, that there must be no
bounds set to your hatred: it evidentlie shows Sin to have a kind of
infinitness of evil in it.

Fifthly, Sin has a kind of infiniteness in it in that it is the Universal
Cause of all Evil: As God appears to be an infinite good, because he is the
universal cause of all good; this does much set out the infiniteness of Gods
goodness in that he is the universal cause of all good So it does set out the
infiniteness of Sin, in that Sin is the universal cause of all evil, all evils
flow from it. This is the Fifth Thing.

Sixthly, There is an infiniteness of Evil in Sin; it appears thus, That as
the infiniteness of good in God is shaddowed out unto us by all good things,
and in as much as we and the Scripture makes use of all good things to shadow
out the goodness of God, this manifests an infiniteness of good in him: So in
as much as the Scripture mak^s use of all kind of Evil things, only to set and
shadow out the evil in sin; this makes it appear there is a kind of
infiniteness of Evil in it: As thus, That all those Creatures, Vipers,
Serpents, Dogs, Cockatrices, Dragons, Wolves: all deadly Creatures the
Scripture makes use of but to shadow out the evil in Sin. As if the Holy Ghost
should say, do you see any evil in such Creatures that you account the worst:
put them all together, and that is in Sin and more. So take all kinds of
uncleanness, the vomit of a dog menstruous Clothes, all this does but shadow
out the evil in Sin. Look at sicknesses, leprosies, plague, and death it self,
and darkness, any hidious evil, all these do but shadow out the evil of Sin.
We might mention many more to show you the evil of Sin. And in that the
Scripture makes use of so many evil things to show the evil of Sin. This shows
Sin has a kind of infiniteness in it.

Seventhly, As Gods infinite goodness is set out thus, that he is his own
Happiness and Blessedness; in this God does appear to be infinitely good,
because he is his own good and happiness, there is no higher good to be the
goodness of God; no higher blessedness to be the blessedness of God but
himself; because he is infinitely good and blessed. So the Scripture sets out to
us the Evil of Sin by it self, because there is no greater evil to set Sin out
by, but by it self: Therefore this shows there is a kind of infiniteness of evil
in Sin. And therefore you have that of Romans 7. 13. Was that then that was good
made death to me? God forbid, but Sin that it might appear sin working death in
me by that which was good: that Sin by the Commandment might become EXCEEDING
SINFVL. He does not say that sin might appear to be Exceeding miserable: but
that it might become Exceeding Sinful: So that the sinfulness of Sin is that
which sets out the evil of Sin more than any other thing does. It was the
Speech of the Heathen Seneca, It is the punishment of Sin, to have Sin: So it
is the reward of Virtues to have them. Godliness in it self is the Excellency
of a man; and Sin in it self is the misery of a man: and this is a Proof of
this, That there is a kind of infiniteness of evil in Sin.

Now then by all these Seven Discoveries of the evil in Sin, having a kind of
infiniteness in it, this one thing comes fully and powerfully from them; That
for to fall into sin again, and for to be prevailed withal by any such
temptation as this, Oh it is no great matter, if I do no worse than this, I
hope it is well, and others do worse: I say, to yield again to the commission
of any sin upon such a temptation, is a great wickedness. What do thou make
any comparison in sin, and use any such words, when thou have heard it, or read
it proved to thee, that Sin has a kind of infiniteness of evil in it. Nay,
which I thought to have finished here, but cannot now come to it, but shall in
the next Chapter show the reference Sin has to the Devil; this shows the
greatness of Sin above all Evils: Sin is that which makes the Soul conformable
to the Devil. Afflictions does not, they make the soul conformable to Jesus
Christ: I suppose you know that place, Phil. 3. 10. mark there the difference
between Sin and Affliction, Paul there accounted all things dung and dross for
the Excellency of the knowledge of Christ: and what more? That he might be found
in him, and that he might know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the
fellowship of his sufferings being made conformable unto his death. He did
desire above all things to have the fellowship of his sufferings, and to be
conformable to his death: he accounts all the world as dung and dross to be
conformable to Christ by Afflictions, or sufferings. It is true, it may be many
account all the world to be nothing, to be conformable to Christ in Glory in
Heaven. But here is the work of Grace (and I beseech you observe this in the
conclusion, and carry it away) That a gracious heart accounts all the world
dung and dross to be conformable to Jesus Christ in his sufferings; there is so
much excellency and glory in the Sufferings of Jesus Christ. Now you see the
wide difference between Afflictions and Sin: Sin makes a man conformable to the
Devil; Afflictions make a man conformable to Jesus Christ. I would have showed
wherein, in several Particulars, how sin makes us conformable to the Devil: I
will but name this one now, and that which might be enough to make every soul
out of love with Sin, in that by Sin thou joynest with the Devil, and
conspirest with the Devil against God himself. There is no Creature that is
against God, but Men and Devils: The Devil was Gods first Enemy, and now man
comes in and conspires with the Devil. Now we account it a great evil if you
had a Child; and if there were but one Traitor in the Common wealth, and you
hear, Oh my Child is joined with this Traitor, and conspireth against me and
the State. Before sinful Man, there was but one sort of sinful Creatures in the
world, the Devils: now by Sin, Man comes in, and joins in conspiracy against
the blessed God; and so one Generation after another: perhaps the Father comes
and conspires with the Devil, and then the Child; and so along in a Succession.
And this should come near our hearts to humble us for our sins and wickedness,
that in this we be those that of all Creatures that ever God has made,
conspire with the Devil against the blessed God, the Fountain of all Good.

THE SIXTH PART OF THIS TREATISE.
CHAP. XLIII.
Sin makes a man conformable to the Devil, opened in Six Particulars. First,
Sin is of the same Nature with the Devil. Secondly, Sin is from the Devil.
Thirdly, Sin is a furtherance of the Devils Kingdom in the World: For 1 By Sin
we oppose Christ's destroying the Devils Kingdom in the World. 2 By Sin thou
opposest thy prayers when thou prayest, Thy Kingdom come. 3 By going on in a
way of sin, thou becomest guilty of all the sin in the World. Fourthly, Sinning
is a fulfilling the will of the Devil. Fifthly, Sin sells the Soul to the
Devil. Sixthly, Sin, it turns the Soul into a Devil.

THe Sixth and Last Demonstration of the Evil of Sin; It is from that reference
Sin has to the Devil.

The Scripture speaks of Afflictions, that they make us conformable to Christ;
but Sin makes us conformable to the Devil. There are Six things to be opened
about this: I have mentioned the First, which was this, That Sin was of the
same Nature with the Devil: every Sin has the same kind of Malignity in it,
that the Devil has. But,

Secondly, All Sin, it is from the Devil, either Originally, or at least by way
of a Cause, helping it forward: Sin is the work of the Devil, not only a
joining with him, but his work: therefore Christ is said to come to dissolve
the works of the Devil: Sin is from the Devil, therefore it is said in 1 John,
3. 8. He that commits sin is of the Devil, for the Devil sins from the
beginning; and to this purpose the Son of man was manifest, that he might
destroy the works of the Devil: He that commits sin is of the Devil, it comes
from the Devil. And so John, 8. 44. Brethren (these things which I speak
concerning the reference Sin has to the Devil, though they may seem hard and
harsh, yet) it is to be observed, none speaks so much of Sins coming from the
Devil as John, who was of the most loving, sweet Nature of any of the
Disciples; and yet when he comes to speak of sin, he speaks of it in the most
harsh terms that possibly can be; so that it comes not from harshness, but may
stand with a loving and sweet Nature to speak of sin in the harshest terms that
we can do: for John the most loving, and beloved Disciple of Christ, so full of
love; and yet none spoke so harshly of sin, especially in its reference it has
to the Devil, as he says here, Joh. 8. 44. You are of the Devil, and his lust
you will do: Thus Sin, the lusts of Sin come from the Devil, and it makes a man
or a woman to be the Child of the Devil: So the Scripture is clear it comes
from him Originally; all Sin that is in you, is Originally the Spawn of the
very Devil himself in your souls; and originally it comes from him: as all Sin
originally comes from his temptations and suggestions, so also the Devil helps
forward and furthers all sin that is in your souls, this is the evil of it. But
here understand this aright, The Devil is not so the cause of all Sin, as God
is the cause of all Grace, not so: It is true, the Devil has a hand in every
Sin, but not such a hand in Sin, as God has in Grace; for God has such a hand
in the work of Grace, that he does not only give a principle of Grace, but all
the operation of Grace is so from him, as it would never stir but by him, he
gives the will to work and do all; the will and the deed are from him: But all
Sin is not so from the Devil, though originally it is, and the Devil puts it
on; yet we are to know, though the Devil now should tempt no more, yet there is
enough in the hearts of men and women to sin against God all manner of sin,
even from their own innate corruption that now is in them; if the Devil were
destroyed, Sin would not be destroyed: In Grace there is no power to work but
by Gods working together with it; but in Sin there is a power to work without
the Devils working: though the Devil is forward enough to work with our
corruption, yet I say there is corruption enough in our hearts for to work al
kind of sin, though the Devil should not tempt us any more; therefore we must
not lay all upon the Devil, as many do; when they fall into any wickedness,
they will say, this is the Devil, and lay all the fault upon the Devil, and so
think to take it off from themselves by laying it upon the Devil: No, know,
though the Devil labors to further it what he can, yet there is such corruption
in you, that it would stream forth from you though the Devil stir it not at
all: therefore charge your own hearts as well as the Devil. In the work of
Grace, we must give all the glory to God; but in the work of Sin, we cannot
allot all the fault to the Devil; we are not to take any of the glory of the
work of Grace to our selves, but we are to take a great part, yea, sometimes the
greatest part of Sin to our selves: but however the Devil is the cause of Sin
originally, and helps forward to it.

Thirdly, All Sin is the furtherance of the Kingdom of the Devil in the World.
You know that the Scripture says, that the Devil is the Prince that rules in
the Air, and is called the God of this World, because he rules in the Children
of disobedience. There is a Kingdom of the Devil set up by sin in the World,
and maintained by sin in the World; it has a succession in the World by sin:
So that all sinners that continue in ways of sin, they do what in them lies to
uphold the Kingdom of the Devil in the World, and the Rule of the Devil in the
World.

1 Therefore men in sin, are exceeding opposite to the End of Christ's coming in
the World: for it is Christ's End in coming into the world to dissolve the
Kingdom of the Devil, as you had it before in 1 John, 3. 8. It is an especial
End why Christ came into the world, for to bring down the Kingdom of the Devil,
and yet thou by sinning upholdest the Kingdom of the Devil; so thou do what
in thee lies to oppose and resist the very End of Christ's coming into the
world. There is very much in this consideration to humble the hearts of all
wicked men for sin; thou have lived in a course of sin it may be many years;
now Brethren know, the Lord charges thee with this, this day, That all this
time that thou have lived in a course of sin, thou have done what in thee lies
to oppose the End of Christ's coming into the World; that if thou could thou
would hinder the end of the death of Christ, and of all that he has done:
for the especial end why Christ is come into the World, it is to dissolve the
work of the Devil; and thou keep up the work of the Devil.

2 Again, it follows hence, That thou do directly contradict thy own Prayers:
When thou prayest, Thy Kingdom come, in the Lords Prayer, thou prayest there
that the Kingdom of Christ might come: but in every way of sin that thou take
liberty in, thou do oppose the Kingdom of Christ: How do thou take the Name
of God in vain, and mock God in this Prayer? Every wicked man and woman in the
world mocks God in praying the Lords Prayer, when they say Thy Kingdom come,
and yet live in such ways as upholds the Kingdom of the Devil, instead of the
Kingdom of Christ.

3 Yea further, this follows, That by going on in ways of sin, thou come to
be guilty, and stand charged for all the sins that ever were committed in
the world: This may seem to be a hard thing, to charge any man or woman that
now lives in ways of sin, that by that sin of thine that thou now live in,
thou come to be guilty of all the sins that ever was done in the world, since
the beginning of the world. I undertake to make that good thus; You know the
Scripture charge those that persecuted the Prophets, as guilty of all the
persecution of the Prophets that ever were, all the blood that was shed from
Abel to Zacharias shall come upon this Generation, says Christ; why so? why
should all the blood shed from Abel to that time, come upon that Generation?
The Reason is this, Because they continued the succession of that sin of
persecution of the Prophets, that as there was a persecution of the Prophets
before, so they go on and uphold this succession of that sin. Now by the
holding of the succession of a way of sin, we come to be guilty of all that sin
that went before: As for example, Suppose there should be Treason against a
King or State, by some vile treasonable act; now the Father commits the first
act, the Son afterward goes on in the same way, and his Children come after
him, and goes on in the same way, and their Children after them: now I say,
the Children, and the Grandchildren, and the great Grandchildren, are guilty
of the first treasonable act that was committed; why? Because they uphold the
succession of the treasonoble act. So now, Sin that was in the beginning of the
world, was to bring in the Kingdom of Satan; and the next Generation upheld it,
and the next upheld the same, and the next Generation went on the same way; so
that every Generation is not only guilty of those particular sins which they
commit; but they be guilty of all that went before, because they uphold the
succession of the Kingdom of the Devil, and the opposition of the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ: As for instance, Take a scorner of Religion, that is one sin (for
we cannot open things but by instancing in particulars) I say, take a scorner
of Religion, know thou art not guilty of these acts of scorning only in thy
self, but art guilty of all the scorning of Godliness since the beginning of
the world; why? Because thou hold a succession of that way of scorning of
Religion. So a Blasphemer may be said to be guilty of all the blasphemies in
the world; why? Because he upholds the succession of that way of sinning
against God; and so opposing the Kingdom of Christ, and upholding the Kingdom
of the Devil. This is the third thing, Sin is the upholding of the Kingdom of
the Devil in the World.

Fourthly, A Fourth thing is this, That Sin, it is a fulfilling of the will of
the Devil: That is another distinct Consideration, and you shall see that in
the opening of it, it will be of distinct use to you: I say, it is a fulfilling
the will of the Devil; that place is very famous for that in the 2 Timothy 2. 26.
That they may recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil, who are taken
captive of him at his WILL: There wicked men be taken captive by the Devil at
his Will, or to do his Will, so you may read it: some they be ensnared by
Satan to do his will, his lusts you do, as Christ speaks: you may think you do
your own will in sinning, but certainly you do the will of the Devil as well as
your own: As for instance, that of passion and anger Ephesians. 4. 26. Be angry,
but sin not, let not the Sun go down upon your wrath; neither give place to the
Devil: you think you give place to your own passion, but you give place to the
Devil, and fulfill the will of the Devil: You come by sin to do the Devils
drudgery and slavery; you do his work he sets you about, and his will you
fulfill. Now for such a Noble Creature as Man is, to come to be a slave of the
Devil, that is the lowest now of all Creatures; it must needs be a very
dreadful thing; it is an evil to be in slavery to any thing vile or base. I
remember I have read a Story of one Gunno, King of the Danes, that having
overcome a People, he set a Dog over them to be their Governor; that is thus,
he would have all Commands to go out under the name of the Dog, and they should
be under the Government of the Dog; this he did in disdain and indignation
against those people he overcame. But now, as he would show the baseness of
that People that he designed to be under a Dog; much more debasement is it for
an immortal Soul to be under the Command of the Devil, as all wicked men are
under the command of the Devil himself. Thou will not fulfill the will of God
when it is opened to thee out of his Word and Will, what thou ought to do;
thou stand out against the Will of God: But now you that think it such a
bondage to be obedient to the will of God, you be brought under a worse
bondage, you are fain to be obedient to the will of the Devil. And certainly
those men and women that think they be at most liberty when they be free from
obedience to the Will of God; by that liberty they come to be under bondage,
under slavery to the Devil All wicked men that think much to obey God, they
must be obedient one way or other; we must be all servants, and obedient either
to the Will of God, or the Devil: which is best then? Wicked men think it a
brave life that they may have their own will; true, if they might have their
own will, they might think it a brave life: but know, you have rather the will
of the devil than your own, in that you do his will, you fulfill the will of the
devil. To be in slaverie, not only to the devil, but to any man, is a great
evil, to be at the will of man, yea, to be at the will of a good man is an evil:
I should be loath to live in any such Commonwealth, as that I should be under
the will of man in it, any further than might be revealed and bounded by some
set Law. The difference between a Slave and a Subject is this, A Slave is such
a one as lives under Arbitrary Government, that is the WILL of such as are in
Authority, is their Law, and they are ruled by no other Law but by the Will of
such as Govern them, there is no Law set, to know when they shall offend, and
when not; but when their Rulers say, this is an offense, that his will is
crossed, that is an offense, and they be therefore punished: But now Subjects,
they be bound to no obedience to any man, any further than some set Law does
require their obedience; that is a Subject, and that is the very difference
between a Slave and a Subject. If men in Authority should command any thing,
though good (I mean only indifferent) yet I am not bound in conscience to obey
at al, because they command, except it be by a Law, except they command it by a
Law: if he command it merely as his Will, and only say, I Will, here is no tie
upon the conscience. It is ordinary for people to think, if men in Authority
command, they will have such a thing done, Oh say they, Authority commands: We
deny it, Authority commands nothing but what it commands by a Law; and then we
are bound to obey, or to suffer, if it be a Law once: but if it be not a Law,
though it should be the will of men in Authority, it does not bind us at all,
till it come to be a Law, any further than there is Equity it self in the
thing, in its own Nature: for then does a People come to be in slavery when
they come to be subject to the will of men without a Law. Now Brethren thus; If
it be a slavery, and a great evil to be subject to men, though good men,
subject to their will, and nothing else, without Law; then what an evil is it
to be in subjection and slaverie to the will of the devil? merely at his will?
and yet every wicked man is so. We should account it a very sore thing if we
should come under Arbitrary Government, to be subject to the will of men. Now
so long as thou remainest under the power of Sin, thou remained under the
government of the devil himself; this is a sorer evil than affliction: A man
were better live in any Country, though not so fruitful as England, and suffer
hardship in his Estate, so he live like a Free man, than to live here, or in
any other fruitful Country, and live under Arbitrary Government. This we hope
for, not to be under the Wills of men, but the Laws made by them. Then it were
better to endure hardship and any affliction, than bear this, to be at the will
of the Devil, and ful^l his will.

Fifthly, In reference to the devil, Sin has this evil in it, if it grows to a
height, itsels the soul to the Devil: As with Ahab, 1 Kings, 21. 20. when
Elijah met Ahab, Have thou found me, O my Enemy? (says Ahab) And he answered,
I have found thee, because thou have SOLD thy self to work evil in the sight of
the Lord: Now if he sell himself, he must sell himself to some body, to
somewhat, we cannot sell a thing but we must sell it to some body, or to
somewhat; now to what must Ahab sell himself? Certainly, to no body but to the
devil; he sold himself to work iniquity and wickedness, and wickedness when it
comes to the height, is a selling of our selves to the very devil himself. We
cry out of those poor, miserable Creatures that sell themselves to the devil, we
say, Oh how be they deluded and besotted that sell themselves to the devil?
Certainly every wicked man and woman in the world, when sin grows to the
height sell themselves to the devil.

Sixthly and lastly, Sin when it grows to a height, it does turn the Soul into
a Devil; it makes men and women to become Devils, when it grows once to a
height: The Scripture is very clear in that; you know what is said concerning
Judas, John, 6. 70. Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a Devil?
and so ordinarily the Scripture speaks in this kind of phrase, Revel. 2. 10.
Fear none of these things you shall suffer, behold the Devil shall cast some of
you into prison: why? is the Devil come to be a Pursevant, or an Officer, or to
give Warrants to cast into prison? No, but it is spoken of wicked Persecutors
that the Devil sets on work, they be called by the name of the Devil. Sin when
it comes to a height, it makes the sinners to be such, that they are pronounced
to be Devils: the Devil shall cast some of you into prison; and one of you is a
Devil: that is a strange metamorphosis. We read of strange Fictions, of some
Creatures turned into other Creatures; but this, for the Creature to be turned
into a Devil, is the strangest metamorphosis that can be. Brethren, what made
the Devil a Devil? they were once glorious Angels, more glorious Creatures than
men and women, but what is it that should make them devils now? Nothing but
Sin; it is Sin that has made Angels to be Devils: and therefore do not so much
wonder that sin should make men and women to be devils Incarnate. Do not wonder
at the phrase of Scripture, seeing Angels by sin, yea, the sin that the Angels
did commit, did presently turn them into devils: therefore wonder not, that the
continuing the acts of sin, when it grows to the height, should turn men and
women into devils. These be the Six Particulars in this Head, of Sins Reference
to the Devil. 1 It is of the same Nature with the devil, joins with him against
God. 2 It is the work of the devil, that is, he is the Original, and helping
Cause of it. 3 It furthers the Kingdom of the devil. 4 It fulfils the will of
the devil. 5 When it grows to a height it sels the Creature to the devil. 6 It
turns them into devils. These be the Six Particulars of the evil of Sin in the
Reference it has to the Devil.

From these Six, follow these notable Corollaries and Consequences, to show the
dreadful Evil in Sin beyond all Affliction.

Corollaries and Consequences from all the former Particulars.
CHAP. XLIV.
The First Corallarie.] Its worse for a man to be sinful, than to be turned
into a beast.

FIrst, Hence then it is worse for a man to be sinsul and wicked, than if he
were turned into a beast: It is worse to be like the Devil to fulfill his will,
to be a servant to him, to be turned into a devil, than to be turned into a
beast. And yet we should account it a great misery if God should put any one
under such a punishment to turn your bodies into beasts. I remember I have read
out of Lactantius of a place he quotes out of Tully, Who would not rather die
(says he) than have his body, the body of a man, turned into the shape of a
beast, though he should retain the mind of a man, under this condition? As if
God by his power should turn the fashion of a man's body, to be just like a Dog
or a Swine, and yet he should have the mind of a man the soul should be kept
within such a body, of such a form, of a dog or a swine, and he should go up
and down in the world as a dog or a swine, with the mind of a man: Now this
Heathen says, A man had rather die than be so; then how great an evil (says
he) is it for a man to have the soul of a man turned into the fashion of a
beast, though his body continue still in the form of a man, this a heathen
could say. By this it appears, Though we see not God work such miracles, as
to turn the bodies of men and women, by his judgments, into the fashion of
swine, or dogs, or such Creatures as he might do if he pleased; but this we see
ordinary that the souls of men and women, be turned just into the very fashion
and shape (as I may so speak) of the sensitive souls of bruit beasts; as a
drunkard, or a glutton, his soul is justlike to the sensitive soul of the
swine. And those that do rail against Religion, their souls be turned just like
the sensitive soul of a barking dog, and they do bark like (nay, a great deal
worse than) a dog. And those that are wickedly subtle, they are like to Foxes.
And the Scripture speaks of men cruel, like to Wolves: their sins do turn their
souls to be like the very spirit and sensitive souls of the bruit beasts. So
that they are in a worse condition than if their bodies were turned into the
shape of bruit beasts. But when their souls be turned to be like the Devil,
this is worse a great deal than if they were like bruit beasts. This is the
First.

CHAP. XLV.
The Second Corollarie.] Its worse to be Sinful, than to be Afflicted with
Temptation from the Devil..

SEcondly, From the Reference sin has to the Devil, it follows, That for any
man or woman to be wicked, it is worse a great deal than to have the greatest
trouble and affliction by any temptation from the Devil. There be many men and
women exceedingly pestered with hidious and horribl temptations by the Devil,
and so troubled with them that they be even weary of their lives, and know not
what to do. Many send up Papers to the Minister in Public, desiring to be
prayed for, because of that sore Affliction upon them, those dreadful
temptations of the devil; whersoever they go, whersoever they be, whatsoever
they be adoing, when a hearing, a reading, and if they go to prayer, still
hidious temptations of the devil comes upon them, and this wearies their lives:
They had rather endure any misery in the world. I dare appeal to you that be
troubled with hidious temptations of the devil, which dog, and follow you; had
you not rather endure loss of estate, sickness, poverty, and shame, and
disgrace, rather than have these hidious temptations follow you? Oh you should
have many quickly make their choice, rather let any thing befall me than have
such hidious temptations pursue and pester me. Now if such hidious temptations,
be a greater evil in your account than all Afflictions that can befall your
body; than much more evil are your sins than all afflictions; for sin has
greater Reference unto the devil than temptations, and make you more like the
devil than temptations do: for temptations may be no other but such as did
befall the Son of God himself. Christ was pestered with temptations, hidious
temptations, temptations to deny God, and to tempt God, and to worship the
devil himself: As hidious temptations befell Christ as could befall any one, yet
the Son of God, beloved of God, therefore your temptations are no other, no
greater than might befall Christ, and therefore not so great evils as Sin. They
make you not so like the devil as sin; if temptations come from the Devil, if
not entertained, though they be afflictions, yet not Sin. Now in that Sin has
such reference to the devil it appears that Sin is worse than all the
Annoyance you can have by any temptation.

CHAP. XLVI.
The Third Corollarie.] Its Worse to be under Sin, than to be haunted by the
Devil.

THirdly, Hence it follows, That Sin is worse than to be continually in the
presence of the Devil: It is worse for a man or woman to be under the power of
any Sin, than to be continually haunted by devils, and to have the sight of
devils before their eyes, and be in company with them. If God should lay such a
judgment upon a man or woman, that wheresoever they should be, they should see
devils before them; to be under the power of any one sin is worse than if God
should lay such a judgment upon thee. Many be mightily terrified in the dark,
Oh! there is the devil in the room, and Oh! he comes to them, and there be
apparitions of devils, this they be troubled with; Oh! these men and women
haunted by devils, and houses haunted by devils, this is a miserable condition:
Now art thou haunted by any wicked lust and sin, certainly thou art in a worse
condition than any man or woman haunted by devils, or house haunted by the
devil. Is there any house in your parish where there is Blaspheming, and Oaths,
and railing at goodness, and Sabbath breaking, and such things? this house is
worse than any house haunted by devils: For Sin is worse a great deal, than the
mere presence of the devil. I remember I have read of a Tyrant, one Maxensius
in Hetrusia, he invented this torment to put men to death, he would have a dead
man's Carcass tied about their bodies and so let them go wheresoever he would,
but he still carried the dead Carcass about him, and at length the stench put
them to death: this was his Tyrany. If you should have a dead man or woman tied
about your bodies; may be the face of a dead man is hidious to you, but if they
should be tied about you, so that when you lie in bed, and when you rise, when
you sit at meat, it should be always with you, and you should endure the stink
and putrefaction; what a sore evil would this be? now if in the presence of a
dead Carcass there is so much evil, than in the presence of the devil there is
much more. Now sin, any one sin, tied close to your hearts, that you carry
about with you, wheresoever you go; know there is in that a greater evil upon
you, than if a dead Carcass should be tied to you; yea, than if the devil
should haunt you wheresoever you go: because the presence of the devil, is not
so much, as turning of the souls of men and women into the nature of the devil;
and making the Souls of men and women so like to him.

CHAP. XLVII.
The Fourth Corollarie.] Its worse to be given up to any way of Sin, than to be
given up to the Devil: Quest. How the Delivering up to Satan, can be for the
saving the Soul?

A Fourth Corollarie hence is this, That for any man or woman to be left to one
Sin, it is worse than to be given up to the Devil. I say, it is a greater evil,
a greater judgment for any man or woman to be left to any way of Sin, than to
be given up to Satan: is thy soul given up to the power of any one Sin? I dare
here as I stand in the presence of God, To speak the truths of God, I dare avow
it; you are in a worse condition than if you should be given up to the devil. I
make that good thus, In Scripture, 1 Cor 5. 5. we have an example of one that
was given up to the Devil, and that in a right way, there is an Incestuous
person that committed that horrible wickedness, not named among the Gentiles,
that had his fathers wife and committed Incest with her: the Apostle commands
him to be delivered to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that his spirit
might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus: He was delivered to Satan; but for
the destruction of the flesh; but to the end that he might have his Spirit
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus: So that the delivering up to Satan was a
means appointed by God to save his soul: But to deliver up any one to the power
of Sin, is no means to save his soul, that is a means to damn the soul, and not
to save it. So then, you see the reason grounded clearly upon Scripture, That
it is worse to be delivered up unto any sin than to be delivered to the Devil;
for he that was delivered to Satan, it was for the saving of the soul; but he
that is delivered to Sin, it is for the damning of his soul. This requires a
little opening.

Quest. You will say, How can the delivering up to Santan be for the saving of
the soul?

Answ. It will be needful for clearing of this, to tell you what this
delivering up to Satan was; and the truth is, this delivering up to Satan, or
excommunication from the Church, this was a most dreadful thing when done in a
right way; it was done when the Church was gathered together by the power of
Jesus Christ: As certainly where there are a company of Saints, that at least
outwardly so appear; a Church, that in a solemn manner is gathered together,
through the power of Jesus Christ, having their Elder going before them the
Officer of the Church; when they in a solemn manner* in the power of Christ,
shall cast out any one deservedly from Church Communion; this is a delivering a
man or woman to Satan (this is another manner of business than ordinarily we
were wont to have, by the Ordinary, or Commis^ary, and Dean, in the Prelates
Courts; certainly they were but wooden Daggers in comparison of this dreadful
Sword, to cut off from the Communion of the Church) it was when the Church was
Assembled, not the Commissary and Officers, but when the Church was gathered
together, to cut such a one from the Church of Christ, for some vile act; not
for not paying of their Fees, or the like, these things only scared people; but
if this Censure of Excommunication were in a right way executed, it were the
most dreadful thing in the world: it is that which has awed and terrified the
most proud and stout sinners; the very sight of another Excommunicating, it
has terrified the conscience of those that have been by: It is a delivering
them to Satan, and putting them from under the protection of God, giving them
up to the devil, to take power over them, except they come in, and repent: and
this is a way to save the soul, because if there be any way in the world to
cause men to see their sin, and repent, and be humbled, and come in, this is
it; and when no other way would do it, this many times has done it. And
therefore those people that live in such a condition, that want this Ordinance
of Excommunication in the right way, want an especial means to keep off sin,
both to keep them from sin before they are fallen, and of delivering of them
from sin when they have fallen into it. But to be given over to the power of
sin, is a greater evil than to be delivered to Satan.

CHAP. XLVIII.
The Fifth Corollary.] It is worse to be given up to one sin, than to be
actually possessed by the Devil.

FIfthly, Shall I say further (and this will make it pla^^ly appear what
abundance of (...) ^ere ^s i^ Sin, more than in Affliction: for though ^oken
abundance of it, yet all this (...) draw the Point higher and higher, and ^ve
the nail deeper and deeper, that this Truth of God might settle upon your
spirits; and therefore a Fifth is this, which follows from this reference sin
has to the Devil) That it is worse to be given up to any one Sin, than to be
actually possessed by the Devil, than for the Devil to come and actually
possess us as those poor Creatures were in the Gospel; and this is worse than
to be given up to Satan: There is a spiritual possession of Satan, as in Judas,
and that is a spiritual possession of their hearts to rule them: but there is a
temporal possession spoken of in the Gospel, and that is of their bodies, that
the Devil possessed them, and caused them to rage and foam at the mouth, and rend
and tear: and the men we read of in the Gospel that lived among the graves and
dead people, and cut themselves with knives and stones; this was a grievous
thing to see men thus possessed. Many men have extraordinary fits of the
Convulsion; and the like, and men think they be possessed; we ordinarily
mistake, and it is but a mere fit of the Convulsion; but if we did know they
were really possessed, we should be terrified: Oh such a friend, such a
neighbor lived wickedly before, and now the Devil has possessed him; we
thought it a Disease till now, we thought it the Convulsion, but now we see it
is from the Devils possession of them. Would you not endure any affliction in
the world rather than God should say of you, the next oath you swear, when you
open your mouths to swear, the Devil shall come in and take possession of your
bodies; or the next evil language you speak, the Devil shall come in and
possess you; this were a fearful thing, and you would take heed of this. But
this I am to make good, That when you go on in sin, in any one sin, it is a
greater evil than if never so many Devils possessed you, if there should be
Legions; as he said to Christ when he asked his name, he said, Legion, because
we be many. It is not so great an evil if God should give up your bodies to be
possessed by Legions of Devils; you will say, surely that is a great evil, but
not so great as to be under the power of one sin. How will that appear you will
say? Thus: Possession makes you not hateful to God, and guilty before God, and
loathsome to God; nor is it that which God hates, but it is an object of pity;
Christ pitied them when he saw them thus: but Sin makes a man odious and
hateful to God. I remember an excellent Observation Gregory has on the Book of
Job, (says he) What is the reason when God gave up Job to the Devil, and bid
him do what he would, but spare his life? (says he) What is the reason the
Devil did not possess him when he was given up to his hands, for so the words
are, He is in thy Hands, only spare his life? So that it appears, he was in his
power to possess him, but yet he did not; and what is the reason? this is the
Answer that Ancient gives, the reason is this, Because if he had possessed him,
then though Job had fretted, and frowned, and torn himself, it had not been his
Sin, his impatiency, so as it was when he was not possessed: Now because the
Devil envied Job, the Devil would bring that upon Job which he knew to be the
greatest evil as much as he could; for so all envy does. One that envies
another, labors to bring the greatest evil on him that he can. So certainly the
Devil envied Job, and therefore he labored to bring the greatest evil on him
that he could. Now it seems possession was not the greatest evil; but the Devil
would go so to work, as if he could possibly he would get Job to be impatient,
and make Job curse God, and sin against God. If Job should have cursed God in
word by possession of the Devil, the Devil cursed God in him, it had not been
Jobs sin so much as if he had got him to curse God otherwise: Now the Devil
would have him so curse God, as to be a sin to him; and therefore the Devil
would not possess him because that was the lesser evil: So that to be given up
to sin is a greater evil than to be possessed. Therefore all you that have
friends and children, which you see wicked and licentious, and you see some
cause to fear they be given up to the power of sin for the present, it should
cause Fathers and Mothers to come to Christ, as earnestly as ever those poor
Creatures did, that had Children possessed with the Devil, in the Gospel; poor
women had children possessed, and so men; Fathers that had Children possessed
with the Devil, that did rent and tear him in the presence of Christ, he cries
out mightily to Christ, if he could, Oh that he would come and help him: and so
the woman of Canaan for her daughter, cries after Christ to help her Daughter,
for she was miserably vexed with an unclean Spirit. So you should even go and
cry to God, Lord, help if possible, and have mercy upon my Son, upon my
Daughter, for they have unclean Spirits; yea, they are in a worse condition
than if possessed by the Devil: I have a Son, a swearing young man; a Daughter,
that is vain, and profane, and wicked, and licentious, and stubborn, and
unruly, Oh if it be possible help me: if you could be as sensible of the sins,
and wickedness of your Children, as in the time of the Gospel, Fathers and
Mothers were of the possession of their Children, much might then be done.

CHAP. XLIX.
The Sixth Corollary.] Sin brings to wicked men the same Portion the Devils have.

Sixthly, Hence it follows, if Sin has such reference to the Devil, then this
must needs follow, That the same Portion that the Devils have, must needs be at
last the portion of wicked men: The Scripture expresses it, Mat. 25. Go you
wicked into the Portion prepared for the Devil. And so in Timothy, the same
portion that the Devil has, shall be the portion of wicked and ungodly men. We
read in the Book of the Revelations, of fearful Judgments that shall befall
such as have the mark of Antichrist upon them, Revel. 14. 9, 10. An Angel
followed, saying with a loud voice, If any man worship the Beast, and his
Image, and receive his mark in their Foreheads, or in their Hands, the same
shall drink of the Wine of the wrath of God poured out without mixture, and
shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the Presence of God, and his holy
Angels, and of the Lamb. Mark the dreadful Judgments upon such as have the mark
of Antichrist, either openly in their Foreheads, in profession, or more
privately in their Hands, he shall drink of the wrath of God, etc. Now if such
as have but the mark of Antichrist upon them shall have such dreadful
punishment; pray what shall those have that have such a likeness unto the Devil
himself? the mark of the Devil, that are even turned into the very Nature of
the Devil, that are children of the Devil, what shall the end of such wicked
and ungodly men and women be?

And now Brethren, we have finished all these Six Particulars, in opening the
evil of Sin; and therein showed that there is more evil in Sin, that there is
in any Affliction. And now I had thought to have made some good entrance into
the Application of this; for though all this while in the Explanation, I have
mingled some Application, yet there remains very many excellent useful
Considerations, which does flow from all that has been said of the evil of
Sin, that if possible it may be brought to your hearts, that all may not vanish
and come to nothing in the Conclusion. Now this one Use I had verily thought to
have gone through; I shall only name it, and show what I intend in it, and I
shall finish it in the following Discourse.

CHAP. L.
Use I. Show that trouble of Conscience for Sin, is another manner of business
than Melancholy, or timerousness.

Use I. HEnce follows this plainly from all that have been spoken, if sin be
worse than any affliction, and not to be chosen rather than Affliction; Hence
it follows, Then that trouble of Conscience for Sin certainly is another manner
of business than merely Melancholy distemper, it comes not from Melancholy,
nor foolish timerousness, and the like. There is another manner of business in
trouble of Conscience for Sin then the world thinks for; this is the First Use
that follows from all that has been delivered. Me thinks all of you should
yield to the strength of this Consequence: If you have heard or read what I
have opened: you that have heard al, or read it, it should take this effect in
you all: Well then by what I have heard now, I come to understand what the
meaning of trouble of Conscience for sin is. I have heard (heretofore) of many
men and women troubled for sin, and I wondered what it meant, I wondered what
it was that troubled them; many young people may be heirs of great estates and
excellent good friends, of healthful bodies, in good trades, all well about
them; and yet mightily troubled for sin. yea, perhaps some that to the view of
the world lived very civilly, yet had in secret been guilty of some notorious
profane course, and yet when God shall but settle any one sin upon their
hearts, and trouble their Consciences for any one sin; they could not bear the
horror of their Conscience for this one sin. Well, this I have heard of the
evil of sin, tells me I have had mistaken thoughts about it; I thought all was
melancholliness, and even madness, and the Physician must be sent for, and
merry company sent for, because men and women have such poor and mean
apprehensions of the evil of sin. and therefore when any are troubled in
Conscience for Sin, Oh then get him into merry company, get a pair of cards,
make them play a fit of Music, go to some business in the world, put
themselves upon business, one thing or other, drink down their trouble, play
down their trouble, thus many have slight thoughts of trouble of Conscience:
And therefore when in their Children, they cry out, Oh! my Child will certainly
run mad, is grown mad; many carnal men and women when their Children begin to
think of sin, they think verily they begin to run mad: I remember in the
story of Erancis Spira, he says thus (because his friends thought it a kind
of Frenzy, and that it was not trouble of Conscience for sin) Oh says he to
his friends, I would to God it were Frenzy, either feigned or real; if it were
feigned Frenzy, then I could put it off when I pleased: if it were a real
Frenzy, there were a great deal more hope of Gods mercy, I should not
apprehend Gods wrath as I do, but it is otherwise with me. Brethren, those that
have felt trouble of Conscience for sin, upon whose hearts God has settled, but
the guilt of any one sin: what do you think of trouble of Conscience for sin?
they feel reallitie, they find that there is reallie unto them, that which is a
greater burden, and grief, and trouble than all the miseries of the world.
Dreadful expressions are many of them that Francis Spir^^ has, which is a most
dreadful example of horror of Conscience for sin; Oh! (says he) I feel the
very torments of hell within me, and this afflicts my Conscience with
intolleroble pain: Oh! that some body would let out this tired soul out of my
body; Oh! that I were in the place of the damned, that I might be but free from
FEARING any thing that is yet WORSE to come. For though he did acknowledge,
there was greater torments in hell, yet he professed he did desire to be in
hell, that he might be freed from the torture of his Spirit, that was still in
fear of worse, that was to come. And verily a most hidious story it is, that
shows the dreadfulness of a wounded and troubled Conscience for Sin.

Certainly if Sin be all that which you have heard, or read, well might the
Holy Ghost say, A wounded spirit, who can bear? A man may sustain his
infirmities, whatsoever his infirmities and troubles are in the world, it is no
great matter to sustain them; but a wounded spirit who can bear? for a wounded
spirit sees it has to deal with the Infinite God, the Glorious Eternal Deity:
and you must not tell such a one of Melancholliness, and such grounds of
trouble; for such a one knows, the Arrows of the Almighty stick in his heart,
and it is another manner of business than so. I might here have enlarged my
self, and have spoken much to those that have such mean apprehensions of
trouble of conscience for sin; and have showed the difference between
melancholy and trouble of conscience for sin; but I shall not at present, only
I shall wind up all now briefly, and prosecute it further in the next Chapter.
Certainly it is not melancholliness, it is another manner of business than
melancholliness. What think you of the Lord Christ himself in his Agony? that
sweat drops of water and blood, which you see was the fruit of Sin? was that
melancholy? certainly that was of the same nature that the troubled in
conscience feel for sin. The Angels that sinned against God, the Devils
themselves, they are not capable of melancholiness, they have no bodies; and
yet none have such horrors for sin as they have: And so the souls of wicked men
many times they have horrid apprehensions of the wrath of God for sin. But
certainly, if the souls of wicked men and women go out of their bodies without
pardon, the very first instant the soul is departed from the body, it has
other manner of horrid, dreadful, and dismal, apprehensions of the wrath of God
for sin, then ever it had before. I remember further, Luther had such a Speech
concerning trouble of Conscience for Sin, in his Comment upon Genesis; It is a
harder matter to Comfort an Afflicted Conscience for Sin, than to raise one
from the Dead. This was a Speech of Luther, he saw what was in an Afflicted
Conscience for sin.

Further, Surely Melancholy it is not; no nor timerousness, nor folly* do but
take an example or two, and so I shall conclude. that of David, you shall find
in David that he was a man most free from melancholy, for the temper of his
body it was a most cheerful disposition, and a warlike spirit, and very wise:
And yet there is none in the Book of God more troubled in spirit ^or Sin, than
he was.

First, I will show you what manner of man David was; and then what his
troubles of Conscience were for sin: Sure he was no melancholy man* For First)
you shall find it in 1 Samuel 16 12. that he for his bodily Constitution was
sanguine, and not melancholy; he was of a ruddy and beautiful Countinance,
and goodly to look upon: So that David for the Constitution of his body, was
of a sanguine constitution. And then, for the Valor of David, he was a mighty
man of Valor, 2 Samuel 17. 10. And he was valiant whose heart ^as as the heart of
a Lion: This was the commendation of Hushay, 2 Samuel 17. 10. concerning David.
And he was very cheerful who made so many Psalms, and was so Musical as
David? 2 Samuel 22. 1. he is called the sweet singer of Israel; and had such a
sweet complexion, was sanguine, and a great deal of valor, and the sweet singer
of Israel. And for Wisdom, he was as an Angel of God, as the woman of Tekoa
spak to him. And yet, who ever in such anguish and distress for sin as David
was? this you shall find if you read his penitential Psalms; I cannot mention
all, take but some few; Psalm. 6. there he is in trouble of Spirit; and then
Psalm. 32. When I kept silence my bones waxed old through my roaring all the day
long: Mark, David felt the weight of sin so upon his heart that his bones waxed
old through his roaring all the day long; he found not sin a light matter as
many ordinary people do. And Psalm. 38. there is notable expressions, verse. 2.
Thy Arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presses me sore: there is no
soundness in my flesh because of thy Anger, nor rest in my bones because of my
Sin. Verse. 3. and verse. 4. My iniquities have gone over my head as an heavy
burden, they are to heavy for me: verse. 5. My wounds stink and are corrupt
because of my foolishness. verse. 6. I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I
go mourning all the day long. See what Sin cost David. And I beseech you take
this note along with you; you that will make use of David's Sin to encourage
you, and harden your hearts in sin; you will say, Why? did not David commit
Adultery and Sin, that was a man according to Gods own heart? Yea, but mark,
you that will make use of David's sin, make use of what David felt for sin, you
see David's sin cost him dear, and made the arrows of the Almighty stick fast
in him, and caused him to roar out in anguish and distress of Spirit, all day
long, and he professes, he watered his Couch with tears. And that 51 Psalm.
Restore to me the joys of thy salvation, that the bones that thou have broken
may rejoice. David's bones were broken through the trouble of his Spirit, that
is the strength of his spirit (not bones literally) as bones are the strength
of the body, so the strength of his spirit was overcome by the anguish and
trouble of his soul for sin. Thus it was with David that was such a sanguine,
such a pleasant, and such a valiant man, and such a wise man, and yet he felt
this trouble of Spirit; trouble of Conscience for Sin. You think slight, and
make a light matter of it, Oh you have brave stout Spirits, you will scorn to
be so afraid, What! afraid of every thing the Minister speaks, I scorn to be
such a fool; you think you be Sermon proof, and can hear all this dreadful evil
of Sin, opened without any fear or trembling: Well, you that have so stout
spirits, know David's spirit was as valiant as yours, his heart was as valiant
as a Lion, and yet the weight of sin brok his heart, and so it will yours too
if God lay it aright upon your Spirits: Oh! it is not timerousness that causes
this trouble of Conscience; for let God come and lay Afflictions, his
afflicting hand on them, they can bear that as nothing in comparison of sin. I
remember I have heard a story of a Woman that had Nine Children, and great
pains with them all, and yet having afterward trouble of Conscience, Oh! says
she, All the pains I have had with my Nine Children, is nothing to that which I
have felt in a little time, in trouble of Conscience. So certainly, all pains
are nothing, in comparison of the pains of Spirit when Sin is settled by strong
conviction upon your Souls. So you have many that are troubled for sin, that
could bear outward affliction, but can not bear that. And you that speak of the
valor of your Spirits, that are so valiant, that can bear trouble for sin so
easily as you think, and are so full of Courage; when afflictions are upon you,
your hearts are down, and are poor, low, spirits; white liver'd, and can bear
nothing, no cross, and affliction, this shows you have no true courage; you
have courage to resist Conscience and the motions of the holy Ghost, and the
Word; but no true courage, it may be you have impudent spirits. And mark one
example more: One of the wisest men that ever lived upon the earth, yet greatly
troubled for sin, all his days, and this is the example of Heman, such woeful
trouble of spirit had he on him for sin: See Psalm. 88. read the whole Psalm
and you shall see the trouble of his spirit for sin, especially the 7. verse Thy
wrath lies har^ upon me, and thou have afflicted me with all thy waves. And the
14. verse. Lord, why castest thou off m^ soul? Why hidest thou thy face from me?
I am afflicted and ready to die (mark) from my youth up God was pleased to
exercise him from a young man and it is a blessed thing when God begins with
young ones, and makes them kn^w what sin means, when they are young, as Heman
did, from my youth up. While I suffer thy terrors I am distracted: and v (...).
Thy feirce wrath goes over me, thy terrors even cut me off. Well, who was this
Heman? for this is not a Psalm of David; you* shall see in the Title it was a
Psalm of Heman, and you shall find, that he was one of the wisest men that lived
upon the Earth, ^ Kings, 4. 31. there he speaks of Heman, he was brought in, in
the Story among the most wise men that lived upon the Earth, he is compared
with Solomon; it is said of him, he was exceeding wise, and of excellent
wisdom, More wise than the Children of the East Country, for he was wiser than
all men, than Heman; for he was one of the wisest of all, though Solomon
excelled him; yet next him, he was one of the wisest: and how comes he to be
thus wise? it is like that was one means that caused him to be so wise, he was
afflicted, and ready to die; from his youth up, he was troubled for sin all his
days. What is the folly of young people? They go up and down, and take liberty
in wickedness and sin, and never feel the weight of Sin; but if God please to
begin with them, and make them to see the evil of sin rightly, this is the way
for them to come to have true wisdom; if God train them up in trouble of
conscience for sin, it is the way to make them wiser than their Teachers, rhan
their Forefathers, and to bring them to the wisdom even of the most wise.

CHAP. LI.
The former Use further prosecuted. First, Against those that have slight
thoughts of trouble of Conscience, which arises either from gross Ignorance,
or Atheism, or desperate slighting of God. Secondly, Trouble of Conscience is
the beginning of Eternal death. Thirdly, Those that have slight thoughts of
trouble of Conscience, can never prize Christ. Fourthly, Those that have slight
thoughts of trouble of Conscience now, shall one day alter their opinion.
Fifthly, It were just with God to let those sink under the burden of Conscience
that have slight thoughts of it now. Sixthly, Those that have slight thoughts of
trouble of Conscience, those very thoughts do take away a chief restraint from
sin. Seventhly, Slight thoughts of trouble of Conscience for sin, are, 1 A high
degree of Blasphemy. 2 And a degree toward the unpardonable sin.

WE have entered upon the Application of all that has been said concerning the
evil of Sin. And you may remember I have only named one Use that do arise from
all that has been said about the evil of Sin: and that we shall now prosecute.

The Use is this, If there be so much evil in sin as you have heard opened unto
you, beyond all the evil of any affliction, Hence then we see that the wounds
and trouble of Conscience for sin, certainly it is no melancholy conceit, it
is not a fancy or imagination, as many in the world think of it. Many men have
very slight thoughts about the trouble of Conscience for sin; and when they
hear of men or women troubled for their sin, they think, it is nothing but
melancholy, or temptation, or some kind of frenzy, or madness, or folly, or
weakness of spirit, or timerousness: These be the thoughts men have of trouble
of conscience, and according to their thoughts that they have of it, such are
their Cures that they seek for it. I spoke some what of it in the last Chapter:
but now certainly, if these things be true, as verily they are the Truths of
God that have been delivered concerning the evil of sin; then we are not to
wonder at men and women that have troubles of conscience for sin. I showed by
some examples, that trouble of conscience was not melancholy; especially in
the example of Christ himself, that had the burden of sin, troubles of spirit;
I cannot so properly call it trouble of conscience, for there is a substantial
difference between the wrath upon his soul that he felt, and the wrath of God
that others feel upon their consciences; but in effect, the wrath of God is the
same, that was upon him by imputation of sin; and upon others by reason: of
their own proper guilt: and it was not melancholliness in him, nor in David, as
I showed in the last Chapter.

Now to proceed. There be two things I desire to proceed in: And

First, I have many things to say unto those that have slight thoughts of
trouble of Conscience for sin, somewhat to say to those; and if there be any in
this place that have wondered at men and women that have been troubled in their
conscience for sin; let them attend to what they read, I have diverse things to
say unto them.

Secondly, I am to show you some difference between melancholy distempers, and
trouble of Conscience for sin

First, These thoughts of thine, they certainly eome from either abundance of
Ignorance; or, Atheism; or, Desperate slighting of God: One of these three
Causes

1 Ordinarily these thoughts that men have of trouble of Conscience, to be no
greater matter than such melanchoby conceits, they do come from gross
Ignorance: thou know not God, thou know not what it is for a soul to have
to deal with an infinite Deity; thou never yet hadest a real sight of an
infinite Deity, with whom thou have to deal: And it is a sad thing to think,
that men and women should live a long time, and never in all their lives come
to have a real sight of that infinite Majesty and Deity, with whom we have to
do: It comes from ignorance of the nature of sin; thou do not know what sin
is, God has yet blinded thine eyes that thou should sin, but not know what
sin is. Certainly thou do not know the Law of God, the Spiritualness of it,
and the d^eadfulness of the wrath of God revealed against sin: thou do not
know what Eternty means, thou do not apprehend what it is for a soul to be in
hazard of miscarrying to all Eternity. It was the Speech of Francis Spir^ (as I
opened in the former Chapter) I shall make use of that example further, because
a notable ezample: Oh says he, If I might endure the heavy wrath of God, but
for twenty thousand years I should not think it much; but it must be Eternally,
Eternally; I must endure the Eternal wrath of God: that lay heavy upon his
spirit. Let any man or woman in the world, the stoutest, proudest spirit that
lives upon the face of the Earth, think what it is to miscarry to Eternity, and
this will make his spirit be troubled. Therefore its gross Ignorance in men,
that makes many have such slight thoughts of trouble of conscience for sin.

2 Again, If not from Ignorance, yet from Atheism: For many men that seem to
have excellent Parts, and are not ignorant Sots, and yet have slight thoughts
of trouble of conscience for sin. It is not so much to be wondered at, to see a
company of ignorant Sots, that know nothing of God, and the Principles of
Religion, that they should have such slight thoughts, and wonder what men mean
to be troubled for sin: But men, that have good Parts, perhaps men of great
Gifts, and pregnant Wit, and great Scholars, and yet they have slight thoughts
of trouble of Conscience for sin.

Now in them, Usually the cause is Atheism, or slighting of God. Woeful
desperate Atheism is in the hearts of many great Scholars, many pregnant Wits,
many that w^ll speak much of Religion, yet they are desperate Atheists in their
hearts, therefore from thence it comes. Therefore when you see learned men,
understanding men, go on in such and such sinful ways, and slight all that is
said concerning the evil of sin, do not wonder at it; for woeful desperate
Atheism lies under abundance of Knowledge, a great deal of knowledge, learning,
wit, and parts; and yet slight sin: this is the Cause, the Atheism in their
spirits. Compare these two Scriptures together, Psalm, 14. 1. The fool has
said in his heart, there is no God: and in Prove. 14. 9. Fools make a mock of
sin: that is, those fools that do say in their hearts, there is no God, those
fools make a mock of sin, and they think lightly of all that has been said of
the evil of sin: and what need so much ado about the evil of sin? they can
slight it, and make light of it; well, it is such that make a mock of sin, as
say in their hearts, there is no God; or otherwise, it comes from desperate
wickedness, slighting of God: Perhaps men are not grown so far, to be plain,
downright Atheists, yet they have slight thoughts of God: Oh what slighting the
Majesty of God is this, for any man or woman, to think it a light matter to
sin against God? or for trouble of Conscience for Sin, to be a slight matter:
thus it will appear to spring from some of these Causes. Perhaps if thou thy
self be but crossed in any thing, or any thing come cross to thy will, thou
think it a great thing, and art troubled woefully, and art in a rage; when
thou art crossed, thou think it intolerable, it must not be born or suffered,
that any should cross you: but when it comes to cross God, and sin against him;
thou have slight thoughts of it, and it is a matter of nothing to cross God, or
sin against God is a slighte matter: to cross you, or to do any evil against
you is unsufferable; what a slighting of God is this, that if you be crossed in
your will, it is so unsufferable; and yet to have such slight thoughts of
sinning against God. This is the First.

Secondly, Thou that have slight thoughts concerning troubles of Conscience,
consider that what thou have slight thoughts of, In it self, in its own Nature,
it is no other but the very beginnings of Eternal death, of the second death,
the very beginnings of Hell. The principal torments of Hell, lie in the
perfection of that trouble now, that for the present, is upon conscience; and
yet this thou make nothing of, as if it were but melancholy, as if the wrath
of God that shall lie upon the damned in Hell to all Eternity, were but a
frenzy. Certainly that which the Lord will at the last torment the souls of
the Damned withal to all Eternity, it is the principal of that, it is of the
very same Nature with the wounds and horrors of conscience in this world: It is
true, that God does indeed often times bless the horrors of Conscience to the
saving of the soul, to bring the soul to Christ; but horrors of Conscience in
their own Nature (I say) are the beginnings of the second death: as pains, and
sicknesses of the body of a man or woman, are the beginnings of the first
death; so wounds and horrors of Conscience are the beginnings of the second
death. The Soul of Man is a Subject of more large Capacity for torments than
the Body can be: Now the principal way that God has to torment the Soul, that
we know of, in Hell it self, it is by the horrors and wounds of Conscience. I
remember therefore it was the Speech of Francis Spira, says he, I feel in me
the wrath of God, as the torments of Hell; and he was not mistaken, for they be
the beginnings of the torments of Hell: and therefore God many times, to keep
men from being swallowed up in those torments, he makes them feel these
torments, they have some sparks of these torments of Hell upon their souls now,
that they may be delivered from the flames of Hell to all Fternity. Troubles of
Conscience for sin, is nothing else, but Gods letting out some sparks of Hell
upon the Soul. Now what a mistake is this, Thou think this but melancholy,
when the truth is it is nothing else but the sparks of Hell upon the soul. This
is the Second.

Thirdly, Thou think this a melancholy conceit: Certainly, It is impossible
for such a man or woman, ever, so long as they thus continue, to prize Christ,
or love Christ: I say, whosoever thou art that has such conceits, if this
abide in thee, I dare as from the Lord charge thee, That, thou did never yet
in all thy life prize Jesus Christ, and love Jesus Christ.

But how does this appear?

Thus: Thou did never prize Christ, and love Christ aright, if thou have
this conceit, Because thou can never know what Christ suffered for thee. The
principal thing Christ suffered for Sinners, was The bearing of the Wrath of
the Father upon his Soul, his Soul sufferings were more than his Bodily
sufferings. Thou hear sometimes of Christ's shedding his precious Blood for
thee, and dying upon the Cross; but the death of his body, shedding of his
blood, was not the principal thing Christ suffered for thee if thou ever be
saved; but the sufferings of the Wrath of God upon his Soul, when his Soul was
troubled, when he cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? and yet
thou have slight thoughts of these Sufferings. If you see a man or woman in
tortures in their body, in some disease, thou think, there is some reallity
in that, but for the sufferings of the soul, thou have poor thoughts of these,
and can not imagine what they should mean when they speak of the wrath of God
to be upon the Soul. Now if thou have slight thoughts of the wrath of God upon
the soul, it is impossible thou should price Christ, because thou know
not what he suffered. But a man or woman that has felt the wrath of God upon
their souls, in the wounds of Conscience for sin, such a one has a little
intimation of what things the Lord Christ endured for them, such a one can tell
what Christ endured, and so can price Christ, and love Christ, such a one can
Reason thus, What? is one spark of the wrath of God upon the soul so terrible?
and the tortures so sore? What then did the flame of Gods wrath that was let
out upon the soul of Jesus Christ? For so it was. If thou have a little trouble
of soul under the sense of sin now; know it is but as a spark of that fire that
did blaze out upon Christ; if thou have one drop upon thee, it is but as one
drop of those flood gates let out upon the soul of Jesus Christ; the flood
gates of Gods displeasure were let out upon the soul of Christ. This certainly
is one Reason, why God will have sinners that be saved eternally, to feel
trouble of soul for sin, that they may know how to prise Christ, and love
Christ more, and understand what the sufferings of the soul of Christ were for
sin. As (brethren) Christ did suffer in his soul, that he might be a merciful
high Priest, and have compassion upon us, and help us, when we need, as it is a
comfort to one that suffers in soul, that Christ suffered in his soul, and so
knows how to compassionate such: So, on the other side, God causes poor souls
to suffer trouble, that they might be sensible of Christ's sufferings, and so
praise and love him the more.

Fourthly, Thou that have slight thoughts of trouble of Conscience for Sin;
certainly whosoever thou art, this is a most certain truth, These thoughts of
thy heart shall certainly be altered one day, though they be slight now: This I
dare affirm of every one that have slight thoughts of Sin, and the troubl for
it; these thoughts of their hearts shall be altered. You must come to know Sin
in another manner than now you do; you must come to feel what Sin is, in
another manner than now you do. I remember I once heard a credible Relation of
a Scholar, that was in jovial Company, and very merry, and yet one that had
some inlightnings of Conscience, and being very profane, there was
occasionally, one in the Company, speaking of a wounded Conscience, he
presently claps his hand upon his breast, Well, says he, One day this breast of
mine must know what a wounded Conscience means: He being Conscious to himself
of abundance of guilt in him, for he had light, and yet was profane, and his
Conscience told him, though now he was merry, yet one day that breast of mine,
must know what a wounded Spirit means. So I say to you, is there any profane
person this day before the Lord, that has had, or still has, slight thoughts
of the evil of Sin, and trouble of Conscience for Sin: Well, Go thy ways, and
lay thy hand upon thy breast, and say to thy self, One day this breast of mine
must know what a wounded Spirit is, and must have other manner of thoughts
about a troubled Conscience for Sin. If thy heart be not yet troubled for sin,
if thou feel not the weight of sin now, it is a dangerous sign, that thou
art reserved to feel the weight of sin in torment, to know what the meaning of
sin is, in the burden of it in torment. If now thou have slight thoughts
concerning trouble for sin; I say, take it as from the Lord this day as spoken
to thee, it is a fearful sign, a brand upon thee, that thou art reserved to
feel trouble for sin eternally. God has time enough to trouble you for Sin
hereafter, and therefore it may be he lets you go on in these slight thoughts
for the present, and you do bless your selves in your own conceits; and God
does not now convince you, because he has time enough hereafter.

A Fifth thing I would say to those that have slight thoughts about trouble for
sin, is this, That if ever God should in this world come to awaken your
Conscience, and lay the weight of sin upon your souls: it were just with God
then to let you sink under the burden. I say it were just with God so to wound
you for sin, as to see you sweltring in your wounds, and deny compassion. Why?
Because you have had slight thoughts of such a wound. Certainly brethren
(observe what I say unto you) the very Reason why men and women are so long in
anguish of Spirit for their sin, and under such sore troubles, and distress of
Conscience, by reason of their sin, and can have no comfort; it is because
heretofore they have had such slight thoughts of trouble of Conscience. Perhaps
when they were in their jollitie and mirth, they made a mock of it, made
nothing of it; heard dreadful threats against sin, and made light of it, and
thought people were troubled more than needs. Well, you once had such slight
thoughts of trouble of Concience for sin; now God comes upon you for it, and
this hand of God lies upon you, and it is just with God you should feel it to
purpose, that you should have smart enough; that God might instruct you, and
convince you, of your error, and might now come and teach you after another
manner. What do you think now of trouble of Conscience for sin? you had such
and such thoughts of it heretofore, what be your thoughts of it now? I remember
there was one not far from the place where I ordinarily lived, and it was a
young Maid, hearing of many troubled in Conscience for Sin, she in a kind of
scorn and contempt of it, would feign her self troubled in Conscience for sin,
and o, she was mightily troubled, and in scorn of the Ministers, Oh these and
these Ministers must be sent for to comfort her, merely out of contempt and
scorn; but afterward God laid on in good earnest upon her Conscience, and then
she was troubled to purpose; and so, that she was at the very brink of making
away her self, and it was very much feared by all her friends; indeed she would
have made away her self, and atempted it many ways, if God had not wonderfully
hindered it. So those that have light thoughts of perplexities of conscience for
sin, when it comes indeed, it may be just with God it should be so heavy, that
they should not be able to bear it, but sink under it; then it will be so
strange a thing, to such as have slight thoughts of it, that the very
strangness of trouble of Conscience for sin, will amaze them, that they, will
not know what in the world to do. This is a Fifth thing, When trouble comes
upon them, God may justly leave them under trouble.

A Sixth thing, I would say to such that have slight thoughts about trouble of
Conscience for sin, is this. These thoughts of yours do take away a chief
restraint of sin, and causes you to disregard all the Authority of the Word:
There be these Two fearful Evils that do, follow upon your slight thoughts of
trouble of CONSCIENCE, for SIN.

1 They take away that which is the chief Restraint of Sin. There are many
outward restraints to keep men and women from sin, but all outward restraints
from sin are nothing to the restraints of Conscience; a man that has a tender
Conscience, has the greatest restraint of sin that can be, no restraint like
to that; but one that is so far from a tender Conscience; that he thinks
trouble of Conscience is a melancholy conceit, such a man has no restraint
(to purpose) from sin: he may have restraints from outward and gross sins, but
from close, secret sins, he has none. Now it is a great evil to a man, that
the hindrances to secret sins be taken away, and he gives himself liberty in
secret sins.

2 And then for the Authority of the Word: It is a great mercy for men and
women, to be in such a condition, that their heart should be continually under
the authority of the Word; howsoever you think it a brave thing that you can
get your hearts above the Word: but certainly it is one of the greatest mercies
of God upon the earth, for God to keep the hearts of men and women under the
authority of the Word. But that man or woman that thinks lightly of troubles of
Conscience, such a one can slight the Word, regards it not, let what will be
spoken, he can easily put it off, because the main hold that the Word has,
upon the heart of a man or woman, it is upon their Conscience, the Word takes
hold upon their Conscience, and brings down the heart under the power of it:
but if the Word take not hold upon conscience, it takes not hold at all. But
let a man or woman come to know what trouble of conscience for sin is, and what
the power and authority of the word is, and how then does the soul prise the
word? no man or woman ever comes to prise the word tell they have felt the
pow^er of the word troubling their conscience; then they come to prise the
word. You have a famous place for this, Job 33. 16. Then he opens the, ears of
man, and seals their instruction. That is, God coming upon men, in times of
affliction, opens their ears, and seals their instructions; that is, makes the
word come with power and authority. As a thing sealed, comes with more
authority, than a blank, or a writing not sealed; Sealed, that is when the word
comes with power; That, I may withdraw man from his purpose, and hide pride
from man: That is, Having Sealed instruction, ^he humbles the heart; First, he
causes the word to come with power, and then he humbles the heart, He keeps
back his, soul from the pit, and his life from perishing, he is chastened also
with pain upon his bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong pains, (and
so forth) And in verse. 23. If there be a messenger with him, an interpreter,
one among a thousand, to show unto man his uprightness: Then he is gracious
unto him, and says, Deliver him from going down unto the pit. That is, when
God comes to ^eal Instruction, and to humble the heart, ^and to cause pains to
be upon the man, and so make them sensible of their sin; then let a messenger,
an Interpreter be found* one of a thousand: such a one does account a Messenger
and Interpreter that shall be able to declare the way of Righteousness, and show
him a ransom how to be delivered from sin; he accounts him a man of a thousand;
Oh he is a man of a thousand: whereas, if he should come thus before, ^he were
no body, and the Word nothing, a mere silly business; but now he is a man of a
thousand, Oh such a Messenger, let such a one come and welcome: And therefore
you shall have many men slight a conscientious Minister in their health, and
prise those that preach slightly; but in their sickness, when conscience is
open, they will not send to a slight vain Minister, that preach and never touch
conscience; but they will have those that have preached most to Conscience,
they shall be most prised by them upon their sick and death beds; when
Conscience is awake, such a one will be one of a thousand then. This is the
Sixth.

Seventhly and lastly, and indeed one of the Principallest; and I desire all
those that have had slight thoughts of trouble of conscience for sin to attend
to it; and it is this: Those slight thoughts of thine about trouble of
conscience for sin, they are a high degree of blasphemy against the Holy Ghost.
If I make this plain, that they be guilty of a high degree of Blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost, (this should ^we the hearts of men and women, and make
them take heed^ what they do, in giving way to these vain thoughts, about
trouble of Conscience) yea, such a degree I will not say it reaches the
highest degree of blasphemy, yet I shall make it out to you, that they come
near it. It is a high degree of blasphemy against the Holy Ghost: it appears
thus; Because trouble of Conscience for sin, it is an especial work of the
Spirit of God upon the Soul of a man or woman, wheresoever it is: such a work
of the Spirit of God, as from thence, the Spirit of God, the Holy Ghost, has
the denomination, so as he is called the Spirit of Bondage: no, God has no
denomination from any light and slight work, there must be some especial, and
great work of God, in which God does much glory, that he has a denomination
from it; now Romans 8. 15. the Spirit of God has this denomination, it is called
the Spirit of Bondage: For you have not received the Spirit of Bondage again to
fear; but you have received the Spirit of Adoption, crying Abba Father: Ye have
not received the Spirit of Bondage again to fear; as if the Holy Ghost should
say, there was a time when you had the Spirit of Bondage; and what was this
Spirit of Bondage? It was no other but the Spirit of God, discovering unto, and
setting upon the heart of a man or woman, that bondage that they be in under
the Law, and corrupttion, and Satan: This is the Spirit of Bondage; when Gods
Spirit shall come to enlighten a man, and convince the Conscience, and so lay
this upon the conscience of any man or woman; thou art by reason of sin, a
bond-slave to the Devil; under bondage of all the Curses of the Law, by reason
of sin; yea, a bond-slave to thy Lusts: this the Spirit discovering, and making
the Soul sensible of this bondage, is that which causes this denomination to
the Spirit of God, to be called the Spirit of Bondage. Now for thee to
attribute that to foolish melancholy conceits, that is one of the especial
works of the HOLY GHOST in the SOUL, and is the Spirit of Bondage: Is not this
Blasphemy against God? This is Gods work, and it is a work of Gods glory; for
all the works of God be his glory; and that which the Spirit of God glories in,
as that work proper to him, thou say it is but folly, and melancholy
conceits, and the like; is not this blasphemy and reproach to the Spirit God?
Certainly it is no other but reproach and blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, in
attributing the trouble of conscience to these conceits.

2 Nay further, It is a great degree toward the unpardonable sin, if ye do it
out of malice and knowledge, by it you come to the unpardonable sin; Take for
that this one place of Scripture, Mark 3. compare the 22. verse with the 24.
30. Verse 22. when Christ cast out Devils, the Text says of the Scribs and
Pharisees that came from Jerusalem, that they said, he has Beelzebub; and by
the Prince of the Devils, casts he out Devils: they attributed the work of
Christ's casting out Devils, to the power of the Devil; he casts out Devils by
the Devil. But now it was by the Finger of God: well, Christ calls them to him,
and said, How can Satan cast out Satan? There he convinces them, Satan could
not cast out Satan; and told them it was by the Spirit of God they were cast
out: Mark how he goes on in the 28. verse, Verily I say unto you, all sins
shall be forgiven unto the sons of men, and Blasphemies, wherewith soever they
shall blaspheme: But he that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost, has never
forgiveness, but is in danger of Eternal Damnation. Because they said, he has
an unclean Spirit, Christ tells them, other blasphemies shall be forgiven, but
the blasphemies against the Spirit of God shall never be forgiven. Why does
Christ speak of this, how comes it in? (Mark) the Text says, Christ spoke it,
because they said he has an unclean Spirit: Mark, Christ casting out Devils,
the Scribes and the Pharisees attribute this to an unclean Spirit, and therefore
they sinned against the Holy Ghost, merely because they attributed that which
Christ did by the Finger of God, to an unclean Spirit; and therefore Christ
tells them they sinned against the Holy Ghost, and they shall never be forgiven.
Now Brethren, see how near you come to this sin, for the Scribes and Pharisees
saw Christ cast out Devils; they did it out of malice, they could not but know,
and yet they say it was by the Devil. You see one troubled in Conscience, which
is by the Holy Ghost, and you say it is a foolish and a mad spirit, and
sometimes. it is an unclean spirit; but it is worse when you say it is a foolish
and melancholy spirit, you do more blaspheme the Holy Ghost, and come nearer
this sin. Oh take heed, and be humbled, your condition is dangerous, that have
had, or have any such low thoughts about trouble of Conscience for Sin.

Object. But we see by experience men and women troubled for Sin, be very
melancholy, and heavy.

Answ. To speak to this: True, sometimes God may be pleased to sanctify, even
that humor of melancholliness, so as to further such a work as this; yea, God
may cause a work on Conscience to be furthered by melancholy, and yet a great
deal of difference between melancholy and this.

1 As first, God may make use of melancholy to bring in trouble of conscience:
as thus; If it be not too prevailing, to besot men and women, as sometimes it
does; but if it be no more prevailing but thus, to make men seriously consider,
and ponder, and weigh things, then God makes use of a degree of melancholy, to
make men and women to know themselves; and sin, and the things of their Eternal
Estate, and such a melancholy is a blessed melancholy, and you have cause to
bless God for it. Melancholy in some inferior things is very useful; and the
Philosophers say, That the most Eminent men in the world for great matters,
were melancholy, because they were serious in their thoughts; whereas othermen
be of slight, vain, frothy Spirits. Many that never had melancholy, they
conceive of things, and it passes, and they never ^ay any thing to heart, they
never knew what it was for one half hour to be serious in their thoughts all
their lives: Many that be Sanguine, be of a light, vain spirit, and it is a
heavy Judgment of God to be given over to a light vain Spirit, that considers
nothing. Now when God makes use of this Particular degree of melancholy, to
make men and women serious, to consider what shall become of them another day,
what the terms between God and they are; what if I were now to die? and what if
I were now to stand before God? then it is a good help to this work: But yet
because this work is a work beyond any melancholy conceit, we shall give you in
the Differences.

But yet further, it must be acknowledged, when God comes with trouble of
Conscience, it may be so mighty, and strong, that it may alter the body, and
consume the very Spirits in the Bodies of men and women, and alter the temper
of blood, it may be so strong and powerful, and so there may come melancholy
in afterward; but yet there is abundance of difference between melancholy and
trouble of Conscience, and that will appear in these Six Particulars.

CHAP. LII.
Six Differences between Melancholy and Trouble of Conscience. Diff. 1.
Melancholy may be in those that are most grossly ignorant; but trouble of
conscience comes with some enlightening work. Diff. 2. Melancholy prevails on
men by degrees, but trouble of Conscience many times comes suddenly, as
lightning. Diff. 3. Melancholy trouble is exceeding confused, but troubles of
Conscience are more distinct. Diff. 4. The more melancholy any has, the less
able are they to bear outward affliction; but the more trouble of Conscience,
the more able to bear outward afflictions. Diff. 5. Melancholy puts a dullness
upon the spirits of men, but trouble of Conscience for sin puts a mighty
activity upon men's spirits. Diff. 6. Trouble of Conscience cannot be cured the
ways melancholy may.

FIrst, Melancholy, it is many times in men and women where there is most
gross Ignorance of God, and of Sin, and of the things of their Eternal Estate;
it may consist with gross ignorance: Many melancholy people are most ignorant
and sottish, and know nothing of the Principles of Religion: but troubles of
Conscience can never come without some new Light of God darted in, and settled
upon the hearts of men and women; it comes always with some inlightning work
of the Spirit. Melancholy is many times with a great deal of darkness within;
the mind is dark where melancholy prevails, and many times gross ignorance;
but never any true trouble of Conscience, but God comes in with some light. And
therefore if any man or woman be troubled, and say it is for sin, I put this to
you; What has God discovered to you now, more than before? What Truths of God
has God settled upon their hearts more than before? If they can give no further
account of no other light let into them, than before, or further Truth let in
upon their hearts than before; then indeed it may be suspected not to be
trouble for sin; as many melancholy people have the name of being troubled for
sin, and they have fears of Hell, because of dark thoughts: But it is not the
true work of the Spirit upon the Soul, except it be with convincement of some
new Light, or settling some Truth more upon the Soul than before.

Secondly, Melancholliness comes by degrees upon men and women; alterations of
the Body are not sudden things, the temper of men and women's Bodies cannot
suddenly be altered to any extremity, but gradually, from one degree to
another: but trouble of Conscience comes many times as a flash of Lightning
from Heaven. Many men and women have come to the Congregation with scornful
spirits, profane, wicked, and ungodly; never knew what sin meant, nor trouble
for sin meant, and God has met with them in the Word, and fastened some
Sentence upon their hearts so, that they fall down under the power of it: that
comes just as an Arrow struck into their Liver, and they could never get out of
it, and have gone away with horrors of soul; and therefore this has not been
melancholliness Certainly the humors of the Body, never so suddenly alters the
Spirits of men: but when God comes to work, when the Spirit of God, and Bondage
comes to work, it needs no matter before, no preparative matter, for the work
of the Word is such, as it works immediately, without any preparation: Therefore
many men that understood as little of trouble of Conscience as ever any did in
their lives, and yet God lets some Truth reach them, fitted to their hearts and
dispositions; that he finds his own sin come to be discovered, and the man is
smitten: as he in 1 Cor. 14. 25. the ignorant man that comes into the Church,
and hears there the Saints prophecy, He is convinced, and falls down, and
says, verily God is among them, of a truth God is in them: it is a remarkable
Text: what ever he thought before; it may be he heard strange Stories of the
Church of Christ, of profane Meetings, That Gods People, when they met
together, they blew out the Candles, and committed Uncleanness, and Wickedness.
As there be notorious lies reported abroad of such Sects in the world; for
certainly there is no such Sect in the world; but such reports are raised,
merely to make the Meettings of Gods Saints odious in the esteem of others. As
the Jesuit said, Do you but Calnmniate strongly, somewhat will stick, though
nothing be true: Well, what ever thoughts they had of the Assemblies of the
people of God (for it is like the Heathens had strange thoughts) but when he
came in, and heard what was done, he is Convinced, and Judged, and the secrets
of his heart came to be discovered; the text says, The man falls down and
Worships God, and reports God is among them. So many people hear great
Relations of such Men, and such Preachers, and Sermons, and they go to hear
what they can say, and what they do; and may be go with an intention to scorn;
as I have known some, come and sit close to a Pilar, and with an intention to
jeer, and scorn, but before they have been gone, God has darted some truth
into their Conscience, and they have been struck with the word, and gone away
with terrors in their Conscience, this cannot be melancholy. As Paul, when God
converted him, God comes and meets him, with light from heaven, and strikes him
from his horse, and he stands trembling, and cries out, Lord! What will thou
have me to do? There is a great deal of difference between this and melancholy.

A Third Difference is this, Melancholy is exceeding Confused, they are
exceeding Confused in their thoughts, and the trouble of their Spirit: And many
times they have troubles, and sinkings, but they can give no account of it at
all; yea, their troubles be beyond their ground, the grounds that they be
troubled about, are very confused, that they understand them not themselves;
but troubles of Conscience are a great deal more distinct, and there the soul
sees ground for the trouble beyond the trouble. As in Melancholy, the trouble
is beyond the ground of trouble; so in affliction of Conscience, the ground is
beyond all trouble; I am troubled indeed* but I see cause to be troubled more;
and this is a great part of many men's trouble, That they can be troubled no
more.

A Fourth Difference is this, The more melancholy there is in any man or
woman, the less able are they to bear any outward affliction that befalls them:
but the more trouble of Conscience, the more able shall they be to bear
afflictions that befalls them. Those who feel the trouble of Sin heavy, do
account all other afflictions light: but melancholy people do feel all
Afflictions heavy, they cannot bear the least cross, their hearts are ready to
sink upon any thing, and the more melancholy increases, the more weak are
their spirits, and the less able to bear any cross. But now, trouble of
Conscience, the more sin, and the heavier the butthen of sin lies upon the
Soul, the more slight thoughts has the soul of outward crosses. Alas, it may
be he hears of some that have some grievous diseases in their bodies; Oh says
he that is troubled in conscience, Oh if it were no worse with me than so, it
were but a flea bite, but it is another manner of matter: if God would change
my trouble, I could easily bear that. As Francis Spira has this expression,
Oh! (says he) were I but released, and set free, as before, from trouble of
spirit, my thinks I could scorn all the threatenings of cruel Tyrants, and with
undaunted resolution bear all torments: So that the height of this trouble
makes the other less. It was a good Speech of a reverend Divine of our times,
when he heard any impatient under afflictions; he used to say thus, Surely the
Reason why Affliction is heavy upon you, is because Sin is light. Those that
be impatient under Afflictions, it is a^sign Sin is light, because Afflictions
are heavy; troubles of Conscience would make all Afflictions light,
Melancholy will not.

Fifthly, A principal Difference above all that has been named is this,
Melancholy does mightily dull the spirit of any man or woman wheresoever it
prevails it makes them heavy, and dull, and unapt: But now, trouble of
Conscience for Sin, it puts a mighty quickness in men, it puts an activity,
another manner of activity and stirring in the spirit than ever was before. You
shall have many men and women sit dully under a Minister many years, under the
word, and never act; but when God comes to stir, and awaken Conscience for Sin,
their Spirits be active and stirring then, in another manner than they were
before. Whereas poor people, overwhelmed with melancholy, they sit moping, and
heavy, and dull, and lumpish, and no activity of spirit at all; but trouble of
Conscience for sin, is as fire in his bones. As Jeremiah said, He would speak
no more in the Name of the Lord; but the word of God was as fire in his bones,
and made him active and stirring, so trouble in Conscience makes them active
and stirring; now they can pray, they could not pray before; now they be
active, and working; As Acts 9. When God troubled Paul, the text says, Behold,
Paul Prays: Go says the Lord to Annanias to Saul, Behold he prays: as if
Paul never prayed in all his life before. Certainly you that cannot pray, that
never prayed, but read a prayer, or prayers your mothers taught you; you cannot
Pray: but if ever God troubles your Consciences for sin, then you will Pray, as
if you were in heaven, Oh mighty Prayers then, Oh for Christ, Oh Pardon of Sin,
and Peace; then there is another manner of acting, and stirring of his spirit,
in Prayer; than ever was before. But melancholliness, will not do it; but makes
a man heavy, and dull, in the very act of Prayer. There is a notable example
of the actings of Spirit in troubles that come from Sin, whereas the other
makes them dull: it is that in the Book of Ezra, Chap. 9. verse. 3. and 5. Verse
3. And when I heard this thing, I rent my garment and my mantle, and plucked off
the hair of my head, and of my beard, and sat down astonished. This you will say
made him dull; mark what follows: Verse. 5. And at the evening sacrifice I
arose up from my heaviness, and having rent my garment and my mantle, I fell
upon my knees, and I spread forth my hands unto the Lord my God, and said, Oh
Lord my God, I am ashamed and blush to lift up my faee to thee my God, for our
iniquities are increased over our heads, and our trespasses are grown up to the
heavens, etc. There mark the Prayer Ezra makes at the evening Sacrificed when
the time was come that he should stir and seek God, then his Spirit was mighty
active, and stirring, though he were astonished before. If it had been
melancholy, his heart would have sat still then; so that trouble of
Conscience puts life into the Soul in Prayer. And so it makes the soul active
in meditation and contemplation; melancholy people be dull, and heavy, and
know not how to meditate, nor what to meditate on. Those troubled in
Conscience, Oh what quick thoughts have they about God, and Christ, and
eternity, and the law, and sin; and their souls work about such objects, that
they can have no help unto from their bodies and senses, and yet their spirits
are raised higher than before, in their workings^ And so when they come to hear
the Word, Oh how active be their spirits; in catching of the word, and at every
truth. I appeal to you that are troubled, what difference there is between your
spirits now, and what they were before you were troubled for sin, before you
came to the Congregation, to see and be seen, and wondered what men meant to be
so earnest; and now, you mark every truth, and catch hold of every sentence,
and mark the mind of God, and understand what is said: before you came and
heard, and never understood what was meant by such and such things; you saw the
Minister earnest, but you could not conceive what the man meant in his
earnestness, but now you see what he means in his earnestness, and understand
what weight is in those truths, you hear revealed: this is som^what like, when
the spirit is thus ^ed, and acted in Prayer, and Pearing. And in Conference,
when you were in Conference with good men, before, Conference about good things
was dry, and a dull thing, and you savored not the things confered on, but
presently were asleep: but now, if you come where there is Conference of God
and his Word, and Christ, and the like, your mind closes with this. If you
were only melancholy, this would make you more dull and heavy, but this makes
you more lively and active, therefore there is a great deal of difference.

Lastly, Trouble of Conscience cannot be cured as Melancholy is. Melancholy
many times is worn out with time, and Physic cures that, and outward comforts
and contentments cures that, but trouble of Conscience is a wound of a higher
nature. As Francis Spira said, when they brought Physicians, and thought it
trouble of body; Alas poor men, they think to cure me by Physic: Ah it is
another manner of malladie, and must have another manner of medicine than
Plasters and Drugs to cure a fainting Soul and Spirit for Sin. Conscience must
have Gospel Antidotes; therefore you that thought you had trouble of Conscience
for Sin, and you are now eased, or perhaps not so much troubled now as before;
look back what cured you, how comes it to pass you be less troubled than
before? has time worn it away? such a Sermon, and such apprehensions of such a
truth, darted into you mightily, and troubled you; you had such troubles, but
what has cured you? many times one can give no account but this, Sure time
has worn it away; if so, then it was not a right trouble. So it may be you
took Physic, your body was troubled before, now it is lively, and more blood
in your veins, more spirit now, and may be now your affliction is taken away,
and this has ^ured you: if there be no other trouble than this, certainly you
know not what trouble of conscience means, at least not in a saving way; either
it was not trouble of conscience at all, or else it is not cured aright, but as
the thorn that lies rotting and rankling in the flesh; a thorn when it first
gets in, puts one to a great deal of pain; perhaps if it be let alone, the pain
will be over for the present; but it lies rankling, and will put you to pain
afterward, if it be not cured: So of trouble of Conscience for Sin, and if
nothing have cured it, but these things, it is like the thorn in the flesh, and
will trouble you afterward. There is another manner of Cure, for it is the
greatest thing God can do to comfort a troubled Conscience, it must be the
blood of Christ applied by the holy Ghost; it must be a plaster made of the
blood of Jesus Christ, and applied by the holy Ghost to Cure this. And
therefore I beseech you consider what has been said about this Argument; and
as the Psalmist says, Blessed is the man that wisely considers of the poor,
so I say blessed is the man and woman, that wisely considers of these
troubles; in this, don't cast it upon your children, and friends, Oh they be
froward, or madmen, or melancholy, Oh do not say so. You that are acquainted
with storms and tempests, you think them dreadful, it may be some of your
friends have lately known what dreadful storms there have been; now if any of
them should make relation of it, and another should sa^, this is but a conceit,
and a fancy, and no reallity but a dream; would you think these men spoke like
wise men? Certainly, if any storm you have met withal at Sea has terror in it,
know, stroms in Conscience has a thousand times more than storms at Sea:
Therefore when you see any troubled in Conscience for sin, fear and tremble, let
your Conscience shake at it, and make use of their trouble. I remember a story
of one Vergerius that came to comfort Francis Spira, and he came to comfort him
as other men did; but he saw such dreadfulness upon Francis Spira, that it
struck terror in his Soul, that he left his Bishopprick, and went to Basil, and
became a famous Protestant. Thus when we hear of troubles of Conscience, slight
it not, but let the fear of God be upon you; go and renounce Sin. Oh if some of
our friends did know what slighting of a troubled Conscience were, it would
make them do as he did; though he had a rich Bishopprick, he renounced all. And
thus we have done with this First Use.

CHAP. LIII.
A Second Use from the whole Treatise, showing that a man may be in a most
miserable condition, though he be delivered from outward affliction. First, If
a man be prosperous by sin, if a man raise himself to a prosperous condition by
any sinful way, let such men consider three things: 1 What is got by sin, it
cost dear. 2 What is got by sin, is accursed to thee. 3 What is got by sin,
must be cast away, or thy soul is cast away. Secondly, When men come to be more
sinful by their prosperity: explained in three Particulars: 1 When prosperity
is fuel for their sin. 2 When it gives men further liberty to sin. 3 When it
hardens in sin.

WE are yet upon the great Doctrine of the Evil of Sin, showing that there is
more evil in Sin than in any affliction. Many things you know have been
delivered in the Explanatory part of it, wherein I have endeavored to set
before you, the vileness of sin, to paint it out unto you in the true colors of
it, as I was able: And having set Sin before you in the vileness of it, we have
begun the Applicatory part of this Point, to draw some Collections by way of
Use from what has been said concerning the dreadful Evil of Sin. I have
finished the first Use: I shall now proceed to the Second.

Use 2. And that is this, If there be such dreadful evil in Sin above all Evils
of Affliction, Hence then it follows, that a man or woman may be in a most
miserable condition, a miserable estate although they be delivered from
affliction: I say, It is possible for a man or woman to be a most miserable
creature, though they have no outward affliction; yet their condition may be
very miserable, because there is evil enough in Sin to make one miserable
without affliction. Most people in the world know no other miseries than that
misery that comes by affliction, and they make afflictions to be the only rule
and measure of a miserable condition: so much afflicted, so miserable is their
estate; and so little afflicted, so happy is their estate: They think that
those people that are delivered from affliction, are happy people; and those
people that are under affliction, are miserable people; Oh he has lost his
estete, suffered shipwreck, has grievous diseases in his body, is put in
prison, and so lives miserably all his days: thus people look upon men and
women in affliction, as if they were only miserable. Before I have done with
this Use, I shall I hope, convince you, That it is not affliction, yea, all
afflictions, miseries, troubles outwardly, do not make us miserable, but only
sin; where there is most sin, there is most misery, though less affliction. It
is a great mistake in people to judge of happiness or unhappiness by these
outward things: You shall have many people when they see men and women very
poor, that have no houses, nor clothes, nor meat and drink, that are fain to
work hard for their livings, that are sickly and weak, Oh they be in a pitiful
condition: but when they see others provided of houses and land, that have
attendance, and are gorgiously attired, brave diet, and good trades; these be
happy men. Now the Point that has been opened to you, will serve to rectify
your Judgments in these things, and not to make afflictions or no afflictions
to be the rule of happiness; but to make sin, or no sin; or less sin, to be the
rule of judging of the happiness of our condition. It was the Speech of Luther,
One drop of an evil Conscience is enough to swallow up all the joys in the
world, all the prosperity in the world: There is so much evil: in sin, that
though a man or woman had all the joys and prosperity that possibly the world
can afford, yet one drop of an evil conscience, the guilt of one sin in an evil
conscience, is enough to swallow up all, and make this man miserable in the
height of all prosperity. Let a man be raised up as high as the world can
raise him, set upon a Throne, having a Scepter in his hand, and a Crown upon
his head, having all the Pomp and Glory the world can afford; yet if sinful,
yea, if he have but the guilt of any one Sin upon his Spirit, this man is a
miserable man. But let any one be as poor as Job, and sitting upon the dunghill
scraping his sores, if delivered from the evil of sin, this man is a happy
man. I remember a Speech of Anselm that I have read; That he had rather be in
Hell without sin, than in Heaven with sin: looking upon sin as so great an
evil, as if to be rid of sin would make a man happy under the torments of Hell:
and being under the guilt of sin, it would make a man miserable, though in
Heaven. Certainly then the guilt of Sin, makes a man miserable in all outward
prosperity; and the deliverance from Sin, will make a man happy under all
outward afflictions and miseries. So though a man be prosperous in his worldly
estate, yet if Sinful, that has enough in it to make a man miserable:
especially considered in this, if there be these two Branches in it:

First, If a m^n be prosperous by Sin. Or, Secondly, Be sinful by his
prosperity.
Then he is indeed a miserable Creature notwithstanding all his prosperity, I
beseech you observe it, and it follows from the Point that has been opened,
that there is so much evil in Sin.

As First, If there be so much evil in Sin, Let a man be never so prosperous,
if prosperity be furthered by sin, or sin furthered by prosperity, he must
needs be a m^st wretched miserable Creature. If prosperity be furthered by Sin:
as thus; If any man raise himself to any outward prosperous estate in a sinful
way, although the world may judge such a man happy, having his hearts desire
satisfied yet it is most certain, this man is a wretched man. As suppose a man
get preferment by a sinful way, Oh his heart is eagerly desirous to get up to
Preferment, to get Livings and Estate in the world, and he does strain his
Conscience for it; and when there is a Sin between him and his Preferment, he
will get over the Sin he will climb and scamble over this Sin to get the
Preferment; rather than lose the Preferment, he will scamble over Sin, and go
through Sin unto his Preferment: so eagerly desirous are men of Preferment,
that though Sin be between them and their Preferment, they will break through;
they will break through the hedge but they will gain it. Oh how many Scholars,
and others, especially such whose Educations have been mean, when they see any
way of Preferment, Livings, or Estates, though they have some Sin between them
and Preferment, how have they got it, and think themselvssafe when they have
got Livings and Preferment: Oh these men be miserable, and therefore miserable
because preferred, because prospered in their hearts desire. And so for men
that get riches and estates otherwise than by right, by deceit and oppression;
in any sinful wicked way; it may be now they have got fair houses, and well
furnished, and means coming in, and they bless themselves, and think now they
be happy; yea, and others also, they think them happy, and live bravely in the
world: but if you knew all, you would look upon these men as most wretched
cursed Creatures. Certainly those men will one day curse the time that ever
they had such an estate, and will wish rather, that they had begged their bread
from door to door, than have got their estate by sin. Seeing there is so much
evil in Sin, let these men consider these things. Such as have Prosperity by
Sin, let them consider,

1 This thy Pros^ it cost dear* exceeding dear; of thou make up thy reckoning,
and put all in that it cost thee, you will find you be no gainers at all. When
men have got any thing in possession, they usually reckon, I but, what did this
cost me? thus much, or thus much; and if they see that the costs and charges
comes not so high as the benefit, then they applaud themselves as gainers.
Well, you have gotten Estates, Preferments, Honors, be it what it will in the
world; but what did it cost you? Some sin or other, did you not strain your
Conscience in that benefit you have got? And if did so, certainly if this be
put in the reckoning, if there were any sin in it thou have got nothing by the
bargain: What hope has a hipocrite though he has gained? though he may seem
to have gained his own hearts desire, yet if all be reckoned, put in what Sin
it cost, and there is no gain at all. If any of you should go to Sea, and when
you come there, you suffer shipwreck, and yet thou make a shift to get home,
by boat or some other way, saving your life, and when you come home, you have
brought a toy or trifle to your wife; now has this been a good voyage? do you
reckon this a good voyage? perhaps it was for a toy you suffered shipwreck, and
you bring this home; do you think this will make the voyage good when you have
cast up your reckoning? How many men and women in the world for trifles and
toys, suffer shipwreck of a good Conscience? when you look upon that you have
got, it is but a trifle and a toy; you might have been happy without it, and
you have ventured shipwreck of a good Conscience for this; do you think your
prosperity to be delighted in that you have got in sinful, and vile evil
ways? I remember the Prophet when he came to Ahab, when he had gotten Naboths
Vineyard by most cursed, sinful, wicked ways, 1 Kings, 21. 19. God bad him go
and meet Ahab, and say, What have thou killed, and gotten possession? As if the
Prophet should say, Oh wretched man that thou art, thou have gotten possession
of the Vinyard, but have thou killed, and gotten possession? So may I say to
any wicked man or woman in the world that has got by ways of sin; What have
thou sinned, and gotten possession? lied, and gotten possession? cozened and
cheated, and gotten possession? Do thou think good will come of this? art
thou happy in the enjoyment of this? Well,

2 Know, Whatsoever thou have gotten by sin, it is accursed to thee: Thou
may look upon every bit of bread thou eatest, that thou have got by sinful
ways, look upon it as having death in it; and every draught of beer, and
wine, thou drinkest, thou may look upon it, as having the wrath of the
Almighty mixed with it. You have got an Estate, perhaps you were poor, and
mean before; but now you have wronged, and cheated, and cozened others in
sinful ways, and now you have your tables furnished, and can go to the Tavern,
and drink: in this meat and drink of thine, there is the wrath and curse of
God. Suppose a man had stolen a garment, and it proved to be in a house that
had the plague; suppose a thief got into a house that has the plague, and has
got clothes, and perhaps the bed-cloathes of one that died of the plague, and
if one tell him what they be, can he have delight in them? perhaps he has them
upon his bed, but the plague is in them. Certainly whatsoever any of you in all
your lives, have got by any way of sin, the plague is in it: that is a certain
truth, there is the plague, the very curse of the Almighty in it.

3 Therefore, Whatsoever is got by sin, it must be cast away, or else thy soul
is cast away: It must be restored again, there must be restitution made to the
utmost of thy power, for any thing got in a sinful way; for there is so much
evil in the way of sin, that God will not have any man by any means in the
world, enjoy comforts that come that way; God himself does so hate Sin, and he
would have all his people so hate Sin, that he would not have any one in the
world have any comfort by Sin. Therefore as soon as ever any ones Conscience
comes to be enlightened, to understand what Sin means, if they find that there
be any thing in the house, got in a sinful way, they can never be quiet til
they have rendered it back again; the sight of it strikes terror into them,
they cannot endure to come into the room to see that got in a sinful way. There
have been some have got much by ways of Sin, and when they have lain upon
their sick and death beds, and conscience awakened, Oh they have cried for Gods
sake take them from my sight; they could not bear such things in their sight,
that they have got in the ways of sin. As ^udas got thirty pieces, out of a
covetous hu^or he would have money, and not be so poor as the other Disciples,
but he gets money in a sinful way: but when Conscience came to be awakened, and
terrified, he goes, and a kind of vengeance goes with him, he goes and
throws it to the Scribes and Pharisees; he throws them down, they were to hot
for him, he could not endure the scalding of them in his Conscience, they were
even as it were melted in his Soul, he could not keep the thirty pieces, they
were so terrible to him.

So certainly that is thy 30. pieces, any household stuff, any thing thou have
got in a sinful way, oh it will be terrible to you one day I beseech you
brethren take notice of it, any one that has got by ways of sin any thing,
it is not enough to the salvation of that soul that it has been never so much
sorrowful; all the sorrow in the world, and repentance thou can have for sin,
will not save thy soul, except thou do restore, except restitution, to the
utmost of your ability be made, you can never have comfort and assurance that
sin is pardoned. It is an old speech of an ancient, The Sin is not remitted,
till that taken away be restored. There are many men and women* they think if
they can get any thing by sinful ways, they will repent, and pray to God for
forgiveness, and be sorry, and yet keep that gotton in a sinful way. No, that
will not serve the turn, all thy praying to God with never so much sorrow, yet
there must be restitution of what you have sinfully gotton to the utmost of
your abilities, though the party be dead, you must not keep it: Suppose
whomsoever you have wronged are dead, you must not keep it if they have any
heirs, or executors; suppose you know not them, then you must give it to the
poor, you must be rid of it. So much stain and evil is in sin, that any thing
that comes by way of sin must not be kept. And this is not so strange a thing
but that the heathen have been convinced of it: I remember a story of a
heathen that did but owe to a Shoemaker for a pair of Shoos, and no body knew
he owed it, when the Shoemaker was dead, he thought to save it; but his
Conscience was so troubled, though the man was dead, and no body could charge
him with it, that he could not sleep, or rest, and be quiet, but rises with
amazement and trouble in the night, and runs to the Shoomakers house, and
throws the Money in, and says, Though he be dead to others, yet he is alive to
me. If a heathen had such convictions of Conscience, that he must not keep that
which was gotton by sin, if he could see sin so sinful, that what was gotten by
sin must be cast out; surely you Christians must be so wise; Oh consider this,
you are a multitude, come together, is there never a man or woman's Conscience
now in the presence of God, that tells them, That there is something that they
have gotten by such a sinful way. Now this is the charge of God to you upon
your spirits, That as ever you do expect to find Mercy from God, that you do
forth with and immediately restore that which you have gotten by any sinful
way, it will be your bane, and your ruin, you will venture your souls else;
that must be restored, or your souls must go for it; and all your sorrow and
trouble, will not do, ezcept these be restored, these be restored to your
power; either that, or some other thing in lieu of it, you must not think to
live upon sin. It may be servants, in their Masters service, pilfered and
purloined; whatsoever you got for your selves, perhaps you have spent it, but
hereafter, either your souls must perish, or else you must, if God have made
you able, restore it, though it be all your estates, you be bound to cast up
those sweet morse^s you have taken. There was once one that had wronged a man
in five shillings, and it was fifty years after that wrong was done, that he
sent to these hands of mine, those five shillings, and desired me to restore
it; Conscience now did so sting him, that he could not enjoy it. So though it
be forty, fifty, or threescore years ago, when you were young, that you did
the wrong, you be bound, as you do expect mercy from God, to restore what you
have wronged, because there can no prosperity come in by sin, no good, there
is so much evil in sin. This is the First, when a man comes to be prosperous by
Sin, then he may be miserable notwithstanding his prosperity.

Secondly, When a man comes to be sinful by Prosperity: As when a man comes to
Prosper by sin, so when Sin comes in by Prosperity: And for this, Three
Considerations likewise. Sin sometimes comes in, by Prosperity, a man is more
sinful, because more Prosperous; certainly this man may be miserable
notwithstanding his Prosperity As,

First, When Prosperity is fuel for sin. Secondly, When it gives them further
license, and liberty to sin. Thirdly, When it more hardens them in sin.
Certainly this man, though he be freed from Afflictions all his days, yet is
a most miserable man; because he is delivered from Afflictions.

1 He comes to have Prosperity fuel for sin: That is matter for sin to work
upon; so that Prosperity nourishes and fattens up sin. As many men, because
they have Prosperity, their sins grow to a mighty height by Prosperity:
Prosperity is fuel for Lust, fattens your malice, and o^asions pride. Were it
not he had such an estate as he has, and a healthful lusty body, then he
could not be guilty of so much Lust, uncleanness, drunkenness, pride; so much
malice and revenge; the more God does deliver them from Afflictions, sickness,
poverty, the more feuel has he for sin, wickedness, and the lusts of his
heart to burn upon, and grow up to a flame. As it is with a body, those humors
of the body, are matters for the disease to grow upon, and feed the disease;
they be no good to the body, but mischief to it: some men have great big arms
and legs, but what bigness is it? a bigness that comes by disease by dropsies,
such humors their bodies being full of them, they feed the disease of the
body: now be these humors any such things as that we should rejoice in? do
they make for the good of the body? they make for the bigness, but not the
goodness of the body. So any man's estate, that makes matter to feed lust
upon, and nourish and grow upon this; such a man is so much the more miserable,
by how much the more Prosperous he is: as usuallie wicked men, through the
malignitie in their hearts, they do make all their Prosperity to be nothing
else but nourishment for lust to breed on. As it is with a gracious heart, it
will turn al things he does enjoy, to be matter for his grace to work upon, and
to further the work of grace: so a wicked heart will turn all he does enjoy, to
be matter for his lust to work upon, and to further his lust; the excellency
of grace appears in the one, and the malignitie of sin appears in the other.
Now if sin be so great an evil, then whatsoever a man injoys, if it be a
furtherance of sin, and nourish sin, it makes him the more miserable, a
miserable creature; though a prosperous man, yet this man is miserable, because
his Prosperity makes him more sinful.

2 If his Prosperity does give him further liberty in Sin? As thus, Many men
that be poor, be quickly restrained, they have many restraints, alas, they be
afraid the Law will get hold of them if they be drunk, or unclean, he is
quickly restrained; may be he dares not for fear of the displeasure of some
friend he depends upon: a hundred things keeps in men in affliction from
taking* their liberty in Sin, which otherwise his heart would have committed,
whereas, a man Prosperous in the world, takes liberty, and who shall control
him? he will be drunk, and unclean, and break the Sabbath, and who dares
control and speak to him? and I beseech you observe this, many men account
that the greatest happiness of Prosperity, that by this means they may come to
have their wills, their sinful wills, that they shall live without control in
the satisfying their sinful lusts; this they account the happiness of
Prosperity. This is a most abominable cursed happiness, to account the good of
Prosperity to consist in this, That it gives more liberty to sin; Oh it is a
most Pestelentious Power that inables to do mischief, to hurt ones own soul, or
others: So that is a most pesteferous estate and condition, that gives a man
liberty to satisfy his lusts the more. Brethren, consider of this, it is a
most dreadful curse of God upon a man, that God will let a man go on smothlie in
ways of Sin, without control, that he shall have liberty without control;
if there be any brand of Reprobation that one may give, this is it, as black a
brand as can be given, that God suffers a man to go on smoothly in sin without
any control, that he can have full liberty. It is a speech of Barnards,
Therefore does God spare the Rich, because his iniquity is not found only to
DISPLEASVRE, but to HATRED; because God is not only now Angry, but he Hates
him for Sin: that is a Speech of Barnard, Therefore does God spare the rich,
and deliver many wicked men from Affliction, because Sin is grown to the
height, that it is above Gods Displeasure, God may be displeased with his
children for Sin, but he does not come to Hate them; they be not children of
hatred, because of infirmity; but now when God suffers a wicked man to go on
smoothly without any affliction in his way of Sin, and so take liberty in
Sin, this man's Sin it is to be feared is grown to the height, that it comes to
the very hatred of God, not only to displeasure. I remember Barnard in
another place calls this kind of mercy in God, to deliver men from affliction
in a sinful way, he calls it a mercy more cruel than all anger, and prays God
to deliver him from that mercy. That is, That he should go on Prosperously in
a wicked way. And if you knew all, it would be one Petition to God (you in a
Prosperous way, it would be one Petition you would put up to God) every day,
Oh Lord, never let me prosper in a sinful way and course, Oh Lord, rather let
any Affliction be upon me, than that my smoothness in my way should make my sin
more smooth and delightful. I appeal to you Mariners, suppose you were sailing
near Rocks or sands, and were becalmed, till you come just there where they
are, and then you should have a wind come full upon you, and fill your sails to
the full, your sails perhaps are all up, and a wind comes that fills them to
the full with wind, I but this wind carries you directly upon the sands, or
rocks, would you not rather have the wind a little more still? would you not
rather have a half wind? or a side wind? would you not rather have your sails
down? or not half so much filled as they are, when they carry you upon the
rocks and sands? So here, it is just as if you should see a man rejoice that
his sails be filled with wind, and all his sails up, when another that stands
by knows, it carries him upon the sands that will undo him. So it is with a man
that rejoiceth in Prosperity, that carries him with full sail to wickedness.
God fills their sails, their hearts be filled to the full, with all that their
hearts can desire, and they be filled with all their braverie, but this (as the
sail) carries them on further to Sin and wickedness; upon the rocks and sands
to eternal destruction: It were better for these men, that their sails were
down, and all under the hatches, a thousand times better than to have all the
liberty to Sin. I beseeeh you brethren, observe the difference between Gods
dispensations and his dealings with the wicked, and his dispensations and
dealings with his Children, in this one thing it is very observable; with the
wicked God deals thus, in just judgment he suffers stumbling blocks to lie in
the way of Religion, that they stumble therein, and find abundance of
difficulty, when they have some good stirrings of their affections, and good
motions, and intentions; but there is such a stumbling block they be offended
at, and such a thing lies there and hinders them, and makes the ways of
RELIGION difficult: but when they come to the ways of Sin, there all their
ways be smooth, there is no stumbling block lies there, but all is clear, and
God suffers them to prosper and go on a pace; the way to life is full of
stumbling blocks, but the way to destruction is clear: thus God deals with the
wicked. But with his Children God will make the way to life and Salvation to be
very smooth and clear; The way of the upright is plain: if the heart be
upright, those things others be offended at, and stumble at, they be delivered
from; those stumbling blocks be taken away: gracious hearts find the Ways of
Godliness, plain, comfortable, and smooth ways: But now, the ways of Sin to
Gods Children, they be full of stumbling blocks, there God is pleased to lay
stumbling blocks; when God sees his Children hanker after sinful ways, God
makes this let, and the other let, this affliction, and the other affliction;
one thing or other they shall find in Gods Providence to stop them in the way.
A most excellent Promise for this to the Children of God, when God was in a way
of mercy to them, you have in Hosea, 2. 6, 7. Therefore behold, I will hedge up
thy way with thorns, and make a wall that she shall not find her paths: (Mark)
when God intends good to his Church, he promises to hedge up the way, and wall
it up; that is, the way to Idols, that they should not find it so easily as
before: Oh take notice of this, Oh all ye Servants of God, when you have found
your hearts hanker after evil ways; Oh the goodness of God, he has laid
stumbling blocks in the ways of death; whereas others when they have come to
the ways of death, all is clear and smooth before them, and they have their
hearts desire. This is the difference between Gods dealings with his people,
and the wicked.

3 As Prosperity is fuel for sin, and gives liberty to sin, So it hardens the
hearts of men and women in sin: As it is with the Clay, when the Sun shines
upon it, it grows harder, mire and dirt grows harder with the shining of the
Sun; so wicked and ungodly men, their hearts grow hard in the ways of sin,
with the shine of Prosperity upon it. As the Iron is soft when the fire is in
it, but harder when the fire is out; so with men and women, in affliction they
seem soft, but they are the harder when out again: We have a notable place for
this, Job, 21. from the 7. verse, to the 14. there is a description of the
prosperous Estate of the wicked; now at the 14. verse, see how their hearts be
hardened, Therefore they say to God, depart from us, we desire not the knowledge
of his way; because he had said before of them, Their houses are safe from
fear, neither is the rod of God upon them. Their bull gendreth and fails not,
their cow calveth and casts not her calf. They send forth their little ones
like a flock, and their children dance. They take the timbrel and harp, and
rejoice at the sound of the organ. They spend their days in wealth. They live
merry, brave lives; therefore their hearts be hardened in sin, that they say
to the Almighty, depart from us, what need we the knowledge of God? what need
so much preaching? and so much ado? we desire not such things. I beseech you
mark, and observe what kind of men those are, that so slight the Word of God,
and disesteem of it; and that in their carriage and actions, do as it were, say
unto God himself, depart from us; for so it is, though it may be they think not
so, when the Word and Ordinances depart; yet they do as much as if they should
say to God, depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy way: I say,
observe what kind of men these are, not men under Gods wrath, or afflictions,
observe what men they are, and when they say so, I say, not when they be under
Gods wrath, but those that live in Authority, and flourish, and have delights
and contentments to the flesh; these say, depart. I confess, many poor people
that know nothing of God, and that be mere Atheists, that live all their days
in mere Atheism, to hear them say so, it is no wonder: But I speak of men
enlightened, and where, almost, have you any so ready to say, depart from us,
let the Word and Ordinances depart, and that slight God in his Ordinances, as
men do that are in the greatest Prosperity, that enjoy comforts, and brave
lives, and have the world at will. Now let all such know, That though they may
bless themselves, and the world may bless them; yet woe to them, when God says,
let them prosper in sin; Hosea, 4. 14. I will not punish your daughters when
they commit iniquity: God threatens it as a Judgment not to afflict them. I
remember Origin upon that Text has this note; Will you hear the terrible voice
of God? God speaking with indignation? I will not visit when you sin; this he
calls the terrible voice of God, speaking with indignation: This is the most
extreme of Gods anger, when thus he speaks. And so Luther has such an
expression, Woe to those men at whose sins God does wink and connive, and that
have not afflictions as other men. And so Jerome, in writing to a friend that
prospered in wicked ways, says he, I judge thee miserable, because thou art
not miserable: So certainly, those men are therefore miserable, because they be
not miserable; and it were a thousand times better for these men, to lie under
some heavy and dreadful affliction in this world. And this is the Second Use,
If there be so much evil in Sin, then a man may be a miserable man, though he
be not an afflicted man, because there is evil enough in sin alone to make a
man miserable without affliction.

CHAP. LIVE.
Use 3. If there be so much evil in sin, then it is a mighty mercy to get the
pardon of sin.

Use III. IF there be so much evil in Sin as you have heard of, then certainly
this must needs follow, That to get pardon of sin is a mighty mercy. It must
needs be a wonderful thing to have the pardon of sin, to get to be delivered
from that which has so much evil, that is so dreadful, it must needs be very
hard to be obtained; grievous diseases be very hardly cured. Certainly
Brethren, those men and women that do think, that to get pardon of, and power
against sin, is a little or light matter, I dare charge them as in the presence
of God, they never yet knew what sin meant; and all that I have delivered about
the evil of sin, has been but as the beating of the air to them, to no
purpose, that yet make but light of the great work of procuring pardon for sin,
and making peace with God for their sin. If all the world were in a confusion,
turned into a Chaos, we should think it a great work of God to bring all in
frame and o^der again: Certainly it is a greater work of God, for to deliver
the soul from the evil of sin, and free the soul of it, than it would be for to
raise up the frame of Heaven and Earth again, if all were turned into a Chaos.
Therefore Numbers, 14. 17, 19. verses, where Moses speaks of pardon of Sin; see
how Moses speaks of it there: And now I beseech thee (says he) let the power
of my Lord be great, according as thou have spoken, saying. What was this
concerning which God had spoken, that he would show his great power in? See the
19. verse, Pardon I beseech thee the iniquity of this people, according to the
greatness of thy mercy: (Mark) let the power of my Lord be great, and then
pardon the iniquity of thy people: as if Moses should say; Oh Lord, this
requires great power, the Almighty power of God is required for pardoning of
iniquity, as well as the infinite mercy of God Oh consider this, you that
think lightly of getting pardon of sin, this is the greatest business in the
world, and certainly that soul that God does set in good earnest about this
work, to get the pardon of sin, that soul is the most busy Creature in all the
world: never was the soul taken up about a more blessed work, since it had a
being, than this is; if it understand what it is about, it takes up the whole
strength of soul and body, when the soul is about so great a work: therefore
you that come to have some inlightenings to show you the evil of sin, and you
be about that work of getting pardon; Oh you had need intend it; and work
mightily and strongly indeed; for know this, you are about the greatest
business, the greatest work that ever Creature was about in the world; there is
no creature in all the world was ever about so great a work as thou art about;
when thou art about the getting pardon of sin, thou had need mind it, and
follow it, and not have thy heart taken up about other things, for it is the
great work of the Lord, that infinitely concerns thee; Oh that men and women
had clear apprehensions about the sweetness of this work; it is true, Gods
mercy is above all our sins, and he is ready to pardon, and to forgive; but
the Lord will have his Creatures know, that it is the greatest work that ever
he did: yea, and take altogether Justification of a sinner, is as great a work
as ever God did; the means that tend to it, and the work of a soul about
procuring pardon, is the greatest work that ever soul was about: so you must
understand it; and you cannot but understand it, if you understand what has
been delivered. This is the Third Use.

CHAP. LV.
Use 4. If there be so much evil in sin, this justify the strictness and care
of Gods People against sin. Two Directions to those that make Conscience of
small sins. First, Be even in your ways, strict against all sin. Secondly, Be
very yiedling in all Lawful things.

Use IV. IF there be so much evil in Sin, Hence then is justified the
strictness and care of the People of God against sin. They be afraid of every
sin, they dare not be so bold in the ways of sin as others are, but they
tremble; when any sin is presented to them, they be afraid, and tremble; others
go on boldly, and presumptuously, and laugh at such as be afraid; Oh such
scrupulous Consciences! Oh they dare not do such a thing because it is a sin
they say! Oh they dare not by any means because they dare not sin: thus others
laugh at them, because they think they be more scrupulous than they need be,
that should be afraid to do things so little as they think these are. I beseech
you observe the perverseness of men's hearts; you shall have them if men offend
the Law of man, them that are in Authority, the Commands of men, in things
that they themselves will profess to be very little, and small, then they will
cry out of such its Rebellion, and Rebels against authority, and they are not
worthy to live, and they would have the severest punishments that can be,
against them that will not obey man's authority in little things: but mark,
these men that will so urge small things, and where they be small, the worse
the disobedience (say they) in disobeying in small things. Yet these men that
seem very Conscientious in such things, when they see men afraid to offend
God, that dare not do little things if sinful, dare not speak an idle word, and
be sinfullie merry as others are, that are afraid of intemperance, and every
small thing, (as they think) these men will jeer such; what a horrible Sin is
this? What! urge man's Authority in small things, and jeer those that be
Conscientious to Gods Authority in small things! What shall the Authority of
man put weight upon small things, and not the Authority of the Almighty put
weight in small things? Well, whatsoever they think, brethren go on, and make
Conscience of small things, and never call any sin little, because you have
heard of so much evil in it, go away with this impression of the Evil of Sin on
your hearts; Well, by this I have heard of the Evil of Sin, I have learned to
account no sin small, though never so little in the eye of the world. Is it a
Sin? If so, do thou never admit of it; if it be a sin, abhor it: let this
temptation never prevail with thee; What? will you not do this, you may do
worse? This I would advise those gracious and godly, that do indeed make
Conscience of small Sins, and do well in making Conscience of small things; I
give you these Two Instructions to carry along with you, as you do make
Conscience of small things, and you do well in it, because there is so much
Evil in Sin. So,

The First Instruction, Be sure your Course be even this way, that as you seem
to make Conscience of some things small; so make Conscience of all: Let not men
of the world, that observe your ways, find you tripping, and have just cause
to say, These men seem scrupulous in small things, but in otherways, they give
liberty enough to themselves. And (say they) though they will not swear, they
will lie; and such like aspertions, sometimes through malice, the men of the
world cast upon Profession. But I speak to you in the name of the Lord, take
heed you give not occasion to the men of the world to say so; to say, I, these
be so scrupulous in Ceremonies, and so nice in these things; though certainly
we are bound to be so, for God is a jealous God, and if in any thing we be
Conscientious, we must in his Worship be Conscientious there; but then you had
need be so much the more careful, that they find you exact in every thing that
you do. You servants, perhaps you inquire after the Worship of God, you young
people; and it is a great mercy of God, that God stirs up young ones to inquire
after the true worship of God, and not to worship God in that ignorance that
your forefathers did; that took up every thing upon custom, or the use of
the Parish they lived in; for certainly it is not the practice of many; nor
the command of Authority can make it lawful, if not warranted by the Word:
Well, perhaps many young ones now begin to inquire after the way of Gods
Worship; and perhaps your Masters, or Parents, or may be Husbands be angry, and
vexed, and wonder what is come to you; because grown so scrupulous of these
things: Now I say, you had need be very exact in your Masters family, that
you may not be found tripping in other things; and you Wives had need be very
exact, that your Husbands find you not faulty in other things; and you
Children had need be very respectful to your Parents, and careful of your
Duties to them, because they be more apprehensive of any failings in that
which is due to them, then they are of any thing in the Worship of God; and
they know God ties you to the practice of those duties. Now if you cannot join
in their practice, and such Superstition as your Masters do. Now if these
Servants be unfaithful in Service, and carelesss, and stubborn, and stout in
answering again: how does this harden their Masters against this way of
Worship; and harden their hearts against them? What? You make Conscience of
Superstition because sinful, and is not this Sin, as well as that? to be
unfaithful, and stubborn, and stout; if you make Conscience of one sin, why not
of another? therefore all you that seem to have more tender Consciences than
others, and more afraid of the least sin than others; be sure you walk exactly,
and especially have a care of your duty toward men, with whom you walk; for
they can spy you presently, if you trip.

A Second Instruction I commend to those that make Conscience of little, of the
least Sin; is this, Be sure you be as yiedling and tractable in all other
things as possible you may, in all things lawful: I ground it upon this,
Because those whose Consciences be tender, and dare not commit the least Sin,
for any seeming good; they cannot but stand out rather than commit some evils,
some things that they be required to do they dare not do, because sinful, it
cannot be but in some things they must stand out, because they be convinced
that it is a sin: now this the world judges stoutness, and pride, you make
Conscience of it, but they think it pride, and stoutness of spirit, why? Cannot
you do this as well as others? when alas God knows, and your Consciences tells
you, that you would with all your hearts, but cannot; you should sin against,
and wound your own consciences, therefore let them do what they will, you
cannot do what is required; let masters rage, and be angry, and husbands be
displeased, you cannot yield, your consciences will not suffer you. Now that
you may convince them, that it is conscience, and not stubbornness, how shall
this be known, that it is consciousness, and not stubbornness? for we cannot
see into your consciences? I give you this Note to discover it, to them; be
more pliable and yiedling in all other things, and there, to go beyond all
other women, or children, or servants. As now, if there be a woman whose
Conscience cannot yield to some things, and her husband is displeased because
he believes it is stoutness, now that her husband may believe it Conscience and
not stoutness, it concerns that woman to observe whatsoever gives content to
her husband in every thing else; and to be more yiedling, and pliable, and
tractable, and herein denying her own will, to give content to her husband in
other things, and herebie he will be convinced, sure she is not stout and
stubborn in other things; why? because in this I find her more pliable, and
yiedling, and willing, than before. So for Servants, if you cannot yield in
that your Masters would have you; strive to give him the more content in other
things: Children to your Parents, in other things be more dutiful, and one
neighbor to another; if neighbors would have you do that which is against your
Conscience, when you cannot do that, yet in other things yield to your own
prejudice, to convince them, that in what you do not yield, it is meerlie out
of Conscience, and not stubbornness. This is the Fourth Use

I might here have gone further, and (if there be so much evil in Sin, I would)
have labored with men and women to come to be sensible of all the evil of sin,
and to have stopped sinners in their sinful ways, and courses; and likewise to
have drawn sinners to Christ, and to have made men and women to prise Jesus
Christ, by whom all their sins may possibly come to be forgiven; who is the
only Ransom and Propisiation for sin: for this brethren, is the ground of all
I have said, that we might be made to esteem Christ, and prise Christ. And in
this regard, though what I have said, seems legal, yet certainly it is a fond
unistake in people that think Christ is not preached, except the word Christ be
named. But know all that has been said about the Sinful ness of Sin, has been
a Preaching of Christ, for it has been in way and order to bring Souls to
Christ, that I might cause Souls to fly to Christ, and go to him that is the
only Propisiation for Sin, and the only Ransom for Souls. And certainly
brethren, if once these things I have delivered concerning the Evil of Sin,
come to be apprehended, and the Soul made sensible of them; Oh! how sweet, and
precious, and dear will Christ be to such a Soul? and the Name of that great
God will be honored in such a Soul: But I shall prosecute this in the following
Discourse.

CHAP. LVI.
Use 5. If there be such Evil in Sin, hence then is justified the dreadful
things spoken in the Word against sinners.

THere is more Evil in Sin, than in all Affliction: That Is the Argument we have
been long upon; and have made some good entrance into the Application of it,
there has been Four Uses made of this Point already, that has flowed
naturally from the Evil of Sin. There are yet diverse more Uses which are of
great Concernment: wherefore we proceed to it.

Use V. If there be such dreadful Evil in Sin, Hence then the Word of God that
speaks such dreadful things against sinners, cannot but be justified of all
those that know what sin is. There are very severe and fearful things,
revealed in the Word against Sin. Now, such as understand not what the Evil of
Sin is, are ready to think them very hard. For indeed, it is only by the
word, we come to understand, wherein the true Evil of Sin lies. Paul to the
Romans tells us, That before the Law came, he knew not Sin: And had I Preached
these Sermons concerning the Evil of Sin before the Athenians, the wisest of
Philosophers, they would have said as they did concerning Paul, What new? What
strange Doctrine is this? And so it is like it has been unto all those who
have no other rule to judge of things by, than carnal Reason and Sense. Those
who are not acquainted with the mind of God, revealed in his Word; they perhaps
have strange thoughts concerning all that has been delivered; and think I have
been but an hyperboler all this while: but certainly those that judge of things
according to the word, they see that there is a realitie in all that has been
delivered, and they justify the Word in all; yea, they justify the severitie
of the word against sin, when they see it even against themselves, for their
own sins; that is a good sign, when the heart of a man or woman, does not only
justify the word in general, but when the word comes most powerfullie, and
sharply against his own sins; yet he lies under the power of the Word, and
says, It is good, and holy, and righteous, the word of the I ord; though it
speaks bitter things against his own sins. There are many men and women that
have some seeming good affections, and some tenderness of spirit, and would
seem to melt at a Sermon, when some truths be delivered to them: but when the
severitie and strictness of Gods Justice, in the word is presented before them,
their hearts fly off, and they seem to be very hard things. We have a notable
example for this in Luke 20. if you read in the story before, you shall find
the people spoken of, were much stirred, with many things they heard of in the
Word: but in the 16. verse, when Christ told them he would come and destroy
those husbandmen that had used the messengers so ill that were sent for fruit,
and the Kings only Son too: He shall come and destroy those Husbandmen, and
give the Vinyard unto others; and when they heard it, they said, God forbid. Oh
God forbid that there should be so much severitie: those people, in this
particular, discovering a slightness of spirit; that though they were people
that seemed to have tender hearts, and were much stirred, and their hearts
melted at some truths delivered: well, but yet when they heard of the severe
Judgments against evil men; Oh they had more compassion in them than God had,
and said, God forbid that things should be so hard; What? is not God a merciful
God? and we hear of nothing but severity; that there should be such severitie
in God, utterly to destroy, God forbid. Thus people now a days, when they hear
Arguments of Gods goodness, and mercy, their hearts be ready to melt and yield,
and they be affected, and stirred; but when they hear the severitie of Gods
Justice against sin, Oh then God forbid that there should be such hard things,
God forbid these things should be true. Certainly Brethren, you cannot have any
true meltings of Spirit wrought in you, nor work of Gods Sanctifying Spirit,
unless you find such a principle in your hearts, as should cause you to fall
down and tremble, and yield unto the Justice of God, and the severity of the
Word against sin; except you find a willingness to justify God and his Word in
all the severity that he does reveal against you in your own sins. I his is the
Fifth.

CHAP. LVII.
Use 6. If there be so much evil in sin, it show the miserable condition of
those whose hearts and lives are filled with sin.

Use VI. ANother Use is this, If there be so much evil in sin, Then what a
miserable condition are those in that be full of sin, w^ose hearts and lives
are filled up to the brim, to the very top, exceeding full of sin. Is there all
this evil (that I have spoken of) in the nature of Sin? in one sin? (as you
have heard) such dreadful evil in the least sin? Oh Lord, what a condition are
those in (I say) that are guilty of an infinite number of sins? It is said,
Eccles. 9. 3. The hearts of men are full of evil, full of sin: it is true of
all the sons and daughters of men in the world that their hearts be full of
sin. A toad is not so full of poison as the heart of every man and woman in the
world is full of sin: and that which thou art full of, is such an abominable
thing in the eyes of God, as you have heard: yea, and as their hearts are full
of sin, so they be fully set to do evil, Eccles. 8. 11. Because Sentence
against an evil work is not speedily executed, therefore the hearts of the sons
of men are fully set in them to do evil: this is true of all; in their natural
condition, their hearts are full of evil, and their hearts are fully set in
them to do evil. All the actions that ever thou did do, all the thoughts of
thy mind, and the words of thy mouth; all the actions of thy life, ever since
thou were born, has been nothing else but sin, if thou be in thy natural
estate. This we dare avow, and speak as in the presence of God, That every man
and woman not yet converted, had never any thought* never spoke word, never did
any action in all their lives, but they sinned against God. And if Sin be to
evil, what an evil case are those men in, who be so full of sin? in all that
ever they did in all their lives, yea, their best actions; how full of sin be
those? and how miserable is their condition, in that regard; who have given up
themselves to follow Sin with greediness? Are there not some of you before the
Lord, whose consciences cannot but ^el you that you have given up your selves
to follow the lusts of your own hearts with greediness? to satisfy them to the
full? and all your grief has been, that you could satisfy them no more: this
has been the condition of many who have lived in a course of sin all their
days; yea, and it may be against conscience also; who have been guilty, not
only of multitudes of sin, but guilty of such multitudes with woeful
aggravations, as against light, against means, against vows: Certainly if Sin
be such an evil in its own nature, though but any one, if God should set but
the least sin, but of thought, upon a man's heart as he may do, he would ^ink
the stoutest-heart down to the bottomless gulf of despair; then what will
become of thee if God come to settle all thy abominations upon thy heart
altogether? The Floods of ungodly men (says David, Psalm. 18. 14.) has made me
afraid: The word Men there, is not in the Original; but translated by some, The
floods of wickedness have made me afraid. Certainly if God discover the floods
of those wickednesses that your consciences may tell you, you have been guilty
of it cannot but make you afraid: if God come, and set all those sins in order
before thy face, it will be a most dreadful Object and Spectacle. Let me make
use of that Phrase, Job, 6. 12. Is my strength the strength of stones? and my
flesh of Brass? So may I say unto those who have such woeful guilt of sin upon
them; What is thy strength the strength of stones, and thy flesh of brass? that
thou can bear the weight and burden of so many, and such horrible
transgressions as thou have been guilty of? when thou hear that there is so
much evil in one sin, and that in the least Sin. We read, Leviticus, 16. 22,
24. of the Escape Goat, that when Aaron and his Sons the Priests, should come
and lay his hands upon it, and put the Sins of the people upon him, he was to
go into the Wilderness, into a desolate place among the wild beasts there; to
note the woeful condition of a Sinner that has the guilt of multitudes of Sins
upon him; when he is like that Escape Goat to go into the Wilderness among wild
beasts ready to tear him. Thy condition is worse, except thou art delivered
from the guilt of sin; I speak of one under the guilt of sin, it is like to be
worse with thee, thou art in a worse condition, than if thou were to live among
Tigers, and Bears, and Dragons, ready to tear thee: Certainly thy estate is
far worse. If thy body were full of sores, thou would think thy condition
very sad, it would cause much dejection of Spirit; but for thy soul to be full
of Sin, to have so much Sin, is worse than if thou hadest plague sores upon thy
body from head to foot. If you should see a man, all over from the crown of
the head to the soal of the foot, full of plague sores, you would think that
man in a sad condition: Certainly the state of every man unconverted, is far
worse, because he is all over full of Sin, that has so much evil in it.

As for that Doctrine of the fullness of Sin in the heart and life of man, that
will require another and larger Treatise by it self; therefore I do not intend
to fall upon that Doctrine, how man is full of Sin in his heart and life; that
may be done hereafter: but only for the present, to present this Meditation
before you; If so much evil be in every Sin, then the fullness of Sin must needs
put a man or woman in an evil and sad condition: Psalm. 73. 10. God says, He
will wring out to the wicked, a full cup of wrath, to those full of Sin. Job,
20. 11. there it is spoken of the wicked and ungodly, That their bones are full
of the sins of their youth: thy life is full of sin, thy bones may be full of
the sins of thy youth: many youths, young people, run on in great iniquities in
the times of their youth; and multiply sins, and ad Sin to Sin: well, know that
thy youthful sins, may prove thy ages terror; and thou that art so full of Sins
when young, and given up to all kind of Sin now, hereafter thy bones may be full
of the Sins of thy youth. Thus much for this Use likewise, because that it
would require a Doctrine by it self. I proceed to another.

CHAP. LVIII.
Use 7. If there be so much evil in sin, how dreadful a thing it is for men or
women to delight in sin.

Use VII. IF there be so much evil in sin as you have heard, mark then further
what follows: What a dreadful thing is it for men and women to delight in sin,
and rejoice in sinful ways, to make a sport of sin: What infinite impudency is
this for a Creature to make merry and rejoice in Sin against God? Have thou
nothing to be merry withal? Have thou nothing to rejoice in but sinning against
the Almighty? What? shall there be so much revealed to thee concerning the
dreadful evil of thy sins, and yet you so far from being convinced, that there
is so much evil in it, as you rather look upon it, as having more good in it,
than there is in God himself, and Christ, and Heaven, and all the glorious
things of eternal life? for so does every man and woman that makes any sinful
way their chief joy; I say, they are so far from being convinced of so much
evil in it, as has been declared, as that they do rejoice in it, as if there
were more good in it, than there is in God himself, or Christ, or any thing
revealed in the Word concerning the treasures of the riches of the grace of God
in Christ; this is horrible wickedness: it is an horrible evil in thy heart,
that such an evil as sin is, should be so suitable to thy heart; that there
should be any suitableness between thy heart, and so great an evil as sin is:
yea, note that thou have a very cursed heart, that should be suitable to that
which is so evil; a very poisonous heart, that there should be so much
agreement between that which is so poisonous, and the temper of thy heart:
True, a toad will take poison, and it is suitable to it, it lives upon it, and
takes delight in it, as you do in meat and drink: Now those that can make Sin
their meat and drink; as Christ says, It is meat and drink to do the Will of
my Father; so it is meat and drink to many ungodly men and women to do
wickedlie. Now hereby thou art declared to be a toad, to be of a venomous
nature, that have such a suitableness between thy Nature and Sin. Sure nothing
but a venomous toad can delight in poison: so nothing but a heart more venomous
and loath some than a toad is to the daintiest Lady in the world to put a toads
head to their mouth; I say, none but such a heart can take delight in a sinful
and ungodlie way. Suppose there were a suitableness between the corrupt humors
in thy soul and sin; yet now thou have heard so much of the evil of it, it is a
cursed madness in thee to take delight in it, because it is suitable to thy
Nature: What can thou delight to drink sweet poison? because poison is sweet,
and comes to be suitable because of the sweetness? If thou know it to be
poison, and strong poison, what a madness were it in thee, to drink a ^^ll
draught only because it is sweet? There is the same madness in all men and
women in the world that can take pleasure in sin, because there is sweetness in
it, and the suitableness of it unto their corrupt nature. There is not only
difference, but contrariety between thy heart and a godly man's; a godly man
or woman had rather suffer all the torments in the World, than endure that
which thou make thy chief Joy. What a contrariety to God, and the Nature of
God? what a difference between the Nature of God and thee? That which is a
burden to the Spirit of God, is the most delightful thing in the world to thy
spirit. Yea, what a desperate heart have thou, that that which murdered
Christ, thou can delight in. Certainly where there is delight and pleasure
in Sin; Sin increases infinitely; there must be most desperate increase of
Sin. For as it is with grace, those men and women that have gracious hearts,
and come to make the ways of godliness their delight once; Oh they grow up in
godliness; no men and women grow up in godliness so as these do that come to
make the ways of God their delight. If you would grow up in grace, make the
ways of God your delight, and then you will grow in grace. So contrarily,
those men and women that come to make any ways of Sin their delight, and joy
of their hearts, they grow up in sin, in a most dreadful manner. And be it
known unto you, that according unto the measure of your delight in Sin, so
shall be the bitterness and torment that you shall endure herafter. As Rev. 18.
7. it is said of Babylon, So much as she has glorifed her self, so much
torment give her: So God will say of all sinners, that has taken pleasure in
unrighteousness; So much as you have rejoiced in sin, so much torment give
that soul. Yea, the time will come that God will take as much delight in your
destruction, as you have delighted in sinning against him. Prove. 1. latter end,
God will laugh at their destruction, and mock when their fear comes: Is there
never a man or woman here in this congregation that has committed sin and
laughed at it? or made some others commit sin and laugh at it? I speak to you
as in the name of God, Is there not one man or woman whose Conscience tells
them, I have sworn an oath, or told a lie, and laughed at it? made another
drunk and laughed at it? Do thou laugh at sin? rejoice at sin? take heed,
come in quickly, thou hadsi need fall down and mourn bitterly at Christ's
feet; otherwise certainly thou art the man or woman at whose destruction God
will laugh another day. It were thy wisdom rather to howl and cry out in
anguish of Spirit, because of Sin, than to make it matter of jollitie and joy;
Let us all take heed of making our selves merry with sin: We must not play
with edge tools: There is a notable place we have Prove. 26. 18, 19. As a mad
man, who casts fire brands, arrows, and death, so is the man that deceaves his
neighbor, and says, Am I not in Sport? I beseech you consider this text, many
of you will cozen and cheat your neighbors, and when you have done, make a
jest, and mock of it that you cozened and cheated: so what the holy Ghost
speaks to such a man, and this Scripture culs out that man and woman whosoever
they be that ever deceaved their neighbor. And afterward when they come among
their companions, laughed at it. As mad men or women (mark what the text says)
who casts firebrarnds, arrows, and death; so is the man that deceives his
neighbor, and says, Am I not in Sport? and it is but a jest, and a matter of
nothing, and can jeer him, when he has done: mark, this is a mad man that
casts firebrarnds, arrows, and death; Oh that God this day, would cast a
firebrand, and arrows, and every sentence of death upon thy heart that have
been guilty of this, and not humbled to this day for it, Oh it is the fool as
I have showed, makes a mock of sin. What? Can thou commit a wickedness, be
drunk, or unclean, or filthy, and then thou afterward go and tell thy
companions, and make a sport, or a mock at sin? Thou art one of the fools in
Israel, and God this day casts shame in thy face; thou have shame cast in thy
face even by the Almighty this day out of his Word. Certainly Brethren, if we
understand what the evil of Sin is, when we are in any company, where men and
women be never so merry; if there were but one wilful sin committed among them,
any one apparent sin, it were enough to damp all the joy that day; and indeed
it should be so. We read of David when he carried the Ark, a gracious work,
and there was but one sin committed, in touching the Ark unadvisedly, and it
damped all the joy. And certainly, it was the sin from which there was more
cause of damping the joy, than from the punishment; for there was more evil in
the sin, than in the punishment: Now you shall have many men and women in
merry Meettings, and Company, they be merry, and eat, and drink, and laugh:
well, but abundance of sin is committed in the Company, but not one whit dampt
all that day; but can go on in their mirth, and tales, and laughing; go on as
freely and fully, as if there were no sin committed. Be it known to you this
day from the Lord, any of you that have been in any Company, merry and
jollie, and yet sin has been committed before your eyes, and you have heard it
with your ears, if it have not dampt your joy and mirth; know your hearts be
not right with God; and it is a sign your hearts have been vile, cursed hearts,
that when you have seen sin committed in your company, yet you can go on with
joy. Suppose in your company, in the midst of your mirth, one takes a knife and
stabs himself into the heart; would not this damp your joy? would you goon in
your mirth still? would not all your joy be gone? when you be in company and
hear one swear, if you had eyes you would see them even stab them selves to the
heart: and there is more Evil in this, than in the other; and yet you can go on
in your joy and mirth, though since you sat down there has been forty oaths
sworn there. We read in the 2 Samuel 13. 29. at the feast of David's Sons,
Absaloms inviting of Amnon to dinner, Absalom bids his servants, whem Amnon was
merry, to strike him to the wall; and they did so: and then every one of the
King's Sons gat up, and all their mirth was done, though they were very merry
before. So if your hearts be right when you are in company, and hear one
swear, or blaspheme Gods Name, or speak against Religion, it would be as much
as if one were stabbed in the room, all the mirth of that day would be gone if
your hearts were right. And do not think this too strict, that sin committed by
others should damp your joy: Certainly, the thing is most reasonable, and
apparent as possibly can be, to convince any man's Conscience, that understands
what the Evil of Sin means: and yet many of you have not only continued your
joy, but have been joyful and jocond, the rather because sin is committed in
the company. As suppose one make a jest upon Religion, and scorn Profession,
you laugh with them, and make merry with them. When one makes a lie upon
Religion, you can laugh and be merry: Oh certainly, if you have any
Conscience at all, you cannot but be this day convinced of horrible sin against
God. Suppose thou were in merry company, and thou should hear of a
certain, that tidings is come, that thy Ship is cast away, and that thou have
lost all that ever thou did venture in that Ship, would not thou give
over* would thou go on? would not thou say it is time for me to be gone
now? and do thou not account more the hazard of thy own soul? and the soul of
thy brother? than of thy Goods? Certainly, thy heart cannot be right with God.
Oh! take heed than in your merry Meettings; we do not deny but men and women
may be joyful, and eat, and drink together, and delight themselves in the
Creature, but it must be so, that it must be without apparent sin: I know there
will be natural infirmities in any action; but I speak of open and apparent
wickedness; joy must not be when there is apparent wickedness. You think
godly people are not for Society and good-fellowship; indeed you cannot
expect they should be joyful and merry, but that they should rather be
melancholy and heavy, and sad in your company, when they see so many sins
committed there: what would you have them merry when they see the company
inbrue their hands in their fathers bloods? would you have the Son merry, when
the company imbrue their hands in his Fathers blood? Certainly every godly
man or woman, when they come in company, and see so many sins committed, they
do actuallie and reallie see you stab and imbrue your hands in Gods blood: when
you rejoice in the Lord, they can be as merry and joyful as any of you all:
and have sweet comfort in your company; but not when sin is there committed.
Many of you when you have been in merry company, when you are gone, you can
report, Oh we were to day in such a place, and we had such merry company, it
would do ones heart good to be among them; we were so merry and jocund, we had
a brave time. Well, but was there no apparent wickedness committed in your
company? never an oath sworn? no excess in the Creature in drinking? no
ribaldry talking? you never think of that, as if that were nothing at all, it
did not abate the least of thy joy: Certainly thy heart is not right, thou
know not what sin means, thou must know it after another manner.

One Particular more, because it is useful, and these This was Preached at
Stepney the 26. of February.
merry times are most pleasing among the younger people, when they come abroad
in company, they will make a sport of sin, and think nothing of it. I will
apply one text of Scripture to that sport of young men, when they seek to make
one another drunk, or swear, and speak wickedlie, and rejoice in it: it is just
like that sport, 2 Samuel 14. Abner says to Joab, Let the young men arise and
play before us: and observe what play this was; then there arose and went over
twelve men of Benjamine, which pertained to Ishbosheth the Son of Saul, and
twelve of the servants of David, and they caught every one his fellow by the
head, and thrust his sword in his fellows side, so they fell down together: and
this was their play. So it is with young men, many times when they come into
company, young profane men, they come to play, and make sport, but it is in
the furtherance of Sin one in another; and they do but as it were take the
sword and thrust it in one another bowels, and what in them lies, to be their
ruin and eternal destruction for ever.

CHAP. LIX.
Use 8. If there be so much Evil in sin, than every soul is to be humbled for
sin.

Use VIII. IF there be so much Evil in sin as you have heard, Hence the
Consideration of what has been delivered, should cause al your hearts to be
humbled for the sins your Consciences tells you, you be guilty of: not only
those that are so full of sin, but every woman's Child has cause to apply what
has been said, and to be humbled in their souls before the Lord for that woeful
guilt they have brought upon themselves. And now I speak to every soul, for
there is none here but have much sin, they be guilty of: Now Oh thou sinner
whosoever thou art, charge upon thy soul what thou rememberest concerning the
evil of sin, charge it upon ^hy own heart, labor to bring it with power upon
thy own spirit; bring thy sin with all the aggravations of it that possible
thou can, and lay it upon thy heart, and labor to burden thy heart, to make
thy spirit sensible of it: open thy conscience, and let in all these Truths
thou have heard, suffer the Law to come with power, and though it does slay
thee (as Paul says, when the Law came, sin revived, and I died) though it slay
thy soul, open thy bosom, and let it come: go to the very pits brink that sin
endeavors to plunge soul and body in eternally; be willing to go to the pits
brink, and see what there is in the very pits brink, and upbraid thine own
heart for the hardness of it, and think with thy self thus, Lord, what a heart
have I? I can be troubled for every little loss and affliction, but Oh the
hardness of my heart, for sin I cannot be affected, it yields and stirs not;
for any petty loss, or if any cross me, what a disturbance is there in my
spirit then? but little or nothing for my sin; Oh what shall become of this
heart of mine? what shall I do with this heart of mine, thus hardened from the
fear of the Lord? what? will sin bring confusion upon the whole Creation? what
shall then become of my soul, if ever I come to answer for my sin my self?
Certainly my Brethren, God must have glory, and therefore we must be humbled
for Sin, seeing there is so much evil in it: it cannot possibly be, but that
God must expect to see all his poor Creatures that have been so guilty, to lie
down abased, and humbled, as poor, wretched, miserable, forlorn undone
Creatures by reason of sin. It is a mighty dishonor to God that ever we have
sinned thus against him, as we have done: but that we should not be sensible of
it; this ads as great dishonor unto God as the former Sin did. When a man or a
woman commits Sin, they dishonor God in that; but being not sensible of it
after committed, is a greater dishonor to God than the commission of it was:
and the longer they continue unsensible of their sin, the more desperate their
Sin against God grows: for if thou have not any sense of Sin, but go on, in
a little time thou may come to be past feeling, as the Scripture has the
Phrase, being past feeling: So many men and women, first they begin not to be
troubled for sin, and put it off; at length they come to be past feeling, and
if thy heart be unsensible of the evil of it, then sin grows exceedingly: So
says the Scripture, Being past feeling they give up themselves with greediness
to all lasciviousness, and wantonness. What is the reason men and women give up
their souls to sin, to lasciviousness and wantonness with greediness? Because
they be past feeling. Oh the hardness of the heart in Sin; the stone in the
heart, is worse than the stone in the bladder.

Object. But you will say, If I labor to bring the weight of sin upon my soul,
you have told us there is so much evil in sin, that if God should but bring,
and set it upon my heart, it would sink my heart, and bring me to despair; we
had need labor to put off the weight and burden of it then; and yet now, after
you have told us the heavy weight of it, do you labor now to bring the weight
and burden of it upon our souls?

Answ. Yes Brethren, To bring the weight and sense of Sin, is that I labor for;
not to bring more guilt, but the sense and burden of sin; and this is not the
way to bring you to despair. But first learn what I mean by this, that you may
learn, not to be so shie of bearing the weight of Sin, as before you have been;
but to be willing to take up the burden; for there is no danger of despair in
this: If there come despair, it is rather when God shall force the burden of
Sin upon your souls; but if God see a man and woman free and willing to lay the
weight and burden of sin upon themselves; to that end that they may be humbled
before the Lord, and give glory to God: Certainly God will take care of that
soul, it shall never sink under the burden of sin. This now, as in the name of
the Lord, I pronounce to you; every soul that is willing to bring the weight
of Sin upon himself, to that end that it may be humbled, and give glory to
God; my life for that soul, that soul shall never sink under the burden of sin;
certainly God will take care of such a soul, that it shall not sink under that
burden: therefore be as willing as you will, to let as much weight of Sin as
will, be upon your heart, and the more willing you be, the greater is the care
of God over that heart, that it shall not perish. But it is the way to despair,
if you upon the hearing of these things, come to be shie of meditating upon
sin, and be loath to entertain those meditations, that may work the weight of
Sin upon your own souls. Now it is just with God, when he shall come and force
the weight of sin upon you, and lay the burden of it upon your spirits, then to
let you sink under the burden of it, for God to behold you sweltring under the
burden of it without pity and compassion; and your own Conscience will be
ready to tell you so; yea, now the weight of Sin is upon me, but is forced
whether I will or no; now God may justly let it lie: This is a sad and a
sinking thought; and if any thing let sin lie upon the soul, that it shall
never be purged, it will be this; When the Spirit would have brought Sin in the
weight of it upon my Conscience, I put it off, and now God puts it upon me, and
therefore it troubles me thus. Therefore be willing to be humbled, and know, if
you be willing, Jesus Christ is appointed for that end to raise you up; and
there is as much power in the Gospel to raise your heart, as there is in sin to
press down your heart, if you be rightly burdened with it.

CHAP. LX.
Use 9 If there be so much evil in sin, this should be a loud cry to stop men,
and turn them from sin.

Use IX. ANother Use is this, If there be so much evil in Sin, Then the
consideration and meditation of all that has been said, should be a mighty cry
unto all, to turn back, and stop in the ways of sin. Oh thou Sinner, whosoever
thou art, in whatsoever place of the Congregation thou art; God has brought
thee by his providence to hear or read these Sermons concerning the evil of
Sin; know that all these Sermons that have been preached unto thee, they be all
but as one loud, loud cry to thy soul, stop, stop; Oh Sinner in thy sinful
courses, stop here, turn, turn; Oh Sinner out of thy sinful ways, turn, turn,
why will thou die? why will thou die? Oh wretched, sinful soul, thou art lost,
cursed, undone, and wilt perish eternally in that way thou art in; turn, turn,
while thou have time: God cries, his Word cries, his Ministers cries,
Conscience cries, all those that have known what the evil of sin means, cry to
thee, unless thou will destroy thy self, undo thy self eternally, stop in that
way, for it is a dangerous desperate way thou go in, the very road way to
the Chambers of eternal Death. As ever thou would be willing God shall hear
thy cry upon thy sick bed, in the anguish of thy soul; thou will then cry,
now Lord have mercy upon a poor, wretched, sinful soul: Thou would be glad
(I say) that the Lord should hear thy cry upon thy sick bed and death bed: Now
then, as ever you would have God hear your cry, when you are in the greatest
anguish of your souls upon your sick bed, and see death before you, be willing
to hear the cry of God to your souls at this present: and know, if you do not
hear the cry of God that cries to you, to stop you in sinful ways; then these
very words I have spoken to you at this present, may come in your mind, when
you cry for mercy; and then you may think, Oh wretch, now I cry to God for
mercy, but do I not remember such a time? was there not a loud cry in my Ears
and Conscience, as from God, that I should stop in my sinful ways and courses?
and was not I then charged as in the Name of God, and as ever I expected God
should hear my cry in such a time, that I should hear his voice? Oh it will be
dreadful for you to hear such a voice as this, Because you would not hear me,
therefore I will not hear you. Therefore behold, I cry again in the Name of God,
stop, stop, turn thee; Oh sinful soul; alas! whether art thou going? from God,
from Comfort, from Life, from Happiness, from all good whatsoever, thou art
going! I call Heaven and Earth to record, that these things that I have
delivered to you concerning the evil of sin, are the Truths of God, and have
been the Truths of God: And certainly what I have delivered, and you read,
concerning the evil of sin, it will come and rise up one day against every
sinful man and woman that does go on in any known way of Sin; and it will
prove as scalding lead in thy Conscience: Every Truth thou have heard, and
every Chapter thou have read, concerning the evil of Sin, I say, if yet thou
go on in any one known way of Sin, it will one day be as scalding lead in
thy Conscience; the dropping of scalding lead in the eyes of a man, will not be
more terrible to him, than the droppings in of these Truths will be in thy
Conscience another day. Now it will be a sad thing, my Brethren, if God should
send me amongst you by his Providence, only to aggravate any of your
Condemnations: God forbid, there should be this Errent sent amongst you, that
any of his Messengers should be sent for this end, to aggravate your
condemnation: this is that which is the prayers of my soul, that this may not
be the Errent I am sent for, if possible; not to seal the condemnation of any
one soul: But this I know, except there be great reformation among many,
certainly the very Errand God intended in the conclusion (though I do not say
that is the primarie, and first end, but it is that which will prove so in the
conclusion) through the stubbornness of the hearts of sinners, that will prove
the Aggravation of their condemnation. Wherefore yet let me labor with your
souls; who knows whether any of you shall hear me preach any one Sermon more?
whether ever God will call after you any more? to stop or turn in the ways of
Sin? whether ever you shall hear the Word more? Perhaps God will sear your
conscience, and say to him that is filthy, let him be filthy* God now speaks
to you, and cries after you, if you harden your hearts now, it is more than
Angels or men know, whether ever you will have one cry more. Therefore let me
abide here; tell me Oh Sinner what is it thou gettest in ways of sin that thou will dwell here? what is it the world has to draw thy heart from the strength
of all these Truths delivered in these Sermons? Sure it must be some mighty
thing when such Truths as these, backed with Arguments from Scripture, strength
of Reason (as all these be) cannot restrain thee. Sure it must be some
wonderful thing, that must over balance all these Sermons, and all these
things: what have thou such a heart, that is set upon any sinful way, any
secret hant of Sin, that thou find such good in it? that by it all these
Truths are over balanced? Certainly there is no such good in the world, if
all Creatures in the world should join together, to give some comfort to
balance these Truths delivered concerning the evil of sin, all the Creatures
in Heaven and Earth could not give such things as would balance it* Therefore
certainly thou art deceived; the refore return, return, Oh Shulamite, return*
return. Oh that the Truths delivered in this Point might be as that sudden
amazing ^igh that came to Saul, when he was going o^ i^ courses of Sin, Acts,
9. there was an amazing Light came and stopped Saul in his course. Oh that God
would cause the light of these glorious Truths delivered concerning this
Argument, to be as an amazing light to thy soul, to stop you in the ways of
Sin.

Object. Oh but you will say, We cannot stop, you put that upon our power, that
God must do.

Answ. 1 First, For that act (I have told you) what power God gives, though you
have none of your own; God gives power for the bare outward act; and do not say
you cannot do this; you know what convincements you have had of that, therefore
say no more you cannot: And though you cannot, yet God uses to convey power
through the Word, while God calls upon Sinners to stop and mend, Gods way is
then to convey power: But in the mean time though there be no saving work of
grace come in; yet thus much by an ordinary and common work of Gods Spirit may
be done, God may cause a Sinner to resolve whatsoever come of it, that way of
sin I dwelt in, I will never meddle withal; and so there may be a sequestration
of the heart from sin, though not a full possession of Gods Spirit come into
the soul. As thus, It is many times with God and the Sinner, as with man and
man; A man in debt, and not able to pay, an Ar^est comes on his Goods, and
there is a Sequestration of the Goods, but so as they are to lie in other men's
hands; so as though they, be not quite take ^way from the Debtor, yet they be
out of his power, he can have no use of the^ for the present, til the debt is
paid; but whosoever will come and pay the debt, he shall have the goods. So with
the heart, when the siner comes to venture on Christ for pardon of sin; the
sinner sees I cannot overruled my self, sanctify my heart, overcome my lusts;
however, God sequesters the heart for the present so far from them, that I will
not go on in these ways again, I will not follow that Company again; there is
a forbearance of those acts of Sin; that though the heart could not sanctify
it self; yet it lies thus before the Lord, Oh Lord, do thou pardon, do thou
come in, and Oh, let Christ pay the debt for my Sin, and let him take
possession of my heart, but in the mean time, Satan shall not use it, as
before; and the ways of Sin, those gross ways I will forbear, though I die
for it: I will rather sit still all my days and never stir off my seat, than
go to such wicked Company; and I will rather never open my mouth again, than
swear, and speak so filthilie; but Oh Lord, do thou discharge my soul, and take
it to thy self: and then comes in a sanctifying work of God, to sanctify the
soul, and save it. But Oh! that I might prevail thus far, That there might be
but a Sequestration of the Soul from sin this day; though Sanctification come
not in, though the holy Ghost come not to rule in thy Soul; yet that there
might be a Sequestration, that the heart might come and lie down, and say,
Lord, come thou in, and take Possession; but for those delights and contents, I
took in sin before; I am resolved, though I perish for ever; I will not go on
in them hereafter. Here would be a good stop in the ways of sin; for a man
that goes in a dangerous way, he must make a stop before he turns, and
consider, Oh Lord, where am I? and whether am I a going? and is this my way?
and then he turns. Now this I endeavor, if possible, to make a stop in sinful
ways; that you might consider, Oh Lord, where am I? what am I a doing? what
will become of me? Oh! that you might go away with such thoughts in your
bosoms. And then follows the next.

CHAP. LXI.
Use 10, and 11. If there be so much Evil in Sin, than turn to Christ, and
bless God for Christ.

Use X. TO labor to drive your hearts to Christ; Oh then fly to Christ: Here
you have revealed to you that which one would think would terrify the hearts
of men and women, and make them fly to Christ. One would think that revealed
concerning the Evil of Sin, should make heaven ring with cries to God for
Christ; Oh! none but Christ, none but Christ; what would become of all your
souls, if it were not for Jesus Christ? were it not for that glorious Mediator
sent to be a Propisiation for sin, and to make an Atonement to the Father for
Sin. Christ is set up as that Brazen Serpent, that al those stung in Conscience
with the venom and poison of sin, might look up to the Brazen Serpent, and be
saved. Is there any soul, that by all I have said, of the Evil of Sin, finds
it self stung with the poison of Sin? Know Christ is that Brazen Serpent that
is set up for thee to look upon. If thou find Sin, as the avenger of blood
pursue thee, Oh now run to Christ. If thy heart burn, and scorch in the
apprehensions of sin; as the Heart brays after the water brooks, so let thy
heart bray after Christ, there are cooling and refreshing waters: then indeed,
shall that I have delivered, be useful for the souls of poor creatures. When the
Soul has been before the Lord, crying mightily to heaven for pardon, and part
in Jesus Christ, if so be after I have Preached all these Sermons, if God shall
hear of Souls, getting alone in their closets, and crying out, Oh Lord, I never
understood what the meaning of Sin was; Oh what a wretched creature have I been
all my days? now Lord, except thou have mercy in thy Son, in the mediation of
Jesus Christ, through his blood, his heart blood that was shed for sinners; I
am a lost and undone Creature for ever: Oh Lord, that which is done can never be
undone; Oh Lord, let me find favor in thy Son, here I am, do with me whatsoever
thou please, only a pardon; a pardon in Jesus Christ, to deliver me from the
guilt, and uncleaness of my sin. Yea, now will God say here is somewhat done,
when sinners cries come up to heaven; what has been doing in this
Congregation? what is the matter you come crying for Christ? heretofore your
hearts were never stirred after Christ, what is the matter? why stir you so?
who has told you any thing? As God said to Adam, when God called, and he hid
himself, when he comes out, he says, I was afraid because I was naked: says
God, Who told you that you were naked? So when poor souls cry to heaven for
Christ, God may say to the poor soul, Why? what is the matter? who has told
thee any thing? As Christ said to the Pharisees, Who has forwarned you to fly
from the wrath to come? So God will say, Why? what is the matter? who told you
this? I hope some poor soul will have experience of this, when you go to pray
for Christ, and you shall Pray after another manner than formerlie, when your
Prayers shall be, even cries to heaven; when God shall say, Why? what is the
matter? why cry you more than before? I hope some poor souls, can give a good
account of it, and say, I see my self lost and undone without Christ; better be
a Dog, or a Toad, or any thing, than a man, if I have not Christ; because they
are not capable of sin, and my heart is full of sin; and I have heard the evil
of it, and therefore Oh give me Christ or I am undone: Oh! such a Soul will be
exceeding acceptable unto God. And therefore, to such a soul, I propound in the
name of the Lord, the Doctrine of Life, and Salvation, and Peace; be it known
therefore to you, God the Father, looking upon the sinful Children of men, and
seeing them all in a perishing condition by Sin, out of infinite bowels of
tender compassion, he has provided a glorious way of Mediation, of
Propisiation for Sin; and to that end he has sent his only beloved Son, out
of his bosom, that has taken man's Nature upon him, united in a personal union,
to that end that he might be a fit Mediator to stand between a provoked God and
sinful souls; and this Christ has born the full vials of the wrath of his
Father, the curse of the Law due to sin; satisfied infinite divine Justice,
made a full Atonement between God and sinful man. Only upon these terms now,
he does tender and offer to every poor wearied distressed soul, all that his
Son has purchased by his blood, all his merits, that they might be an
atonement for thy sin, a Propisiation for thy soul, to discharge all thy sin,
that thou might come through him to stand acquitted before the father for
ever more. This is the sum of the Gospel, and this I present and Preach it, and
offer it to you, and this not only to the least sinner, but to the greatest
sinner in the world, this I present, as in the name of God, that is the message
we have in the name of God to deliver unto you; and now whatsoever your sins
have been heretofore, God only requires that your souls should now stand
admiring at the infinite riches of his Grace in his Son, and that your souls
should be taken off from the Creature, and Sin, and live upon Christ, surrender
your souls to him, and cast your souls on that infinite rich grace of God in
him, and upon that instant, every one of your sins, though never so great and
heinous, yet I pronounce in the Name of the Lord, every one of them is
pardoned, and all done away, as if they had never been committed, This is the
Sum of the Gospel unto those that come to see their Sins, and be sensible of
their need of Christ by their Sin.

Object. But you will say, This makes all you have done, but a little matter;
if Sin may be done away thus, what need all this discovery of the evil of Sin?
it is not so great an evil, if it may be thus washed away?

Answ. Ah poor carnal heart, that speaks thus! Is this a light or little
matter? True, it is in a few words, in the end of a Sermon; but be it known to
you, There is more in these words I have spoke in this last half quarter of an
hour, there is more of the glory of God in them; than in Heaven and Earth
beside; not because they come from me, but because I have spoken that which is
the Sum of the Gospel; and in truth, in one Sentence of the Gospel, there is
more of the glory of God, than in all Heaven and Earth besides. You must be
convinced of this, and know it is so; and if ever you come to be partakers of
the good of the Gospel, you will see it to be so. Oh Brethren! in that I have
said, there is the glorious Mystery of Godliness; great is the Mystery of
Godliness, God manifest in the flesh; the great Counsel of God, working from
all Eternity, is in this, in the Sum of the Gospel. The greatest work that
ever God did, was in sending his Son, and in the offer of his Son to Sinners
that their sins might be pardoned. Therefore think it not a small thing, and
hear when I call upon Sinners to come and cast their souls upon Christ. It is
one of the gloriousest works that ever was done, for a sinful soul to come and
close with Christ the Mediator; and if once you come in, your hearts will be so
full of the glory of God, that presently all the glory of the Creature will
be darkened in your eyes, and you will be so filled with the glory of God, that
you will come to see the filthiness of Sin this way as much as in any way. All
the Sermons I have delivered concerning the evil of sin, will not set out the
filthiness of Sin to you, as that glory of God that your hearts will be filled
withal, as soon as you come to close with God in this Mystery of the Gospel.
Perhaps it is not so apparent to every soul; but wait a while, and there will
more of the evil of sin be discovered in this, than in any way.

Use XI. And then the Use that I shall make of it is this, If there be such
evil in sin, then bless, bless God for Christ; Blessed is that man and woman
whose sin is pardoned, Psalm 32. Oh blessed is he whose sin is forgiven.
Certainly it is a blessed thing, that sin should be forgiven; this requires a
whole Sermon by it self: I shall but name it now, because I shall (it may be)
hereafter speak of this particularly, of the great Blessedness of the Pardon of
Sin, only take notice of it; any that has a comfortable assurance of their
sin being pardoned, go away rejoicing, Son, Daughter, rejoice, your sins are
pardoned* there is enough in that word to bring comfort and joy to your souls.

CHAP. LXII.
Use 12. If there be so much evil in sin, then it is of great concernment to be
Religious betimes, and there by prevent much sin.

Use XII. AGain; One Use more. If there be such evil in Sin, Then it is of
great use to begin to be Godly and Religious betimes, for young ones to come to
be godly betimes: why? Because they may come to prevent so much evil and so
much Sin. Oh happy those that begin to be godly when young; you prevent a
thousand sins, that others commit by their not knowing sin betimes. True, if
there were no other use of Godliness, than meerlie to bring you to Heaven, then
you might stay till your sick and death beds, and then be Religious, it were
enough: but besides bringing you to Heaven, there is use of Godliness to keep
you away from Sin and Ungodliness; and there is enough in that to countervail
any pleasure: suppose you young people abstain from some pleasure, or joy that
others have; the truth is, you have greater and better pleasures; but suppose
you had none but keeping of your souls from sin, this meerlie were enough to
countervail whatsoever you suffer in the ways of God. There are many
converted when they were old, and what would these give for to be delivered
from the guilt of some sins committed when they were young? When they look back
to their lives, Oh this sin I committed in such a family, and when I was an
Apprentise in such a place; Oh that I were delivered from them! Oh they lie
upon my heart! Oh that vanity and wickedness! Oh those oaths I swore in such a
company, among young men! Oh those Sabbaths I brake! Oh those lies I told, and
the drunkenness I was drawn to! Oh I cannot look back to these, but my thinks
I could even tear my heart from my belly, to think what a heart I had, to sin
against God, and multiply Sin against Him. Thus at the best, when God awakens
their hearts, they would give ten thousand worlds to be delivered from the Sins
of their Youth: And therefore now, you young ones, seeing there is such evil in
Sin, Oh prevent it: You know how the Sins of Youth lay upon David, Remember not
against me the sins of my youth; therefore now prevent those Sins that
otherwise will lie so heavilie upon you, as that you will be forced to cry
out, Oh remember not against me, the Sins of my Youth: Oh it is a happy thing
to see young ones good; and it is the greatest hope that God will show mercy to
England, in that God begins to draw young ones on in the ways of Godliness, so
that we hope there will not be so many Sins committed in the Age to come. We
have cried out of the Sins of young ones; and one Generation that has followed
another, has been but like the Kennel, the lower and further it goes, the
more filth it has gathered; and so the lower Generations have gone, the more
filthy they have been. But we hope God intends to turn the course, and to make
Godliness as much honored, as it has been dishonored heretofore, and that
there should not be so much Sin in the next Generation. Heretofore young people
when they had days of Recreation, what did they but multiply Sin? what
abundance of wickedness was committed by Youth then? and on Shrove-Tuesdaies,
abundance of wickedness committed by Youth then; and so the Generation was
filled with Sins of Youth. But now God is pleased to stir up the hearts of young
ones, that instead of multiplying of Sin, they be got together on such days,
to Fast, and to Pray, and make days to attend upon the Word, and so avoid Sin:
It is that certainly, that does encourage the hearts of Gods People to pray to
him, and to seek him for mercy, that God gives hearts to young people that they
multiply not Sin as heretofore. If there be any here that have begun this, Oh
go on in that way, and when others multiply wickedness upon such days, get
alone, and attend upon the Word, and recreate your Souls in the Word, and holy
conference: true, God gives liberty to recreate, but let it he as it was wont
to be with the Companies in London, though they did recreate, they would have
their Sermons too. So instead of horrible wickedness that was wont to be upon
those days, as I suppose some of you can remember; upon Shrove-Tuesdaies
infinite wickednesses was committed in the City, and thereabouts: we hope
instead of wickedness, and joining together in wickedness, there will be
joining together in the Ways of God: And thus doing, you will encourage us in
the Ways of God; and Peace and Mercy will be upon you.

CHAP. LXIII.
Use 13. If there be so much evil in sin, Then its a fearful thing for any to
be instrumental to draw others to sin.

WE are now to finish that Tractate about the greatness of the evil of Sin: It
has been an Argument that has much increased in our hands, like unto the
bread, the Loaves that Christ did break unto the People, that in the very
breaking did multiply; and so has this Argument done: but we are now to put a
period to it. Many Uses you know has been made already, as Corollaries and
Consequences, from that great Doctrine of the evil of Sin, that Sin is a
greater evil than Affliction: The last day the especial aim and intention of
the Application was, Therefore to drive Sinners to Jesus Christ, seeing there
is so much evil in Sin more than in all Affliction: Oh what need have we (who
are such great Sinners) of Jesus Christ, that is the Propisiation for Sin? I
have only one Note to ad further on that, and we shall proceed; it is an
Excellent Expression I find in Luther, says he, There is a great deal of
difference between the Consequencia Legis, and Consequencia Evangelii. There is
a Consequence of the Law, and that is this, Thou have sinned, and therefore
thou must be damned: But the Consequence of the Gospel is this, Thou have
sinned, therefore go to Jesus Christ; that is the Argument the Gospel uses from
Sin. But passing by all we have said concerning that Use, we proceed to further
Applications that are behind. Four or Five Uses we are to speak of, and then we
shall have done with the Point: I will be brief upon the first Two or Three,
and the Two last we shall stick most upon.

Use XIII. If there be such evil in Sin as you have heard, Hence then it is a
fearful thing for any one to be instrumental to draw others to sin. All that
has been said in the opening of the evil of sin, must needs speak very
terribly unto all that ever have been any way instruments to draw others to sin
in all their lives. Now, Oh that God would speak to every man and woman's
Conscience in this Congregation, that are conscious to themselves, that ever
they have been any cause to draw others to sin: Is there not one whose
Conscience presently at the naming of this Use does even tell you, well, now
God speaks to me, for certainly there has been some that I have drawn to sin,
that I have been a means to further sin in. If any one of you have ever been a
means, by counsel, or advise, by approbation, by persuasion, by encouragement,
by abetting of any, by joining with any in any sinful course to draw them to
sin; know, that God speaks to you.

First, God tells you this; That if you had been born to do mischief, you could
not do a greater mischief than this is; if you had been the means to undo men
and women in their outward Estate, it had been nothing so much; but thou have
what in thee lies, been a means to undo an immortal soul; yea; and to cause
them to sin against the infinite God; so that thou art guilty of every sin
thou have been a means to draw others to, and thou art worse than those that
have sinned; for thy act in drawing them to it, is a dreadful evil, and then
that which they have done is thine too: Have not thou sins of thine own enough
to answer for before the Lord, but thou must have the sins of another also?
Do thou know what thou have done, in enticing others to sin? either to
uncleanness, drunkenness, to company keeping, and breach of the Sabbath, and
other sins: Perhaps thou have brought them to pilfering and purloining, and
many other particulars, and other ways that might he named; for indeed if we
should enlarge our selves in this Point, it might well require a whole Treatise,
but we must contract our thoughts. It may be there are some in this
Congregation, that have been a means to draw others to sin, and they be now in
Hell at this instant for that sin thou were a cause of. What a sad thing is
this for any man or woman, to have this to lay to heart; I know I have drawn
such and such to sin, I have been a means (at least) to further sin in them;
well, they be dead and gone, and they manifested no repentance before they
died, and therefore for ought I know, yea, it is much to be feared that they be
now in Hell, and now a tormenting for that very sin I was the cause of, and if
the Lord gives me wages according to my works, I must thither to them: What?
shall they be in* Hell for the sins I brought them to, and shall I escape? is
it any way likely and probable, but that I must follow, when as they be there
for the sins I brought them to? what shall the Accessarie be condemned and
executed, and shall not the Principal? I am the Principal, and the other is but
the Accessarie. Certainly there had need be a mighty work of humiliation, for
thou art in exceeding danger that art the cause of bringing any other to sin,
for it is that must needs lie exceeding heavy upon the soul of any man and
woman; if God never give you a sight of this great evil; certainly you perish:
but suppose God do give you the sight of so great an evil, and you begin to be
humbled; Oh this very meditation will cause your humiliation to be full of
bitterness, and will cause it to be very hard for you to lay hold upon mercy
and pardon; when you shall think thus, Ah were it for my own sins only I were
to answer for, I might have greater hope; but there be others sins I drew them
into, and they be condemned perhaps, and in Hell, and how shall I escape
condemnation my self? I do not say that there is an impossibility of pardon,
for the Grace of God is infinite; and were it not infinite, it were impossible
for such a soul to perish, and thou (that art the cause of it) come to be
saved: I say, there is a possibility, but it is as if it were through the
fire, if ever thou escape; do but thou consider, if it should be, that thou
should die in impenitencie also, as the other did, and that thou did go
to Hell, when you two should meet at the day of Judgment, and he should see
thee, the cause that drew him to sin, Oh what a grief it would be to thee, how
would he curse thee and the time that ever he saw thy face? that ever he lived
in that Family where thou livedst? It may be some Parents have been a means to
draw by counsel and advice, the Child to sin; Oh the Child when he sees his
Parent at the Day of Judgment; how will he curse the time that ever he came
from such Loins? and such a woman's Womb? Oh that rather he had been the
offspring of a Dragon, and the generation of a Viper, than from the Loins of
such a man and woman; you encouraged me to such and such ways of sin, to
opposition, and hatred, and speaking evil against the People of God, the
Servants of God that were strict in their way; and now you and I must perish
eternally: sure in Hell they will be ready to cast firebrarnds in one another
faces that have been the cause of sin in one another in this world: and so
Husband and Wife, that lie in one another bosoms, if they be the cause of any
sin in one another, it may cause woeful terror to them, and appear worse than if
a Serpent had lay in their bosom; for those that draw others to sin, do worse
mischief than any Serpent or Viper in the world can do. You had need look to it
betimes (I shall wind it up with this one Note) Whosoever has been the cause
to draw others to commit any Sin; know this, That the least that can be
required, if God do give thee a sight of thy sin, and to be humbled for it, if
thou do go away out of the presence of God, as having an Arrow darted into
thy bosom for this, then I say, go away with this one Note: You be bound to
make some restitution in a spiritual way as much as you can.

For this you know (I showed before) in a man's temporal Estate when you have
wronged, you must make restitution; if you will have mercy, you must make up
the wrong as you are able: much more here, when you have wronged any in their
souls; a Soul wrong calls for Spiritual Restitution, as well as Body wrong, or
Estate wrong, calls for a Bodily, or Estate Restitution.

Quest. What do you mean (will you say) by this Spiritual Restitution?

Answ. This I mean, That if those be alive that thou have drawn to sin, thou
art bound to this part of Restitution; that is, To go to them and to undo what
possibly thou can what thou have done; and now to tell them of the evil of
that sin, and to do them all the good for their Souls that possibly thou can:
Now to show to them, how God has convinced thee, and what the work of God has
been upon thee, and how heavy and dreadful sin has been made to thee, and to
beseech them for the Lords sake, to look to themselves, and to consider of
their estates, and to repent of that their sin, that you were the cause to
bring them to: And so, if there be any means in the world wherbie thou can
do good unto their Souls, thou art bound to do it; yea, to them, their
children, their friends, as you are bound to make restitution unto the next
friends and heirs of those that you have wronged in their goods, if the party
wronged be dead. So if those should be dead thou have drawn to sin, suppose
when thou wast young, thou drewest such a man to drunkenness, adultery, or the
like, and they be dead and gone; thou art bound to do good to the souls of
their Children: for know, according to the nature of the wrong, must the
Restitution be; One text is observable for this, to show that according to the
nature of the wrong must the restitution be to the utmost that can be, Exodus
22. 5. If a man shall cause a Field, or Vinyard to be eaten, and shall put in
his Beast, and shall feed in another man's field: of the best of his own field,
and of the best of his own vinyard shall he make restitution. This is the scope
of the holy Ghost in this text of Scripture, That if any one shall wrong
another in his vinyard, or his field, he shall make restitution: (and mark what
the text says) not in any slight manner, but of the best of his field, and
vinyard: he must not say, I warrant my Cattle did not do any hurt, but eat a
little of the worst, and I will make restitution of the worst; no, but must
make restitution of the best of his field and vinyard: he must not think to get
off with a barren piece of ground, but with the best must he make restitution.
This shows what a full restitution God will have. So then if a man has wronged
his neighbor in his vineyard, it is not enough for him to say, I will make
restitution in my barren ground; no, but out of his vinyard must he make
restitution; so if he have wronged his neighbor in his field, he must not go
and say, I will give a part of the Common, but of the best of his field must he
make restitution; so if he have wronged another in his estate; he must give of
his estate: and if the wrong be to the soul, the restitution must be to the
soul; according to the wrong must be the restitution: And I beseech you be
convinced of this, All the sorrow in the world is not sufficient, without you
make restitution; this is so clear out of the word, and even by the light of
nature and of Conscience, that they may easily convince themselves, whosoever
doubts of the thing; nothing in Religion more clear than this is, therefore
restitution is required by God of thee, as ever thou will expect to find mercy.

This Argument (if God be pleased to set it home) will make many men and women,
who when they were young, were ring leaders to wickedness to others, Oh how
forward would they be to good now, they would be ringleaders to good to others
now. I pronounce it as in the name of God, you can have no assurance of the
truth of Repentance, except there be some endeavor in some degree to be as
forward for God, now as thou have been in the ways of sin before, if you have
been Ringleaders to the sin of Sabbath breaking, you must be Ringleaders to
draw others to keep the Sabbath; and if you have been Ringleaders to
ungodliness, you must be forward to draw others to godliness. Oh take heed of
this, it is a woeful thing to draw others to sin, seeing there is so much evil
in sin as there is.

CHAP. LXIV.
Use 14. If there be so much Evil in Sin, than there ought to be no pleading
for sin.

Use XIV. IF there be so much Evil in Sin as you have heard, hence then surely
there ought to be no pleading for sin; there is too much evil in it for any one
in the world to plead for it; to make any excuse, or any Plea for it: As if
there be a notorious wicked house where there is much evil done in it, we
account it a great disgrace for any to Plead for it: If it be in Question, and
any Justice of Peace plead for wicked Alehouses it is a blot to him. If there
were no sin committed in it, it were not much; but if it be a notorious house
for sin, to Plead for it, is accounted a great blot. And now you that have
heard of the great evil of sin, will you ever open your mouths to deminish and
excuse sin? and yet how ordinary is this in the world? Some go to evil wicked
company, and when they spend their times in drinking; Plead, Why? they must
have recreation? I pray, what work do they tire themselves withal that needs so
much recreation? what service do they do for God wherein they spend their
Spirits? and the strength of their Souls in serving God, that they need so much
refreshing? And so when they spend whole days in drinking and eating, why?
they do but rejoice in the use of the Creature; and may they not keep Company
with such men that be honest men? and so any kind of sin, wicked ribaldry
talking, is but mirth; and notorious covetousness, but providing for their
Family; and horrible pride, but handsomnesse; somewhat they will have to say,
Pleas and Excuses for almost any sin. Certainly brethren, if we understood
the nature of sin, we would say as Jerubael, Let Baal plead for himself: So let
sin plead for it self; never be heard to open thy mouth to plead for sin in
others, excuse it in others; much less in thy self. Those that be so full of
excuses and pleas for sin, it is an evident argument God never discovered the
evil of sin yet to them; never caused the weight and burden of sin to lie upon
their Conscience, nor what we have mentioned of the evil of it. Oh! know thou
have to deal with the infinite God, it is a matter of thy soul and eternal
estate; and think not to put it off with vain pleas and excuses; but set thy
self in the presence of the eternal infinite God. Indeed if you have to deal
with your Mothers, or Friends, you may put them off with excuses for sin; but
if you would set your selves as in the presence of God, and there set sin
before your eyes, you would not so easily put it off with excuses, as you do.

CHAP. LXV.
Use 15. If there be so much Evil in Sin, Then of all JVDGEMENTS, spiritual
Judgments are the greatest.

Use XV. IF there be so much Evil in Sin as has been delivered, then above all
Judgments spiritual Judgments are the greatest. Oh! what a dreadful thing
then is it for God to give men or women up to sin, this is the most fearful
Judgment that can befall any man or woman in the world, except God should send
them quick down to hell. Yea, it may be, if God should send them quick down to
Hell, and cause Hells mouth to open presently, it would not be so great a
Judgment as to give them up to sin. And yet this the Scripture speaks of; much
of Gods wrath burning this way; God hardened the heart of Pharaoh, God gives up
to a Reprobate sense; he that will be filthy, let him be filthy still; he
gives men up to their own Counsels: I might show you diverse texts of Scripture
for this, but there are Two Things in this POINT, that requires large discusion.

1 How can God that is so infinitely good, have a hand in sin, that have so much
evil in it? we must clear God, that he is not the Cause of sin in any, but to
show how far God has a hand in sin, this would require a long time to open,
which I cannot now do.

2 To show how much dreadfulnesse there is in this misery to be given up to
Sin; to open to you the dreadfulnesse of spiritual Judgments will require a
long time also: Therefore because I have resolved to make an end of this at
this time, therefore I must reserve these Two things to larger discusion. Only
thus for the present upon what has been said, let this be the Prayer of every
one of you; Oh Lord, whatsoever Judgment thou sendest upon us, deliver us not
up to spiritual Judgments; Lord, give us not up to sin; do not punish sin with
sin; rather punish sin with any Affliction than with Sin: when God does come
to punish Sin with Sin, the condition of that man or woman is a very dreadful
Condition, because there is so much Evil in Sin.

CHAP. LXVI.
Use 16. If there be more Evil in Sin than in Affliction, Then when Sin and
Affliction meet, they make a man most miserable.

NOW we come to the Two last Uses; we must insist a little longer upon them:
especially the last, as having several branches.

Use XVI. Therefore if there be more evil in Sin than in Affliction; Hence,
what a miserable Condition be those in, that have both these evils upon them,
and that in a high degree. That Affliction does make a man in a very sad and
miserable condition, that sense teaches men and women; every one does account
those men and women that are under great afflictions to be under great
miseries: well, but now you have heard in these many Sermons, how that there is
another Evil, greater than all Afflictions. Now then, what if both these Evils
come together, and concur both together to make a man miserable? then he is a
miserable man every way. Then he is a miserable man to Sense and Reason of men,
to the judgment of the world; and then he is a miserable man in the judgment
of the holy Ghost too; in the judgment of God, and the Saints, in the Judgment
of the Word: when both shall come and join together to make a man to be
miserable, sure these be miserable persons indeed. If a Child of God see a man
in affliction, he will not presently judge him miserable, because he does not
know; it may be he is godly, if he be godly, he is not miserable, though he
be afflicted; but the world presently judges him miserable, because afflicted:
On the other side, the world judges him not miserable though he be sinful, if
he be not afflicted: On the one hand, the godly man judges that man in
affliction, not miserable, if not sinful; on the other hand, the world judges
that man not miserable that is not afflicted, though he be sinful. But now when
both these be together in one man, as a sinful man, so an afflicted man in a
high degree; this all judge misery. And what a company of most miserable
wretches have we in this world? how many in woeful straits and extremities, for
the Body? in their estates, for want of bread, for want of clothes, in want of
house, in want of fire, in want of all necessaries that can be; their bodies
diseased, full of pains, their bodies deformed, their very parts of Nature
exceeding loathsome, unfit for Service every way, in all outward appearance, for
their outward estates extremely miserable; and yet together with this extremely
wicked also, extremely sinful: go into their houses, there is nothing but
beggerie, and misery there, and there is as much wickedness and iniquity, as
beggerie and misery: it may be these poor Creatures thus miserable, their
hearts be full of Atheism, live without a God in the World, know not God, know
not Christ, know nothing of their IMMORTAL SOULS, know nothing of another Life,
live just like Bruit Creatures, in all filthy uncleanness; it may be suffer
for their wickedness before men, are whip't, put in the Stocks, or Cage, lie in
dark Dungeons, in cold, nakedness, and hunger, and all for their sin and
wickedness: what woeful Creatures are these, and how many hundreds, nay
thousands, have you of this kind of Creatures in this Stepney, that are such
objects of pity, that me thinks should make all your hearts bleed when you
consider them, and how many you have of them in this place: were it, I confess,
that the charge of Souls in this place should lie upon me, I should think I had
work enough to do with such poor Creatures as these; if I should live
Methuselah's days, and should make every day to be more hours than twenty
four; yet work enough for all my time; I should think I had little time for any
refreshment any other way; knowing how many poor souls are in such a condition
that perhaps are not only outwardly miserable, and inwardly poor; but their
outward misery, increases by their inward misery, the one increases the
other: As it is a great evil for sin to bring affliction; so a great evil for
affliction to increase sin as their affliction does; there affliction puts them
upon swearing, lying, prophanness, cozening, keeps them from sanctifying the
Sabbath, seldom come in the Congregation: I persuade my self, there be
thousands belonging to this place, scarce ever heard Sermon in this place,
scarce know whether Christ be man or woman, scarce know any more than if they
had lived among the Turks; and yet these poor Creatures live miserable lives
every way for their bodies: Alas, I suppose there be very few of these I preach
to now, that be Hearers of me now; perhaps God may have some love to some poor
Creatures that may come creeping into the Congregation, that may hear me: this
Exercise was intended for such Poor that might come in the morning, for many of
the Richer sort had rather take their ease, and give them room enough; they
might supply the want of their room, and yet how few of them come here: they,
it may be, are at home (many of them) mending their clothes, or perhaps at some
worse exercise on the Sabbath; and thus have neither God, nor the World; are
miserable here, and like to be eternally miserable. If there had been given to
this Place by the Parliament, or any other, so much, as that every Sabbath day
morning, sixpence a piece should have been given by way of dole; nay, if it had
been but a twopenny dole, we should have had abundance; whereas now scarce any
once come: And as, not many mighty, not many rich or noble come, so not many
very poor, and outwardly miserable come. Me thinks when any of you look upon
their condition, you should have your hearts raised to bless God that has made
a difference between you and them: and when you be crossed in your families,
think with your selves, Why should I be discontented because I have this or
that cross? does not God make my condition a thousand times better than many
hundreds that live near to me? do not I every day, nay every hour almost in
the street, see hundreds of people, I would be loath to change conditions
withal? And who has made the difference? who has put a difference between you
and them? You that have Estates, and comfortable Yoke-fellows, and Children
about you, that have your Tables spread, and Houses furnished, and Lodging, and
good Friends, and God has made known Himself, and given his Ordinances unto
you, and hopes of Eternal Life; Oh what a difference is between you, and such
wretched Creatures as these are? And yet there are many of such poor Creatures
thus afflicted, that (may be) look upon themselves, and do acknowledge they be
miserable Creatures in regard of affliction, but never think themselves
miserable in regard of sin, they understand not that misery. But now I speak
to you who have heard these Sermons of the evil of sin, or read them, I hope by
this time you come to understand what a deal of evil there is in sin, that so
you may put both together, woeful Affliction, and Sin. If there be any here
account themselves miserable by affliction, as I suppose (though you be not in
that extremity of poverty that others are, yet) many think themselves
miserable by affliction, that little think your selves miserable by sin all
this while: nay, some may be have thought themselves so miserable by affliction
that you have made out and measured Gods intentions of good to you hereafter by
that; you have your Hell here for the present, and therefore think you shall
have Heaven hereafter. This is the great Argument many men and women have,
because they have a Hell here, therefore they shall have Heaven hereafter. But
be it known unto thee, if together with thine affliction thou still remainest
sinful and wicked, thou may have a Hell here; and a Hell Eternal hereafter
also. Mark what is said of Sodom, unclean and filthy Sodom who lived in all
manner of filthiness like bruit Beasts; it is said of them in the Epistle of
Jude, ver. 7. Even as Sodom and Gomorah, and the Cities, about them in like
manner giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh,
are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of Eternal fire. Mark,
Sodom suffered the vengeance of Eternal fire, and yet Sodom suffered the
vengeance of present fire; there came fire in this world, and brimstoue, and
consumed them for uncleanness who burned in Lust; and yet for all the fire and
brimstone upon them in this world, the Holy Ghost says, that they suffered the
vengeance of Eternal fire; they were sent down from fire in this world, to
Eternal fire in that world to come So certainly, many people be sent from
misery in this world to Eternal misery; and all the miseries on them in this
world, be but the beginnings of misery, but as the per-boyling of flesh to the
roasting hereafter; they have a little heat of misery here, but it is but as the
per-boyling to the roasting in Hell hereafter. Know therefore, all those that
are miserable here, and sinful, and wicked; let them know, the Justice of God
is an infinite stream, and there is never a whit the less to run because of all that has run before, but his hand is stretched out still; as in Isa. 5. 25.
after God had spoken of dreadful wrath against his people, says he, Therefore
is the anger of the Lord kindled against his people, and he has stretched out
his hand against them, and smitten them, and the hills did tremble, and their
Carcasses were torn in the midst of the street; for all this his anger is not
turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. Mark, Gods wrath is so
terrible, that hills and mountains tremble at it: We hope now, we that endured
so much shall endure no more; mark what he says next, For all this, his anger
is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still: So though God have
manifested some displeasure, or brought woeful misery upon thy Body, Estate, or
Name, and yet thy heart not brought to the true work of Repentance; for all
this, the hand of God is stretched out still, and Eternally against thee, if so
be thou return not from sin. For thee to think there will be an end at last,
because thou have endured hard things, is just like the Fool I have read of,
one that sat by a running stream, a river, and he would have gone over, but he
thought he could not yet; but there had a great deel of water run away, and he
saw it still running apace, and so sat still, hoping it would have done
running before night, nay says he, it has run a great deal, at last I hope it
will be dry, and never considered it was fed by the Fountain, and was a running
stream: Such is the folly of many people that think because that they suffer
somewhat now, ere long they shall suffer no more: Do thou not know Gods
wrath is a continual stream, fed from an Eternal Fountain? Some reason thus,
Because I prosper, therefore I hope God loves me: And others reason thus,
Because I am afflicted, I hope He loves me: but both these Reasons will
certainly deceive thee. Oh that I had here many of these people to speak to, I
would enlarge my self much to them, for my soul even bleeds over them: Oh
consider, thou that art under great afflictions (if God have brought any such
poor Creature to this Exercise) consider you are under great and sore
afflictions, and sensible of them; Oh if thou were but delivered from sin and
wickedness, the greater part of thy misery by far, were gone and over: What
would thou do to deliver thy self from misery? thou art in woeful poverty,
and in painful diseases, and grievous extremities; Oh if one should come to
help thee, he would be a good Master that could but deliver thee from thy woeful
pain, and thy miserable poverty and extremity. We know, if God do but give a
heart to turn from sin, the greatest of thy misery were gone, and thou will
presently be in a better condition than the greatest Emperor, or Monarch, or
Prince in the world, in a sinful condition. I would but put this to any of
those poor sinful Creatures, sensible enough of their misery by affliction;
Suppose thou were quite delivered from outward misery, and thou hadest an
Estate given thee to live bravely, and in as great pomp as any Gentleman or
Knight; so that thou that were in great beggary and misery, now come to live
like a man of fashion: would not thou think it a woeful evil for thee, upon a
sudden to be put in the same beggary thou were in before, in rags, and beggest
for a farthing? If now thy Estate be changed, and thou ridest in thy Coach, and
have all thy heart can dedesire, would not thou account it a woeful condition
to be presently put in that woeful beggary and penury thou were in before? This
would sink thy heart. Know, the commission of any one sin, is a greater misery
than if there should be such a change of thy Estate; if God should give thee a
heart to turn from thy sin, perhaps thine affliction might be taken away, for
it is a punishment for sin; and as you know David says, I have been young, and
now am old, yet never saw I the Righteous forsaken, and his seed begging their
bread. And truly that he has said, I verily believe most of you may say, That
in all your lives you never saw one, that you had good evidence of, to be truly
godly and gracious, to go up and down as our common beggars in that woeful
perplexity. I do not say but godly righteous men may be in want and in need,
but for my part I never knew any godly and righteous, but one way or other, God
stirred up some to Relieve them: Or if they have been forced to seek relief of
some, they have gone and made known their condition to others their neighbors,
and so they have commended them to others, and those to others, and so they are
commended from one to another, that either know them, or by the recommendation
of them that do know them, and so are releived. But to go in such an
extravagant way, from door to door a begging their bread, I hardly think you
can give example of any godly have been so: And if God would but turn the heart
of some poor, wretched, miserable Creature, so that there might appear
godliness in them, God would provide for them. Its true, though there be not
godliness, we should not let them perish, God forbid; let them not want that
which is absolutely necessary, let them not starve; yet the Scripture says,
Let them that will not work, not eat; let not us do more than the Scripture
commands, to give liberty in such ways as increases sin; and let not us
nourish that which nourishes sin; but inquire after them that be godly, and
relieve them: And if poor people would depend upon God in his ways, he would
provide for them. And know if thy Afflictions should not be taken away, if thy
sin were gone, thou would be far more able to bear thy Affliction: for a man
that has a sore shoulder cannot bear a burden, but if the soreness be gone,
he can bear it the better: so thy Affliction would not be so heavy, if thou
were godly, as it is now; nay, it would be sanctified to thee, and thon
would bear them the better. I confess, this is hard to convince them that
be ignorant of God and the nature of grace; but certainly there is a truth in
these things; therefore though it be rare for God to come in with his saving
grace into the heart of such that be miserably afflicted; though it is true,
their Affliction does not hinder, for were it not for their wickedness, they
might be happy; I would not make their Affliction greater than it is, they
might be happy were it not for their wickedness: but we see it so rare,
because their Education is such, there is no good Principle in them, and
nothing to work upon in them; being bred up in Atheism, therefore it is very
rare. But because it is so rare, so much the greater will Gods grace be, if God
have some of these poor Creatures in this Congregation at this present, and
speak to their hearts; how much more rare would it be because it is not often
seen? what if God pass by great, rich men, Noble men, Princes, and shall look
into thy Cottage, and on thy miserable Estate, and convert thy Soul, and show
mercy to thee: What! for God to set his heart upon thee! and give the Blood of
his Son for thee! and to make thee an Heir with Jesus Christ! give thee an
Inheritance in the Kingdom of Glory, and in Life! to make thee come and reign
with him Eternally! Oh the infiniteness of Gods grace, that ever God should set
his heart upon such a poor Creature as thou art! Therefore go away with these
thoughts; Oh wretched Creature, how have I lived without God in the world, and
looked for nothing but a little bread and drink, and thought my self happy if I
could but get this; and thus lived miserably here, and I confess have thought
my self a miserable wretch all this while; but God has told me this at this
present, there is a worse evil than all this; the evil of sin I have been full
of all my life; and put both together, how miserable are we? and therefore the
Lord be merciful to me: if God strike thy heart, know, thy soul is as precious
in Gods eyes as the richest man in the world, as King or Prince; the greatest
Noble man's in the Land is not more precious in Gods eyes than thine: yea, and
the Ministers of the Gospel be sent by God to preach Jesus Christ to thee, as
well as to preach to the richest and greatest in the world; Christ came to shed
his blood for thee, as well as for the greatest in the world; and the Kingdom of
Heaven is opened as wide to thee as to the greatest and richest; though it is
true, thou can not deliver thy self from outward affliction, yet thou may
deliver thy Soul from Hell as well as the greatest in the world: therefore be
not miserable here, and miserable hereafter, but look after God, and Christ,
and Eternal Life; though thou be not like to be great here, yet who knows
but that thou may be crowned with Glory Eternally hereafter? there is
fullness of Mercy in God. Poor Creatures, if they see a Coach come, if they
think a Gentleman be there, or a Noble man, how they run, and cry out, Oh good
my Lord, or your Worship, and lift up their voices for Alms: If an ordinary man
come, they will desire relief, and beseech them for a halfpenny or a farthing:
but if a rich and a great man pass by, then they cry and lift up their voices;
why? because they think there is more to be had. Oh know, there is fullness of
Riches and Grace in God, to turn thy misery to Eternal felicity; there is mercy
enough in God to raise thee from thy low, weak, miserable estate, to the height
of glory and happiness: And if God cause his Word to prevail with thy Soul,
thou may go away with the best dole that ever thou hadest in all thy life.
And thus much I thought to speak to those poor people that were both sinful,
miserable, and afflicted.

CHAP. LXVII.
Use 17 Being of Reprehension to six sorts of people. First, It reprehends
those that are more afraid of Affliction than Sin. Secondly, It reprehendeth
those that are careful to keep themselves from sin, but it is merely for fear of
affliction. For 1 This may be without change of Nature. 2 Thy obedience is
forced. 3 Thou art not unbottomed from thy self. 4 Thou art not like to hold
out. Also two Answers to an Objection of those that think they avoid sin for
fear of Hell: 1. Thy Sensitive part may be most stirred by fear; but yet thy
rational part may be most carried against sin as sin. 2. Those that avoid sin
merely for fear, never come to love the Command that forbid the sin. 3 They are
willingly ignorant of many sins. 4. Those that avoid sin, and not out of fear;
even when they fear, God will destroy them; then they desire God may be
glorified. 5. Those that avoid sin out of fear, do not see the excellency of
Godliness, so as to be inamored with it. Thirdly, It reprehends those that will
sin to avoid affliction. Fourthly, It rebukes such, as when they are under
affliction, they be more sensible of affliction than of sin. Also there is five
Discoveries whether men's affliction or sin trouble them. Fifthly, It reprehends
those that get out of Affliction by sinful courses, and yet think they do well.
Sixthly, It reprehends those that after deliverance from affliction, can bless
themselves in their sins.

Use XVII. COme we now to the last thing. The last Use is this (I will but show
what might have been said, and so wind up all) There are six sorts of People,
that from this Point are reprehended. You shall see all Naturally follow from
the Point in hand, that there is greater Evil in Sin than in Affliction.

First, Such kind of people as be more afraid of Affliction than of sin. There
be many people very ^hy of Affliction and solicitous to prevent Affliction, but
not to prevent Sin. Many reason thus, I had need be a good Husband, and lay up
somewhat, I know not what I may meet withal before I die, I may want before I
die: many are penurious and covetous, and will not enlarge themselves to good
uses when God calls, because they be afraid they and their Children may want
before they die; who knows what we may meet withal? and thus they are careful
to prevent Affliction. But for Sin, they do not lay up to prevent that; whereas
we should be very solicitous, least we should be drawn into temptation, and
therefore we are taught to pray, Lead us not into temptation, as well as,
Forgive us our trespasses: True, God keeps me from such and such sins, but what
if God should leave me to temptation? what a wretched Creature should I be if
ever this corrupt heart of mine should prevail against me? as I have cause to
fear, I find such wickedness boiling and bubling up, and such pronenesse to
such and such sin; if the Lord be not infinitely merciful to me I shall break
out to the dishonor of his Name, scandal of Religion, and wounding of my
Conscience; and this God knows causes the most solicitous care that I ever had,
least my heart should break out against God, to the scandal of that holy
Profession I have taken upon me. Oh is it thus with you? Oh this were a happy
thing indeed As when men hear of one that is broke, they will inquire what is
the reason; he had such an Estate, what is the reason he broke? One (may be)
says, he trusted Servants too much, and that caused him to break; Oh this will
cause him to look so to it, that he will never trust his Servants too much:
Another (may be) says, Because he lived above his means; and this makes him
that he will not live above his means: And another, He will have his Country
House, and his Servants riot at home when he is abroad: And another, He trusted
too much, and such like Reasons: Now we will be wise to take heed of that which
brings others to afflictions. So it should be with us when we see any fall into
sin; Professors that made a show of Religion, and afterward fall foully,
inquire now, what is the matter this man broke? he broke his Conscience, what
is the matter? one that had such admirable gifts, and made such a Profession;
Oh may be all the time he had a proud heart; therefore I will keep my heart
humble: Oh he had Excellent Gifts, and enlargements in Prayer; but he had a
slight vain Spirit; Oh let me take heed of this root of bit ternesse in my
Soul: He is broke now, but what is the matter? Oh he began to be sluggish and
cold in Closet work, and such duties in his Family; Oh let me take heed, and
keep up communion with God in secret in my Closet, and in my Family: He broke
indeed, but how? Oh some secret sin he kept in his bosom, there was some secret
sin he let his heart hanker after, and now God has left him to it; now by Gods
grace I will look to my self, I will by the grace of God take heed of secret
sins. Thus Brethren, if we were sensible of the evil of Sin, we would be thus
careful to prevent the evil of sin, as well as the evil of affliction. And so
many, for their Children, Oh they will be providing for their Children, that
they may live like men, and have somewhat to take to: but if you were
apprehensive of the evil of sin, you would provid for their Souls as well as
their Bodies; and therefore, Oh let me put him in a good Family, and there he
may learn to prevent sin. This is the First, To reprove those that labor to
prevent Affliction, but not Sin.

Secondly, It serves to reprove those that be careful to keep themselves from
sin, but it is merely for fear of affliction, only upon that ground: as if there
were not evil enough in sin it self, but all the evil were in affliction.
Certainly these men and women understand not this, That there is more evil in
Sin, than in Affliction; if thou did understand, and were sensible of this
Point I have treated upon, thou would find Arguments enough from sin it self
to keep thee from sin, though no affliction should follow. Thou abstainest from
sin, what is the reason? not because of any great evil thou see in sin, but
because of affliction; thy Conscience tells thee it will bring thee to trouble,
and into affliction, and this keeps away sin: It Is true, it is good for men and
women to avoid sin upon any terms, and this is one motive God propounds to
avoid sin by, but this is not all or the chief motive; because of affliction,
and trouble, Conscience tells thee, God will be even with thee, and the wrath
of God pursues thee: very few come so far, to have such apprehensions of the
evil consequences of sin, and to avoid sin upon them grounds: But you should
labor, not only to avoid sin from the evil consequences of sin, but for the
evil of sin it self; for if thou avoid sin only from the evil consequences of
sin: Know,

1 This may be without change of Nature; a man or a woman may be in such an
estate, as they may not dare to commit some sin out of fear of trouble that may
follow, and yet not his Nature changed: as a Wolf chained up, may be the same
that he was before he was chained up; his nature is not changed.

2 If merely for fear of trouble thou forbearest sin; then know, thy service
and obedience is forced service and obedience, and so not accepted when merely
forced.

3 If thou avoid sin merely for fear of affliction, then thou art not yet
unbottomed off from thy self, not quite taken off from thy self.

4 If thou avoid sin merely to prevent affliction, then thou art not like to
hold out; that is a principle in Nature, nothing is perpetual that is violent;
and this is violent, to avoid sin merely for fear of affliction: such men and
women will not hold out, if there be no other principle than this, they will
fall off at last, they will abate at last, and so they will come to fall off.

But you will say, Oh Lord, this is my condition; I am afraid. There are I
suppose many in this Congregation may, and do apply these things, and it
strikes to their hearts to think, Lord, then I am afraid I have no grace at
all; for it is true, I have avoided sin, and have not gone on in the same sins
others have done; but for my own part, for ought I know, merely out of fear of
Hell and Affliction, and trouble that will follow, rather than from any other
evil in sin: What is there no grace in me that avoid sin for fear of affliction?

For the helping of them that apply it otherwise than it should be, to conclude
there is no grace at all. Therefore,

1 Know, That though the Sensitive part may not be so much stirred from the
beholding the evil of sin, as of affliction, yet the Rational part may more
work against sin as sin, than from affliction that follows. How will this
follow (will you say) that the Rational part is not ordered by the Sensitive?
Thus: If I put my finger in the fire, there will be more pain to Sense, than if
I endured that which is a hundred times worse: as, suppose a Prince should lose
his Kingdom, that is a greater evil than to have his finger a little burnt; yet
there would be more to sense for the instant, than can be in the other: But if
he come to the Rational part, to choose which he will take, he will rather take
that which is most painful for the present. So the troubled soul, though to
sense it find more from the fear of evil; but if it were put to its choice, he
will choose any affliction rather than sin; so that the Rational part fears its
sin more than its affliction: For if it were thus, that it might have its
choice, that it might commit such a sin without any affliction, or such an
affliction without sin; which will you take? Certainly that soul in the
rational part, will choose the affliction without sin, rather than the sin
without the affliction.

But yet I have here more to say to such, to satisfy the Consciences of those
that are troubled, and that say they be afraid that they avoid sin from fear of
affliction: To see if there may not yet be grace.

2 Know therefore, That man or woman that avoids sin merely from fear of
affliction, though he avoids the sin, he never comes to love the command that
forbids that sin; but is weary of Gods Command: But now a soul that does not
only avoid sin through fear, but withal has a love to that command that binds
his Spirit also: if thou find it thus, that thou have a love to that command
that forbids that sin that thou do avoid; certainly thou do not avoid it
merely from fear of affliction. Those that avoid sin merely from fear of
affliction, they do not commit sin because they dare not; but in the mean time
would be glad if there were no command against it. As it was the Speech of one
that cried out, Oh that God had never made the seventh Commandment: He had an
enlightened conscience, but a filthy heart; but conscience now stood in his
way, he hates therefore the Command that forbid that sin; Oh that that Command
had never been made, says he. So those that merely refrain sin from fear of
trouble and Hell, though they keep from the sin, yet they never love the
Command that forbids sin: But if thy heartclose with the Command, and says it
is good, holy, and righteous, and blessed be God for this holy Law; peace be to
thy soul: it is not thy case to avoid sin for fear of affliction, but for sin
it self.

3 To satisfy those Consciences: Those that avoid sin merely from fear of
affliction, they are willingly ignorant of many sins; they do willingly turn
their eyes from the Law of God that forbids sin: True, they dare not go on in
the commission of those sins directly against Conscience, Conscience will not
suffer them: now because they have a mind to sin, they wink with their eyes,
and be loath to be convinced that it is a sin, because that they have a heart
delighting to close with the sin: there is a great deal of deceit this way. But
now when a man's or a woman's Conscience tells them this; It is the desire of my
soul to know any sin, and if I find there be a sin that I am ignorant of in the
way I walk, I could spend night and day till I come to know it; and when I have
found it out, I hope my Soul should come to rejoice that God has revealed that
to be sin, that before I knew not to be sin. But now one that avoids sin for
fear of affliction, if he know it not, he can go on quietly, and therefore is
willing to go on in that ignorance, and therefore is loath to take pains to know
a sin to be sin; if he have any fear of, or suspicion that such a gainful way,
or pleasant way be sin, if he fear it, says he, give me time to examine whether
it be sin or no, and he is willing to pass over examination, that so he may go
on and enjoy his lust without fear. But now where the heart is right, if there
come to be suspicion that such a way is sinful, though I have got never so much
by it, yet it must be left off; I must, if this be sin, come to live lower than
I have done; yea, my conscience tells me, if this be found to be sin, I must
come down; yet my heart tells me, I would with all my heart know it, and ask
counsel of them that know the mind of God, and beg of God that he would
discover to me whether this be a sin or no. But now those that avoid sin for
fear, they when they ask counsel, will be sure to ask their advice (whether
such a sin be a sin or no) that be of their mind.

4 Those men that are willing to avoid sin, not out of fear, but because of the
evil of sin it self, they shall find this disposition in their souls; At such a
time as they be even afraid God will destroy them for sin, they even then
desire God may be glorified; though I perish, let God be glorified. But those
that avoid sin out of fear, when they apprehend there is no hope, they be ready
to fly in Gods face: nay, if I must be damned, I will be damned for somewhat; if
I must perish, I will perish for somewhat: But that soul that fears sin for the
evil of it, it says, well, though I perish, and am damned, yet let God be
glorified, though I perish: Certainly thou avoidest not sin merely out of fear.

5 Again, Those that avoid sin out of fear, they do not see the beauty and
excellency of godliness in others, so as to be enamored with it. Some avoid sin
out of dislike and hatred of sin; and do thou see a beauty in these, and
do thou say, Oh that I were in such a condition. Those that can see the
excellency of grace in others, and prise and love it in others; certainly there
is some Seed of that grace in their souls. So now, they that have no grace,
envy others that have grace: but they that have grace rejoice in those that
they see have any grace. This is the second Particular, rebuking those that
avoid sin merely out of fear of affliction, together with satisfaction to that
case of Conscience, because I know it lies heavy upon men and women's Souls

Thirdly, The Consideration of this Point, does rebuke such as are so shy of
affliction as that they will fall into sin to prevent affliction. Certainly
this is a foolish choice, for any to be so afraid of affliction, as to prevent
affliction, rather venture upon sin. As if a man should see a Craggy way, and
he will rather turn into a puddlely way, one all mire and dirt, than endure one
hard and craggy: Thou see the ways of God hard and craggy, and thou turnest
into the puddlely and dirty ways of sin to avoid that hard craggy way: well,
if God have a love to thee, he will bring thee back again, and thou must go
that way that thou will not now. Augustine has this Expression in his
Confessions, says he, When God first convinced me, I was convinced of the
rightness of Gods way, but I saw the trouble in it, and I cried out, it
pleases not me well to go in such troublesome ways. So many men and women, be
convinced of Gods ways, but they shall suffer such trouble in them, and they
must go through such traits; and to prevent this, they will choose sin.
Certainly Brethren, it was not long, since there was a time, that those that
made conscience of sin, were subject to many troubles, and suffered much; when
(we know) if a man departed from evil, it was enough to make him a prey: I
beseech you, see if you did not (to prevent some suffering) commit some sin:
Some of you when brought to be sworn Vassals to those Courts, that never were
by Gods Institution; had you not some remorse in conscience? (I mean the
Churchwardens, as they styled them) and when you were put to such Oaths, had
you never inward regreet in your Consciences? but yet you must be
excommunicated if you did not take the Oath; and if you did, then you bound
your selves, not only to be their Vassals (which were not of God) but besides,
you bound your selves to be Persecutors of the Saints by it: for certainly, the
fulfilling of all their Cannons, it was merely persecution, and yet you were
their sworn Vassals; and yet because you were afraid of trouble, you ventured
and made bold with your Conscience; Oh look back to these things. If you will
say, now Ministers speak against such things; you should have done so two or
three years ago. For my own part, I did then, two, three, four, or five years
ago, and was of the same mind I am now; and through the strength of Christ and
Gods mercy to me, I ventured somewhat, and therefore I may the more freely and
boldly speak now; not because it was merely to keep from danger that I have
spoke no more, for I did speak it hertofore. But now look back what regreet of
conscience you had; and yet merely for fear of affliction, thou pasedst through
that regreet of Conscience: It were just with God to make affliction more sore
and heavy; and those that will avoid the affliction by sin, God may justly
bring back that affliction: But this would be a large Argument, to speak to
those that will not venture upon suffering, but run upon sin.

Fourthly, This rebukes such, that when they be under affliction, yet they be a
great deal more sensible of affliction than of sin. This is against the Point,
that says there is more evil in sin than in affliction; and yet when you be
under affliction, you be more sensible of the evil of affliction than of sin.
There be diverse sorts of these, and diverse things to be said to these.

1 As some profane wicked men that commit horrible wickedness, that it is a
wonder their Conscience flies not in their faces, and tears not their hearts
out of their bosom, for the woeful guilt upon them; and yet they are never
stirred: But when Gods hand is upon them, in some grievous Sickness, they cry
out for pain, but not one whit sensible of sin, that never comes in their
minds; but their pains and disease: and when their friends come, they complain
of grievous nights, and what heat they be in with their Fever, and how they
burn, and have been tormented, but not a word of sin; all their guilt, the
Sabbath breaking, oaths, company keeping, opposition of goodness, this lies
not upon their Conscience at all: Oh! these be wretched creatures, besotted,
guilty, hard hearted, left of God to the day of His Righteous Judgment.

2 Others, when they be under Gods hand, they lie fretting, and vexing, and
murmuring, and repining: As Solomon says, Prove. 19. 3. Man perverts his way,
and his heart frets against God: First perverts his way, and yet when Gods hand
is upon them, fret against Gods way; thou should fret against thine own heart
for Sin; but thou fretest against God for Affliction.

3 A Third sort, and these principally I intend, and they be such that when
they be in Affliction, will complain much of sin, and seem to put all the
trouble upon Sin; but in truth their trouble is more for affliction than sin.
Now I would find out these (it will require time) I suppose I might cull out a
great many that it may be make a great complaint of sin, and yet the truth is,
that which lies at the heart and pincheth there, is Affliction rather than sin.
How do you know this? If a man come and complain, Oh this wretched heart of
mine, and pray help me against it; how can you tell it is for Affliction and
not for sin? Perhaps they have had great loss by Sea; brought their names into
disgrace, lost such a friend, are pincht with poverty; and then come and lay
all upon sin: whereas it is the affliction that lies in the heart, this
pincheth them most. Many men and women, account it a kind of shame to complain
of Affliction, this they think a disgrace, and therefore that they might not
have the disgrace of complaining of Affliction, they turn all upon sin; and it is
sin troubles them. Now I would find them out thus.

1 You shall find many that come and complain of Sin: who do they complain to?
to strangers, that know little of them and their condition, rather than to
others that are acquainted with all their ways, and their whole-courses, though
able to help them: for there is a great deal of Suspicion in that; for
certainly if your heart be right, you will make complaint to those that know
most of your ways and courses; but those that be strangers, you can go and
complain to in some general way; and perhaps to some that may be some way able
to help and relieve you in Affliction; but will not complain to those that may
help you against Sin, if they be not able to help otherwise.

2 Another is this, Those that make complaint of Sin (and indeed not true) it
is affliction, not Sin; you may know it by this, Though they complain of Sin,
it is in general terms, Oh! they be vile sinful Creatures, but never come to
rip up the secrets of their hearts to those that they complain unto: But now
any secret sins that might cause shame, they be kept in, and never opened. But
that is their general complaint, That they be vile sinful Creatures; whereas if
it were sin that lay upon thy heart, thou would come and open all thy secret
sins to those that are faithful and willing and able to help thee, if thou
judge them faithful, if thou do not judge them so, why complainest thou, to
them? if thou think they be, thou will be willing to open all thy sins to
them. But if thou art all upon general terms, it is a dangerous sign, it is
Affliction, and not Sin.

3 Again, Many complain to others, but very little between God and their own
Souls in secret; their complaints be more large, when they come to them than
when they are between God and their own souls in their Clossets: now if it be
for thy sin thou complainest, then though thou do complain to them that
through Gods blessing may help, yet thy chief complaint will be to God at the
throne of grace, and there thou will pour forth thy soul in the bitterness of
thy heart. Many come to the Minister and complain That they be wretched
sinners, but scarce go to God in secret: or content themselves with some
Prayers, just as they are in the Book, or the like, but never pour forth their
souls in secret for sin. This is another Note that it is rather for Affliction,
than for sin.

4 Another Note is this, If it be for Affliction more than for sin, any one
that has grief upon them, according to that grief that is upon them, they be
ready to aggravate that grief: As thus, suppose a man or a woman troubled for
the death of their Father, or Husband, or Wife, Oh such a ones dear friend is
dead, father dead, or husband, or wife is dead; well, they be mightily troubled
and perplexed for this: Now if any come and speak any thing to aggravate their
sorrow, they close with it presently; as thus, You complain of sorrow for your
father; I he was a loving father, and they presently close with it, and this
aggravates their sorrow; and so you have lost your husband; Oh! never woman
lost so precious a husband as I! so that which is spoken to aggravate that
which lies upon the spirits of men and women they be ready to close withal. So
now, if you would know what lies upon your spirits, when men and women be
troubled, for trial, what they be troubled for, here is the art of a Minister,
or a Christian to find out what lies upon the spirits of men or women; some say
sin; well, but it may be its not that; how shall we find it out? Thus,
Whatsoever lies upon the heart that troubles them, they will be very willing to
acknowledge any thing said to agravate it that lies upon their Spirits most. If
any come and tell them of the Evil of Sin, and agrravate it, and say, This is
an evil condition, and you must be humbled for it, and thoroughly apply the Word
of God to them, to show how deeply they are to be humbled, and lay sin before
them in its right colors: if sin trouble them, they join with it, and say, It
is evil indeed, the Lord humble me, and show me more of this Evil of Sin, and
they like that Word of God that lays home the Evil of Sin most. But if it be
not Sin that they are troubled for, by these speakings against Sin their hearts
be hardened, and their hearts rise against the aggravation of sin; but if it be
Affliction, come and pity and condole them, and say, Alas! you have such
sorrows, and troubles, and Oh! poor Creatures it is pity but some others
should help you; I, they take this, and this aggravates their sorrow. It Is
observable in David when he fled from Absalom, how ready he was to entertain
any thing that might aggravate his sorrow. When Ziba came and accused
Mephibosheth, though it were very unlikely, he presently embraces it. So when
a man is under Affliction, he will readily hear, and embrace what may aggravate
it, and a man under trouble for Sin, will readily embrace that which will
aggravate his Sin; this is an excellent Note to come to know where the burden
pincheth, whether it be Sin, or Affliction.

5 The last Note to try whether Sin or Affliction trouble thee, is this, There
is according to the trouble of the heart for sin, a favorinesse of Spirit to
the contrary good: thy heart will in some measure have a love to, and a favor
and relish of that spiritual grace contrary to that sin of thine that thou
complainest of. But now you have many that complain of sin, they say, but yet
their hearts be still as unsavory, and they do no more relish spiritual and
heavenly things, contrary to that sin that they complain of, than ever they did
before. Therefore the burden and weight lies not upon sin, but affliction.
Take heed, examine thine own heart, there is much deceitfulness in the spirits
of men and women. Thou take the name of God in vain, when thou come and
complainest of sin, and the truth is, thine affliction is upon thee, and if
thine affliction were gone, thou were well enough: perhaps thou art crossed in
thy family, if that were taken away thou were well enough for all sin. Therefore
be sure thou be faithful with God, and thine own Soul.

A Fifth sort of people to be reprehended are such that get out of Affliction by
sinful ways, and think they do well. But if there be more Evil in Sin than in
Affliction, Then it must be a woeful getting out if by way of Sin. Many people
in straits, if they can get out any way, by hook or by crook, so they get out,
they care not how: What! have thou gotten out of prison by sin? thou have broke
prison: Just like a Malefactor that has broke prison, but then there is Hue
and Cry sent after him, and the Constable pursues him, and if he be taken, he
is laid in the Dungeon, and Bolts put upon him, and is used more hardly. So I
say, if thou art in any Affliction, thou should lie there till God let thee
out; but if you break out before God let you out, Hue and Cry follows you* and
you will be certainly ^ver taken; the Remedy is worse than the Disease: this is
to skip out of the Drying Pan into the Fire. Like a man in a burning Fever,
should he drink a pint of cold water to ease himself, this may ease him a
while, but he is scorched and parched with heat afterward. This is like as if a
man should run from a little Cur that barks at him, and he runs into the mouth
of a Lion. Are you in Affliction, and to prevent it run to Sin? This is just as
if some little Whelp should come at thee, and thou runnest from it to a Lion.
So much difference there is between Sin and Affliction: Just as if you should
say, God will not, and therefore the Devil shall: every man that takes sin to
help him, does as much as if he should say, well, I see God will not help,
therefore the Devil must: For what God does, he does by Lawful means, and if
thou must not have it by Lawful means, thou must say, well, this way I shall
not have help, and yet thou will have it, and therefore thou will to the Devil
for it. Certainly if thou knew all, thou would have little comfort in
this. Will thou break thy bounds in sinful ways to get out of affliction? As
many Apprentises, because their Masters chastise them, run away into many
hardships: So many men and women, because they have crosses in their
yoke-fellows, break away, and will not live together; and a hundred other
particulars I might show how men break from affliction by sinful ways: but I
must hasten, only take that place for this in Jeremiah, 28. 13. Go tell
Hananiah, saying, thus says the Lord, Thou have broken the yokes of Wood, but
thou shall make for them, yokes of Iron: When God sent a yoke of Wood to
declare what affliction the people should bear, Hananiah breaks it; yea says
God, has he broke them? go tell him, he shall have a yoke of Iron. Thou
breakest off the yoke of affliction; know from God, thou shall have a yoke of
Iron.

Sixthly, This reprehends those, that after deliverance from affliction, can
bless themselves in their sin, though they be not delivered from that. There
was such a sickness thou hadest, and there thou laiest in anguish of Spirit,
and every one thought thou would die, then thou thoughtest thou should to
Hell; well, thou art delivered, and art as bad as ever, as unclean as ever, as
covetous as ever, as malicious and profane as ever; Oh know thy condition is
woeful. I remember Austine has this Speech of one, Thou have lost the benefit
of affliction as well as thou have lost the affliction: Oh it is a heavy loss,
to lose affliction without profit, for this is the last means God usually
uses, and therefore thou art worse than before thou were: it may be thou were
troubled with the stone, and thou art cut of the stone, but have as hard a
heart as ever; What is the stone gone from the bladder, and the stone in the
heart still? Oh! God it may be sent this to cure thy heart, and thou art
delivered from the one, and thou art glad of that; Oh know, that thou art in a
woeful case, for sin by this means has gotten firmer root, because it has
withstood affliction; as if the Arrow were taken out, and the venom still
remains. Now all I shall say is this, The Lord seal all these Truths about the
Evil of Sin upon your hearts, all I have said of the Evil of Sin. I must be
brought at the day of Judgment to avouch and justify what I have delivered:
and know every one of you here, at that great Audit Day, must be brought to
answer, what, and how you have heard, and what effect it has had upon you all.
Consider what has been said, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

FINIS.
The Names of several Books Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden Hall, London; and
are to be sold at his Shop at the sign of the Printing-press in Cornhill, near
the Royal Exchange.
Eight Books of Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs lately published: As also the Texts of
Scripture upon which they are grounded.
1 The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment, on Phil. 4. 11. 2 Gospel Worship,
On Levit. 10. 3. 3 Gospel-Conversation, on Phil. 1. 17. To which is added, The
Misery of those men that have their Portion in this life only, on Ps. 17. 14. 4
A Treatise of Earthly-Mindedness, on Phil. 3. part of the 19. verse. To which is
added, A Treatise of Heavenly-Mindedness, and walking with God, on Genesis 5. 24.
and on Phil. 3. 20. 5 An Exposition on the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh
Chapters of the Prophecy of Hosea. 6 An Exposition on the eighth, ninth, and
tenth Chapters of Hosea. 7 An Exposition on the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteen
Chapters of Hosea, being now Complete. 8 The Evil of Evils, or the Exceeding
Sinfulness of Sin: On Job, 36. 21. latter part.
Twelve several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Collected into one Volumn. viz.
1 The great Gospel Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and
applied from Christ's Priestly Office. 2 Satan's Power to tempt; and Christ's Love
to, and Care of His People under Temptation. 3 Thankfulness required in every
Condition. 4 Grace for Grace; or the Overflowing of Christ's Fullness received by
all Saints. 5 The Spiritual Actings of Faith through natural impossibilities. 6
Evangelical Repentance. 7 The Spiritual-Life, and In-Being of Christ in all
Believers. 8 The Woman of Canaan, 9 The Saints Hiding Place in the time of Gods
Anger. 10 Christ's Coming is at our Midnight. 11 A Vindication of Gospel
Ordinances. 12 Grace and Love beyond Gifts.
Six several Books, by Nich* Culpeper, Gent. Student in Physic and Astrology.
1 A Translation of the New Dispensatory, made by the College of Physicians of
London. Whereunto is added, The Key to Galen's Method of Physic. 2 A Directory
for Midwives, or a Guide for Women. Newly enlarged by the Author in every
Sheet, and illustrated with diverse new Plates. 3 Galen's Art of Physic, with a
large Comment. 4 The English Physician: being an Astrologo-Physical-Discours of
the vulgar Herbs of this Nation: wherein is showed how to Cure a man's self of
most Diseases incident to man's Body, with such things as grow in England, and
for three pence charge. 5 The Anatomy of the Body of Man, wherein is exactly
described the several parts of the Body of Man, illustrated with very many
large Brass Plates. 6 A New Method both of studying and practicing Physic.
Six Sermons Preached by Doctor Hill, viz.
1 The Beauty and Sweetness of an Olive Branch of Peace and Brotherly
Accommodation budding. 2 Truth and Love happily married in the Churches of
Christ. 3 The Spring of strengthening Grace in the Rock of Ages Christ Jesus. 4
The strength of the Saints to make Jesus Christ their Strength. 5 The Best and
Worst of Paul. 6 Gods eternal preparation for his dying Saints. The Bishop of
Canterbu^^es Speech on the Scaffold. The Kings Speech on the Scaffold. King
Charles his Case, or an Appeal to all Rational Men concerning his Trial. A
Congregational Church is a Catholic visible Church, By Samuel Stone, in
New England. Mr. Owens stedfastness of the Promises. Mr Owen against Mr Baxter.
A Vindication of Free Grace, By John Pawson. The Magistrates support and
Burden, By John ^ordel. The Discipline of the Church in New England, by the
Churches and Synod there. A Relation of the Barbados. A Relation of the
Repentance and Conversion of the Indians in New England, by Mr Eliot and Mr
Mayhew. An Exposition on the Gospel of the Evangelist S. Matthew, by Mr Ward.
Clows Chyru^ge^y. Marks of Salvation. An Exposition of the whole first Epistle
of Peter, by Mr. John Rogers of D^ in Essex. Christians Engagement for the
Gospel, By John Goodwin. Great Church Ordinance of Baptism. Mr Love's Case,
containing his Petitions, Narrative, and Speech. Vox Pacifica, or a Persuasive
to Peace. Dr Prest^^s Saints Submission, and Satan's Overthrow. A Treatise of
the Rickets, Published in Latin by Dr Glisson, Dr Bate, and Dr Regemorter, now
translated into English. Mr Symsons Sermon at Westminster. Mr Feaks Sermon
before the Lord Major. Mr Phillips Treatise of Hell. -- Of Christ's Geneology.
Mr Eaton on the Oath of Allegiance and Covenant, showing that they oblige not.
THE ALPHABETICAL TABLE.
A
Addition
NO addition to sin can make it good. Page 18
Affliction
Affliction is better than sin. 3 It Is light. ibid Christ's the greatest. 8 Some
good in it. 11 It is instrumentally good. 12 It is sanctified to the Soul. ibid
A fruit of Gods love. 13 Good annexed to it. 14 Good of Promise. ibid Good of
Evidence. 15 Good of Blessing. ibid Affliction cannot make a man evil. 140
Affliction may stand with Gods love. 266 Affliction to sinners the beginning
and forerunner of all evil. 336, 337. -- Ripens them for destruction. 337 It is
not mercy to be delivered from affliction when we are in a sinful way. 439 It
is sometimes a judgment not to be afflicted. 443
Approve
God approves no sin. 38
Abstain
Some abstain from sin for fear of Affliction only 523
Avoid
Some sin to avoid affliction 526
Authority
Sin resists Gods Authority 65
Attributes
Sin wrongs God in his Attributes 58 -- They plead against sinners 67
Alsufficiency
Sin wrongs God in his Alsufficiency 59

B
Beams
Beams of Gods wisdom in the light of nature 63
Bitterness
Sin makes affliction bitter 330
Bless
Saints bless God for afflictions 16 -- Not for sin ibid Bless God for Christ
482
Burden
Christ's burden 127 Sin a burden to heaven and earth 321
Beast
A sinner worse than a beast 370, 371
Bondage
Sinners in bondage to the Devil 264, 265
Bounds
No bounds to be set to our love of God, and hatred of sin 350, 351, 352.

C
Capable
Sin is not capable of good 17 Men and Angels only capable of sin 73
Charge
Job's false charge 1 Saints must charge their hearts 54
Choice
Sin a worse choice than affliction 2 The wicked choice 60
Conscience
Conscience must not be strained 21 Trouble of Conscience being overcome, if
men return to sin, they are worse 91 Make Conscience of all sins 450 Conscience
troubled for sin what: 385, etc. -- It is the beginning of the second death
399, 409
Cry
Saints cry unto God 16
Creator
Sin wrongs God as a Creator 69
Contrary
Nothing contrary to God but sin 35 Contraries seek the destruction one of
another 53
Cause
God no cause of sin 37
Creature
Creature comforts in order to God 38 All Creatures against sinners 289 The
Devil the lowest Creature 364
Curse
Christ made a Curse 131 Sinners under the Curse 291 Sin is a Curse ibid Sin
brings a Curse upon the whole world 321 Sin brings a Curse upon al evil. 331
Comforts
-- Of wicked men, what: 279 No comfort by sin 432
Confusion
Sin would bring all to confusion 323
Conformity
-- To Christ, in sufferings; to the Devil in sin 355, 356, 357, 358.
Condemnation
Sin brings men under the sentence of it 277 Condemnation not recalled but
transmitted to Christ 278
Communion
-- With God, what: 254
Converse
They fit to converse that live the same life 254, 255
Covenant
The Covenant of Grace keeps sin from taking away the Image of God in the
regenerate 256
Consequence
-- Of the Law and Gospel 492
Course
Some get from affliction by sinful courses 534

D
Death
Sin the Death of the soul 255
Deliberation
Sin needs no deliberation because wholly evil 29
Disease
Sin compared to a disease 257
Despise
Sin is despising of God 46 Who despise their souls 310
Destruction
Sin seeks Gods destruction 54
Devil
The Devil better than a base lust 61 Sin is Originally from the Devil 358, 359
Lay not all upon the Devil 360 Sins reference to the Devil 357, 358, 359, 360,
361, 362, 363
Do
Few men know what they do when they sin against God 8
Deceive
The way of the wicked deceives 294
Deliver
Delivering up to Satan, what: 377 Some bless themselves in sins, after their
deliverance from Affliction 536
Dealings
Gods dealings with the wicked and godly are different 440
Draw
Draw not others to sin 492
Defile
Sin defiles the soul 262 It defiles all things man meddleth with ibid
Delight vide Joy
Delight in sins dreadful 462, 463, etc. God takes delight in the souls that
converse with him 255
Departing
Sin a departing from God 285
Despair
Despair is not from the depth of humiliation 86 -- But from want of it ibid
Divorce
It is hard to make a divorce between sin and the soul 90
Displeasure
Gods displeasure against sin 113 -- Against Angels 114 -- Against Men 117 --
Manifested in his law 118 -- In its Terror and Curse 119 -- In his severity
against small sins 119, 120 121 -- His Wrath and Hell 122 Gods dealing also with
his fore-shews his displeasure against sin 123, 124, etc. Gods displeasure with
his people 438, 439
Deceit
Against deceit 466

E
Enemy
Who Gods enemies 48 To whom God an enemy 285, 286 All the Creatures are
enemies to sinners 288, 289
Encourage
Saints encouraged to bear afflictions 17
End
Men think of three good ends in committing of sin 18 No good end in sin ibid
The end of the Agent and of the Act 44 Loss of the end worse than loss of means
75 Gods glory his end of creation 76 Man's end what 259
Endless
-- Torments 133, 134
Enjoy
We cannot enjoy God and sinful ways together 61
Estate, vide Gettings
Wicked men usurp not their Estates 280 -- Have right to them and how ibid
Eternity
The Eternity of all evil from sin 339
Evil
-- Sin the greatest 10 Of Two Evils to choose the least, no god axiom in
point of sin 23 Sin makes a man evil 140 It Is better to hear and read evils
than feel them 297

F
Face
Gods face what 286
Fight
Who fight against God 41
Froward
Guilt causes frowardness 270
Fuel
Prosperity is fuel to sin 436
Full
Men's hearts full of sin 458
Floods
Floods of wickedness 460
Fear, vide Terror
Sin causes fear 290 You must not fear affliction more than sin 517
Feeling
Past feeling 473

G
God
God needs not the Devil to help his Cause 21
Good
Good in comparison vide Affliction 3 Good of Entity and Causality 11 Good by
occasion 12 Good instrumentally ibid Good and End is the same 258 Sin spoils
all good 320
Grief
-- Must be for others sins as well as for our own 103
Guilt
Sin brings guilt 269 Guilt what ibid Guilt makes men bloody 270 Guilt takes
away comfort 271 Guilt brings fear 272, 273, 274, 275 Only guilt makes
sufferings evil 276
Gettings
Gettings by sin cost dear 430 Gettings by sin are accursed 431, etc.
Glory
Sin labors to frustrate God of his glory 75 It cannot frustrate Gods glory 76
God will have his glory one way or other 78 Our good and Gods glory connexed 312
Grace
An eternal Good 340, 346 In Grace no power to work except God works with it
359

H
Hearts
The different working of the Saints hearts 15 The way to break a heart 96 Sin
hardens the heart 297
Hell
Hell is better than sin 4
Humble
The way to humble the soul 34, and 47, 48, 49 Few humbled truly 84
Holiness
Sin casts dirt upon Gods holiness 64 Holiness what 291
Horror
-- Is not true Humililiation 88
House
The house where sin is, is worse than that which is haunted by the Devil 374,
375
Harden
Prosperity hardens 442
Hands
Concerning such as lay violent hands upon themselves 19
Hate
God hates sin 38 Who hate God 44 The object of Gods hatred 265, 266, 267
Sinners hate themselves 310
Humiliation
-- For sin against God sanctifies his name 87 -- It abides after pardon 89 --
Makes a divorce from sin 91, 92 Exhortations to humiliation for sin 471

I
Image
Sin most opposite to the Image of God in man 145, 146 The excellency of the
image of God in man 147 Holiness the image of God 147, 148, 149, 150, 151
Infinite
Infinite and less than infinite cannot stand together 345 A kind of
infinitness in sin 345 Infinite power must overcome sin 346 Sin has infinite
desert 347 Sin deserves infinite misery ibid Infinite in time, and in degree
348 An infinite price paid for sin 349
Justice
Sin wrongs God in his justice 66
Judgment
Examples of Gods judgments upon sin 118, 119, 120, 121, 122 The difference of
the judgment of God, from the judgment of the world 142 Spiritual judgments
the worst 502
Joy
Against joy in sin 464 465, 466, 467, 468 Sin damps joy 468, 469

K
Know
Few men know God or sin 80, 81 Sinners know not the excellency of the rational
creature 306 They know not Gods holiness 307 Four things must be known 327
Knowledge
Knowledge of sin makes Christ precious 56
Kingdom
-- Of Christ, and of Satan, what 361, 362, 363

L
Law
-- The glass to see sin 124
Light
Common light, and saving light 150
Little
Call no sin little 448, 449, 450
Lie
An Officious lie 19 Lie not to save the world 20
Life
Sin strikes at the life of God in man, 151, 152, 256 What the life of God in
man is 253 The life of man excellent 256
Losses
A Christian may have many Crosses, but no Losses 340
Liberty
Prosperity gives liberty to sin 437

M
Mercy
Sin wrongs Gods Mercy 68
Mediator
-- Must be God and Man 82
Ministry
Ministry of the Word is for our good 295 -- And Gods glory ibid -- It makes
sin bitter ib. -- Makes stomachs rise against it 296 -- A great Ordinance 323
Magistracy
-- A great Ordinance 324
Mariners
-- Englands strength 324, 325, 326
Mean
Mean-men, who 252
Malliciousness
Maliciousness in sin 312
Means
Means to crush sin 323
Melancholy
-- Distinguished from trouble of Conscience 387, 388, 389, 390, 391 392, 393,
394, 395 -- Six Differences of it 414, etc.
Misery
Men freed from affliction may be in misery 426 Great misery when sin and
affliction meet 504

N
Nature
Sin in its nature opposite to God 35 Man's nature 253
Necessity
No man brought to a necessity of sinning 24

O
Omniscience
Gods Omniscience wronged by sin 62
Omnipresence
Gods Omnipresence wronged by sin ib.
Opposition
-- Of sin to God in Four things 33
Order
Sin breaks the worlds Order 72
Occasion
God takes occasion by sin 73 Affliction may occasion sin 141

P
Persecute
Who persecute God 47
Pity
Sinners to be pitied 313, 314, 315
Pleased
Saints never well pleased with sin 16 Pleased with Affliction ibid
Price
A great price notes greatness of inisery, or of the Person 350
Promises
The promises of sin are delusions 25
Possession
Satan's possession of the heart 379 God hates not people possessed, but pitties
them 380
Portion
The Devil and wicked men have the same portion 383
Prosperity
Of prosperity by sin 428 429, 430 Of sin by prosperity 436, 437, 438
Prosperity a judgment to the wicked 441
Plead
Plead no^ for sin 500
Pardon
Some Saints grieve most after apprehension of Pardon 90 Pardon is a great
mercy 445, 446
Patience
-- Of God to be admired 92 -- Of Christ is perfect 233
Power
Sin wrongs God in his power 65 Power in creatures a drop of Gods power in them
287
Pray
Afflictions teach to pray 298

R
Rebellion
Sin is rebellion 45
Report
Martyrs have a good report 6
Repentance
-- A continual act 89
Resist
Sin resists God, how 42
Revenge
Let out revenge upon sin 317
Root
All sin comes from the same root 43
Rejoice
Saints rejoice not in sin 16 Saints rejoice in affliction ibid
Redemption
Sin wrongs Christ in his work of Redemption 70
Restore
Ill gotten goods must be restored 432, 433, 434, 435
Restitution
-- According to the nature of the wrong 497

S
Satisfy
Sin denies good in God to satisfy the soul 58
Serviceable
No good thing ought to be Serviceable to sin 27
Seed
Sin the seed of evil 293 Grace the seed of good ibid
Shame
Shame better than sin 6, 7 Sin brings shame 303, 304, 305 Why Sinners not
ashamed 306
Sufferings
-- Of Martyrs 5 The red glass of Christ's sufferings 124 More in Christ's
sufferings than in any 134
Speak
-- For God 104, 105
Strength
-- Of Christ 133 Sin the strength of all evil 328, 329
Striving
Striving against God, what 42
Striking
Sin is a striking at God 50
Spirit
Sin wrongs the Spirit of God 71
Sweat
Christ's sweat 128
Strictness
Strictness of Gods people justified 448
Stubbornness
Stubbornness distinguished from from Conscientiousness 452
Separate
What separates men for God 291 What separates men from God 292
Slave, vide Subject Soul
Christ's Soul sufferings 401
Sorrow
Christ's sorrow 125
Sin
-- More evil than any misery 3, etc. -- A heavy Thing 7 -- A Non-Entitie 11
-- No good in the being of it ibid -- It is cause of no good 12 -- It comes not
from good 13 -- No good annexed to it 14 -- No good of Promise ibid -- Of
Evidence ibid -- Of Blessing 15 Sin is Opposite to all good 319 Sin in its self
is misery 354 Sin sells the soul to the devil 367 -- Turns the soul into a
Devil 368
Sensible
Some more sensible of affliction than sin 528
Sinner
Every sinner guilty of all the sins in the World 362
Succession
-- Of Sin 362, 363
Subject
Difference between a Slave, and a Subject 366

T
Temptation
-- To avoid 98 -- Edward the 6th avoids it with tears 101 -- No sin if not
entertained 372
Terror
What causes terror 273, 274
Thoughts
Thoughts of God terrible to some 273
Time
Time spent in sin is lost 28
Truth
Sin wrongs God in his truth 67 Truth in its Latitude, the object of man's
understanding 283
Turns
Sin turns all good into evil 321 Exhortation to turn from sin 476

V
Venture
No good should be ventured for sin 26
Venom
-- Of sin 43
Vile
A wicked person is a vile person 141, 144
Useless
Wicked men useless men 29
Undo
Man does undo himself by sin 140, 262
Union
What breaks Union 282. 284 Spiritual things Unite 282 Why man's soul is capable
of Uuion with God 283, 284

W
Wisdom
Sin wrongs God in his wisdom 63
Weapons
Sinners fight against God with his own weapons 77
Way
-- Of the godly and wicked difference 441
Worse
No man is worse for Affliction, but for Sin 141
Worth
All the men in the world not worth one Christian 143, 145 The end is worth the
means 260, 261
Work
Sin is not the work of God 25 Sin opposite to God in its working 41
World
Sin would destroy the world, were it not for Gods wisdom 74
Wrong
What wrong sin does to God 54 They who have wronged God, must do much for God
109, 110, 111, 112 -- Sin wrongs the Soul 309
Wrath
-- Of God 125 Christ drinks the Cup of Gods wrath 129 What the wrath of God is
343
Will
A Sinner exalts his will above Gods 64, 65 Fulfils the Devils will 363, 364,
365
Walk
How God walks contrary to sinners 286
Word
The Word must be prized 406, 407 The Word justified for threatening 455, 456
Worm
Sin is the matter whereon the worm breeds 263 Ways to kill the worm of
Conscience here 26 The Blood of Christ cures the worm here 264
Weight
-- Of Sin, what 132 God weighs out Afflictions to Saints 334, 335 It is good
to bring sins weight upon our selves 474

Y
Youth
It is good to be godly in Youth 488

FINIS.
THere are these several Books of Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs that will shortly be
published, viz. His Sermons on Job 36. 21. The second of Peter the 1. and 1.
The first Epistle of John 3. 3. The second of Corinthians 5. 7. Matthew 11. 28,
29, 30. The second of Corinthians 5. 18, 19, 20.

There are also in the Press Seventeen Books (being the substance of many
Sermons) Preached at Harford in New England; By Mr. Thomas Hooker, sometime
Fellow of Emanuel College in Cambridg, in England; which are Discourses on
Seventeen several Scriptures.


