THE WOEFUL CRY OF Unjust Persecutions, and grievous Oppressions of the People
of God in England, through the Injustice of some of her Rulers, and wikednesse
of Teachers and People, who hasten to fulfill the measure of their forefathers
cruelty. WITH A LAMENTATION Over them all who rewards the Lord evil for good,
and is a warning to them all for repentance; showing that the coming of the
Lord is nigh. AND This may serve for an Answer in full, to all such who have
Persecuted by violence, by Word or Writing the innocent people in scorn called
QUAKERS. WITH A SHORT ADDITION, Which shows unto all, the ground of
Persecution; in its first cause, and the enmity which is betwixt the two seeds,
is clearly discovered,

By a Friend to the suffering Seed of God, E. B.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black Spread-Eagle, near the West end
of Paul's.

TO THE READER.
READER,
THIS is sent abroad into the World, that all people may see what is brought
forth in this Generation against the Innocent, who suffer cruel things for well
doing, and not for evil; and the words of Christ are fullfilled, who said, As
they have done unto me, so will they do unto you: And the time comes, that
whosoever kills you he will think that he does God good service. And this is
now come to pass, according as he has said, to our rejoicing, and to the
sorrow of all our enemies. And as any is moved herein, this is to be given to
the hands of the Persecuters and of them who have done evil against the Lords
people, as a gift unto them from

a friend, Who is at present a sufferer under Bonds for the testimony of Jesus
Christ, through the wickedness of men (but most especially by the supposed
Minister of this Town)
in Kingstone upon Thames. The 7 Month, 1657.
The Woeful Cry of unjust Persecutions and grievous Oppressions of the people
of God, in England, through the Injustice of some of Her Rulers, and
wickedness of Teachers and People, who hasten to fulfill the measure of their
forefathers cruelty.
OF a truth the Lord is arisen, and he has caused the light of his countenance
to shine forth upon his people, his day is dawned, and the brightness of his
glory is shining forth as the sun at noon day, his everlasting arm is
stretched forth to lead out of captivity his own chosen, the days of perfect
freedom is approaching, he that brings health, peace and liberty to all
Nations is come and coming, who will restore the breaches, and subdue all
things under himself, that he may reign for ever and ever, who alone is worthy
(for he has all power in his hand, and he brings to pass whatsoever he will,
that all men and Nations may fear before him, and tremble at his dreadful
presence, who has power in his hand) to change Times and Laws, Orders,
Decrees and Governments, the hearts of all men he can turn what way he lists,
and he pulls down one and sets up another, and whatsoever is in his heart
to do, his power can bring it to pass: who would not fear before him and
reverence his Name? Who would not be afraid to offend him? who gives unto man
breath and takes it away in a moment; all Nations are as the drop of a bucket
before his eternal eye, he dwells in the high and holy place, and his
habitation is high above the world; he inhabits eternity forevermore, and yet
abides, and walks, and dwells with the children of men, that fear his Name
and tremble at his Word; he has been as a stranger, as one not known, for men
have been separated from him by transgression, and have been ignorant of his
ways; he has been as one hidden for many ages, and has been worshipped
ignorantly, and has winked in the time of ignorance, but now he calls all to
repentance every where: Blessed are they that wait upon him, that they may know
him and their souls may live, and now the purpose of his heart is to bring in
his scattered people into the fold of peace, where Christ Jesus is the
shepherd, and his people shall dwell in safety, and shall be a free people, to
worship him in the Spirit and in the Truth, and every yoke of bondage shall be
broken, and the oppressed shall be set free, and Christ shall reign, and his
Government above shall be established over all the world, man's honor shall be
laid in the dust, and the pride of all flesh shall be stained and the glory
thereof shall wither as a flower, the loftiness of all flesh shall be laid
low, and the Lord alone shall be exalted, and his people, which now are
oppressed, shall replenish and fill the earth: All corrupt men and Rulers their
strength and might shall utterly fail them, and men that fear God and love
righteousness shall take their place, and all things shall be changed, and the
world shall be turned up-side down.

But because of this is all the world troubled, and the Heathen is on a rage,
and the people do imagine vain things, and men of high degree and low degree,
and of all sorts, have set themselves against the Lord, that they might stop
the purpose of the most high, and their hearts within them burn because of
envy, and the Devil has stirred up all sorts of people to work for him, and to
uphold his kingdom and h^s power, he is come down in great rage, knowing that
his time is but short, and has filled the hearts of all his servants with
despite and ravening envy against the seed of God.

The heads of the people, they have conspired together against the Lord, and
against his truth; and have decreed unrighteous decrees, that they might
prevent the purpose of the most High. Many of the Rulers and Judges, as members
of the beastly power, rather than of Jesus Christ, has unjustly judged and
falsely imprisoned and trodden under foot the meek and upright, who fear the
Lord and walk in his way, even such who have come from under the subjection of
the worship and power of the Beast, which all the world had wondered after,
has the Beast raised his force against. How many hundreds in this Nation have
been imprisoned falsely, and suffered grievous abuses unjustly for
righteousness sake, and not for evil doing, as a testimony against this
generation of Judges and people, and for a testimony that they are of God, who
have in patience born the sufferings, and the cruelties of the wicked, many
have suffered the loss of liberty and riches, and some the loss of life, for
the exercise of a pure conscience toward God, and for the Kingdom of Jesus,
many have suffered under the power of wicked men, for declaring against sin and
iniquity, in Towns, Steeple Houses, or high ways, and for crying against
pride, and vanity, and idolatry, and coveteousnesse, and the wickedness of
Rulers, Priests, and People, whose deceits and transgressions has abounded in
this generation, and others have deeply suffered grievous cruelties, because
they could not swear and respect persons with hat or knee and so were witnesses
for the Lord and his Kingdom, which stands in righteousness, and against the
power and kingdom of the Beast; which stands in iniquity, in fainednesse and
flattering titles, and disobedience to the Son of God, and many hundreds are
woeful unjust and oppressed sufferers at this day, by false imprisonment and
spoiling of goods, because they cannot pay Tithes, that abominable and crying
oppression, by which the Beast chiefly maintains his false Prophets, and
because the unchangable Priesthood is witnesed, and the changable denied, and
Christ the light of the World followed, therefore is this suffering laid upon
the just, and many are sufferers under hard tasks, because they cannot maintain
the Idol temples, and Idol worships, and Idol Priests, which the power of
Antichrist upholds against the power of the Son of God, and against the new
Covenant of life, where God in spirit and in truth is worshipped without
respect of places, days, or men, or things; and the true worshippers, they
worship God in the spirit and in the truth, and cannot be subject to days,
places, or things, appointed and ordained by the power of men and false
prophets; and how many unjust fines and false inditements have been most
illegally charged upon the innocent, in many Courts and Judicatories through
this Nation, and all in the defense of the kingdom of the man of sin; lest his
authority should be abated, and the authority of Christ Jesus exalted; many
cruelties have been done, and injustice acted both by Rulers and People,
against such which no evil could justly be charged against, nor yet the
transgression of any just law, by any one of them; O! horrid grievances and
cruel oppressions has been brought forth in this Nation, by such who should
have eased the oppressed, and set at liberty the captives, such who should have
judged justly the cause of the poor, and heard the call of the oppressed, have
turned judgment backward from the poor, and equity have found no place to
enter, but truth has fallen in the streets, and justice and mercy have
perished from among men, and the poor has been oppressed, and they that have
departed from iniquity have been made a prey to the mouths of devouring Lions,
for some of the Judges have been as ravening Wolves, and as greedy devouring
Foxes, the Lambs of Christ have been chased by the wicked, and his power for
their life; O how have the oppressed groaned in this Nation, under false
judgment? to ages and generations for ever, may it be recorded for a witness
against this generation of cruel hearted men, whom the beast and false prophet
has raised in his defense, and against the Kingdom of Christ Jesus and them
that follow him, how full have the most part of the prisons in all this land
been with guiltless sufferers under cruel bondage, with unjust dealings and
false judgments, have gone forth from some of your mouths, you that have been
set to judge over the people, who should have been a terror to the wicked, but
have rather strengthened the hands of evil doers, and been a terror to
righteousness, so much as is possible, the great whore which sits upon the
beast, has made your Rulers drunk and stagger with envy and hatred and
persecution, and works of wickedness against the upright; Woe is me for you,
what have you brought forth? even iniquity by Decrees, and injustice by
Ordinances, and false judgment by Laws; alas, alas, your destruction comes as
an armed man upon you. Was ever the like heard, or any president in any
generation before you, for imprisoning just men, for declaring against sin and
the abominations of the times, as you have done many, and for imprisoning men
because they cannot put off their hat to you and respect your persons, and so
transgress the law of God, and because they cannot swear, and so break Christ's
command? For this you have imprisoned many, and caused them to suffer because
of this, may not you fear and tremble before the Lord God, and your faces
gather blackness at this, when you consider it? Did ever any that were set to
judge in the earth among men so abuse their power, and subvert it so, quite to
another end than wherefore it was committed to them? May not shame cover you
all, to commit men to prison for the exercise of pure conscience toward God,
because they cannot swear, or respect men's persons, or maintain Idol-shepherds,
and Idol-temples and worships, which is abomination to the Lord; and for taking
peaceable men out of peaceable meetings, and out of their travel on the
Highways, and first whipping them, and sending them to prison, the example of
this which you have done, never went before in any age and therefore have you
exceeded in oppression, in injustice, in cruelty and false judgment; all your
forefathers the Pope nor Bishops, hardly ever brought forth such things; but
the Lord will reckon with you, and plead the cause of the oppressed against all
you oppressors; yea, and will give unto you a recompense of reward according to
your works; ye that have exalted your selves against the innocent, shall be
brought down to the dust of misery, and the Saints shall reign and rejoice over
you, when the Kingdom of Christ Jesus the Lamb shall be set up over you all,
and your beastly power dashed to pieces as a Potters vessel, when he whom you
have persecuted and his followers shall rule with a rod of iron, and break you
asunder; and this shall shurely come to pass, therefore consider it, ye that
thus deal in your anger against the Lord and his chosen, for the Lamb shall get
the victory over the Beast, and over you all that seek to defend him, and that
strive under his power; for they that are with the Lamb are Called, and
Faithful, and Chosen: O! therefore be awakened, be awakened, ye heads, and
Judges, and Rulers of the people, remember and repent, the Lords hand is
stretched forth against all oppression and oppressors, and his wrath is kindled
against the wicked ones, and his power to overthrow his dominon which long has
reigned in the Nations, and now though he seeks to defend himself against the
Lamb and his followers by injust dealing, yet the outstretched arm of the
Lord shall bring deliverance to his chosen, who has been made havoc upon, in
their liberties and in their estates; some cruelly suffering in prison, and
others by spoiling of their goods, and none of these for evil doing, but upon
false suspicions, and envious jelousies, and secret surmisings, without any
ground of occasion given; but by wickedness have many of you sought occasion
to make offenders, by laying snares for the feet of the harmless and innocent;
you have made men offenders for a word, and perverted innocent words and
actions, that you might make to your self a ground to persecute, and have
sought a cloak to cover your cruelty in the sight of men, but naked and bare
are your hearts made manifest in the sight of the lord, who has looked down
from heaven, and considered these things, and has regarded the unjust
sufferings of his people whose liberties, and estates, and good names have been
spoiled through injustice, by grievous burdens laid upon some, because they
could not pay Tithes (that heinous oppression) to satisfy the unmercifullnesse
of cruel men, and many suffers at this day, unjustly in the sight of God, and
illegally also in the sight of men; and some suffer the spoiling of their
goods, rather by way of robery and theft, than by just execution of judgment in
proceeding of just law; this can largely be witnessed, and this is brought
forth by subservant Officers to you that are set to judge, and you to them are
evil examples, and strengtheners of their malicious hands, some of them are not
ashamed to take sixtimes the value of what is unjustly claimed for the use of a
false teacher and deceitful hireling who rides upon the beast, and make you
their servants to oppress the poor, to uphold them and maintain them in their
pride and vanities, but the Lord has considered these things, and he has
numbered the oppressions against you, wherewith the just have been grieved and
oppressed under you, he has counted this cruelty and recorded all your unjust
dealing, which you have (or suffered to be) brought forth, yea the day of
account hasters and the term draws near upon you, wherein the just and
righteous Judge of heaven and earth will call you to account who will plead the
cause of the poor, and of the unjust sufferer, and oppressed, against you all,
who are oppressors the innocent prosecute against you, and the begging of the
poor is heard, which calls for vengeance upon you. In the Record of justice,
what account will you give to the Highestpower, who rules over heaven and
earth, for imprisoning just men for crying against sin, and declaring against
the wickedness of this age; this shall be proved against you in the day of the
Lord; Is your answer ready, or will not your mouths be stopped and you
speechless, when righteousness it self pleads against you? And what can you
plead for fining men, and imprisoning them, for not respecting your persons,
and bowing with hat and knee, and because they could not swear; this has some
of you done; will you have any thing to say in the cause of these things, when
Christ Jesus comes to reign and his Saints with him, unto whom the government
and the authority, and rule shall be given: though now they are persecuted, and
as the refuse of men accounted by you, unto whom they are become a prey, to act
your oppression and cruelty upon; and because they render not evil for evil,
therefore is the impudency of some men the more increased, and their hardness
of heart enlarged; and because judgment is not speedily executed, therefore are
the hearts of some men set in them to do evil. O! what a sad reckoning in that
day, and what large indictments and verdicts for your oppression, will be read
against you, and proved to be just in the sight of God and men; a sad thing
will it be upon you, when laid to your charge by the Lord, for causing men to
suffer because they could not swear, nor respect persons, nor uphold the
deceits of false worships and teachers, nor cease to cry against sin, in your
Towns and Steeple Houses. O! be stirred up out of your security, you Heads,
and Rulers, and Judges, and Officers, even all you be awakened who have turned
your sword against the peaceable, and been a terror to righteousness as much
as you could, which you ought not to have been, and so your power you have
abused, and subverted it to another end than wherefore it was committed to you:
instead of defending the upright you have offended him, and instead of being a
terror to the wicked, his hand has been strengthened through your wicked
presidents; this is the truth, as the light in all your consciences shall
witness in the day of the Lord; O! how has justice and true judgment been
neglected, and oppression and cruelty abounded, the like in generations past
has not been know^ (...) the Lord is now arisen, and has said, I will ease
(...) enemies, and take vengeance upon my adversaries, (...) done wickedly
against him and his people, till the patience of the Lord is near an end, and
his long suffering finished, and his judgments will he make known upon his
enemies in this generation, that ages to come forever may be warned not to
oppress the innocent, as these have done by false accusations, and unjust
judgment, and wicked proceedings, and because of it, the wrath of the Lord is
kindled, and his viols of indignation shall be poured upon the beast, and upon
the false Prophet, and all their power shall be smitten in one day.

And O what wickedness has abounded in the people also, to help up the
measure of the Rulers sins, that may receive the recompense together; how have
the people of all sorts abused the innocent lambs of Christ, whom he has
called? What beatings, and stonings, and bruisings, and other abuses, in
Towns, and Highways, and Steeple Houses, its hard to be expressed and large
to be declared: some have been wounded night unto death, others bruised till
blood have gushed out, and others cast down in the dirt and punched with feet
and trodden upon, and many have been in danger of their lives, some have been
knocked down with staves and their clothes rent, and their hair torn off their
heads, and some have been pursued after with throwing stones and dirt at them,
and many halled, and tumulted, and lugged, and hurried up and down in cruel
manner, to the danger of life and oppression of the creature, and others have
been whipped, and lashed, and put into cruel torment of their bodies, by engines
framed of purpose to torment the bodies of the harmless, as Chester and
Carlisle may witness, and others have been halled before rulers, and falsely
slandered to the taking away of life if the Lord had not prevented, more than
mercy of men, and having been unmercifully and unjustly sent to prison, there
have they suffered cruelties from the Goalers or their servants, by beatings,
or punnishings, or threatenings, or cruel words, and casting into dungeons, and
great abuses shamefully acted upon them, and other prisoners have made a prey
upon them, by t^king away their clothes and meat, and beating of them, and
abusing them diverse ways, and murderers have had more privilege of freedom
in prisons and in trials, than these who are innocent, and these things thus
acted contrary to their own law, has passed without reproof from many in
Authority, though it have been brought to their door, and in this manner have
the children of God, the Lamb and his followers been persecuted without cause,
or any evil works brought forth by them, and legally proved against them; but
for well doing, and not for evil, has the wicked vented their malice against
them, that the more the Beast and his power has fullfilled wickedness, the
sooner may be his destruction.

And O what scorning, and reviling, and lying, and slandering, and evil
speeches, with mockings, and cruel words of envy, and terms of cruelty against
the innocent, has this generation brought forth in this day, wherein the
dragon with his Angels has joined battle against the Prince of
righteousness, and they that follow him, and whole Gog and Magog is gathered
together, to compass the Camp of the Saints about, and to fight against the
beloved City, the Judges and Rulers, with their train of subservant officers,
as Bailiffs, Clarks, Goalers, Constables, with all that to those belonged, have
with a high hand persecuted and laid oppressions by hard-heartednesse, upon the
backs of the poor and distressed, and the scorners, and liers, and profane
wretches have bent their tongue against the just, in uttering lies, slanders,
reproaches, backbiting, nick-namings, and falseaccusing, and all manner of
evil speehes, and false reproaches, and the just have been burdened by all
this; and thus they that have been departed from iniquity have been a prey to
Rulers to act their injustice upon, and to the people to utter their slanders,
and to do cruelty against; and the teeth of evil doers have been set on edge,
to bite and devour, and to satisfy their maliciousness upon the sufferings
of the upright people, and from the Judge upon his throne, to the beggar upon
the highway; all have had their hand dipped in this cause of cruel and unjust
persecution, and the Lord has considered and harkened from his holy
habitation, and numbered up the sum of all your iniquities that he may repay
and recompense upon your heads, woe unto you unjust Judges, and corrupt men, who
have abused your power. And woe unto all that do oppress by hard dealing, who
have offended the just, and defended the unjust: Woe unto all you scorners,
liers, back biters, and reproachful tongues; the Lord is coming to take an
account. Your sins cry for vengeance against you, and though your hands and
tongues have been strengthened to speak and act ungodliness, by the evil
example of your rulers, yet your own iniquity shall you bear in the day of the
Lord, and though your rulers and judges have been strengthened in their
unjustnesse and mercilessenesse, by the false lying teachers and diviners of
false visions, which have seen vanity, yet their own iniquity shall they bear,
and every man shall die for his own sin; Woe unto your teachers they have eaten
up the sin of rulers and people, and covered iniquity and transgression, by
flattering and lying words; they have daubed with untempered mortar, and healed
up the wound deceitfully, and cried peace, peace, to the wicked, that have
walked in the imaginations of their own hearts, when unto such the Lord never
spoke peace.

And now whereas the Rulers and people have stretched forth their hands to vex
the Lords people, and have through unjust judgment, and grievous oppressions,
and unmercifull dealings, trodden the innocent under foot, and made them a prey
to their mouth, and diverse ways have persecuted in cruel manner the followers
of the Lamb; yet also have the wise men of this world, even the Priests and
Teachers, who have led the people, and have caused them to err, and have set
themselves as in battle array against the Lord and his way and people; How have
you hardened your hearts and made your forehead as brass, against the Word of
the Lord, and you have been as the fountain of all this wickedness acted
against the just, and strengtheners of the hands of ungodly men; the Heads and
Ruler, you have strengthened in their cruelty, of false judgments by your
arguments of strife; in subtiltly you have been as nursers of all this
persecution and wickedness, and have interceded for oppression, to cause the
just to groan, whom the Lord has raised to testify against you; the judges
they have given regard unto you, and the people they have taken you for
examples, who have been cursed presidents to the Rulers and people, who have
followed your cruel steps of malice and envy; and from the head to the tail,
they have drunk in your poisonus doctrines; and made themselves drunk
therewith, and out of reason, in their furious zeal of madness, and all have
taken council together to slay the harmless from off the face of the earth;
some by false judgment and oppression, and others by cruel abusings, as
beatings, and stonings, unheard of, or unequalized in generations of late. O ye
Priests, and Teachers, and wise men, and Scribes! how many of you in this
Nation joined hand in hand to betray the innocent, by your false doctrines and
lying divinations, and have filled (and sought to do so) the mind of the people
with slanders and false reproaches, and lying imaginations, and many
conceptions and jealousies against the people of God; many of you have made it
your study work, to bring forth evil by cunning arguments, to suggest into the
hearts of people, that they might not enter the kingdom, and even so have you
been shutters of the kingdom of heaven against men, and would not enter your
selves, nor suffer others that would.

Woe unto you, you have taken away the key of knowledge and lost it, and
multitudes of false aspersions, and lying assertions have you brought forth
without fear, by wicked consequence and lying productions, that you might take
away the key of knowledge thereby, and hide it from men, and lay stumbling
blocks of iniquity before the people, to stop the way of the upright, and you
have traveled to seek occasions of evil against the just, and watched for the
halting of the innocent, that you might glory and rejoice in their fall, and
without any occasion by words or actions, you have taken offense, and made
offenses by evil surmisings, to blind the eyes of people, that your Idolatry
might not be discovered, nor the way of righteousness shine forth. O be
ashamed and repent, for to account must you Come, and the sin of Rulers and
people, whom you have blindly led, will be charged against you, who have given
them wicked examples, of cruelty in your pulpits, you have spent time in
railing, and slandering, and lying, to infuse evil into the minds of men,
against the truth, and many books have you given forth and sent abroad from
your lying pens, out of your vain studies, of false prophecy, and men's hearts
have been filled with your damnable doctrines of Devils, wherewith the simple
have been poisoned, and the innocent betrayed; even great numbers of books, and
lying scroules have gone through the nation from some of you filled with false
divination, and intents of evil, against the way of the Lord and his people,
and worse than Balaam, and far exceeding him have you been: you have sought
enchantments to curse the people whom God has blessed altogether, and some of
you have done it to your evil reward of your evil work; and you have not known
that there is no divination against the holy seed. O! what will become of you
when he Lord is arisen to plead with you for these things, the cruelty and
oppression of the Rulers shall be added to your account, and the sin of the
people which you have swallowed down, it shall be laid to your charge; for you
have strengthened the hands of evil doers, so that none could turn from his
evil way, but have by you been hardened therein, and from you profaneness have
gone forth to the ends of the earth. Woe, woe, is approaching, what account
will you render in the day of the Lord? you will all be speechless in that
day, when the swift witness does arise; therefore to all you I am moved to
write, who have set your selves to gainsay the truth, and to write against the
people of the Lord, whom you call Quakers, who walk in the truth, and have
received the truth from the Lord, whom you have reproached and slandered in
secret, and also in open print, in the face of the world, and have laid many
cruel and false charges and accusations against them, and to all that has, or
ever shall hereafter bend your tongues and pens, to utter wickedness and
falsehood by writing or otherwise. Repent and cease your wickedness, for the
wrath of the Lord is kindled against you, and take this for an answer in full
to all your books, and false reproaches; we are of God, and he that is of God
hears us, and the whole world lies in wickedness, and we have the testimony
that we please God; and he is our God, and we are his people, and he has
chosen us, and we have chosen him, and the name of the Lord is our strength,
and his covenant of life is with us, and among us has he fullfilled his
promise, and his spirit is poured forth, and sons and daughters do Prophecy,
and one king reigns upon mount Sion, and the night to us is far spent, and the
day is dawned, and the darkness of the night, which long has overshadowed the
world, in which no man could work, is from us fled, and the mavelous light is
risen, and we are them whom God has gathered according to his promise, Ezekiel.
34. from the mouths of Idol-shepherds which once made a prey upon us, and the
glory of the Lord is revealed, and the time is come of Restoration, and of
bringing back out of the captivity of darkness, where all have laid, with a
vail of darkness spread over all their faces, and we are eyewitnesses of his
glory, and it is given us to taste, and feel, and handle the Word of Life,
which lives for ever, therefore I say unto you all, it is a little thing to us
and not respected to be reproached by you; our life you cannot reach, nor our
glory deface, and you we know to be them who God never sent, but must fulfill
your measure of wickedness, till the time of your overthrow, which draws near
upon you all, and despisable shall you be to all that fear the Lord and love
his ways, for your nakedness and shame shall be uncovered and them that have
loved you shall be filled with the indignation of the Lord against you, all
your writings, and books, and lies, and Senders, and false reproaches uttered
in public and private, shall go into the pit from which they came, and shall
return upon your own heads, and when your vail of slanders and false aspersions
is taken off, then shall we (as we are) appear, and till then all your evil
brought forth against us we bear in patience, and love your revilings rather
than your praise; wherefore with shame put off your armor, and lay down your
crowns, and stop your mouths in the dust, and bow and tremble before the just
God, and before the lamb, who is risen to make war against the beast and
against you his false Prophets, whose generation must grow feeble and become
weakness in this the day of the Lord, your time is at an end, wherein it was
given you to reign, and to seduce and deceive the Nations; and now shall the
son of God be exalted, and the kingdoms of this World shall become the
Kingdoms of Christ, hear and consider this, all ye that exalt your selves
against the Lord and his way, and are established in the throne of
unrighteousness, under the beastly power, if any man has an ear to hear let
him hear, the light is risen, and these things are made manifest, and with the
light of the world, in all men shall they be witnessed to be truth, and the
state of things as they are at this day, and if you can discern the times, and
the signs of times, and the changing of times, here you may read and
understand, blessed are all that have an ear to hear.

TO all ye Heads and Rulers, Judges and Magistrates, Mayors, Bailiffs, Goalers
and Constables, and all others whatsoever, governors Priests and people, who
have, and do persecute the children and servants of the Lord, the Saints of the
most high God, who fears the name of the Lord, and walks in his way, who
are not of this world, but redeemed out of it, and are despised among men, as
all the generation of the just every where; to all you persecuters and violent
doers, this is a word from the Lord God: Repent, repent, for evil have you done
in his sight, and vexed his soul, and grieved his spirit, and heaped up wrath
against the day of wrath, and multiplied your transgressions and the measure of
your Iniquities are well nigh filled up; ye have set your selves against the
Lord, and your hands you have strengthened against his people, you have
rejected the day of your visitation, and you have not regarded the day of your
salvation, you have plainly made it manifest that you are that generation which
killed the just, and that you are of the seed of evil doers, the works that you
have brought forth* do plainly declare that you will not Christ to reign
amongst you, nor his government to rule over you, who have thus persecuted the
innocent without cause, by false imprisonments, and false judgments, and hard
dealing, and reproachings, and revilings, consider your ways and what you have
done, search your hearts, and let it take place in you all, how have you
persecuted the just, how have you stretched forth your hands and dealt cruelly
and violently with the meek of the earth, how have you trodden under foot the
poor and needy, and greatly oppressed the upright hearted, who have not rendered
evil for evil, but forgiven you and prayed for you, and wished well unto you,
and born in patience (without complaining) all your injustice and cruelty, and
have not sought vengeance against you, even such has God chosen more than
many, and them you have despised and persecuted more than any, and laid heavy
bonds of oppression upon them, and doubled their task through your
hardheartednesse, least the seed of God should grow; grieveous yoaks have you
laid upon it by false imprisonments, and unjust fines, and illegal proceedings,
by beatings, halings, abusings, reproaches, and revilings, all manner of evil
have been acted and spoken against the generation of the just, by you and under
you in your judicatories and jurisdictions, in your Corporations, highways,
Towns, and Goals, and other places.

O! what have you? done consider, and suffered to be done under you, lay it to
heart what havoc of the people of the Lord in their persons and estates, and
what cruelty exercised upon them through your robellious hearts, without any
evil justly charged upon them, or breach of any law justly proved against them,
for well doing and not for evil have you caused them to suffer: For crying
against iniquity, and reproving sin in the gate, and for bearing witness to
the truth, and against all unrighteousness which abounds in this generation;
such have you falsely judged to be offenders, and cried a confederacy against
them, and strengthened the hands of the wicked, and caused the innocent to
groan. O! what will you do in the day of your visitation, when the Lord arises
to plead with you, to whom will you fly for refuge, and to whom will you cry
for deliverance? Shall not the Lords soul be avenged upon you, yea from the
least of you to the greatest? You shall feel his hand of judgment, even all you
who have had your fingers dipped in the unjust sufferings of the dear servants
of the Lord, whom he has called to place his name with for ever, who are his
faithful witnesses in this perverse generation, and by your persecuting of them
have you proved them to be the people of God, in the sight of all Nations, and
it is for a testimony unto them, that they are of God, and against you, that
you are of the Devil; and Christ's words are fullfilled upon them, to their
rejoicing, and to your sorrow, who said, The time comes, that they shall speak
all manner of evil falsely, and persecute you, and think they do God service
that kills you, and casts you from among them, and the Devil shall cast some of
you into prison. And these things you have done, and fullfilled Christ's words
against your selves, for a witness against you, and to show that you are
enemies to Christ and to his kingdom, and that you will not have him to reign
(as I have said: Therefore when he reigns, he shall say, bring hither those
mine Enemies and slay) them before me.

O! what will the just Judge of true judgment, the God of Heaven and Earth
render unto you, when he arises to plead the cause of the poor and needy, and
to deliver his Inheritance from under your oppression into perfect freedom?
What account will you give in that day, when he brings swift destruction upon
you? And wherewith will you answer him when the secrets of your hearts are made
manifest, and when the true witness in you all is awakened, which will bring
to your remembrance all your cruel and unjust dealing, and all your bitter and
hard speeches which in your envy you have brought forth against the Lord and
against his people? What will be done to you his enemies, when Christ Jesus,
whom you have persecuted, comes to reign in his Kingdom, and subdues the
kingdoms of this World, and changes them into the Kingdoms of the Lord, and
his Christ, and the Saints which you have oppressed, receives the Authority and
Dominion? It shall be said, All that would not that Christ should reign, slay
them before him; when it shall be given to the Saints to bind Kings in chains
and Nobles in fetters of iron, and to execute upon the heathen all the
judgments written; for behold all ye stout hearted, the Lord comes with ten
thousand of his Saints to judge the World in righteousness, and you shall be
convinced of all your ungodly deeds; for the Scriptures must be fullfilled, and
as you have done, even so will it be done unto you, when the suffering of the
righteous is finished, and your wickedness come to an end; when the Lord shall
reign you shall lick the dust off his feet, and all the persecuters of Christ
shall be trodden down as mire, and the righteous shall rejoice over them, and
the Lord shall mock when your fear and calamity comes, which come suddenly, in
a day when you expect not, how shall the Lord pardon you for this? you have
sinned against knowledge, and gone on after warning, and hardened your hearts
after reproof, and the day of your visitation you have greatly slighted, ye
Rulers have abused your power, and ye subjects have abused your subjection, and
now consider what God did in gerations past unto the rebellious children, what
he did to Pharaoh and all his Hosts, when his long suffering was finished, how
did Pharaoh harden his heart, and his cruel Task masters oppress the
righteous, even as you have done, and they would not let Israel go free to
serve the Lord, but they kept them in bondage; and this way you walk, who
exercise cruelty as they did, and laid heavy burdens upon the innocent
grieveous to be born; cruel taskmasters have you been over the heritage of the
Lord, and in Pharaohs example of wickedness have you walked, fullfilling his
measure of cruelty, and Pharaohs example shall you follow in a cursed end;
remember how the loftiness of his heart was bowed down, and how his proud
heart was abased in the day that God pleaded with him in his righteous
judgments, he and all his taskmasters was confounded in a day, and the bondage
of the righteous was broken in a moment, how was his whole strength of tyranie
overturned and turned into weakness, the righteous were delivered, and he and
all his train overwhelmed in one day, and thus shall it come to pass upon you:
Therefore consider this, all ye that fulfill the measure of iniquity, suddenly
will the righteous God be awakened to take vengeance upon you, and the just
shall not always groan under your bondage, for he that looks from the heaven
has pity upon the distressed, for whom now his arm is stretched out to bring
deliverance unto them, and all their enemies will he confound, who have this
long time ploughed long furrows upon the back of the righteous, the oppression,
and cruelty, and injustice, brought forth in this Nation, it calls for
vengeance from Heaven.

Alas, alas, woe is me for you, you Heads, and Rulers, and Judges of England,
what have you done and suffered to be done (under you) against the innocent
people of God, who is as dear to him as the apple of his eye, for they be
written on the palms of his hands, and because of the cry of the poor and the
needy will the Lord arise and plead their cause. Oh consider and let it enter
into your hearts, the cruelty and injustice that has been brought forth in
this land, and remember what God did unto all the persecuters of old, how was
their strength consumed, and they overturned and destroyed, what did he to
Pharaoh and all his host, who persecuted the seed of God, how was he destroyed
and the righteous set free; and what was done to Hammon? How was he justly
rewarded, who persecuted the innocent seed of God? What did God to Herod and
all his people who persecuted the innocent? and remember what he did unto them
that persecuted the three children, and them that persecuted Daniel, how did
they fall into the pit which they had dug for another, and how were they
destroyed, and the innocent delivered, consider and remember these things, ye
that suffer the just to groan by you.

Search through the records of old, and search what God has done unto all them
that lifted up their hand against him and his people, and is he not the same at
this day, his hand is not shortened that it cannot save his people, and destroy
his enemies, his ear is not dull of hearing that he should not understand this
unjust suffering of his people, though you live carelessely in pleasure upon
earth, while the innocent mournes, yet does the Lord regard, though you spend
your time in pleasure, and delight your selves in vanities all the day long,
yet the Lord has taken it to heart, and his spirit is grieved that his
innocent servants should lie in holes and dungeons to be trodden upon, and be
accounted as the offscouring of all things, hardly thought worthy to have a
place on the earth. Oh remember these things, ye that are high minded, and
consider what God did to the Bishops and their crew of persecutors in this
Nation, your selves are witnesses how the Lord overthrew them, and delivered
his people in a few years time, and as little as you did they think that they
whom they perseceuted, should so soon come to have reigned over them, the Lords
hand was then against oppressors as it is at this day, do you think the Lord
has forgotten or that he takes no notice of what is come to pass, how should
he forget his people to save them, or his enemies, that he should not
recompense them; but know ye assuredly that the Lord is the same, and all those
things are written in a book, and remembered by him, and he will judge justly
and righteously in his dreadful day, Ah let it enter into your hearts, serve
not your selves altogether in the pleasures of this world, but serve the Lord,
and this he requires of you, let the oppressed go free, and break every bond,
whereby the innocent does suffer, and this the Lord requires at your hands; Oh
but I feel great hardness of heart, and rather a strengthening of cruel bonds,
than a breaking of them, and you appear rather to be given up to work
wickedness, and to fulfill the largest measure of them that went before you
than otherwise, unrighteous decrees are rather established than dissannulled.

Oh what will be the end of these things, and what will be your judgment when
the Lord awakens himself as out of sleep, who has left you to follow your own
spirits to try you, that it might be known unto all what is in your hearts, and
behold perverseness lodges in them, and while the Lord has looked for justice
amongst you, even the cry of oppression has been heard, even a grieveous cry
of unjust persecution and violence against the seed of God, and once you would
have been ashamed of those things which now you act without shame, so that
which is in your hearts is powered forth in the sight of the World,

Oh ye Rulers of England, the Rulers of the Heathen shall rise up in judgment
against you, even they that never professed so much as you have done, they
shall be rather justified than you whose ways have been more equal than yours,
and less cruelty brought forth by them than by you, unto their subjects, and
this makes your sin more great, in that many of you were raised from low
estate, and you have exalted your selves more than is meet, and have caused
your very equals to groan under you, by the heavy yoke which you have prepared
for them; well, but the Lord has listened and heard, and a book ofremembrance
is written, and he will repay into your (...), the time is not long when the
Lord may scatter you and give you unto the will of your enemies, therefore be
awakened and warned, the day of your visitation is upon you all.

OH England that thou had known in this thy day, the things that belong to
thy peace.

Oh that thy Rulers and people had known how that the Lord has called unto
them.

Oh that they had considered how that his hand has been stretched forth all
the day long, and he would have gathered them as a Shepherd does his flock, but
they have not known, neither have they considered, and therefore that which
belongs to their peace will the Lord hide from their eyes, the day of their
visitation is spending apace, and the night will come, and no man shall be able
to work, and because the Lord has called and you have not heard, therefore
shall you try and the Lord will give no answer.

Oh Nation, thou art filled with oppression, and griveous iniquities; and from
the head to the foot thou bear marks of great abominations; in thee is found
lamentable oppression of the poor; and great and grieveous idolatries; and Gods
righteous soul is vexed in thee day by day, the Just groans and mournes under
the heavy hand of oppressors, many of thy Goales do witness it, where many
innocent and upright people have suffered unjustly the loss of their freedom,
without any ground, or charge of evil laid upon them.

Oh what have thy Rulers done, Judgment and Justice have they turned backward;
the cry of the poor has not been regarded, and equity has not found a place
to enter.

Who would have thought (...), who have been so high in profession of the
Scrip^^^^ should thus have dealt with them who are in the life of the
Scriptures, this agravates; your sin, in that none has been like you in
profession of Religion, and in pretenses of Righteousness; and yet you have
exceeded others in persecuting (and suffering of it) the servants of the Lord,
but it is now made manifest what lodges in your hearts; under your fair
covers of promises, words and shows, what deep hypocrisy is this that you
should profess liberty of conscience, and yet have persecuted hundreds for the
exercise of their pure Consciences.

Is not this to be taken notice of, that you should profess that which you do
not perform; and will not the Lord plead with you because of it, in his
dreadful day, which is hastening upon you, as a chief in the night, and the
wicked shall not escape; do you think that he whom you persecute in his members
and his members shall sure reign over you, do not you know that he is
sufficient to avenge himself of all his enemies; and do not you believe that he
could command thousands of thousands to fight for him, and to revenge his
Cause? Has the consideration of these things no room in your hearts, or are
your hearts wholly shut up from all compassion toward the Lords people? Surely
to vengeance will the Lord be awakened, and he will tread you down as mire in
the streets; and as you have done, and suffered to be done to the Lords people,
even so shall it be done unto you.

THere are only two Seeds in the World, and there are but two and no more, to
wit, the Seed of God, and the Seed of the Serpent; and these two are contrary
one to the other, in their bringing forth, in their time, and in their ends,
they differ in their Nature, in their fruits and works, and in their reward;
and these two are at continual enmity one against another, and never was, is,
or shall be reconciled, the life of one is the death of the other, and where
the one does live, the other does dye, and where the one rejoices, the other
is made sorrowful, and where the one is in freedom, the other is in bondage,
and where the one is Ruler, the other is a slave and in captivity, and thus are
they contrary, where the one brings forth fruit, the other is barren, and the
one is rewarded with the overthrow of the other, and the one of these is ruling
in every creature man and woman, and growing and bringing forth fruit from it
self through the creature; the fruits of the one is blessed for ever, and the
fruits of the other is cursed for ever, and betwixt these two there is no
concurrence or agreement in any thing whatsoever, they differ in likeness, and
their fruits differ in appearance, the fruit of the one is love, and peace, and
unity; the fruit of the other is hatred, and envy, and trouble, and enmity; the
fruit of the seed of God in the creature, is truth, and righteousness, and
faith, and patience, long-suffering, and temperance, and joy, and peace in the
Lord, with all other things which are good, and just, and pure; but the fruits
of the seeed of the Serpent are of another nature, as lying, theft, murder,
dissimulation, drunkenness, and whordomes, hypocrisy and all
unrighteousness, which is not according to God, but contrary to him; and by
these several fruits proceeding through the creature, do we know every
creature, and so judge of him to be the child of God, or the child's of the
Devil; in the election, or in the reprobation, for through whom the fruits of
the seed of God does spring forth, we know such are not of the Devil; and
through whom the fruits of the seed of the Serpent does spring forth, we know
such are not of God. And these two seeeds are now striving in the earth, the
one against the other, and they in whom the seed of God rules, are persecuted
by them in whom the seed of the Serpent rules; for they in whom the seed of God
rules are born of God (...) of his Spirit, and they in whom the seed of the
Serpent rules are born of flesh, and minds the things of the flesh, which shall
not endure for ever, and so every one that is born of the flesh, is of the seed
of the Serpent, or the seed of the Serpent rules in him, and every one that is
born of the seed of God, the seed of God rules in him, such are persecuted for
righteousness sake, by the seed of the Serpent which is at enmity against the
seed of God, which cannot fulfill the will of the Serpents seed, nor be
subject to his laws, for the seed of God cannot be subject to the Serpents
seed in any thing, but is subject to God, and not to any thing that is contrary
to him; but rather suffers imprisonment, and cruelties, and bonds, under the
serpents seed than in the least to bow to it.

So this is the ground of all persecution and enmity, which is betwixt the two
seeds, which seeks the overthrow each of other, but who are of the seed of God,
knows that they are of God, and that the whole world lies in wickedness,
under the government of the seed of the Serpent; and such where the seed of God
is brought forth, has the testimony in themselves that they are of God, and
have believed in the Son of God who is the light of the world, and knows him
to be the foundation and the rock of ages, and the gates of hell cannot prevail
against him, nor the enmity of the Serpents seed overcome him, nor they that
are builded on him; and this is a testimony for the seed of God, and against
the seed of the Serpent in all the World, that it is persecuted of the seed of
the Serpent, and spoken all manner of evil of by the World, according to the
words of Christ, which are fullfilled upon us to our rejoicing, who are of the
seed of God, and to the trouble of all our enemies, who are of the seed of the
Serpent. And otherwise it cannot be, but that they who are born of the flesh
must persecute them who are born of the spirit; for because of the enmity that
is placed between the two seeds, the one cannot love the other, nor have
fellowship the one with the other, and which of our forefathers the Prophets
and Disciples of Christ, which were of the seed of God, were not persecuted,
hated, and reviled, and reproached by your forefathers who were of the seed of
the Serpent, and they, no more than you, could receive the knowledge of God and
his ways, but ever despised the path thereof, and counted the wisdom of God
foolishness, and stood in the enmity against God and his people, and all their
ways, and they that were of the seed of the serpent ever called truth error,
and the way thereof heresy and blalphemie.

Jeremiah, Amos, and the rest, were called deceivers and mad men, and seducers
of the people, and evil was done unto them, Jeremiah was put in the stocks and
in the dungeons, by the Rulers of that generation, who were of the seed of the
serpent, even the Prophets of God who were sent of God, and were witnesser of
his name in truth and righteousness, were acounted and called deceivers, and
were persecuted by imprisonments, and some unto death as you may read in the
Scripture, Jeremiah 20. Amos 7.

These with others who were sent of the Lord to bear testimony of God and
against the Rulers, who executed not true justice and judgment, but were
oppressors of the poor, who judged for gifts and rewards, and against the false
Prophets and Priests that ran and had not been sent, who used their tongue, and
said the Lord says, and the Lord had not spoken to them, who prophesied
falsely, and preached for hire, and bare rule by their means, and made a prey
upon the people, these were of the seed of serpent, and did persecute them that
bore witness against them, that were of the seed of God.

The Word of the Lord was even a reproach unto Jeremiah daily, and they smote
him with the tongue, and the chief governor of the house of the Lord, smote
him and put him in the dungeon, and Amos, which had been no Prophet not the son
of a Prophet but a herdsman, he was persecuted by the Priest of Bethel, and was
commanded not to Prophecy in the Kings Chapel, and Amaziah the Priest
complained to Jereboam the King against Amos the Prophet, and Ezekiel the
Prophet could not be received of the people, for says the Lord, they will not
hear thee, for they will not hear me, and they were a rebellious house, and
impudent, and hardhearted, and would not receive the Prophets words, and thus
it was in the time of the Apostles and Christ Jesus, they were persecuted, and
some of them put to death for bearing testimony unto the father, whom they were
witnesses of and against the World; what reproaches, slanders, beatings,
buffetings, scornings, tumults, uproars, and all manner of evil did they suffer
in their generation by the seed of the Serpent, from the hands of the Rulers,
and Priests, and people; Christ was accounted a deceiver, and called a devil,
and a blasphemer; and the Apostles were called heretics, deceivers, and
pestilent fellows, movers of sedition, destroyers of the Law* and turners of
the World upside down, and such like: All these were of the seed of God that
were persecuted, and the persecuters were of the seed of the Serpent, which
brought forth violence, and wickedness, and false judgment against the
innocent; and some were put to death upon the false account of being deceivers
and blasphemers.

If you search through the whole Scripture, you may read how the just were
persecuted, even from Abel who was of the seed of God, and all that ever were
persecuted for righteousness sake, were persecuted upon the account of being
evil doers, and the persecuters judged themselves to be righteous.

He was the chief Governor of the house of the Lord, that persecuted Jeremiah,
and the people that smote him with the tongue, said, They knew the Law should
not perish from the Priest, nor Counsel from the Honorable: and it was Amaziah
the Kings Priest that persecuted Amos, and it was they that seeemed to be
religious that persecuted the Prophets, and it was the wise Scribes and
Pharisees, and the chief Priests, that handled the Law, and that offered
Sacrifice, that persecuted Christ and the Apostles.

How zealous were the Jews in their traditions and observations, in their
sabboth-keeping, and in the days of their humiliation, in their
Temple-worship, and in all the Commandments of God? They were zealous according
to their own thoughts, yet were they of the seed of the Serpent; and persecuted
the seed of God in blind zeal, upon false judgment, and the persecutors had a
name to be righteous, and the persecuted were accounted unrighteous, and so
darkness was put for light, and light for darkness, and them that were
well-doers were accounted evil doers, and them that were evil doers were
accounted righteous.

And such was the blindness of Rulers and people, such as prophesied falsely,
and came in their own name were received, for the people loved to have it so
when the great abomination was committed, but they that came in the fathers
name could not be received, but were persecuted; the Prophets, Christ, nor his
Apostles could not be received of the World, but were persecuted in it, and
laws and decrees were made against them, whereby they suffered unjustly upon
grounds suspicions and jealousies, for that way was called heresy, in which
the true God was worshipped.

Christ was called a deceiver, and the wisdom of the World could not receive
the knowledge of the things of God, and as it was then, so is it now in every
particular, if any man has an ear to hear he may hear, and a heart to
understand he may perceive; for now is the seed of God and the seed of the
Serpent at enmity, striving one against the other, and the one persecutes the
other in this generation as ever it was we are persecuted upon the false
account and false judgment of being evil doers, and deceivers, and our
persecuters accounts themselves righteous and zealous for Gods ways, and such
as are false Prophets and deceivers, are accounted true Ministers of Christ,
even them that preach for hire, and seek for their gain from their Quarter, and
through convetousnesse, by feigned words makes merchandise of souls, such
were, and such are deceivers and were never sent of God, and yet such in this
generation are accounted Ministers of Christ, and such as are Ministers of
Christ, who walk in the Doctrine of Christ, as they have received freely, so do
they freely give, and seek not advantage themselves, but are persecuted and
reviled for righteousness sake, such are accounted and falsely judged
deceivers, and so true judgment is turned backward, good is called evil, and
evil good, deceivers are called Ministers of Christ, and Ministers of Christ
are called deceivers, and thus people in this generation erres in judgment, and
persecutes the righteous, who are of the seed of God.

And it was ever the Ministers of Christ that were persecuted, and never any of
them persecuted any, nor ever any of the deceivers persecuted for
righteousness sake, but they ever persecuted the just and sought to the
Rulers, and to the Elders of the people for violence to be done unto them that
feared the Lord, and witnessed against their wickedness, it was the Chief
Priests and them that handled the law, which caused Christ and the Apostles to
be persecuted.

Amaziah sought to Jereboam to have Amos persecuted and as it was then, so it
is now. How does the Teachers of this Nation seek to the Magistrates to have
the innocent persecuted, and yet these men are zealous for their performances
and duties in the set days of humiliation and lectures, and even they think
they do God good service in imprisoning the innocent, they have great zeal
without knowledge as the Jews had, and they are strict in their Sabbath
keeping, in their singing and praying, etc. But yet is violence done to the
just and true judgment and justice neglected, and therefore all that which they
perform to God is abomination in his sight.

Oh what complaining is by the Teachers of this N^tion to the Magistrates? What
crying out for defense, showing that they want the spiritual armor, and dare
not trust the Lord? What plotting and contriving against the seed of God by the
seed of the Serpent, who ever was a persecutor and never was persecuted? What
laws and decrees are brought forth against the Lords people, as traps to
ensnare their fee, like as it was in the days of old, even like unto
Artaxerxes the King, who made a Decree and gave commandment that the City of
God should not be builded, and this was from the information and complaining of
Rhehum the Chancellor and Shimshai the Scribe, who brought certain accusations
to the King against the people of God, and called the holy City, a rebellious
and bad City, and that it was hurtful unto Kings, and danger to endammage the
revenue of Kings.

Here was a conspiracy by the Scribes and such as handled the Law, with the
King against the people of God, and thus it is now, he that has an eye to see
may see; how many petitions have they put to the Rulers against the people of
God? What grieveous and false accusations have they laid to the charge of the
innocent, saying they be Popishly affected, and disobedient to Government: so
that the seed of the Serpent ever does hatch evil against the seed of God to
destroy it from off the face of the earth, and it was the wise, and the
learned, and the Rulers, whom the Devil made use of to persecute the righteous:
it was such as Rhehum the Chancellor, and Shimshai the Scribe, and Pashur the
chief Governor in the house of the Lord, and it was such as the chief Priests
and Elders of the people, and the wise men of this world, such as these it was
that persecuted the righteous, and so it is now, Orthodox men (so called)
Justices of Peace, etc. whom the Devil makes use of; to persecute the innocent,
against which no occasion can be found but concerning the Law of God, as it was
with Daniel, as you may read, Daniel 6, and 5, 6. against him they could find
no occasion that they might presecute him, but concerning the Law of his God,
and it was the President and Princes, and Counselors and the Governors which
consulted together against Daniel, who was the servant of God.

And as it was then, so it is now in this generation, they can find no occasion
against us (the people of God) either by doctrine or conversation, but only
concerning the law and worship of our God, for there is a law against the law
of Christ, and all that will not swear contrary to the law of Christ, must be
counted evil doers and Popish recusants, and punished, and this is not for any
evil in us, but because we cannot transgress the law of our God, and also
another decree, which takes hold upon them that travel to worship God on the
first day of the week, whereby the innocent does suffer and are like to suffer;
and not for evil doing is any occasion against us, but because we will not stay
from the worship of our God, but are made to travel that we may meet together
to worship him; with such other decree; which shows unto all men that they
seek occasion against us concerning the law of our God, not having occasion by
doctrine, or conversation, or any other thing; so for righteousness sake are
we persecuted, and not for evil doing; some are persecuted because for
conscience sake they cannot stay at their own houses but are moved by the Lord
to declare the Name of the Lord abroad in the Nation, many by a decree are
taken and punished as for vagabonds, and this is an occasion concerning the law
of our God; and Christ was persecuted and put to death by an unrighteous
decree, for they had an (unrighteous) law, as they said, aad by it he ought to
dye, and unrighteous laws and decrees were made against the Apostles, whereby
they were commanded to depart out of their towns, and to preach no more in the
Name of Jesus, and by such decrees were the Apostles persecuted. So that this
may show unto all, that our forefathers who were of the seed of God, some were
persecuted unto death by unrighteous decrees and statutes, and as it was then,
so it is now, he that has an eye to see may see: the same as ever was is come
to pass in the earth, the seed of the Serpent striving against the seed of God
and persecuting it where it is brought forth: by unrighteous decrees, how did
the late Bishops of England persecute the harmless? What Laws and Ordinances
were then brought forth, whereby violence was done against such as feared the
Lord, and then was the seed of the Serpent striving against the seed of God.

And this is given forth to show unto all the World the cause of persecution in
its first ground, (to wit) the irrecoverable enmity which is betwixt the two
seeds, the one continually hating and persecuting the other, and seeking the
overthrow each of other, and the enmity betwixt the two seeds, is the cause of
strife, the one being innocent, and the other unrighteous, so it is not for the
persons sake, or any other thing that the just are persecuted, but it is
because of the seed of God, which cannot bow, nor worship the seed of the
Serpent, that is the first cause of persecution.

Again, all may see what unrighteous laws and decrees were and are brought
forth to persecute the innocent, whereby they have suffered in all generations
for righteousness sake, and not for evil doing; also it may be seen, that it
was the wise, the learned, the Presidents and Chancellors and chief Priests,
and Scribes, who were and are the very active persons by whom the seed of God
is persecuted, and even such as were and are zealous in their observances and
Sabboth-keeping, and such like, it was not the poor nor the foolish only, which
the Devil made use of to do his work; but it was the wise, and the learned, and
the chief in Authority, and such like, it was such in whom the seed of the
Serpent ruled, who were the active men against the servants of God.

Also it was through the evil counsel of such as were Teachers and Scribes, and
handlers of the law, and it was through the false accusations of the chief
Priests unto the Governors and Elders of the people, and so it is now at this
day, as I have proved; and also the righteous was persecuted upon the false
judgment of others, and they were falsely adjudged to be deceivers, and
blasphemers, and evil doers, and upon this account were they persecuted and as
being falsely reputed to be destructive to Government, and revenue of Kings, and
upon such like, and that they made void the Law of God, and were movers of
sedition and upon such accounts as these, was the seed of God persecuted, as it
is at this day; and all men that read this with moderation may come to the good
understanding, upon what account and by what instruments and by what means the
seed of the serpent has persecuted the seed of God, even from Cain unto this
day.

And this is to go abroad into this Nation, and into the World, and it is given
forth from the suffering seed of God, to clear it self in the sight of all men,
that not for evil, but for good are these sufferings laid upon it. But behold
the Lord regards the cry of the poor and of the unjust sufferer, and he will
remember his mercy and his covenant with his own seed; and when it passes
through the fire, he is with it, and though it be afflicted it cannot be
forsaken, though the Lord hide his face from his people, and suffers grievous
things to be done against them by the wicked, yet it is but to try them and to
prove them, that they may be found faithful to him, and the seed of God shall
reign in the earth, and the seed of the Serpent, and his head shall be bruised,
and is bruised already, and it bruiseth its heel by following after with
persecution and cruelty, but the seed of God shall arise and is arisen, and
praises the living God for evermore.

It plainly appears that the suffering of the people of God in this Age, is a
greater suffering and more unjust, than in the days of Christ, of the
Apostles, or in any time since: Queen Mary's days brought not forth a
suffering more cruel, and in many respects, as does appear; First, What was
done to Christ and the Apostles, was chiefly done by a law, and in a great part
by the due execution of a law; and also the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, had
more just examination, and a more just persecution in law, than the people of
God have now, for now it is a matter of conscience among some of the
Magistrates in England to cast men into prison, and confine them, and to cause
their goods to be spoiled, without any law or the due execution of a law; which
is utterly contrary to the Charters of England, and hereby it appears the
suffering to be more unjust, because what the persecuters of old did to the
people of God, they did by a law, and by the due execution of a law, but now
many are caused to suffer deeply; whom the transgression of no law, good or
bad, can be charged against; and others suffer without the due execution of a
Law.

Again, herein it does appear to exceed the suffering of the Saints in former
ages, in that many suffer now cruel things about trivial foolish matters, as
for not putting off a Hat or Theeing men; and for denying the foolish
circumstance of swearing; and we do not read that the worst of Tyrants in the
Apostles days, or before or since, ever caused any to suffer for such things
as these, or ever questioned any upon any such small accounts, for hundreds have
suffered upon suspicion, when nothing at all can be charged against them, and
this is contrary to Magna-Carta, and in many other respects which might be
named; this suffering is greater than has been in any age, for many have
suffered in this Commonwealth, which have been faithful, and hazarded all in
time of war for the good of the Commonwealth; and many of them suffer by them
who have been enemies and in Arms against the Commonwealth, and herein the
suffering appears more intolerable. But does the Magistrate think to come to
account for these things, yea the Lord is just, and his way is righteous; What
flesh could but be provoked hereby? But the Saints are changed in nature, and
are to fulfill the Will of the Lord by suffering: the cruelty of men is become
exceeding great against the Lord and his people.

Again, hereby the persecution in this age appears more to exceed former ages,
because liberty of conscience in the exercise of Religion, was never so much
promised and professed, as in this Nation at this day; and yet for the exercise
of a pure conscience many are woeful sufferers, even by such who in words
profess liberty of conscience themselves; and yet persecutes the exercise of
it in others, even for not putting off a hat or the like to them; these with
many other things, may aggravate the heinousness of the sin of persecution
to be great and more unjust than in former Ages.

Alas how is the sword of justice turned backward, and the innocent smitten and
persecuted, and that for righteousness sake and not for evil doing.

THE END.

