THE VVALLS OF IERICO Razed down to the GROUND.

OR, An Answer to a lying Book, called the Quaking principles dashed in pieces:
Wherein one called Henoch Howet, which goes under the name of an ANABAHTIST,
does falsely accuse, and maliciously belie us; his seven principles which he
calls ours, I shall lay down, and what we own is vindicated, and what he has
belyed the truth in, is turned upon his own head.

By one who is zealous for the name of the Lord of hosts, called Edward
Borough.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, and art to be sold, at the
Black-spread-Eagle, at the West End of Paul's.

THE VValls of Jerico Razed down to the GROUND.
NOw is the time wherein the Lord God of heaven and earth is setting up a
kingdom, and exalting his name in the earth, and is exalting his own Son upon
the holy hill of Sion, and is discovering the mother of harlots, who has made
all Nations drunk with her fornication, and Iesabel shall be cast into a bed of
torment, and the fire of the Lord God is come down from heaven, and is kindled
in the earth, to burn up and destroy, and to consume to ashes, even all those
that have worshipped the Beast, and has his Image, and the false Prophets that
has deceived the Nations, and they both shall be taken alive, and cast into
the pit; for the Lord is grieved and wearied with this adulteress and viperous
generation, who are offering up that which stinks in his nostriles, and strange
fire, and are professing him and his resurrection, who crucify him, and put
him to open shame, and they deny the end of his coming, and are offering in
Cains nature, while they slay the Just, and are in the gainsaying of Corah, who
perished in it; and so shall all those that gainsay the Lord in his way, and
now the Lord of heaven and earth is proclaiming war with the Dragon and his
Angels, and they shall be cast out, and whosoever does resist him in his way,
shall be broken to pleces as a potters vessel; and thou Henoch Howet, who would
limit the holy one of Israel, and bind him up in thy carnal reason, and stint
him in his way, and form up things in thy imagination from the Scripture, and
walks by tradition; thou art accusing us among the Papists, but let it stand
for thy self, and to that in thy conscience I speak, and it will let thee see
that all thy worship is taken on in thy will, and in that nature, in which the
enmity stands, and so has taken on things, and up things by tradition from
others, and that which was commands to others, who followed the Lamb
whithersoever he went, and no commands to thee, neither does God require those
things of that nature, neither does he accept it, while the bands of wickedness
is not loosed, and the oppressed is not set free, and therefore let all flesh
and carnal reason be silent, for God will confound the wisdom of the wise, and
they that have divined in their reasons, which is in the curse, and under the
curse, shall be mad; now in the day when God is raising up his own Image, and
bringing back that which has long been held in captivity, and now the men of
the earth, Pharao, and all the Inchanters of Egypt, and the Soothsayers, and
the Diviners, and Gog and Magog, among which thou Howet art found one, and they
compass the Camp of the Saints about, but fire shall come down from heaven,
that shall destroy all the adversaries of the Lord, and Israel shall go free.

1. That which thou calls our first principle; And first, thou says they oppose
the word Christ, to the written word; and will a word that is a discovery
spiritual to be the word, but whatsoever it is they call the word, it is
perfectly false, and not the truth.

Answ. Oh thou liar and slanderer, the Lord will plead with thee, for addars
poison is under thy tongue, and thou have a whores forehead, that art not
ashamed of thy self accusing, let hundreds in the City of London who has heard
us, be witness against thee, and thy lies that thou have Printed; and suffers
them to be cried up and down the streets, as thy filthy songs and ballads, and
runs to disgrace the truth, but to the Lord who is righteous, shall thou give
an account; and thou art Ianes and Iambres, that withstood Moses, and for all
thy hard speeches and filthy lies, shall thou give an account, for to him who
is the searcher of hearts, and that in thy conscience shall bear witness
against thee; and that we oppose the word Christ to the written word, as thou
calls it: I charge it upon thee, that we do not oppose Christ to the Scripture,
for Christ is the word, John 1. and this the Scripture does not oppose, but
bears witness to him who is the word, and his name is called the Word of God,
and this word became flesh and dwelt among us, as the Scripture witness, and
the Word of the Lord endures for ever; but he does not say the Letter endures
for ever: but thou that art accusing that we do not own a form of sound words,
here thou shall be judged out of thy own mouth; where reads thou of a written
word in the Scripture? and here thou shall be tried by the Scripture, and
judged by it that thou art a perverter of the Scripture; thou would have more
words then one, the word is but one, the word sanctifies, sanctify them
through thy word, but he does not say the Letter sanctifies, and the Word of
the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting, but the Letter is not from
everlasting; and the Scripture had a beginning, and was declared in time, and
prophecy shall cease, but the Word is from everlasting to everlasting, and the
Word of the Lord is as a hammar, and as a fire, but the Scripture does not say
that it is as a hammar and a fire, and yet the word that he spoke was spirit
and life, yet the Scripture is not spirit and iife; and thou that would set up
the letter in the place of God, to try all things, and search all hearts, thou
makes an Idol of it, and so opposes God with it, and so would bring that to
contend against the Lord, the which they witness through suffering: and I tell
thee and all the world, the word is but one, and all who knows God hears that
word, and it is a light and a Lanthhorn unto their paths, but that is
invisible and eternal, and what the Saints were witness of this word they
declared, 1. John, and the Scripture is true, and bears true record and
testimony of the word, and they were true witnesses of the word of life that
wrote it, and it is a true declaration or testimony of those things that are
certainly beli^ved, Luk 1. of the which they saw and heard, and tasted; and all
who come to know the Word of the Lord, reads it again, and sees it as it is
written: and further, thy envy and shame is made manifest, that thou would
accuse, and yet thou says whatsoever they call the word, it is perfectly
false, and not truth; here thou would judge, and yet thou cannot tell what we
call the Word, but at last concludes its false whatever it be: and here thou
blasphemes, and calls Christ Jesus in whom is all truth, false; for no other
word I own but Christ, and the Scripture speaks of no word of God but one, and
thou that would make the Letter the Word, it self shall judge thee; and thou
makes much mincing and arguments in thy carnal reason, and says the ground of
error, is ignorance of the Scripture, and thou brings Mark and Matthew; alas, I
know what Mark and Matthew wrote is true, if thou had an ear to hear, the
ground of all error is because he is not known, nor his voice whom the
Scripture bear record of; and thou says we drive men into darkness, that works
upon people to disesteem the Scripture, and persuades people to an uslessness
of the Scriptures; let all that have heard us in the City of London, or
elsewhere speak, if they heard us say the Scriture was usless, or did disesteem
it, but on the contrary we exhorted them to search if the Scripture did not
bear witness to those things we declared, and so let shame cover thy face thou
falfe accuser; and thou brings 2 Timothy 3.17. that it is for the perfecting the
man of God, and that its profitable to correct and instruct; this is owned, but
its not the man of God, thou would have perfected by it, but such hirelings as
thy self has been, and false accusers as thou art, and I say it is profitable
to us to reprove thee, and correct thee, and read thy portion; a liars portion
is in the lake, and as Romans 15.4. its not denied, but as Christ Jesus is
witnessed, who is the Comforter, whlch the Scripture bears witness of, there is
comfort and hope; and thou says the Scripture proves the New birth, and
teaches perseverance to the end, it bears testimony of some that did witness
the New birth, and that persevered unto the end; but what is this to thee, that
never came one step in the way,? and as for promises, there is no promise, but
condemnation in the Scripture, in such as thee, and read it, the liar and false
accuser, and the envious shall not inhererit the Kingdom of God, and their own,
thy promise and thy portion.

2. Particular which thou calls a mistake, that is speaking to a thing within
thee, I would fain know what can be meant of the thing within men, for there is
nothing to be spoken to in man, but man.

Answ. Here thy igno^ance, shame and envy is made manifest, that thou that has
pretended to be a Minister, and a Pastor of a Church, and cannot tell what thou
has spoke, to what has thou ministered, to the wind, or have thou ministered
to the devil, and preached glad tidings to him, who is in the transgression,
and free grace to him that has walked contrary to God it is so; and therefore
thou and al^ who are in that nature, knows not what you speak, and therefore
none has been at all profited by your Ministry; and blessed be the Lord that
its hid from the eyes of the wise, and revealed to babes: and thy envious
spirit is seen, that it is of thy father the Devil, who is the accuser of the
Brethren, that would lay a thing down as an error, and tells of dashing in
pieces our principles, and yet knows not what it is, nor what we speak; do
thou accuse, and knows not for what, let shame cover thy face, that ever thou
should put pen to paper, or speak of God or Christ, and speaks thou knows not
what, and th^n thou has hatched a thing, and concludes there is nothing in man
to be spoken to, but man, and before thou knew not, and so art in confusion;
for Christ and his Apostles always spoke to man, thou says the Apostle says,
he went and ministered to the Spirits in prison, and to open the blind eye, and
to raise the dead, and the dead should hear the voice of the Son of God and
live, and he preached liberty to the captive, and is given for a covenant to
open the blind eyes, and unstop the deaf ears, and make the lame to walk, if
thou have an ear thou may hear, but not to feed thy serpents wisdom do I speak,
I will shut thee out, for into it thou cannot enter, but through death, and
death wrote the book, and the Apostles were made manifest to every man's
conscience in the sight of God; and the slothful servant had a talent given to
improve, which was another and not his own, and that was required of him, and
that will God require of man, and unto that we speak which hears us, and shall
witness us eternally, even that which is not in the transgression, neither is
of man, but is given to man to improve, and ye^ is not far from man, but this
is a mystery, and it shall be sealed for without a parable spoke he not, to
such as thou art, and I know this is a parable; but in the end thou says, thou
knows not how they can speak to any light in man distinct from him, unless they
speak unto Satan, or some of his legions: here again thy shame and ignorance is
made manifest, we speak to the ear, and the eye in man, which the God of the
world has blinded, and this is not of man, and yet is not far from man, but
distinct that is thy own word, I do not own it: bring forth the blind that has
eyes, and the deaf that has ears; did the Prophets speak to the devil in man;
we speak to the witness of God in man, and according to this shall all be
judged, if thou have an ear thou may hear: oh thou blasphemer, do thou call
that which may be known of God, which is manifest on Romans 2. do thou call
this a Legion of Devils, even that which declares the eternal power and
Godhead, but thou art he that calls the Master of the house Beelsibub, and in
that nature thou art, and the Lord will rebuke.

3. Principle, That thou calls a mistake, that is, the denying the use of reason
in the matters of God, calling it serpentine.

Answ. The world by wisdom knows not God, and all the disputing and twining,
and lavishing of the wisdom of man, and that which thou calls reason, it is
corrupted, and is shut out, and who lives in that nature, are the unreasonable
men that has not faith: now he that has not faith, has not reason, and he
that has faith, has the witness in himself, but I see thee, thy witness is
without thee, and so thou speaks unreasonably; and all that would understand
the mysteries of the Kingdom, must come through death, for light shines in
darkness, but darkness cannot comprehend it, and therefore one cries lo here,
and lo there, and with that which thou calls reason, is Scripture torn asunder,
and strife, and contention, and endless disputes and striving for Mastery,
which is carnal, and all this we deny: And thou says upon this ground, they
will not do as the Apostles and Christ himself, who disputed with the
gainsayers, Ioh. 6. and Stephen, Acts* 6. and thou brings in some of the
Synagogue of Libertines, and Syrenians, and Alexandrians, and the rest, and
disputed with Stephen, and they were not able to resist him: let many hundreds
of this City of London, both in public, and in private, bear witness against,
if we have not disputed, and has not been ready to give an answer to the
gainsayers, though not such a one as they desired, even as Christ our Master
did not answer the Jews in their subtle tempting of him, and of those Sects
that encountered both Stephen and Paul, truly I must needs say unto thee, we
have met with the same generation in this City, whereof thou art one, and truly
more subtle then they were, but in the eternal light you are all seen, and many
though they could not gainsay, yet have resisted us; and after a little, thou
says thou pleads not for carnal reason, for this will not suffer any to follow
Christ: further, then they can carry their own things, their honors,
pleasures, ease and lusts, to that in thy conscience I speak, whether this does
not rule thee and guide thee; it will let thee see thou art pleading for
honor, and respecting men's persons, and has them in admiration, because of
advantage, and brings the example of others to prove and uphold thy deceit,
which they were neither commanded nor commended for to oppose the commands of
Christ, and the express Scripture: and thou goes on further and says, God is
the author of memory, and wisdom, and reason; but I tell thee there is a
wisdom and a reason that God will confound, for by faith we know the heavens
were made, and see them upholden, and by faith all things is brought to our
remembrance, and it is the light that convinces of sin, even the light of
Christ, and so in the eternal light I see what thou pleads for; for eating of
the tree of knowledge, and there thou art till thou art become a fool, and die
to that reason; thou shall never eat of the tree of life, and therefore flesh
be silent: and thou says, thou does not allow that reason that gets only a
conclusion, or an argument instead of Christ; and after thou says the day is
yet to dawn, and the day star to arise, and thou pryes violently for it: and
here what has thou more for an assurance of thy salvation, then an argument,
and a conclusion instead of Christ, for thou confesses the day is not dawned,
and then thou art yet in the night, and in darkness, for the day dawns, and the
day star arises before Christ be witnessed, but thou knows no such thing, as
either Christ, or the dawning, if thou had not others testimony, and that is
without; and thou art one Christ spoke of since John, the Kingdom suffers
violence, and many thrust into it, and thou art striving, and art violent, but
I say thou shall not be able till thou lay down thy contending in thy carnal
wisdom, and striving, and resisting, but thou must become a fool, and sit at
Jesus feet, but thou art full, and rich, and hole, and need no Physician, and
therefore thou must be sent empty away, and when the book of conscience shall
be opened, thou shall be judged for what thou has done against the innocent.

Now something in Answer to the fourth particular, Which thou say is a
tenent held forth by the Northern people; which is a denying of the assention,
and being of the body of Christ.

Answ. O thou enemy of righteousness, when will thou cease to pervert the right
way of God, who utters thy lies and slanders against the Innocent God shall
judge thee, and between thee and us, whether thou have not uttered lies and
false accusations in the name of the Lord, and put forth in writing unto the
world for truth, that which is absolutely contrary unto the Truth; God will
reward thee, thou full of subtilty, according to thy deeds who takes part with
the Dragon against the Lamb, and goes about by thy lying slanders, to rend the
way of truth (which thou can not comprehend in thy serpents wisdom) odious
unto all men, but God takes our part against thee, and will dash thy lies and
slanders, and thy Impudent forehead in pieces, even by that power which make
the earth to quake and tremble, which is become a reproach unto this
generation, many who have heard us since we came to this City (though our
enemies) shall witness against thee, and for us in this particular; for we have
often witnessed forth, and I do here again witness forth in the sight of God and
men, that Christ Jesus is risen, and ascended far above all principalities and
powers, and the same which descended into the lower parts o^ ^he earth, is also
ascended, and raigns over all, subjecting all unto him^^lf, that he may be Lord
over all, and in all, and may be glorified by all; and members of his body we
are (who thou enviously rails against) and wit^esses of the body we are,
whereof Christ Jesus is head, and because ^f ^he resurrection of the dead body,
which is ascended, we are called i^ question, and all Sects and opinions are
troubled, and on an uproar ^^^ce^^in^ us; and I tell thee plainly, we are so
far from denying the asc^nsion and being of the body of Christ, that because of
being called to ^^^^ess i^, as being members of it, we are persecuted and
reviled by such (...) thy self, whose carnal conceptions and imaginations of
truth we do deny, and does testify unto you all, that though death is the
resurrection and ascension witnessed, and every one that reads the Scripture is
not witnesses of the resurrection of the body of Christ; and all whose witness
is only without them, other men's words which had the witness within them, we
deny to be true witnesses, but are found false witnesses of the resurrection,
and of the ascension, and knows not Christ, nor his body but by hearsay; and
whereas thou brings many Scriptures to prove his resurrection and ascension: I
answer, the Scriptures we own to be a true declaration of the witness which
was in the Apostles, of the resurrection, and of the ascension of Christ; but
thee we deny, who art found a liar, and a slanderer, and thy resurrection will
be unto condemnation, and thy ascension will prove a descending into the
bottomless pit, for ever to be tormented, except thou repent, and from the life
of the holy men of God thou art razed out, who art found in the way of
ungodliness, and thou have nothing to do to profess their words, who art out of
their life, nor no inheritance in their words; but as thou seals them, adding
thy own imaginations upon them, and wresting them to thy own destruction, being
one unlearned in the way of God, and in the doctrine of Christ: And whereas
thou say, and thus you see how these men deny the Lord that bought them, if
they deny the body that was crucified for them: I answer, We deny not the Lord
that bought us, for by him can we say, we have received the end of his coming,
and of his death and ascension, even he has purchased us, and set us free from
the power and Kingdom of the Devil, of lies and slanders, and false
accusations after us, by whom the Man-child is brought forth, and this shall
stand for thy own condition, who art a wandering star, and has no habitation in
the heavens; God will plead with thee, thou who have set thy self against the
Lord, in slandring and reviling his servants.

Now to thy fifth Particular, That we deny the Ordinances of Christ, in which
thou say, we also deny the Lord that bought us.

Answ. The way unto God, and unto everlasting life, which is Christ Jesus, we
deny not, but are true witnesses, that same Christ alone which was crucified at
Jerusalem, and which God has raised from the dead, and which is ascended, in
him alone is salvation, and by him also alone are all justified that believe in
him; and this we declare freely unto all people, that Christ is the Ordinance
of God, ordained by him, for the salvation of all that believe, and for the
condemnation of all that believe not in him; and that the way unto this Christ,
is not any outward visible thing, but even that which is manifested from him,
leads up unto him, even the light by which he has lightened every one that
comes into the world, which is spiritual as Christ is spiritual; and whereas
thou say, there is nothing that Christ commanded, but we deny it, mentioning
only your Baptism, and your Breaking of Bread, which is your Idol, and your
Image you bow unto; the one Baptism, which is by one Spirit into one Body, into
the death of Christ, we are witnesses of, and the bread which we break, is the
Communion of the body of Christ, and we being many, are one bread; but the
beggarly rudiments of the world, we testify against, being witnesses of the
substance, and your taken on practices, in that nature, which is contrary unto
Christ, from the words and commands of Christ, unto them that followed him, we
also testify against, and in it you are found among the Papists, which walks
by tradition, and not from the motion of the Spirit of God; and here thou art
found a liar, for the commands of Christ is our life, our joy, and our peace
and glory, and hereby we know that we love him, because we keep his
commandments, and they are not grievous unto us (which is not received by
tradition from without us, but by the eternal Spirit, Christ Jesus revealed in
us, which is not contrary to his commands without, but a fulfilling of them;
for he is not a Jew who is one outwardly, whose praise is of men, neither is
the obedience which Christ does require, a conforming the outward man unto an
outward thing, which obedience is your boasting only, and there only your
difference lies from all the world, in the outward appearance, Pharisee-like;
but the ground of enmity, and seat of the beast, is standing within, and you
are twofold more the children of the devil, and Go^ is risen to confound you,
and to break your Image to pieces, and he shall have the praise of God, who is
the Jew inward, whose obedience and Circumcision is inward, and who have no
confidence in the flesh: and whereas thou exhorts to hear one loving reproof
out of the Scripture, which their predecessors (I mean the Papists) thou say
would have taken from us in the English tongue, and these would take from us
the virtue of i^, that is to say, the sharpness and sweetness of it, by working
upon us a dislike to it; I answer, we do deny thy voice, and though thou may
bring Scripture in thy mouth to us, it is but as the devil brought to Christ,
and we deny it from thee, for if thou say God lives, thou swears falsely, and
the Papists they are thy predecessors, who walks only by tradition as thou
do, from a thing without them, separate from the life, and both them and thee
we do deny, and bears witness against you, to be without God in the world, in
the alienation out of the Covenant, knowing nothing of him, but what you have
heard by a fame and a report, and that we in the least would take from any the
virtue of the Scripture; it is a lie uttered by the devil in thee, for we
testify unto all, that it shall every tittle be fulfilled, even upon the
ungodly, and thou shall know it one day to be fulfilled upon thee, thou liar
must be cast into the lake that burns for ever; and this is the sharpness and
sweetness which you must have from it, who art a false accuser of the Brethren,
bearing the Image of the Dragon, the Devil whose servant thou art, as it is
manifest by thy writing, and this many will witness with us, that often we do
declare upon the just and the unjust, the Scripture must be fulfilled, and the
righteous must have a reward, and the ungodly must have their portion in outer
darkness, according as the Scripture says and herein we establish the
Scripture in its place, to be a true declaration of God and Christ, and what
the righteous and the wicked shall enjoy, but that it is God and Christ, or the
way unto life, we deny it; for this is its virtue, a declaration of that which
the Saints believed, and he that witnesses the same life and truth which it
testifies of, to be made manifest in him, is a witness of it, and it is a
witness unto him, and this is the virtue of i^; if thou have an ear thou may
hear, and that we work upon any a dislike of the Scriptures; I charge thee to
be a liar, for to the fulfilling and establishing of it we declare, that every
one may walk up in the life of it, by that which gave it forth, and to be a
true witness of it, as they were that spoke it; but thee and all such we do
deny, which adds your imaginations upon it, to sell for money; and whereas thou
say by way of Query to us, has the Scripture no power over you? have you a
spirit to guide you without a written word, it is out of Gods government if it
cannot be brought to the Law and to the Testimony? I answer, Jesus Christ only
has power over us, and not a Letter without us; and the spirit by which we are
guided, is no other but that which gave forth the Scripture, which spirit is
the Word of God, and which spirit the Scripture bears witness unto; and this we
often say, if we speak or act contrary to the Scripture, let us be judged by
the Scripture, and we, as Paul did, do commend all that shall search the
Scripture, to try whether these things be not so, which we declare; and herein
we are under the government of God, who alone has power over us; but you who
has not the same spirit which gave forth the Scripture, neither knows it, nor
us, but out of the evil corrupt ground thou judges of it, as thou do of us,
and both thy judgment of it and us, is to be judged by the eternal light of
Christ, which never erreth nor changes; and whereas thou say, we may be
familiar spirits for ought thou know, what muttering and uncouth howling is
among us, which you cannot but impute to be a spirit contrary to the Word, if
we will not come to the Word to be tried; I answer, it is true, thou knows us
not, for we are unknow to thy generation, though you have the Scripture, which
our life and practices, are witness of; as Christ was unknown to the Pharisees
who had the Scripture, which he came to fulfill; and thou art ignorant of the
Scripture, and a scorner of the power of it, who calls the power of the Lord
uncouth howling; what would you have said concerning David, who lay roaring all
the day long, even as a man distracted; and concerning Habakkuk, whose belly
trembled, and whose lips quivered, when he heard the voice of God; but here you
are made manifest, who scorns that which the Scripture bears witness of, and
never knew what it was to be pricked to the heart, as they were which cried
out, what shall we do to be saved; and if thou can, thou may try by the
Scripture, whether this be any other but that which the Scripture speaks of,
and not the same spirit which made the servants of God to quake and tremble,
which the Scripture speaks of, which this day is become a reproach, even unto
them that profess the Scripture; for by the word of God, which the Scripture
declares of, shall all flesh tremble, and be confounded, and then thy self
shall be judged, into the lake that burns for ever, except thou repent; and
whereas thou say, how shall you do to try the spirits, if we deny both the
written word which is your rule, and reason to; for we appeal from both.

Answ. Art thou not ashamed to say the Scripture is thy rule, who art found a
liar, and a false accuser; thy rule shall try thee, and shall bear witness
against thee, when God judges thee by Je^us Christ; for neither by the
Scripture, nor thy corrupt reason, can thou know the things of God, who art a
natural man, in the fall, in the world without God; but again I say, let any
try us, in our lives, and in our practices, and if we speak, or act contrary to
the Scripture, judge us by it; but thy eye is blinded, and when thou see the
Scripture fulfilled, even crying out as a woman in travel, thou calls it uncou^h
howling, and a spirit contrary to the Scripture; and how art thou able to try,
who art blind and deaf in the mystery of the Kingdom of God, for thy reason
must never enter unto God, but is shut out, and in seeing thou sees not, and in
hearing thou do not understand; and upon thee herein is the Scripture
fulfilled: And whereas thou say, we will not have Christ to rule over us,
for we deny both his Person, and Word, which is the rule of life and love. I
answer, O thou liar, God shall judge thee, let shame cover, and let thy own
conscence convince thee, for thy lies and slanders against the innocent, Christ
Jesus is our head, and we are of his body, and his word is sweet unto us, even
our life, and rule of life, and by him we see thee to be an enemy to him, and
from him I judge thee; not his word, but the spirit of the Devil is thy rule,
for he is the ruler and father of lies and liars, and thy portion thou must
have with him in the lake, and what thou say of us, it shall stand for thy
own condition, thou will not have Christ to rule over thee; who lives in thy
lust and carnal mind without the fear of God, which Christ comes to destroy, in
all that witness him: and whereas thou say, in the name of God thou
proclaims, that those men that disown the written Word, are not spiritual men,
they may have the spirit of Antichrist.

Answ. Thou have nothing to proclaim from God, but as the false Prophets, had
other men words, and also I say, if thou find any that disown the Scripture, we
also disown such, and do say they are not spiritual men, but has the spirit of
Antichrist; and of this number thou art, guided by the spirit of Antichrist,
who art a liar and a false accuser which is contrary to the spirit of Christ,
and art without faith, and so art unreasonable in the corrupt reason, without
pure and undefiled reason: and whereas thou say, who but the spirit of
Antichrist durst countermand the commands of our Lawgiver the Lord Jesus.
Christ? I answer, the commands of Christ is spiritual, and in and by the
spirit, and not traditional from the Letter without, and Antichrist may conform
to the command without, as the Pharisees did, and yet be an enemy to the life
and substance of his commands; and this is thy own condition as it was the
Pharisees, who said he destroyed the Law, which came to fulfill it, as thou
say we make void and deny the commands of Christ, when as we are witnesses
of them, and directs all into the fulfilling of them; and thy spirit here is
tried to be the spirit of Antichrist, the same which was in them that
persecuted Christ, and thou rails and slanders his members: and whereas thou
say, there were never any men appeared in the world so like those that Peter
speaks of in his second Epistle, and these desire to overthrow the writings
of the spirit of God: I answer, Peter spoke of such as thou art, for a cloud
carried about wi^h the Tempest thou art, and a Well without water, and defiles
the flesh, and dispises the Saints digni^y, and speaking great swelling words
of vanity, while thou thy self art a servant of corruption, serving the Devil,
by lying, and falsely accusing, and that we desire to overthrow the writings of
the Spirit of God; thou art a liar, for we go about to establ^sh it, and
declares of him, who is the substance of it, and God will reward thee according
to thy deeds, who also accuses us of unseemly kissing in Glasiers-Hall, thou
say if Mr. Pope do not belie us; I answer, this is another lie, which
proceeds from thee, let all the honest hearted which ever has frequented our
assembly at that place testify against thee, and Mr. Pope, and your father the
Devil, whom by lying you serve, and that no unseemly actions have proceeded
from us, but soberness and civility; and unseemly actions shall stand for thy
own condition, they are such as thy self, who commits unseemly brawling, and
folly and vain contending against the truth in Glasiers hall, as many honest
hearted will witness against you, and for us who have seen your base actions,
as scorning and flowting in that place; and so here you your selves are guilty
of the wantonness which Peter speaks of, and of aluring through the lusts of
the flesh, which thou slanderously would cast upon us; and thou further say,
none ever premised to themselves so much liberty as these and the Ranters, in
being freed from the power and trial of the Word. I answer, both the Ranters
and thee we do absolutely deny, and testify against you both, to be in the
enmity against God, and against us who are his servants: thou before was
ranking us with the Papists, and now among the Ranters, but herein the
Scripture is fulfilled upon us, as they h^ve done unto Christ, so they do unto
us; he was numbered among transgressors by thy generation of painted
Sepulchers, and whited walls, as we are by thee; and all liberty which is of
the flesh, and to the flesh, we do deny, as many can witness, who are witnesses
of our Ministry; and again I say, he that is able, let him try us by the
Scripture; but thou art blind, and has hardened thy heart against God, and
has neither salt nor savory, and so is good for nothing but to be trodden
under foot.

And wh^reas thou say, the Lord bless every one of his from the condition of
Chandler, who formerly was the head of a Company of Shakers.

I answer, The day is coming when thou can not fly the wrath of God, though
thou pray God will not hear thee, and if ever thou have seen Chandler in this
condition, thou might have read thy figure in him, weeping, and ^^w^^ng and
gnashing of teeth will be thy portion for ever; and I say unto the^ ^^is
condi^^o^ of Chandlers is not come upon him, because he was o^ce a Sh^^e^, by
the d^e^d of the Lord upon him, but because he went out from that condition,
out of the fear of God into the libe^ty of the flesh, out of his shaking and
fearing state which once he was in, and this he shall witness with me to be
true, and against thee, who would reproach the way of truth by him, when the
book of conscience is opened.

And whereas thou further say, their spirit w^^l persuade them that they are
not fallen from righteousness, and would therefore justify them.

I answer, We are gathered up into righteousness, and fallen from vanity, and
this the Spirit of God persuades us, and witnesses in us and for us, by which
only we are justified freely, and not by the works of the law, nor by any
outward observance; and herein thou also art a liar; who s^ith, we are fallen
from righteousness, for even the righteousness of God is manifested to us, by
which we deny all your carnal outward observances, by which you think to obtain
life and righteousness.

Now in answer to thy sixth Particular, which thou calls a heavy and sad
offense, which is a denying honor to men, which thou say is the example of
good men; to which I do answer: God has commanded to h^nour him alone, and
not to bow down to any Creature, and thou have brought many Scriptures to
oppose the command of God, and so art more fully made manifest to be an enemy
unto him, which would plead against him, by that which is written from him,
pleading the example of good men; which is no example to us to break the
command of God, no more then David's example in committing whoredom, and Joseph's
example in swearing by the life of Pharaoh, is an example for any to act those
things now; and I do utterly deny that any of these Scriptures which thou have
cited, will prove and maintain your heathenish custom, in your deceitful way
of honoring one another, to please the devil in one another, which is without
the fear of God; and it is a sad offense to none but the devil, because it
weakens and disturbs his kingdom, of which thou art, as is made manifest, who
pleads to uphold it from the Scripture; but vain honor with flattering titles
unto any man we do deny, but yet we honor all men in the Lord, and out of him
we honor none, to uphold the pride of man, for God will bring it all down, and
lay it in the dust, and exalt himself, to reign over you all; and whereas thou
say, how far are these men from the holy Writ: To which I say and answer,
thou slanderously would make us to appear odious in the sight of men, but all
the upright in heart will see thee, and thy blindness and ignorance, who brings
that Scripture where Christ (in fulfilling the Law of God, which he came to
fulfill) worshipped in the Temple, to prove and maintain the worship of man.

Answ. O you blind Pharisee and perverter of the Scripture, God will plague
thee, thou enemy of his truth, who perverts the Scripture, to thy own
destruction, and art worse then the Pharisees, who said he respected no man's
person, and they shall witness against thee; and whereas thou speaks of
honoring father and mother, which thou say we deny in this our practice: I
answer, I charge thee to be a liar, for as I said we honor all men in the
Lord, and directs all children and servants, to obey their parents and masters
in the Lord, and this many can witness for us, which have more frequented our
assemblies then thou have done; but this we also testify, where the obedience
to any man stands in opposition to God, the obedience to God is rather to be
chosen; and herein he that will not hate father or mother for Christ^ sake is
not worthy of him; but thou carnal, earthly man, is pleading for the Kingdom
of the Devil, to honor man above God; and I say how can you believe that seeks
honor one of another, your honor and your heathenish custom we testify
against, yet unto every ordinance of man we are subject for conscience sake.

Now to that which you call the seventh mistake, affording absolute perfection
at one Instant, in admitting of none but perfect men into conjunction.

Answ. It is a mistake in thee, for such a word never proceeded from us, I may
say it is rather an absolute lie invented by thee, to make us odious, then a
mistake from us; for thy heart is desperately wicked, and thy torment is
kindling by the breath of the Almigh^y; many which have heard us will testify
against thee, for we say the Saints have their growth up into a perfect man in
Christ, as Christ himself had, and we say also their is children and young men
and fathers, as the Apostle said, but thou art not ashamed to utter thy lies
and slanders, which hundreds in this Ci^y will witness against thee for a liar;
and even thy light in thy conscience will accuse thee to thy face, that thou
have imagined lies and mischief upon thy bed against us; and whereas thou
brings many Scriptures to prove thy slanders against us to be true: to which I
answer, all the Scriptures we own and bear witness unto, by that spirit from
which they were spoken; but thee and thy spirit we deny, for both you and it is
of the devil; and thou have divelishly added thy imagina^ions upon them, and
wrested them, which I shall not now mention, because I do deny the thing which
thou assertest to be an absolute lie, and do say unto thee, God will reward
thee thou slanderous tongue: and whereas further thou say, in our perfection
we deny any man being under frailty or capablen ss to sin to be of our
communion. I answer, here again thou art a liar, these words war never uttered
by us, as thou have set them down; but I say, he that sins is of the devil, and
such we have no unity withal, nor such has no unity with God, for no impure
thing enters to him, nor has communion with him; for whosoever works
abomination, is to be cast out, and trodden in the winepress of his wrath,
where the portion of liars is, among whom thou must reeeive thy reward; for
with such we have no union, who are disobedient children, but with him who in
the least measure which he has received from God, walks up in the light unto
God, we have unity and communion with him; thou say one of us told ^hee
(that which sinned could not be saved.) I answer, it is out of the reach of thy
wisdom, and thy vultero^s eye shall never see it; I say as the Scripture
says, the soul that sins must die, and every man must die for his own
iniquity, if thou have an ear thou may hear; and fu^ther thou say, that
our doctrine may appear to be utterly against the Scripture; thou brings Romans
7.23. where Paul was under the Law, and saw a Law in the members, warring
against the Law of the mind: I answer, this Scripture we own, and are true
witnesses of it; but there was also a time, that the Law of the spirit of li^e,
had freed him from the Law of sin and death; but thy ignorance is made
manifest, who brings one Scripture to opp^se another, and knows not the
conditions in thy self, from which Paul spoke, and so art ignorant of what he
spoke; for I say, there is a time without the Law, and a time under the Law,
and a time dead to the Law, and not under it, and all these states Paul
witnessed, which we also in our measure are witnesses of, which thou knows not
in thy self, and so wrests Paul's words: And whereas thou say, yet let not
them think that we by this doctrine nourish sin, having brought many Scriptures
to plead for sin; I answer, being guilty in thy self, thou art afraid, and has
a jealousy lest we should lay it to thy charge; and truly concerning thee we
think nothing in this matter, for thy heart and the secrets of it is made
manifest in the eternal light, by which thou art comprehended, and answered,
and by which God will eternal judge thee; therefore repent lest the wrath of
God overtake thee, and thou be swept away with the besom of destruction, who
has falsely accused and slandered us with lies and false reproaches: but now
its the time that Pilate and Herod is made friends, and Gog and Magog is
gathered together to battle, to compass the Camp of the Saints about; and even
the Priests and their crew, and the Anabaptists and their crew, and all Sects
is combined against the truth, but God is with us, and in him alone can we
rejoice over you all for ever and ever; and in him make our boast all the day
long, for this is our heritage, every tongue that rises up in judgment
against us shall be condemned, for the Lord is our port, and even the stone
which is refused is become the head stone of the corner, and thou Howet shall
be grinded to powder by it, who has bent thy bow to shoot at the righteous,
therefore consider what thou have done, and repent, lest God tear thee in
pieces, and there be none to deliver.

FINIS.

