DIGEST OF GOVERNMENT: TOGETHER WITH Certain Additional PROPOSALS TENDERED To
the Consideration of all Peaceable PATRIOTS.

By William Ball, Esquire;

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Johnson, at the sign of the K^ in Paul's
Churchyard, 1659.

Additional Proposals, etc.
FIrst, That Explanation be made of all ambiguous Clauses, and words, in any
Law, Statute, or Act of Parliament, which may admit of different, or
indifferent constructions; that so the Letter of the Law may be direct, and
plain (as in Reason it ought to be) and that ten Judges may not interpret the
Law by way of Intendment, and seem therein rather dare ius, than dicere; by
which means they have done, and may do, wrong.

2 That, (whereas, in regard of the multiplicity of Suits in Law, Hearings are
delayed, and sometimes put off from Term to Term, to the obstruction or
hinderance of Justice, and to the trouble, charge, and wrong of the Parties
aggrieved), the Judges of the Courts at Westminster do sit, and hear Causes (if
they have any depending before them) on every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday in
the afternoon in the Term-time, and on the days commonly called All Saints, All
souls, the Purification, and St. John Baptist if it happen within the Term;
(for certainly it is reasonable to do justice on any day) and that the Lord
Keeper, or Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal, and the Master of the Rolls
sit once every week (and oftener, if they see cause) in every Vacation: that
Suits be not so long depending, and delayed in Chancery.

3 That whereas Writs of Error are sometimes necessary, and many times the
causes of vexatious and chargeable delays, to the parties aggrieved; if
erroneous Judgment shall therefore be found through Default of the Judges
themselves, such Judges to be forthwith displaced, and utterly dis-inabled to
meddle in the Law, and suffer mulct according to their Demerits. And so
touching the Barons of the Exchequer. And if such erroneous Judgment shall be
otherwise found, that the party or parties aggrieved be allowed quadruple Costs
and Damages; and so, if through the default of the Judges.

4 That Demurrer be abolished, and that if the case be matter of Law, and not
Fact, Judgment be forthwith given, according to the merit of the cause; unless
such case be very difficult and then the Judges to meet within eight days in
the Exchequer Chamber (as formerly) upon penalty of 100 l. for every Judges
default who ought to meet; and then, and there to give a final Determination to
the Cause.

5 That all Abators of Lands pay Quadruple Costs and Damages, or suffer severe
corporal punishment; and that all Disseizo^^ of Lands and Rents pay Quadruple
costs and damages.

6 That no relief be given in Chancery against the lawful Entry of Donors;
F^offors, and Leassors; that so their Acts and Deeds be not defalcated by way
of Equity; and that all Bills of such nature or pretext, be dismissed of
course, or not admitted into Chancery.

7 That Deeds of Covenants to stand seized etc. and Wills or Devises for Land
invalid, or insufficient, according to the Letter of the Law, be not made
valid, or helped by way of Intendment, or Interpretation (which many times have
been, and may be wrested) of Law or Equity against Heirs at Common Law: for it
may seem to imply an act of GOD not to permit such Deeds or Devises to be
valid, that so Lands may descend according to His Law, Numb. 27. And therefore
the defects of such ought not to be supplied by Man.

8 That un just Decrees in Chancery be reversed by the Council of State, or by
some of them the eunto, appointed or nomiminated; together with the aid or
assistance of such Judges or Sergeants at Law, as they shall think fit to call
unto them; and that such as made such unjust Decrees be forthwith displaced,
and suffer mulct according to their demerits: howbeit, such as shall complain
without just cause, to be severely punished.

8 That whereas there are diverse covetous and greedy persons, who desire and
labor to incorporate as it were, and add Lands to Lands, and will therefore
venture to purchase any broken Titles, on purpose, by power of their purses
(being moneyed men) to weary our such as have better Right, thereby to obtain
their Rights for little, or for some unvaluable considerat^on; and also to
molest and contend with such as have Rent-charges, or other engagements in, or
upon such Lands, on purpose to make such parties (especially if mean and
necessitous) to agree and compound with them to their losses; therefore all
such covetous and greedy Purchasors, who shall be lawfully evicted touching
Right, Rene, Charges, or other Engagements in, or upon such Lands, shall pay
quadruple costs and damages.

10 That whereas diverse covetous and greedy persons do not only themselves,
but also procure others (who may be termed Brokers) to inveagle young Heirs,
and others, by flattery, feasting, and merry-making, to sell their Lands,
Rights, or Interests, and at such times, and in such manner, obtain or get from
them Agreements, or Contracts, for the sale of their Lands, Rights, or
Interests (many times upon unvaluable considerations, and sometimes to their
undoing) therefore all Agreements and Contracts so obtained to be null. And
also, that the persons themselves, and their procurors (or Brokers) using such
practice, be severely punished.

Touching Commerce and Trade.
1 That a Council, or Committee of Audience, be institu^ed to sit, hear, and
receive such Proposals, as shall be exhibited unto them in writing touching the
Commodities, discommodities, conveniences, inconveniences, advantages,
disadvantages, of Commerce, Trade, Manufactures; and of all Improvements, and
Aggrievances, touching the Public; and that the said Council, or Committes do
consider, and propound to the Parliament, such advancements and furtherances,
remedies and redresses, as the merits of causes shall require.

2 That, if our Neighbour-Nations, or other^ more remore, shall raise the
prices, or impose extraordinary Impost, or Excize, etc. upon their Commodities
importable, into the Dominions of this Commonwealth; we do the like for our
commodities transportable un^o them: Ours, of Tin, Lead, Cloth, etc. being as
necessary and vendible unto them, as theirs to us.

3 That no Fullers-Earth be transported out of this Land without special
License from the Council of State, upon great penalty; and, for that,
sufficient Excize to be imposed: forasmuch as not only the Low Countries, but
other our Neighboring Nations, do thereby improve their Manufactures of
Clothing. etc. and dis-improve ours.

4 That Refiners of Sugar be not permitted to refine with Lime, as they usually
do; which is not only a cheat, but unwholesome for bodily health; and that if
there be no other Remedy, such manner of Refining be wholly prohibited.

Touching Elections of Members for Parliament.
THat the Members for Parliament (for the future) do neither directly or
indirectly, by themselves or others, procure themselves to be elected, upon
penalty of being dis-inabled to sit in the House, and to pay the Fine of 500 l.
to the use of the Commonwealth: and that all Feastings, and Entertainments for
Elections be abolished upon like penalty: and that the Freeholders, and such as
should elect Members for Parliament, do assemble, and meet No Free holder under
10 l. per annum, to be admitted to elect Knights etc. upon penalty, etc.
for Elections at their own charges, upon some penalty, etc. to the use of the
Commonwealth (unless some lawful excuse of sickness, etc.) And that if they
happen to choose Knights for the shire, under the value of 500 l. per annum, and
Burgesses for Boroughs under the value of 100 l. per annum, or some way
equivalent; that they allow them their Salaries toward their charges (if they
shall require, or desire it) and not otherwise: and that such members for
Parliament as shall be legally so Elected (being persons capable to sit in
Parliament) shall undergo the same, upon penalty of 500 l. to the use of the
Commonwealth (unless some lawful excuse of sickness, etc.) and that such
Elected Members swear before the Sheriff, and two, or one Justice of the Peace;
or, in Corporations, before the Mayor, etc. to perform their best endeavors
for the places, for which they are elected; and for the Commonwealth in
general. By this means, self-seeking and self-ended Members may be expunged;
and yet sufficient, able, and knowing men elected.

FINIS.

