THE INNOCENCE OF THE CHRISTIAN QUAKERS MANIFESTED, AND The TRUTH of their
PRINCIPLES and DOCTRINE cleared and defended from the loud (but false)
Clamours, base Insinuations and wicked Slanders of James Barry.

Published for the general Satisfaction and Benefit of all, who simply desire
to know and embrace the TRUTH.

He that hides Hatred with lying Lips, and he that utters a Slander is a
Fool. Prove. 10.18. I have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran; I have not
spoken to them, yet they prophesied. Jer. 23.21. Therefore Night shall be unto
you, that ye shall not have a Vision; and it shall be dark unto you, that ye
shall not divine; and the Sun shall go down over the Prophets, and the day
shall be dark over them, Mic. 3.6. Prove all things: hold fast that which is
good. 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Printed in the Year 1688.

The Innocence of the Christian Quakers manifested, etc.
SEveral Papers having past between some of us, the people called Quakers of
the City of Dublin, and one James Barry of the same (who calls himself an
Independent Priest,) occasioned by his often abusing and frequent reflecting
upon us and our Principles, as erroneous, in his public Preaching, and
sometimes in private Discourse; and an account thereof coming to diverse of us,
by several persons, some notice we took of his said Reflections, and
accordingly sent to him, by way of Admonishment, but did not pursue it; not
looking upon it so very material for us to concern our selves with him, only
returning his false Aspersions upon himself; he being reputed a man so addicted
to rail against diverse sorts of people, at last were necessitated, by the many
Informations brought us, of his continuing his abusive Reflections upon us, and
many desiring to see and hear us together, that they might be satisfied whether
it was so as he had said or no; and accordingly sent to him, and desired him to
give us a public Meeting, and there to make good his Accusations, or otherwise
to acknowledge the wrong he had done us therein. But in answer to our so just
and reasonable a Demand, he sent a scurrilous Paper, wherein he both greatly
abused us, and the Evidence we had quoted to him, as also several of our
Friends, and their Writings in general terms, though to this day he has not
produced to us one Sentence out of all their Books, that he does charge to be
erroneous; yet had the confidence to bid us call in all such Books, and let
them be burned by the Common Crier, and deny the Authors of them, and withal
denying he had so said as we were informed: We thereupon further examined our
Evidence, who still affirmed what he had declared as aforesaid was truth: And
we also having the substance of the matter in two chief points, viz. that we
denied the Resurrection, and Salvation by the coming of Christ, witnessed by
another of his Hearers, who declared he had heard him so charge us; to which we
returned him an Answer, giving him an account, how that we had examined the
said Evidence again, and that he stood to his said Information; and also how
that another person testified as before mentioned, with several Certificates
from other persons of other Abuses and wicked Accusations he had cast out
against us; we therefore did renew our Demand unto him, viz. to give us a
Meeting, and then appear to make good his said Charges (if he could) against
us, and that we would then also appear to vindicate our Principles, as laid
down either by us or our Friends, whom he had so abused, whose names he had
incerted in his first Paper.

After a long time he sent us another Paper, wherein he tells us, that by our
method he perceives we are not like to appear in public to discourse
Principles, etc. and in a boasting way tells us, that we will not vouchsafe him
the least ground imaginable, on which to bottom a hope that we and he shall
come to grapple in a public Contest, and so proceeds still in the denial of
some of the matter in charge already proved, not failing to renew his
Reflections upon us, and our Principles.

Now when we had received this boasting Paper of his, by which one might think,
that he on his part should not fail to grapple in public, we returned him
Answer (seeing he denied some part of the Charge as laid down) and made him
this offer as a moderate expedient, to give him a Meeting, and that the
Witnesses and he might come face to face, and that they might have liberty
before the people to declare their matter of Evidence which they had to offer,
and we to lay down our Reasons why we were dissatisfied, and then he to say
what he could to clear himself, and when all had said what they had to say to
the opening of the matter, we would quietly leave it to the Consciences of the
people to judge, and believe as they should find the Justice of the Case in
their own understandings, and this being done, we offered to proceed to
discourse with him about those three Principles, viz. the Resurrection,
Justification, and Perfection in Sanctification as to degrees attainable. And
further, about particular Election and Reprobation of persons, and also offered
to dispute with him Principle for Principle, so long as might tend to
Edification, etc.

And for this end we demanded a Meeting, and desired an orderly and peaceable
Auditory of sober people, that gravely in the Fear of God we might go through
those things in our Discourse to our Satisfaction and their Edification, etc.
And further offered our largest Meeting House for an Accommodation to the
Meeting, if he pleased, or otherwise we would submit to go to any other
convenient place of his appointing, and left it to him, to make it as public
as he thought good, etc.

Some time after he received this, he sent us another scurrilous Paper filled
up with Reflections not only upon us, but also upon the people that might have
been at the Meeting, which he could not possibly know who, nor of what sort; he
might have brought all his own Hearers if he would, we put no limitation but as
above, an orderly, peaceable Auditory of sober people; but instead of coming to
grapple with us in public (as he terms it,) which one might have thought by
his boasting there was to be no doubt of, he flies quite off from that, and
tells us of printing to the view of the World what we have to offer, etc. And
in the beginning of his Paper tells us, The expedient propounded in our last
Paper is altogether vain and impertinent, etc. and says, It rather bespeaks us
Children not past our nonage in those things, etc. and further says, that our
offering such an expedient for an Accommodation, etc. he looks on it to be a
part of that Subtlety of which the mystery of Quakerism is made up and
constituted, in that we do so readily contrive, and under color of seeming
Zeal for Truth, propose such mediums, as we doubt not will in the end, or
event, make for the advantage of our Cause and Interest, could we, by our
pretty Serpentine acts, as easily charm James Barry into a compliance with our
Proposals, as our Semi-proselites into a belief, that (because of our
forwardness and seeming earnestness to appear for our dark and rotten Cause)
the people termed Quakers are, beyond all dispute, the only holy and pure
people whom God has blessed, etc. Thus far James Barry.

Now let all sober unprejudiced Readers observe and consider, whether our
Expedient that we offered, and the Mediums we proposed be such as he would here
suggest and insinuate, and whether there appears such subtle Contrivance and
partial Intentions in our method for the advantage of our Cause and Interest,
that in the end, or event, if our Proposals had been complied with, beyond all
Dispute, the Judgment must be given on our side, that we were the only holy and
pure people whom God had blessed. Now our Offer was as before related, and if
our Proposals had been complied with, he might have brought whom he pleased; we
excluded none that he would bring, nor put any limitation, otherwise then
desiring an orderly and peaceable Auditory of sober people; so that it is
evident, we had no Contrivance (nor could) in that method we desired, to have
only such persons as would give the Cause on our side, right or wrong, as he
would wickedly insinuate: But it is plain, for all his boasting and railing
Rabsheka-like, he has been contriving how to find out a crafty shift to cover
himself in his retreat, not being willing to appear to our faces in public,
lest he should be publicly manifested and reproved for his unchristian railing
against us, and abusing and belying of us and our Principles behind our backs;
but this is not all that has this tendency in his Paper; but he renews it over
again, to persuade people to believe that the Quakers had made such a choice of
Moderators as would give it on their side, let it be Nonsense or Heresy, or
what it will; For, says he, you will not leave the Decision to men that are
the same in Judgment with me, etc. and in Answer he proceeds to give Jugment
upon the Meeting that was proposed, to whom he says, he will not leave it,
(counting them the Moderators which the Quakers chose,) and thus represents the
people, calling them a dark, faithless and ignorant Rabble, whose Nature (says
he) is the very recipient of spiritual darkness, and who will on that account
suck and drink in Whimsies and the poison of Error, as the Fish drinks Waters;
with those kind of Moderators, (says he) which the Quakers choose to decide
Controversy in Matters of Faith; Nonsense and Heresy will be the best
Divinity, Noise and Clamor set off with the paint and varnish of multitude of
Words and Texts of Scriptures, neither understood, nor rightly applied, will be
the most convincing Arguments to prove a Victory. By all this the Reader may
see, that he would persuade the People, that the Quakers had made a choice of
what sort of People they would have, and that they were such a People, whose
Nature is the very Recipient of Spiritual Darkness, etc. And with whom Non
sense and Heresy would be the best Divinity, etc. Let all sober unbiassed
People judge in this Case, whether he does not greatly wrong us yea or nay; for
you may see he is left free to bring whom he would: What! could he find none
but such to bring with him, to hear and judge? Secondly, you see what sort of
people we desire as in our Paper signified; and we also affirm, that it was the
desire of our Hearts to have sober Conscientious Religious people, that would
have their understandings exercised according to a good Conscience, that they
might discern Right from the Wrong and receive every thing accordingly. And so
he goes on further with a lie from his Pen; and says, Certainly should James
Barry consent to the Quakers in this Matter, he believes the Quakers
themselves, as well as others, would laugh at him. This is but a silly shift to
endeavor to get off with, and he a Believer of a Lie; for we are more serious
in our Resolutions, and intend better things in our Desires, then in the
obtaining of them to Laugh at it. And we do believe that if James Barry had
given us a Meeting as desired, and had given no more occasion, nor worse than
his Answering our desire in that, no sober People would have Laughed at him, nor
have made Rhimes of him neither; for all he says, When he does so, he will not
be displeased with Quakers, and others, if they do make Rhimes of him for his
folly in this thing. But the Wise in Heart may see the end of all these
Evasions and Shuffles and impertinent Excuses, as well as his wicked Abuses and
ungodly Reflections and false Accusations, which he endeavors to cast upon us,
and so to the Understandings and Consciences of such we leave it, let them
Judge between us in this Matter.

But among all these, he has yet another Proposal, which it may be he accounts
a chief one, offered in a former Paper, and that is, that we agree upon
Judicious Persons to be present at our Discourse, who may be in the capacity of
Moderators to Judge indifferently who is in the Right, and who is in the Wrong.
I can hear nothing of that, but willing you are (says he) to leave the dispute
to be determined by the Conscience or Reason of every one that shall hear. We
suppose that in this Proposal he accounts himself above a Child, because he
Judges our expedient we propounded altogether Vain and Impertinent; which
rather bespeaks us Children not past our Nonage in those things we pretend to
know: However we would have him produce his Example for his riper Age he thinks
himself grown into; and seeing he judges ours Vain and Impertinent, let him
prove his Proposal in this Case, to have been the Practice of the ancient
Gospel Ministers and Primitive Christians, and thereby he may Convince us of
our Childhood: For when he discoursed with our Friends that we sent, to whom
we left it to conclude with him about time and place for a Dispute; speaking
about the Moderators, he said to them, He looked upon it Improper that those
Moderators which should be chosen, should be either of his People or our
People; and gave this Reason for it, that then the Difference would still be
the same: So its evident, that the Moderators must have been of a different
Faith and Principle from us both. Now how this would consist with True
Christianity, and with a right contending for the Faith delivered to the Saints
according to Judes advice. Let it seriously be considered; For us to give up
our Faith and Testimony, and to be concluded whether its Right or Wrong by Men
not of the same Faith, we thought very improper, and that which no True
Christian can do.

We do understand the Apostles and Primitive Christians were concerned in
Disputes, and did contend for the Faith, and were to give an answer to every
man that asked a Reason of the Hope that was in them with Meekness and Fear, 1
Pet. 3.15. But where it was thus referred to chosen men agreed upon, not of
their Faith, to judge who was in the right and who was in the wrong, is not to
be proved from their example, though he proposes that the sacred Scripture
shall be the standard of Examination, and trying every matter by, we find in
Acts 6.9. and Acts 9.29. that Stephen and the Apostle Paul were concerned to
dispute with such men of malice and bitterness, as James Barry appears to be,
but finds no such chosen men to refer their Testimony, or the Difference
between them, and their Opposers unto; we also find in Acts 17.17. Paul
disputed in the Synagogue with the Jews, and with the devout persons, and in
the Market daily with them that met with him; but nothing is said of such
Moderators to be in such a capacity to judge as James Barry proposes; and in
Acts 19.8. how Paul went into the Synagogue, and spoke boldly for the space of
three months, disputing and persuading the things concerning the Kingdom of
God; and in the 9th verse, that he disputed daily in the School of one
Tyrannus, but nothing of James Barry's method of Moderators: therefore we leave
it to James Barry to bring forth his Example from the Standard he has chosen
for examining and trying every matter by: For if he do not, though he says, we
bespeak our selves Children, he will appear to be in a worse condition, not yet
come to be a Child, and so not so far as the Childhood of the true Birth,
without which none can enter into the Kingdom of God; but he says, willing we
are to leave the Dispute to be determined by the Conscience or Reason of every
one that shall hear: we do say, as touching those things which the Witnesses
charge him with, seeing he denies some part of it, when he, and we, and the
Witnesses have said what each has to say, we will quietly leave it to the
Consciences of the people, etc. and then proceed to discourse of the three
Principles aforementioned; and when we dispute, and are persuading the things
concerning the Kingdom of God, as Paul did, as before showed, whether it be not
most proper to leave or commend our Testimony to the Consciences of the Hearers
in the sight of God, let wise men judge. For the Apostles, as they were
concerned in the Ministry, and in handling of the Word of God, did by the
Manifestation of the Truth commend themselves to every man's Conscience in the
sight of God, as you may see, 2 Corinthians. 4.1, 2. and you may see what he
further says in chap. 5.11. how he said they were manifest to God, and did
trust also they were made manifest in the Consciences of them at Corinth; and
this is the furthest we ever intended, thus to leave it to the Consciences of
people, and let them receive or reject as they will answer it to God; and this
is evident from the Scriptures, to be the method of the true Ministers, and
such as were concerned to dispute or persuade things concerning the Kingdom of
God; but not to give up our Testimony in matters of Faith so to be determined
by any chosen or not chosen whether it is right or wrong, and so to hold or
deny accordingly, as to our selves and our own Faith, that we find no Example
for, from the true Christians; For Paul says, they were made manifest to God,
(and there he stood) and did trust they were made manifest in their
Consciences; he also says, 2 Corinthians. 2.15, 16. they were unto God a sweet
Savor of Christ in them that are saved, and in them that perish, but to the
one the Savor of Life unto Life, and to the other the Savor of Death unto
Death; so that you may see, they did not give their Faith away as it was to
God, but commended their Testimony to every man's Conscience, and left them to
answer it to God, as they received or rejected; so that we do not find in the
holy Scriptures James Barry's method of choosing men not of the same Faith and
Principle to be in a capacity to judge who is in the right and who is in the
wrong, and so to end the Dispute by their Determination. We have been the more
large in answering this, because it is looked upon by him and some of his
Hearers to be so wise and necessary a Proposal, that ours, in comparison to it,
is accounted by them altogether vain and impertinent.

As to other qualifications proposed by him, we answered thus in ours to his
first Paper, that we look upon it, to be all our Duty to keep in the Fear and
Wisdom of God, that we may be preserved out of all Clamours, Janglings, and
unhandsome or unchristian Raylings, or Reflections on both sides, (which were
also his own terms, having thus assented to him therein.) We further said,
being thus preserved then to stand in our Christian Liberty to endeavor that
which may tend to the Honor and Glory of God There is one passage more in his
Paper we are not willing to omit the observation of, before we proceed further;
where he says, Blessed they are, I confess more than the generality of their
Neighbors; but says he, It is with that kind of blessedness, which is the
Portion of Gods Enemies; and so cites Psalms 17.14. and Psalms 73.12. Where it
is said, From men which are thine hand O Lord; from Men of the World, which
have their Portion in this Life; Behold these are the ungodly who prosper in
the World, they increase in Riches. And then James Barry says, I doubt not but
that this is one of the most powerful Engines by which the art of Quakerism
has been propagated in the Kingdoms of the Earth.

Now let all sober People observe how he applies these Scriptures, and how like
it is to the rest of his envious doings; for first he confesses, that we are
blessed in having Worldly Riches, so then it is well, that what we have comes
as a Blessing, and is not wickedly got. O but (says he) it is with that kind
of Blessedness which is the Portion of Gods Enemies.

Now we would have him make out how he knows it to be so; Is all that prosper
in the World and increase in Riches, God's Enemies? Surely nay; Abraham, Job,
David, and Solomon when his heart was enlarged in the Wisdom of God, and many
other Faithful Men were Rich, and yet not Enemies to God. Paul in his Epistle
to Timothy did not find fault with their being Rich, but desired such might be
warned not to trust in them, but to be Rich in good works; and Christ said, It
is more blessed to give than to receive, Acts 20.35. Therefore it would be no
unhappiness in James Barry to have Riches, that he might rather give and be
helpful to the Poor, then to be burdensome, and make his Ministry chargeable
to his Flock; for we suppose he is subject to seek and desire it, as well as
other Men; as is evident from his receiving several sums of Money upon pretense
of going into America, which when he had got failed in performance.

Oh but he doubts not but this is one of the most powerful Engines by which the
art of Quakerism has been propagated, etc. but what reason he has thus to
believe he does not give: But we may easily believe it is because he is full of
Envy and Bitterness toward us, or else he might see cause to doubt of it: But
in short we say, that true Christianity, which he calls Quakerism, has not
been propagated by this Engine, but by the Power of God which upheld his
People; that it could not be the increase of Worldly Riches that propagated it
will plainly appear, seriously considering the cruel and grievous Sufferings of
our Friends from the very first that it pleased God to call and raise them up
to bear a faithful Testimony to his Name and Truth: Surely, if they had sought
the Riches, Ease and Glory of the World they would not have chosen Afflictions,
by cheerfully giving their Backs to the Smiter, and not with holding their
Goods from the Spoyler.

Many to the losing of all, not having a Bed left to lie upon, nor Cattle to
till their Ground, nor Corn for Bread or Seed, nor Tools to work withal: Also
Whipping, Stocking, Stoning, Imprisonment they have been treated with.

For many years not so few as a thousand Prisoners at once, until released by
the present King, scarce a Prison in England but has been filled with them;
besides many Premunired, their Estates seized, and they kept Prisoners, some
for twenty years, others during Life, many hundred's dying Prisoners.

As at large may be seen in George Bishops two Books, entitled, New England
judged.
All this in Old England; yet James Barry's Brethren in New England exceeded
these Cruelties against our Friends there; not only Stockt, but Whipped so
unmercifully, their flesh like Jelly, and in that condition drove them many
Miles into the Wilderness among the Indians, and wild Beasts.

Yea, Tender Women have they tied to a Cart, stripped to the Wast, and whipped
through several Towns, ten Stripes a piece in each on their naked Backs, and
then unmercifully left them in Frost and Snow, also cut off Ears, Burnt in the
Hand, Banished on pain of Death, and at last put four of our Friends to death by
the hands of the Common Hangman, on no other pretense, but merely for being
Quakers, in which Cruelty they continued, until stopped by an Order from the late
King.

In Plymouth Pattent they made a Law to take all the Quakers Cattle from them
except one, and in the Execution left the worst, thus our Friends were fully
tried there; but the Lord who called them not only to Believe, but also to
Suffer upheld them by his Power, so that they cheerfully underwent all those
hardships rather than violate their Faith, or make Ship wrack of a good
Conscience. Now all seriously considering their Faithfullness toward their
God, their Patience in Sufferings, their Peaceableness toward the several
Governments, they have lived under their Honesty and Charity toward their
Neighbors, will plainly demonstrate James Barry's Charge cannot be true, viz.
the getting of Riches is one of the most powerful Engines to propagate the Art
of Quakerism, as he scornfully calls our Holy Religion; which we affirm to be
no other than Worshipping God in his own Spirit and Truth, and does also
evidence James Barry's application of the aforesaid Scriptures to be wicked and
false, and not as David intended, who sets them forth in the 73d Psalm, as you
may see; They set their Mouth against Heaven, etc. saying, how does God know,
is their knowledge in the most high?

After all this abusing of us, and these Shuffling evasions to avoid giving us
a public Meeting he comes off thus; Seeing therefore that by coming together,
the matter in Dispute is not like to be determined; it remains therefore that
what you have to offer in Vindication of your Selves and Principles, etc. be in
Print exposed to the view of the World by you. But let all consider why we do
not come together to endeavor the Determination of the Matters in dispute: And
they may see it is, because he will not appear in public, though he has
boasted as before, and now puts us to Print in Vindication of our Selves, and
the Three Principles before mentioned: But wherefore shall we Print in defense;
seeing he has not in all his Papers laid down one Argument, nor brought one
Scripture to confute any of the three, as laid down either by us, or by our
Friends whom he abuses; nor yet as they are laid down by himself; and besides
the same Friends of ours that he names, and diverse others have writ in
Vindication of two of the said Principles: So that whosoever desires to read
the Vindication of them, may see it in Samuel Fishers Rusticus ad Academicos,
never yet answered; and in George Whitehead's, and William Penn's, (in Answer
to diverse Books, and to Thomas Hicks's lying Dialogues; where he, like James
Barry, forges many Lies against us) entitled, The Christian Quaker, etc.
remaining unanswered either by him or any else that we ever heard of.

And as for the third Principle, we never before him heard any judge Perfection
in Sanctification as to degrees attainable in this Life, an Erroneous
Principle; and therefore it does not so much concern us to Vindicate in Print,
that which so often is done already, and he to make no offer to confute them;
however he after his former manner, as may be seen in his last Paper, can make
a great threatening boast; saying, At the back of your Vindication James Barry
will send forth in Print his Arguments to prove the Quakers grand Heretics in
these Points, etc. And why would not James Barry give us a Meeting to prove us
such according to his former Boasting; might not that have been convenient
first? or otherwise in writing to have given us some Arguments; that we might
have had something to have vindicated our Selves against, that Wise Men might
have seen a little into the ground of our Difference? But it is to be
questioned, whether he has any Arguments against them, that is fit to be
brought forth before wise Men; and therefore his greatest Policy is to keep
them hid; and so please fools with his boasting of them; but, to do him justice
we must confess, he has given us cause to appear some way to vindicate our
selves and our Principles, according to his demand; and since he himself
proposes Printing as the method, now we think it not amiss to do accordingly,
believing he cannot reason ably find fault with that which he himself seems to
advise unto.

In his first Paper he calls us persons who delight in brangling, and stirring
up the spirit of Animosity and Prejudice, and men of as little Charity and
Religion, as those we receive our idle Stories from; whether this be not more
his guilt than ours, we shall leave to the Lord to judge, and also to men of
understanding, who have the knowledge of both our Practices. In his second
Paper he charges our Principles to be dark and uncertain, but lays down no
Arguments against them. In his last, before recited, you see how he charges
Quakerism, as he terms it, to be made up and constituted of Subtlety, and
judges us to be in serpentine acts, and our Cause dark and rotten; and likewise
you may see what an Imputation of being Gods Enemies he endeavors to fasten
upon us in his Application of those two Scriptures, viz. Psalm. 17.14. and
73.12. and in the conclusion of the same Paper, giving his Reason why he sent
all his without date, tells us, he did it willingly, having seriously
considered, that a dateless Answer was at any time good enough for foolish and
impertinent Stories, and nonsensical Whimsies.

So that though he lays down no Arguments to confute our Principles, yet you
may see, who are unbyassed and without prejudice, what confidence he has to
pass sentence upon us, and our Blessings to be that kind of Blessedness which
is the portion of Gods Enemies, and that is a sad portion. Let him be as full
of Envy as he can, to answer it, he need desire no worse for us; the Lord
forgive the thoughts of his heart, and the words of his mouth, and bring him to
Repentance, if he see good; for from these doings of his, it appears he is in
the gaul of bitterness, and wants Charity, which is the perfecting Virtue; he
spares not to judge both us and our Principles, as the worst of men, and
Principles, which if he speaks truth of us, then we are so indeed; but he has
that yet to prove: and therefore he had been wiser, if he had first proved us
such, and then given his Judgment upon us; but alas, his Malice and Envy would
not suffer him to stay for that, lest he should be prevented for want of proof.
You see how he judges us to delight in brangling, and stirring up the spirit of
Animosity and Prejudice, which is the work of evil men, and our Principles dark
and uncertain, and therefore not of God, who is Light and unchangeable, and
that our Religion is made up and constituted of Subtlety, then not of
Simplicity, and our Acts Serpentine, that proceeds from the wicked one, and not
from Christ, that bruiseth the Serpents head; and our Cause dark and rotten;
then it is not in the everlasting Light; all this being once proved by him,
then he makes good his Application; we are Enemies indeed to God and Christ.
But all this we do deny, and leave at his door to prove if he can, and until
then we lay it upon him, as a wicked Sentence and Judgment; but this is not
all, though this were enough, if true, to make the Quakers and their Principles
hated of God and good men.

But in his Preaching and other Discourse, as well as in his said Papers, he
has not spared to rail, abuse, and pass Judgment upon us, as appears by
several Witnesses, one whereof John Smith.
affirmed, that he heard him in his public preaching declare, that the Quakers
were the Spawn of the Jesuits, and that the Jesuits were the Spawn of the
Devil, which he himself has since owned to two of our Friends who spoke to him
about it.

Now this false and wicked Accusation we utterly deny, and therefore turn it
upon himself to prove the same; we having born our Testimony against them, as
we do against him, and all others who stand up against the glorious appearance
of Truth, as it has pleased God to manifest it in this day; and therefore do
utterly deny to be of their Offspring. Yet do desire, that in his next he
would make out how they are the Spawn of the Devil, and we their Offspring, in
that Line. So let all people consider the desperate boldness, harshness and
hardness of this man's heart and spirit; you see how in his unwholesome words he
places us in the Devils Line and Offspring, and so near as his Grandchildren,
what worse can he make of us, or in what state that is more dreadful can he
place us? Sure in his Judgment we are far separated from God. Doubtless he
accounts us of the reprobate number, that God never had Mercy for; since he
believes there are such.

It is also evidenced unto us, that he joined the Quakers and Muggletonians
together, and said, Witness Thomas Smith.
that we did take upon us to know the Dimensions of God, viz. to know his
length, breadth, bigness, form and likeness, which is altogether false: for we
utterly deny such erroneous Principles, and have born our Testimony against
Muggleton.

It is also evidenced unto us by two Witnesses, that James Barry in his
preaching did affirm, John Kelson, Thomas Cole.
that the Quakers were a bewitching and blaspheming, erroneous people, cheating
God of his Right, and that they did compass Sea and Land to make one Proselite,
and when they had done, made him twofold a child of the Devil more then before.
Thus it appears that he still endeavors to insense people against us, as that
we are from the Devil, and are working for him, to turn and beget to him, and
not to God. Those with many more such like unchristian reflections, and abuses
against us and our Principles are brought to us, and testified to have
proceeded from his mouth; and therefore we offered, as before, that we desired
a public Meeting before the people, that the Witnesses and he might come face
to face, and that the people might hear both sides with their Witnesses, and
when all was heard, that we would leave it as before proposed. And this we
thought might be a good opportunity for him to clear himself if innocent; but
it is like he knowing in his Conscience, his guilt made him fly from so
reasonable an offer; and shuffle as he has done, that he might escape coming
to the trial, lest he should be further manifested.

Now as to those three Principles James Barry promised to send forth his
Arguments in Print to prove the Quakers grand Heretics in, they were in our
Answer (to one of his said Papers) sent him, laid down, and expressed according
to the following words, viz.

To the first we affirm, That we own the Resurrection, and do believe that the
Righteous shall rise and ascend into Glory, and be glorified in Heaven with an
eternal Reward, and that the Wicked also shall rise and come to Judgment, and
be turned into Hell, to receive an eternal Punishment. But that the same
fleshly Body which must undergo Death and Corruption shall rise and enter into
Heaven, we leave for thee to prove, and make good from the Scriptures of Truth;
being our selves satisfied in believing what the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15.36,
37. when he answers the Fools Question, saying, that which thou sowest, is not
quickened, except it dye And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that Body,
that shall be, etc. and further says, verse. 44. It is sown a Natural Body, it
is raised a Spiritual Body; etc. and in the same chap. says further, verse. 50.
Now this I say, Brethren, that Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of
God, neither does Corruption inherit Incorruption.

Thus we laid it down, and looking upon James Barry's asserting, that it must
be the Fleshly Body, which must die, and see Corruption, (for these are his
words;) we did believe he contradicted the Apostle in so saying, and also
Christ himself, who said, that the Children of the Resurrection were equal unto
the Angels, etc. Luke 20.36. and therefore did we offer to dispute with him in
the vindication of our Faith as to this Principle.

The second Error he charged upon us, was, That the Quakers deny, that Men are
justified and saved by the alone Righteousness of Jesus Christ, imputed without
the Concurrence of inherent Righteousness. And in another Paper condemns us of
Error, for believing that the active and passive Righteousness of Jesus Christ
is not the only Righteousness (as imputed to us by God, without any mixture of
Righteousness inherent in us) by the which Sinners must be justified and
eternally saved. We answered,

That we do own Righteousness to be imputed of God, and Gods Imputation thereof
to be a Blessing and Happiness unto man, but do not believe that Sinners shall
be justified and saved by the Imputation only of the active and passive
Righteousness of Christ without us, without any Righteousness wrought in us by
the Spirit of Grace, which comes by Jesus Christ.

Let all people that are of understanding hearts seriously consider this, which
he calls an Error, and charges upon the Quakers for such an Error, as that he
will prove us grand Heretics herein, etc. for allowing any mixture of
Righteousness inherent in us, that is, cleaving to or abiding in. One might
think he had never read the Scriptures, thus to exclude the work of Grace in
the heart. Did not the Apostle say, Ephesians. 2.5. By Grace ye are saved, and verse.
8. again, By Grace ye are saved, through Faith, not of your selves; it is the
Gift of God. And was not this Grace a Spiritual Gift? and was it not to be in
their hearts? did not the Apostle say, Let the Word of God dwell richly in you.
And were they not to sing with Grace in the heart, Coll. 3.16. and was not
Christ in them the Hope of Glory? chap. 1.27. and did not Christ say, Joh. 3.3.
Except a man be born again (or from above) he cannot see the Kingdom of God.
And, verse. 5. Except a man be born of Water, and of the Spirit he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God: For that which is born of the Flesh, is Flesh, and
that which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit, as v. 6. From all which it is
evident, that none can enter the Kingdom of God, without this Regeneration, and
being born again. And how can this New Birth be, without the work of the Spirit
of Christ in the heart? and how can this work of Regeneration be wrought, and
no inherent Righteousness? or, how can it be, that a man may be born of the
Spirit, or from above, and have no Righteousness abiding in him? and without
this work of Regeneration and new Birth, you see Christ says, he cannot enter
the Kingdom of Heaven. This being rightly understood, let James Barry tell us
what manner of Justification and Salvation that is, which he means, that is,
without any mixture of Righteousness wrought in a man, by the Spirit of Grace,
or abiding in him; for he says, By the alone Righteousness active and passive
of Christ, imputed without any mixture of Righteousness inherent, must Sinners
be justified and eternally saved. But it is evident from Christ's Words, that by
this eternal Salvation of James Barry's, a man cannot enter the Kingdom of God,
for they are not prepared for it. Behold, Christ says, John ^5 I am the Vine
ye are the Branches, abide in me, and I in you: and verse. 5. he that abides in
me and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit: without me ye can do
nothing.

Now can it be possible that any should be in Christ, and Christ in them, and
yet no Righteousness inherent (that is ^^icking to, or abiding in them;) and
yet they, as branches bearing fruit, and if they do not bear Fruit, they are to
be taken away, then not saved and justified, if they be taken away; and if they
bear Fruit Christ is in them, and they in him: Then, if it be so, Righteousness
is inherent, both by sticking to, and abiding in. So let James Barry make out
how any can be in Christ, and Christ in them, and no Righteousness inherent: or
otherwise how any can be fruitful, and consequently justified and saved, and
Christ not in them, and they in him; seeing Christ says it cannot be: and
verse. 6. you may see the end of all that abides not in Christ, as withered
branches cut off, they are gathered for the fire. So that they that abide not
in Christ, bear no Fruit, and are neither justified nor saved, agreeing with
the very Parable Christ speaks, Matthew. 9.17. Neither do men put New Wine into
Old Bottles, else the Bottles break, and the Wine runs out, and the Bottles
perish, etc. which plainly demonstrates, there must be an inward work of
renewing; for it is not the Old that must enter: therefore the Apostle says, 2
Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature: and in 1 Cor. 5.7.
the Apostle exhorts them to purge out the old Leaven, that they might be a new
Lump. etc. and in Gal. 6.15. the Apostle having spoken before of the effects of
the Cross of Christ, tells them, that in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision nor
Uncircumcision avails any thing, but a new Creature. So that we may see the
Apostle (who believed his Masters Doctrine) pressed to have it answered, by
witnessing the old man put off, which was corrupt according to the deceitful
Lusts, and to be renewed in the Spirit of their minds, etc. Ephesians. 4.22, 23.
and in Coll. 3.9.10. There you may see that the Apostle tells them they had put
off the old man, with his Deeds, and had put on the new, which was renewed in
Knowledge after the Image of him, who had created him; and was not this new Man
Christ, or at least the bringings forth of his Power in them; for the Apostle
says, Romans 13.14. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, etc. and Coll. 2.6. As
ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him. And Coll.
3.11. Having spoken of them that had put on the new Man, as before; says,
where there is neither Jew nor Greek, etc. but Christ is all, and in all. As
the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 1 30. He was made of God unto them Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption.

So here was the true Imputation, or gift of God, thus given or made theirs,
and so imputed; and so they did witness his power to work in them; as the
Apostle says Ephesians. 3. and 20. and in the same Chapter, you may see how he
desired with bowed Knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he
would grant them according to the Riches of his glory, to be strengthened with
might by his Spirit in the inward Man; and likewise in his Epistle to Titus
3.5. Having spoken of the Love of God to Mankind, not by works of Righteousness
which we have done, but according to his Mercy he saved us, by the washing of
Regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost: So here still the Apostle has
regard to the Doctrine of Christ, and maintains Regeneration through the
renewings of the Holy Ghost, so they were washed thereby, and born thereof. To
this agrees another Testimony of his, 1 Cor. 6.11. Having told them that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; and having reckoned up to
them the wickedness that the Gentiles were given to; says, And such were some
of you, but ye are Washed, but ye are Sanctified, but ye are Justified in the
name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.

And what says James Barry, was not Righteousness here wrought in them, was
there none inherent, when this work of Sanctification, and washing was wrought
by the Spirit, or were they saved and justified while they were in those gross
Evils beforementioned; if so let us know what manner of Salvation it was, for
the Apostle says, None such shall inherit the Kingdom of God; and the same
Apostle says, Phil. 2.12, 13. Work out your own Salvation with fear and
trembling; for it is God that works in you both to will and to do of his good
pleasure.

Now it is evident that though they preached Remission of Sins past in the name
of Jesus to those that did believe; and so through Faith their Sins came to be
blotted out, yet without this washing of Regeneration and work of the Spirit to
renew them that they might be born again, as Christ had said, they could not
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; and therefore you may see how the Christians
witnessed the new Birth, and how the Apostles labored for it; yet this neither
was by them then, nor is by us now accounted Man's work alone. But was the work
of Christ in them by his Spirit, and that was the reason why the Apostle came
under such a Travel, as in Gall. 4 19. where he says, my little Children, of
whom I travel in Birth again, until Christ be formed in you. Here the Apostle
was concerned lest they should be lost, and he had bestowed upon them Labor in
Vain, as verse 11. Seeing they were going out into the Observations which was
unprofitable; and therefore in Chap. 5.16. Says this, I say then walk in the
Spirit and ye shall not fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh. So you may see it was
the Spirit the Saints were to walk in, and thereby was the overcoming of the
Flesh, with its Lusts. As the Apostle in Romans 8, does at large testify and
tells us plainly, verse. 9. that if any man has not the Spirit of Christ he is
none of his. And verse 14. says, as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they
are the Sons of God. But James Barry with some of his Hearers denied
Revelation, and accounted it an Error in us to own it; and therefore it cannot
be expected that they should walk in it, who denies it, or that they should be
adopted by it, or Sealed by it: And therefore let James Barry in his Answer
make out how they came to be Christians, or Children of God and whether they
are Christ's, and how they came to be so, and whether they own Regeneration
necessary to Salvation, yea or nay, and whether this eternal Salvation he says
Sinners are saved by, without any mixture of inherent Righteousness, do fit man
for the Kingdom of God, yea, or nay. And whether any man can reap benefit by
the active and passive Righteousness of Christ without, except he have a true
Faith; and whether any Man can have a true Faith without the word of Faith, and
whether this word of Faith be not in the Heart, etc. yea or nay; and whether
true Faith be not an effect of this word in the Heart, yea or nay. According to
Romans 10. And this is not the speech of the Law, but of the Righteousness of
Faith, as in verse 6th and 7th, thou need not say who shall ascend into Heaven
to fetch Christ down, or who shall descend into the deep to bring him again
from the dead, etc. verse the 8th, the word is nigh in the Heart and Mouth:
This is the Word of Faith which we Preach, and is this word there in the Heart?
and does it beget Faith in Christ, and concerning his Righteousness, and yet no
Righteousness within? for James Barry will have no mixture, it must be a Faith
without Righteousness, or else a Justification and Salvation without Faith; so
let him send forth his Arguments to prove us grand Heretics according to his
Promise, and then it may be seen what we have further to say in the Vindication
of our Principles, which if he do not, let it rest upon him as such a one, and
let Error and Heresy lie at his door.

The next Error that he charge upon us, as he lays it down in his own terms,
is, that we do own Perfection in Sanctification as to degrees in this Life.

Answer. We having said so much before tending to prove this no Error, in our
so owning of it, need now say little more; especially, seeing we never heard it
accounted an Error before till now by him, and do question whether any will be
now of his mind; the Apostle, as is showed before, said to the Saints, they
were washed, and they were sanctified: and again he speaks of their being saved
by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost; and Jude ( verse
1.) writes unto such as were sanctified by God the Father, and preserved in
Jesus Christ. Was this Washing and Sanctification which was by God the Father,
and by his Spirit, and in the name of Jesus Christ, altogether without
Perfection, that it is, by James Barry accounted an Error, to hold Perfection
of Sanctification in any degree. What! is the Works of God and his Spirit in
Christ so imperfect, that it admits of no degree of Perfection in them? then
how should the Saints perfect Holiness in the fear of God, according to the
Exhortation given by the Apostle? 2 Cor. 7.1. We look upon it, thus to charge
God in the work of his Spirit in Christ, to be little less then Blasphemy.
David says in Psalm. 18.30. As for God his way is perfect; and in verse. 32. It
is God that girdeth me with strength, and makes my way perfect. And Moses
says, I will publish the Name of the Lord, ascribe ye Greatness unto our God,
he is a Rock, his Work is perfect, for all his ways are Judgment, etc. Deuteronomy.
32.3, 4. These bear a better and truer Testimony for God, his ways and works,
then James Barry, who will admit of no degree of Perfection in Sanctification;
which we always held to be the Work of God and his Spirit in Christ wrought for
the Saints, and in the Saints: as the Prophet also testifies, Isa. 26.12. Lord
thou will ordain Peace for us, for thou also have wrought all our works in us.

To vindicate these our Principles, or any thing writ in vindication of them by
our Friends, which he has abused, viz. George Fox, George Whithead, William
Penn and Edward Buroughs, we offered to give him a Meeting, and with him to
dispute fairly, that it might be manifest whether his or ours did most agree
and concur with the Testimony of holy Scriptures.

We offered further then, to dispute with him about the Doctrine of particular
Election and Reprobation of persons, or of Christ's not dying for ALL Men, and
told him we were desirous to be informed, what Gospel of glad Tidings Ministers
of such a Faith and Principle had to preach to them that Christ died not for,
which might tend to their benefit unto Salvation, or whether they never press
such to believe as a duty incumbent, nor ever offers Salvation unto them in the
name of Christ, if they do believe. This we said we did look upon to be a
material Principle, and ought to be cleared up, because it concerns so great a
part of mankind. And James Barry's Messenger, that he sent with his Papers,
said, that James Barry would lay down his Life in vindication of this
Principle: therefore we expect he should inform us, what Gospel he has to
preach to them Christ died not for, and what object of Faith he has to lay
down for them to believe in; for Faith must have an Object: or whether they do
not press it, as a Duty in general upon all to believe; and then let us know
their method of distinction, who preach not the Gospel to every one; for sure
there can be no Gospel of glad Tidings to those Christ died not for: and we
know it is the common opinion of such, that they that Christ died not for, are
the greater number; and if this Doctrine of theirs be true, how can the Message
of the Angel be true, Luke 2.10. And the Angel said unto them, fear not, for
behold I bring you good tidings of great Joy, which shall be unto ALL People.
And in the same Chapter you may see what Simeon said, For mine eyes have seen
thy Salvation, which thou have prepared before the face of ALL People. Here he
witnesses to the general Offer of God unto ALL. And the Apostle, Romans 5.18.
says, that as by the Offense of ONE, Judgment came upon ALL men to
Condemnation; even so by the Righteousness of one, the free Gift came upon ALL
men unto Justification of Life. And in Psalm. 68.18. David, speaking of Christ,
says, Thou ascended up on high, thou have led captivity captive, thou have
received Gifs for men; yea for the Rebellious also, that the Lord God might
dwell amongst them. And to this agrees the Parable of the Sower, whose Seed
fell, some on the high way, some on the thorny, some on the stony, and some on
the good ground: and also the Parable of the Talents, Matt. 25.15. where it is
said, he gave to every one according to their several abilities; but ALL did
not improve, as Paul says, Romans 10. they have not all obeyed, though they had
heard; and in 1 Timothy 2.6. you see what he says of the Mediator, who gave
himself a Ransom for ALL men, to be testified in due time. 2 Cor. 5.14. For the
Love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one died for
ALL, then were ALL dead; and was not their Judgment right in this? Heb. 2.9.
But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower then the Angels for the suffering
of Death, crowned with Glory and Honor, that he by the Grace of God should
taste Death for EVERY man. So you see, that by the Grace of God he should taste
Death for EVERY man; and yet James Barry and such, by their ungracious
limitations, would have it to be but for a few; and so he goes to contradict
the Scripture, and so is witnessed against, by that which he said should be the
Standard to try every thing by: and therefore is not true according to the
Standard. And in the 1st Epistle of John 2.2. you may see what he says of
Christ and his Death; And he is the Propitiation for our Sins, and not for ours
only, but also for the Sins of the whole world. So not for theirs only, but
also for the Sins of the whole world. And 2 Pet. 3.9. there the Apostle tells
us of the long-suffering of God to usward, not willing that ANY should perish,
but that ALL should come to Repentance. And the Prophet Ezekiel, being of the
same mind, declares fully in the 18th chap that the Lord has no pleasure in
the Death of a Sinner, but rather that he would repent and return. Many
Scriptures might be laid down to witness against this unrighteous Principle of
limiting God in the universality of his Love to mankind; for the rejecting of
which, and slighting the offers of Free Grace, which has appeared to all men,
according to Titus 2.11. man brings destruction upon himself.

But James Barry's Messenger that he sent, which we suppose may be an esteemed
Member of his Church, did charge it to be Blasphemy, for any to say, that man
could do contrary to the Will of God; and when it was offered to be proved in
an hundred places of Scripture and more, where the Will of God was manifest,
and that men did contrary to it; for if it were not so, we should not have sin
committed; for in the Scripture all sorts of Sin is forbidden. After this was
offered he still affirmed it; and further discoursing of what benefit the
Reprobate could have by the coming of Christ; he said the Devil had a benefit
by it, but being much desired to show wherein, he could make nothing out.

James Barry makes a Boast of his Hearers, most of them being in a state of
Grace; but if they be not founded upon better Principles then these, they are
far from being in a state of Grace and Happiness. Therefore in Charity we
desire they may look to their standing, and not to be settled upon such unsound
Principles as James Barry the Independent Priest (as he calls himself) labors
to settle them in; which is opposite to Gods Free Grace which brings Salvation.

James Barry also with some of his Hearers did account it an Error in the
Quakers to own immediate Revelation; and said they did disown it: Now seeing it
is so, that the immediate Spirit of Christ, and its immediate Revelation is
denied by him; we demand of him how he came to be a Minister, and whence he
has his Ability, and that Knowledge of God, he pretends to have, and from
whom he has received his Gospel that he Preaches; its evident enough not from
Christ, for indeed it is not like his, nor him, who would have gathered the
Children of Jerusalem as a Hen her Chickens, but they would not, therefore were
they rejected, because they would not be gathered; the Apostle says, 2 Cor.
3.6. they were made able Ministers of the new Testament not of the Letter, but
of the Spirit; and verse 5. says, their sufficiency was of God; and Gal. 1.11,
12. the Gospel which Paul preached, it was not after Man, for he neither
received it of Man, neither was taught it, but by the Revelation of Jesus
Christ; Ephesians. 3. he declares, that he was made a Minister according to the gift
of the grace of God given unto him by the effectual working of his Power; and
Peter says, 1 Pet. 4.11. If any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of
God; if any man Minister let him do it as of the ability which God gives, that
God in all things may be glorified, etc. Now how is this ability received from
God, if not by his Spirit; and therefore he gave different Gifts of the Spirit
for the work of the Ministry, and by that they were opened and enlarged and
made able. But James Barry denying this, from whom has he his Call? and whence
has he his Gospel and Ability? If he says from God, We desire to know how he
received it, being not by the Spirit, he having denied that; and if it be not
by the Spirit, it cannot be from God: For what a Man receives of Spiritual
benefit, it must be by the Spirit either immediately, or mediately by its
working through an Instrument: Therefore let him make out, how he comes by his
Call, Ability; and that necessity he pretends to be upon him; for the Divine
Spirit being denied, it must be from Man, or else from his own corrupt Heart,
for Self-interest. Which is most probable, that he might get Gain and live upon
the People: For it is evident his necessity is not the same, that was upon the
Apostle 1 Cor. 9.16. he owns not his way of receiving it, nor does follow his
Example in preaching it.

And to his Hearers this advice we give; Consider well your State, and whether
you profit under his Ministry, or no; For of old, they that ran, and the Lord
did not send them, did not profit the People, for he denying Revelation by
which the Father and the Son is savingly known. No other Knowledge is come to
without it but by Hearsay, which is not that Knowledge Christ speaks of, which
is Life Eternal; and for your satisfaction read the following Scriptures Mat.
11.27. Christ says, Neither knows any Man the Father but the Son, and he to
whomsoever the Son will reveal him. So Christ is positive that no Man knows
God, but by his Revelation, Matt. 16.17. Christ says, it was the Father that
revealed him unto Peter; and Gall. 1.15.16. There you may see the Father
revealed his Son in Paul, 1 Cor. 2.10. The Apostle speaking of the great things
God had prepared for them that love him, says, God has revealed them unto us
by his Spirit; and in Ephesians. 1.17. you may see how the Apostle prayed for the
Saints, that God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory,
would give unto them the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the Knowledge of
the Son; and 1 Cor. 14.30. he says, if any thing be revealed to another that
sits by, let the first hold his Peace. Here you may see that from the Testimony
of the Holy Scripture, which your Minister said, should be the Standard to try
every thing by; that in the true Church Revelation was expected, and to be
given way to in the Church; and by the Apostle was prayed for, that God would
give the Spirit and Revelation unto the Church; for he knew they could not
Worship, Pray, Preach, nor Sing aright without it. And what! Is this accounted
an Error now, by your Minister, or you? Where is your Standard? Will you not
come to the Scriptures, nor to the Spirit neither? Where is your bottom and
Foundation that you Build upon? What Is your Root that bears you? You have got a
foolish Builder, he will not follow the example of Paul, a wise Master Builder,
1 Cor. 14.15. Paul said, he would pray with the spirit, etc. and sing with the
spirit, etc. Ephesians. 5.18. there the Apostle exhorts them to be filled with the
spirit; and Romans 8.26. he says, they knew not what to pray for as they ought,
but the Spirit helped their Infirmities, etc. and Christ in the 4th of John
says, that God is a Spirit, and they that Worship him must Worship him in
Spirit and Truth; and such does the Father seek to Worship him. Now let your
Minister clear these things up to you; How in your Church or Families either;
He and you denying Revelation, can Worship aright; Preach, Pray, or Sing
aright, and by what you have Ability, and know what to pray for, without the
Spirits help. What are you so strong of your selves, in your Self Ability that
you do not need, that which the Apostles, and all true Christians sought the
help of, and could not do without: Nay it was that, by which they knew what to
Pray for, and therefore they waited for its assistance, and Paul said he would
pray with it. You may make long Prayers like the Pharisees, but what will it
avail, it being done without that, in which the Saints had access to God. So
here your Praying and Worship, and Separation or Gathering being without the
Spirit; What can it be, but from self, and in self? and so like them spoken of
in Jude 19. These be they who separate themselves, sensual, not having the
Spirit: And we desire you to read the 8th Chapter to the Romans, and consider
what you are to walk after, as Christians, and to be led by, and to live after;
and with what you are to mortify the Flesh, or the deeds of the Flesh; if you
own a Mortification needful to Salvation; and whether you can be Christ's, and
not have his Spirit, and whether you can be the Sons of God, and not be led by
his Spirit? and whether you are Children but by Adoption? and if by Adoption
whether this Adoption is not by the Spirit? And whether it was not the Spirit
it self, that bore witness with the Saints Spirits, that they were the Children
of God, as verse the 16. And then consider what your Evidence is, or whether ye
have any, or no? You considering these things weightily will certainly find
your selves at a loss; while ye are denying the Spirits discovery, or
Revelation; whatever James Barry may tell you of your being in a State of Grace.

And therefore ought all people to be turned unto the Spirit and Light of
Christ Jesus in their hearts, and if your Minister do not direct and turn you
thereunto, he is no Minister of Christ, nor will ever bring you to Christ your
Savior, and then how can you be saved? and if he turn you to the Light and
Spirit of Christ, then he must own the Revelation thereof in the Church, or
else he denies Christ in his Offices to teach his people, who is both King,
Priest and Prophet, in his Church; and if he turn people to the Light, then he
must not preach against it; but if this be not a part of his Message, that God
is Light, and Christ is spiritually the Light of the World, and so, a part of
his work to turn to this Light, he is no Minister of Christ; and for your
Satisfaction, read these Scriptures, Paul, a true Minister, Acts 26.18.
speaking of Gods sending him to the Gentles, said, it was to open their blind
eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to
God. And 1 John 1.5. he said, their Message which they had heard of him, and
declared, was, that God is Light: So then they that turn people to the Light,
turn them to God and Christ, as is further evident from Christ's own words Joh.
8.12. Then spoke Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the Light of the world, he
that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the Light of
Life. And John the Baptists Testimony concerning him (who was the eternal Word,
by whom all things was made,) was, that he was the true Light, which lights
every man that comes into the world, Joh. 1.9. and Christ commanded to believe
in the Light, Joh. 12.36. saying, While ye have Light, believe in the Light,
that ye may be Children of the Light, etc. So people is both to be turned to
the Light, and to believe in the Light, and to walk in it, or else whatever be
professed, people can be but Children of darkness, and such as know not whither
they go: and in Isa. 42.6. and Isa. 49.6. you may see how God promised that he
would give Christ for a Light, etc. so that they that deny and slight the
Light, deny Christ, Gods Light, and Salvation; and Ephesians. 5.13. the Apostle
says, that all things that are reproved, are made manifest by the Light; for
whatsoever does make manifest is Light: so that you may see, what need people
have to mind the Light, or else they must be ignorant of their states, and also
of the Glory of God; for in the Light is the Knowledge of Gods Glory received,
as may be seen in 2 Cor. 4.6. and also you may see where this Light is to
shine; For God, who commanded Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in
our hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face
of Jesus Christ.

Much might be said in the vindication of this Testimony, for the true Light
wherewith Christ has lighted every man; but this may suffice, to all that will
believe the Scriptures, and accordingly turn their minds to the true Light of
Christ, that he may give them a right understanding to know him, that is true,
according to 1 John 5.20. Seeing James Barry, in his last Paper, seems to
accuse us, as if we would bring Texts of Scripture, neither understood, nor
rightly applied. Therefore when he sends forth his Answer upon the back of our
Vindication (according to his promise,) let him give his Applications upon the
forecited Scriptures, which are quoted for the Proof of our Principles, and as
an Evidence against his: and so let him prove us grand Heretics, as he said he
would; or otherwise let him leave off his boasting, and cease from belying and
abusing of us as formerly he has done.

Written in vindication of the Truth, our selves, and the rest of our traduced
Friends.

Dublin the 20th of the first Month, 1687/8. John Burnyeat, Amos Strettell.

POSTSCRIPT.
JAmes Barry's Answer to two Letters sent him by Anthony Sharp, which by way of
Postscript was in his last Paper to us, in the following words, viz.

I do acknowledge my self indebted to your Scribe, viz. Anthony Sharp, in two
most exquisite and polite Letters, the which I hope to answer when I have
little else to do. So begging hit Worships Patience may bear a little longer
with my slowness in this business. I bid him Farewell. J. B.

For Answer. Anthony Sharp being abused and belyed in particular as well as we
and our Principles in general; when James Barry finds leisure to answer his
Letters, we shall leave Anthony Sharp to reply, who doubtless therein will
further manifest both him and his folly, without either such delays, or using
such vain and scornful flouts, improper to have come from the Pen of a
Christian, much less a pretended Minister.

Memorandum. If any be desirous to see the several Papers that have past
betwixt James Barry and us, the Originals may be seen with Amos Strettell, at
the Band and Hood in Back-Lane, and true Copies thereof with Thomas Ashton at
the Three Kidds and Gloves in Cavan-Street, Dublin.

THE END.

