A DESCRIPTION OF THE State and Condition OF ALL MANKIND Upon the face of the
whole Earth.

AND A Discovery unto all; showing what Man was in his Creation before
transgression, and what he is in transgression; how he is become a degenerate
Plant, bringing forth curled fruit, to the grieving of the good Husbandman, who
is thereby provoked continually against the works of his own hands, to destroy
that which he has made, because it is defiled through man's transgression.

Also, the Way of Restoration, of Salvation, Redemption, and of Life Eternal,
is here declared unto all the sons and daughters of Adam in the whole world,
that all may come to the knowledge of the Creator, and to have fellowship with
him again, from whom all the children of men are separated in the state of
enmity, and are ignorant of him, and drove from his presence.

This is to go abroad into all the Earth, through the whole world, as a Call
and Visitation unto all mankind, that they may hear and consider their
condition, and may return from whence they are fallen, and may be restored
again to serve, and worship, and glorify and living God, who made Heaven and
Earth, and all things therein.

By one who has measured and viewed in true judgment the condition of all
mankind, who is a lover of souls, and a friend to the Creation of God, known in
England by the Name of Edward Borough.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at his shop at the
Black-spread-Eagle near the West end of Paul's.

THis is chiefly to go abroad into the dark parts of the World, among those
called Heathens most especially; but its service reaches to all men and people
upon the face of the earth: And out of love unto the Creation, and to all
people in the world was it written, and is it brought forth in public, that
all that have ears to hear, may hear; and it is to be translated into several
Languages by any who are moved of the Lord thereunto; for of a truth the Lord
is risen among us, and God has given the word from his mouth, and many are
they that publish it abroad through the world.

To all the World, and all people upon the face of the Earth without exception.
TO all the Sons and Daughters of Adam in the whole world, this is the Word of
the Lord God, the power that made you, and that made Heaven and Earth, and all
things therein, your state and condition consider, How that you are all drove
from God your Maker, and from the knowledge of him and of his ways, which are
life and peace, and are in darkness, blindness and ignorance feparated from
that Power that made you, and in the enmity against it, and are enemies to it
in all your ways and words, where the sorrow, anguish, woe and trouble is: But
the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, the Power by whom all things were made,
who is called Christ Jesus, has lightened every one of you with the true light
which shines in your hearts in darkness, to give you the understanding of the
knowledge of him that made you, and of his salvation and redemption, and of
eternal life, if you love the light with which you are all lightened: And first,
The light measures every man's state in true Judgment, and with it you may all
see your selves in the state wherein you now stand which is a state separated
from God, and the state wherein man was created, which was blessed.

Therefore search and consider your state and condition in the light of the
world, of the dust of the ground were you made and into man was breathed the
breath of life from the living power which formed all things, and man was
made a living soul, and was brought forth into the World in the Image and
likeness of the Power that made him, every one in particular that be come into
the World, for Male and Female in the Image of the Creator created he them,
without sin or evil; and man was a noble Plant, wholy a right Seed, planted
with the choicest Vine, and placed in paradise, the Garden of the Creator, and
there was set to bring forth Fruit, and to glorify and honor him by whom man
and all creatures were made; for man was made perfect and upright, set in the
council of his Maker without sin, or spot, or evil in his sight, and was the
glory of the Creator, and was made for his glory; and Power and Wisdom was
given unto man to rule and govern in Dominion, in Righteousness and in Wisdom
over all living creatures, and was Lord over all things, and had rule and
authority over all the Creation, and was Steward over all things whom the
Creator had made, who made all things for man, and made them subject unto him,
to be ordered and governed by him, and used to his glory by whom they were
made; and in that day when man was in the council of him that made him, and was
subject to his Will, he was blessed above all creatures, and unto him was all
creatures blessed, and not any thing was evil that was made, but good in his
sight that made it, and good unto man that was to use it, he being brought
forth in the Image of the Creator, and had a measure of his Wisdom and his
Power to teach him, and to lead him in the exercise of all creatures, and was
in perfect freedom over all things, to rule in the Wisdom of God. And this was
the state of man before transgression, which state was blessed, and not
subject to the curse of misery, or sorrow, nor trouble, nor torment; but man
disobeyed the Power that made him, and went from its Council, and contrary to
its will, and grieved it, and vexed it till it became his Enemy to fight
against him, and to curse him; for he had transgressed against it by feeding
that part which should not with the knowledge of things, and so became wise,
and lost uprightness, and touched that which the Power that made him had
forbidden; and so his mind and heart adulterated from the Creator into the
visible glories, pleasures, and things which were less then himself; and so he
became unprofitable to his Maker by transgressing against him, and only
profitable to himself to seed, and nourish, and delight, and please himself in
the outward Creation, and forgot the Power that made him; and thus being with
his mind turned into the earth, there the evil entered and the devil overcame
him with his temptations, and the power of the earthly darkness gained
dominion over him to sway his affections, desires and lusts, into vanities of
the earth, and he lost his dominion over the creatures; and they gained
dominion over him to serve and worship them, and to please himself with them
who became captive with his mind, to be ruled by them in vanity and in evil:
And thus man became unprofitable to his Maker, and unfruitful in the Garden,
and kept it not undefiled; and being turned from the Covenant wherein he was
set, into his own willing and desiring in the outward Creation, the evil
defiled him, and he became evil, and a fruitless tree that cumbred the ground,
and an enmity was placed in him by disobedience, and all things became evil to
him, and the door of all misery and sorrovv was opend, and let in the curse
upon him inwardly and outwardly, for he became dead in transgression to the
life, and power and wisdom of the Creator and every moment was subject to
dye to this World also. And through transgression of the Power that made him
he was cast out of the Creators Garden, and out of his love, to labor under
the curse in unprofitable ground; and also out of his own dignity, and honor,
and dominion was he cast, and became heir of death, and child of Wrath, and
Enemy in his mind unto the Creator, and an enmity was placed in him against
the Power that made him, and rebellion in his mind from which all the Works
of unrighteousness proceeds, and innocence was lost, and man became hurtful to
himself and to all creatures, and grieved continually the Power that made him,
and was drove from the presence and feeling of his Creator, into
insensibleness: and in this state unto this day are all ye sons and daughters
of the first Adam in the enmity against the power that made you, every moment
transgressing it; and death reigns over you all, and the power of darkness
rules in you all, and the Law of sin, and death, and transgression are you all
subject to and led captive in your minds, affections and desires, at the will
of the power that leads into transgression, called the devil; and in that
state you are all strangers to God, and are without him in the World, and
ignorant of the knowledge of his ways, and are in the perishing state for want
of knowledge, and subject to the curse of the power which you transgress, and
are heirs of his Wrath, having no part in the Inheritance of blessing; for a
vail of darkness through sin has overspread you all, and covered you all from
the sight, and hearing, and feeling of the Creator, and of the mystery of his
glory and wisdom; and every one in particular, and none excepted of all the
children of Adam upon the face of the whole earth, but all have sinned and
transgressed, and death reigns over all, and blindness of heart has possessed
all, and all have fallen short of the glory of the Creator, and all men are
concluded (by his spirit) to be under sin, and children of Wrath, and Heirs of
Corruption, and in disobedience and rebellion to the life that gives all men a
being; the whole world, and all people in it, without exceptions of tribes,
Generations, or Nations, this is the state and condition of all the sons of
men; all flesh has corrupted his way upon the earth in his sight that made it;
and the wickedness of man is great in the earth, and the imaginations and
thoughts of every man's heart is evil continually, and grieveth the Creator; for
the whole earth is filled with violence through man's trnsgression: And now if
any stock or age has privilege one above another, to redemption and
salvation, and to the Kingdom of Peace and Glory, but Jew and Gentile, wise and
foolish, Noble and Ignoble, Male and Female, all people without exception are
in transgression, and by the line and measure of true judgment are shut out
from the knowledge of life and salvation, and of the Inhheritance of the
Father, in that state of enmity wherein every man in the world is fallen into,
and by one the offense came, and so death upon all men, which reigns in the
hearts of all, and opposes the life of the Creator, and every one is imperfect
in the sight of the Lord, blind, deaf, dumb, lame and without the sense of the
Power that made him and brought him forth, his eye sees not, for it is covered
with a vail of darkness; neither does the ear hear, for it is stopped; nor the
Tongue speak, nor the understanding pecceive any thing of the secrets of the
Lord, but all are separated and divided from the tree of life, and are cast out
from his presence by whom the world was made, into blindness of heart, and to
the loathing of your selves, and are more ignorant of your Maker then the Ox is
of his owner, or the Ass of his Masters Crib; for you know not him that gives
you life and all good things, and that upholds you by the Word of his Power;
and this is his word unto you all, You are all under the power of Satan, and
subject to his will, acting in iniquity and in evil, bringing forth the fruits
of death from that ground in which you now stand, which is cursed, and your
Maker has no pleasure in it, for your fruits grieves his spirit that made you,
and vexes his soul which brought you forth; for man is degenerated into the
plant of a strange Vine, and brings forth wild grapes and cursed fruits which
is of a bitter taste unto the Lords soul, who planted all things for himself,
who is the good Husband man; but the whole earth is currupted, and all mankind
in it, and man is not now acted, nor led, nor ruled in his heart by the Power
that made him, which gives him all good things; but the power of Satan, the
Serpent, the old Dragon, which deceived from the beginning who is in the enmity
against the life of the Creator; he acts man, and rules man, to the abuse of
all creatures, and to his own destruction, and every particular man is liable
to the wrath, and to the curse, and to everlasting woe, and misery, and tormeut
from his Maker, in that state of disobedience whereinto all mankind is fallen,
not one upon the face of the whole earth excepted from transgression, and so
from misery; nor none privileged one above another unto happiness, but as I
have said, Male and Female, who was made in the Image of their Maker in the
first Creation; but now every man in the whole world is in the enmity against
the life of the power that made him and is a child of wrath and shut up in
blindness and unbelief under the Devils power, which power abode not in the
truth, but is out of the truth, and all mankind is left in this condition
without help, or helper, or deliverance, or means, or way of salvation from
himself or any other creature upon the face of the whole earth but is a Sheep
without a Shepherd, straying and wandering in the thoughts of his own heart,
after vanity, and that wherein there is no profit to the Lord, nor to his own
soul, but death and sorrow in all his ways, having forsaken the Fountain of
living waters, and gone a whoring after other Lovers, and defiled himself, and
so brought destruction upon himself by his own doings, who abounds in all evil,
lying, theft murder, envy, strife, stealing, and Whoredom, and such like which
are the fruits of the ground that is cursed for man's sake: But now unto all
people, the sons and daughters of Adam, the first man that ever was made;
though you be thus fallen into misery by transgression, and helpless from your
selves, or from any other creature, yet has the living God, the power which
made you, and which you have transgressed against, ordained and prepared a way
to be restored and healed, and to be brought to the enjoyment and feeling of
the Creator from the disobedience, and from the curse and misery, unto the
blessing and happiness; and unto all Mankind in particular, is prepared a way
out of death unto life, out of the loss which every man has received in
transgression, to salvation, and redemption, and deliverance out of the
captivity and bondage, which all is fallen into, into liberty and freedom, to
serve his Maker, and to glorify him, for he has not been served nor
glorified, but grieved and vexed by all men on the earth; and so he has
brought misery and the curse upon all, by forsaking them, and leaving them
under the power which made them not, to be led and guided by it in rebellion
unto destruction. And now this same power by which man was made is man's
Restorer, and Deliverer, and Redeemer and Savior, though he have transgressed
against it; for when there was none to help nor to save of any creature upon
the face of the earth, the arm of that Power which made all things stretched
forth its self to save the creatures which was made; and that same Power
which is trangressed is the Redeemer of all mankind, though it is offended,
and burdened, and pressed as a Cart with sheaves by transgression against the
Creator; and that is the power which works out salvation and deliverance by
slaying the enmity, and condemning iniquity, and removing the cursed ground out
of man's heart, that the evil Fruits may cease which it brings forth; and by
this Power all must be saved that ever are saved, and delivered from Wrath.
And this all men have been ignorant of, and not felt, nor known, nor tasted of
the life and power of the Creator, though it has been near unto every one,
and all men and creatures lives, moves, and has their being by it, and
sustenance from it, and yet man transgresses it, and grieves it, and is not led
by it.

Therefore all people upon earth consider your condition and state, and hearken
to the Power that made you, a measure of which moves in the hearts of all
mankind upon the face of the earth; and it moves against the evil, and against
the defiled and transgressing part in every man's heart that is come into the
World; and this Power by which all men was made, and which they have
transgressed against (a measure of it from the Father is made manifest to all
mankind upon the face of the Earth, and convinces of the evil, of Murder, and
Adultery, and such like, and condemns the works which are evil in every
particular man, whether Heathens or Christians (so called) and unto all people;
here is the way to be restored into Covenant with your Maker, a measure of his
power in you, secretly moves upon you, and calls to you to return to it, to be
led and guided by it in fear, and obedience, and subjection to it, from which
you have been driven, and against which you have transgreded; and this power
the Creator has sent his Son into the World, and given him a gift unto all
mankind, and he has given light and understanding to every particular man to
know good from evil; truth from a lie, right from wrong; Justice from
injustice, and equity from falsehood; and this Power of the Son of God in you,
does witness to you, and accept you, when with it you be guided, and when
according to it you speak and act; and it justifies the good, and the right,
and the equal, and excuses all men in that from condemnation; but against lying
and wrong dealing, and deceit, and injustice it testifies; and when you do
these things, you transgress against that Power that made you, which should
save you, and justify you, and excuse you, and with it you are accused and
condemned, and it brings trouble upon you, and the curse of misery and sorrow;
and this Power in you will search your hearts, and try your reins, and let you
see your thoughts, and make manifest unto you the state and condition of
mankind, who is become enemy to his Maker, in following that which brings
death, upon which the wrath remains till there be a returning unto the Power
by which man was made, a measure of which (as I have said) moves in the hearts
of the sons and daughters of Adam in all the world: And now if every one of you
do turn your minds from the World, and from the glories and vanities thereof,
and from the evil which has possessed you in thoughts and actions; and if you
stand still for a moment from willing and desiring to your selves and after the
World, this shall you find secretly moving in you, which shall draw you toward
the Creator to enjoy him, and to see his glory, which none that are still in
transgression against him can ever partake of, or behold; and if to that you
hearken within you, and heed it, and follow it, which witnesses to that Power
that made you to be great, and mighty, and wonderful, this will show that you
are short of his glory, and it will condemn evil in you in all thoughts, and
words, and actions, which proceeds out of the cursed ground in which the
Creator has no pleasure; and this will take away the vail which is spread
over you all, and open the blind eye, and unstop the deaf ear, and bring you
to hear, and see, and understand the things which are eternal, which belongs
unto your peace; and if you all come to be guided by that which moves in you
against evil, it will lead you up to its self to be renewed and changed (out
of the evil, and from under the devils power, under which every man bath been
subject, which Power has been out of truth) into the Image and likeness of
the Creator, and to be restored to his Inheritance to enjoy peace and rest for
ever.

And this is the Word of the Creator of Heaven and Earth to you all, and to all
mankind, this is the Way unto redemption, and salvation, and unto the blessing,
out of all sorrow, and troubles, and afflictions, and torments, and vvoes and
miseries, which is the Portion for ever of all that disobeys this Power which
moves against evil in you, which is the Power of him that made all men and
things which moves in your hearts against all that which the Creator never
placed in you, but w^ are fruits of darkness. I say unto you all. This power in
you must you own and believe in and follow, and be guided by it, and bear its
condemnation and judgment upon all that which is contrary to it; if ever you
be restored to the blessed state, and all anger, and wrath, and murder, and
lying, and dissembling, and whoredom, and drunkenness, and brutishness, and
beastliness, and wantonness, and backbiting, and theft, and all these things
whatsoever must be condemned in you, for who acts these things, are Enemies to
the Creator, and is led by the Power of Darkness which is the destroyer of you
soul and body, and the cause of the curse upon you, and the ground of all
sorrow, and sufferings, and afflictions, and troubles which comes upon that
part in you which is in transgression against the power of God, for there is a
birth born of the flesh which brings forth, and goes after fleshly Ways,
fleshly Joys and Delights, and Pleasures, and fleshly Words and Vanities,
which murders the Just, and blinds the eye, and grieves your Maker; and this
birth must not inherit eternal life, but all that ever does inherit must be
born again of another Seed, and into another Nature, where all the former
things is passed away, for all glories of this World will wither, and all your
joys and pleasures will come to an end, and you will be left miserable and
wretched.

Therefore oh earth, earth, and all the children of Adam in the whole World, be
awakened, be awakened and stirred up to consider of your state and condition,
for the Creator of all things is risen to gather his people up to himself, and
his voice sounds abroad through the whole World; if any has an ear to hear,
let him hear; terror and vengeance is against all the rebellious, and to the
judgment must all come before the Maker of all things, to be judged by him
according to the Power which moves in every man, which is just and equal, and
witnesses in equity, which is a measure of the Power that made the World, and
all mankind unto it shall confess, to its greatness, to its justness, and to
its authority; and to it must all the children of Adam bow, and before it
tremble, and he that has done good, and lived in meekness and soberness, in
the truth, and in justness, in all that which is good, and not in any evil,
shall receive life, peace, rest and glory from the righteous Judge, the Power by
whom the World was made, and he shall be excused from all condemnation; but he
that has done evil, and transgressed against the Power of God by which he is
upholden, who is degenerate, and brings forth rudeness, wildness, and
wickedness, he shall receive tribulation and anguish, and be deprived of
happiness in this life and for ever; and all who does not own the measure of
the Power of the Creator in you to be guided by it, such does neglect and
reject the day of your Visitation, and shuts your selves out from the glory of
God, and are unworthy of life and peace; but all that owns this, and are
subject to it, the Power of his Son, who is the Maker of all things, and does
follow it, this will reconcile you, and stay the enmity, and bring you into
unity with the Creator, and this will lead you out of darkness out of death and
evil, and all the ways thereof, and will save you from all the effects
thereof, and you will be excused and justified in the sight of the Creator.
Therefore all people upon earth consider, this is the day of your Visitation,
the Way of life and of death is set before you, the Way unto peace, and the way
of trouble; Prise the day of your Visitation.

This is to go abroad through all the world to all the Sons and Daughters of
Adam; it is a Warning from the Creator and Maker of all things, by a friend
unto all people, and a lover of their souls.
HEre is the estate and condition of mankind described, whereby in the sight of
the World all may come to understand how all the sons and daughhters of the
first Adam are degenerated, and subverted, and fallen from the state wherein
man was created in the beginning, who was blessed of his Creator, being brought
forth in his own image and likeness, to rulin dominion over all living
creatures, and to use them to the glory of the Creator; and in that day man was
not subject te the curse of misery, or sorrow, or vexation, for that door woe
not opened for the curse to enter, but man was altogether blessed in the state
wherein he was brought forth, until by disobedience unto the power that made
him, another power gained dominion over him, even the seed of Enmity placed it
self in man's heart, which prospered by man's rebellion, and became a great Tree
of bitterness, bringing forth much Fruit in the hearts of all the children of
Adam, to the vexing, and grieving, and dishonoring of the Spirit and Life of
God the Creator, even to the making void of his Purpose in creating man, who
created him for his glory, but man disgraces him, and dishonors him altogether,
and brings forth fruit not accepted, but grievous, and of a bitter taste, and
the Lords soul has been pressed as a Cart with sheaves, under man's
transgressions, who have backslided and revolted, and turned aside for a thing
of naught, and have cast himself down from his excellency of Dominion into
shame and dishonor, daily provoking the long-suffring of the Lord, and wearying
his goodness, and he has been provoked to cut off the Works of his own hands,
which Satan has entered into, and defiled, and made loathsome and abominable to
the Maker; for Satan has made man barren of all good, and fruitful in all
evil, and he is wholy subverted into another end in all his Works, then
wherefore he was created; he that reads let him understand (the Creator of all
things planted a Vineyard, with the choicest Vinr, his own image) and he
dressed the Vinyard, and watered it, and he came to look for Fruit in the
season, and behold the Vinyard was degenerated into strange Plants, and brought
forth only wild Grapes; and sower Grapes, and crossed the expectation of the
good Husbandman, for the Fruit of the Vinyard was loathsome to him, of an ill
smell, and of a bitter taste, and his soul was not satisfied, but grieved, who
labored for himself, that he might gather. Fruits of the Plants which he had
planted with the choicest Vine; but behold, his Vineyard (all mankind) was
barren of good Fruit, and no pleasant Fruit could the Husbandman reap to
himself, but the Vines were degenerated, and all brought forth wild Grapes, and
sower Grapes, which the good Husbandman has no pleasure in, but is vexed
thereby; for his Vinyard is barren of all good Fruit, and the fruits of
unrighteousness has abounded, whereby the good Husbandman is provoked to fury
and indignation against the Vinyard which he had planted, being become
degenerate Plants, and strange slips; this is a Parable, and describes the
condition of all mankind; if any have ears to hear, let him hear, and read
himself how he was planted with the image of his Maker, but is now degenerated
and turned aside from truth and righteousness, from all good, and from the
ways of peace, out of the love and pleasure of his Maker, and is now in all
evil, in deceit and unrighteousness, and in the Ways of sorrow and trouble,
and in the Makers displeasure; and the Seed of Enmity rules in him, and is
suffered to be King in the Wrath of God, and must be taken away in Gods
displeasure and anger; for that is not the anointed of God, but is in
rebellion against his Authority, and breaks his Law, and transgresses his
commands, and must be condemned into perdition; for all cursed Fruits does
spring forth from that Seed, to the vexing and grieving of the Lord God,
injustice, oppression, deceit, hypocrisy, falsheartedness, lying, murder,
whoredom, theft, envy, bitterness, perverseness, devouring one another
covetousness, idolatry, and all manner of evil which gives an ill savor, and a
corrupted taste, and a loathsome sight in the presence of the Lord God, who made
all things. Oh how abominable are all the ways of man become-unto his Maker,
who has nodelight in any of his ways, nor pleasure in any of his Works! Oh how
is the Lord grieved, and his soul from day to day oppressed, and his
long-suffering provoked by the ways and works of his creatures which he made
for himself! but they are become the Devils, and subject to the power of the
enmity; and all man's works are brought forth in that nature which is evil, and
out of that ground which is cursed; his good works are not accepted, and his
evil deeds are condemned, all which springs forth of one root of bitterness and
enmity, which is in the displeasure of the Creator: Oh earth be awakened, and
all ye sons and daughters of Adam, call to mind your state and condition, and
repent, and return before destruction, when no time of repentance can be found.

Hearken to instruction, and let your ears be open to hear; here you may all
hear and understand the way to restoration to be restored and recovered out of
this condition, and out of this Enmity, and from under this curse of misery and
destruction; for a way has God prepared unto all mankind, and is making it
manifest unto the whole earth, that the Sons and Daughters of Adam may again
know their Maker, and have fellowship with him; and this way is but one, which
is ordained for all people upon the face of the earth, of what Tribe or Nation
soever; and all that comes to the knowledge of the Creator must walk in this
way, which is called Christ Jesus, who is the Son of the Creator, the second
Adam, the Lord from Heaven, the Power and Wisdom of the Creator, and by him
all things was made, and without him was not any thing formed that was brought
forth; he is the Restostorer, the Redeemer, and the Deliverer; for he connot be
overcome of the evil, but overcomes and treads down all the Powers of
Darkness, and death, and the Devil, which rises against him in all the world;
and the Creator has so loved mankind, though he has transgressed against him,
and grieved him, yet he has given his Son into the world, into all Nations,
without respect of persons or people, to be the Savior of all that believe in
him, and receive him, that they may come out of death and darkness, from under
the Devils power, and may be translated, and changed, and renewed out of sin,
and death, and ignorance, and rebellion, and out of the Kingdom of the Devil,
into truth and righteousness, and into the kingdom of God. And this Restorer,
and Savior, the Power and Wisdom of the Creator, has lightened all mankind,
every one that comes into the world is lightened by him, that every one may
follow him, and be guided by his power and wisdom; and every one that does
receive him, sin and iniquity, and transgression is condemned, and the seed of
the Enmity is cast out by his power, which is revealed against all
unrighteousness, and he subdues it, and works it forth of the hearts of all
men, and so reconciles man again to his Maker, to have fellowship with him; and
this Restorer, the second Adam, comes to be revealed within every man, who
executes true Judgment upon the Transgressor, and binds under the rebellious
Nature, and death and condemnation passes upon the seed of Enmity and all its
fruits, upon the Devil and all his works, upon him who is born of the flesh,
and all his ways, his joy is turned into mourning, his pleasures into sorrow,
his glory and rejoicing into sadness of heart, and the life which he has lived
comes to be crucified, and the ways which he has walked in comes to be hedged
up, and no more followed, and his strength is turned into weakness, and all his
ways and pleasures fades and perishes, and the birth which is immortal comes
to be brought forth, which is not of this world, but Heir of the Creators
Inheritance, who has no glorying under the Sun, nor no pleasure in the glory
of this world, which passes away, but lives unto God in all things, and brings
forth fruit unto the Father, and is replanted into the living Vine, and is
leavened into a new lump, and placed in the Garden of God, all the old garments
are put off, and old things are passed away, the devil is cast out, the blind
eye is opened, and the vail is taken away which has been spread over all, and
the deaf ear is unstopped, and man is again returned unto his Maker, and hears,
and sees, and understands the things which are eternal, which belongs to his
peace; the fear of God is set up in his heart, and Gods secrets are revealed
unto him, and he is become the glory of his Maker, to praise him, to glorify
him, and to magnify him for evermore, being restored again unto Gods Image,
and guided with his power and wisdom, and have received dominion and authority
from his Maker to reign and rule over all creatures, and to be exercised in all
things to his glory by whom they were made; he is not in bondage to any
creature, but in liberty over it, and the creatures are become his servants,
and he servant to his Maker, and the earth yields its increase unto man, the
curse is removed, and the blessing restored in the Covenant of Peace and
righteousness, where all creatures comes to be enjoined; the covenant of Death
and Hell being broken and disannulled, where the curse stood; and stands in
all the world, where the Restorer of the second Adam is not received, who
moves by the measure of his power against the evil in the hearts of all men,
and he knocks at the door of the heart, that he may be received, and come in
and dwell with the children of men, whose delight is with the sons of men; and
every one that opens unto him, and hearkeneth to his cry who calls by the
Light, and moves by his Power, by him they receive life and peace, and sulness
from the Father, and are raised from death to life, and redeemed from under the
power of Satan to the power of the Creator, all evil in the ground and in the
fruits, judgment goes upon it all, and condemnation; and thus mankind comes to
be restored again to God his Maker, to be the children of God, and heirs of his
Inheritance, and is no more of this world, but redeemed by Jesus Christ out of
kindreds, tongues, and people, out of respect of time, place, creatures, or
things, and sees through all creatures, to be before the world was, beyond all
the glory of this world, to the glory of the Lord; and here is the praising,
the singing, and rejoicing, the living and walking in that life which cannot
change, and in the world, of which there is no end; and here a greater glory is
known then the first man's glory, a greater state then that which was overcome
of the Devil, a greater dominion then that which was lost; this dominion never
can have an end, death is swallowed up of life, all sorrow and anguish is
swallowed up of rejoicing, all tears are wiped here, and there is no more
sorrow, the quickening spirit is felt and witnessed, which has quickened again
to God, and God Tabernacle is with men, and his dwelling place with the
children of men, and that is felt and seen, and tasted, which was before the
world was, before any creature was made; and the whole world is comprehended,
and man's state in his first creation is here known, what it was; and man's state
in transgression is also known, whiat it was, and man's state restored again, is
also witnessed, and the difference sperceived betwixt the first Adam, which was
overcome of the Devil, though he was innocent and without sin, and bore the
likeness of his Maker, and of the second Adam, who cannot be overcome of the
devil, whom Satan has nothing in, who is the express image of the creator it
self. He that has an ear to hear, let him hear; eye has not seen, ear has
not heard, it has not entered into the heart of man that which the Father has
revealed by his spirit; things not lawful to be uttered, of which there is no
declaring, that which is infinite, endless, eternal; and in this I shall end.

London the 6. of 3. mon. 1656.
FINIS.

