STATE-MAXIMS, OR, CERTAIN DANGEROUS POSITIONS, Destructive to the very natural
Right and Liberty of Mankind.

Laid down in a Book entitled, The Grounds of Government and Obedience; By
THO. WHITE Gent.

Discussed, and both by Scripture and Reason confuted, by WILL BALL Esquire;

LONDON, Printed by G. Dawson, for T. Brewster at the three Bibles at the
West End of Paul's, 1655.

The Authors Motives inducing him to write and publish this small Treatise.
FIrst, It has in almost all Ages been too much the Practice of some able
Wits, to advance a boundless Interest of Potentates; as if that Majestas
Imperii (not salus Populi) were the adequate, yea, total object and end of all
humane Government: by means whereof Oppression has overspread, and Tyranny
under yoaked many of the greatest and most flourishing Nations on the Earth.
But such men (who have sometimes been Mercurialists, sometimes Martialists,
sometimes both) might be termed Humani Generis inimici, for that either in
hopes of their own Preferments, or Applauses, they exposed to sale (I might say
shipwreck) the Natural, or innate Liberty of all mankind.

Secondly, There have always been many (too many) churlish stubborn Persons,
who have hated and opposed Regular Civil Government (although Prudent and
Moderate) even as exorbitant Tyranny, and boundless Potency; but such may be
termed bruit beasts of the wilderness, who by Irregular Licenciousness would
destroy the well ordered and cultivated Proprieties of all civilized People.

Now, the Author of this small and compendious Treatise, was moved to write and
publish the same, to satisfy (if it may be) both the one and the other by
candid and concluding Reason.

WILL. BALL.

OBSERVATIONS Upon a Book entitled, The Grounds of Obedience and Government,
Printed 1655.
OBSERVATION 1.
Upon the sixth Ground, Touching Right, or Due.

I Have perused a Book entitled, The Grounds of Obedience, and Government,
written by Thomas White Gentleman; wherein self-end or interest is greatly
employed, and though the Author seem to dislike blind obedience, yet he
endeavors to enslave free men under the Bondage of Boundless Government, or
rather Governors. I shall instance and insist upon the Positions of the sixth
Ground, not the first, but the fittest to begin withal.

The words are these: We ought therefore to know, that a man, considered in
pure nature, looks on all other things, men, and beasts, and insensible
creatures, as his subjects to work on; his only Rule being Reason, which takes
nothing to be good, but what is good to himself.

I will examine this Position, first according to the Rule of the Creator, and
then according to the Rule of the Creature: All Schoolmen agree, that GOD
works all things for himself, but they do not all agree touching the formal
Reason, why he so works: Some hold that GOD works merely because he will
so; but this is gross, to say, that God merely wills, without Non vult Deus
quia vult, sed quia velle sapit.
the Dictamen of his Divine Knowledge; wherefore the Apostle says, Romans 8. 29.
Whom he foreknew he also predestined: as for that touching Esau and Jacob,
cap. 9. it only shows, that GODS eternal Decree precedeth matter of Fact,
not that his eternal Decree precedeth his Divine Knowledge. Others hold, that
GOD works to the end he may manifest his Attributes; but this is to say, that
GOD has a self-end dissonant to his Greatness and Goodness. For what does the
manifestation of Attributes add to GOD, whose Greatness and Glory consists in
Octjectum creationis est Bonitas ipsa Divina ut communicabilis participative.
Genesis 1. 4. 10. 12, etc. Potuit Deus ulterius communicare Participative
Bonitatem creaturis possibilibus, Deo tamen visa est sufficieus Existentibus
communi^atio.
self-Being, not in self ends? Nor can an extrinsecal end be the adequate
object of the infinite Greatness and Goodness of GOD. Others therefore say,
(and that more truly) that GOD works to communicate his Goodness severally,
and this is agreeable as to the Action of Creation, Genesis 1. 4. 10. etc. so to
the mystery of Incarnation, of which it is said; John 3. 16. So God loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son: Now if GOD work to communicate his
Goodness, ought not man, considered in pure nature, work (what he may) to
communicate good to others, and not merely or wholly to himself? Ought he not
also by the Rule of Reason to take that for good, which is good to others, as
well as to himself? Ought not the reasonable creature, considered in pure
nature, to follow the Rule of his Creator: Moreover, can a man, considered in
pure nature, (and consequently in prudent Reason) look on all other things,
men, and beasts, and insensible Creatures, as his subjects to work on? Is there
not subjectum per quod, which is the means whereby, and subjectum ad quod,
which is the adaequate Term, as well as subjectum quod the subject or ground
whereon to work? Certainly prudent Reason dictates so. When GOD created Eve he
said, Let us make him an help, ut subjectum per quod; he said not, let us make
him a subject to work upon, as subjectum quod: And if Adam and his Posterity
had persevered in the state of Innocence, doubtless he and they had educated
their children (being the adequate Terms of their Propagation, or Generation)
in holy contemplation, and some bodily employment (for certainly he and they
should not have lived idly, albeit This may be gathered from the 2. of Genesis v.
5.
their employment, or work, should have been no toil, or tediousness unto them)
so that Adam should not have looked on any of his Posterity in the state of
Innocence, or in pure nature, as a subject to work on, but rather as a subject
to work for, or to: (other creatures peradventure he might have looked on as
subjects to work on) wherefore it is improper, yea, dangerous to say, that a
man, considered in pure nature, looks on men (as well as Beasts, and
insensible creatures) as his subjects to work on; it is the way to make men
wholly self-ended, and to vilify others.

In the same Section, or Ground, Mr. White says; It is true, there is an
inclination in man, from Reason, to do another any good I can (so it is
printed) without my own prejudice, and to have a desire to keep Peace with all
men. But if I do not, it follows not that I wrong him, even though I do him
harm, or seek his ruin: But I wrong my self, nature binding me to make my
carriage to every one Rational, and becoming a man, for he is no otherwise to
me than a piece of cloth or wood, which I cut and shape after my own will,
sittingly for my use.

I would know of any Rational man, whether prudent Reason (even as Religion) do
not dictate this of St. Luke, cap. 6. v. 31. And as ye would that men should do
to you, do ye also to them likewise? Certainly prudent Reason, no way
over-byassed by pernicious will, dictates, that good is specified of, or by an
entire cause, an entire object, an entire end; and therefore prudent Reason
dictates also, that GOD is to be loved for his excellency, not for our own ends
(as the Devil falsely alleged against Job) and that man, or all mankind is to
be loved for GOD's sake, because he has dignified him with a Rational soul,
and not merely for the use one man has of another: so that, according to
prudent Reason, I should not only have an inclination to do another man what
good I can, without mine own prejudice, but even an Actual Application of what
good I may prudently without my own wrong, if he will accept thereof; however I
ought no way to wrong him, but to do unto him, being my equal in nature, as I
would have him do unto me: would I have him do unto me good, if I stood in need
thereof, albeit I were not able to require it? I ought to do the like. Would I
have him do me no harm, nor seek my ruin, by depriving me of my natural
liberty, which is an individual power of what is lawful, or by depriving me of
my National propriety, which is a legal Relation to a temporal benefit? I ought
not to do it to him. Would I have him esteem me no otherwise than a piece of
cloth, or wood, and to cut or shape me after his will, fittingly for his use?
Why then should I esteem him no otherwise, or shape him according to my use,
unless he freely give his consent thereunto? Bruit beasts have a sensible
estimation of those which are of their own species, or kind; kill but an hog,
and those of his own kind shall approach showing their discontent by their
grunting, and endeavoring what they may to rescue their fellow creature:
Beasts of prey, although they fall out about their prey, will not prey upon
those of their kind: Shall a man then prey on another by doing him harm, or
seeking his ruin, or enthralling him against his will, without any Offense or
Demerit on his part? Certainly this is so little suitable to manhood, that it is
worse than bestial; and Mr. White his Positions before recited are so
destructive to humane society, that he may seem to some to be an Athenian
Timon, an hater of mankind.

And now I think it not amiss to deliver somewhat concerning Right or Due. I
frame therefore these Definitions.

Jus est Regula rectae Rationi undequaque consentanea.

Right, or rather righteous dealing, is a Rule every way agreeing to right
Reason.

Lex est norma Politica, Protectioni and Ordini conveniens.

Law is a Politic Rule convenient to Protection, and Order.

By the first every one (having the use of Reason) is tied to do what good he
may to another (not prejudicing himself) and to do as he would be done unto.

By the first also every man has a natural or Ratinal Propriety to a
livelihood: for Adam and Eve had a Natural or Rational Propriety of the Garden
Although Paradise in Respect of the Garden it self, was (in the Opinion of
many) but small, yet in Respect of its extent it may seem to have comprehended
the goodliest part of Asia; moreover GOD could have enlarged it, in case the
Posterity of Adam had persevered in Innocence.
of Eden, or Paradise; GOD excepting, by way of Prohibition, the Tree of good
and evil: which Exception made a Propriety, showing what was theirs, what not:
and doubtless, had their Posterity persevered in the state of Innocence, they
had had Propriety of Food (peradventure of Raiment and Ornament) Regulated by
right Reason without confusion, or contention, and probably Paradise might have
been proportioned to the children of Innocence, as was the Land of Promise to
the Children of Israel: but since the fall of Adam, natural or Rational
Propriety falls under Legal, and Individual, of which in Order.

By this Rule likewise the will of one man (having the use of Reason) is not
subject to the will of another, any further than he subjugateth himself: for
although conjugal subjection was pronounced against Eve, Genesis 3. 16. as part of
her punishment for her disobedience toward GOD (which subjection was As
conjugal subjection was from Eve Traduced to her Sex, so from her Potential
sub^ection, that is to say, that the will of one man might Positively (not
naturally) be subject to the will of another) was Traduced to all mankind: even
as was the Original Aversion of the mind from GOD, and Rebellion of the flesh
against the spirit Traduced from Adam.
traduced to her Sex) yet neither men, nor women (conjugal subjection excepted)
are De Jure naturali, subject one to another; being by nature equal, as are the
Angels in heaven, amongst whom there is only a superiority of excellence, no
soveraignity of Power one over another, for that would not be agreeable to
their free, complete, and continual fruition of God in the Beatitude of Glory,
the most perfect of all states. But some it may be will say, that Children by
the Law of Nature are subject to their Parents: In which, I say, there may be a
mistake; for if Adam and his Posterity had persevered in the state of
Innocence, there had d been such an Harmony in nature, that the Child should
not have offended the Parent, and then there had been no cause of sovereignty,
and subjection, but only of Paternal Love, and filial Honor, so that Children
are not subject to their Parents by the rule of pure nature, but in regard, or
respect of depraved nature: Moreover in the Decalogue it is written, Honor thy
Father and Mother, as the Instrume^tal causes of natural Being; it is not
written, be wholly subject to thy father and mother, as to sovereign Lords over
thee. We know that sons and daughters (who have attained to the mature Ripeness
Subjectio Filialis est tantum Reverentia Naturalis erga Parents in Finem
debitum.
of convenient Reason) may not only in matters of Religion, but even in the
Latitude of morality, with due Reverence admonish, and reprehend, yea, and
legally oppose their Parents.

In England, when any one under age is bound Apprentice, it is specified, or
signified in the Indenture, that he or she were so bound, not only by consent
of their Parents or Friends, but by their own consent, to signify, that he or
show was not bound but by their own voluntary submission. Thus much of the
first Rule.

By the second Politic Rule of Law, men have their several Proprieties of Meum
and Tuum Individually; sometimes by way of Legal Possession, which is facultas
Positiva aliquod bonum mundanum comprehendens; a Positive faculty comprehending
a worldly Good: So it is of House, Land, etc. sometimes by way of Legal use,
which is Applicatio Positiva alicujus Boni mundani; a Positive Application of
some worldly Good: and so it is of money and other Chattels which a man
applies to his use: Sometimes also by way of Legal Office, which is Potestatis
alicujus in finem debitum Referentia Positiva, a Positive Reference (or
Relation) of some Power to a due end; such is the nature of all Offices from
that of a King, to that of a Constable. Now whosoever shall digress from either
of these Rules (much more whosoever shall Actually Transgress) by endeavoring
to harm, or seeking the Ruin of another in any of the Particulars
forementioned, does deviate from right Reason, and unmans himself by becoming
unhumane.

OBSERVATION II.
Upon the eight Ground, touching the Authority given to an absolute Governor:
upon the ninth Ground, touching the lawfulness of slavery; and also upon the
eleventh Ground, touching the quality, and Rational Power of a supreme
Governor.

IN this Observation I shall be enforced to recite much of what Mr. White
states by way of Positive assertion, to ravel out what he has knit, or rather
unduly knotted together.

He says (Ground 8.) That the People, as far as they have renounced their own
will, so far they have no power left in them to contradict, or resist the
Orders of the Magistracy. I say, So far as the People have submitted their
wills: for since this Power is in the Magistrate in virtue of their wills, it
cannot extend farther than the Peoples promise: so that if the People bind
their Magistrate to certain Laws and Limits; he has no right to transgress
such Laws, nor extend himself beyond the prefixed Limits, by his installation,
and the original Power given him: But above all he cannot dispose of one chip
or dispense in one the least Law, farther than he apprehends it as fit and
necessary to the good of the Commonwealth: Here is to be observed, that the
People are not subject but so far as they have submitted their wills; that the
Magistrate has no right to transgress such Laws, or extend himself beyond the
Limits prefixed to him: So then, if the People bind their supreme Magistrate
(by Oath, and Promise, or either) not to make, or repeal Laws, nor impose
Taxes, or the like, without their consent given by their Trustees, Deputies, or
Delegates, he has no Right to do any of them: yea! but says he; In case the
supreme Magistrate apprehend it fit and necessary to the good of the
Commonwealth, he may in somewhat dispense touching Law: Verily Mr. White his
magisterial License is far worse than Poetical License, for this only makes
words long, or short, but that of his makes Laws long, or short, at the
Magistrates apprehension.

I demand, whether the supreme Magistrate apprehending somewhat good for the
Commonwealth, may not mistake? Whether he may not merely pretend good to the
Commonwealth (as even all self-ended Potentates do) and intend it not? if so;
why should a People be subject to his frail, or possibly, yea, probably erring
apprehension, or doubtful intention? Should they have thought it fit; they
would have submitted their wills, and conferred such Authority upon their
supreme Magistrate at his instalment; not thinking it fit, it is clear they
Reserved (for what is not conferred is Reserved) to themselves chiefly the
power of judging what is fit and necessary to the good of the Commonwealth: So
that the supreme Magistrate (limited as aforesaid) has no right to dispense
with, or in the least Law, to null or abrogate it; but he has only Power to
dispense with matter of execution of the Law in some cases; as to pardon or
exempt a Delinquent from Punishment, where the Parties former merits, or hope
of future Behavior, may seem to counterpoise his demerits. Farthermore I
conceive it dangerous to any People, who desire to live under a certain Rule of
Law, to be subject to their supreme Magistrates uncertain apprehension, and
Arbitration, in permitting him (upon any pretense whatsoever) to dispense in
the least Law generally beneficial; The supreme Magistrate may dispense with a
Law prejudicial to many, or some, and beneficial to none but himself.
for if he find that he may make ruptures in the lesser, he will not want
pretenses upon seeming (peradventure probable) Reasons to break through as many
(though of greater importance) as stand in his way, or seem inconvenient unto
him. It is said by a great Politician, that tell a good Prince that he may do
what he list, ex optimo fit pessimus, he soon becomes from good the worst of
all; if he begin to tread upon one Law, he will proceed to trample upon others
at his pleasure.

But some will say, there may be such an exigency in Affairs of the
Commonwealth, that the supreme Governor may be enforced to do something
different from Law; as if a sudden invasion happen, he may be constrained to
levy forces, and raise money for defense of the Commonwealth, without the
immediate and explicit consent of the People, or their Trustees.

I answer; That this is a thing seldom not foreseen, so that he may have time
enough to require the Peoples consent: but if such a thing should unusually
happen, he then by raising of forces, and money for Defensive War, does not
dispense with Law, but only dispenses with matter of Fact, agreeable to the
end of Law, which is salus Populi. Otherwise it is when (without the consent of
the People, or their Trustees) he levies forces and raises money for Offensive
War, for An unlimited Potentate may make war without the consent of his
Subjects: so also may a limited Potentate, if not limited to matter of Peace
and War.
then (if he be limited as aforesaid) he does a thing different from Law in
propriam Majestatem to advance (it may be) his own Greatness, and to engage the
People in war without their consent and approbation given (by their Trustees,
or Delegates) touching the cause why, and end what, and means how.

I shall now descend from this Discourse to that of slavery: Whether (as Mr.
White has it, Page 59.) a whole Nation may voluntarily submit it self to a
Government, by which it shall have nothing of its own, nor be able to deserve
or get any thing; but be entirely at the disposition of the Magistrate it
chooses, without right or propriety:

I say, They may, though imprudently, and unworthily, not suitable to the nature
of reasonable men, but bruit beasts. Yet I say, that such their slavish
submission does not, nor cannot enslave their Posterity, no more than the Bond
of a Father, who has no Power to sell his Land, does oblige the Son to perform
his Fathers covenants: for a People cannot deprive their Posterity of their
natural Right, which is (amongst other things) not to be farther subject than
they submit their wills; as I have before instanced, and as Mr. White grants.

I but some will say, a Father (and consequently a People) may deprive a Child
of his inheritance, and why not of his Liberty or Freedom?

I say, the case is not alike; for inheritance is Legal Positively, so that
according to the Laws of some Nations (though not altogether Rational) a Son
may be deprived of his inheritance; but Liberty (such as I instance) is natural
inherently, so that a Father cannot deprive a Son of that, because it is the
Gift of GOD as the Author of Nature; nor consequently one Generation another,
both in regard of its inherency in Nature, and priority by Nature before any
written, or conditional Law. Wherefore I affirm, that not only the Progeny of
the Greeks (who are enslaved by force) but also the Progeny of the Muscovites,
and such like People (whose Predecessors enslaved themselves) may free
themselves from slavery, in case themselves have not, or do not Actually by
their own voluntary submission enslave themselves: Nor in so doing should they
oppose the direct end of Power, which is Dignitas Regularis in Ordinis, and
Protectionis conservationem: a Regular Dignity to, or for the conservation of
Order and Protection, according to that of St. Paul, Romans 13. v. 6. but they
should only oppose the indirect end of violation, or violence, which is
Impetus irregularis in oppressionis, and servitutis involuntaris impositionem,
an irregular force for imposition of oppression, and involuntary, or
constrained slavery, destructive to natural inherent Right given by GOD, as
aforesaid.

I shall now again revert and reflect upon the power* and condition of the high
or supreme Magistrate, tied, bound, or concluded by the Peoples Limitations.
Mr. White puts the case (Ground 11. Page 83. and 84.) When some great fault
discovers it self in the Limitations, and the end of Government is prejudiced
by such a defect; and nevertheless it is no doubt, but it is the intention of the
People, or the Trustees of the People, to bind their Magistrate to such
conditions; whether in such a case, he be bound to his Orders, and Oath, or
whether the duty of a wise and good man does enfranchise him to do what is
truly best for the People, though it be against their wills?

Mr. White seems to imply some difficulty in the question, but I can find
none: for if any great fault discover it self in any Limitations (being matters
generally well prepondered and debated by the most prudent of the People, or
their Trustees) the high Magistrate may in convenient time convene the Trustees
of the People, to whom he may propound, with whom he may debate, and by whom he
may reform, such fault in the Limitations (if any such be) and no doubt but
some of them will be as quick-sighted as himself, and as willing to reform any
fault for the Peoples good: but however he himself is strictly tied to the
observation of his Orders and Oath, by the Rule of Religion (if he have any)
which teaches, that solemn Covenants are without fraud to be kept, Psalm 14.
Moreover the Apostle teaches us, Romans 3. 8. That we ought not to do evil that
good may come of it: how then may we falsify an Oath for any humane end, or
good? Farthermore Reason dictateth, that to do a Rational man good against his
will, is not rationally good, because I violate his will he esteeming it no
Rational good.

Mr. White says (page 61.) But when I speak of a Nation, methinks I speak of
Nature it self: And me thinks when I speak of the Trustees of a Nation, I speak
of Reason it self; who as they ought not, so they need not have any humane good
enforced upon them, themselves being an Epitome of all humane Reason to know,
and prosecute or pursue any humane good convenient to themselves, so that the
high Magistrate does them wrong, if he do them good against their wills.

But Mr. White says (page 88.) that he is entrusted to do for the common good:
and then proceeds to say, He then of necessity must be false to his Oath, if he
do not, according to his Trust, act for the common good what he evidently sees
in a high degree to import it: further, because we know, in moral businesses,
the end aimed at, is more principal than the means ordered to it.

I must tell Mr. White, that (according to the proverb) he runs before his
horse to market: for a Limited high Magistrate, or Governor, is not entrusted
to do all good in general to a Commonwealth, but only such good as is
comprehended in his Rules and limitations; even as a General of War is not
entrusted generally in all things touching War, but only in such affairs of
War as are contained in his Instructions and Commission; so the high Magistrate
is not false to his Oath, if he observe his Limitations, but he is false to his
Oath if be exceed them. In Limited Government the People in many places Reserve
to, or for their Trustees, a joynt-power Juridicent or Law-making (being the
greatest ultimate end of their common good) and as they grant, so they tie and
bind their high Magistrate by promise and oath to a Power Juritenent or
Law-administring (being the greatest means to the ultimate end) wherefore the
chiefest end a Limited high Magistrate should look upon (as comprehended within
the sphere of his Activity) is the best means of Law-administring, leaving the
ultimate end of Law-making or common good to the Trustees of the People, and
not to undertake what by his Rules and Limitations he is not entrusted with;
least he be esteemed an Arbitrary Tyrant, or perfidious enemy to the People
(though he intend real good) and be censured, or adjudged accordingly: for the
Trustees of the People (to whom Law-making and care of common good is chiefly
referred by the People) may censure, or judge an irregular, exorbitant or
Tyrannical limited high Magistrate, and not only depose or displace him, but
condemn and punish him, as they shall think fit. The Reason is, because the
Limited Power of Law-administring is subordinate to the General Power of
Law-making, as is the means to the accomplishment and preservation of the end.
Yet the Trustees of the People are not altogether unlimited (though some
suppose otherwise) as I shall hereafter declare.

Whereas the Gentleman says (page 90.) How many promises do Divines and
Lawyers pronounce null, though they were good and valid when they were made, by
reason of the change of accidents following, which could not be foreseen?

The Gentleman must give me leave to tell him, that some subtle Casuists, and
crafty Lawyers, do pronounce some promises null which ought to be esteemed and
adjudged valid: indeed not any promise of any thing good and lawful ought to be
pronounced or adjudged null, unless it be illegally obtained by force, forgery,
or fraud; not through the Promisers voluntary neglect, or careless mistake:
wherefore he that gives to another all that is in a Trunk [I instance the
Gentleman's example, page 90.] wherein himself had put nothing but a Suit of
Aparrel, and his servant without his knowledge had taken that out and put in
bags of Gold in the same bulk; I say (that unless the Master can make it
appear, that the servant did of purpose put into the Trunk the bags of Gold to
defraud his Master) the person to whom he gave the Trunk withal in it, ought to
have and enjoy it; for it was casus fortunae, or more Theologically, the
providence of GOD punishing the masters careless neglect, who, if he knew that
his servant had such power committed unto him, as that he might put any thing
in or out, should prudently have foreseen and over-seen it. In like manner, he
that promises absolutely his Daughter in marriage to another, and afterward
the party is not found to be of such competent means, as the father of the
Daughter esteemed him to be (I omit matter of Religion and manners, for those
being dissembled may sometimes alter the case) is for his part tied Jure
contractus civilis to perform his promise, for he might prudently and carefully
have looked into the parties means, before he had made an absolute promise;
howbeit the Daughter is free to dissent, if she have not absolutely given her
consent. But neither these cases of imprudence and negligence, nor that of
Jephte, can give scope to a Limited high Magistrate for promise, or
oath-breaking: for Jephte made a rash and imprudent vow, he should have
prudently considered what had been fit to sacrifice to GOD, and not have rashly
vowed to sacrifice the first thing that met him from home, which casually might
have been one of his neighbors or servants, as it was his only daughter; and
therefore in the Opinion of solid Divines he ought rather to have broken his
rash vow, than to have sacrificed his daughter: howbeit in regard he had his
daughters consent, and in regard the Scripture reprehendeth it not, and that it
might seem a Type of the militant Church submitting her self to martyrdom in
honor of the victory of Christ, the fact of Jephte may be argued. But however
Jephte his miscarriage, in not breaking, but accomplishing his rash and
imprudent vow, cannot (as aforesaid) be a sufficient Warrant for the Limited
high Magistrate to break his Oath or promise made with deliberation and
according to prudence, that a People might be preserved from slavery,
oppression, or mere Arbitrary Government; so that he is bound by the tie of
honesty and fidelity to a strict observation of his Rules and Limitations, nor
ought he to exceed them, nor in any thing to violate them, unless he be
released of his Oath or Promise by the People, or their Trustees, or by them
enlarged touching his Rules and Limitations. All understanding men know, that a
deliberate and prudent Oath or Promise ought to be kept.

OBSERVATION. III.
Upon the fourteenth Ground; in what conditions the subject may resist
Government; And upon the fifteenth Ground; wherein consists the Power and
Liberty of the subject.

IN this place I must tell Mr. White, that he does either of purpose, or
mistake, confound the Power of a Limited high Magistrate, and of an unlimited
supreme Magistrate; for in the places which I have quoted his scope is touching
a Limited high Magistrate, in other places he instanceth, or induces the Power
of an unlimited supreme Magistrate, as in the twelfth Ground, page 98. where he
says; The next thing that occureth is the subjects fact by making this Trust,
and that is, that he has made away all Power of judging and caring for the
common good, farther than the eyes and hands of the Magistrate, his Trustee,
otherwise they have not made him supreme Governor.

Now I intend not to discourse of such an unlimited Magistrate, to whom the
People, by making away all Power of judging and caring for the common good,
have submitted themselves slaves, to stand to his Judgment, solid, or not
solid, and to depend on his conscience, or rather will, good, or bad: but my
intent is to discourse of a Limited Magistrate from whom the People have
received the chief Power to their Trustees of judging and caring for the common
good, and of the Peoples duty to such a Magistrate.

The Gentleman says (Ground 14. page 112.) Who should ask me, if the Governor
exacted for one time all the subject had, so there remained a Ground to work
upon a new, and within a little time to live contentedly; I should be troubled
to confess, it were a sufficient injury to take up arms against him, because I
cannot judge which were the greater mischief to the subject.

Truly I am no whit troubled to aver, that a Limited Governor, who should deal
so enormously with any People, as to exact all they had, leaving them only a
Ground to work upon a new, ought not only to be by arms (if no other Remedy be
left) displaced, or deposed, but also punished Romano more majorum: for he not
only violateth or breaks his Promise or Oath, which obliged and tied him to
his Limitations, but inhumanly trampleth upon the Rule of Nature it self, to
spoil those whom he ought to protect. To Even by the strength of that Power
which he ought to defend.
omit the Scenes of horrid Tyrants, Christianus the second King of Denmark for
oppressions, no way suitable to what Mr. White has stated, was expelled out of
his Kingdom, and could never be admitted to the Government, albeit Charles the
fifth (his Brother in Law) and some other Princes labored what they might for
his restoration. For my part, I never read that any of the Eastern Monarchs
did at any time so Tyrannize over the subjects, as at one time to axact all the
subjects had; howbeit those effeminate people, used to the yoke of slavery, do
voluntarily or carelessly undergo the burden of Tyranny.

Touching the clause; viz. So there remained a ground to work upon of new, and
within a little time to live contentedly; It is a Riddle above my reach, I
cannot conceive from what clouds such contentedness should drop, unless pains,
and penury, instead of plenty and prosperity, should be esteemed contentedness;
as amongst the poor Peasants in France.

The Gentleman says (page 114.) When evidently the Tyranny of the Governor is
greater than the mischief hazarded (viz. of taking up arms against him) when
ever this happens, be the material conditions what they will, the subject is
free.

I would know of Mr. White, or any Rational man, whether it were not better for
the Subject to take up arms, than to suffer a Tyrant at one time to exact all
the subject had, leaving only a ground to work upon of new, which peradventure
may be barely the spade and ground? If the Subject permit a Tyrant at one time,
(or, I say, at several times) to exact all, he is accessory to his own wrong,
but if he depose and severely punish such a Tyrant, he justly vindicateth
himself according Genesis 14. dictateth this: Also the Book of Judges.
to his original or primitive Power in the force of Nature, which gives to
every People power to free themselves from any kind of slavery, to which they
have not, or do not voluntarily submit: Now it is in Reason evident, that the
Tyranny of the Governor in exacting all, is greater than the mischief,
hazarded by the subject, in endeavoring by arms to preserve all, by suffering
the first, nothing but slavery can be expected, by hazarding the other, freedom
may be hoped for, and if lost, yet Rationally and nobly lost: howbeit I think
it very Rational to go prudently, and not rashly, to work, in so weighty a case.

Mr. White ingeniously confesses (page 119.) It is clear, there can be no
question of the necessity of the resistance; for they are such (speaking of the
oppressions of a Tyrant) as do put the question beyond all ambiguity in the
very conscience of the Magistrate (he should have done well to have added, if
he have any) the objects bearing on the subject, in every ones particular,
beyond denial and dispute. Such a one, who puts his Subjects to such
extremities, Mr. White also (page 118.) jugdeth fit, to deserve all the
mischief that may light upon him for it: and withal concludes that discourse
(page 120.) And therefore his either ignorance, or carlesness, or Tyranny,
ought to be so evident, that it be beyond all question; or else the subject
must have patience for his own good, which is his aim in putting himself under
Government. Now if ignorance (which may peradventure be but mistake) or
carelessness (which may sometimes be but confidence) seeming so evident to the
apprehensions of the People, as that they be beyond all question, are Grounds
(I will not say sufficient) for the Subject to resist the Magistrate, certainly
the Tyranny of exacting all the Subject had, at one time, leaving only a
ground to work upon of new, (being a case more transcendent in voluntary
mischief, than ignorance, or carelessness, which may sometimes be involuntary)
must needs be a sufficient Ground for the subject, not only to resist the
Magistrate (if he reform not, and make restitution for The Roman Caesar's, even
Nero, had the Explicit consent of the Senate, and the implicit consent of the
People of Rome, at least wise a part post.
such oppression) but also severely to punish him; which thing Mr. White needed
not to have been troubled in his Judgment to have confessed.

And now I think it not amiss to declare who are Tyrants: whosoever acquireth
power or sovereignty by mere force, without the explicit or implicit (which
some call tacit) consent of a Nation, or People, is a Tyrant: formeer
acquisition of Power, or merum Imperium, does not barely of it self create any
Right, no more than does a forcible Entry, or Possession unduly gotten. Also
all and every Power Monarchical, Aristocratical, or Democratical, who I have
formerly instanced touching Limited Tyrants, and if unlimited Potentates may be
Tyrants, consequently Limited Potentates must be Tyrants if they transgress
their Limitations.
(albeit they have the Peoples consent explicit, or tacit, without
Limitation) do transgress the end of Government (which is the Peoples safety
and welfare) are Tyrants; the Reason is, because all Government is by the Rule
of Reason intended for Protection and Preservation, not any for destruction or
desolation; and therefore this is an usual Maxim, viz. ubi nulla Protectio,
nulla subiectio; the Reason is, because the final cause or end of subjection
(which is Protection) is wanting; to which end St. Paul points at, Romans 13.
6, Therefore, or to this end, pay ye Tribute, etc. I think it convenient to
define Protection, and Subjection, and from thence to deduce some Reasons.

Protectio est Relatio Defensiva superiorum erga inferiores. That of 1 Pet. 2.
18. is to be understood of froward Masters Protecting and paying wages, or
allowing maintenance.


Protection is a Defensive Relation of Superiors toward Inferiors.

Subiectio est Relatio submissiva Inferiorum erga Superiores.

Subjection is a submissive Relation of Inferiors toward Superiors.

Hence it will follow, that the Governor and Governed are but as Relatum and
Correlatum: that the submissive Relation of Rational Obedience supposes the
Defensive Relation of Rational Justice: we ought Rationally (not blindly) to
obey, Romans 12. 1. we ought Rationally (not rashly) to Judge, Luke 12. 57. Hence
it follows also, that no submissive Relation of Rational obedience is due to
such Tyrants (if any such Monsters be amongst mankind) who at will deprive
their vassals of life, or take away from whom they please, what they please,
when they please, ad Arbitrium; for such do not defend, but destroy; nor can I
be of opinion, that any People did at any time submit to, or rather enthral
themselves under such Tyrants voluntarily, but of constraint, which if so, then
are they Free (if able) to free themselves; as I have formerly showed.

But whether or no any People have voluntarily enslaved themselves I shall not
insist upon: Howbeit I will instance the late Government of England, not so
unlimited as some have supposed it, and would peradventure have had it so, but
exactly Regulated to the Rational end of Government, until Exorbitances, like
briars, overspread the Land. In England the King had the sole power
Juritenent, or of Law-administring, but not solely, for in the time of
Parliaments they could jointly administer Law, and Judge of matter of Fact,
even as could the King: In England the King had only a Joynt-power of
Juredicent, or of Law-making, for without the Parliament the King could neither
make, nor repeal Laws, nor (Legally) impose Taxes upon the People. Yet the
leaving matters of great consequence to the Resolution of the governed Party,
did not make them Governors (as Mr. White supposes, Ground 15. pa. 127.) for
the Members of Parliament were coordinate with the King in Law-making, and
Law-administring at the times of their Sessions; and in other things, and at
other times subordinate to the King. Moreover in England neither the King, nor
Parliament (though united in consent) could do three things: to wit;

1. To deliver over the People of England to a Foreign Government. 2. To
deliver over the National Benefit of the People of England to a People distinct
in Law and Government. 3. To deprive the People of England of their own
National Law.
That is to say, to judge and determine Meum and Tuum contrary to the Essence
of any Law, as long as such Law was in Being. For the Kingly and Parliamentary
Sacred Scripture is the written Rule of Religion, Law Positive of Government.
Nulled or repealed, etc.
power united was but efficiently in Posse, not formally in Esse, above the
Law, because the Law obliged all, even King and Parliament, until such Law were
by Parliament (being the Representative Body of the Nation, and Trustees of the
People) nulled or altered. The Reason is, because all Government ought to be
Regular for the peoples safety, not any absolutely, or merely Arbitrary to
their Destruction.

Wherefore, if the Kingly and Parliamentary power should have granted the
Propriety of John to Thomas, merely at their pleasure, contrary to Law in
Being; albeit they should therein have violated but the Right of one man
Explicitly and Actually, yet they had therein violated the Right of all men in
England Implicitly and Potentially, in regard all men had been subject to the
like Danger. In such case I should have applied to the King and Parliament what
Mr. White applies to the Magistrate (Ground 15. page 123.) where he says; So
that in truth, the Magistrate first by his miscarriages abdicateth himself from
being a Magistrate, and becomes a Brigand and Robber, instead of a Defender;
And the People, in way of Natural Preservation of themselves, make Resistance
against him. But Mr. White applies this to a Magistrate, who should wrong, or
Tyrannize over a People in General; and seems to deny (page 129.) that any
Resistance may be made by a People to vindicate the wrongs of some Particulars;
for he says, If the wrong be done to Particulars, we ought to consider, that
accidental harms cannot be prevented neither in nature nor in humane affairs;
and so are objects of pity, rather than of hope to be amended, and to be
tolerated rather, in respect of the great good which is the common peace, than
expose all to such confusion as must be, and ever has been where the
Government is, in part placed in unexperienced hands.

I am not altogether of the Gentleman's opinion; for besides the Rule of
Humanity, the Tie of National Amity obliges a whole Nation to vindicate the
wrongs of a few, even by arms) if no other Redress can be had) especially when
the wrongs done to some Particulars may manifestly seem to presage the Ruin of
all. I do not find, that the Israelites had any special warrant from GOD to
punish and suppress by Arms the Benjamites for not punishing such as abominably
abused the Levites Wife or Condubine (Judges 19. and 20.) yet for the wrong of
one or two, the Israelites hazarded the good of common Peace, to do the good of
Justice; and surely they did Rationally, for the good of Justice is to be
preferred before the good of Peace; albeit Peace is highly to be esteemed as a
blessing from GOD, yet Justice is to be esteemed as the Rule of GOD Regulating
humane Affairs, and though not formally, yet finally omnis virtus; for the
Preservation whereof men ought to hazard Peace or Tranquillity, Lives and
Livelihoods: as for that of exposing all to confusion, etc. it has so happened
when a giddy Multitude have rashly attempted somewhat against their high
Magistate, or superior Rulers, but seldom, or never, when an whole Nation, or
People, or the major, or a very considerable part of them, have prudently
engaged against an over-lording Oppressor, or Oppressors, as in Switzerland and
Holland.

I shall now return to instance somewhat more touching the former Government of
England, before I conclude the discourse thereof.

In England neither the King nor Parliament were (to speak strictly) the
efficient causes of Laws primarily, but only secundarily: The Reason is,
because the People tied the King by Oath to conserve the just Laws which the
Peogle shall choose, or (as some contend) have In England the People had a
National Innate power of Electing and Intrusting Representatives; The Kings
Writ did only appoint the time and place, not give power, as somehave supposed,
and expressed.
chosen: The People also nominated, and, as it were, created their
representatives in Parliament; and although the Kings of England were
heretofore born by Descent to their Kingly Office, and so many times admitted
thereunto before they took their solemn Oath, yet the People always admitted
them with reference of their Oaths to be taken, and kept, or performed. I
therefore make this Argument.

1. All Power which did primarily oblige by Oath, and which did constitute
Representatives, was the primary Power of Laws, or of Law-making. 2. The People
of England were the Power which did primarily oblige the King by Oath, and
which did constitute Representatives. Olim Episcopi, and quidam Pontifices, (ut
vocantur) a Populo electi fuerunt, ad denotandum Populi libere consensum erga
Ecclesirsticos; hoc Historicis notum est.
3. Therefore, the People of England were the primary Power of Laws, or of Law
making.
The major (touching the King) is manifest; for first, not any can oblige
another by Oath, but such as have some power over him; wherefore it was truly
said of an able Lawyer, that the King was singulis major, universis minor; for
indeed the People are primarily, and intensively above any Kingly Power in
respect Hanc rerum etiam Scriptura denotat, de Mathiae, Acts 1. de septem
Diaconis, Acts 6.
of the end of Government, which is salus Populi, and therefore to be preferred
before Majestas Imperii. Secondly, the Kingly Oath was in nature of Contract,
which obliges between Contractor and Contracted. Both major and minor are also
manifest (touching the Representatives) it being evidently known by the Peoples
former Indentures to their Trustees.

To apply what I have written touching the former Government of England; I say,
where such Government or the like does continue, as in Holland, The Prince of
Orange was State-holder in Holland, etc. but not wholly entrusted, so were
heretofore some Princes, or Princely Lords amonst the Switzers.
Switzerland, etc. (albeit those People seldom plenipotentiate their Trustees
without Limitations) the Governors and Trustees abdicate themselves from the
Government and Trust reposed in them by the People, and are subject to their
primary power always intended and reserved for their preservation: for every
Free man has a natural innate power in himself of himself, and All united have
a national innate power in All of All.

I shall not take upon me to prescribe Rules of Government; but only say, that
that Government is best for any people, to which the people will willingly
submit, and which they may, or have power to reform (by their Trustees or
Delegates) if it become grievous or burdensome unto them.

And so far Mr. White seems to assent (Ground 1. page 7.) saying, Men are not
wont to repine often at what themselves choose and judge best for themselves;
especially if, even after the action performed, and peradventure the attempt
failed, yet the subject remains satisfied, that it was best for him, in those
circumstances, to do what he did.

I could wish that all Governors, unlimited as well as limited, would consider
this, not prefering their own self ends, or greatness, before the Peoples
selfimbracing Good. Jamque opus exegi.

WILL. BALL.

FINIS.

