AN ALARM TO THE WORLD, OF THE Appearing of Sions KING. OR, A brief Discovery
of the footsteps of the Lord upon EARTH.

Isaiah 24. 19. The Earth is utterly broken down, the Earth is clean dissolved.

Matthew. 25. 6. And at midnight there was a cry made, behold the Bridegroom
comes, go ye out to meet him.

Rev. 16. 15. Behold I come as a thief, blesed is he that watches, and keeps
his garments, lest he walk naked, and I see his shame.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-spred-Eagle at the West End of
Paul's, 1649.

To the READER.
Honored Friend.
WHen thou openest this little Book, for to travel through it, if thou meetest
with any thing, that thy heart cannot close with, (as possibly thou may) yet
let thy heart respect thy friend, who has writ his heart to thee, and watered
the lines with his tears, by reason of beholding the earth watered with blood,
I, with the blood of Kings, Princes, and mighty ones of the Earth, and yet
further he will proceed in blood, even to the horse bridles, and what I have
writ, I have writ not respecting the person of any man, but out of pure love to
all, and in love I have told you in part what you are, and what I am my self,
and in part what will become of us all; I have not written any thing in the
least against Kings, and powers, with a grudging heart, or a scorning of Kingly
Authority; but exceedingly honoring them all, and by this it is manifest, in
giving you notice and warning of the great Kings coming, who is the King of
Kings, and therefore will unthrone all Kings, and overturn all Kingdoms, and
all powers, and none but the Lords King and Kingdom shall stand. Friend, Thou will find something written in a very mysterious way; But time shall declare,
and days to come shall bring forth to the view and knolwedg of all, every
mysterious truth of God, especially to them who are saved, and called with a
holy calling; And therefore in the holy number, if thou art one of the holy
number, thou art honored with a Princely name, which name is Israel, and it
belongs as a gift given to the Princes of Israel to know the mysteries, the
very inside mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, where Christ thy King has
dwelt, ever since his ascending, but now ready to be revealed in these our
days, being the last days of the last days, in the which all things that are
written shall be fulfilled, even so Amen.

THOMAS BANASTER.

TO all Emperors, Kings, Princes, Rulers, Judges, Magistrates, and Powers
throughout the earth, after what name or Title soever mentioned, with all
Ministers and people, high, low, rich, poor, noble, and ignoble, and thou
Israel amongst the rest, throughout the whole inhabitable parts of the world,
do I send greeting, with a word (Behold the King of Kings is coming now with
Clouds to visit you) and by and by with light.

THOMAS BANASTER.

AN ALARM TO THE WORLD, OF THE Appearing of Sions KING.
Revelation 1. 7. verse. Behold he comes with Clouds, and every eye shall see
him, and they also which pierced him, and all kindreds of the Earth shall wail
because of him, even so Amen.
WHeresoever you find the word (behold) written, you find something more then
ordinary following it, something very excellent, very admirable, and
wonderful, and also something very terrifying and amazing, by reason of the
great destruction which attends it: which things at their appearing let them be
either joyous or grievous, they will cause great admiration, great wondering
and great astonishment, upon all people, and paleness upon all faces: here
follows this word (behold) joy, peace, rest, salvation with eternal glory;
also fear, trouble, confusion plagues, Judgments with eternal misery. Therefore
Hear ye dispisers, and wonder, and perish; and hear ye Saints, and in hearing
rejoice, and bless his name who is your King, and coming now with clouds;
which appearing will cause great joy of heart, and great sorrow of heart; ye
shall joy for joy of heart, and they shall sorrow for sorrow of heart; for here
is life and death, joy and peace hasting on apace; for the Lords warning piece
is shot off upon the world, to give warning to the world of the coming of Jesus
Christ, and that there is such a thing, read Phil. 3. 20. Our conversation is
in Heaven from whence we look for the Savior. Heb. 9. 28. And unto them that
look for him, he shall appear the second time, etc Titus 2. 13. Looking for the
blessed hope and glorious appearing of the great God, Revel. 22. 20. Lo I come
quickly, even so come Lord Jesus; This coming of Jesus Christ will be a coming
to the purpose; his second coming therefore hear ye sons and daughters of
Jerusalem, your King is come, and yet coming still, but it is a cloudy coming
or appearing. He that you have waited for so long, and looked for with so many
a long look, with fetching of many a long sigh and groan, and in the bottom
of your sigh was written, Lord! when will thou appear? why, behold he is now
coming to thee, oh thou afflicted soul, to ease thee of all thy troubles, and
to deliver thee from al thy many sufferings, which thou have suffered, for this
many thousand years, by thy own evil heart and fleshly mind, and also by
wicked men, which hated thee and thy King; therefore now lift up your heads,
and cast sorrow from your heart, for he that is your joy, is descended the
second time, behold he comes.

Here are three things considerable in these words, first, who it is that
proclaims this news, with a behold he comes, it is the Lord by the mouth of
John.

Secondly, what it is he proclaims, it is of the coming of Jesus Christ, Sions
King.

Thirdly, to whom it is proclaimed, it is to all the world, good and bad, godly
and profane, and the reason why it is proclaimed to all, is, because all shall
see him, and every eye shall see him; The first appearing of this King is a
cloudy appearing, and this cloudy appearing, will be a dark, tempestuous,
confused, and destructive appearing, and also bloody, and for the proof of
this, read Isaiah 50. 3. Psalm. 97. 1. The Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice,
and the multitude of the Isles be glad thereof, clouds and darkness are round
about him, and Psalm. 18. 9. The Lord bowed the Heavens and came down, and
darkness was under his feet. This Scripture is fulfilling in this your days
the second time, and then it will be finished; The Lord raigns, do not ye see
and feel his power? and if not, why do ye tremble, oh ye Inhabitants of the
Earth? Psalm. 99. 1. The Lord reigns, let the people tremble, and let the
Earth be moved; Ye find it also in the Text, and that cloudy reigning there
mentioned, or coming, is now, The Lord is entered his Throne upon Earth, but
entered with clouds and darkness, and sits there with clouds and darkness round
about him; There is a threefold appearing of this King upon Earth, for to be,
first with Clouds, and that is now.

Secondly, with his Spirit, and that is near the pouring forth.

Thirdly, with the brightness of his coming, 2. Thessalon. 2. 8. Then shall
that wicked be revealed, whom the Lord will consume with the spirit of his
mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming. And all these
appearings will be in order, according to the order of God, and all of them
destructive to the world, and to all things below God, and therefore the word
Mystery is brought in; The first appearing of this King upon the Throne, is
such a dark and cloudy appearing, that he is scarce known to be there, because
his first appearing and power is a cloudy appearing and power, but the second
will be more light because spiritual, and therefore more destructive then the
cloudy; And the third will be more excellent, more powerful then both, because
it will bring along with it the perfect brightness of your King, and a perfect
brightness of his glory, shining out to the view of all the world, which glory
will not only consume, but destroy all seeming glorious good and excellent
things; I say, the first appearing of this King is so dark and cloudy, that it
is hard to be known, whether he be come to sit upon the throne of Judgment or
no; and the reason why the Lord comes first with clouds, is, because he takes
great delight to let his Israel know, first, of him, and where he is, whether
in the place he spoke of returning to, Hosea, 5. 15. or whether risen out of
his holy habitation, Zecha. 2. 13. Be silent oh all flesh before the Lord, for
this my Lord the King is risen up out of his holy habitation; and that the Lord
lets some of his Israel know and understand where he is, whether come down, or
not come down, witness Noah, Genesis 6. 13. witness Abraham, Genesis 18. 17,
18. Witness Lot, Genesis 19. 12, 13. witness all the Prophets, and among the rest,
Huldah, 2 Cron. 34. 22. And witness Ezekiel. 4. 1. and 12. v. Witness Daniel, Dan.
10. 14. and 21. Now I come to make thee understand what is noted in the
Scripture of truth. Witness the language of Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 4. But you
brethren are not in darkness, that that day should take you as a thief;
witness John, who saw by clouds the Lord coming to Judgment, and witness oh
thou my soul, to the coming of Jesus thy King, and long-lookt-for Lord and
Savior; but let me tell you one thing by the way, and that is this, the Lord
has yet Messengers for to raise up, and to send forth, which Messengers mouths
he will fill largely with good news, and that with great power too, and the
news will be this (behold your King) Isaiah 52. 7. But his appearing as yet is
but a dark and cloudie appearing, so his Messengers dark and cloudie
Messengers; see what order there is in the goings of this King; look to it
worldlings, and watch ye Saints, for the Lord my King is risen out of his holy
habitation, Jer. 25. 30, 33. The Lord shall roar from on high, and utter his
voice from his holy habitation, I must say the Lord does, the word shall is
forgotten with my King, and the word does is come in the room of it: therefore
be silent oh all flesh before the Lord; for he has a controversy with you
all, and he is in this your day come down to put an end to the controversy,
Jer. 30. A noise shall come even to the ends of the Earth, for the Lord has a
controversy with the nations, he will plead with all flesh, and give them that
are wicked to the Sword, and they shall pass from end to end: why, the noise is
come, and the controversy is in dispute: what, do not ye hear the voice of
God? he calls to you all, not one is excepted that is this day in the world,
and the voice is, Hear oh ye Priest, and hearken ye house of the Kings, and
give ear oh ye house of Israel, Hosea 5. 1. Here is Kings, Priests, and Israel,
I must put in one number more; that is, all ye people of the world, because the
Lord is come to end his controversy with all flesh, therefore not one shall
escape, no, not Kings, and for you oh Emperors, Kings, and Rulers, and Princes
of the earth; I must tell you one sad thing, you and your names are dying, and
your Crowns are taking off from your heads throughout the world, and the Saints
King, Jesus by name, the ancient of days, Son, the Lord of Hosts, righteous
Branch, he shall be set up King in your rooms. And that's the reason why he is
coming now with clouds, and it will not be long ere all the Kingdoms of the
world be broken down, nay, they are in this your day ruining by the King of
Kings. Dan. 2. 44. In the day of these Kings shall the God of heaven set up a
Kingdom, which shall break in pieces all other Kingdoms; Where do you think to
stand, O wordlings! who have made gods of earthly Kings, ye and your gods are
fallen, like the Philistims false gods, and shall never be remembered more* I
must confess with you, God by his own providence suffered Kings in the earth
for to be, and caused them there for to reign, but now their reign is almost
up, and their glory is almost at an end, and when it is not almost, but
altogether up, then the Lord will do to you, as he did to Nebucadnezar; let me
tell you, O Kings, you are all weighed in the balance of the King of Kings,
and being weighed, you are found too light, and I hear a voice from the Lord,
saying to you all, as the Lord said to Belshazer, The Kingdoms are departing
from you, and are to be divided among them, who are more fit to reign then you
a great deal, this a mystery to you, Dan. 4. 31. Dan 5. 20. The Lord is come to
unthrone you all, O Kings! and that is the judgment of the Lord upon you in
this your day, but does that he does, after a cloudy manner, that you cannot
understand nor see, and therefore you contend for your Crown still, but the
Lord will conquer you, and therefore is he risen to unthroan all, Haggai. 2.
22. I will overthrow the Throan of Kingdoms, and bring down the power of
Nations, and their riders shall come down every one by the sword of his
brother; Take notice how they shall come down, and see if the Lord be not risen
to pull down all powers; hear again what the Lord says, and in his word
manifests that he regards no power, but that that is righteous and just, like
himself, and if they be not so, he will unthroan them all, and therefore it is
he is come, Eze. 21. 25. your day is come, all ye Rulers of the earth, in the
which your iniquity shall have an end, therefore thus says the Lord, remove
the Diadem, take off the Crown, this shall not be the same, exalt him that is
low, and abase him that is high, for I will overturn, overturn, overturn, and
it shall be no more until he come, whose right all is. Let me tell you all
that are in power, let it be kingly, or not kingly, you shall all be
overturned, and for the Kings of the earth, if they were once as the signet
upon the Lords right hand, yet now their time is come of being plucked from
thence: Oh how all the world startles at the footsteps of the Lord upon earth,
being they are cloudy, dark, bloody, and tempestuous steps; indeed well ye may
fear, when the Lord appears surrounded with clouds and tempests; who is he that
will not fear, and be in great trouble in that day? why this is the day, Psalm.
50. 3. Our God is come, ye must now read it; the verse indeed runs Our God
shall come and shall not keep silence, a fire shall devour before him, and it
shall be tempestuous round about him. Esaias 30. 30. The Lord shall cause his
glorious voice to be heard, and shall show the lightning down of his arm, with
indignation of his anger, with the flames of devouring fire, scattering
hailstones and tempests: you know clouds are the forerunners of storms and
tempests; and this the cloudy appearing of the Lord has caused for to be,
great storms, and amongst many, one is this, the storm of war, Esaias 3. 25. Thy
men shall fall by the sword, and thy mighty in the war, Is it not thus? let me
tell you, the war that is now in the world, is the war that Christ spoke of
long ago, and that was the war of wars, though not the first, yet the last war,
and that war is the confused, and unnatural war, a war having many divisions
in it, Luke 12. 51, 52* 53* here is division upon division, the father and the
son, the mother and the daughter, each one against the other, and a war that
causes most to be offended; Matt. 24. 10. Then shall many be offended and
betray one another, and hate one another, it is an iniquity-abounding war,
verse 12. great tribulation attending of it, verse. 21. This shall be in the day
of the Son of man; how is it, that ye do not discern this time? you shall hear
of wars, says Christ, but not only kingdom against kingdom, but kingdoms
divided, Cities, Towns, and Families divided, and divisions in every man's heart
too, as well as in the kingdoms. Hear all once more, The Lord is come down with
a sword in his hand, which sword has a long time been bathed in heaven, and
now it is fallen upon every accursed thing, or upon the people of his Curse.
Esa. 34. 5. Come near O Nations, and hear, Kings, Priests, and People, and thou
Israel, for you are all turned out of the way, and now the Lord has met with
you; look how every man comes bleeding back, some die in the place where the
Lord met them, and some fallen by the way in their retreat; We have all turned
aside from the Lord, and therefore woe be unto us, Esaias 10. 1, 2, 3, 4. Woe be
unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and turn aside the needy from
judgment, and take away the right from the poor, that widows may be their prey;
O how is this Scripture fulfilled in this our age, therefore all our glory is
like to come down, nay, it is falling, it is falling* it is falling, for the
Sword is drawn; I must call it the Sword of the Lord, the Lords sacrificing
Sword, which will not regard, neither Kings, Priests, nor People, because all
are fallen from the Lord, Jer. 6. 13. For from the least of them to the
greatest, from the People even unto the Priest, all are given unto
covetousness; Israel, thou art not out of the number, the Lord has a
controversy with you among the rest, Hosea 4. 1, 2, 3. Hear the word of the
Lord, ye are all unclean, and a polluted generation, fit for nothing but to
fall by the Sword of the Lord, and to be devoured by the fire of his jealousy,
not regarding Kings. Ezec. 39. 18. Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and
drink the blood of the Princes of the earth, every one has taken of the
accursed thing, and every one shall drink of the blood which his bathed Sword
lets out, and therefore the Lord has called for a Sword, Esa. 13. 3. I have
commanded my sanctified ones, I have called my mighty ones for my anger; verse.
11. He will punish for iniquity, and cause the proud to cease; verse. 12. The
Lord will make a man more precious then the fine gold: behold this is the day,
the Sword of the Lords vengeance is come down in this the day of the Lords
vengeance, and in the year of the recompense of the controversy of Sion,
therefore behold the day of the Lord God of Hoasts, the day of his vengance, a
day of wrath, a day of trouble, of distress, of wastings, of clouds, of thick
darkness that no man knows where he is, for every man walks up and down like
blind men* and that is the reason that every man runs upon the sword of his
brother, friends: All things, and all powers, and all practices are corrupt,
and perfectly corrupt, and this cloudy power is to destroy them, and now being
come destroy he will, and that Nations, not a few, and for that end the Lord
has called for a Sword, and this Sword shall enter into all the inhabitable
parts of the earth. Me thinks I see, where the Lord has called up his
sanctified ones, and I hear him still calling them up in all the kingdoms of
the world, and ere long you shall hear of the Sword of the Lord being drawn,
and sheathed in the sides of all Kingdoms by a civil war; England, thou have
begun to drink blood, and thou shall yet drink one draught more to all the
world, and they shall pledge thee round in a bowl of blood again, for the Lord
will give them all blood to drink; therefore Hear all ye sanctified ones of the
Lord, whom he has called up to offer up a sacrifice of blood, in what Nation,
or Kingdom so ever you are, Esaias 13. 3. Esaias 54. 16. The Lord has created you
for to destroy, and called you to do that, that never was done, and to unthroan
that never was unthroaned throughout the world, yea, and that quickly. Jer. 25.
26. And all the Kings of the North far and near, one with another, and all the
kingdoms of the world which are upon the face of the earth; wherefore look now
on your left side, for there, I suppose is a sword, it is the Lords bathed
sword, his sacrificing sword, the sword of the Lords vengance; turn you whether
you will, ye shall never be prevailed against, so as to be conquered by a sword
of steel of the world, you shall have power to conquer all, and so to overturn
all, and to break down all powers, ways, and governments; but let me tell you
one thing, you shall never have power to settle any thing, for ye have not
wisdom enough, nor is it any of your work; that is the Lords: do you yours, and
let the Lord alone with his, and take heed of abusing your power, and
corrupting of it with injustice, if you do, God will raise up a more refined
power then yours, and more just, and conquer you, who have been conquerors, and
send you to your graves in blood; for this is the bloody age, and when you are
gone, the Lord my King will arise, and by his glorious light conquer the most
just and most refined conquerers, and so you shall all fall, by the Sword of
the Lord, and the last power by the light of the some Lord, in the day of the
Lords spiritual and light appearing; This is the cloudy day of the Lord, and
the day in which he judges men by the sword, and therefore it is no more man's,
but the Lords, Jer. 12. 12 The Spoylers are come up upon all high places, and
the sword of the Lord shall devour from one end of the world to the other, and
no flesh shall have peace. A second reason why the Lord comes with clouds, and
blood, is this, because his feet stand upon a place where much blood has been
spilt, Rev. 17. 6. I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the Saints, and
with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus; You Kings and Rulers of the Earth, you
have spilt the blood of the Saints by your Law throughout the world, And the
Lord my King is come down to follow you throughout the world again, for to give
you a deadly draught, and to avenge the blood of his Saints, and so give you
blood for blood, Rev. 8. 6. In the cup which she has filled, fill to her the
double, to her utter ruin and perfect removing, 14. ver. and Rev. 16. 6. Oh
nations! the cup of the fierceness of the wrath of God is put into your hand by
my King, and I cannot but tell you of it, You have drunk blood, oh Kings, for
many an Age, and now the Age is up, and time fulfilled, and you shall drink
blood again oh Rulers, and all people, Isaiah 49. 25. I will contend with them
that contend with thee, I will feed them that oppress thee with their own
flesh, and they shall be drunken with their own blood, let me tell you oh
Kings, and all ye Rulers of the earth, from the first day ye wore a Crown, and
had power put into your hand, even unto this my day, you have all along slain
better then your selves, and each one of them resembled the person of a King,
and now the Lord is come with Clouds to make inquiry who they were you slew,
you have the type in Judges 8. 18. Then said he unto Zeba and Zalmunna, What
manner of men were they whom you slew at Tabor? And they answered, as thou art,
so were they, each one resembling the person of a King; They were my brethren,
even the sons of my mother, had thou saved them; I would not have slain you.
Here is a mystery, but now the time of slaying is come, slay I must, This is
the dispensation of the Lord throughout the world, and all this arises from
the Lords being General of all Armies, which are sanctified by him for this
work, Rev. 19. 11, 12, 13. v. And he was clothed in a vesture dipped in blood;
ye have great trouble in the Earth, and all arises this day from the Lords
being come with clouds, and by reason of his cloudie presence* all Councels are
darkened, and all powers are broken down, let them be powers temporal or
spiritual, as you call them, and therefore the Lord has it mentioned three
times, overturn, overturn, overturn, until he come whose right it is, and he
will give it him: indeed it is my happiness that the Lord will do this; for by
this I know, I shall in due time be perfect, as my heavenly Father is perfect,
but for the present, there is nothing in my heart, nor in the world, but that
that is fit for ruin, for truth is fallen in the street, equity cannot enter
into her kingdom, nor the heart; worldly wisdom is turned to folly, Isaiah 29.
14. Spiritual and heavenly wisdom, that is returned into the Fathers bosom,
Isaiah 41. 28. There is not a man, no not yet a Counselor among you all, that
is able to answer the Lord a word, if he should ask you, out of the Cloud, what
you are doing, for he has taken away all wisdom from you; Is wisdom no more?
is Council perished from the prudent? is their wisdom vanished? Jer. 49. 7.
Yes, the Lord has destroyed all the wise men of the world, or else turned
their wisdom into foolishness, Obadiah 8. verse. Shall I not in that day
destroy the wise men, and the understanding men? In what day, oh Lord my King?
why, in my cloudy day, in a day which I come to recompense, with an overturning
all, and making the earth empty, and in turning all out of the world that is in
it, Isaiah 24. 1. I will make the earth empty, make it waste, and turn it
upside down, Oh! what haste the Lord makes to finish his work in the world, my
King turns and turns, removes and scatters, and yet not a man takes
notice of it, and I beholding my father, cannot but speak to you, and therefore
awake oh souls, for me thinks I hear Israel begin to sing in this the cloudy
day of God, Isaiah 24. 14. They shall lift up their voice, and shall sing for
the Majesty of the Lord, and shall cry aloud from the Sea; but for thee oh
world, wisdom and understanding has left thee, and the Lord has befooled all
thy Counsels, and put a spirit of fear into the heart of every man, and
whatsoever men do, they do in fear and much trouble, for this is the fearful
Age; Has not the Lord scattered all power? being but corrupted, tyrannical,
beastly power, so that there is no way left to save the kingdoms of the world,
no, nor thee oh England, but by another manner of power, thou dreamest of, but
I see; for that way, by which the Lord once saved kingdoms, is now become the
only way to ruin kingdoms; And by this you may see that this cloudie
appearing of my Lord, has turned the world upside down, this is the Lords
unthroning day, it is the Worlds-power-changing day, and it is a flesh-ruining
day, and for this end the Lord is come out of his place with clouds, for to
punish the Inhabitants of the earth, for their iniquity, and to cause it to
disclose its blood, and therefore it shall no more cover the slain, Isaiah 26.
21. At this Scripture in his fulfilling, even in this our day, the earth shakes
and trembles, Psalm. 18. 7. He has made great divisions in the world, great
commotions there are, troubles and fears, shakings and tremblings,
hearts-failings, and faith-dying, the whole land is barren of faith, the way of
truth is hid; Wit, that has hid it self, and understanding has withdrawn it
self, into its secret chamber indeed, it is sought of many, but not found; for
unrighteousness, and unconstancy prospers upon earth; Friends, the world is
grown very weak, by reason of age, and therefore needs must the evils be very
great that are upon it, I, and so they are, for my heart can say Amen to this
evil world; These are the evil days, the perilous days, the sin-multiplying
days, days, in which the word (do violence to no man is forgotten) and for
love in the spirit, it cannot be found in neither kingdom, nor heart. Judgment
and Justice, with all the other righteous streams is departed, and run sarre
away, from Kings, Princes, Rulers, Judges, Magistrates, Priests, people, and
from thee oh Israel too, and therefore the Lord is come down to destroy all,
Jer. 7. 28. Oh England, thou art the nation of all nations that obeys not the
voice of the Lord, Isa. 59 3, 4. and so along to the 15. ver. Your hands, oh
people, throughout the Land are defiled with blood, your fingers with iniquity,
your lips speak nothing but lies; not a man in thee oh England acts in a just
way, not any plead for truth, The way of peace ye know not, there is no
Judgment in your goings, ye grope like blind men, and are in desolate places,
as dead men, sin and iniquity is grown almost to the height in thee oh Land,
and therefore now behold the Lord, Isa. 59. 16, 17. I saw, and there was no
man, and therefore behold, I the Lord will put on righteousness as a breast
plate, with salvation and vengeance, for to repay every man; Ye have lost all,
oh ye Kings, and Rulers, people, and Ministers of all Lands; for Gospel Light
and truth, is taken away by the Lord from you, as well as judgment, justice,
and righteousness from Kings, and Rulers, Isaiah 29. 10, 11. The vision of all
is become unto you as a book sealed; Hear oh ye Ministers! your gifts are
perished, and quite blasted, and your sheep are scattered, Hosea 4. 6. Think
what you will, your gifts are perished, although you may say, it is not so,
Jer. 18. 18. Ye and (...) gifts are lost, and the judgment of the Lord is upon
you, as well as upon Kings and Rulers, for the night of darkness which the Lord
spoke of long ago, is fallen upon you all, and darkness has covered you all,
even thick darkness, Micah 3. 6, 7. Here is mischief upon mischief to the
purpose, Ezekiel. 7. 26. Kings, Priests, and people, and thou oh Israel, ye are
all turned backward; The wise men shall be turned backward, so that the way of
truth, and Gospel Light is hid from you all, your condition has been a
perishing condition many hundred years, Prove. 29 18. Where there is no vision
the people perish, The word of the Lord is a precious thing; and it is grown
very precious amongst us; Ruling in judgment is very precious, Magistracy
according to the order of God is very precious too, for I know not where it is;
There is a perfect loss of all Justice and Judgment, righteousness and truth,
there is a famine upon you all; Kings and Rulers they are famished, and lost in
their judgment, Ministers and people they are famished too, for the
Gospel-knowledg of the Lord, which is bread indeed, is taken by the Lord from
you all, yea, and my very pen speaks out to you all, that I am one, whose soul
is half famished for want of bread, what a cloudy day are we in? it is no
wonder to me to see the Lord come now with Clouds to overturn all, because all
is grown corrupt, and fit for nothing else, for the wisdom of both Kings,
Priests, and people, and thou oh Israel, is all turned into folly, our knowledge
into ignorance, and our light into darkness, and our peace into trouble, and
this is by reason of the Lords being come down for to fight against all
Nations, and all things, and to plead with all flesh, for with fire and with
sword the Lord is now pleading with all flesh, and the slain of the Lord are
many, and shall be more, and the Lord is gathering all together for that end,
Zepha. 3. 8. O world! me thinks I hear a rumor from my Lord, and I see, an
Ambassador which is sent from the Lord to all the world, to tell them they
must gather themselves together for ruin, Esaias 24. 22. And they shall be
gathered together as prisoners are gathered together, Who? why Kings, and the
host of the high ones, that are on high; The days in which we live are the
Lords gathering days, Joel 3. verse. 2. The Lord does gather, and that round
the world, and all Ploughshares are a beating into swords, and Pruning Hooks
into spears, and you will see all kingdoms watered with blood ere long, clouds
full of blood, and sea full of blood, and the whole world full of blood too,
and a man shall come to be more precious then the golden wedge of Ophire;
therefore you that are for the sword, and you that are for the famine, to the
famine, and you that are for the pestilence, to the pestilence, for this is the
great day of the Lord, his dividing day, his cloudy dividing day, his cloudy
gathering day, and his cloudy ruining day: your day is come, O worldlings! and
now fall you must* for you are but the left hand host of God; the Lord has
two great hosts, that have lived together many a day, let them alone till the
harvest, says Christ; now the harvest is ready, and therefore ye begin to
fall; I saw the host of heaven, 1 King. 22. 29. Here is two hoasts, and these
are called multitudes, Joel 3. 14. And these multitudes are gathered together
by the Lord into the valley of Jehosaphat; and by reason of the multitudes, it
is turned into a valley, decision, all the world is turned into Jehosaphats
valley, or into a valley of decision in the world; nay it is, for the Lord is
come, and by his cloudy appearing, has made a great division in the world. Thy
King, O Sion is come, and the end of his coming is, to take thee from the
enemies, and the enemies from thee, and the world from both, and when this old
world is gone, thy kingdom and glory is gone, O worldling! the Lord is making
great have to remove you, and for that end he is gathering you, Ezeck 38. 14,
15, 16. In these verses they gather, verse. 18. the Lord rises up, at verse. 19.
they shake at his rising, and Israel also, and they fall in Ezeck. 39. 4. Thou
may read thy doom here O worldling! ye are in gathering by the Lord, and ye
are, and shall be slain by the Lord, and his Israel, do, and shall go away
conquerers, and sing praises to their King, who has taken to himself his great
power, and reigns, although it be but with clouds, and as his coming is a
cloudy coming, so his wrath that he poures forth is a cloudy wrath; the day of
the Lords wrath is come, and yet still to come, and it hastes greatly, thou
have outward temporal wrath fallen upon thee from the Lord, and therefore ye
are intombed in your own blood; the Lord has waited long upon the world, for
their filling up the measures of their fathers wrath, and now they are full;
the world is full of evil and darkness, hands full, and minds full, and hearts
full, and now behold he is come to recompense wickedness filled up to the brim,
with plagues filled up to the brim, and my King has begun with the plague of
the sword, called by the name of a Sicle, Joel 3. 13. and in verse 9. A Sword;
you wonder a at these strange things that befall you, and you say in your
trouble, you think the world is almost at an end; why, thy world, O worlding!
is almost at an end, it shakes mightily, it reels apace, and would quickly
fall, were but thy doom read to thee; you shall receive your doom here, and
sentence in this world, where you have passed sentence upon so many of the
Lords heritage; thy sentence has been upon them, Let them die the death, Psalm.
94. 21. They gathered themselves together against the souls of the righteous,
and condemned the innocent blood; the very same sentence is passed upon thee
from the Lord with a woe, Esaias 33. 1. Woe to thee that spoilest and wast not
spoiled. and Esaias 54. 17. woe be to you indeed, for you have risen up against
the Lords heritage, and now the Lord is risen up against you; you have judged
the Fathers beloved many thousand years, and he is now come for to judge you;
and the first Judgment is this, a wounding you all with a taking peace, rest,
and quietness from you, and so taking, that you shall never see it more,
because the day of the Lord is come, the day which thou have so long desired,
with a praying Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done, and Hallowed be thy Name;
thou may now, it may be, call to mind what you have said all of you, and
whom you are angry with: how many times have you said, Hallowed by thy Name,
Thy kingdom come? you little know what you said, and what you desired; you
prayed for the Lord to come and glorify his name, which you, and I, and all
the world have profaned all our days; and you prayed for the Lords Power,
Justice, and Judgments to fall upon you; behold it is come according to your
desire, although it be with clouds, and that is the reason why Kings fall, and
lose their Crowns and Thrones too; the Lord, the Lord of hoasts my King, whose
possession all the kingdoms are, is come, and earthly Kings have, do, and shall
perfectly fall before him, for all kingdoms are the Lords, and he is now come
for to take possession of them, Dan. 7. 13, 14. Behold one like the son of man
came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the ancient of days, and there was
given to him dominion, glory, and a kingdom; what will thou do, O world? now
thy long desire is granted, or where will ye stand, the Saints fear, and are so
moved, they cannot tell where to stand: Mal. 3. 2. But who may abide the day of
his coming, and who shall stand when he appears? Behold he is come, and you
are doubly miserable by it, and in a worse condition then ever you were, for
there went out a woe against you long ago for this thy desire, Amos 5. 18. Woe
unto you that desire the day of the Lord, for the day of the Lord is darkness
and not light, even very dark, and no brightness in it, therefore what profit
have thou by it, but rather trouble, fear, with great astonishments, and sorrow
added, and in stead of a Lion, a Lion and a Bear, and a Serpent too, for to
bite, and to tear, and who shall deliver you out of his hand? you are hurt, and
in trouble, and yet you cannot tell who hurt you; why, it is the Lord, and
nothing but the Lord, and he is come for to gather you for destruction; the day
of the Lords gathering is the day of the worlds reeling too and fro, Esaias 24.
19. The earth reels too and fro (I must read it) and is removing like a
Cottage, and the transgressions thereof are heavy upon it, and shall fall and
never rise again; there are great breakings up and great cries in verse 11. and
the 21. the Lord punishes, the Lord is risen to the pray, do you not hear the
sound of his feet? nay, ye do not only hear, but feel, not only feel but see:
and yet ye cannot tell that the Lord is come down, and that is your plague,
Mich. 1. 3. Behold the Lord comes forth out of his place, and will come down
and tread upon the high places of the earth, and the mountains shall be moulten
under him; you are all in great trouble and in fear, and you would fain know
what the meaning of it is, and to what it will grow; thus much is the meaning
of all your trouble, it tells you, the Lord, and Sions King is come down upon
the earth, and by reason of his presence the earth shakes, and fears and
trembles, I, and sinks under him, being not able to bear his weight, nor to
behold his cloudy presence; indeed it is impossible but that it should fear,
for the breaker up is come up, and has broke up. Mich. 2. 13. And Michael the
Prince stands up, and my Lord is risen, and your King is before you, O Saints,
this is a mystery, Dan. 12. 1. And there is now come, and for to come still,
such a time of trouble as never was, for that must be shaken, ye, and is
shaking that never was shaken, and that must be removed that never was removed,
because that that is to be brought to my Father, is that that never yet was
brought; heaven and earth must be removed before thy glory shall come to thee,
O Israel! Oh how heaven and earth does shake, at this the cloudy appearing of
Jesus Christ. Friends, where are you all, where do you now stand? in this the
day of the Lords shaking heaven and earth; let me tell you one thing in a
mystery, again, all are risen out of their seat in heaven, because of the great
shaking there, and all are risen out of their seat on earth, and dare not sit
any longer there, because of the great shaking there; Behold I shake heaven and
earth, sea, and dry land, all Nations, and then the desire of all Nations shall
come and fill ye all, O ye Israel, with his glory, Hag. 2. 6. Heb. 12. 26. Oh
what a shaking is there of both things visible and invisible! there is a
leaving strong holds visible, and a leaving strong holds invisible, let me tell
you one thing more, the shaking of heaven and of earth is so great, that the
Sion of God, for whose sake all this is, are but as when a standard bearer
faints, and for their sakes these days shall be shortened, Isa. 10. 17, 18.
Oh what fear and trembling is there seized upon the spirits of all the Israel
of God, who is able to behold his cloudy presence! Zeph. 3. 16. When I heard,
my belly trembled, my lips quivered at the voice, rottenness entered into my
bones, I trembled in my self I, that I might rest in the day of trouble; when
he comes up unto the people, he will invade them with his troops, The Lord in
this our day is invading all lands, and his coming is with clouds; choose
whether ye will believe it or no, and this his cloudy power, has, and will all
fall upon powers, let them be powers Kingly, or powers Parliamentary, or power
by Sword, ye must all fall, but the power of the sword shall be the last that
shall be destroyed, I mean the last visible power: this cloudy power of the Lord
is fallen upon all your Idols, temporal and spiritual; and high time it is,
for all lands are full of Idols, and every man boweth to them, Esaias 2. 8. 9.
The lofty look of man shall be humbled, and the Lord alone shall be exalted,
and ye shall cast away your Idols of silver and gold, and hide your selves, if
you could tell where, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his Majesty:
This day is the day of the Lord, and yet alas, ye are all so blind, that ye
look for peace, and what have you for to do with peace, are not ye all of the
earth? have ye not all a wicked earthly mind, and an evil idolatrous heart,
and an earthly god, called the god of this world? which god of this world has
blinded your eyes, that ye cannot tell what the Lord is doing; ye look for
peace, and that is taken from the earth, Rev. 6. 4. And there went out another
horse that was red, and power was given to him that sat thereon to take peace
from the earth and that they should kill one another, and there was given unto
him a great sword: England, what say thou to this, and now therefore behold
trouble, and trouble is most fittest for you all; O world! thou have been a
troubler of the Lords heritage; and O Israel! thou have been a troubler of thy
Father, and that made him return to his own place: thou O world! have been a
wonder unto death, the fathers beloved, in stead of pleading their cause, and
now the Lord is come to plead the cause of his heritage himself, and for thee,
O Israel! thy life has been so wicked, and so grieving to the Spirit of God,
so that thy long continuance in this thy spirit-grieving way, has wounded thy
King to death in thee, and the life which thou now live is a dead life;
wounded, I say, thou have thy dear Lord, Zach. 13. 6. What are these wounds in
thy hand? these are the wounds which were given me in the house of my friend,
Zach. 12. 10. The world has wounded Christ, and his members have wounded him,
and behold now the Lord is risen and come down, for to wound, and never heal,
and yet for to wound and to heal, that is, for to pull down and to build, to
pull down and to destroy all, both Kings; Priests, People, and thee O Israel!
and to take away from us that which we are very loath for to lose, but lose it
we must, being got into the cloudy day of God, and if Noah, Daniel, and Job
were in these our days, they should save but their own souls, Ezekiel. 14. 17.
and 21. verse. Behold the Lord is come, do not ye hear his sound yet? how long
shall the Trumpet blow, O sleepers! ere ye will awake? the Lord is come down,
and walks up and down the earth, and not a man hears him, or sees him: this
is a mystery, ye are certainly asleep, O souls! Kings, Priests, People, yea and
Israel too, and that lulled asleep by the Devil into a heart-sleep, and when
the heart is once asleep, the cloudy appearing of Jesus Christ cannot awaken
it, and a heart-sleep is within one step of the sleep of eternal death, and if
ye lie a little longer, O all ye people of the world! Lord have mercy upon you,
may be written upon all your doors, for my King will pass by, and enter into
his Fathers kingdom, with all his Princes, and then for to awake will be too
late; what not yet? cannot ye behold my King, nor see him? why, you shall, for
the clouds shall be taken away, and therefore the words run with every eye
shall see him,

And every eye shall see him. The second appearing of my King will be a
spiritual appearing, and so a spiritual destruction shall attend this
spiritual appearing, that is, a destruction attended with much light,
therefore the word Every eye is brought in; when this cloudy appearing of Jesus
Christ is finished, then comes this spiritual appearing of the Lord for to
destroy that the cloudy appearing of my King could not do, which spiritual
appearing will cause all flesh for to tremble doubly, and out of trembling,
fear, and out of fear, fly to the mountains, hills, and great rocks for to
hide themselves from the presence of the Lord, Rev. 6. 16, 17. But let me tell
you, there will not be a mountain nor a hill left in all the world to hide thee
from the presence of the Lord, for that is the reason why the Lord comes first
with clouds and darkness to remove every mountain and hill, and every hiding
place, that you shall have no where to go for shelter, for the Lord will make
bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the Nations, Isa. 52. 10. Oh what an
exceeding light, and glorious appearing of Jesus Christ will there be ere long,
for all eyes shall see, and light shall burn, and God will search all the
world, and all hearts too, and cause them for to see and know what they are,
Isa 9. 5. Every battle of the Warrier is with a confused noise, and garments
rouled in blood. This shall be with burning and fury of fire. And Zeph. 1. 12.
at that time I will search Jerusalem with candles, and punish the men that are
settled upon their lees, and say in their heart, the Lord will not do good,
neither will he do evil; but you shall know ere long, what the Lord will do
when he comes, for to give you eyes to see withal, that you never saw; there
are diverse eyes, the eyes of the body, the eye of Reason, the eye of Faith, and
the eye of the Understanding; for the eye of the body, you know it is a
dim-sighted thing, and cannot behold the Sun, it is good for nothing but for to
give light unto the body; but this eye here spoken of by John is a spiritual
eye, or ye may call it the eye of the Lord gone forth from the Lord to the
works of his hands to behold their great Workman, the Lord of hosts, for
nothing can behold the Lord but that which comes from the Lord: I am apt to
think, that the eye which the Lord will open to all flesh, in the day of his
glorious light appearing, will be the eye of the Understanding and my reason is
this, because that Paul says, that by that eye when once opened, they shall
know what is the hope of their calling, what is the riches of his glory of his
inheritance in his Saints. Ephesians. 1. 18. Isa. 41. 20. That we may see, know,
and understand together, and then shall they see eye to eye, when the Lord
shall bring again Sion, and then shall we behold him as he is. Hear Israel, and
ye gentile world too, for ye are both brought in; hear Israel, the first sight
that thou shall have of thy King, will be a sad sight, for thy wounded Savior
will be represented unto thee, which thou have wounded, pierced, and grieved
all thy days; but the time now of thy grieving him is almost up, and he is
coming out of cloudy dispensations, for to cause thee by his light to see, what
thou art, and what thou have done, and what a condition thou art in; and when
he has carried thee, hither and thither, up and down, here and there, and
showed thee all thy abominations and all thy idols, and imaginary religious
Exercises, as he did to Ezekiel, in Jerusalem, and in the Temple there, Ezekiel.
8. 5, 6, 9, 10, 11. and so to the end of the Chapter; that is a Gospel type, we
may read there what our condition is; for thou art the Temple of God, and this
Temple of the Lord is defiled with all manner of unclean things. O thou Temple
of the Lord! there is great abomination in thee, spiritual abomination,
mysterious abominations, and there dwells in thee, thou can not tell what;
for every thing that bears not the image of the Lord, is sin upon thee, and
thou art defiled with all manner of unclean things; with an unclean heart, an
unclean mind, an unclean conversation. O how death is written upon all thy
labors and ways, rathen then life: Behold therefore the Lord is come down for
to open an eye to thee, wherewith thou shall see all that thou have done, to be
wicked, fleshly, and naught: The first sight will be a sorrowful sight, but
after sorrow comes joy. Israel, the Lord will first open thy eye, because
judgment shall begin first with thee, yea, this spiritual judgment: The Lord
will first search thee with candles, and after thee, then thy enemies; thou
shall see first, because thou shall rise first; nay, do not thou begin to
see? for methinks the clouds begin to break; if not, what is the reason of so
much strange noyses among the Sion of God? was there ever heard or seen the
like, that is in this our age? what distress? what blasphemies? what cursings?
These days are the last days, these days are the blaspheming days: I tremble to
think how all the world is, and will be filled with blasphemy, Revel. 13. 5.
and 7. 3. and 16. 9, 11, 21. Here is trouble indeed to the purpose, war was but
the beginning; and this shall be the end, and when ended, never trouble more
shall come near thee, O Israel; for thou shall see thy King ere long with great
joy, and with such a beholding of him, as thou never yet did behold him
withal, and by this thy beholding of him, thou shall go forth and speak great
things of his name to the consuming of all the world, Ps. 40. 3. And he shall
put a new song into thy mouth (even praise unto our God) men shall see it and
fear, God will come and consume all within thee, because thou shall consume all
without thee, and make all fall before thee, by the light and glory that God
will cloth upon thee, and all shall come unto thee, in chains, and shall bow,
and make supplication unto thee, and Ps. 149. 8. To bind their Kings in
Chains, 2 These. 2 8. Whom he will consume with the Spirit of his mouth, and
destroy with the brightness of his coming, all things below himself, which
destruction every one shall see, and be convinced, it is the Lord. Saints and
worldlings, your eyes shall be opened all ere long for to behold your selves
first, and then the Lord after; Israel, the eye which the Lord will give unto
thee, shall as well behold all the glory of the fathers house, as it did cause
thee to behold all thy evil, for this eye will carry thee into the secret
chamber of God, there to behold all the inside glory of thy father, and thou
shall not only see it, but be convinced all that is thine, and laid up for thee
of old, yea, and thine for to wear upon thy shoulders in the day, when the Lord
comes for to give reward unto his Saints, and them that fear his name, which
day is hasting on amain, and it will not be long ere thou see thy King, by
the perfect light of God, called the light of an eye; And for thee oh world!
thou shall have an eye opened unto thee by the Lord, for to cause thee for to
see him withal, and so to convince thee of all thy evil ways, and of all thy
evil deeds, and hard speeches, which thou have moved withal toward his
Israel; You may all read your doom in Jude, and hear there what the Lord
says; He says that the next appearing after the cloudy, called the day of
light, or the day of Christ, which day will be a day of conviction, a day of
enlightening, throughout the world, of good and bad, a convincing day to all men
of their ways, Jude 15. ver. Therefore rejoice oh Sion, and fear oh world, for
the Lord is come near to Judgment, and it will be a spiritual one, attended
with the spiritual light of God, Isaiah 4. 4. When the Lord shall have washed
away the filth of the daughter of Sion, and shall have purged the blood of
Jerusalem by the Spirit of Judgment, and the spirit of burning; This light of
the Lord will be a reproving light, a light which shall cause men to see and be
ashamed, and see, and yet not be ashamed, because he will bring a further wrath
upon them, it will be a reproving light, John 16. 8. When he comes he will
reprove the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment. Oh the mighty,
great, and unparallell fear that will fall upon all the world, by reason of the
light of God, which shall break forth upon them, for to behold the Lord
withal: and as they shall behold him, so themselves too, and read their own
charge, and be their own Judges, Math. 12. 33. For by thy words thou shall be
justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned. That is, by thy own mouth,
thou shall be judged, either for salvation or damnation, and therefore Christ
says, The words that I have spoken, and you have rejected, shall judge you at
the last day, John 12. 48. You are got into the last days, yea, unto the last
days of the last days, that is, into the half time Daniel spoke of, and that
half time is almost out too, Oh world! and therefore a spiritual judgment is
near to be revealed to us all; And the words that Christ has spoken, shall
judge us all, that is, God will open the eye of the understanding of all, by
his spiritual light, by the which light you shall know, and see, what you did
reject, and what you have done in rejecting, and also what Christ said, and how
you all have answered him again, and also how you have lived, and you shall
need no other Judge then the light of God, which shall shine upon your
understanding and consciences, for that shall give you light into all your
ways, in the which ye have walked, and this your enlightened understanding and
convinced consciences shall condemn you all, that is, all flesh; There is a
mystery, John 8. 9. And they that heard it being convinced in their
consciences, went out one by one; their consciences bearing witness again,
Romans 2. 15. Their consciences also bearing witness, and their thoughts the
mean while, either accusing or excusing, and a convinced conscience either of
good, or bad, lies in the understanding being enlightened, your understanding
and consciences oh Saints and worldlings! is all the book that God needs to use
in the day of his spiritual judging of you, and behold he is coming to
Judgment, and every eye shall see, by this light of God, every one shall be
saved that have part in the first resurrection, and by the same light every one
shall be destroyed, that have not part in him: so that this light of God will
bring salvation and destruction, both at one time, unto the two hoasts that
stand at the right and left hand of God, Isa. 33. 4, 5. The sinners in Sion are
afraid, fearfulness has surprised the hypocrites, and who among us shall dwell
with devouring fire? read one of the next verses, and it tells you who shall,
and who shall not; the Lord is come, and coming still for to destroy, and yet
to save, and that's the reason why all flesh does so fear, Ezekiel. 39. 21. I will
set my glory among the heathen, and all the heathen shall see my Judgments that
I have executed, and my hand that I have laid upon them, Isa. 66. 14. The hand
of the Lord shall be known toward his servants, and his judgments toward his
enemies, ye shall not only have judgment, but see the judgment of the Lord upon
you, yea, eat your own flesh, and drink your own blood, and the Lord will come
for to open your eyes for to see it, And the glory of the Lord shall be
revealed, and all flesh shall see it together. Isa. 40. 5. And again, that they
may see, know, and understand together, that the hand of the Lord has done
this; you shall see the Lord oh ye nations! ere long in his Saints with great
power, for to consume thee oh world, and all that is in it, that will be the
next dispensation of God after the cloudy; Sion stand up now and rejoice, for
thou have almost received double for all thy sins, Isaiah 40. 2. Therefore
comfort thy self in thy God, for my King is very near bringing double joy,
double peace, double rest, and double glory, with a double spiritual power,
Isaiah 61. 7. And all shall be thine, and therefore gather to thee, And the
reason is, because the Lord will glorify the house of his glory, and all shall
call thee the City of the Lord, the Sion of the holy one of Israel; for the
Lord will give thee such a spiritual power, that by that power thou shall
consume all the wicked in thee, so that no oppressor shall pass through thee
any more, Zach. 9. 8. And I will encamp about my house, because of the Army,
and because of him that passes by, and because of him that returns, and no
oppressor shall pass through thee any more, for now have I seen with my eyes;
this is a mystery, the light of God is a consuming, and a destroying light,
Isaiah 11. 4. Hear oh world! your fall is begun, for your Prince that is your
leader, is wounded by the light of God, and so wounded, that he bleeds all the
way he goes, and so he will until he has bled himself to death, for the wound
that is given him, is an uncurable wound, for it is given him by a mighty
Prince, called the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Sions King and your terrible
Judge, and from this arises all your fear, and you know it not; Oh who shall
stand before this great Judge, when he comes out of Clouds into light, to
judge with light and glory: why, this the Lord is coming near withal, and the
day of the Lords light, will be the day of the Lords dividing, Joel. 3. 14. Or
the day of the Lords great separating, not only a dividing, or separating the
powers of evil men far from you oh Saints, or you from them, but a dividing or
separating two ancient warriers, flesh and Spirit: so that you shall never
learn war more; Why, oh soul! thou shall never learn war more, for the Lord who
is thy King, will conquer, all thy inside enemies, as well as thy outside
enemies, and there shall be a great valley between ye both, and that is the
reason why he comes with his glorious light, for to destroy all, and then for
to make known all to you, Israel thou have been a long time under a veil, the
which veil so covered thy fathers glory, that ye could not see, nor yet
discern him, but now ye shall very suddenly, for it is near taking away, Isaiah
25. 7. And he will destroy in this Mountain the face of the covering cast over
all people, and the veil that is spread over all Nations; A spiritual light
brings a spiritual discerning along with it, Malachi 3. 18. Then shall ye
return and discern, and Isaiah 14. 16. And they that see shall narrowly look
upon thee, and consider thee, saying, Is this the man? Thy eyes shall be opened
too oh world, and thou shall see, and know, what Israel is, thou shall know the
Lords Sion, but with another manner of knowledge, then ever yet thou knew
them withal, and by that sight thou shall confess, this is the seed which God
has blessed, Isa. 69. 1. And as the light of the Lord in thee causes thee to
know his Israel, so the light of the Lord in them shall destroy thee, as well
as that in them, that bears not his image, and therefore is but stubble, and
not fit for any thing but to to be destroyed by the light of God, Isa. 10. 17.
18. And the light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his holy one for a flame,
and it shall burn, and devour his thorns and briars in one day; And as the
Lord has wounded the Prince of evil powers, so he has wounded you all, and
is revenging the blood of his Saints, Land the Lord is come for to make a full
end of all things, but first with Clouds, and by and by with light, for all
shall be destroyed by the light of God; and I cannot but out of pure love give
you warning of it: look therefore oh world about you, cannot ye see him yet? is
Isreal's cloud between you and the Lord that ye cannot behold the Lord? why, the
light of God will cause the clouds to remove, and then woe to be you, And they
also which pierced him. Hear ye despisers, and piercers of the Lords Sion, I
will tell you what you have done, you have pierced the most precious Jewels the
Lord has, and pierced them so deep, that the wound is gone through the very
side of God; And he is now coming, for to open thy eyes to cause thee to see
the many wounds that thou have given him and them, and when that is
represented, you shall see your selves wounded with a deadly and eternal
wound, even unto death, and yet never for to die, in dying thou shall dye, and
yet not die, Revel. 9. 6. And in those days men shall seek death, and shall not
find it, for the light of God will keep them alive for ever and ever, thy fall
will be very great; Oh worldling! although you be as the Sun of the morning,
how art thou cutting down to the ground, which did once weaken the Nations?
and thou art in casting out of the grave of security, where thou have lived and
layen in peace, for many an Age. Therefore hear ye sufferers for the Lord, he
has recorded thy sufferings in his book, and them that pierced thee has he in
remembrance, and behold, he is coming to reward upon them the evil of their
own ways, and will plead with them here for thee, I, he will plead with all
thy enemies temporal and spiritual, inside and outside ones, he remembers
them all, and all shall fall and never rise more, I, and that quickly, for the
great day of the Lord is coming on amain; cannot ye see, hear, nor take
notice, of the Lords goings, which proclaims to all the world that he is
coming? ye are angry, and ye cannot tell with what, ye are displeased and ye
cannot tell with whom, and the Lord is now coming to tell you, it is with
himself that you are offended; There is a generation that must be offended,
being out of the holy number, and therefore not honored with that princely
name Israel, so having no lot in the holy land, and therefore no entrance into
the princely and heavenly Court, into which Christ is coming for to gather all
his up into, by the light of his father; Great will be thy joy oh soul, who art
boloved of God, when this light of God has not only purified thee, but carried
thee into the Court and mansion of heaven, and set thee down there with thy
father, and thy King Jesus, who is now come with Clouds, and by and by with
light, watch ye therefore all ye sons of Sion.

And all kindreds of the Earth shall wail because of him, even so Amen. Oh the
unspeakable walling and crying out there will be ere long! I even tremble to
think how the earth will ring with the cries of enlightened souls, which have
the light of God given them for no other end, then to be an eternal plague
unto them, great crying, because of great wrath, and this great wrath will
cause great anger to ceaze upon your spirits, And your anger will arise from
two causes, first from the Lords coming to judge thee by the light of himself
in thee; Secondly, by the Lords coming for to give rewards unto his Saints, and
to them that fear his name. First from the Lords appearing for to judge you by
the light of God in you; The day of the Lords appearing will be a day of great
trouble, because it will be an eternal appearing, an appearing that shall
bring along with it eternal light, eternal darkness with an eternal death
too, Isa. 8. 22. And they shall look unto the Earth, and behold trouble and
darkness, and dimness of an anguish, and they shall be driven into darkness; As
eternal light, eternal darkness with eternal death makes up but an eternal
plagues, so eternal light, eternal life, eternal joy, eternal peace, and an
eternal glory, with an eternal knowing of God, as he is in himself, makes up
an eternal salvation to the saved ones of God. Worldlings, where are you? what
are you doing? are ye filling up the measures of your fathers wrath fuller yet?
why, make have, for my King cannot come with a light, called the light of an
eye, until you have finished the works of darkness, and if I be not mistaken,
you have almost, if not altogether finished your work, for Sions King, and your
terrible Judge makes have to come away, and me thinks I hear you begin to
wail, but if not wail, you are filled with much trouble, fear and anger which
is within one step of wailing; the next sight of my King will make you wail,
then farewell all your honors, rich treasures, and worldly enjoyments, for all
are condemned to dye already, and then they leave thee, and thou must leave
them, I say, trouble, fear, and anger ye have in your hearts, and your hearts
full of it, but ye cannot tell what is the cause of it, nor from whence it
arises; I will tell thee, First, from the Lords coming to judge thee, and thy
Judgment is begun, but it is a cloudy judgment, that is, an unseen, and an
unknown judgment, if it were made known to thee by the light of the Lord, what
the Lord is adoing, and going still about for to do to thee, and what have he
makes until he has done, thou would not only fear, but wail, and let me
tell thee one thing over again, all thy glory, wisdom, riches, honor, and
delight, with all thy other enjoyments, are condemned by the Lord of the whole
Earth, for to die the death nay, they are dead, and that is the reason thou have
so little comfort in the world, in this thy age; There is a great change made,
instead of a sweet smell there is a stink, and instead of a girdle, a rent,
instead of well-set hair, baldness, and instead of a stomacher, a girding with
sackcloth, and burning instead of beauty, so that all is out of order, by
reason of the cloudy day of God, and when once the Lord appears with light,
then will thy wailing begin, but never end, because the light that God will
give thee, will be a light that will never go out, Rev. 14. 11. And the smoke
of their torment ascends up for ever and ever, and they have no rest day nor
night; thy City and thy glory oh world is falling, is falling, is falling Rev.
14. 8. And now thy great strength is gone, and therefore nothing but trouble
comes in the room, by reason of the Lords appearing; And it will not be long
ere the earth shine, or be enlightened with the Lords glory, and the shining and
enlightening is for to let thee know, that thy kingdom and glory is going,
being but a Babylonian glory, Rev. 18. 1. 2. And I saw an Angel come down from
Heaven, having great power, and the earth was enlightened with his glory, and he
cried with a strong voice saying, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and
become the habitation of Devils; Thou oh world! have the mystery of iniquity
dwelling in thee, and by thy mysterious iniquities, have carried the Lords
Israel captive at thy will, for many thousand years, and now the years of thy
power is up, and the day of thy ruling is at an end, because all thy actions
have been unrighteous actions, and all thy ways and paths, which thou have
walked in, have been sinful ways and paths, and therefore now after thy
iniquity, woe be unto thee, Ezekiel. 16. 23. Woe be unto thee indeed says the
Lord, for thy sins have reached up to heaven, and have raised the Lord of hosts
out of his place, Isa. 33. 10. Now will I arise says the Lord, now will I be
exalted, now will I lift up my self, behold now he is come down, and is with
thee, to be exalted over thee, and to recompense upon thee according to thy
works, Rev. 18. 5. For her sins have reached up to Heaven, and God has
remembered her iniquity, your ways oh ye sons of men, and all ye rulers of the
Earth have been, and are still Canaanitish ways, and ye have all run greedily
after the error of Balaam for reward, but in the end will perish in the
gainsaying of Core, Jude 11. ver. Thy end is now begun, I, the end of your
evil ways oh Saints, and worldlings, is come up before the Lord, and what do
you think to do? for Job, whom the Lord honored with the name of my servant,
and faithful one, and just in all his ways, yet though so, when the Lord who
is a God of so pure eyes that cannot behold iniquity, did but once rise up, Job
feared, with a saying, What then shall I do? Job 31. 14. When God arises up
and when he visits, what shall I answer him? If the Sion of God do as it were
fear, what will thou do oh world? then the Lord arises up to the prey, and to
gather thee for eternal ruin, and to judge thee with an eternal Judgment,
attended with a just sentence, and a just reward like thy works; Oh all ye
workers of iniquity; and by the light of God ye shall see it, and then your
wailing will begin. What ailest thou oh world for to wail, why, do ye not know
oh ye blessed of the Lord the light of him who is your King; and therefore
reigns over you, and in you, even he whom I scorned and rejected with a
saying, This man shall not rule over me, has wounded me to the heart by this
light; and this light by which he has enlightened me, carries me forward and
backward, backward and forward, just as he did David after he had committed
adultery with Beersheba, and slew Vriah with the Sword, he carries me
backward, to behold all my evil deeds which I have done; and the many wounds
that I have given him and you, And also carries me forward to behold what once
was offered me, what mercies and what blessings, what glory, and what life,
what peace and what rest, with an eternal salvation with your eternal King,
but now rejected of him, by my own rebellious and scornful denying of him and
you, and I behold all this by the light of God, and this light of God causes me
to wail, with an everlasting wailing, and therefore what condition can be like
unto mine? why, no condition can be like unto thine, for thou art doubly
miserable, and therefore shall be doubly plagued by that light that shall come
down from the Lord to shine upon thee.

Secondly, from the Lords coming for to give rewards to his Saints, what a
plague will it be to thee oh world for to behold Gods Israel, whom thou
thoughtst not worthy to live, nor yet the remembrance of them in the earth for
to be, that they so little esteemed of the earth among men, should come to be
clothed with such glory, and righteous robes, and to be invested with all the
glory of heaven, called the glory of the father? did thou never hear of
Mordecai, and the royal clothing he wore, and the horse that he rid upon, and
the Crown Royal which was set upon his head, and the Proclamation which was
made before him, by one of the most royallest Princes of that Court, and of the
ring that was put upon his finger? this is a mysterious type, these are the
Lords Mordicai's, that I now tell thee of, and they shall all of them ride upon
the wings of the Lords free grace, ere long, although thou now disesteemest of
them, and they shall have given them all manner of change of raiment, called
the white robes, though for the present their clothing is but ragged and
filthy and an old clothing, thou art angry with them now, and enviest them
with thy very heart, although they do but bear a dark Image of God, and their
light is but an imperfect light that they have yet O world! And though their
gifts, knowledge, and understanding be imperfect, and their clothes ragged, yet
thou hate that in them they have. Well, thou shall not hate this imperfect
image long, for the Lord is coming for to take them away; and methinks I hear a
voice crying in my ears, Take away, take away, take away, these filthy rags,
Zach. 3. 3, 4. And he spoke to them that stood by him, Take away those filthy
Garments which they stand before the Angel withal, they shall be suddenly taken
away; for that is the reason why Michael the Prince stands up, that Archangel;
and that is the reason why the breaker up is come up, it is I say, For to take
away all our putrified and corrupt clothing; and upon the remove, there will
be trouble in thee, O Israel. And now they are risen, it will not be long ere
it is finished, Dan. 9. 24. It is but as it were a seventy weeks; before it
shall be done, seventy weeks are determined upon thy people, and upon thy holy
City; to finish transgressions, and to make an end of sin, and to bring in
everlasting righteousness. This is a Mystery; you have this Mystery opened in
part in Heb. 9 28. unto them that look for him; he shall appear the second time
without sin unto salvation. It will not be long, ere this Scripture be
fulfilled upon thee, O Israel, for thou art the City spoken of in Daniel. The
world is old* and the Cities of the Nations are old too, and therefore every
thing is stepping his last step, and looking his last look, and a joying his
last joy, and in speaking his last words, and in breathing out his last breath.
O World, thou art dying, thou art dying, and all within thee too; for the end
of all things is at hand, I, and the beginning of all things is at hand; the
beginning of a new look, a new joy, and so a new enjoyment; a new song, called
the song of the Lamb, a new language, even the holy Language of Heaven, a new
righteousness, a new peace, a new salvation, a new glory, a new breath, a new
life, even the holy Life of God; therefore what will thou do? O World, I cannot
but weep for thee; for the Bride, and the Bridegroom, will meet ere long, and
then there will be no room for thee among them. The Bride by the power and
light of the Lord, is a making her self ready, understand it if thou can; for
it is a Scripture phrase, and the Bride shall be made, as fit a bride for the
bridegroom, as the bridegroom is for the bride; and then meet they shall, and
shall be both as glorious and comely, as all the glory in Heaven and Earth can
make them; and they shall wear this, the inside, perfect glory of the Father in
thy sight, and this shall be one of thy plagues, I say; that the children of
the light will have a glorious white robe given them, and they shall wear this
their robe in thy sight, being the children of the day, 2 These. 5. 5. And for
thee, O World, thou art not so in the dark, but that the Lord can, and will
enlighten thee to behold Sions glory; and therefore, he says, Every eye shall
see him* I, thou shall see him, and them; Why? who shall we see, you blessed of
God? why? you shall behold the bride, and the bridegroom; that is, Christ and
his Saints, the King and his Subjects, the Father, and the Children, the Head,
and the Members, the King, and the Kings, the lover and the beloved, both
clothed with one glory, from the Father of glory; and then the desire of the
Lord my King, will be fulfilled. Father, make them one, as thou and I am one,
John 17. 21, 22, 23, 24. Pray read there, O Israel, and that will tell thee
what condition thou will be in ere long; for the height, and breadth, depth,
and length of the love of Christ, shall be known to you, and ye shall be filled
with the fullness of God: How do thou like this, O World? I must tell thee one
thing more, and when that one thing comes to be fulfilled; it will be as an
Arrow in thy heart, and so a hearty plague upon thee; for thou shall know, and
see all this by the light of God, but shall receive no more of it to thy
comfort, then that Lord did, which stood in the gate of Samaria, after that
long destructive siege was raised; and that bread was to be had, who was
trodden down in the gate, and died; he saw indeed, but never tasted of it, read
2 Kings 7. 2, 19, ^0. Thou shall see it with thy eyes, but shall not eat
thereof: So, O World, thou may stand without the gate, or at the gate, and
look in and see the glorified ones of God, but never enter in for to joy with
them; for thou art the dog, and without are dogs, Rev. 22. 15. within is
perfect joy, without perfect wailing; and the Word tells you, That the Reason
of the Worlds wailing will be, by reason of the appearing of Jesus Christ in
his brightness. The cloudy appearing of Jesus Christ is a dark appearing, and a
dark appearing is an unseen, and an unknown appearing to all men as men; and
what the eye sees not, the heart grieveth not for, that is a common phrase
among you; but you shall have eyes given you for to see the Lord withal; and
then the sight of him, will cause wailing in you. The Lords wrath is begun with
clouds, but shall end with light, the Spiritual light of God, and then thy
plagues will be perfected. The Lord has waited upon you long, O Kings,
Princes, Rulers, Magistrates; and all ye powers of the earth after what name or
title soever mentioned; with all ye Ministers and people, I say, my King has
waited upon you very long, and suffered you to fill up your wickedness, and to
make measure up to the brim; and when thou have done, Sions King will begin
with a saying. Put in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe; get ye down, for the
fat is overflown; their wickedness is great, and come to perfection; and
wickedness perfected, will be recompensed with plagues perfected: The Lord has
begun to pour out his vials of plagues upon thee, O World; and he will never
leave pouring out, until he has perfected them all; for there is a perfection
of plagues, as well as a perfection of beauty; there is a full knowing all
miseries, as well as a full knowing all mysteries; and the time is hastening on
apace by the Lord, in the which, both shall be known: Therefore all ye powers
of the earth, make have and do that ye do quickly; for when you have poured
forth all that you have to pour, and fulfilled all that you have to fulfill,
upon Christ and his Members, that you have no more to fulfill; then the Lord
will begin to pour out all that he has to pour, and to fulfill all that he has
to fulfill upon you, that is, All the plagues written in this Book, Revel. 22.
18. And when the Lord has done all that he has to do, and fulfilled or poured
forth upon you all that he has to pour, then ye shall be left in your misery
for ever: and then the word, Even so Amen, shall be finished upon you.

The word, Even so Amen, has a joyful sound, and a terrible sound. Hear, O
Israel, and ye Nations of the Earth; hear ye Nations, and all ye powers of the
World; Ye are fit for nothing, but to be destroyed by the light of God; your
very actions speak out, your destruction is near at hand; for death is written
upon all your footsteps, and the word, Even so Amen, will prove your dreadful
doom: For when the Lord has poured upon you all plagues, and has separated
all his sheep far from you, and you from them, and withdrawn himself, after
that he has enlightened you with an eternal light, for to be your eternal
plague; and to perfect your plagues, you shall have darkness, and light mixed
together, eternal light, and eternal darkness; and darkness shall cover thee
for ever, even thick darkness, that Jude spoke of, To whom is reserved the
blackness of darkness for ever; and when all this is done the Even so Amen is
finished.

And now hear one word more oh Israel, behold the Lord my King is coming, and
yet come too; And at his presence the world shakes, and mountains tremble, and
the end of his coming is for to finish upon thee, all that he has for to
finish, and to give thee of the fatness of his house, to cloth thee with the
perfect heavenly glory, and to give thee that, that shall never be taken from
thee, nor never be shaken, but remain with thee for ever, thy heavenly King is
coming, and in his hand there is for thee spiritual and heavenly blessings, I,
and he is coming with both hands full, and they hold all the inside treasure in
heaven and earth, and when all that that is for thee, whether it be wisdom or
knowledge, glory or blessings, is given unto thee, and clothed up thee,
according to the full and perfect gift of God, then the word, Even so Amen,
will be finished. The word, Even so Amen, ends all, it puts an end to all thy
sufferings and sorrows, and it puts an end to all thy faith, and heavenly hope;
because thy heavenly King has brought unto thee, the unseen substance, and
thou have received that, that thou so long hopedst for; and if we hope for that
we see not, then we do with patience wait for it: And Faith it is the substance
of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen; but thou shall have a
thousand times more then ever thou could believe or hope for; and when that
not seen, and not believed, and not hoped for substance and treasure, which the
Lord has laid up for thee, is given to thee, then the word (Even so Amen) will
be finished upon thee. I shall therefore close up all with a saying, Eye has
not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man, to
conceive the things that God has prepared for them that love him.

FINIS.

