A Short Description and Vindication Of the True Sal Volatile Oleosum.

OF THE ANCIENTS: Wherein it is proved The Great Medicine of the Spirits;

And consequently, An Universal Remedy.

By T. BYFIELD, M. D.

LONDON, Printed for R. Cumberland, at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1699.

Price Two Pence.

A Short Description and Vindication Of the True Sal Volatile Oleosum.
THE Errors about this Noble Medicine are so many and so gross, they deserve
not to be refuted. But the disparagement done to Learning thereby, as well as
Damage to the Healths, and Lives of Persons, has concerned me in the
Preparation and Vindication of it.

All the Learned Masters of Chemistry, who have treated of this Celebrated
Medicine, have declared the Subject to be the Salt of Nature alone; although they
have obscurely wrote, concerning its Discovery and Preparation, which has
precipitated many into very great Errors; who not knowing the Subject, busy
themselves about other things, altogether unfit for this Work. But if they
would consider, what this Salt is in its own Nature, and what Qualities it
has, and so comparing the Qualities of their Compositions, with the Qualities
of this Salt of Life, the Thing it self would discover what is Truth, and what
not.

Take a Description of it in these Particulars: 1. The Subject of the true Sal
Volatile Oleosum, must be only one thing; For, Oleosum is opposite to Macrum,
as Fat to Lean. 2. The Virtues and Powers of the Superiors and Inferiors, are
concentrated in it. 3. It contains in it self the Vital Fire. 4. It Is
incombustible, and despises the Violence of the Flames. 5. It Is both Volatile
and Fixed. 6. It contains the three Principles of Nature, in the highest
Purity; viz. Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury. 7. It Is of great Splendour, Ponderosity
and Tenuity. 8. It contains the Vital Tincture of the World, in Potentia. 9.
It Is the very Spring of Radical Moisture. 10. It Is only one Clean, Bright, Fat,
Salt.


I know there are many, who will not approve of this Description of our
Medicine, especially those who are employed about diverse Mixtures and
Compositions, which they call by this Name, although they have nothing of the
Nature and Virtues of the true Medicine. But such would do well to consult the
Ancient Philosophers, who expound the Principles, and their occult Operations.

Then the certainty of this Salt would be evidently known, by showing Sulphur
residing in it, in the form of a Subtle, Thin, Illuminating Oil, of an Ethereal
Quality. And Mercury as the Aereal Humidity, and the inseparable Companion of
Sulphur and the Medium to conjoin it with the Salt. And the Principle of
Coagulation is the Salt, wherein is secured the Mercury and Sulphur, for it is
called, Domicilium invisibilis seminis.

So you have the three Principles of Nature, all in one Saline Body. But Salt
is always reckoned first, by Chemists, because, whoever has the true Universal
Salt of the World, has Mercury and Sulphur included.

You must be very wary in the Choice of your Salt, for it is of most profound
search, and differs much from all other Salts.

Avicen discoursing of this Medicine, says, Salia cujuscunque generis sint,
nostrae Arti sunt contraria, excepto Sale Naturae.

Sal Naturae in centro Elementorum, qualificatione Astrorum, per Spiritum
Mundi, absque ulla cessatione, generatur, and radiis Solis and Lunae in ma^^
Philosophico gubernatur. Arnoldus. But Morienus gives the Receipt: Spiritus
Vniversi dicitur Sal Spirituosum, and illud Sal extrahitur mensibus vernalibus,
Sole ad nos redeunte: Illud ipsum Sal ex rore Majali colligitur, ex eoque fit
and conficitur Medicina Vniversalis.

If your Salt be right, in the Anatomy of it, you will see a certain Subtle,
Shining, Transparent Oil, (which is the Oleosum of the Medicine) full of Active
Virtue, and containing the Vital Fire of the World; But most Temperate, Equal
and Similar to Life in Man.

For the Natural Heat, or Fire in Bodies, is that Vital Flame, which forms its
own Body, and is nothing else but the Spirits, or Fiery Life in Creatures. And
this Fire, or Life, which preserves Beings, must be clothed with such an
Essence, as can pierce and penetrate all Bodies whatsoever; for where it cannot
penetrate, it cannot quicken and illuminate.

The Sun by its Fire does excite and quicken every thing upon Earth: So the
Fire which is proper an^ peculiar to every Creature does preserve in it Life.

For we find that when our Heat or Warmth begin^ to decrease in its wonted
Activity, we grow Dull* Cold and Unactive; and when it cease altogether we
Die and Perish.

It may be observed in declining Age, when Natural Heat abates, that a cold
Phlegmacy and rawness abounds with a crude Earthiness, and such Persons have
often fresh insipid Urines, for want of the Salt of Life, which is inseparable
from the Volatile Living Fire.

Experience shows that wheresoever our Fire is strong, Salt abounds, as in
Sweat, Urine, etc.

The Salter any ones Sweat and Urine is, the more lively and vigorous he is. So
that Salt is the consequent of Fire. Wheresoever Salt is, there Fire is also,
whether it be in Air, Earth, Vegetables, Animals, etc. Some of the Ancients
have called the Sun the Salt of the World. For which reason it is probable, the
Greeks called Salt la and the Sun Hlio. The Romans called the Sun Sol, and Salt
Sal, representing the likeness of their Natures, by the likeness of their
Names. It Is said Mark 9. 49. Every one shall be salted with Fire. And this
Fire, or Life, which is in the Salt, is properly that, which preserves the
Creatures from Putrefaction: For when this Life has once left the Salt, we are
told, Matthew. 5. 13. That it is good for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be
trod under Foot by men.

Every Creature has its vivifying Spirit or Fire, and stands in need of a
Spiritual Nutriment, which is plentiful in the Air, and to be attracted in the
Form of a tender Oily Salt. And since Spirit of Blood is a fine Volatile Salt,
what more similar and uniform, than the Salt of Air to that of Blood.

But it is from the Sulphur and Mercury contained in the Salt, that it becomes
capable of Production; for with them the Volatile living Fire insinuates it self
most intimately with its influential Virtues giving Splendour and Spirit to the
Salt: Thus it becomes agreeable to all Creatures for the sustaining of Life,
and those Bodies that are most impregnated with it, are in a better State of
Health and Vigor.

Besides it is the true Vital Ferment of Bodies, and Root of Radical Moisture;
For by the Action of the Fire upon the Principles, is generated the Balsom of
Nature and Seminal Spirits, and these are coagulated in this Salt of Nature,
which is the Soul of the Earth and of all other things. If the Earth were
deprived of this Salt, it would want the Power of Sprouting and Budding. It is
the only Subject under the Concave of the Moon, in which the Virtues as well of
the Superiors, as of the Inferiors, lie concentrated, and out of which alone by
the Chemical Art, our Learned Masters prepared their true Sal Volatile Oleosum.

And not from the Lean, Impoverisht, Caustic Salts of any Bodies whatsoever, in
Conjunction with Oils, Spirits, Perfumes, etc. after every ones Fancy,
wherewith the World does so abound. For at this rate may be made 1000 sorts.
Whenas there is but only one in Nature, viz. A Clean, Bright, Fat, Virgin-Salt,
which opened by Art, shows a transparent white Sulphur, or Oil, that is of so
great Moment; For in the white, lies the incombustible red Sulphur, which
clothes the Fiery Life of Beings, and is the Spring of indelible, Vital
Tincture.

I have chose to give this Salt, thus opened, for the more easy mixing with
Liquors, and its readiness to be assimulated. Besides it is a demonstration of
its Oilyness, which manifests the Medicine and a piece of Art. For the Body is
wholly Saline, and by an easy heat I can lock up the Mercury and Sulphur
again, and represent an entire Body of Salt. So you have the three Principles
of Nature in Unity. This is a great Secret, and a branch of oceult Philosophy.

Honest Avicen, in very poor Latin, writing of this Medicine, says thus, Qui
ergo scit Salem and ejus solutionem, Ille scit verum Salem Volatilem Oleosum
Antiquorum Sapientum: Pone ergo tuam mentem super Salem, nec cogites de aliis,
nam in ipso solo occultatur Medicina Vera.

From what is said, it is manifest, that this Salt alone has Vital Endowments,
let it appear under what form soever. And so it becomes the genuine, adaequate
Medicine of the Spirits, and consequently an Universal Medicine.

In Man is a peculiar, vivifying, innate Spirit, which contributes both Light
and Life to the Body; for conserving and sustaining the same. And it manifests
its own exquisite Skill, (as Experience daily proves) in separating the pure
from the impure, of all our Meat and Drink.

This Spiritual Essence, the Active, Internal Agent in all Bodies, is often
invaded by Diseasy Ferments, received from Meats, Drinks, Corrupt and Unwholsom
Airs, etc. And very often no longer capable to suppress those Disorders,
without the help of a Medicine naturally gifted, to cast a friendly Ray or Beam
of Light, upon the discomposed and darkened Spirit, by which it is enabled to
expel what offends.

And of such a Nature is our Medicine, Homogeneal to our Spirits, whereby they
are kept undisturbed, and Life and Health maintained.

Our Natural Spirits are Volatile Oily Substances, therefore by Sympathy they
are delighted and refresht with our Volatile Oily Salt. Spirituum Oleaginitas
consistit in Sale Oleoso Volatili.

That which Fabricated the Man, must be the Conserver of that Frame. Diseasy
Powers aim at nothing else but its Destruction. Yet no morbifick Power can
exist in the Body of Man, where the Spirit of Life stands clear and undefiled.
As is apparent in a Pestilential Season: In some Bodies the Spirits being clean
and strong, remain untouched, and no Venom introduc't. But in others the
Spirits being not so clear, or strong enough to defend themselves, admit of
Pestilential Airs, and so form the Disease: Yet if timely assisted by Natural
Remedies, easily and readily expel the same.

When the Spitits have any Diseasy Impress, by the means of a generous
Medicine, they can rectify their own defiled Air, and illuminate and restore
the discomposed Spirits to their pristin State, so that no Disease can long
abide.

In Sacred Scriptures we read that Elisha, at the request of the Inhabitants of
Jericho, intending to heal their Venomous Waters, went not to the Streams, but
to the Fountain it self, and there cast in Salt. So ought every Physician in
his Administration of Remedies, to respect the Fountain or Original, not the
Streams or Effects of Diseases.

For That, by which a Disease is formed, is That, to which the Remedy ought to
be applied.

A true Medicine relieves the Natural Spirits, d^bilitated or disturbed,
without resolving the nourishing Juices of the Body, and ejecting of 'em as
Excrements and Superfluities, as common Purges, and other forcible Medicines
do, to the impoverishing of Nature.

The Spirits interrupted and oppressed are incapable to perform their wonted
Actions and Natural Separations. But a Congeneal Medicine excites their Powers
to officiate, amend and restore the Body.

The Body is the Subject, containing the Spirit, and the Spirit the contained
Agent, vivifying and agitating the Body.

When the Body in all its parts, is entire and complete, the Spirit without
interruption performs all its own Operations perfectly. And it is evident the
Spirit of Man delights in no Remedy, that is not capable to assist it in its
own Acts, and to be bettered by it. Spiritus Spiritibus curantur: Spiritus
optimi sunt Morborum Medicatores.

Physicians are Nature's Ministers, and whatsoever tends not to her
Preservation is out of the way that may be called Living. Eximius Medicus
excellens debet esse Physicus: Accuratissime sciat quibusvis Spirituum
defectibus subvenire, convenientes accommodare Medicinas, Naturam juvare,
errantem in viam ducere rectam, debilitatem roborare, oppressam relevare,
succumbenti succurrere. Et talia praestare, si calluerit, jure merito
Naturae-Consultus dicendus est. Medicus vero, qui nec Naturam, nec Naturae
Spiritus, nec Naturae Vires novisse didicit, qui Spirituum Morbos and
impotentias ignorant, qui Purgationibus Naturam destruit, qui Medicamentorum
farragine Stomachum obruit, qui Naturam in actionibus suis and operationibus
confundit, Valetudinem conculcat: Et talis Medicus Naturae est destructor,
Hostis and Medicaster.

Sanitatis formalitas est Potentia Naturales actiones exercendi. Spiritus sunt
illi ipsi qui exercent illam potentiam.

Positis Spiritibus radiantibus, ponitur Vita, amissis and extinctis, ponitur
Mors.

Illa itaque Spirituum Medicina est Sal Spirituosum, quia fluidam, volatilem,
luminosam reddit Spirituum, Sanguinis and humorum obscuritatem, crassitiem and
segnitiem.

The true Sal Volatile Oleosum is to be preferred before a thousand common
Medicines, which prove themselves to be rather injurious than profitable:
Beccuse they want those Universal Virtues, that are capable to answer the
Spirits Necessities.

Moreover, Experience manifests, that the Relicts of acute Diseases managed by
Medicines contrary to Nature, become the Causes of Chronical Distempers.

Whereas true Medicine should not be contrary to our Natures: But contrary to
Diseases, which are contrary to our Natures, and friendly to our Spirits.

Many Droop through Languid and Disordered Spirits, and for Relief suffer
themselves to be tormented by Externals, or contrary Internals: Whereas a
generous lively Remedy, agreeable to the Harmony of our Natures, and that
neither dulls the Stomach, nor increases praeternatural Heat, but is found
Temperate, Clean and Subtle; such a Remedy would soon please the Spirit of
Life, and charm all its dependent Powers and Organs.

Tale est Sal Volatile Oleosum nostrum, quod non tantum hominem, sed quodlibet
Animal praeservat in conservatione sanitatis. Curat omnes infirmitates de
quibus Medici desperaverunt, and facit Hominem juvenescere. Virtutem habet
efficacem omnem sanandi infirmitatem super omnes alias Medicinas Medicorum: Non
enim permittit Sanguinem putrefieri, nec Phlegma superdominari, nec Choleram
aduri, nec Melancholiam superexaltari. Nam Sanguinem purum multiplicat;
contenta in Spiritualibus purgat, and omnia Corporea membra efficaciter
restaurat and custodit. Denique omnes tam Calidas, quam frigidas, tam siccas
quam humidas infirmitates arctissime sanat. Et si quis nostro Sale utitur
quotidie, illum aio animo, ac omni sensuum habitu tam alteratum iri, ac si
revera viveret in Paradiso.

Here I should end: But that nothing may be wanting to any ones Expectation,
I Will instance some particular Distempers it frequently Cures, without the help
of any other Remedy.

First, Distempered Stomachs, from Heat, Choler, Phlegm, ill Digestions,
Surfeits of Meat or Drink, Heart-burn, Sowerness, Wind and Weakness.

All sorts of Colli^^^, though Scorbutic, and consequently habitual.

The Scurvy in all its Shapes, Rheumatisms, and Dropsies: For it renewes the
Tincture of the Blood, and restores its Vital Ferment.

Fevers of all sorts, especially malignant.

Vapors, Melancholy, Hypochondriac Fumes, Hysteric and Convulsion Fits.

Headaches, decay of Sight and Senses, Numness, Tremblings, Palsy, Lethargy,
etc.

Coughs, Hoarsness, Tissicks, Asthma, Short-breath, etc. It keeps the Pipes and
Lungs clean from Clamminess and Ulcerous Putrefactions.

In all Weak, Declinning, Consumptive Cases, it is Restorative, Strengthening and
Preservative. And so it is, to repair the Decays and Infirmities of Age.

All the time of Women's Lying-in, and in many other Cases, it is a Noble Remedy.

It Is an Excellent Remedy at large, for an ill Habit of Body.

This Vital, Balmy Medicine disposes the Blood and Flesh to Healing, and so
promotes a sound and speedy Cure in Chirurgical Cases.

To such as are afflicted with Gout or Stone, it is very advisable, for mending
the sharp Ferment in their Blood and Stomachs, and to expel Wind freely.
Herewith may be prevented the Fits of Gout and Stone, and the Increase of
either.

In the beginning of all Indispositions, while the Case is yet doubtful, it is a
safe and proper Medicine.

DIRECTIONS.
First, be sure of the right Thing (for there are innumerable Pretenders)
otherwise the Virtues ascribed to it cannot be answered.

You cannot be deceived, if you take but a little pains to inform your selves.
Only remember it must be but one Thing, and no Composition by any means. It
must be clear and full of Splendour, without any Color. It must taste of Salt
only: And have no Scent, but what is Natural to a Volatile Salt. Dropped into
Liquors it must appear Oily in its form, but without any Oil, Scum, or swiming
on the Surface: For it must all go down to the bottom.

In White-wines, Cider, and other Spirituous Liquors, you will see it lie at the
bottom of the Glass and show it self red, which is an excellent mark, for
that is a view of the internal Sulphur and Dignity of the Medicine.

In half a pint of Thames, New-River, City-Conduit, or other soft, open Water,
take 60 or 70 drops.

In half a pint of Ale or Table-Beer, take 25 or 30 drops.

In a Glass of Wine, take 10 or 12 drops.

In Cider or Mead, take 15 or 16 drops.

In a Glass of Mum, take 40 or 50 drops.

Remember to stir them up very well in all Liquors, before you drink 'em.

Rub a Drop or two betwixt the Palms of your Hands and smell to 'em: Thus it is
to be used frequently in many Cases.

It may be drank at any time, Full or Fasting, and at Meals.

With these Drops you may amend all Liquors in their kinds, and render 'em
Wholsomer and more agreeable to your Stomach and Palate. As Wines, Cider,
Mead, Mum, Beer, Ale, etc. Only you must observe due proportion to each, as
before Directed: Thus you may make all Drinks Mellow, and rich in their kinds,
without perceiving any thing put into them: And from being hard and sharp to
what degree of softness and seeming newness you please.

But when taken Medicinally, my common way is a Glass of Water and Drops in the
Forenoon, another after Dinner, and one just before you go to Bed; or instead
of this last Dose, take it in your Evenings Draughts.

If your Stomach feel Full or Foul, then drink two half pints of Water and
Drops, with 60 in each, within an hour, or one single pint of Water with 100,
110, or 120 Drops. But thus it is not to be continued, only for a Morning, two
or three, as Necessity requires, and may be omitted all the day besides, unless
to correct and renew your Drinks, and free 'em from doing Injury.

In many acute Cases two or three Glasses of Water and Drops may be given in an
Hours time, and seasoned pretty strong.

These Drops may be drank in Milk-water, sweetened with loaf Sugar to your
Palate.

You may Distill this, which is very grateful to every ones Stomach, and
signifies somewhat more.

Take one handful of Carduus Benedictus.

Of Spear-Mint two handfuls.

Of Roman Wormwood, Angelico, Rue, Bawme,
each one handful.

Shred 'em Gross, and put 'em into a Gallon of Milk over Night in a cold Pewter
Still, and next Morning Distill gently two quarts or five pints. This you may
make any time in the Year, for some of the the Herbs are as well Dry.

About 40 or 50 Drops in a Claret Glass full, first sweetened, and then stirred
in, is a moderate Dose to be taken at any time by any one, and repeated at
pleasure.

Many being used to great Variety of Medicines, cannot understand how so much
benefit may be received by one: Being accustomed to Vomiting, Purging,
Sweating, Bleeding, Blistering, and other Violences; but wholly unacquainted
with what is Grateful, Innocent and Powerful; easily conjoining to the Vital
Spirits, yet sensibly discerned, and only by its good Effects.

From my House in the the Square in Salisbury-Court, Fleetstreet.

