MOLA ASINARIA: OR, The Unreasonable and Insupportable BURDEN Now pressed upon
The Shoulders of this groaning NATION: BY The headless Head, and unruly Rulers,
that usurp upon the Liberties and Privileges of the oppressed People. Held
forth in a REMONSTRANCE To all those that have yet sound and impartial Ears to
hear, and duly weighed in the Scales of Equity and Justice.

By William Prynne, Bencher of Lincolns-Inne.

Wherein is demonstrated, What Slavery the Nation must subject it self to, by
allowing the lawfulness and usurped Authority of the pretended LONG PARLIAMENT
Now unlawfully and violently held at WESTMINSTER.

Jusque datum Sceleri.

Printed at London, in the Year MDCLVIX.

Mola Asinaria, etc.
Countrymen:
THere is not any thing in the Universe deserves less to be a Member of it,
then a self-seeking Man, who unconcerned in the public Good, regards only his
private Interest. The World unwillingly contributes to his maintenance; and
Nature less abhors a Vacuum, then that any place should be filled by a Subject
so empty of desert. He is a savage Creature in the midst of civil People, not
deserving to be born of others, as not caring to live, but for himself. Nay, it
is worthily reputed a kind of civil death, to do nothing else but live: for as
long as we have a Country to abide in, we have a duty to tender it. All we
have, we have from it; and by consequence owe it all we have. Our Lives and
Fortunes are safest, when ventured for the public Interest; and he is the
truest Lover of Law and Liberty, that affects rather to be ruled, then to rule;
he the freest Subject, that creates himself a voluntary Slave to his Countries
service. Take from the world this inviolable Law, (that is not writ in brass,
but deeply imprinted in loyal hearts) and it shall again turn savage and
barbarous. This is a truth so manifest, and not to be dissembled, that never
yet was there a Tyrant, but pretended to be a Savior of the people. Liberty,
Conscience, a glorious Nation, The Good Old Cause, and such specious Names are
made use of: Tacit.
Nec quisquam alienum servitium and dominationem concupivit, ut non eadem ista
vocabula usurparit. These Machiavilian Tricks, and political Cheats so often
put upon the people of our Nation, me thinks should have by this time
undeceived us with a sad experience of the miseries we have subjected our
selves to, by a perpetual itch of reforming, annulling, creating Laws, and
framing new Governments to the model of every Grandees ambition; and yet we are
again ready to thrust our Necks into a new yoke of Slavery, rather then any
man will engage his private Fortunes, and venture to redeem his Country from
Bondage. It is laid to the charge of Englishmen by Forraigners, that we are
(...), and above all Nations under Heaven pretending to civility, the greatest
self-seekers; as regarding much more our own particular, then the general
concerns. I must needs say, other Nations would have canonized for Martyrs, and
erected Statues after their death to the memory of some of our Compatriots,
whom ye have barbarously defaced and mangled yet alive, for no other motive,
but their undaunted Zeal. It has been (I know not whether I should say) your
misfortune, or my glory, to become a Sufferer for a Legal Vindication of the
Liberties of our Kingdom; but yet I never knew what it was to fear, when I
perceived my self engaged in so good a cause; not envy nor snarling Pamphlets
shall stop the course of my Pen freely running into my Countries defense, which
my Profession and Age forbid me to vindicate by the Sword. Let young Men serve
it with their strength and arms, let old Men secure it by their heads and
counsel: for my part, I desire to live no longer then I can in some sort
contribute to so glorious a work. I have of late been snarled at for it by
certain licentious Scriblers, that durst not own their names for fear of
discovering their Asses ears: however, they are pleased to twitch at the
honorable remnant of mine. They thought to have stopped my mouth by their
brauling and braying; but I dare yet speak louder; and I hope I shall be heard
by all such as have yet sound and impartial ears: but if my cry will not reach
you, I fear (dear Countrymen) the voice of blood will speedily interrupt your
slumbring security. Those that will be Lawless, find fault with my Writings,
because I vindicate the anciently established Laws of England; and tax me of
desperate Nonsense, because I will not allow them an unlimited, unlegal
Legislative Power to repeal, annul, alter, and enact what Laws soever they deem
best to serve their own turns. They deceitfully cry out, Salus populi suprema
lex esto! Cicero.
an Axiom that I no ways deny to be true; but I would desire to be instructed
who are to be Judges, of what is expedient for the good of the people? The
Author of the forecited Maxim says, Leges Magistratibus praesunt, ut
Magistratus praesunt populo: And the great Doctor St. Austin not doubted to
affirm, that those societies where Law and Justice is not, are not
Commonwealths or Kingdoms, De civit. Dei.
but Magna latrocinia, great thefts and trapanning cheats. As for the power of
altering Laws, or bringing in new ones, and setting up new Governments, it is
allowed by wise men, that all power lawfully exercised upon a Commonwealth,
must necessarily be derived either from the appointment of God, who is supreme
Lord of all; or from the consent of the Society it self, that has the next
power to his, of disposing of their own Liberty, as they shall think fit for
their good, whose benefit is the end of all Government. Therefore whoever
arrogates such power to himself, that cannot produce one of these two Titles,
is not a Ruler, but an Invader, or a Tyrant. Now how this pretended Long
Parliament, restored by the force of Soldiers, by whose force it had first
been dissolved, and was before annulled by the death or murder of King Charles
the first, that summoned it, he being Principium, causa, and finis Parliamenti;
after his murder, the house of Lords and Monarchy being abolished, and so many
of the ancient Members thrown out, new ones unduly elected, and such horrid
thefts, rapes, etc. committed by them upon the people, can lawfully be said the
Peoples Representatives, and authorized by them, is the greatest Riddle that
ever was propounded to a puzzled State. It was in the year 1649, that I
published a Legal Vindication of the Liberties of England; in which I
demonstrated the nullity of the then-pretended Long Parliament; and lately I
set forth a lively pattern of the spurious Old Cause pretended to be revived
and vindicated by the fine Pageant or now-sitting Ghost of the long-since
departed Long Parliament; neither need I reason farther with reasonable Persons
about it: Yet since this Fantastical Hob-gobbling appears still to fright the
quiet people, and tempts them (like an evil Spirit) to give themselves to such
an unruly Devil; I will here only hold forth to the view of all good
Englishmen, what slavery they must needs subject themselves unto, if they
resolve to cast off forever their lawful Master and Sovereign, and take for new
Masters these upstart domineering Tyrants. Let then every honest freeborn
Subject of England, lay his hand upon his breast, and ask of his own
Conscience, whether notwithstanding all former Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy,
Protestation, solemn Leagues and Covenants, etc. he can voluntarily submit to,
and thereby freely acknowledge, contrary to his former knowledge and the said
Oath, etc.

1. That there may be, and now is a lawfully-assembled Parliament of England
actually in being, legally continuing after the late Kings death, or lawfully
re-assembled without King, Lords, or most of their Fellow Members, consisting
only of a few late Members of the Commons House.

2. That this Parliament re-established by a Military force* and packed
together by Power of an Army combining with them, has just and lawful
Authority, and had it before; 1. To arraign, condemn and execute their lawful
King himself, with the Peers and Commons of this Realm. 2. To dis-inherit the
Kings Posterity of the Crown. 3. To extirpate Monarchy, and the whole house of
Peers. 4. To violate the Privileges, Rights, Freedoms, Customs, and alter the
Constitution of Parliaments themselves; to change and subvert the ancient
Government, Seals, Laws, Writs, Courts and Coin of the Kingdom. 5. To sell and
dispose of all the Lands, Revenues, Jewels, Goods of the Crown, with the Lands
of Deans and Chapters, for their own advantages, not for the easing of the
people from taxes. 6. To dispose of the Forts, Ships, Forces, Offices of
Honor, Power, Trust or Profit, to whom they please. 7. To raise and keep up
what Forces by Land or Sea they please, and impose Taxes, etc. to make what new
Acts, Laws, and reverse what old ones they think meet. 8. To absolve themselves
(by more then a Papal Power) and all the subjects of this Land, from all the
aforesaid Oaths, Engagements, Protestations, etc. 9. To permit, settle, or
invent what Sect, Heresy, or Religion they please, provided they be not Papacy
or Prelacy, and that they allow not blasphemy against the Trinity. 10. I ask
now if every freeborn Subject that has not raised himself an Interest by
villainy, or an Estate by robbery, or incurred a guilt to the Gallows for having
his hand in blood, had not better venture Life and Fortunes to reduce the true
and lawful Heir into a peaceful Possession of his right, then to authorize by
his consent a newfangled Government compacted of Treason, Usurpation, Tyranny,
Theft and Murder?


FINIS.

