To avoid the intolerable Drudgery of giving full Satisfaction by a several
Letter to every one that may Deserve and Desire it, the Rector of Exeter
College has taken this way to give an account of the unhappy Affair which
has drawn such Clamors, as decry Him and his Assessors in behalf of one of the
Fellows, who they say is Injuriously, or at least too Severely Expelled.
The Statute.
QUOD si quis Scholarium vel Electorum Adulterij, Incontinentiae etc. coram
Rectore, SubRectore, Decano, and quinque aliis Scholaribus maxim senioribus,
vel majore part eorundem, cum dicti Rectoris assensu, legitime convictus
fuerit, ipsum perpetuo exclusum and privatum ipso facto a dicto Collegio, nulla
alia monitione praemissa, virtute praesentis Statuti decernimus.

The Fact.
On New Years Night 1688, Anne Aris Daughter to a Bedmaker of the College was
brought to bed of a Bastard. Before the next Michaelmass, Anne Sparrow servant
to another Bedmaker was delivered of another. Anne Aris laid her Child to
Ferdin. Smith Anne Sparrow's Master; who stoutly denied it, and fled to Cornwall
about the end of October, furnished with Money by Mr. Colmer Fellow of the
College. On the 26th of January Mr. Colmer went to Cornwall, where he took
Ferdin. into his service, and ( Aris's Child being dead) brought him home with
him toward the later end of April, employed him in keeping his own and his
friends Horses, and every way cherished him beyond what he had done before that
Journey.

After a while Anne Sparrow's belly spoke her with Child, but she obstinately
denied it, till within a few weeks before she lay down. Ferdin. then vaunted
that he had been wrongfully named Father to a Bastard, but this he owned, and
let no body trouble themselves, he would maintain it.

This double scandal of two Bastards within three quarters of a year, and the
boasts of a Servant (who being in Cornwall at the time when the later was
begotten, must needs act in behalf of some considerable member of the College)
obliged the Rector to wipe off so great a Blemish as this must cast upon his
Conduct, if neglected. And upon enquiry finding the guilt must light upon Mr.
Colmer made him acquainted with what he heard: and finding him resolved to
stand upon his Justification, was for some weeks in great pain, between
tenderness for a Person with whom he had held more familiarity than is usual
between the Head and a Junior Fellow of a College on one side, and his care for
his Own and his College Repute on the other: and almost resolved to make use of
the pardoning Power wherewith the College Statutes entrust him: but the
Insolence of Mr. C -- 's friends, and the Admonitions of his Own, prevailed
with him to bring it to the hearing of those whom the Statute makes Judges in
such cases. He therefore appointed a time, giving Mr. C. six days warning to
provide for his Defense.

The Proceedings.
About half a year before Anne Sparrow was brought to Bed, and none thought of
her being with Child, Joice Aris told Mr. Crabb and some others, that she
wondered what ailed A. S. for she heard her curse Mr. C. saying she had reason
to curse him for he had undone her: and in that anger refused to go for Wine
for him: Before A. S. was delivered she refused for some weeks to do any work,
whereof Thomasin her Dame, Ferdin's wife, complained to the Rector's Wife, and
afterward told her she was paid for keeping her.

The Coll. Cook being Overseer of the Poor of his Parish came to the Rector's
Wife (in the Rector's absence) asking if without offense to her (whom he knew a
friend to Thomasin) he might put A. S. into the hands of a Justice so to secure
his parish from charge of the Bastard; she readily consented, and the next day
asked him what he had done? he winking and smiling said he was satisfied, for
he had gotten Security.

When she was delivered, the Rector asked the Cook what security he had; he
showed Ferdin's Bond of Forty pounds, the Rector blamed him as false to his
Trust, in taking Bond from one that could not secure the parish from his own
children; the Cook answered he had better Security and should not have accepted
this, if he had not been bid to do it by one that said the parish should not be
damnified.

The Midwife said that when she pressed A. S. to name the true Father, Thomasin
persuaded her not to urge her any more, for (said she) she has told me already.

The Rector surprised Thomasin before she had been instructed, and upon
examination she acknowledged that she had been paid several weeks for keeping
A. S. before she was brought to bed, that she had the Money of her Husband, and
he of Mr. C. that A. S. had named Mr. C. for Father, and her self had hindered
the Midwife from examining her, because she was loath to have him disgraced
before the company that were then in place.

He then also surprised Ferdin. with whom in his study he had this Dialogue. R.
What mean you to Father a Bastard that cannot be your own? F. The same Man
which is father of this, was father of the other. R. And are not you a sweet
Fool to do such service for one that did you such an injury, and would have
done the same now if you had not been out of the Country? F. I do not know that
this Gentleman persuaded the other Wench to do me that wrong. R. That would
have undone you if I had thought you guilty. You know the Sub-Rector in my
absence banished you the College for That, and I shall do it for. This, if you
tell me not what I ask you. F. The Wench has named the Father. R. I know it,
for your Wife has already told it: But the Question to which I must have your
Answer is this, Who gave you the Money which you paid your Wife for keeping
Anne before she was brought to bed, when she could not or would not work? F. It
was mine own money which I earned by keeping Horses. R. We all know that you
are so far from having Money to spare for keeping such a Wench, that you have
not wherewith to keep your self, for it is your Wife that maintains you: nor
has she or your children ever had so much of you as she has had for keeping
this Wench. F. The Wench has been chargeable but one week. R. That Is false,
she has been so many weeks: and if you refuse to answer what I ask you when my
credit and the credit of my College is so much concerned, you shall have no
place in it. F. I know I have always been obliged by you, I beseech you excuse
me, I shall be undone. R. If the loss of your place will undo you, you shall be
undone unless you answer me. F. A Gentleman will be Expelled and I shall lose
my Friends. R. Your Friends will all be lost if you lose your place: consider
your own interest, and not a man's that has so much abused you: F. I pray give
me 3 or 4 days time. R. To what purpose? F. To speak with my Friend? R. What,
to frame a lie? if you mean to speak truth, you need no further time. F. But
till to morrow morning. After many words the Rector requiring a present answer
and Ferdin. praying time. Ferdin. went away and the next morning came, with his
first answer, That he paid his Wife with his own Money.

A. S. was removed from the house where she lay in, and Mr. C. denied not (what
after clearly appeared) that it was done by his Friends. This was equivalent to
a Man's flying when named for Father of a Bastard; and since it appeared to be
done to avoid her examination, was taken for no less evidence than if she had
sworn what she said. Upon these Evidences and after six days warning the matter
was brought to Hearing.

The Conviction.
That Mr. C. offered Money or Rudeness to other young Women (though then
testified) is not now insisted on, because it will not amount to such
Incontinence as deserves Expulsion.

What Joice said concerning Anne's Cursing Mr. C. before she appeared to be
with Child (which was confirmed by Mr. Crabb to whom she then told it) this
compared with Anne's naming him for the Father, appeared such a concurse as
could not but be true, though either of them single were never so doubtful. The
Cook was absent attending the Mayor, the Rector told what he had said, (and he
still averreth it) that Mr. C. bid him take Ferdin's Bond, and the Parish
should not be damnified.

Thomasin began with a surprising Preface, Sr. I must now tell you what I never
told you yet; Anne says, That Mr. C. never touched her: at which words the
Rector said he must expect no truth from her, and then took his voluntary Oath
of what she had told him before.

Ferdin. denied nothing of the Dialogue above recited, and being pressed by the
Assessors to tell who that Friend was whom he must speak with before he would
answer the Rector's question, because if he refused to do it, it must lie upon
Mr. C. at last after much tergiversation, he said his Wife was the Friend,
though he had acknowledged it was a Gentleman that must be Expelled.

In Mr. Colmer's Defense.
To take off the Cook's Testimony it was alleged, that what he spoke was
publicly in the presence of three whom he named, and all of them were known to
be his fast Friends.

Two of them took their voluntary Oaths that Ann had cleared Mr. C. and said,
that Goodwife Roberts persuaded her to name him. But Anne was known to be
scarce half witted, and the Proverb which says Children and fools speak Truth,
is to be understood of what they speak of their own accord, but when they are
in other folks conduct, then they speak as they are prompted; and therefore
this was not thought of weight sufficient to answer other Evidences, especially
because she ought to have been produced to speak it her self.

So that Mr. C. was found guilty by so many; that the Rector (who was to speak
last) could not but declare him Convicted, and consequently Expelled.

The Confirmation.
Himself afterward acknowledged more than once, that he could not blame his
Judges, for that himself upon the same Evidences must have judged any other
Person guilty, but the Witnesses were etc.

Had he continued in that mind his Disgrace had been the less, but since he
took encouragement from some that he takes for his Friends to use his College
as rudely as his Women, the Rector in his own Defense found it necessary to
seek such other Proofs as might baffle all objections.

The greatest Objection is, That he ought not to be taken for lawfully
Convicted, without Witness upon Oath; This, though it hold not in
College-Affairs, where the Governor has no power to administer an Oath, or
compel any that is no member of his Body so much as to speak; yet (to avoid
cavils) the Rector labored to have Testimony upon Oath.

Ferdin. and Thomasin who having been Agents must be principal Witnesses said
peremtorily they would not swear. He went to Alderman Fyfield, if by any means
he might learn from him, where Anne was From him he learned that he had been
with her and taken her examination, wherein she freed Mr. C. and said she had
lain with a Gentleman of Christ Church and another of Brazen Nose, but what
their Names were, she knew not, nor did himself know what House she then lodged
in when he examined her.

This Alderman is a Justice of Peace, a Mercer, Mr. C's Friends and their
Pupils are his Customers: he debaseth his Office so low as to go to the (Hutt
rather than) House of one of the most profligate Rogues in the Town, to examine
(without Oath) a poor Whore, upon whom he executed not the Law, nor took any
course to secure the Parish, but left her where he found her, without naming
any Father, and refused to make known her hiding Place, that the Parish and
College might be righted.

Then the Rector (comparing together Probabilities) thought fit to have Anne
Aris examined.

Mr. C. told the Rector's Wife that he had given. Ferdin. Forty shillings when
(upon Anne Aris's laying her Great-belly to him) he fled to Cornwall, whereupon
she then merrily told him, she believed him to be the Father of that Child.

Ferdin. said that the same man was Father of both the Children. Mr. C's
extraordinary kindness to Ferdin. was observed to have began about That time.
A. Aris before she was known to be with Child had told some young men, that Mr.
C. had tempted her as she was rubbing his Chamber. Upon these Suspicions a
Warrant is obtained from Sr. William Walker, and A. Aris brought before him;
where upon Oath she confessed that Ferdin. had had Carnal knowledge of her Body
three times, and Mr. C. twice.

About the same time, by a fortuitous concurse able to convince an Epicurean:
A. S. was met with: The Rector had caused the Town to be searched for her,
thereupon she was conveyed to the great living Forest. The first morning after
she was lodged there, looking out at a Window she espied one of the College,
and with joy called to him, and freely answered whatever he asked of her: He
sending notice hereof to the Rector, was by him directed to have her examined
upon Oath by some Justice of Peace; before this direction came she was removed;
but after much endeavor, was found, and examined upon Oath: she swore that she
never carnally knew any man but Mr. C. and what she said to Alderman Fyfield
concerning a Gentleman of Christ Church, was upon Mr. Cl's and Mr. M's
persuasions, who told her that if she accused Mr. C. he must be Expelled, but
no one ever persuaded her to accuse Mr. C.

That all this and more is true, the Rector is ready prove, challenges any one
that please to put him to a capacity to do it by bringing an Action of Slander
against him, and in conformity to the Law against Libels subscribeth his Name.

ARTHUR BURY.


