A STOP TO THE False Characterizers Hue-and-Cry And a Reproof to their
Unfruitful Works of Darkness.

Wherein the Folly of B. C. and L. K. is Greatly Manifested AND THEIR Malice
and Envy DETECTED.

The Soul of the Wicked desires Evil; his Neighbor finds no favor in his
Eyes, Prove. 21.10. Wrath is cruel, and Anger is outrageous; but who is able to
stand before Envy? Prove. 27.4. Upright men shall be astonished at this, and the
Innocent shall stir up himself against the Hyprocrite. The Righteous also shall
hold on his way, and he that has clean hands shall be stronger and stronger.
But as for you all, do you return, and come now, for I cannot find one wise man
among you, Job 17.8, 9, 10. Printed by Andrew Soul, in the Year 1685.

To Faithful Friends (or others that make a Profession of Truth) unto whose
view the Pamphlet, called, The Libeller Characterized, has or may come.
Friends;
BEfore we give a particular Answer to the several parts of the forementioned
Pamphlet, we think it needful to give some Account both why we have for-born to
Answer in hitherto, and why we have undertaken to answer it now, and the rather
L. Key, (whose Name is to the greater part thereof) does in his second and
third Pages say, That the Observations and Queries made public, were long
since delivered to some of the formal Preachers in Reading, but no Answer given
to them. Now as for the Observations he mentions, we saw them not till they
were Printed. The Queries we acknowledge were sent to us in Manuscript,
enclosed in a Letter from him, bearing date the 7th of the 12th Month, 83. On
the 5th of the 1st Month following, Benjamin Coals (his Confederate in this
Work) had finished his Hue-and-Cry, ready to be made public, and on the 2d of
the 2d Month L. K. had concluded his whole Work for the Press, as by the
several Dates thereof appears: So that the time his Impatience complains of, as
long, was less then two Months, and it appears by the date of the Hue-and-Cry,
that there was preparation made for Printing soon after the Queries were sent
to us. And therefore if he urges our not answering his written Queries, as the
Ground or Reason of his Printing them, he dissembles, and is not plain. Now the
plain Reason why we did not answer those Queries of his at that time, was the
Injustice and unfair dealing we had met with from L. K. and some others that
took part with him; for besides his reading a Paper of his own against some of
us, he refusing, with his Company, to suffer an Answer to be read thereto, he
had before this sent a Letter to one of us, namely William Lamboll, to which W.
L. gave him an Answer in Writing, sealed, which Answer soon after L. K. had
received, he tore into pieces sealed as it was, without so much as looking into
it, to see or take notice what was written therein: Which rude, unreasonable
and unmanly Act of his (the Fruit of a froward peevish Mind, and of a
Headstrong ungoverned Will) made us think it not worth our while to write
Answers to be tore in pieces without being read. This was the Reason why we
then for-bore to answer his written Queries, which we willingly submit to the
Judgment of Truth in every honest Friend, whether he had not thereby given just
cause so to do? And we leave it to the Witness of God in every upright Heart,
whether L. K's publishing what he has done to the World, does not proceed from
the Spirit of the World, and savor more of Strife and Envy, than of Peace and
true Christian Charity? And whether he has not hereby added a further proof of
Friends Charge against them of the same Spirit with himself, namely, that they
are the first Publishers of Differences in Print. -- And if any should
question, Why we have not answered the Pamphlet sooner after it was printed?
Our answer is, (his Impatiency considered) we therein followed them wise man's
Counsel, Prove. 26.4. we were not willing to be hasty upon him with an Answer,
but to give him time to consider at leisure of that which he had hastily and
forwardly done, desiring (if it would have been) that he and all others
concerned with him in Speaking, Writing and Printing against the Truth and
People of the Lord, might have received in themselves that sentence of
Condemnation that is due to their evil undertaking, that from a sense thereof
they might have repented of what they had done, and of their own accord have
called in their envious and naughty Pamphlet; but instead thereof, after we had
waited some Months, finding the said L. K. to be very busy and forward in
spreading his mischievous Pamphlet abroad in City and Country, and observing
him to grow more confident, lofty, exalted and conceited than before, and
having of late received from him another Paper in Writing (and of like tendency
with what he has Printed, in which he presses earnestly for an Answer) but it
being not made public, shall take no more notice of it here) but say as we
said before, observing him still to grow more confident, lofty, etc. We
remembered what the Wise Man said, Prove. 26.5. For which cause partl^, but
principally for the sakes of such, who through weakness, and want of due
consideration, may upon the first view of his Queries and Observations,
according as they are represented by him, be in danger of being misled to think
otherwise of things then in truth they really are, or that by our altogether
being silent, any should conclude what L. K. has written is justly charged
upon us, the following Answer is now made public by us,

Reading, the 25th of the 2d Month, William Lamboll, John Buy.

THE False Characterizers Hue-and-Cry stopped, etc.
Benjamin Coal and Leonard Key;
WE have read and examined your railing Pamphlet, which you call The Libeller
Uncharacterized, or a Hue-and-Cry sent after him, etc. In the first Page whereof,
and in several other parts of it you charge some whom you call An envious
Person, or Persons, with abusing several honest men, by sending great Packets
by Post, thereby. as you say, not only putting them to considerable Charges,
but also abusing several with scurrilous Language and Falsehood. What have been
sent by Post to you or others, of what Contents, or from whom, we neither know,
nor think our selves concerned to enquire; sure we are you never received any
such from us: And if any such Packets have been sent you by any Body else, it
seems (so far as we can gather from your Words) to have been some of your own
printed Books, or Papers, that have been written and published by your selves,
or some of your partakers, and have been returned to you again; for you mention
printed Books writ upon between the Lines, and wrapped up in a blank piece of
Paper. And surely if it were so, it is strange you should send forth a Hue-and
Cry after him that helped you to your Goods again. Men use to send the
Hue-and-Cry after him that takes away their Goods, not after him that finding
them straggling abroad, sends them home again. And as for scurrilous Language
and Falsehood, you speak of; if that be it which you have printed in your 5th
and 7th Pages, who-ever shall impartially view your Work throughout your Book,
may clearly see who the envious Person is, and whose the scurrilous Language
is. For what Page is there in your whole Pam^hlet, that does not show forth
both your Envy and Scurrilousness? The Person that sent you your Books again,
is called in your Pamphlet [formal Apostate] no less than five times in three
Pages: envious Person, treacherous Person, Night Wanderer, one that cheats Men,
little less than picking their Pockets, false Tongue, one that like Lucifer
thinks to make his Nest among the Stars. This sort of Language is to be found
in your Pamphlet. And whether this be Scurrilous or no, let all that read it
judge? And also, whose Tongue has been most at Liberty? and who have spoken as
though their Tongues were their own, without fear and regard? How often do you
call that Person you are so angry with, (for sending you Packets written
between the Lines of your Book) Libeller? It Is the title, and common strain of
your Pamphlet, Libeller, Libeller: But who-ever it be that you mean, why do you
so often call him Libeller? Is it only because he set not his Name to the
Packets, you say he sent you? We can find no other Reason you give in your
Pamphlet, but this: And this you seem to give over and over, and call him so
often the nameless Author, as if ye feared you should have wanted Matter to
fill up your Sheet without it. And when you had thus vented your Enmity in part
against him, then you Quarrel about your Money (your fourteen and eighteen
Pence for Postage, as you say) and Wrangle about a Name, as though they were
the two main things that troubled you. But that will not cover you, for in your
7th Page you say, Observe, so many as have an Eye to him, are zealous for the
Form, etc. What! do you know who it is they that are zealous for the Form (as
you say) have an Eye unto, and yet do you not know his Name? Is not this an
hidden Work of Darkness, thus secretly to smite in the dark? But through all
your Coverings, the Light discovers you. You say in Postscript, Here Is a short
Description of him. (meaning the Person that sent home the Books.) A short
Description indeed, but a long Villification, and foul Reproach. In the 2d Page
thou sa^est, Benjamin, If this Libeller will come forth, and own his Work, he
shall have a fair hearing. But we must tell thee, if he have, thou and some
others must Repent, and amend first; for it is more then some of us can say we
have had from you, since you have gone into such Work as is here discovered.
Further thou say, This is to give notice, that whosoever (mark the Word,
Whosoever; you intended your Pamphlet it seems for all sorts of People) can
give certain Intelligence of his Name, and place of Residence or Habitation,
shall have reasonable satisfaction for his Pains. And yet in Postscript,
Leonard thou say, It is left to some that have made a great talk of their
inward sense, to make a further discovery of this nameless Author. What
sh^^^ing and juggeling is here between you? Is this the way you intend to ^a^e
(who call your selves honest men) first to say, Whosoever can give certain
Intelligence, shall have reasonable satisfaction; and afterward say, It is
left to some that have made a great talk of their inward sense to make a
further discovery? What, do you intend your Scoff at last shall be the
reasonable satisfaction for your p^omise you made at first? Is that reasonable?
Is this like honest men, as you are fain to call your selves? Is this like men
of understanding, which you are so desirous to be taken for? first to propose
it to whosoever, and then say it is left to some: One while to all, without
exceptions; and another while to some, and that with a limitation, to such as
have an inward sense: What silly contradiction is this; are not you now found
to be Libellers, who call the Person you write against, formal Apostate five
times over, without any show of proof thereof? And yet you say, You do not know
his Name, nor place of Habitation. Your work is seen by them that keep their
Habitation in the Light, to be a Work of Darkness, and the Fruit of Envy,
Strife and Contention are in your Hearts, Rage and Anger possesses your
Breasts; your Spirits fret, and are disquieted within you; Contradiction is
among you, and the line of Confusion stretched over you, for you are fighting
against that divine Power that will be too hard for you, and all that rise up
against it.

And now having thus far taken notice of the first Part of your Pamphlet, to
which thy Name Benjamin is subscribed, we shall go on to Answer the other part
also, to which thy Name Leonard is underwrit, or put. But in the way we take
notice, that between your two Parts, there is this Scripture set down, Ephesians.
5.11, 12. To which we say, that as a Testimony, That we have no fellowship with
your unfruitful Works of Darkness, we do reprove them; and because it is indeed
a shame to speak, as well as a grief to think of those things, which have been
done by some in secret, we do in Modesty forbear to mention them.

Now, Leonard, to being with thy Preamble to thy Queries, thou say, Here is
the Work of a formal Apostate manifested, and some Observations and Queries
made public, etc. Herein Leonard thou have said true; thy Work is indeed the
work of a formal Apostate, the Observations and Queries, which thou have made
public, do sufficiently manifest it so to be: For had thou not apostatized
from the Truth, and fallen from the living Power, and inward Virtue of it, into
a dry withered lifeless Formality, thou would never have published those
Queries and Observations which so directly tend to Reproach and Vilify the
People of God, and expose the holy Truth which they profess to the Scorn and
Contempt of every profane Reader. By thy self therefore, and out of thy own
Mouth, is thine own Work condemned to be the work of a formal Apostate, and
therefore to be the less regarded. However, we are willing to look through thy
Work, and manifest more particularly of what sort it is; thou joynest thy
Observations and queries together, saying, Some Observations and queries made
public, that was long since delivered to some of the formal Preachers in
Reading. Now Leonard, we make no question but by formal Preachers, thy flouting
Spirit means us two (for to us two thou know thou did send they Queries)
whom in a lofty, but empty conceit of thy self, being a powerful Preacher, thou
scornfully call formal Preachers; we see thy Sting (blessed be God) though
we do not feel it; Thy scornful Spirit reaches not our Life, which is above the
stroke of Envy. But Leonard, thou should have regarded, to have written
Truth, which herein thou have not done, for though it be true, that thy Queries
were delivered to us some time before they were made public, (which how long
it was, and why we did not answer them then, we have given the Reader account
before) yet that the Observations (which make up a great part of the Pamphlet)
were ever delivered to us before they were made public, is utterly untrue, as
thou thy self well know. And therefore in saying, Some Observations and
Queries made public, that was long since delivered to some formal Preachers in
Reading, thou have published a plain Falsehood, which perhaps is worse than to be
a formal Preacher: So that thy Work has but a bad beginning, and therefore thou
can not well expect it should have a good end.

Thy first Query is, Was not Peoples going from the Light and Spirit in their
own particulars many Ages since, the cause why so many forms of Prayers were
made to be said by the Church of England?

Answ. This Query most properly concerns the Church of England: what, and how
many forms of Prayers they have, for what cause, and upon what occasion made,
the Church of England is fittest to answer: Yet this we say, (and you may do
well to take notice of it) that the Form used in the Church of England, of
publishing their intentions of Marriage three times, and having a Certificate,
if either party live in another Parish, out-does, and condemns that loose
liberty, which some of thy Spirit have contended for, and appeared in. But
since thou mentionest Peoples going from the Light and Spirit in their own
particulars, we tell thee, It was they that went from the Light and Spirit of
God in their own particulars, many Ages since, tht went out from the true
Apostles and Church of Christ, into vain Janglings, Strife and Opposition, as
thou and others of thy Spirit have done. And if thou had not first gone from
the Light and Spirit in thy own particular, thou had never published this
your envious dark Pamphlet, the Work of a formal Apostate.

Qu. 2. And did not their Compelling, and using Violence to those that were
otherwise minded, proceed from the Spirit that made the Form?

Answ. This Query as well as the former, relates to the Church of England, who
may answer for themselves. Thy Snare is therein seen, and we may truly say of
thee what B. C. in page 2. suggests of some (as he says) asks Questions to no
purpose, except to stander and abuse men. Such is this Query of thine
concerning the Church of England's using Violence (which concerns not us more
than to suffer it, while others shrink from it.) If thou do not intend hereby
to insinuate, that the Quakers use Violence, then are thy Queries to no
purpose: And if thou do so intend, then are thy Queries to an ill purpose,
viz. to accuse, and not prove, to slander, abuse and bespatter, as R. C's words
are. Yet we do say, Persecution and Violence proceed from that Spirit that is
out of the Truth, which Spirit (as Jude testifies) wrought in some, in the
Apostle ^^^s, that went in the way of Cain, in Envy (which is the ground of
Persecution) as thou and thy Company have done in Printing, and spreading your
spiteful envious Books (a means) to raise up Persecution against Friends, and
in the way of Korah, to cast stumbling Blocks through your opposition and
gait-saying to the Work of Truth, and orderly Proceedings thereof in the Church
of Christ, which has so corrupted the Minds of some that they have appeared in
a light airy scoffing Spirit, which is both out of the form of Godliness, and
contrary to the true Liberty which is in Christ Jesus.

Qu. 3. Did not the Presbyterians, with their Church-Faith, and Directory that
they had made, do like the Church of England, when they had Power,
Excommunicate, and cast into Prison such as could not bow to their Image, which
they had set up?

Answ. What the Presbyterians have done, has been manifest, but what thou and
thy company have done, and are doing, some simple-hearted do not yet clearly
see; but the day has in a great measure to many, and we believe will more and
more discover of what sort your Work is, and what the tendency of it is, and
what Spirit you are of, who endeavor to fill weak and unstable Minds with evil
Surmizes, jealous Thoughts, which you, with subtilty and craft, insinuate into
them, to disaffect them to the work of Truth, and beget in them, first a slight
esteem thereof, and then an open opposition thereunto, in which your Enmity
against Goods Truth and faithful People, is no way short of the Presbyterians.
However, we observe, you here explain the Violence used by the Church of
England, to be Excommunicating and casting into Prison, of which some use may
be made hereafter.

Qu. 4. Did not the Baptists with their Form, which they did cry up, do like
the former? And has not all the Lo here is and Lo there is arisen when the
People in every Generation have gone from the Spirit's Teaching?

Answ. Whether the Baptists did do like the former, that is, Excommunicate and
cast into Prison, we cannot certainly resolve; but we think thou have little
Reason to reflect upon the Baptists, about their Form, considering how formal
and envious thou art thy self; for there was a time when some of them were
tender and conscientious to Godward, in the Practice of their Form; but thou
and thy Company are found in the Practice of a part or piece of a form (which
one of your company compared to your Marketting) in Strife and Opposition, and
whilst you are crying against all Forms; for have not some of your company
preached, That the Way of Truth is without Track, like the way of a Ship in the
Sea, and like the way of a Young man with a Maiden. Did not one of them say, If
there were no impression of Form left behind, he liked in well; And another,
That he consented to a Paper tht had some such words in it. And on the
contrary, have not some of you preached, That God is a God of Order, (as faith
the Apostle) in all the Churches of the Saints? And has this Order, in all the
Churches of the Saints, no form? Had not the Decrees that were sent by the
Saints from Jerusalem, (by which the Churches were established. a Form? And
were they not of Gods Order? Does not the Apostle say to Timothy, Hold fast the
Form of sound words, which thou have heard of me, 2. Tim. 1.13. And the things
that thou have heard of me among many Witnesses, the same commit thou to
faithful Brethren, who shall be able to teach others also, 2 Timothy 2.2. Does not
the same Apostle write to the Thessalonians, Therefore Brethren, stand fast,
and hold the Traditions which ye have been taught, whether by word, or our
Epistle, 2 These. 2.15. And again, Now we command you Brethren, in the Name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, that you withdraw your selves from every Brother that
walks disorderly, and not after the Traditions which he received of us, 2.
These. 3.6. Come (Leonard) consider seriously of these things: Were these things
which the Apostle exhorted to, and commanded, out of the way of Truth, or in
it? We think thou will not dare to say, it was out of the way of Truth. Well
then, if it was in the Way of Truth, was it without Track? Did it leave no
Impression of Form behind it? Was it like the way of a Ship in the Sea? How
then could it be holden fast? Now you that in words, for Contention sake, cry
out against the Lo here is and Lo there is, are not you in the Lo here is and Lo
there is, one while saying, God is the God of Order, as in all the Churches of
Saints, [There's one of your Lo here's] Another while saying, The way of Truth
is without Track, or like the way of a Ship in the Sea, which is as the way of
an Adultrous Woman that is without Order. [There's one of your Lo there is.]
Thus you are unstable, up and down, to and fro, tossed about like the Waves of
the Sea, divided between your own Lo here is, and your own Lo there is. The
Apostle, who abode in the Doctrine of Christ, which brought People off from the
Lo here is and Lo there is (but not from the Form of Godliness, for that he
directed Believers to) said, We see Jesus: And Christ said, While you have
Light walk in the Light, lest Darkness come upon you. Now had you seen Jesus,
and abode with him, who brings off from the Lo here is and Lo there is) and had
continued walking in his Light, by which you were enlightened, you had not been
found in such Darkness, Confusion and Contradiction, as this beforementioned,
which shows you are gone from the Spirit's Teaching.

Qu. 5. And has it not been so with all other Sects, when they have erred from
the Spirit, which was given to be for a Leader, and have runs into the setting
up of outward things, which have proved a snare in all Ages; read and set how
it was with! rael of Old, when they forsook the Lord, how did their Enemies
prevailover them? Let it be a warning to all in our days.

Answ. The beginning of this Query is, Has it not been so with all other
Sects, etc? So! How? So as it was with Baptists, Presbyterians and Church of
England, viz to compel and use Violence, by Excommunicating and casting into
Prison, as the second and third Queries express (for these Queries hang all one
upon another, and this thing of using Violence, Excommunicating and Casting
into Prison, is the vein that hitherto runs through them all.) Now to this we
say, We do not know that it has been so with all other Sects; There has been
other Sects. besides those thou have named, which have not used Violence, nor
cast into Prison, that ever we heard of; but thou speak of running into the
setting up of outward things, which thou say has proved a Snare in all Ages:
They that have erred from the Spirit are in the Snare, though they never set up
outward things; but otherwise to them that keep and dwell in the Spirit, the
setting up of outward things has not proved a Snare in all Ages. Thou runnest
too fast (Leonard) to see thy way; The Apostle Paul by the Spirit did set up
outward things; did he, think thou, set up a Snare? The setting up of
outward things in the Error from the Spirit, is denied; but the setting up of
outward things in and by the Spirit, never was a Snare in any Age, whatever the
Abuse of it afterward might prove. Thou biddest us read and see how it was with
Israel of old, when they forsook the Lord, but thou do not ^irect us where to
read and see it. As formal Preachers, as thou representest us to be, we can
both read and see that thou do not divide the Word aright here: Do thou
make no difference between setting of outward things, and forsaking the Lord?
Which then will thou stick to, that Paul did not set up outward things, or that
he therein forsook the Lord? That he did set up outward things, the Scripture
speaks fully. One Instance of many may be given from 1 Cor. 16. And 1st. where
speaking concerning the Collection for the poor Saints, he says, As I have
given Order to the Churches of Galatia, even so do ye. And then goes on to
direct the manner. What will thou say to this? Was not this the setting up of
an outward thing? Did he forsake the Lord in doing it? We hope thou will be
more considerate, and rather acknowledge thy own Error in confounding things
that differ. Thy instancing Israel of Old, to prove the setting up of outward
things a Snare in all Ages, is a very unapt comparison; for the Administration
and Worship of Israel of old stood most in outward things, set up by Moses, the
Servant of the Lord. It is true, when Israel forsook the Lord, their Enemies
did prevail over them, as your evil Surmizings against the Work of Truth, and
you perverse Wills (your Enemies) have prevailed over you, since you forsook
the Lord, and have set your selves in Opposition to what he has set up: And
did not he prove an Enemy to Israel, who set up a separate Altar at Bethel, in
subtle Policy to keep the ten Tribes from communion wi^h their Brethren, the
Children of Judah in Jerusalem, under a pretense that it was too much for them
to go thither, which indeed proved a Snare to them. And the made them a Feast,
like unto the Feast that was in Judah, but it was in a time of his own
devising. And so by rejecting Gods appointment, by going from that which God
had set up, and setting up a Form of their own devising, not of the Lords
ordering, but in opposition to that which he had set up, they became a Sect,
and so were scattered from the Lord and from his gathering. And now read your
selves in this, and let it be a warning to all concerned in our day.

Qu. 6. And now it is come to the formal Quakers turn, and are not they, with
all their strength and might they can get, in most places a setting up the form
that they have made, and giving it higher Names than any that has gone before:
And some have had the confidence to say, and preach openly, (that what they had
set up) was to keep things sweet and clean, notwithstanding many things have
happened amongst them in many places, which is a stink and a shame to mention,
yet calling them holy Orders, and such like names, as they, in their Imaginary
Minds, could think on, too much like the Golden Image that was set up in the
days of Daniel, which the Lord did and will confound.

Answ. This being a long Query, had need be answered in several parts. First,
thou say, Now it is come to the formal Quakers turn. The Formal Quakers are
in reality your selves, but we understand thy Speech, and know whom thou
meanest by formal Quakers, even the Ancient Brethren and Laborers in the Lords
Vineyard, with all the faithful Friends, that having held fast their Integrity
to the Lord, have stood and do stand VVitnesses in Gods Power, against the
deceitful creeping Spirit that has got an entrance and habitation among and in
you, and by and through you, endeavors to draw back the Lord's People from the
true Order of the Gospel, and from their diligent Care and Watchfulness over
themselves, and one another therein, into a false Liberty, and a licentious
Looseness: These are those thou Stigmatizes with the brand of formal Quakers.
And now thou say, It is come to the formal Quakers turn. What is this [It]
that is come to their turn, to use Violence, Excommunicate, east into Prison?
This is, and must be the sense of thy Words, if thy Words have any sense in
them: This String thou have harped on all along: This is it thou taxest the
Church of England with in thy second Query ( Compelling, and using Violence.)
In thy third, thou queriest, Whether the Presbyterians did not do like the
Church of England; which thou explainest to be Excommuncating, and cast into
Brison. In thy fourth, thou ask, Did not the Baptists do like the former,
which was to Excommunicate, and cast into Prison? In thy fifth, thou ask,
Has it not been so with all other Sects? which still relates to the same thing
( Excommunicating and casting into Prison) is come to the formal Quakers turn.
This is a false suggestion Leonard, and of an high Nature: Where Is thy proof?
Whom have those thou call the formal Quakers, cast into Prison? Whom have
they used Violence to? You and your Company's shutting Friends out of their
Meeting houses, and nailing up the Meeting house Door, looks somewhat like an
act of Violence on your parts to wards those you call formal Quakers. But what
act of Violence have they done to you? Whom of you have they cast into Prison?
Is not this suggestion of thine an horrible Slander? Is not this Libelling?
What else is this, but as B. C. says in your Pamphlet, to have an unbridled
Tongue, tht will accuse, and not prove, and ask Questions to no purpose, except
to slander and abuse men? Besides, we cannot but take notice how slily thou
do link together Excommunicating, and casting into Prison, as if they were
alike evil, alike to be avoided and condemned: This savours of a loose Spirit,
that would tolerate all disorderly and scandalous Persons in the Church, have
none cast out, how corrupt soever, which is the design of the wicked One,
against which God's faithful People in all Ages have watched and warred, and at
all times under every Dispensation, as occasion has offered, and need
required, have used and exercised that just and necessary Power, which God has
always invested them with, of disowning, and casting out, and testifying
against whatsoever was hurtful and scandalous to the Body; and this, how
grievous soever it be to you, always will be, as it always has been in the
true Church. And whereas thou ask, Are not they (whom thou scornfully
ca^lest formal Quakers) with all their Strength and Might, etc. setting up the
Form that they have made, etc. and giving it higher Names then any that have
gone before. -- We answer, Nay; there is in these Words of thine, a base
Insinuation: For neither have Friends made a Form, nor are they setting up any
Form, but what the Power of god leads into; nor do the use Strength and Might
outwardly, muchless are they getting all the Strength and Might they can in
most places, as thou most falsely and enviously suggests, to set up any other
Form but tht the Spirit of the living God in and through his People has set
up, as to his divine Wisdom, seemed most advantageous and serviceable for his
Truth and People, and by the strength and might of his own eternal Arms of
Power, he hitherto has maintained, and will maintain and preserve it against
all the poisonous Darts of every envious Tongue. Thou say, Some have had the
Confidence to say, and Preach penly, That what We neither set up nor contend
for any Form, but what the Spirit and Power of God leads into, and justifies in.
THEY had set up, was to keep things sweet and clean: Notwithstanding many
things (thou say) have happened amongst them in many places, which is a
Stink, and a shame to mention, etc. In this we believe thou slanderest those
[Some] thou speak of: Who-ever said or preached openly, or privately, that
what THEY had set up, was to keep things sweet and clean; this sounds like
Truth, but like one of thy slanderous Suggestions. We own no Form or Order of
Men's setting up, any further then men are or may be Instruments in the Lords
hand. The holy God by his holy pure Spirit, has set up his own holy Order in
and among his People, and the end of it is to keep things sweet and clean, and
that is the Reason the unclean Spirit in you rages so against it, and them that
stand up for it. And it any thing has happened, which is a shame to mention thou
Leonard, if thou had not been past Shame, might have been ashamed to have so
much as hinted it, knowing whom it will gratify, and also considering how it
has been, and is with many of that Party thou appears an Advocate for. Thou
go on, and say, Yet calling them holy Orders, etc. It Is thou, and you
that in your scoffing flouting Spirit use to talk of holy Orders, etc. We say
God is an holy God, and he is the god of Order, and the Order which he is the
God of, and has set up in his Church, is an holy Order. They that love
Holiness, love it: They tht are for Unholiness and Looseness, contend against
it. And Leonard, had not Envy blinded thy Eye, and strangely clouded thy
Understanding, even as a Man, thou would not have published thy Weakness and
Folly, as thou have done in this matter. If any thing has happened amiss among
those that profess the Name of the Lord, does that prove either tht the order
of Truth established amongst us, is not Holy, or has not a tendency to keep
things sweet and clean? Is the Scripture of Truth, or the Spirit of God e're
the less holy, because some unholy Professors of it don't observe it, but walk
contrary to it? Did not the holy Ghost in the Apostles days, set up an holy
Order in the Church of Christ? Was not the intent of it to keep things sweet
and clean, and from running into Disorder? Yet too many things happened among
them that bore the Christian Name then, which were a shame to mention: What!
then does it therefore follow, that they fault was in the Order, or in the
setting up of the Order? Nay, rather is it not manifest and certain, that the
Fault was in those loose disorderly spirits, that like thee and thy Party,
would not be subject to Truth's Order, but rejected it, and walked contrary to
it? Thou persuest thy evil suggestion, and say, That this which thou have
mentioned of setting up Forms, calling them holy Orders, etc. is too much like
the golden Image that was set up in the days of Daniel, which the Lord did,
and will confound. But Leonard, was that which thou in derison call the
Quakers Form, and Holy Orders, ever set up under the Penalty of being cast into
a fiery Furnace (or under any outward Penalty) as the Image was in Daniel's
days? Have not thou herein showed thy self to have too much Ignorance, as well
as too much Envy? Besides, they that set up the Image in the days of Daniel,
were such as had not believed on, nor known the true and living God: But they
whom thou abusest under the Name of formal Quakers, do both know him, and are
led and ordered by him even in those things that relate to Godliness and
Christian Charity among them as a Religious People; So here they Comparison is
Lame, as well as Malicious. And it is not thy crying against Forms in general,
and comparing us with others in their Formality, that will cover, or excuse
thee and thy party in your unbridled liberty. Have thou forgotten how the same
Spirit of Opposition in Truth's Enemies, did appear, and strive and work
against Truth and Friends in the beginning, much after the same manner as now
it appears, works and strives in thee and others, against Truth an the Friends
thereof? For after Truth had been declared, and many convinced, and made a
Profession of it, then some turned from it again, and run out into a corrupt
Liberty, and therein brought forth such things as are indeed a shame to
mention, and a grief to the truly Religious to think on: And then the Enemies
of Truth appeared against the Work of Truth, bringing up those bad Actions,
which had been brought forth by some that had made a Profession of Truth, and
stung them at Friends, saying, These are the Fruits of your new Light, etc.
just as you have done against the Work of Truth now, by saying, where any have
gone into bad Actions, These are the Fruits of your new Orders. And thus you
have judged and condemned the Order, because of the disorderly walkings of
some; as those in the beginning condemned the Light, because of the bad Actions
of some that professed it: And here with Truth's old Enemies you have joined,
and have set up an imaginary false envious Judgment against Truth, which God
confounded in those before, and is also confounding in you: And look to it in
time, before it be too late, lest you also be confounded in and with it.

Qu. 7. And does not many of the formal Preachers sit with their Hats on, when
many of the Lord's Servants are moved to Pray?

Answ. No; those thou scornfully call formal Preachers, do not sit with
their Hats on when the Lord's Servants are moved to Pray; but it is when such
as are not the Servants of the Lord (whatever they may pretend) but his great
Enemies, take upon them to Pray, That those thou call formal Quakers, sit
with their Hats on, as a Testimony against that envious and contentious Spirit,
in which such undertake to pray. The Lords Servants are such as are ruled by
him, and are found in his Work and Service, which is not a work of Strife and
Division, as you have been, and are found in. David says, If I regard Iniquity
in my Heart, the Lord will not hear my Prayer. But have not you regarded that
Spirit of opposition and W. Roger's, and other pernicious Books brought forth
by it (works of Iniquity) so heeply in your hearts, that you will rather deny
us all, than you will give judgment against those work of Iniquity; Nay, have
not some of your Company been found in the like practice of keeping on the Hat,
which thou so frowardly condemnest others for? And those of you that put off
your Hats when such as you call formal Quakers and formal Apostates, Pray, do
not you therein act Hypocrisy? Is this the Liberty of Conscience you make such
a brawling for, to join in Prayer with those you have rendered formal Preachers,
formal Apostates, Setters up of Forms of men's making, etc? Are not you herein
found bowing at that which you clamor so loud against? And is not this vile
Hypocrisy and base Dissimulation, to seem to own the Fruit to be good, even
while you are rendering the Tree so bad?

Qu. 8. And does not many others imitate them in that ungodly Practice? so that
it maybe said, as it was in times past, like Priest, like People; which is a
trouble to many, and a stumbling block to the weak that behold it? And may it
not be said, as in times past, The Teachers of the People have caused them to
err?

Answ. If the weak sees any imitating an ungodly Practice, they are weak indeed
that will hurt themselves with that they see to be Ungodly. And it seems it is
those that are in the Imitation, that are a trouble to many, and a stumbling to
the weak, not those that are in Reality. And so, thy secret smiting does not
reach us; but if the weak stumble and fall, it will lie at your Doors who have
joined to and followed that Spirit of Opposition and Contention (and those in
it) that has caused Division, and done Mischief. And you that have falsely and
maliciously rendered the Ancient and Honorable in the Truth, Apostates,
Innovators, and Incliners to Popery; whereby you have corrupted the minds of
some, and given an occasion of stumbling unto many: it is not your telling of
Hats, nor your sometimes using good Words, and fair Speeches to beguile the
Weak and Unstable, that will cover you much longer. And can thou expect
Leonard, any should think that thou have any regard to the Weak, who in your
malicious Pamphlet in Print, have laid so many Stumbling Blocks in their way?

Qu. 9. And do not some of the formal Preachers send great Packets by the Post,
directed to honest Men in the Country, without any Name to them, on purpose to
put them to Charge?

Answ. If any such Packets have been sent, they that sent them best knows the
occasion and reason of sending them; we are strangers to it. How come thou to
suppose they were sent by formal Preachers, seeing thou do not know who sent
them? May thou not be as much out in being so positive that they were
directed to honest men in the Country to put them to charge, as thou art in
supposing they were sent by some of us whom thou call formal Preachers in
Reading (for to us whom thou call'st so mal Preachers in Reading thy Queries
were first directed and sent, before they were printed, as thou say in page
3. And in the written Copy thou sentest us, they are directed to be answered
by any in Reading) so that it seems as if thou had thought the Packets had
been sent by some of us in Reading. But if so, thou were out, for we sent no
such Packets; nor do we think any body would send Packets by the Post, on
purpose to put honest men to charges (as thou B. C. often suggestest) without
any other reason. But were not the Packets you speak of, your own Books that
you have printed and spread about the Countries? And have not you, and W. R.
and others of your Company, expended a great deal of Money in printing and
spreading your malicious spightful and conceited Books? And although you have
been at so much pains and charge to do Mischief, we never heard, you thought
much or complained of that; so that we may well think, your clamor about the
charge of Postage, is rather to vent your bitter Minds against those you call
formal Preachers, than for parting with your Money, which at the highest
Reckoning you have set down, amounts not to above 3 s. 8 d. But it is most
likely, it is your state and condition opened unto you in what was written upon
those Books, or in those Packets you speak of, that has so much disquieted
you, tho now you go about to place it upon the charge, it may be, thinking that
may have the fairest show in it, to carry off your work with a show of Justice
in your Complaint; but that Covering is too narrow.

Qu. 10. And are these the Fruits of a Christian Spirit, or from them that are
apostatized from it? Let any that have any understanding of the things of God
judge.

Answ. We don't think it the fruit of a Christian Spirit for any to send great
Packets by Post on purpose to put honest men to charge; neither is it at all
likely the Packets you speak of were sent on purpose to put any of you to
charge. To us it seems far more probable, that whoever sent the Packets you
mention, had a better end and purpose in sending them, than to put honest men
to charge. But you should do well to consider what Fruit of a Christian Spirit
you have showed in taking occasion from this 3 s. 8 d. charge to publish your
envious and scandalous Pamphlet to the World, thereby, as much as in you lies,
making the Truth a Scorn, and the Professors of it a Reproach, and a Byword to
the Ungodly and Profane, whom you have feasted with your own Folly. Is this
the Fruit of a Christian Spirit? Let any that have any understanding of the
things of God judge, whether you have not preferred your 3 s. 8 d. before the
honor of god, and the Prosperity of his blessed Truth? Had you been of a
Christian Spirit, you would have valued the honor and Reputation of Truth
above Three Shillings and Eight Pence. But your opposing the good Order of
Truth, your Writing, Printing, Publishing to the World your Malicious
Scandalous Books and Pamphlets, your shutting Friends out of their
Meeting House, and denying them their Rights and Properties, are such Fruits as
sufficiently demonstrate to all that have an Understanding of the things of
God, what Spirit you are of.

Qu 11. And have not you, according to your Power, been like them before
mentioned, considering your standing, in giving bad Names, both in your Prayers
and also Preaching, calling such, dark Spirits (that could not join with you
about your Forms) and that they were gone in the way of Cain, etc. when you
know in your Consciences that many that you so brand, are blameless, both in
Life, Conversation and Doctrine?

Answ. If by [them before mentioned] thou meanest the Church of England,
Presbyterians, etc. thou should remember, thou chargest them in thy second
and third Queries, with using Violence and casting into Prison, which thou
know in thy Conscience we have not done, and therefore not like them. And
whether they give bad Names in their Prayers and Preaching we know not; but we
know whom thou art like in thy fly Suggestions of Slander and Falsehood. What
those Forms are that thou have so o ten reflected upon us for, thou have not
yet particularly mentioned; so thy general Clamor does but beat the Air: Thou
seem to run against all Forms, without distinction, as some others of thy
company have done; one saying, The way of Truth is without Track; and another
said, It was like the way of a Young man with a Maiden. And if there be no
Impression of Form left behind, one liked it well; though it be contrary to the
Scriptures of Truth, where the Apostle bids Timothy, hold fast the form of
sound Words, And if such of you as have (...) these things, and the like, be
called dark Spirits, we think you have no cause to be offended thereat; for
none but dark Spirits would ever have broached or held such dark things as
these; nor do we know or believe such to be blameless in Doctrine (to say
nothing of their Conversation) that hold such dark Doctrines as these. Do
thou think him blameless in Doctrine, that holds the Way of Truth to be like
the Way of a Ship in the Sea, and the way of a young Man with a Maider, which
the Scriptures compare to the way of an Adultrous Woman? Is this blameless
Doctrine, or the Doctrine of dark Spirits? Dark Spirits indeed you are, who are
gone from the Light of Christ Jesus in your selves, and are joined to the
Spirit of Darkness, which has prevailed over you. So that what the Apostle
said with joy to the Ephesians, Ye were sometimes Darkness, but now are ye
Light in the Lord, may with grief be turned backward upon some of you, unto
whom it may be as truly said, Ye were sometime in some measure Light in the
Lord, but now Darkness is come over you again, and your Spirits are become
dark. And though ye retain a Notion of the Light and Spirit to talk of, and
deceive by yet the Work thereof you resist, and set your selves, in your dark
Minds, to oppose and revile what is brought forth thereby. And the ENVEY you
have manifested, plainly shows you are going into the way of Cain. And the
calling such Dark Spirits, is not giving bad Names, but giving suitable Names
to bad things. But surely if you had intended to charge others with giving bad
Names, you should have forborne to have given so many bad Names your selves, as
your Pamphlet, in almost every page is stuffed with.

Qu 12. And was it not the Elders of Israel in days that are past, that gave
unrighteous judgment, and did condemn the Innocent? And has it not been so in
our days? witness the Paper that was signed by sixty six against their Innocent
Brethren in the North? And may not the same Cry be sounded in this our day, as
it was then in the Ears of many, Return, Return to the place of Judgment, even
to the Principle that was first preached, which was the first, and will be the
last?

Answ. If the Story of Susanna in the Apocrypha be true, it was the Elders of
Israel (but in Babylon, mark that by the way) that in days past gave
unrighteous Judgment, and did condemn the Innocent. But what then? thou ask,
Has it not been so in our days? We answer, No: In our days the Youngsters,
and many loose raw Lads have taken upon them to give unrighteous Judgment
against the Elders, and have condemned the Innocent, witness the Westmoreland
and Wiltshire Papers, and thine, and others Papers and Books, since your
opposition began. Had those thou call Innocent Brethren in the North, been
truly Innocent, they would have committed their cause to the Lord, and to the
Judgment of Truth in his People, and not have used such subtle ways and
politic means (with the help of others) to cover themselves, as they did,
witness the Remonstrance out of Westmoreland, and J. S. and J. W. their
fallacious Paper of Condemnation. The which Paper J. S. did seemingly, fully
and plainly acknowledge to Friends at London, but when he came into the
Country, a Friend of his, (or rather an Enemy) told him (in the hearing of one
of us) it looked as though he had recanted; whereupon he recanted indeed, that
is, he denied again what before he had acknowledged, by devising subtly to
put other meanings to his former words. But how comes it (Leonard) that after
you have villified the sixty six as Apostates, and the number of the Beast, and
such as have gone in the way of Cain, that now thou countest them Elders of
Israel, especially considering how slightingly and scornfully you use to speak
concerning Eldership, rendering it as Popery, etc. Had thou, and others of
you, kept to the first Principle, you might have been preserved out of that
evil Spirit which has led you to do so much Mischief as you have done, for
which you must not only return to the place of Judgment, but also feel the
weight of Judgment, if ever you come to receive mercy.

Qu. 13. When David kept to the Spirit's Teaching, did he not say, O Lord! thou
have made me wiser thon all my Teachers? and this taught him to order his
Conversation aright; and it is the same at this day, and will remain forever.

Answ. Had thou kept to the Spirit's Teaching, it would have taught thee to
be wiser than to write a Query (or rather an Assertion) to no purpose, except
to show that thou think thy self wiser than all thy Teachers. We could wish
thou were wise enough to see thy self, and some of them that join with thee in
this thy pernicious Work, which you had never run into, had you kept to the
Spirit's Teaching. But being gone from the Spirit's teaching in your selves,
and having set up your own Imaginations in the room of it, you are grown heady,
high-minded, and hardy, to oppose and speak evil of what the Spirit teaches,
and leads others into.

Qu. 14. And is not the Lord God, who has an All seeing Eye, appeared and made
known himself in this our day, for this very end, according to his Promise, to
gather a People to himself, from all the Lo here is and Lo there is, etc. and all
such as they, abide under his teaching, need go no more forth, etc?

Answ. That the Lord God is appeared, and has made known himself in this our
day, according to his Promise, to gather a People to himself, this is certainly
true; and had thou kept to that which gathers, thou might have been
gathered, and kept near unto the Lord, and then thou would not have been
found going forth in such an unadvised scattering Work as this that thou have
published. But that which has been a loss to thee, and others that join with
thee, was, your not waiting singly upon the Lord, to feel his heavenly Motion,
that so you might have followed him withersoever he goes, and into whatsoever
he leads. But you have run with a Lo here into the Desert, where Dryness and
Barrenness has taken hold of you, and Withering and Death is come and coming
upon your, for which our Souls lament over you.

And now (Leonard) having answered all thy Queries, we shall not need to say
much to thy Observations, in which there is little but what has been spoken to
already. Yet we cannot but take notice how thou shufflest in thy Answer, about
shutting Friends out of their Meeting Houses, which it seems was mentioned in
three particulars in some of the Packets thou speak of.

To the first, of shutting the Quarterly men's Meeting out of the House at
Blewbery, thy Answer is, If is were so, the Friends at Blewbery can give the
best Account why it was so. Thou need not have said, [if it were so] 'twas
too notorious to be denied or doubted; for they kept the Meeting House door
fast locked, and refused to let Friends have the Key, although two Friends went
the Evening before tht if possible they might have prevailed with them, to have
lot Friends meet in the Meeting House, as formerly, and they to meet with them;
but instead of that they shut Friends out, and the most of them went to your
separate Meeting at Reading, the which was wilfully proposed and resolutely
carried on by you at the Quarterly Meeting before at Oar, contrary to your
usual course, and contrary to the Minds of the most of Friends that were
present at the said Meeting. And the best account thou or thy Friends at
Blewberry can ever give of so bad an Action, must needs be a bad one. Thou
say, It is a sign they were a weary of such company, which made it their
business to brawl and contend against honest men, etc. Brawling and Contention
has been your chief business in those Meetings for some years, and we have
hardly ever found you weary of that; but for them that are gone from the Life
and Power of Truth, to be weary of the company of such as keep in it, is no
great wonder. It Is the next Instance of A. Eastmed's nailing up their
Meeting House door at Calne, so that Friends were fain to meet in the Street.
Thou say, Whether it were so, or no, I shall leave it, it being without the
compass of my Knowledge; but do wish he had not as much ground for what he did
as they had at Blewbery. This is but a poor simple shift (Leonard) and it is
greatly to be questioned whether thou have not belyed thy own Knowledge, or
have some Equivocation or-mental Reservation in thy Answer. However we observe
these Actions are so black, that though you love to do them, you do not love to
hear of them, nor are at all able to justify them. The Lord give you a sight
of your selves, and a sense of what you are, and have been doing; for of a
Truth, the persecuting Spirit is entered you, and these are some of the Fruits
of it. Have not Friends of late (if not at this very day) been kept out of
their Meeting Houses, and their Meeting House doors nailed up by the Worlds
People? And have not you done the like, and led them the way thereto? See now
how you and the World have joined together in one and the same Spirit, to do
one and the same thing against Friends. Thus by your Fruits your Spirit is
judged, and found to be the same with the Persecuting Spirit of the World. But
(say thou) What Is all that to B. C 's Answer? It Is to B. C. and all the rest
of you, tht are liked together in that Spirit of PERSECUTION, and have joined
hand in hand, in a Confederacy against the Righteous. But if thou would have
something that more particularly hits him, the other Instance does it; The
shutting the Women's half years Meetings out of the Meeting House at Reading
(which several of them had a Right in) which was his Act, and which it seems
thou durst undertake to defend him in. But because the Women friends being shut
out of the Meeting House, were fain to meet in a Mault-house, thou scornfully
playest upon that, in a frothy jeering Spirit, saying, I confess that was
hardly well taken by those that came from London and other place, to help to
settle the Government of the Women's Meeting. And again, But he need not be so
much offended with the Mault-house, for it is no such inferior place to sit in
at ^ummer. So here is Cain and Ishmael, the Persecutor and the Scoffor found
together among you, by which we hope, all Friends will judge what Spirit you
are of. -- And in the same flouting strain thou go on, for when upon your
shutting Friends out of their Meeting house, it was queried, Is this your
Liberty of Conscience? Thou scoffingly answerest, Surely the Women in the
Mault-house in Reading, there met and assembled together, might have brought
forth as good Edict as they did that met at Barbados. Thus, without fear or
wit, have thou run on in a scornful, scoffing, frothy, loose Spirit, uttering
many unsavory light Expressions, without Solidity or Weight, which shows thou
art departed from the Fear of the Lord, and (art become Unsavory Salt, the end
of which thou may read, Matthew 5. ver. 13.) have no Bridle to thy Tongue.

And in many places your Pamphlet abounds with Scurrilous Language, Bad Names,
and Reviling Terms, flowing from that Gaul of Bitterness and Rancour of Mind
that lodges in you against the Innocent. And as this on the one hand shows
your Envy, so your straining so often for ocasion to call your selves Honest
Men (such of you as pretend to have Packets sent you) which you do at least
eight times over, is a plain demonstration of your Folly. The Wise man would
have taught you better, Proverbs 27.2.

Now having Answered plainly, without fear (of you) or flattery, the most
material Passages in your Pamphlet, and cleared our Consciences to you, we have
done with you at present, till further occasion be given. Yet in that Christian
Spirit that can pray for Enemies, we heartily desire that God will be pleased,
if it stand with his Determination, to give you yet an Eye to see, and an Heart
to Repent of the Mischief you have, and are yet doing. This is our sincere
desire, who are

Lovers of Truth, Righteousness and good Order, And Friends to all that are
found therein, William Lamboll, John Buy.

THE END.

