The Case of Thomas Bushel Esquire
MAster Bushel, according to his obligations of duty and particular
engagement, to put in practice his Master the Lord Chancellor Bacons
conceptions, concerning Minerals and Minerals discoveries, made his first
adventure in Wales, where his experience verified his Masters Theory, and his
success answering his expectation, he (according to the advice of his Lord,
from whose deep foresight in future events he had received that command, and
urged by the inconveniences which attended his taking up money in London, and
returning it thence to pay his Workmen, and the charge of returning it back to
London) contracted with his late Majesty, that in care he should find any
quantity of Silver in cutting, through the five mountains nominated to Mr.
Bushel by the Lord Bacon, he should have a Mint to coin it, which Mr. Bushel
did, had his Mint established, and coined considerable sums weekly.

But the wars in England survening, His Majesty's commands called him from
those Mines (which yielded him above 4000 l.per an. and relieved many hundreds
of poor people, that were employed in those works) to attend his Majesty's more
immediate service* How his Comportment ^^erein answered the trust reposed in
him by His Majesty, His Majesty's attesta^ion under his Royal hand and seal
will sufficiently evidence: although there are many other services performed by
him, both to the King and Queen which are not mentioned therein.

His Majesty, in consideratien of his Loyalty, and the vast debts he daily
contracted for his service, was pleased (with ^he advice of his Council) to
grant him under the great Seal, the Customs of Lead for 2^, years at the yearly
rent of 6000 l. But the Parliaments victory over His Majesty's forces soon
defeated him of the possession of them; as the wars before had outed him of the
Silk-office, which was erected upon the complaint of the S^^k weavers, to
prevent the false dying of Silk; all Silk, both before and after it was dyed,
being to be brought to the said Office, and 6 d, per Pound by their voluntary
offer to be paid for it, one two pence whereof was to be divided between Mr.
Bushel and Mr. Carleton, to support the great charge of the said Office and
the remaining 4 d* was reserved for His Majesty, who finding of what importance
the Mines would be, both to His Majesty and Kingdoms, if the rich veins in
other mount^^ns were pursued like those in Wales, was pleased to allow Mr.
Bushel the disposing of the said 4 d. upon such mineral works, as the Lord
Bacon had designed for trial, he giving a just account of his Receipts and
Disbursements to the Lord Warden of the Stanneries, and the Lord Mayor of
London for ^he time being, but the wars intervening, deprived him of the
benefit of both: Nor since His Majesty's happy Restoration can he be admitted
to eit^er, although the one be assigned by him, for the payment of his debts to
Widows and Orphans, and contracted for His Majesty's servi^^ and the other for
a general good to take off the Taxes of the people, if Providence add a
blessing to his endeavors.

His Majesty was pleased to entrust him with the command of Lundy Island, where
he received ^^eral summons from diverse of the Parliament Officers, but still
refused to yield it without His Majesty's Royal consem by word of mouth at
Caussam, (whither Mr. Bushel had a safe conduct from Sir Thoma^ Fairfax)
although formerly invited to it by His Majesty's Letter, And then he gave it up
to Sir Thomas Fairfax, (who was the Parliaments General) and the Lord Say, (who
was the proprieto^ of the Island) upon Articles, which being formerly violated,
and he contrary to the teno^ of them arreste^, he put in Bail, and his Bail
being afterward prosecuted by one Snellock, the said Snellock was committed for
his contempt, the Articles con^^med by an Ordniance of the Lords and Commons in
Parliament in the year 1647. although he could never be restored to his Estate,
according to the intent of them.

The several revolutions there distracted Kingdoms suffered afterward, still
deprived Mr Bushel of the justice he ought to expect as his due; so that he
resumed his mineral Profession, and coming about three years since to London,
to settle some business in order to his proceedings in mineral discoveries,
notwithstanding he was still injuriously debar^ed of his Estate, he was
(contrary to his Articles) arrested, dangerou^ly wounded, and committed a clo^^
Prisoner to Newgate, under which restraint he lay ever since, until upon his
Petition to the Lords the last Parliament, he was relieved by their Order to
attend their Lordships de die in diem. But no sooner was the Parliament
adjourned, but one Crofts, Edney, and Ogden an Attorney slighting and openly in
disdainful language ^^lifying and despising the said Order, sued the Sheriffs
for an Escape, whereupon he was again clapped up a close Prisoner in the same
Newgate: But upon his Petition to the Lords at their reassembling, their
Lo^dships were pleased to order the commitment of those Creditors, but the
sudden dissolution of that Parliament frustrated Mr. Bushel of the benefit of
the said Order.

The same Creditors at whose suit he is now a Prisoner, did in Cromwels time
subscribe to take five in the hundred; nor do they aim now so much at the
satisfaction of their debt, as to serve the avarice of others, (with whom they
are combined) who have intruded into Mr. Bushells Estate, and now seek by this
oppression to deprive him of all means to recover his Rights, which they have
wrested out of his hands: One Jones having now a Mine of Mr. Bushells, which he
has kept from him many years, worth 700 l. per an. and that for nothing almost.

Nor is the debt to Crofts so just as is pretended, being for Commanders and
Soldiers clothes, in which the said Mr. Bushel was cheated with Copper
instead of Silver Lace.

Mr. Bushel humby conceives hereupon, that the relief their Lordships shall
afford him will be a high Justice to their late and present Majesty's, their
Lordships own Honor, and the whole Nation in general.

For if a Person that has done their Majesty's such Signal services shall have
no other Monument then a loathsome Jail, it cannot but cast an unhandsome
reflection on their Majesty's: What his services to his late Majesty were, and
what His Majesty's Resentment of them was, does appear by his Royal
Attestation.

For his service to His present Majesty, he humbly refers himself to His Royal
Breast; only this he must take the boldness to say, That by the intelligence
which at a dear Rate he purchased, and gave His Majesty of a design laid by
Cromwell and his cursed Fraternity, to destroy both His Majesty and the Duke of
York, he was one of the Principal Instruments of the happiness, these Kingdoms
now enjoy in their restored Prince.

What a Justice it will be to their Lordships own Honors, will be no hard
matter to conjecture: For, if Articles made by their General, and Confirmed by
the Parliament, and Orders in pursuance of them be so easily violable; a great
diminution and contempt both of their Honor and Authority will necessarily
follow, especially in such a Case as this: For Mr. Bushel could not be so
stupidly insensible of his own engagements, as to have adventured himself among
so many Creditors, but that he conceived himself secured by the Honor of a
Parliament, which he had received in Hostage for the performance of his
Articles.

What a Justice it will be to the Nation in general, may be concluded from his
constant endeavors (which have not been without Eminent success) to promote
the honor and profit of it, enriching it by discovering its Subterranean
Treasure, and employing many poor people who are now ready to starve for want
of him: Nor are the Mines in a better condition, those that have injuriously
extorted them out of his hands, not knowing how to work them; So that they now
lie useless and unprofitable, being buried in their own Ruins; and that he is
able to restore them may be easily Credited from his first reducing them from a
ruder Chaos to such a perfection, as that of the Silver extracted out of Lead,
he Coined a 100 l. a week.

Nor have the Eclipses he has suffered in his fortunes (to a total deprivation
of them) had any influence on his Industry, which has still continued
indefatigable. Witness the Recovery of a Work at Row-Pits on Mendyppe in the
County of Summerset, formerly deserted (by reason of the abundance of water) by
Sir Bevis Bulmar, which Mr. Bushel is so confident, that he will be content to
forfeit all his Grants both of the Mines, Mint, and Customs of Lead, and to
suffer death as the greatest Traitor and Imposter, if in two years time he does
not out of that drowned work and other discoveries of his own, raise 1000 l. a
week. Provided he be secured by the Parliament in the quiet enjoyment of them,
when he has been at the trouble and charge to drein the one, and discover the
other.

This work had been long since perfected, had not his Arrest and Imprisonment
(contrary to his Articles, destroyed that little Reputation he had left, and
involved him in those misfortunes, which make him now an humble Suitor for
their Lordships relief. And certainly it cannot but seem to my Rational man to
be very hard measure, a Person that has done and is still able to do such
considerable services to the public (to which he ever was, and still is only
devoted) should be denied a share in that happiness of which himself was so
great an Instrument, and which he dares say he is able by mineral discoveries,
to advance more then any other Subject within His Majesty's Kidgdoms. Mr.
Bushel having been proved by a part of his life, led for three years in an
obscure Hermitage, before he was allowed by his master the Lord Bacon to
attempt the said mineral design. And after that, to preserve himself from utter
ruin, he was forced in the late Wars to endure a three years famine in Lundy
Island, before he had those Articles, whose Confirmation he now humbly desires.
As also three years banishment from the Conversation or sight of his friends or
any others at Lambeth for service he had done His Majesty; to which retirement
he was pursued by Cromwels bloudhounds, and others who had intruded into his
Estate. And after all this has languished and groaned under a loathsome
Sepultu^e for three years more in Newgate, contrary to the Articles he had
given him by the Parliaments General, and Confirmed by an Ordinance of their
own, as has been said before.

And if any shall seek to prejudice the Reputation of the said Mr. Bushel, by
objecting against him the multiplicity of his Debts yet unsatisfied: It cannot
be supposed by any Rational man, but that a person engaged in so expenceful a
design as that of the Mines must of necessity Contract some Debts, which had
not his late Majesty's Commands called him from those rich Works his own
Industry had raised, or had he been restored to his Estate as he ought by his
Articles, had, been long since discharged; So that the non-payment of his Debts
contracted before the Wars, those he was engaged in for His Majesty's service
during the Wars, and those which for his necessary support, by reason of his
being divested of all his Estate he has been involved in since, must by any
sober man be rather imputed to his misfortune, then any injustice in himself:
Especially, since the sole aim of all his endeavors ever was the service and
advantage of the Public, according to the Commands and Directions of his Dead
Master the Lord Bacon, without any the least reflection on his own particular
Interest.


