An Appeal from CHANCERY, To the Lord General and his Council of Officers, As
also to the Council of State, And to all Freeborn English men of honest
hearts, who have not forfeited their Liberty, or captivated their Reason, but
fear and love the Name of God, and the interest of all honest men, who desire
to lay down their lives to promote righteousness, and to do wisely by justice,
and judgment, and equity; that Christ's kingdom may be advanced, and the kingdom
of Satan, with Antichrist, and that of the Beast, may be thrown down, with all
their covetous, persecuting, lying, partial, extorting, bribing, perjured
Officers, Ministers, and Attendants, either that have been corrupt
Parliament Men, Committee Men, Judges, such who are in places of Judicature,
Justices, Lawyers, called Counselors, or concealers of our Law, and Registers
or Clerks, with every corrupt Member thereof, by any name or title whatsoever
distinguished, in England, or in places, called Innes of Court, or the devil's
School of Sophisticating and Lying, Frauds and Hypocrisies, which bring forth a
generation of Vipers, which destroy and eat up the Commonwealth their mother;
Wolves in sheeps clothing, which devour the Lambs of Jesus Christ: or those in
places of Government in Cities, Ports, Guild-halls, Companies, Corporations, or
Fraternities, who usurp Authority over Englishmen, and that because they are
in place or places over them, they combine also with this Serpentine brood, and
tyrannize over their brethren which never yet brake their trust, as the most of
these have done, and that because they will not sacrifice to this devil of
unrighteousness, or follow this Antichrist, or receive this Beasts mark in
their foreheads and right hands, to do unrighteously, and to deceive, and
defraud, and oppress their brethren, and to undo them, as these experimentally
many of them are found and known to do, for filthy lucre sake.

Enter not into the way of the wicked, and walk not in the way of evil men:
avoid it, and go not by it: turn from it, and pass by. Prove. 4.14,15. For they
cannot sleep, except they have done evil; and their sleep departs from them,
except they cause some to fall. For they eat the bread of wickedness, and drink
the wine of violence. Prove. 4.16,17. Woe unto him that builds his house by
unrighteousness, and his chambers by wrong, or without equity. Jer. 22.13. Thou
shall not defraud thy neighbor, neither rob him. Ye shall do no
unrighteousness in judgment: thou shall not respect the person of the poor,
nor honor the person of the mighty: but in righteousness shall thou judge thy
neighbor. Levit. 22.13,15. Shall thou reign, think thou, because thou
closest thy self in cedar? Did not thy father eat and drink, and prosper, when
he executed judgment and justice, or as long as he dealt with equity and
righteousness? yea, when he helped the oppressed and poor to their right, then
prospered he well. But thine eyes and thy heart are only for thy covetousness,
and to shed innocent blood, and for oppression, or violence and destruction.
Jer. 22.15,16,17. as several Translations set it forth or read it. Printed at
London, the next month after Englands Parliament was dissolved for their
corruptness, 1653. to entreat all others to be warned thereby, to act
righteously: and are to be sold by Will: Larnar, at the Blackmoors head near
Fleet-bridge.

The APPEAL OF Capt. Nathanael Burt.
RIght Honorable Conservators, and all you honest Officers and Soldiers in
the Army, who profess to fear and love the Name of God, and promise protection
and assistance to those who walk with peaceable spirits, and in Gods fear and
love; Since that you have in a great measure, for their sakes, and for
righteousness sake, taken your lives in your hands to do this great work you
have done, in the dissolving or nulling of the late Parliament; which by the
corruption of some, the jealousy of others, the negligence and non-attendancie
of many, most perspicuously evident to you, as also to the honest people of
this Nation, so that you both found and held it your duty incumbent, as to
secure both the Cause which the good people of this Commonwealth had been so
long engaged in, and to establish righteousness and peace in these Nations, as
your Declaration sets forth, signed at White Hall, April 22. 1653.

And you, my dear Countrymen, Conservators for our Peace, and
fellow-Commoners, who have noble and incorrupt English blood running in your
veins, that have not been corrupted by Faction, Bribery, Extortion, Partiality,
Treachery, Unfaithfulness, Fraudulencie, or Hypocrisy, or fearfulness, to
betray either the honest Cause you took in hand and engaged in, or any of your
own Liberties or Self-interests, any of your brethrens Liberties and Rights,
who were engaged and are engaged with you herein, as English men not only born
free, but have by Conquest Hazard, Charge, and loss of treasure and blood
obtained it, who have with the rest of the Nation obtained it, of the like
concernment with us, as well as by birth, and therefore you ought to prefer
this Freedom which has cost so dear to the Nation, at a high rate or esteem,
and not to be supplanted therein by any false brothers suggestions,
insinuations, or persuasions, but to press forwards toward the settling of the
Nations, be you Soldiers now under present command, (or otherwise) that so the
Law (such of it as is amiss) may be reformed, and Justice may be impartially
administered to all, as God commands, without respect of persons, Levit.19.15.
that so righteousness and peace may dwell among us and God may delight and
dwell in us. For Christ faith of his Father, Joh.8.29. And he that sent me, is
with me: the Father has not left me alone; for I do always those things that
please him.

I remember, those who usurped a Parliamentary power over us, when they caused
Money to be coined, they gave this Inscription about it, GOD WITH US. Now, as
Azariah told Asa, and Jndah and Benjamin, The Lord is with you, while ye be
with him; and if ye seek him, he will be found of you: but if ye for sake him,
he will for sake you, 2 Chronicles.15.12.1 Chron. 29.9. For, (as David taught
Solomon) the Lord searches all hearts, and under stands all the imaginations
of thoughts. Seeing now these will be granted for truth, it makes me stand
amazed at our late Parliaments Act, they made for a day of public Fasting and
Humiliation, September the first 1652. to be observed October the 13. 1652. The
first clause whereof begineth thus viz. Whereas the most wise God, whose
Judgments are unsearchable, and ways past finding out; has by his
overruling providence made a breach upon that Amity (which the Parliament has
in all sincerity labored to conserve) between this Commonwealth, and the
united Provinces. But so sure as the Lord searches all hearts, so he
understood the imagination of their thoughts; and since they are dissolved and
put an end unto, as faith the Declaration of the General and his Officers,
April 22. 1653, I shall leave aspersing of them and leave the words to sober
judgments, whether they were blasphemy against God, or no: they setting the
sincerity of their hearts as it were above God, to save the spilling of blood,
and charge it upon God, and also the breach of the Amity: when the Apostle St.
James faith. Chap.3.17. 18. The wisdom that is from above is first pure then
peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits,
without judging, and without hypocrisy. And the fuit of righteousness is sown
in peace, of them that make peace. But observe the noble General, and the
Souldery in their Declaration, say, page 6. We have been necessitated (though
with much reluctance) to put an end to this Parliament which yet we have done,
we hope, out of an honest heart, preferring this cause above our names lives,
families, or interests how dear soever, with clear intentions and real purposes
of heart, to call to the government Persons of approved sidelity and honesty,
believing that as none will expect to gather grapes of Thorns; so no good men
will hope, that if persons so qualified be chosen, the fruits of a just and
righteous reformation, so long prayed and wished for, will by the blessing of
God be in due time obtained. Wherefore my dear and honest Brethren, truly
honest English men let us mind our time, for to reform not altogether the Law,
which next unto Gods Law is sacred much of it; but the abusive mercenary lying
Lawyers, and their dependants, who are diabolical and corrupt the most of them
scarcely being Christians; who like the sons of Zeruiah are to strong for us,
and our liberties, utilleties, rights, and profits yea to the daily imprisoning
of us against Law and English right, liberty, and Freedom, many times to the
destruction of our lives as well as our estates and inheritages, by frauds
forgeries, perjuries, extortions, briberies, false returns by Sheriffs and
Bailiffs, or Secondaries, false and partial reports by Masters of Chancery,
false orders by Councellers, Registers, and Clerks, inserted either for
bribery, self ends, partiality, or by combination, to uphold their friends in
their diabolical and antichristian kingdom, and to destroy the innocent, and
quit the guilty, as by my late Newyears-Gift more fully set forth, and that
colourably by motions, both private and public, by informations, Petitions,
falls suggestions, demurrings, which are but denying, lyings both to bills, and
in answerings thereunto to choke the truth, yea calling truth a lie (or a
slander) if it be against a man in place, as a Justice of Peace, an Alderman, a
Justice of Peace his Clarke, if it be against a Sheriff or his Varlet (vulgarly
called a Serjant of the Compters) or any of the Sheriffs Officers, or the
Clarke of the Peace, or the Jaylers the Sheriffs Deputy, yea could the hangman
the Sheriffs deputy deal unjustly, he should not want a lying mercenary Lawyer,
or concealer of the Law, or serpentine soliciter, or partial Parliamentman that
was, or a Master of the Chancery, to solicit plead, or report for him or his
masters, being in place of power or profits, pretending such are scandalized;
also you have these corruptions in Guildhalls and in Corporations and
Fraternities of men, which should be honorable, just and true with their
Officers and Clerks, and attendants.

Therefore my dear and honest brethren (if you will avoid Englands confusion
and therein your own) assist the honorable General, and his Council of Officers
in your prayers, and the Council of State against all these corruptions, and
corrupt lying Lawyers and Officers; and chat by choosing persons so qualified
into all places for future, as may bring forth the blessed fruit of a just
reformation in righteousness, to the refreshing of all the good hearts who have
been panting after those things. As the Declaration at White Hall April 22,
1653. page 9. expresses: and delay you not to do it, since these noble and
honest soldiers have begun; lest you by your negligence and cowardice, betray
both them again, and your selves and posterity; and are forced to take up
David's lamentation, 2 Samuel 2. concerning Joabs malice, and treachery to Abner,
and therein to David, and to the peoples unsettelment, wherein David
complains, I am this day weak, and but newly appointed; (or the people all
agreed about the government) and ^^^^men the sons of Zeruiah, be too hard for
me: the Lord (...) the doer of evil according to his wickedness.

(...) fore I do appeal unto all honest and faithful Englishmen, (...) not
forfeited their liberty and freedom, whether of the (...), to be faithful,
active, and trusty herein; and (...) work which is already begun, for the
settelment of the Nations, in peace and righteousness, carefully to watch the
sons of unrighteosness and corruption; enemies to our settlement, concealers of
English Law, and traitors to our peace and liberty, freedom and profits, and
in time to expunge them out of place and power; but for the corrupt liars which
call themselves Lawyers but are not, by advice for ever to expunge them and
their attendants who act and practice unrighteously and illegally: yea. to
extirpate them of all sorts that so the Channel or Current of Law, and Justice,
may issue, flow, or run, from or through such men, as may be men that are known
to be such men, as fear God, and hate covetousness, partiality, gifts or
bribery, extortions frauds, false returns, dissentions, false entries or
registerings, lyings suggestings, demurrings, which are but denyings or
deceits, or delayings: For as David said. 2 Samuel 23.2,3. The Spirit of the Lord
spoke by me, and the strength of Israel said, Thou shall bear rule over men,
being just, and ruling in the fear of God.

Now all unrighteousness, lying and partiality is diabolical, Antichristian,
and a transgression both of the law of God, and man: for if ye fulfill the royal
law according to the Scripture, thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: But
if you have respect to persons, ye commit sin, and are convinced of the Law as
transgressors, James 2.8.9.

Now when the Lawyers, (for the Law which is good and equitable to all without
respect of persons, rendering to every one their due) shall delude the Courts
by false suggestions, not rendering the case right in their motions, on purpose
to take advantage against the other party, by informing the Judges in Court
with a lie; by which means both Justice and Law is perverted, and the Judges
abused, who are sworn to do true judgment when they come to their places;
according as God commanded Israel, Deuteronomy. 16. 18, 19, 20. Judges and Officers
shall thou make thee, etc. and they shall judge the people with righteous
judgment.

Now how can the Judge or Judges judge the people righteously, when the
Councellor both concealeth the law from the people, and the truth of the matter
from the Judge, or Judges; informs by his motion or motions, he being seconded
by another Lawyer, or liar, like himself, falsely of the cause, and matter
depending? how can it be but that the Law should be wrested, these mercenary
Lawyers having taken rewards, to blind the Judges eyes; contrary to the
command, Exodus.23.1,7,8.Thou shall not receive a falls tale or report, and I know
none abounds in this abomination like that place, called the high Court of
Chancery; Thou shall keep thee far from a false matter, thou shall not slay the
innocent and the righteous, thou shall take no gift, for the gift blinds the
wife, and perverteth the words of the righteous; does not this I pray good
people concern the Counselors, Masters of Chancery, six Clerks, Registers, and
all inferior officers, and solicitors, as really as the Lords Commissioners,
who are the Judges of that Court. or the Master of the Rolls? to these and all
other in Judicature, I may say as Habakkuk1.3.4. We are full of spoiling and
violence, and there are that raise up strife and contention. Therefore the law
is dissolved, and judgment never goes forth, for the wicked does compass
about the righteous, therefore wrong judgment proceeds.

And thus comes their oaths to be forgotten, that they should administer
justice truly and duly; and also that justice shall not be sold, or delayed,
or denied to any, Magna Charta, cap. 29. Or as one Frances White repeates it,
in his book termed for the sacred Law, page 171. We sell no man, nor deny or
delay no man justice and right; I would I could say so now in our days. The
Law is still the same, and ought to be in force, although the corrupt
Parliament be dissolved; I hope I may not say England is un-Parliamented for
ever, since Captain General Oliver Crumwel in his Declaration on April the last
1653, promises men of fidelity and honesty shall be called from several parts
of this Commonwealth, to the Supreme Authority, as in the Declaration April 22,
also was promised, and as Oliver Crumwel commands all men to give obedience
unto the Laws of the Nation; so he also promises endeavors shall be used, that
no oppression or wrong be done to the people: It is a maxim in Law, (as
Markham says,) The Law always eschewes delays.

The Barons of the Exchequer are commanded to do right to all men without
delay; 22. H. 6.40. a. v. 2. C.25. Stat. Glou. C.2. They are sworn to do it,
20. E. 3. C. 2. 28. E. 1. C. 10.4. Inst. 109. One would believe they were sworn
to deal justly and truly in the Chancery also, and to give every man his right
without delay: why then have some men been suing therein fourteen years and
better and are no nearer their right, then when they first began? and now
again, as new to learn what to do as before; their Clerks and inferior
Officers being so locked up and reserved, that in that Court there is no
certain rule of proceedings; but new Motions and new Petitions, begets new
order upon order, restraint upon restraint, delay upon delay, report upon
report (as well false as true) to the undoing of the poorest sort of people, or
major part that have occasion therein to claim equity and right (as though they
had new Masters of Chancery) and all other Officers and Ministers settled every
Term, or every feal-day, wherein motions are made to procure new orders, or
lying demurrers argued, which indeed are but a sophisticating denial to a
Bill, and a clear deceit or delay, on purpose to vex the party that sueth, and
to overruled him when they please, and by charges of Fees to his Councellers,
or rewards, or gifts, who seem to plead, but betray him, or else they shall
leave off the Argument, and suffer him to be overruled, and over-powred, on
purpose to beget new motions, new orders, new rewards, new fees, it being that
which makes them rich upon the peoples ruins, even many times both Plaintiff
and Defendant, where they be of equality, without an administrator, is for
discovery of estate necessitated to sue many, and they great men or in place
reputed great, or of some Halls, or Corporations, whether City or otherwise;
then it may be, it is the undoing only of the Administrator, and the other are
saved whole, by the Hall-stock, or City-stock, or favor of the Court; and the
Plaintiff may not be suffered to plead, or have liberty to speak, because it is
against the Lawyers profits, rewards, gifts, fees, and this more especially
denied in the Court of Chancery; which one would think a Freeborn Englishman
should have the equallest respect in, it being termed a Court of equity and
conscience. But I am afraid, they being set so high, have followed that corrupt
Assembly lately called a Parliament so close at the heels, that if they step
not speedily backward by repentance, they having made crooked paths as well as
the Parliament: so that they have no conscience, no equity in their doings, as
you may read in Isaiah, chap. 59. so that though we do, and have looked for
equity (yet there is none) Judgment is turned backward, and truth is fallen in
the street, and equity cannot enter, and be that refraineth makes himself a
prey.

Wherefore Judges and Lawyers, be advised by Jeremiah, chapter 7. trust not in
lying words, but amend and redress your ways; and your works, and execute
judgment between a man and his neighbor; left you also and your accomplices be
compared as they were of old, to a den of Thieves, and are suddenly dissolved
as the Parliament was: For as David faith, Psalm.94. Has the throne of
iniquity fellowship with those which forgeth wrong for a Law, or frames
mischief for a Law, and gather themselves against the soul of the righteous,
and condemn the innocent? God will recompense them in their own malice, the
Lord our God shall destroy them. For the Lord abhors these seven things: the
haughty eyes, a lying tongue, hands that shed innocent blood, a heart that
imagines wicked interprises, feet that be swift in running to mischief a false
witness that speaks lies, and him that raises contentions among Brethren,
Prove.6.16,17,18,19.

Now you cannot be ignorant being Lawyers, and in place, that justice is a
constant and perpetual will of rendering unto every one their due, and that the
knowledge of the Law is both divine and humane, and a science distinguishing
what is just, what unjust and the precepts of the Law teaches to live
honestly, to do no injury to any one, and to render every one their due. The
first book of the institutions of the Laws of England, Tit. 1. page 1 (Observe)
It was the Parliaments delays dissolved them, or caused it; Declaration of the
22 April. 1653. His Excellency and Officers desired by many to move the
Parliament, to reform what was a miss in Government, and to settle the
Commonwealth upon a foundation of justice and righteousness, page 6. and they
delayed it, being by them Petitioned thereunto, and grew averse with much
bitterness; see that it be not so with you Lawyers and others that are in
places of power, and profits; doubtless though there were as cunning Lawyers
among them as is among you. yet it could not help them; I rather believe it
hastened their dissolution. Be herein advised you Guildhalls, and Corporations,
or Fraternities incorporated, and you which call your selves Governors therein
and thereof, who are in Office and are averse therein for your brethrens good.
Have you not learned this aversion and bitterness of this corrupt fountain, the
quondam Parliament, to perpetuate your own fittings, as the corrupt Parliament
did before you, and as they endeavoring to perpetuate themselves enslaved the
Nation, as our fellow soldiers Remonstrance from Scotland relates, p. 4. and
we by experience have found it both from them and you, who by perpetuating your
selves, enslave your brethren, and tyrannize over their persons and estates?
But (believe it) our day of Redemption grows near, and the bud of our Liberty
begins to appear; and as both Monarchy and the Parliament are dissolved, so
are the great Diana's or Idols your Charters, which you boast of and trust in,
fallen, and so will you, and your power you usurp and exercise thereby; since
the makers thereof are dissolved, the thing made with or by them must cease,
since both succession fails, as well as the predecessor that granted it, as
your selves well know, and proclaimed it down in all Cities, Ports, and
Corporated Towns, and yet you will adore and set up the Idol-Deed-Patent,
Grant, or Charter of those dead, conquered, nulled, dissolved, or (if living,
yet) not to de owned, served, obeyed by Englishmen: so that since the lively
character of Succession is dead to this Commonwealth, (and it is Treason
against the Commonwealth to acknowledge any other) then I pray what are all
your Grants and Charters worth you so love, honor, idolize, and tyrannize by?
Wherefore you in places of Government and Power, in Cities, Ports, corporated
Towns, and Guild-Halls, and other Halls, and Corporated Fraternities, weep and
howl, for these your Idols are fallen, by which you have made your selves rich,
and have corrupted your selves. See what James advises, Chapter 5.1. to 9. and
repent of the cries of your brethren which are come up against you; and behold,
the Judge stands before the door. Wherefore I entreat you all to repent, and
to walk humbly, and glory in nothing but this, To understand and know God the
Lord, which exercises and is delighted in mercy or loving kindness, judgment
and righteousness, Jer. 9.23. that so your, brethren may live by you in peace,
and not be any longer oppressed, defrauded, destroyed. Yet trust, my dear
brethren, in Jacob's God, and not in man, in whom there is no help; whose
breath goes forth, and he returns to the earth: for it is better to trust in
the Lord, then to put confidence in man: David knew it in all his troubles:
yea, he knew it is better to trust the Lord then to put confidence in Princes,
Psalm.11.8.8,9.Then, I pray if there is no help in man, nor trust in Princes,
Psalm.146. 3,4 5 6 7 9. what trust can be in the Grants or Charters of dead
Kings, and yet none to be given to the persons of living Princes? But happy is
he that has the God of Jacob for his help and hope, which keeps the truth
for ever.

O remember this, you Judges, Justices, Commissioners, Masters of the Chancery,
you that call your selves Lawyers but are Liars; Counselors at Law, but are
Concealers of our Law; and all your Viperous and Serpentine brood; Know, that
God which keeps truth for ever, loses the Prisoners, gives food to the
hungry, executes judgment for the oppressed, loves the righteous, raises
them that are bowed down, opens the eyes of the blind, preserves the
strangers, he relieyeth the fatherless and the widow: but the way of the wicked
he turns upside down.

Reader, here follows the Petition to the quondam-Speakers Sir John Lenthals
brother; but as he is Master of the Rolls, which is the first part of my appeal
to the Souldery, for then there was no other visible power settled, for the
people who are the Commonwealth, and his order thereunto, to dismiss my Bill
then in Chancery, to which I still stand; because I paid the costs to Mr. Web,
a party in the behalf of the rest of the combinators or his accomplices; and
here follows the Order since made, which provoked my Petition to the General
and council of State, the present settled trust for the people, to declare and
manifest the abuses of the Chancery and Rolls proceedings for filthy lucre
sake, to betray and undo the people of the Commonwealth, my dear Countrymen,
for whose sake I have presented these lines for their preservation, to whom
next unto my Maker, I hold (as I ever did) my self obliged, and shall to
procure the good of the public; though I know for this I shall be censured
abundantly of abundance of men, there being by computation in England and
Wales, of Lawyers Solicitors, Clarks and their dependents, about six score
thousand; besides the multitude of Office is discovered herein in Guild halls
and all other Corporated Companies and places; which may seem to be offended
hereby, their wickedness being rebuked, like that of the Lawyers mentioned Luke
11. 45. for their hypocritical formalities and ravening wickedness: Then
answered one of the Lawyers and said unto him, Master, thus saying thou put
us to rebuke also. But he said Woe be to you Lawyers who lay grievious burdens
upon the people, and take away the key of knowledge from them etc.

And he reproves the proud Pharisees, men in place as Aldermen and others, for
their formality and devouring widows houses, and since the great fraud by
imbezling the Orphans estates in Guildhall London is in Print discovered, which
one would think were for the value thereof incredible (if not printed) to
relate; for which, doubtless God will be avenged, who is the Father of
fatherless, where you defeated Orphans put your trust in him; he it is that
relieveth the oppressed, the fatherless and the widow, which shows mercy,
judgment and righteouss in the earth, and is delighted therein.

The parable of the unrighteous Judge, mentioned by Christ, Luke 18. which
neither feared God, or reverenecd man, yet when the widow demanded justice of
him against her adversary, he at the last said to him self, Because this widow
trossbleth me, I will do her right, lest at the last she come and make me
weary: And it is beloived, that when he had done justice and right to her, he
did not afterward by Petition Motion, or Order, undo what he bid by her
importunity done for her. Lords Commissioners and Master of the Rolls, let your
Chaplain or Chaplains often read this Gospel to you, and let it be expounded to
the mercenary lying Lawyers, and then let be read unto them both my Petitions,
and a few of their regained and again regained Orders, either by Motions or
Petitions or both at Court, the Temple, or the Rolls; by which they have
overturned, overturned, overturned, Equity, or Justice and Right.

There being a Warrant sent to me, under Nathanell Hubarts hand, to summon me
to a private hearing, my Lawyers being out of Town, to circumvent me, I having
but 23 hours given thereby to appear, two days after writ this ensuing Letter,
viz.

A Letter sent to the right Worshipful, NATHANAEL HUBART, One of the Masters of
the CHANCERY.
Worshipful Sir,
WHO are as a Doctor, or Master, and read in the Laws of this our Israel, our
England, or ought to be; and therefore have sent out your Warrant, being one of
the honorable Court of Chancery, upon the Lords Commissioners Order, upon John
Iretons Petition, Esquire; though your Warrant also name Andrew Riccards
Esquire, yet as I told or declared yesterday before you, Alderman Riccards
never did Petition in the business; neither was he ever sub-poena'd to answer
to the Bil: Worthy Sir, I complained in Chancery, it being called a Court of
equity, as a place I hoped I should be relieved in, under God that did
establish equity, and executed judgment and righteousnoss in Jacob, Psalm. 99.
4. Who is Lord of Lords, which regards not persons, nor takes rewards, Deuteronomy.
10. 17. 1 Pet. 1. 17. Act. 10. 34. where I expected to find men in the fear of
the Lord, acting faithfully, executing not man's judgment, but the Lords
judgment; as Jehosophat said to the Judges of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6, 7, 9.
which Law of God Moses had before commanded the Israelites, Levit 19. 15. Ye
shall do no unrighteousness in judgment: Thou shall not respect the person of
the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty, but in righteousness shall thou
judge thy neighbor. I pray when Micah prophesied, and reproved the Heads of
Israel, were not they the Magistracy thereof, and Governors, as Aldermen and
Sheriffs, as well as Priests and Prophets? Micha. 3. 8, 9, 10, 11. yet he tells
them, that they abhor judgment, and pervert all equity, etc. he being full of
power of the Spirit of the Lord, Sir, I pray that I may find in your Court,
wisdom, judgment and equity: That I may say, God is in this Court, or place,
as Jacob said, Genesis 28. 16.

Sir, I pray observe my case, I being a suitor, or plaintiff in your Court,
being Administrator of or to my honored father deceased; complaining that
diverse, and several persons combining together, do conceal and detain much of
the Intestates estate, and abused him in his lifetime, and me since his death;
and that this combination of theirs is by power and fraud carried on: and that
Sheriff Ireton his Officers did, to delay and abuse my father in his life time,
and me since his death, make a false return of a Latitat, by which we are by
one James Ryton and Matthew Mason defrauded, of 100 pound in money, and if not
here in your Court of equity releived, for ever also so like to be, and also of
2500 pound estate by others, as the bill declares and sets forth, or
thcreabeuts, and this is truth, and no lie, or scandal both to him and others.

Sir, I would not offend God, or the Law of the Land, which is my birthright,
and which as my right I ought to have.

Sir, I observe (among the choice cases of the Chancery, Arnold plaintist, and
Roberts desendant, Anno 19. 20 Eliz.) the then Sheriff was merced five pound
for a false return of an Attachment is your Court, in a book called the
Practice of Chancery, page 124. and as yet I am delayed, and abused, and
demurred too, and can have little or no relief or right in any place, but
stopped by Petitions, or abused by false Returns, or denied Warrants upon
Attachments from this Court, and bound up as my adversaries do please in all
places, yet I pay both Court, and Councel-fees, but can not have justice and
right, or equity.

Sir, this is the truth of my Case, the God of truth knows: yet if my Bill be
unpleasing to Court, Rules, or persons, I shall humbly entreat you not only to
expunge such things as are distastive, or as my adversaries call slander, to
hinder me of my right, and thereby to swallow and conceal the Intestates
estate, and to pervert the Law, which is good and equitable to all, (or ought
to be) without respect of persons; but to be a means to dismiss my Bill, and
then I shall advise with Counsel of this honorable Court, which are now out of
Town, when they shall return, to begin again as shall by Court be thought
fit: and in the mean time I shall pray the righteous God to establish equity
and judgment in England, as formerly in Jacob; and shall pray such reasonable
Costs as they in wisdom and equity shall appoint or order in Court; I being an
Administrator; and shall pray for them and rest thankful to you.

From my house in windmillCourt between Christ's Hospital and the lame Hospital
Mar. 11.1652. London. Yours, Capt. Nathaniel Burt.


To the honorable William Lenthal, Master of the Rolls.
The humble Petition of Capt. Nathanel Burt, Plaintiff, against Thomas Starky,
and Thomas Web, Francis Dashwood, Willaim Pease, William Kettle, of the Company
of Sadlers, Defendants.
Shows,
THat your Petitioner exhibited a Bill in Michaelmas-Term last, against the
Defendants and others, who combined together to conceal much of his deceased
Fathers Estate near a 2500 l. in Money, Leases, and Morgages; he formerly being
a member of the said Sadlers Company in his life, and in extreme age dying
intestate, and your Petitioner also a member of the Sadlers Company; but by
serving in the Wars became estranged both from them, and his deceased Father;
yet he being his eldest son, he became Administrator to his honored Father
being deceased, and is by the Court Christian bound therein to give an account
thereof justly and truly. Now so it is, may it please your Honor, that
according to his duty and right both to his deceased Father formerly living, in
whose life time your Petitioner began to complain, and was by him then also
authorized so to do in some cases, and since his death as Administrator to his
Father, which came to him by birthright, and diverse of them would have hindered
him therein, if they could, the better to have defrauded your Petitioner, and
to have disabled him to give account to Court Christian, and to have swallowed
his deceased Fathers estate and shared it among themselves; your Petitioner
having formerly both in his Fathers life time and since his death, petitioned
them as a company of sober and just men, in whom should have dwelt peace and
righteousness full six months for a fair and peaceable end, laying himself
down at their feet therein, and entreating for his right without going to Law
after his Fathers decease as before, and that his Fathers lost Leases and Fine
might be restored now to him he being Administrator, and all other Moneys and
Morgages which were concealed and imbezelled from his said Father and your now
Petitioner, as in the Bill is expressed, whereby your Petitioner was forced to
appeal into the Court of Chancery for equity, and yet by the unjust and false
practices of some has yet found wormwood and hemlock for judgment and equity;
for he has seen the Court and your Honor much abused by misinformations,
false suggestions, and Petitions to gain their wills to conceal former orders
and proceedings, thereby to delay and undo your Petitioner; and he believes he
can make it appear also byorders therein surreptitiously procured, insinuated,
or inserted, entered and Registered, one Order whereof they thus obtained of your
Hoour by a Petition, November 10. 1652. to delay your P^^^^^^ner from an answer
as they had done 6 months before amongst themselves, when by Petition and
Letters he sought themselves as a Company of Assistants in power for Peace, but
they would not; yet since they have given him two of his lost leases again, and
taken a new sine of him, which is part of his said Bill; and since that your
Petitioner taking out Attachments to cause them to answer in Hillary-Term last,
they by Petition February 18. 1652. to your Honor falsely suggest that your
Petitioner was agreed with them, and so got an Order to stop his Attachments,
and as they had promised before in their first Petition to answer to the
Petitioners Bill; so now they procured 14 days also, yet never paid the
Attachment costs; and contrary to the just and honorable rules of Court, which
ought to be kept and observed by all, and they have demurred and not answered,
on purpose to delay and vex by delatory arguing, and by multitudes of Fees and
Charges to undo your Petitioner, when they should have fairly answered to him
therein by promises. Your Petitioner therefore humbly prays your Honor, the
truth hereof considered, that your Honor will be pleased to command them, as
in equity they now ought, to give in their several answers to the Collateral
part of your Petitioners Bill, or else so to order it, that your Petioners Bill
may be dismissed with such reasonable costs as to your Honor shall seem meet,
he being an Administrator he, being like else by the false practisings and
delays already past to be undone (therefore he prays also to be at liberty
to prefer a new Bill) without he does appeal to the General and his Council of
Officers of war herein for justice and equity; if that by your Honor he be not
herein reserved, which if by you he shall, viz.

Your Petitioner and his, shall ever pray for your Honor.

April the 29. 1653. Capt. Nathanael Burt.
April the 30. 1653.
Let the Petitioners Bill be dismissed, with 20 s. costs, and he be at liberty
to prefer a new Bill.

William Lenthal.



Readers of all sorts, observe, after my Bill was dismissed, and the costs by
my adversaries received, they maliciously again move the Court to have my Bill
detained, because they were not pleased with small costs; when I ought not to
have paid any costs being an Administrator, as is recorded in Dixy and Watsons
case, he exhibiting a Bill to discover Assets lately, and also they amerce the
Sheriffs to bring in my body, 5 pound, at three several men's complaint; one of
them being the varlet which made the Arrest upon James Ryton for 100 pound,
when I had the false return made under Sheriff Ireton and believe shall be
defrauded thereby wholly thereof, which was part of my bill, and I have the
Writ so returned in my own custody to prove the thing done, and the oath of
Edward Miles in the Court, to prove the Arrest, and the money paid for doing of
it, which Hurst also received the half thereof from Miles's hand, who was his
Yeoman therein; yet Hurst denis by demurrer upon oath, the Arrest, the money
received, or any part of the Bill; and can this be any other then a deceit, yea
a cheat? And so does Sheriff Ireton also deny it by demurrer, yet he was spoken
with several times therein by my self, when the false return was made, to delay
and spoil me therein, and that by Mr. Ellis the City-Cryer, Ryton was cried,
and that by Sheriff Iretons knowledge, who was acquainted therewith both before
it was done and afterward by Mr. Ellis the Crier; James Ryton the second
merced the Sheriffs, and my false brother John Burt the third, who procured
amercements against the Sheriffs, to bring in my body to answer to them and
their Interrogatories, and to Iretons Interrogatories by misinformation to the
Master of the Rolls, who had dismissed my Bill, as appears in Court filed under
his hand, April 30. 1653.

Yet again, by motion seven days after the Order being served, and costs
paid, by a misinformation in the Rolls in Sheriff Iretons behalf to the Master
of the Rolls, there is an Order in the Rigisters Office privately entered or
insinuated by a pretended motion, made by Iretons council, therein that I
should come in and be examined in four days afterward, or be sent to the
Fleet for my contempt; and I pray good people, Souldery and Council of State,
how could there be a contempt, when there was no Bill in Court, it being by the
Master of the. Rolls dismissed, and the costs paid some days before; and upon
these great abuses, I took occasion to Petition the Captain General Crumwell,
etc. viz.

To his Excellency the Lord General Cromwell, and the Council of State, for the
present Government of this Commonwealth; Conservators for the peace thereof.
The humble Petition of Capt. Nathanael Burt, against Thomas Web, Thomas
Starky, William Pease, Francis Dashwood, John Cox, William Kettle, of the
Company of Sadlers of London, also their Clarke and many others of the said
Combination and Confederacy,
Humbly shows,
THat suing these Combinators, in a place called the High Court of Chancery,
which should be a place of equity, and conscience, to ease and relieve such who
upon just grounds should apply thereunto, for discovery of Combinators, who
fraudulently, conceal or imbezle either writings, or monyes, from persons
impotent through extreme age, or Administrators who succeed the former dying
intestate: that these persons named, and others not here named, but named in
your petitioners Bill, by their several combinations possessed themselves of,
and concealed from your Petitioner of his deceased fathers estate, who dyed
intestate, about 2500 pound in Money, Leases and Morgages, which they yet detain
against the mind of the deceased intestate as in his life time was declared,
and against the conscience and equity ought to be in the high Court of
Chancery, were they not partial and corrupt as the dissolved Parliament: yea
they do act this combination against your Petitioner, being assisted by the
viperous mercenary lying Lawyers, and serpentine Solicitors and Clarks,
purposely of covetousness and malice to destroy your Petitioner who when he
took out Letters of Administration, gave security to Court Christian, to give
in a just and true account.

Your Petitioner also shows, that a against these combinating Assistants
above named, of the Sadlers Company of London, since his bill was preferred in
Chancery, there sitting a Committee, of the late dissolved Parliament to
examine the frauds and oppressions of Corporations, which was grown up therein,
and to renew them, they being upon the old Patents, Grants, and Charters of
Monarchy and their Successors, and so fallen with them: that your Petitioner
procured from the said Committee, three several Orders against these
combinators Sadlers for their oppression and wrongs done to the whole
commonalty, or brotherhood of Sadlers, against them and their now pretended
charter, wherein the Fraternity of working Sadlers are particularly interested,
and are proper heirs thereunto of right, if ever it be settled; and the means
left by our ancestors deceased, to relieve such as should be in distress;
though by these usurpers abused, oppressed, wronged and injured as well as your
Petitioner: Which by a messenger to them belonging, was served upon them in all
their height of jollity, to cause them to answer to the said complaint, and to
bring the forfeited dead Charters, by which they did oppress and wrong their
fellow members of the said Society up to be examined and renewed; and also that
they should bring away to the then honorable Committee their Books of accounts,
and Book of Orders, that so the oppressions and abuses might be understood, and
the people eased, and the corruptions reformed, and they settled as might best
consuit then with that present Government; but these corrupt Assistants of
Sadlers fearing the trial or examination herein. corrupted some thereunto
belonging, and never left with them, or their Council appointed therein, the
grand Charter, but a latin Copy, or the Books of accounts at all: and to
cool your Petitioner a while in the prosecution thereof, sent to your
Petitioner. and gave him two of his fathers detained Leases, which in Chancery
he complained to be fraudulently detained and concealed from your Petitioner,
and took a new fine of your Petitioner, so that his Father had lost both his
leases and also his Fine, which if the book of accounts had been examined,
would plainly have made it appear, as they well knew; yet unjustly and
unrighteously they will not answer in the Chancery, but sordidly still conceal
the Collateral part of the BiH, though these leases was part thereof, and by
combination of Lawyers, demur to him therein, which is but a denial on purpose
to delay and vex your Petitioner, yea to destroy him; whereupon your Petitioner
by order from the Master of the Rolls procured a dismission of his own Bill,
and paid Thomas Web 20 s. costs in the behalf of himself and of the rest
therein concerned, May 2. 1653. yet would these combinators and Lawyers still
detain the said Bill in Court, the better to have their ravenous wills
satisfied, to destroy your Petitioner by charge or imprisonment, even
out-daring Justice, Law, or Equity.

Your distressed Petitioner laying claim to the promises made by your
Excellency, in both your Declarations, 22 and 30 of April 1653, that such
endeavors should be used, that no opposition or wrong should be done to the
people by any that exercise Administration of Justice by the Laws of the
Nation, humbly imploreth your Honors to be rescued out of the mouths of the
roaring Lions and Bears, who else would break the bones of your Petitioner; who
being Administrator, did but sue for the discovery of a concealed estate, and
in conscience and equity ought rather to be cherished by them then destroyed,
yea eaten up, which they some of them have threatened, and their practices do
make good the same; which promises declared, if performed, will set you as
mount Sion for establishment, and work the hearts of the people to praise God
for you; and your perishing Petitioner if herein relieved, these acting against
Justice and equity, yea the Law of the Nation, shall for you be enlarged
toward God. And he and his shall ever pray, etc.

May the 16. 1653. Nathanael Burt.

The Lord Generals Order to me when he came out of the Council was, that I
should attend the Council for Order of this Petition.

Being (as in the Petition is declared) encouraged by the promises of the
Soldiery in their Declarations mentioned, so also calling to mind the Letter
from the General meeting of the Officers of the Army, Jan. 18. 1652. to stir up
all their fellow soldiers to assist them to help the people of this Nation;
who through corruption are subject to grievous oppressions through the
obstruction of Justice of which they were generally and strongly convinced it
was their duty to awaken themselves for the procuring and preventing many
apparent inconveniences; as first, faithful men, fearing God, hating
covetousness, may be chosen into the interest of the Commonwealth. Secondly,
that the Laws may be regulated in such sort that what is good in them may be
maintained, and the corruptions, abuses, delays, vexations, unnecessary travels
and expenses, and whatsoever shall be found really burdensome and grievous to
the people, may be taken away.

Then behold, as you have dissolved the corrupt Parliament, who voted, unvoted,
and abused, vexed, and delayed the people of England, and hardened others by
these practisings to do the like: as Ecclus faith, Chap. 10. 2. As the Judge of
the people is himself, so are his Officers; and what manner of man the Ruler of
the city is, such are they that dwell therein. And as the Master of the Rolls
and Lords Commissioners do, and the Chancery has been known to do for the
memory of man most abusively, as well as other Courts sometimes, but not so
frequently as the Chancery or Rolls. Lend us also your assistances and all
faithful Englishmen stand by them and one another, to open these Cages of birds
who are become ravenous, and their houses full of deceit; therefore they are
become great, and waxen rich; they shine, and are waxen fat; yea, they surpass
the deeds of the wicked, Jer. 5. 26, 27, 28. Thus as there were wicked men
found in Israel, who did set inares and traps to catch men is it not so now in
England? and as they judged not the cause of the fatherless, or the right of
the needy, is not the same cry amongst us at this day? which the Officers of
the Army be convinced of, that those in the Army and elsewhere have not so
improved their interest one to another as they ought, the Lord having done
great things for us of England, as their Letter of Jan. 28. 1652. sets forth,
might say to us, Isai. as he did to his Vineyard; And he looked for judgment,
but behold oppression; for righteousness, but behold a cry: and this you see is
not long since the Officers of the Army printed it, and that they have made
some progress against Oppressors and unrighteous men since. Assist them
therefore, dear Countrymen, Englishmen, and let us not by jealousies grieve
the hearts and weaken the hands one of another, to the destruction of our
Liberty, Freedom and Peace, as by the said Letter they observe. But let us keep
our selves close to God, and let us implore him so to act in them, that their
hearts may be kept faithful as Moses, who when he was to lead the Israelites
out of Egypt, would not leave a hoof in bondage; that so the Lords work being
begun, who turns the way of the wicked upside down. Psalm. 147. 8, 9. but
raises them that are bowed down, and loves the righteous. Wherefore honor
faithful ones, and abandon these Schools, yea abolish them Schools called the
Innes of Court, whose Scholars plead taunts, lies and sophistications, for Law,
like to their father the devil, by which their brethren are murdered, and
their families undone. For as our honored faithful brother Colonel Pride
formerly predicted, as in my New-yeers-gift, page 11. is set forth, That it
would never be well with England until that mercenary Lawyers Gowns were hung
up by the Scottish Trophies. These, my brethren, and their attendants, destroy
Englands Commonwealth, and are of the Beast, and of Antichrist, and of the
devil. That Lawyers, called Secular Judges, proceeded from Romish Clergymen,
yea all Lawyers were anciently of the Clergy; no Clerk but he was a Lawyer,
faith Malmsbury, in William the second's time; they were the first Lawyers in
England, or amongst them, for time and for their knowledge and manners sent to
Rome, some of them being then Counselors to Abbots, had shaven crowns, were
Archdeacons; and most of the Lawyers then held Church Livings.

Now, my brethren, ye may see how Tithes (the great Robbery) has come to be
maintained. And a Monk in Henry the third's time is called the Kings special
Counselor and Clerk, faith the observer, as much as the Atturney-General since.

But I admire how Edmund Prideaux, formerly the great Letter convoyer, to rook
the people of 6 d. in the shilling, as their quarrelling printed Papers make it
appear, does call himself Atturney-General, and comes to the Bar, and moves as
Atturney-General for the people, and yet stands charged with Articles of High
Treason, and has done above a year, which is filed in the Capital Office
against him, and others, for acting traitorously against the Commonwealths
peace, which is the peace of the people, and against English Law, and that he
is not by the people called to the Bar to be convicted thereof as our enemy,
and ought to be, or else by Law acquitted, and his accomplices: for as M. Cook
said concerning the late Kings trial, That mercy to the wicked is cruelty to
the good, and he was a Counselor of Grays-Inne, employed by the State, which
could not be unknown to M. Prideaux, but since gone for Ireland. But
fellow soldiers, as you have promised us in your Letter, and in the
Declarations, you must help us against these destroyers of us and ours, and you
also, if they can. The Bishops (by the consent of most) were voted out, for
that they were Antichristian, and also destructive to the English Liberty,
peace, utility, and freedom, and all their Pontifical Robes, Orders, and Garbs:
yet see, the Secular Judges wear the ancient habit of the Ecclesiastics,
because first it was used by the Ecclesiastics, who have been Clerks,
Justices, Keepers of the Great Seal, Wardens of the Kingdom, Treasurers of
England, Masters of the Rolls, yea Justices of Air and of Assize; yea some of
these, as Hugh of Pashtul Clerk, made Justice of England by Henry the third.

Thus you see Popish Tithes, and Popish Holy Days, and Popish Habits or
Vestures still maintained in all Courts, in sight of the Scottish Banners, where
you may find Popish Antichristian customs and manners. The Clerks who such
Writs dictate, write, sign, and give counsel, they were restrained by Pope
Innocent the fourth his Decretals to assume Church-dignities: since then the
multitude of Clerks ran to the hearing of the Secular Laws. Hence it is that
the ancient Habit of the Secular Judges was the same (and yet is) with that of
the Ecclesiastics; as Francis White, who printed a book for the sacred Law of
the Land, expresses, in the 291, 292, 293. for which he cites D. Wats gloss.
ad Paris. faith William of Bussey, Seneschal and chief Councellor to William of
Valentia, would have loosed (says the same Monk, meaning John Mansel, in Henry
the third's time) the stays of his Coyf to show his Clerkly tonsure, his shaven
crown.

Therefore as in Israel's time when the Law of truth was found in the Priests
mouth, and no iniquity in his lips, in peace and equity he walked to God, and
turned many from iniquity; but since went out of the way, and caused many to
fall by the Law, and kept not Gods ways, but became partial in the Law;
therefore God made them to be despised and vile before all the people, Mal.
2.6,7,8,9. since the Priests lips should have preserved knowledge. And has not
our Clergy (in our remembrance) been in as great places, and honor, and have
come to be despised, for being partial, and causing many to fall by the Law;
and are they not gone and despised, and since that the King gone and despised
for being partial in the Law? and causing many to fall by the sword, whom the
Law would have preserved? And since is not the Parliament not only purged but
dissolved? for that if ever any had known the Law, or if ever any walked in the
truth before God in peace and equity, they should, and not corruptly and
partially gone contrary to truth, peace, and law, and equity; and by their evil
example encouraged others so to do, to provoke Englands misery, and cause
themselves to become despised and vile in the eyes of all the people, and their
fellow Committee Men and their Children to be despised; which they have and
will find, as sure as we have seen the Scripture mentioned fulfilled.
Wherefore London, let the prophecy of Ninevehs fall or ruin be thy warning,
Nahum.3.1,9. Woe to the bloody City, which is full of lies and Robery; and know,
as Solomon faith, Prove.21.3,7. To do justice and judgment is more acceptable
to the Lord then sacrifice, and that the robbery of the wicked shall destroy
them; for that they have refused to execute judgment. And all you corporated
Companies, know that you are exhorted to accept of this warning, as you are
Citizens concerned with your Masters and Officers, left you come also to be
dissolved and despised; but especially you of the Sadlers, who have been sought
by Petitions and Letters for peace sake, but made stiff your necks against it;
take you among the rest notice, that this Babylon of covetousness, oppression,
defraude, and partiality, and hypocrisy is not falling, but fallen, for
because of the multitude of the fornications, of the harlots as the Prophet
Nahum expresses it, who is beautiful, and a mistress of witchcraft, and
sells the people through her whoredoms, and the Nations through her
witchcrafts, which Rev. 18.2. to the 19 verse, may fitly be applied, cried by
the Angel: And he cried out mightily, saying, It is fallen, it is fallen.
Babylon that great city, and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold
of all soul spirits, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird. For all
nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and the kings
of the earth have committed fornication with her; and the merchants of the
earth are waxed rich of the abundance of her pleasures. And the kings of the
earth shall bewail her, and lament for her, which have committed fornication,
and lived in pleasure with her, when they shall see the smoke of that her
burning; and shall stand afar off, for fear of her torments, saying, Alas, alas
that great city Babylon, that mighty city: for in one hour is thy judgment
come. And the merchants of the earth shall weep and wail over her: for no man
buyeth their ware any more. The merchants of these things which were waxed
rich, shall stand afar from her, for fear of her torment, weeping and wailing,
and saying, Alas, alas, that great city that was clothed in fine linen, and
purple and scarlet and gilded with gold, and precious stones, and pearls. And
every ship-master, and all the people that occupy ships, and ship-men, and
whosoever traffic on the sea, when they see the smoke of that her burning,
shall say, What city was like unto this great city! And shall cast dust on
their heads, and cry, weeping and wailing, and say, Alas, alas, that great
city, wherein were made rich all that had ships on the sea, by her costliness:
for in one hour is she made desolate. Who is wife, and he shall understand
these things; prudent, and he shall know them; as was said concerning the
destruction of Samaria, Hos. 14,10. for, the ways of the Lord are righteous,
and the just shall walk in them; but the wicked shall fall therein. And since
you Secular Judges retain not only the Habit of that Babylonish Strumpet, but
much of her Popish impudence of customs and manners; I will chose up this
appeal, and protest against Anichristian Babylonish Ecclesiastic brats and
merchants of England, who are rich made through the abundance of her
delicacies, and that are clothed in fine linen and purple, and scarlet, and
decked with gold, precious stones, and pearls, with Psalm,2. Let not the heathen
rage, or the people murmr: Be wise now therefore, ye kings; be learned, ye
judges of the earth; serve the Lord in fear and rejoice in trembling. Kiss the
Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish in the way: when his wrath shall suddenly
burn, blessed are all that trust in him.

Postscript.
SHould I have further stirred in this puddle of iniquity, and have set down
the partial report made for Hurst and Ireton, and the Affidavit recorded by
Edw. Miles, which spoils them both, and the several Orders upon their several
Motions, and Petitions, and Mis-informations, entered insinuated and inserted,
they would have edified but little: and such who know Chancery-proceedings,
know the lying and lucrous ends and drifts of such Motions, Mis-informations,
and Orders, and Reorderings. But I humbly entreat Sheriff Underwood and his
Partner, in time to consider of the malicious dealing of John Hurst, who durst
betray his Masters into amercements, against Law or Equity, my Bill being
dismissed, and costs paid some days before, above a week before Hurst amerceth
his Masters, yea 10. days, and a dismission enrolled is not to be altered, it
being a final sentence of the Court, as you may read in a book called the
practice of the high Court of Chancery unfolded, printed 1652. page 25.

Let all men be hereby advised, who have any Estate, to settle it, and that
surely, that so trouble may be avoided, and their Children may be provided for,
and not strangers and lying Lawyers filled with their Estates or increase, they
eating up the Childrens bread. In the book named before, page 29.

The Counsel that mis-informs the Court in his motions, or moves, not informing
the former Order in the cause, has had his order so misgotten thereby vacated,
and costs awarded to be paid by himself or his Clyent: by himself, if it lay in
him to have informed himself better, or else by the Clyent, who misinformed
his Counsel; the Court being hereby much troubled, and the Suitors delayed,
desiring an end of their suits, and not movere and promovere: but apparent it
is that such motions only as tend to the end of the cause, and not to put it
out of the way, are good for the suitors and ease of the Court. Truth is
strong, and will prevail, believes

Yours Nathanael Burt.

FINIS.

