BY THE Company of Woodmongers
WHEREAS a general and open scandal in an ignominious and reproachful way has
been falsely laid upon the Woodmongers in their Trade of selling of Wood and
Coals, by some who have (as it has appeared) with unsized Measures,
maliciously and without lawful authority, in a turbulent manner taken upon them
to measure Coals, after the said Coals have been sent from the several Wharffs
in lawful and well sized Sacks, marked and allowed for that purpose, with
allowed sealed Measures in their Carts, which have been proved and tried before
the Chief Magistrate of this City, and the Sacks found, when shrunk, to carry
the full proportion within the Sack without heaping or topping, yet
notwithstanding, by such unskilful in measuring, or partial in action, have
found them short in measure, and so divulged it, on purpose to make the
Woodmongers odious, although the same being afterward meated by a sworn
Meater, with an allowed sealed Bushel from the Office, was then found full
Measure; The Odium is published to all, and believed by some; the Truth appears
privately, and is known but to a few; Insomuch that the Woodmongers money is
often stopped in the Customers hands upon the aforesaid pretense of their Coals
not being measure; and Suits at Law, by some contentious, consequently
following the same, and by such consequent delays, Customers sometimes take
their opportunities and are gone, and the Woodmonger loses his whole Debt;
Which Burden has long lain upon the shoulders of the Woodmongers: All which
being taken into serious consideration, and that the Woodmongers Wharff is his
Market to sell his Commodity in, as the Shop is the Trades-mans; and whereas
the Woodmongers do pay ready money for all their Coals, and many times
beforehand for their Wood, and that Coals and Wood may be sold at the cheapest
rate that possibly may be afforded at,

Out of which considerations it is desired, that all persons whatsoever wanting
Coals or Wood do come themselves into the said several Wharffs, or send their
Servants or Agents thither, to see and approve of such Wood and Coal as they
shall desire to have before they be sent from the Wharff. And if any misdoubt
their measure, they shall there see their Coals measured with a lawful Measure,
into their several Sacks; and for prevention of several Suits begotten as
before is expressed, That all persons whatsoever, do take notice that from and
after the Fourteenth day of September next they bring or send down their Money
for such Coals and Wood, as they from time to time intend to have, before the
same be delivered out of the Wharff where they buy: And the said Woodmongers
after such delivery from their respective Wharffs, are not to own the new
measuring of any such Coals; or make any allowance of any that shall be
pretended to be wanting upon such new measuring, forasmuch as every one that
will may have the same lawfully measured at the Wharff, and being so measured,
to expect his due and no more: And if any shall take the same by consent, they
are to have the same lawful size of Sacks marked and allowed as formerly,
filled and topped with as equal a hand between Buyer and Seller as possible may
be; and the said Woodmongers are not to use any other then the allowed sealed
Measures and Sacks at their Wharffs; and that this may be well and truly
performed, the Masters and Wardens of the said Woodmongers Company will appoint
such Overseers that shall from time to time see the due performance hereof: Or
bring the Offenders to condign punishment.

HALL Clerk.


