BY CONSENT. Charecters of some young Women, belonging to the Changes: Who are
to be Disposed of by Way of AUCTION, July 41.
Conditions of Sale.

Imprimis. No Man shall Presume to bid but such as are very well able to
maintain them after Marriage. Item, They are to be taken with all faults, for
we shall change none after Sale. Item, He that offers most is the Buyer.
Qualified, or not: His Money will Supply his Defects.

They are to be seen every Day at their respective Shops, or where they spend
their Time on Sunday, if you can find them.

l. 1 ONE very Pretty, Proper, black Gentlewoman in the -- Exchange, something
Superannuated, but so fast fixed by continuance, that nothing but a Coach and
six can draw her out, Worth at least 500 2 A Gentlewoman her Associate, she has
an extraordinary Face, I mean for bigness, Worth 350 3 A Gentlewoman, her Face
a little upon the Ruby, declares that if she does not go of this Sale, that she
will go beyond Sea, Worth 200 4 A tall Gentlewoman well shaped, tollerably
handsome, she has staid a great while for a Husband, but she says it was not for
any ill Nature, and so desires she may be Accepted, Worth 200 5 One middle
sized Gentlewoman about 23. Rough-cut, Pock-holes in her Face, not Ugly
understands Court-ship, having practiced it her self, not far off in a
Neighboring Change, Worth 250 6 A Gentle woman about 15. very fair and
slender, scarce an Arm-full, she loves a Man that tosses his Wigg with an Air,
not very Rich though she has good Friends, we cannot promise above 200 7 One
little simpering Gentlewoman, tollerably-handsome, she has a very good way with
her, and is worth 150 8 One Gentlewoman whose Father has the Reputation of
making good Faces, and you may be sure did his Best for his Daughter, who after
all is but so, so, she is good Natured; but her Eldest Sister being unmarri'd,
she cannot be worth above 100 9 A Gentlewoman very Pretty of a good Reputation;
but a small Stock, and a Scanty-trade, she not having the industry to piece it
out with her Tail, like some of the rest, yet she would be very glad to be
taken off of the Cares of the World, and may be worth 40 10 A young Gentlewoman
in the uper Walk, about 18. a pale Face, sparkling Eyes, something too Airy,
her Mother keeps her Country House and a Coach, ay and a Plough too; yes, and
the same Horses serve both, worth when her Mother Dies 100 11 One very Curious,
neat well shapt, tender Skind-Gentlewoman, with a hard Face; alias a brazen
Forehead, worth 320 12 One tall Black young Woman, Pretty-enough, and an
Intrieging-Brain, Roguish Eyes, well Spoken, diligent at her Hands, and has a
Woundy swing with her Tail, worth if you will take her Word 200 13 A
Gentlewoman a Milliner well stockt with Brick-bat's and Past-boards, well
covered with white Paper to sill up the Empty-holes, trades most with Men,
worth in Ireland, if you will fetch it 250 14 One broad Faced Gentlewoman, goes
well Dressed, strait Limbs, very Talkative, and stands much upon a Swords-man,
worth 600 15 A Pretty young Gentlewoman about 14, worth with her Fathers
consent 600 16 One Gentlewoman, extraordinary Witty, a pleasing Air, good
Humored, Dances well, Sings incomparably, every way accomplished, but because
we will not impose upon any Body, we give Notice that her Apron is lined, if
any one likes this Bargain, she will be worth in contribution Money 500 17 One
very tall first rate young Woman, thin Visag'd a pretty low Forhead, a sharp
Nose, and by consequence, a shrill-voice, brisk-eyes, flat Breast's, very
Nimble of her Hands and Tongue, very Covetous, and so, not very Nice in
receiving Presents, she has also a very Confident, I should have said a
competent Stock of Wit: worth at Present o, but when her Grandmother Dies 0000
18 One Widow, open's her Mouth well, has a consident way with her, well stockt
in any thing, but Money, but of that 0 19 One pretty civil Maid, who being Pus't
up with the thick foggy Vapors of the Town, and eating too many Sausages, went
to take the fresh air in the Country, from whence she is returned well
recovor'd, Worth 200 20 This Number we reserve for a Slender pale faced, Black
young Woman about 16, worth just 300

Who for her many Qualifications deserves a Catalogue entire for her self,
which if she will leave Frowning and Scolding, we dare promise shall be
performed to Her satisfaction.


