Exeter College CASE. Philips ver' Bury.
EJectment in B. R. for the Rectors House of Exon. Coll. in Oxon. upon a
special Verdict, (though the Plaintiff was not Statutably elected, yet) the
sole Question was, Whether the Deprivation of Dr. Bury the Rector, by the
Bishop of Exeter the Visitor, be good in Law? And Adjudged for the Defendant,
that the Sentence of Deprivation is void in Law; and from that Judgment the
Plaintiff brings his Writ of Error in the House of Lords?

The CASE.
MR. Colmer one of the Fellows of the College, being Statutably Expelled for
Incontinency, Appeals to the Visitor, who sends Dr. Masters his Commissary, to
hear the Appeal in March, 1689. Dr. Masters comes, and the Rector and Fellows
attend him and Submit to him as in a Visitation, but as to the Appeal they do
protest against it; because by the Statutes of the College, no Appeal lies to
the Visitor or his Commissary, but to the Vice Chancellor of Oxford, who is
Appointed the Judge to determine Controversies between the Rector and Fellows:
And a Fellow when he takes his Oath, Renounces all Appeals, if he shall happen
to be Expelled by the Rector and Senior Fellows; and that Statute which
directs the Expulsion of a Fellow, forbids all Appeals.

The Visitor comes in Person upon the 16th. of June following, the Rector and
Major part of the Fellows under their Common Seal, (being Bound by their Oaths
to defend their privileges) protest, that they cannot in Conscience Submit to
him in that Visitation, because by the Statutes, the Visitor or his Commissary
can Libere accedere ad Collegium, but once in Five Years, unless Requested by
the Rector and Senior Fellows; and they conceived that the Commissary's coming
before was a Liber Accessus, and an Execution of the Quinquennial Power. The
Visitor thereupon gave an Oath to Webber concerning the Summons, and did an Act
of Visitation, and called over the Names of the Rector and Fellows, and they
Appearing and Protesting, he departed.

The Bishop comes again the 24th. of July following, at which time the Rector
and Major part of the Fellows under their Common Seal, make the like
Protestation as before; and then he Adjourned to the 25th. and at that time he
Suspends the Major part of the Fellows, Seniors and others, and deprives (...)
one of the Senior Fellows, and Adjourns to the 26th. day; and at that time he
deprives the Rector, with the Consent of Four Fellows that were not Seniors;
and to enforce his Sentence, Excommunicated the Rector if he did not within a
Week depart from his Posession; which Excommunication upon full hearing, the
Court of Kings Bench commanded him to revoke, but he refuses to do it.

The REASONS of the Judgment of the King's Bench, were:
1. THat by the Statutes of the College, the Bishop can come to Visit but once
in Five Years, and that Visitation can last but three days; but in the Case in
Question, the Rector was deprived upon the 26th. day of July, which was the
4th. day of the pretended Visitation: For the 16th. day of June was to be
reckoned one day of the Visitation; for the Bishop appointed it to be so, and
upon that day did an Act of Visitation.

2. By the Statutes of the College the Visitor may not Punish Rector or Fellow
otherwise then the Statutes direct, and there is a list of such crimes as are
to be punished by Deprivation; but Contumacy is not mentioned. Nor did the
Founder intend to put the Rector and Fellows in worse condition than any other
English Men, by being Perjured if they do not defend their Privileges, or
Ruined if they do.

3. By the Statutes of the College, the Consent of Four of the Seven Senior
Fellows is absolutely necessary to the Deprivation of a Rector: And though to his
Sentence there was the Consent of Four Fellows, yet they were not of the Seven
Seniors; and the Suspension of the Seven Seniors did not debar them of this
right of Consenting to the Sentence.

The Visitor is appointed by the Statutes the Expositor of the words, and
meaning of them; and by taking the Consent of Four Fellows (though they be not
the right) to the Sentence, and their Subscriptions thereto, he has Expounded
the words, so as to require such a Consent as necessary.

4. The Rector's refusing to submit to this Visitation upon a mistake, if there
were any, is not a Reasonable cause for his deprivation.

5. The Rector was never Personally charged with the Crime for which he was
deprived, nor had any time or warning given him to Answer such a charge, as the
words of the Statute do require; and there be words in the Sentence which are
too general, and give no particular Charge, and can receive no particular
Answer; as Aliorum criminum enormium.

6. That the Reasonableness or Unreasonableness of a Visitors Sentence, is
Examinable in Westminster Hall, is the Opinion of the Lord Chief Justice Dyer
fol. 209. as in Dr. Coveny's Case the President of Magdalen Coll. in Oxon. and
of the Lord Chief Justice Cook, in his 11. Rep. fol. 99. in James Bagg's Case.

And therefore it is Humbly Hoped, that the Judgment given by the King's Bench
for the Defendent, will be Affirmed by your LORDSHIPS.


