BEHOLD THE HUSBANDMAN. S. James 5. 7.

Ora and Labora.

LONDON, Printed for John Barksdale, next the Five Bells in New-street. 1677.

To his Loving Friends, and Parishioners.
THis short Discourse I offer you, in remembrance of my Care, to have you be
delighted with your daily Labors; and withal, to raise up your thoughts from
Earth to Heaven, to that God, who makes his Sun to shine, and his Rain to fall
upon your Fields, and gives you to eat the Labors of your hands with comfort.
To his continued favor I daily commend you and yours.

C. B.

S. James 5. 7. Behold the Husbandman.
THe word, Behold, is usually set before things of our careful Observation. I
invite you therefore to a serious view of Husbandry; the consideration whereof,
as it may be delightful to all, so will it be especially useful to them, whose
business is to labor, and spend most of their time in tilling of the earth. For
whose sake I intend in a plain order to declare these two points.

1. The commendations, and praise of Husbandry. 2. The complaints and
grievances of it, together with the Remedies and Answers.
I. Of the commendation and praise of Husbandry.
1. HEre we will look upon the original and beginning of this employment. We
read in Genesis 2. 15. The Lord God took the man, (Adam our first Father, from
whom all Mankind was descended,) and put him into the Garden of Eden, to dress
it, and to keep it. This was the calling, this the employment of Man in the
state of Innocence, wherein he was created, to keep and dress a Garden; a piece
of Husbandry. And this no small commendation, that it was the first employment,
the first business God himself put man upon before the Fall. An innocent Labor,
well became the state of Innocence.

After the Fall, when Adam had sinned by eating the forbidden Fruit, as we read
Genesis 3. God dispossessed Adam of that pleasant Garden, and instead of that
easy and delightful exercise of dressing the Garden, and keeping it, put him
to plow, bound him to this harder labor of raising Corn of barren ground, by
the sweat of his brows. For the earth was Cursed for the sin of Man, and would
not yield Fruit to him that had rebelled against his Maker, until it was
overcome by laborious tillage. In the sweat of thy Face shall thou eat thy
bread. Genesis 3. 19. However, though the Calling be laborious, you see it is by
Gods appointment, and it was the work wherein the Father of all Mankind was
employed, to till the ground. This Antiquity and beginning of Husbandry is that
we observe in the first place. It is the most ancient Calling.

2. Next to the Antiquity of this employment, you may take notice of the
necessity thereof. Bread is the staff of life, and therefore where we are
taught in the Lords Prayer to ask for maintenance, we are commanded to say,
Give us Bread. And when Jacob desired of God to sustain him in his Travels, and
promised that for such a favor he would be Gods faithful Servant, Bread is
named, If the Lord says he, will give me Bread to eat. Genesis 28. 20. Bread is
the most substantial food, that which is of most concernment to us, and for
this reason it goes for all. Now Bread is that which God has ordained to be
the fruit of the Husbandmans labor. The Husbandman plows the ground, the ground
yields Corn, by Gods blessing on it, and of Corn is made Bread. Many other
things may be spared, but Bread may not be wanting. The profit of the earth is
for all: the King himself is served by the Field. Eccles. 5. 9. From the
highest to the lowest, all have need of Bread; it is our daily sustenance.
Husbandry therefore is the most necessary Calling.

3. If Husbandry be so ancient, and so necessary, it must needs be Honorable.
And so it has been of high esteem in the most famous Kingdoms and
Commonwealths. You heard but now from Ecclesiastes, That the King himself is
saved by the Field. A just cause it is, that the King should respect, and hold
with tillage. In the 2 Chronicles. 26. We find a great commendation of one of the
good Kings of Judah, by name Uzziah; and among the rest of his noble acts, it
is mentioned for his Honor, That he loved Husbandry, v. 10. This is something
out of the sacred History.

For other Nations, none was so rich in good Examples as the old Commonwealth
of Rome; none ever set a greater esteem on Husbandry. The Senators themselves
and Fathers of their Country, such as were most valiant in Arms, did not
disdain Agriculture, but made the tilling of their tract a great part of their
care and exercise. Most memorable is that related by the Roman Histories of one
of their Dictators, that was called from the Plow, and sent to command their
Army. When he had conquered the enemy, and delivered his Country from great
danger, Rediit ad boves triumphata Agricola: This triumphant Husbandman
returned to his Plow again. I may add to this, that in ancient times Plow-men
were so much regarded by Armies of Soldiers near each other in the Field, that
the Husbandman followed his work without disturbance. Husbandry is an honorable
Calling.

4. Not only most ancient, necessary, honorable, but it is pleasant also. The
pleasantness of Husbandry, that is the fourth Commendation of it. See here the
goodness of God mixed with his severity. You heard before out of Genesis 3. that
the ground was Cursed for Man's sin; and that Man was sentenced to sweat for his
Bread. Here is, you will say, the severity of God. But let us observe his
goodness too, in turning their labor and pains into the delight and pleasure of
the honest Husbandman. He submits willingly to Gods Ordinance, and seeing God
has commanded him to labor hard, labor he will; and it is more pleasant a great
deal to him to labor than to be idle. He sweats, but his sweat is sweet. He
plows either in the clay, or the stony ground: the Birds of the air in the mean
time make him music, yea and he makes himself music at his work, and either
sings or whistles his melodious Notes, whilst his eye and his hand direct the
Plow. When he returns home from the Field, he brings a good stomach with him,
which makes even the coursest fare more delightful, than the dainties of other
men, and after all, The sleep of the laboring man is sweet, whethether he eat
little or much. Eccles. 5. 12.

Hence it is, from his daily labor and exercise of body, from the wholesome air
he breaths in the open Field, from his plain Diet, and the good rest attending
it: That the Husbandman usually enjoys that which is the most valuable and
sweetest blessing of this life, constant health and vigor, and strength of
body; which makes him not only the more cheerful in his own vocation, but more
able to serve his King and Country when he is called to it.

And this might be another commendation of Husbandry, that it has yielded men
most serviceable in the Wars. Surely, the strength of the English Armies is
reported by our Historians to have consisted in the Yeomanry, in those times of
old, when the English Nation carried their victorious Ensigns over France, and
other Countries. This I do but touch, and conclude our first point, concerning
the commendation of Husbandry from the Antiquity, Necessity, Honor, and
Pleasure of it: Four particulars which may abundantly suffice to procure a
greater Regard thereof.

And I cannot pass to the next point, before I have made some Reflection upon
the unthankfulness both of Husbandmen themselves, and of Men that are of other
Callings.

Husbandmen themselves, many of them seem not to acknowledge the worthiness and
usefulness of their course of life. They do not rightly value the blessing of
God, who gives them to eat the labor of their hands, to use the words of the
128 Psalm. They follow not their business wi^h that integrity and alacrity,
which becomes their innocent and useful Calling Think upon Gods Ordinance, that
has appointed you to your labor; think upon the great benefit of your labors
to the commonwealth; think upon the happiness of having health of body,
wholesome diet, undisturbed sleep, and be not contented only, but thankful that
God has placed you in such a way of life. Husbandmen were happy, if they did
consider well the happiness of their Calling. Felices nimium bona si sua norint.

And Men of other Callings may be taxed of injustice and unthankfulness, who
slights the Husbandman that provides them Bread. Let not the fine Gentleman,
nor the rich Citizen, pride himself in soft apparel, or dainty fare, and deride
the plainness and simplicity of the Husbandman. They cannot live without Bread,
and this comes from the labor of the plain, simple Husbandman.

But least I seem to flatter my Husbandman, and blow him up with a vain opinion
of himself, or lay him to sleep in security, let me now proceed from the
praises of the Husbandmans Calling, to the Complaints and Grievances, together
with their Remedies and Answers.

II. Of the Complaints or Grievances of Husbandry.
1. THe Husbandman, being the Man that fetches his profits out of the earth, is
in danger of being earthly minded. Observe the Plowman at his work: He boweth
his body toward the ground, leaning upon his Plow: He has his eye fixed on the
Furrow: He seems to love the very smell of the dung and soil wherewith his land
is made more fruitful. To walk among his Corn, to see it prosper, and grow more
and more ready for the harvest, is his great delight: To have seasonable
weather is his desire: The Inning of his Corn, and carrying of it out to market
is his care; and these things are so much in his Thoughts, so much in his Talk,
that the fear is, lest he cleave too much to the earth, and to these temporal
things pertaining to our present life, not minding, as he ought, things
heavenly and eternal, in comparison whereof all earthly profits are
contemptible. It Is a hard matter for Men so much conversant with earth, and
looking so much upon it, to raise up their minds to heaven. This is the
complaint.

To prevent or correct this too much minding of the world, and love of earthly
things, Scripture and Reason afford us helps and remedies sufficient. Reason it
self may teach us the vanity and uncertainty of worldly youth: That the things
we possess are subject to many casualties, and may be taken from us; and that
we our selves are also liable to many accidents, and may be taken away we know
not how soon from the things which we now possess. But then the Scripture comes
in with loud Admonitions. Vanity of vanities, all is vanity, says the
Preacher, Eccles. 1. All flesh is grass, and the goodliness thereof is as the
flower of the field, says the Prophet Isa. 40. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon,
sath our Savior: And take no thought for your life, what you shall ear, Matthew.
6. Love not the world, nor the things of the world, says S. John, 1 Epist. 2.
chapter What is your life, says St. James, It is but a vapor. Add to all this the
example of the foolish Husbandman; who pleased himself in his full Barns, and
trusted in the abundance of his fruits but is soundly checked for it, Luke 12.
20. All which may serve to secure our husbandman from danger, or to Cure him of
his over much minding and setting his affection upon this earth; and may teach
him to look up to Heaven to lay up riches there, where they shall be reserved
for him as an immortal possession.

2. But it is urged again, that the Husbandman whose daily employment is about
this earth, and in providing for the body, can have but little time to bestow
upon Religion, and the care of his Soul. And this may be perhaps in your
thoughts, when I exhort you not to be earthly minded; you may think upon the
multiplicity of your business, you must plow, and sow, and gather in, and
thresh, and carry out to market, and besides take care of I know not how many
matters more, belonging to your course of life; and you may wonder that any
Preacher should require of Tillers of the earth, and secular Men, that they
should be spiritual Men, and make Religion their business. To this I answer,
That you must learn to follow worldly business with heavenly minds. That is
thus; Consider your Calling is ordained by God, and that when you do the works
of your Calling rightly, you do then do God service. Take the fear of God with
you, aim at his glory as that great end of your life, behave your self humbly,
and honestly, and faithfully as before him. This having of right aims, this
walking uprightly, this doing of worldly business in obedience to God, this
minding of Gods presence with you, and his Providence over you, is the
following of earthly affairs in a spiritual and heavenly manner, and may justly
be accounted the true serving of God.

But then withal, no Man must so far engage himself to the affairs of this
world, but he must have some time of freedom to attend upon the immediate
service of God in holy duties, both public in the Congregation, private in the
Family, and yet more private in the Closet, or any secret place. I say, No Man
must forget these, but so order his worldly business, that Religion may not be
neglected, that the soul may not be unprovided for, that holy duties may not be
omitted.

This our Husbandman will be the more careful of, I mean to afford time for
holy duties, by considering, that it is the Lords blessing which makes the
earth fruitful. In vain you rise up early, and sit up late; in vain you toil
and labor, except the Lord prosper you, except he send the former and later
rain, and make the Sun to shine upon the Land. Therefore it is, that in
Scripture, the food we have out of the earth for our selves, and for our
Cattle, is not so much ascribed to the care and labor of the Husbandman, as to
the goodness and bounty of God. The eyes of all wait upon thee O Lord, and thou
give them their meat in due season. Thou openest thy hand, and satisfiest the
desire of every living thing. Psalm. 145. 15, 16.

3. It Is a great complaint and grievance, That the Husbandman after all his
care and pains, and labor, meets with many crosses, and losses. After his
diligent plowing and sowing, sometimes he does not receive his seed again:
sometimes his harvest is spoiled by immoderate rain, and unseasonable weather:
sometimes his laboring Cattle are diseased, and die upon his hands: sometimes
the markets fall, and the price of Corn answers not his expectation, nor his
labor and charge to raise it. These, and more sad accidents may make a
Countrymans life not very desirable.

But to give some Answer to this also: I would know of you what Calling in the
world is free from losses, and crosses. Are not the Merchants Ventures in great
perils? Are not their Ships, however richly laden, sometimes cast away in the
tempestuous Sea, and swallowed in the deep, sometimes robbed and plundered by
the Pirates? Do not Shop-keeperse it her, by ill bargains, or bad customers
sometimes break? Are not all humane affairs subject to changes, and chances?
Wherefore, if we would not be within a possibility of any calamity, we must
altogether forsake the earth, and have no commerce with the present world.

All that I can say here is this: We must not by our own negligence make to our
selves, and create crosses: We must walk very circumspectly in all our affairs,
and take heed that we be not injured and abused by a deceitful world. The
crosses which God shall lay upon us, we must learn to bear patiently, and find
out the right use of every accident. And we must set the good we have gotten,
against the evil we suffer. The honest Husbandman, if he fail of his hopes one
year, will comfort himself with the fruitfulness of another year. If at one
time he has a bad market, another time will make amends. If his loss be heavy
now, his gain may be as great hereafter. But suppose he should be impoverisht
by casualties, and adversities: His breeding, and course of life enables him to
bear hardships and want a great deal more easily, than such as are of a more
delicate and soft temper, and condition. And this I take to be no small
advantage of our Husbandman, when the worst that can come, falls upon him.

4. One more complaint, and it is a great grievance in the eye of many
Husbandmen, that their Lands are subject to heavy Taxes, and to the payment of
Tithes. Hence arises occasion of murmuring and discontent, that all the fruits
of their labors, and profits of their estates should not go into their own
Coffers. But let us consider.

The Taxes first and Tribute which is called for by the State; Is it not for
the maintenance of Peace amongst us? Is it not for the defense of the Kingdom?
Is not that which we pay to the King given him by Act of Parliament, the
Representative of the whole Nation? So then, if that which the Husbandman
pays to the public, be paid according to the Laws of the Land; if it be paid
to a very good end and purpose, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life,
and enjoy our lives, and liberties, and estates in safety: Surely, this is not
a just matter of complaint. At this be not troubled, be not grieved.

Then also for Tithes paid to the Church, Shall our Husband men be worse than
Jews? The Ministers of their Law had Cities, and Lands, and Tithes, and
Offerings, which are found upon a just account of Learned Men, far, very far to
exceed the portion of the Ministers of the Gospel. And yet the Gospel is a far
better Ministration, as S. Paul declares, 2 Cor. 3. Again, Shall our
Husbandmen have less Faith in God than the Jews? Among them it was received as
a most certain truth, Da decimus ut ditescar: Pay thy Tithes well, and be rich.
The just and cheerful payment of Tithes was the right way to prosper, and to
have Gods blessing upon their Land. They had a Prayer to be used at the end of
Tithing, wherein they laid claim to the blessing promised: Lord, now look down
from thy holy Habitation, and bless thy people, and bless the Land which thou
have given us. Deuteronomy. 26. 15. Briefly, if Tithes by the ancient Laws of this
Land, are given and solemnly directed to God and his Church. (Deo and
Ecclesiae; so it is in the Records,) To God and his Church: If they are held by
Ministers, by as good right, as other Freemen holds their estates: If they are
neither to be bought nor sold by the Tenant-holders: If the end of them be for
the Glory of God, and the everlasting good of Gods people: Then of this payment
to be duly and truly made by the honest Husbandman, I may also pronounce: Be
not troubled at it, Be not grieved.

Thus Beloved, you have heard, as in the first part, the commendation of
Husbandry, from the Antiquity, Necessity, Honor, and Pleasure of it: So in our
later part, the Complaints and Grievances; in as much as Men that till the
earth, are apt to be earthly minded; and secondly, that they have so much
worldly business, as not to spare time for duties of Religion; and thirdly,
that they are exposed to many losses and crosses; and fourthly, that their
Lands are burdened with payment of Taxes, and Tithes. You have heard of all
the Answers and Remedies, for those Complaints and Grievances.

Conclusion.
IT remains only to conclude with a short exhortation, and that shall be by
calling you off from the earthly to the spiritual Husbandry. As you till your
ground, so must your selves also be tilled and manured. For ye are Gods
Husbandry, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. 9. The Ministers of the Gospel are Gods
Husbandmen to manure and cultivate your souls. Be not, I beseech you, like unto
the Rook, that will not receive the seed of Gods Word. Do not suffer the Word
that is scattered amongst you to be unprofitable. As you expect fruit from the
Land that you bestow pains upon; as you look for a harvest: So do you bring
forth fruit unto God, and let not our labor be in vain. The fruit which the
earth yields, is but for the maintenance of this short, and transitory life:
but the Fruit of the Word of God, the Fruit of the Spirit, holiness and
righteousness, this Fruit endures to Eternity. This Fruit, this most precious
Fruit, that you may bring forth plentifully. God of his infinite mercy grant,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. To whom, etc.

FINIS.
THE GOOD HOUSEHOLDER
1. HE not only provideth temporal maintenance for his Children, and Servants;
but takes care of their spiritual estate, and feeds their souls as well as
their bodies.

2. His endeavor is, that every one of the Household may attend upon Gods
service in the Church, as well as follow their ordinary business in the House,
Field, or Market.

3. Prayer, and Reading, and Catechizing is duly observed in his Family. And
for the better ordering thereof, direction is taken from Gods Minister, the
Guide of Souls, not only by public ministration, but by private and particular
assistance also. With whom he delights often to confer about things Divine,
and the care of his Soul.


