The Kings Return.

A SERMON PREACHED At WINCHCOMB in Gloucestershire UPON The KINGS-DAY,
Thursday, May 24. 1660.

By CLEMENT BARKSDALE.

SENECA. Rex velit honesta, nemo non eadem volet. LONDON, Printed for R.
Royston at the Angel in Ivye-lane, 1660.

The KING'S Return.
II. SAM. XV. 25. If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring
me again.
MEN are generally short-sighted: they see things before their feet, taking but
little or obscure notice of the hand of Heaven, moving and disposing the
Affairs and Events of this World. When Adversity befalls us, we complain of our
Enemies, of bad Luck and Fortune: and when we prosper, we applaud our selves,
our own Wit and Diligence: in both cases forgetting God for the most part, or
remembering him in a very cold and heartless manner.

Hence it is, that so many are discontented and murmur when things go cross
against them; that so many are proud and unthankful in the time of their
successes and prosperity. Whereas a right looking up to God in both conditions
would keep us still in a right frame and temper; not suffer us to swell with
pride, nor sink into despair.

Thus it is in our private Estates, and much more it is thus in the Public, in
the great Affairs of Kingdoms and Commonwealths. Suppose a King, a religious
King, be forced from his Throne, and live as a banished man, persecuted and
almost forsaken, how apt are we to look only upon the rebellious, cruel,
ambitious party that cast him out; a party that pretended Godliness, but showed
no Humanity: and in the mean, not consider at all the Providence of God, who
thus afflicts the King to try his Patience, to exercise and improve his Graces,
to prepare him for the greater Glory, and make him the greater blessing and
more welcome to his people?

Again, the King returns, and is brought home unto the Throne of his Fathers:
Here also we are prone to forget God, and magnify the Valor, and Prudence,
and Loyalty of a most Noble General, and an obedient Army; and to ascribe much
to the wisdom and endeavors of a blessed Parliament; and to commend the
forwardness of a gallant Nobility and Gentry, and of a Loving People: Whereas
God is the prime Author, and Contriver and Doer of all: He begins, and
continues, and perfects this Glorious Work.

If the King send gracious Messages, He moves the heart of the King: if the
Parliament return dutiful and grateful Answers, He stirs up the heart of the
Parliament: If the General ride on prosperously, He gives the General good
speed: If the Navy have a safe arrival, He sends the favorable wind, he fills
the sails, he is the Safe-gard, he the Conductor, that brings the King, and the
Nobles, and the Captains, and all the Royal Retinue to the Haven where they
would be.

This is Opus Diei, this Thankful acknowledgment of Gods wonderful Hand, is the
business of the day: and I could not think upon a fitter Text, then these words
of King David. David is an excellent example to teach us a right behavior in
both Conditions. He is driven from Jerusalem by Conspiracy and Rebellion, and
afterward returns with victory and honor; and in both, in his being driven
out, and in his bringing back, he sees Gods hand, he acknowledges Gods
providence. If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me
again. The same Lord, tha thath been pleased to chastise me by the Rebellion of
my seduced people, can bring them to a better understanding of all things, and
change their hearts, and turn their Affections toward me, and by them restore
me to Jerusalem again, and to the peaceable possession of my Kingdom.

The words, without any straining, will fairly yield us these two Propositions:

1. It is the Lords doing to bring the King again: however, under God, as we
shall see, there are diverse Means and Instruments, yet certainly it is the
Lords doing.

II. To bring the King again is a signal favor of the Lord: a favor to the
King, and a favor to the People also.

When I shall have considered these two Propositions or Observations, first in
relation to King David, and then in relation to King Charles: where some of our
lines will run very parallel: I shall in conclusion, exhort to Thankfulness;
not only a verbal, but a real Thankfulness, for this so great a work of the
Lord, so great a favor in the return of our most gracious Sovereign. This is
the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

I. It is the Lords doing, to bring the King again.
The proof of this Proposition is, either general, or particular.

1. General, thus; It is the Lord, that as he made the world, so he governs the
world. It did not become the Wisdom of God, when he had by his infinite Power
produced and built up this excellent frame of Heaven and Earth, and all things
contained therein, to forsake the work of his hands, and leave it to the blind
guidance of Chance and Fortune. No: as he made the world by his Power, and
disposed it in a beautiful order; so he rules it by his Wisdom; and his
Providence shines forth unto us in those various strange events we behold,
that many times may beget in us admiration, and sometimes tempt us to
infidelity. Afflicted Piety, persecuted Innocence, on the one hand; Prosperous
Wickedness, Triumphant Injustice, on the other hand, has sometimes staggered
the faith of weak man: but when we behold Innocence relieved, Piety rewarded;
when we perceive the prosperity and success of wicked men, and ungodly Usurpers
to be on the sudden over thrown, and themselves brought to ruin and
destruction, and their Names and Memories to not and perish: Then, absolvimus
Deum, we acquit God; no longer suspect, but magnify his Justice and
Providence: Then we say, Verily there is a God that judges the world: God
reignetb in the Heaven and in the Earth: The Lord is righteous in all his
ways, and holy in all his works. From this general Providence of God and his
care in the Government of the world, we cannot but conclude, It is the Lards
doing to bring the King again.

2. The more special and particular proof is thus: God, as he has a care of
all things, so more especially of men; and among all men, most of those that
are styled Gods, his Vicegerents and Deputies, Kings and Princes upon Earth:
and among all Kings, God has a peculiar care of religious Kings, such as David
was, such as our Sovereign is. Great deliverance gives he unto his King: not
deliverance alone, but great deliverance: And shows mercy to his Anointed, to
David, and to his feed for evermore: Not to David only, but to his seed; not
for the present only, but for evermore.

This is in the end of the 18. Psalm, and in the beginning of the 21. The King
shall joy in thy strength, O Lord, and in thy salvation how greatly shall he
rejoice! The strenth of the Lord, and the Salvation of the Lord is upon the
King, and this is matter of joy and rejoicing to him and to all good people.
For it is the usual Method of Providence to convey blessings to the people by
the King: As the Ointment poured on Aarons head ran down to the skirts of his
garment; so a blessing on the King, when his Royal Person is brought home in
safety and honor, and established in the Throne, descends through the whole
body of the Realm, even to the skirts and borders of the Land. And therefore we
may conclude the care of God in the preservation of the King, to be a principal
and peculiar care. When the King is brought home, it is the Lords doing.

A further proof hereof we may draw from another speech of King David
concerning Shimei, chapter 16. where he acknowledges even the cursing of that
wicked man to proceed in some sort from the Lord. I say in some sort, i. e. not
with his allowance and approbation, but by his permission; for this was
permitted and directed by the Lord for David's humiliation: and that use the
good King makes of this persecution by the railing tongue of Shimei. Now if
this evil was from the Lord, surely that good must be from the Lord, and that
in a more proper sense. As it was the Lord that afflicted David in his
expulsion, so it was the same Lord that mercifully comforted David by a happy
restoration.

To speak a little of our David, by way of parallel: How patiently his most
Excellent Majesty has endured his 12. years banishment, how much he has been
bettered by his sufferings; you perceive by his own words, the true character
of his Princely mind. Should I say that he has exceeded David, as in the
measure of his sufferings, so in the measure of his patience, and in his
clemency and easiness to forgive, you would think it perhaps an excess of
speech. Certainly, our King, in his gracious Letters and Declaration shows
himself of a most Christian temper, and as well deserves the title
Christianissimus, as Defensor Fidei. We have great reason to believe, he has
taken his afflictions as from the hand of God, and that it is the same God,
that does now by wonderful ways and means bring him again.

For, though God be the prime Cause and Author, yet under God, as I said, there
be means and instruments of the Kings return, whether we look upon King David,
or King Charles.

And first for King David: Let us cast an eye upon the History: He had the
service of a faithful and discreet Counselor, Hushai the Archite, to defeat
the counsels of the politic Achitophel, v. 34. He had Zadoc and Abiather the
Priests, with their two sons Ahimaez and Jonathan to give him secret
Intelligence from the Enemies quarters, v. 35. He had those valiant Triumviri,
Joab, Abishai, and Ittai, and many gallant Captains and loyal Soldiers on his
side, chapter 18. He had a reconciled General, Amasa, to bow the hearts of the men
of Judah, as the heart of one man, so that they sent this word unto the King,
Return Thou and all thy Servants, chapter 19. 14. He had Barzillai to conduct him
over Jordan, v. 31. Noble Barzillai, a very aged man, a very great man, and a
very good man, Who had provided the King of sustenance, v. 32. Yea, all the
people of Judah conducted the King, and half the people of Israel, v. 40. Thus
for King David.

Now for King Charles, the Means also of his return are worthy to be mentioned,
and truly they are never to be mentioned without honor. I shall but briefly
name them, and but some of them neither, such as are most apparent to us. We
cannot give them praise enough, but must here fly to our Juvate posteri:
Posterity must help us to give them their deserved Glory.

In the first place appears his Excellency, the Lord General; who, by his
declaring for a Free Parliament, gave great hopes to all loyal Hearts of the
Kings Return; conceiving well, that as a force upon the Parliament overthrew
the King, so the Freedom of Parliament would restore the King. What prudent
Counsels, what faithful Endeavors, what happy Successes, his Excellency has
used and enjoyed all along, must be the work of some worthy Historian to relate
and record for after Ages to admire.

Next, are to be remembered the Honorable Secluded Members: who, as they had
been secluded and forced away from the House for their Votes and endeavors to
free the late King, the Royal Father of glorious Memory, and to bring him home
to the Parliament with safety and honor: So, when they were lately restored to
their places, made it their business, and the business of the Honorable Council
of State, to prepare the way for the Return of the Royal Son, his most
Excellent Majesty now reigning.

We may not here forget the many Petitions and Declarations, presented to the
General in his March toward London, by the Gentry specially in several
Counties: nor the Addresses made to the famous City of London, nor the great
Aids of the City it self; nor the later Declarations of this and other
Counties, all tending to the restoring of the Liberties both of Church and
State, to the healing of our wounds, the making up of our breaches, and to that
which might consummate and crown all the rest of our desires, the return of the
King.

To send for the King and receive his Majesty was an honor reserved by the
Providence of God for this present Parliament, consisting both of Lords and
Commons: this most Honorable Parliament, having in it the Flower of the English
Nobility and Gentry; this blessed Parliament, thrice blessed; because the means
of a threefold blessing, a blessing on the King, a blessing on the State, and a
blessing on the Church.

Amongst the means of the Kings return, I shall in the last place mention, that
which is not surely of the least efficacy, the Prayers of the Church; the
lately persecuted Ministers of the Church of England, and of the good people
adhering to them. Faithful Prayers are of great power with God; and the King
himself is said to have openly professed, that his business is most advanced by
the Prayers of religious people, whom he esteems as the best of his Subjects.
Prayers for the King are a Prime part of that Tribute we owe his Majesty, even
by the Law of Christ. Prayer is the fairest wind to bring him safe to land:
Prayer is the surest Guard to preserve his Sacred Person: Prayer is the firmest
Pillar to uphold his Throne. For Prayer procures the favor of the Lord; and it
is the favor of the Lord, by which the King Returns, and Reigns, and Prospers.

So I proceed from the first Proposition; It is the Lords doing to bring the
King again; To the Second, To bring the King again is a Signal Favor of the
Lord. If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, etc.

II. To bring the King again, is a Signal Favor of the Lord.
And here I said, It is a Favor to the King, and a Favor to the People also.

A Favor to the King: How great a Favor, will be manifest, if we consider,
(...), from what to what, the King returns.

1. King David returns from beyond Jordan to Jerusalem: from the way of the
Wilderness, v. 23. to the Royal City. King Charles returns from beyond the Seas
into Great Britain; now to be made, by his presence, again the most fortunate
Island of the whole World. He returns from Holland, from Flanders, from Spain,
from France, from Germany: in which foreign Countries he has long wandered, as
it were in a Wilderness: to his own dear Country, to his own City, to famous
London, the Chamber of his Empire, to renowned Westminster, the Seat of his
Parliament, to White Hall his Royal Palace.

2. King David returns from Poverty to Riches, from want to plenty, from being
fed by the bounty of old Barzillai at Mahanaim, to feed Barzillai if he please,
or at least his son Chimham at his Table in Jerusalem. King Charles returns
from a necessitous condition, wherein he disdained not relief from the bounty
of others, to a flourishing Estate, to distribute bounties and graces and
benefits to all.

3. King David returns from his flight; a most sad and dangerous flight. All
the Country wept with a loud voice, v. 23. and v. 30. David wept as he went
up, and had his head covered, and he went barefoot: and all the people that was
with him covered every man his head, and they went up weeping as they went up.
As his flight was sad, so it was dangerous: he escaped narrowly from the
mischievous counsel of Achitophel, chapter 17. King Charles also fled, but it was
after he had in his own Person fought valiantly (even in the judgment of his
great Enemy) in that unhappy Battle at Worcester. 'Twas a cruel Fight, and a
sad Flight; and a difficult, yea miraculous miraculous escape. The King took
upon him the form of a Servant, and the Lord brought him (by the ministry of
some Noble Persons) safe over the Sea, and now returns him and exalts him after
his humiliation* He brings him again with Honor and Majesty. Such preparations,
such Attendance, such Solemnities, such Rejoyceing and Acclamations, as are
beyond the reach of my understanding and the expression of my tongue.

4. King David returns to the Ark of God and the Tabernacle, to the enjoyment
of the Solemn Worship of God. This is that he most longed for: As the Heart
pants after the water brooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God: My soul
thirsts for God, for the living God: when shall I come and appear before God!
Psalm. 42. This is that he promises himself, The Lord will bring me again, and
show me his Ark and its habitation. King Charles returns from among strangers;
that are, I will not say, of another Religion; because the Creed, the
Commandments, and the Lords Prayer (the Fundamentals) are common to us; but of
another way and manner of Religion; having mixed the Truth with Errors and
Superstitions: where yet his Majesty, by the singular Grace of God, has
preserved himself pure and untainted: He returns home, not only to enjoy
himself, but to give his Kingdoms too the public exercise of true Religion,
liberty of solemn and regular Devotions, and a free Administration of the Word
and Sacraments. This, this, Beloved, is the Glory of his Majesty's return: That
Religion returns with the King: Not only Peace and Prosperity to the State; but
peace and prosperity to the Church returns with the King. And therefore in this
chiefly, as in other respects, the bringing home of the King is a signal Favor
of the Lord.

A Favor to the King, and a Favor to the People also: as you will further
perceive, if you consider, that his Majesty has bound up his own Interest (to
use his own words) entirely with that of his Subjects, and is as ready to give
any thing (for the Public good) as they are to receive.

1. Is it not a Favor to the People, to have Religion established, and good
Order prescribed for the public Service of God, and a lawful Ministry
countenanced and maintained? that the people may be no longer tossed to and fro
with every wind of new Doctrine, nor seduced by false unordained Teachers, nor
deprived any longer of the benefit and comfort of the Holy Sacraments for
themselves and their children: This is one benefit, and the chief of all by the
Kings return.

2. Is it not a favor to the people, to have a firm Peace settled in the State
upon true Foundations: to have reverence and obedience paid to the Fundamental
Laws of the Land: to have Justice equally and impartially administered to all
men: to have vice suppressed, and virtue advanced: to have Trade open, and
Oppression shut: every man to sit under his own Vine, and enjoy his own as well
as the King enjoys his own: This is also a Benfit, and a very great one, by the
Kings Return.

3. Is it not a Favor to have heavy burdens unloosed, to have the oppressed
set free and every yoke broken: that the banished be called home, the ejected
and sequestered relieved, the suffering party eased and refreshed: This is
another Benefit of the Kings Return.

4. Is it not a Favor, that such as have, in these late calamitous times,
either wilfully or weakly transgressed their bounds, and have either invaded
the Kings or their fellow subjects rights, should be assured of pardon and
reconciliation; and that all uncharitableness and animosity, all notes of
discord, separation, and difference of parties should be utterly abolished:
This is another, and a very considerable Benefit of the Kings Return.

Wherefore, being there are so many Benefits and Blessings brought home unto us
with our Gracious Sovereign, we cannot but acknowledge the favor to be a
signal Favor both to King and People: a Favor never to be forgotten: a Favor
deserving all Thankfulness. That Is the Use we are to make of it, to be truly
Thanful. And now, having laid sufficient grounds and motives for the Duty, in
conclusion I must briefly exhort you to it.

Use.
When Liberty was proclaimed to the Graecians, after long Oppression, the
People cried out to the Herald, to proclaim it again and again, delighting and
rejoicing in the very sound and voice of Liberty. England has been long
exercised; and almost exhausted by great and unsupportable calamities; and how
can we choose but exult, when we hear of Liberty? How can we choose but break
forth into thanks and praises for our freedom and deliverance? How can we choose
but testify the Thankfulness of our hearts, by glorifying God in our life and
conversation? Our Thankfulness must begin at the heart, be expressed by the
mouth, be testified and completed by our hands in our daily actions.

1. Our hearts must be thankful. And truly unless our expressions come from
this root, they will quickly die and come to nothing. O let your hearts be
loyally affected toward God the King of Kings, and loyally affected to God's
Vicegerent our gracious Sovereign: Have honorable Thoughts of God and the King:
and then out of the abundance of the heart the mouth will be filled.

2. Our Mouths also must be thankful. The Lord open our lips, that our mouth
may show forth his praise. Vocal praise in the Congregation, in the singing of
Psalms, is a comely thing: and you need not be ashamed of it in your private
Houses: yea, you may sweeten your business, and comfortably pass away your
solitary times by holy Music. Hear the Psalmist: Praise ye the Lord, praise
the Lord, O my soul! While I live, will I praise the Lord: I will sing praises
to my God, while I have any being, Psalm. 146. And Psalm. 147. Praise ye the
Lord, for it is good to sing praises to our God: for it is pleasant, and praise
is comely. God must be praised, as in singing, so in speaking: in our ordinary
discourses, we should delight to make mention of the loving kindness of the
Lord; delight to make a thankful remembrance of the peace and plenty, of the
liberty and protection, of the deliverances and mercies, which God has
bestowed upon our Land; delight to speak reverently of the King, who is under
God the Minister and the Preserver of these mercies for us: Bless God, and
bless the King: Obey God, and obey the King. For

3. Our Actions also must be thankful: and without this real Thankfulness by
our Obedience, all our verbal and ceremonial expressions are of no account.
Obedience is that which God requires, Obedience is that which the King desires
of you: Obedience to the Laws of God, and to the Laws of the King. When we do
all in our places and stations perform our duty; Ministers their duty,
Magistrates their duty, and every sort and rank of people their duty, then are
we all truly Thankful.

1. The Ministers that are the Guides of the people in spiritual things, and by
good Doctrine and good example are to lead them in the ways of God; they must
testify their thankfulness by attending more duly, and giving themselves more
devoutly to the Ministry of the Word and Prayer. O that the daily Sacrifice,
that has long ceased, might now be renewed in every Parish. In this Parish
(till better provision be made) I shall be glad to celebrate Morning Prayer at
the ringing of the School-bell. Pray take notice of it, and let one at least
out of every Family be spared to assist in the public Service of God.

2. The Magistrates, that have power in civil things, and by execution of good
Laws of the Land, and by their own good behavior, are to keep peace and order
among the people, they must testify their Thankfulness by a more faithful
discharge of their Office. Keep up the respect due to Authority: join your
selves together as one man, and this Union will strengthen you to suppress any
disorders among your Inferiors. Consult maturely for the common good, determine
soberly, execute courageously; and let every public Officer be a man of a
public spirit, knowing there is some ray of Majesty descending on him, and
that he is Gods Minister and the Kings.

3. Let all people of all ranks and qualities testify their Thankfulness, old
and young, rich and poor. Let the Elder men and Fathers by their gravity and
wisdom be guides and examples to the younger, rejoicing that they have lived to
see this blessed restoration; and that they may now assure and comfort
themselves, that their children shall be bred in true Religion, and under
lawful Governors. Let the younger testify their thankfulness by their
sobermindedness and modesty, and readiness to follow the steps of their wiser
Fathers, rejoicing that they have happy times before them, and are likely to
have a greater share in the fruits of his Majesty's just and gracious
Government. Let the richer sort show themselves really thankful by their bounty
and liberality to the poor, and by their other works of piety and charity: and
let the poor be thankful too in their way, by their patience and contentedness;
by their diligence and painfulness in some honest labor.

Lastly, Let every one without exception make it his chief care to serve and
fear God, and next to God to honor and obey the King: this being the best way,
to engage God to continue and enlarge his mercies and favors to us; the best
way, to make sure of God to be our God for ever, and to make sure of the King
to be our King, so long, till it shall please God to remove him to that
Kingdom, which alone is better then this, the Kingdom of Heaven.

In the mean, it is our Happiness, our Joy, and our Crown, that we have such a
King, the Son of such a Father, that thought not his life dear unto him, but
laid it down for the Church and People committed to his care: Such a King,
instructed by such a Father in the Art to govern justly, prudently and
mercifully: Such a King, as God has miraculously for us, and delivered from
many dangers, and brought his Royal Person through many Trials, that he might
be more precious, like Gold tried in the fire, and appear unto his people with
the greater splendour: Such a King, as is mindful of these his Sufferings, not
to revenge them, but to make a good use of his Afflictions, and to be bettered
by them: To conclude, such a King, in whom all good men do hope to find that
Wisdom, that Justice, that Clemency, that Piety, which will undoubtedly render
him the Glory of Kings, and the Joy of all his Subjects. Which God of his
infinite Mercy grant through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer.
O Most glorious God, the Creator and Governor of all the world, we
acknowledge thine infinite mercy to this lately distracted and distressed
Nation. It is thy hand, thy power, thy favor, whereby this happy Change is
brought to pass; Thou have inclined the heart of the King to his People, and
Thou have inclined the heart of the People to their King. We know, O Lord, it
is thy doing, and we look upon it with admiration as a wonderful favor both to
the King and People. We beseech thee, accept our Thanks and Praise, which we
offer up unto thee with all our hearts and with unfeigned lips. And we beseech
thee also to enable us, as we desire to testify our Thankfulness by our
Obedience in the whole course of our lives: that all the People of the Land,
Ministers and Magistrates, young and old, rich and poor, doing their duty in
their several places, and glorifying thy Name by a godly Conversation, Thou
may still delight to dwell amongst us, to do us good, and to continue thy
favor to us from generation to generation. We pray thee multiply thy best
blessings upon our Sovereign Lord the King, upon the most Illustrious Prince
the Duke of York, and upon the rest of the Royal Progeny; upon the House of
Lords and Commons, upon the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council, upon all the
Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom: Bless, we pray thee, the Judges and
Magistrates, the Bishops and Ministers, the Soldiers and Scholars, all orders
and degrees of men, that all may live in thy fear, in obedience to the King,
and in brotherly love and concord. O let not the Sword devour any more, nor the
noise of War be heard in our Land: Quiet the spirits of all parties, take away
our carnal animosities, and vain opinions, that we may all gladly close in a
perfect reconciliation under our gracious King. As thou have made him an
example of forgivenness and mercy, so grant that all his Subjects may show
mercy to one another, being tenderhearted and forgiving one another, as God
for Christ's sake is ready to forgive us all. Lord perfect thine own work, and
make us such as thou would have us, and deal with us not according to our
deserts, but according to thine own infinite Mercies in Jesus Christ: For whom
we ever bless thee, in whom we crave acceptance with thee, and to whom with
Thee, O Father, and thy Holy Spirit, one Eternal God, be all Honor and Glory,
now and for ever.

Amen.
The End.

