BARON TOMLINS Learned SPEECH To the SHERIFFS OF LONDON AND MIDDLESEX, When
they came to be Sworn AT THE EXCHEQUER.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1659.

Baron Tomlin's LEARNED SPEECH To the Sheriffs of London, etc.
How do you Mr. Warner? God save you Mr. Love. GEntlemen Citizens,
I observe in you three things; First that ye are well clad; from whence I
note that ye are no Slovens. Truly I wish I were a Sheriff, so it were not
chargeable, and that I might always be in the Office, for certainly a Sheriff
can never be a cold, his gown is so warm: and a my word yours seem to be
excellent good Scarlet. Some men may ask why you wear red Gowns, and not blew,
or green. As for blew, it is a color that signifies Constancy; now Constancy
cannot be attributed to Sheriffs; for a Sheriff, is a Sheriff this year, and
none the next. As for Green, it is Mahomets color, and so too Heathenish for a
Christian. I confess Fuillemoth, which signifies decay, had been the most
proper color for a Sheriff, because he puts off his Gown with the fall of the
leaf; and secondly, because it may decay his Estate, if he be too expensive in
his Office. But next to that, Red is the most convenient color; for indeed
most handsome and delectable things are Red, as Roses, Pomgranates,
Maidenheads, the Lips, the Tongue, etc. so that indeed our Ancestors did wisely
to clothe Magistrates with this decent and becoming color. It Is true I have a
Gown too, but they make me wear the worst of any Baron of the Exchequer, it is
plaincloth as ye see without any lining; yet my comfort is, I am still a
Baron, and I hope I shall be so, as long as I live; when I am dead, I care not
who is Baron, or whether there be a Baron or no. The next thing I observe is,
that ye look plump and ruddy, from whence I give a shrewd guess, that ye
feed well, and truly if you do so, then you do well, which is my third and last
observation concerning ye. But do you know wherefore you come hither? I don't
question but you do; however, you must give me leave to tell ye, for in this
place I am a better man than either of you both, or indeed both of you put
together. Why then I will tell ye; you come hither to take your oaths before
me: Gentlemen I am the Puisne Baron of the Chequer, that is to say, the meanest
Baron; for though I am not guilty of interpreting many hard words, yet this
has been so continually beaten into my head, that I do very well understand
it; However I could brook my means well enough (for some men tell me that I
deserve no better) were it not the cause of my life's greatest misery, for here
I am constrained, or else I must lose my employment, to make Speeches in my old
age, and when I have one foot in the grave, to stand here with the other
talking in public. Truly Gentlemen it is a sad thing, you see what a forced put
I am put to, even God help me out of this sinful world, for when my bones are
at rest, my tongue will be at quiet. I remember, Gentlemen, when I was a Child,
if my Mother had asked me if I would have any Victuals that pleased me not, why
then I would grow sullen, and make no answer; then would she say, Sirrah will
you have it? Speak; still not a word from me; nay then (said she) if you will not
speak, you shall have nothing; this is my condition now, either speak or have
nothing, that is be no Baron. I have prayed to God to mend my weak capacity,
now if I speak better to day than I used to do, you will know that he has
heard my prayers, if not, then it is as it was. However, since it is my
misfortune, I shall talk to ye as well as I can: But friends, you must not
expect that I should ball to you like the fellows that cry Carrots and Turnips
in the Street, for that would be troublesome to me, and perhaps cause the
Almonds of my ears to fall, with over straining my impotent Lungs. And now it
comes into my mind, I desire you when you are in your Office, not to let those
fellows yaul so in a morning, for besides that, they will not let the people
sleep, the Cry of Wisdom can never be heard in your Streets for the perpetual
baling those Carters keep; and truly, if you do not remedy it, I am afraid you
will as soon hear the lamentation of wild Nightingales, as the voice of wisdom
in your City; Yet though I do not ball, do not think I will whisper neither,
for then 'twere impossible you should hear me, and I should seem to sit upon
the Bench like a Madman talking to my self; besides, the Proverb says, that
where there is whispering, there is lying. Truly Gentlemen I am an old man, and
have lived long in the world, and I can assure you I have observed these
Proverbs, and find them to be wise sayings. I remember when I was a goung
youth, it is a great while ago Gentlemen, I warrant ye it is above five and
forty years ago, my Mother saw me fooling with a knife; Lay down the knife,
boy, said she, it is a dangerous thing to play with edged tools. Truly Gentlemen
I believe you find the truth of this; for had your City never meddled with edged
tools, they and you I believe had been in a more thriving condition than now.
At first you played with these edged tools in your Military and Artilery
grounds, and made sport with them before your wives; but I think they have made
sport with you since. Truly for my part I cannot tell what to do for these
edged tools; and I believe you are in a quandary too; for my part I resolve
never to meddle with them, and I hope God has given you so much grace and
Cowardice, as to do so too; King James would never meddle with them you know:
now if you will not take my foolish advice, take his wise Counsel. But to return
where I left, I say I will neither ball, nor speak softly, but talk in an
indifferent tone between both, that you may hear me, and I may hear my self,
and so we may all hear one another; and truly there is great reason for it, for by
hearing we convey our reason one to another. Now that I have reason, I shall
prove; for every man is a rational Creature, now I am a man, therefore I am a
reasonable Creature. Gentlemen this makes as much for you as for me; for by
this do I prove you likewise to be rational Creatures, and so fit to be
Sheriffs; Thus I find ye qualified for your Office. And truly Gentlemen,
Sheriffs are men of very great Antiquity and Authority; Some are of opinion
that Sheriffs were invented in Tire and Zidon; truly Gentlemen, it stands with
reason, for I am sure they were the first inventors of Scarlet; but to leave
this opinion, I do find in the Bible how Joseph was by Pharaoh King of Egypt
made Sheriff of Gran Cairo; And Daniel also was by Nebuchadnezar King of
Assyria made Sheriff of Babylon. In the first place their habit proves this to
be true, for they wore the same badges of their Authority as you have, that is
to say Scarlet Gowns and gold Chains. I will not dispute whether their Gowns
were lined with fur or no, neither was it material, nor indeed so requisite,
the hotness of those Countries not permitting that formality. Secondly we read
how Joseph arrested his Brothers for carrying away his plate, which he could
not have done, had he not had Bailiffs and Sergeants under him, Officers
peculiar to a Sheriff; and to make it more evident, we do not find that he took
out his Writ out of any other Office, but his own, which he could not have
warranted, had he not been Sheriff himself. But you will say, where were the
two Sheriffs, to parallel our two Sheriffs? to that I answer, where was there a
County of Middlesex belonging to either of those Cities for the other person to
be Sheriff of? was it requisite there should be two Sheriffs in those places,
where there was never a County of Middlesex, because there are two Sheriffs of
London, where there is a County of Middlesex? No, for it is the County makes
the Sheriff, not the Sheriff makes the County. This Gentlemen is Law. Now
Gentlemen I shall tell ye more than ever you heard before, to show you that I
have not spent my time in idleness, which is this, that as there is an
Archangel, and an Archbishop, and an Archdeacon, so is there an
Arch-Sheriff, which is Satan or Beelzebub the Prince of the Air; this is
evident from the duty of his employment; for as it is your duty to punish
offenders and Sinners in this world, so it is his duty to punish sinners and
offenders both in this world and in the world to come. And now I speak of your
employment, I shall tell you what it is; First you are the chief Jaylors of the
Nation, and it is your duty to keep those persons that are committed to your
charge, as close, as your wives lock up their best Jewels; To this purpose Mr.
Warner, are the two Counters at your disposal, and Newgate, Mr. Love, is
appointed for your Portion. Secondly you are the chief Executioners of
Sentences upon Malefactors, whether it be whipping, burning, or hanging, thus
Mr. Sheriffs, does Tyburn become your Lot. And now we talk of hanging, Mr.
Sheriff, I shall entreat a favor of you; I have a Kinsman at your end of the
Town a Rope maker, I know you will have many occasions before this time twelve
month, and I hope I have spoken in time, pray make use of him, you will do the
poor man a favor, and your self no prejudice. Pray Gentlemen what have you to
dinner? for I profess I forgot to go to Market yesterday, that I might get my
speech by heart. Truly Gentlemen I count it no dishonor to go to market my
sesf; there is no trusting to servants; had you lived as long in the world as I
have done, you would say so; when I was a young man as you are, I thought scorn
to go to Market then as well as you; but since I went my self, I find that my
servants cheated me of I warrant you five pound in a year, they would reckon me
two shillings for a leg of Mutton, which I can buy as good a one now for five
groats and two pence. One, Two, Three, Four, Five, Six, Seven, Eight, Nine,
Ten, Eleven, Twelve a clock, well God buy to ye Gentlemen; but stay, I have
forgot the main thing ye came for: I must give you your oath. Lord what a
crazie memory have I? but you must excuse me Gentlemen, my thoughts are not
ubiquitary, they cannot be in your Kitchen and my head both at one time.
Gentlemen there are several sorts of oaths; there is the Protectors oath, by the
living God, there is the Cavaleers oath, God damm me; and here is the Chambermaids
oath, As I am honest. Then there is an oath which you are to swear, and which
all men swear that take upon them employments of trust; So help me God. Now
some men say this is not an oath, but I say it is; So some men say that Faith
is no oath, but my conscience tells me the contrary. Truly there are so many
opinions that a man cannot tell which to believe. However I have sworn this
oath twenty times, and would do twenty times more, before I would lose my
place. But why do I use persuasion? I see you are come with a resolution to
swear, and I am come to swear ye, and so we are agreed. Well now you have heard
what those things are which you must swear; lay your hands on the book and say,
As God help us Mr. Baron, we will perform all these things as well as we can.
Thus Mr. Sheriffs you hear what you have sworn; pray be diligent and careful
to observe every particular, fear God, obey your Superiors, and Rule your City
with prudence; that as you are Sheriffs you may become Mayors, and being Mayors
may be Knighted, and being Knighted, may die full of age and worship, and be
buried with Scocheons. Now Mr. Sheriffs get ye home, kiss your wives, and by
that time the Clothes laid I Will be with ye, and so God buy till I see ye again.

The End.

