A SERMON Preached to the SOCIETY FOR Reformation of Manners IN Nottingham.

[ November. 24. School.]

By JOHN BARRET Minister of the GOSPEL.

Published at the desire of the said Society.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Snowden, and sold by John Richards, Bookseller in
Nottingham. 1699.

A SERMON FOR THE Reformation of Manners.
AMOS v. xv. Hate the Evil, and love the Good, and Establish Judgment in the
Gate: It may be that the Lord God of Hosts will be Gracious unto the Remnant of
Joseph.


THough the Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil was very bitter,
and set Man's Teeth on Edge; yet the right Knowledge of Good and Evil is good
and necessary; without which we cannot hate the Evil and love the Good.

The Nature and Difference of Moral Good and Evil is invariable. For any to
conceit Virtue and Vice of an indifferent Nature in themselves; that the former
is only good, because commanded; and the latter only evil, as forbidden, is
certainly a most wild, and very false conceit. Or to imagine, that the Holy God
(of His absolute Sovereignty) might have commanded us to despise His infinitely
Glorious Majesty, to blaspheme His most Sacred and Reverend Name, and to be
unjust, intemperate, to run into all excess of Riot, to make Beasts of our
selves, to be Lewd and Debauched, to work all uncleanness with greediness: Or
to imagine, that he might have prohibited our living Soberly, Righteously, and
Godly in the World; surely such thoughts would be horribly injurious to the
Holy one of Israel, most impious and blasphemous thoughts. They that could
entertain such thoughts of God, would show themselves no Christians; while thus
they would subvert all Religion: Such would not show themselves Men; but rather
to have put off all Reason and Humanity: Such would show themselves Enemies to
Mankind, who cared not to turn the World upside down, cared not to turn Human
Societies into Herds of brute Beasts: Yea, such would interpretatively, and by
consequence deny that there is a God, that Rules and Judges in the Earth. As
such Laws would be most contradictory to the Infinite Goodness and Holiness of
God. And if He were not infinitely Good and Holy, he should not be God. Deny
His perfect Holiness, and you deny Him to be God.

Yet note (by the way) that besides those things, which are intrinsically good
or evil; there are other things indifferent in themselves; which passing under
the stamp of Divine Authority, the Lord requiring them, they thus become
unquestionable Duties; or forbidding other of them, they are Sins; till such
injunction or prohibition be taken off. And it must needs be thus, upon that
Fundamental, undeniable Principle, That God, our Maker, Owner, and Supreme
Ruler and Governor, has a Sovereign Right of commanding, and that Man is
under an indisputable Obligation to obey Him in all his Commands. That it is
unquestionably good to yield obedience even to such positive Commands; But evil
to transgress and violate them.

As God made Man a Reasonable Creature, and Upright, after his own Image; while
Man kept his integrity, there was a right understanding and good accord betwixt
God and Man, (Man's will being fully conform to the will of his Maker.) Thus at
first Man's Nature was framed to love the good, and to hate evil. And nothing
more congruous to right Reason, than that it should be so.

And therefore wicked Men in Scripture are commonly called Fools, (a proper
Name for them) as wanting the right use of Reason: As loving that, which in all
reason they should hate and abominate; and hating that, which they ought to
love. Which shows the horrible depravation of Man's Nature by and since the
Fall. Oh the monstrous deformity of sinful Souls! what lamentable, horrible
disorders are here! As Sinners love simplicity, and hate knowledge, ( Prove.
1.22.) Love Darkness and hate the Light, (as chap. 3. of the Evangelist St.
John, ver. 19, 20. Love their base Lusts, and hate Holiness.

Unto such a foolish, cross-grained, froward and perverse People was the
Prophet Amos here sent. The Children of Israel, the House of Joseph, for whom
(together with their Brethren the Children of Judah) the Lord had done more
than for all the Families of the Earth besides. When yet they requited Him evil
for good; they went on provoking Him with their manifold Transgressions, and
their mighty Sins, (as here ver. 12.) For which they are severely threatened.

Yet here behold, and wonder. Oh, should we not wonder at the goodness and
mercy of God shown toward such provoking Creatures as Sinners are! The Lord
with His sharpest reproofs and severest threatenings, is pleased to intermix
most gracious Calls and Counsels to repent and turn; that so he might repent of
the evil threatened, and turn from His fierce Anger; yea, that he might be
gracious unto the Remnant of Joseph: According to that, Ezekiel. 33.11. As I live,
says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the Death of the wicked, but, etc
What various methods does he take to bring sinners to a better pass; that
iniquity may not be their ruin? His patience and goodness is to lead them to
Repentance. His inflicting lesser judgments (as warning-pieces) is, that if
they take warning and turn unto the Lord that smites them, greater evils may
be prevented, severer strokes may be kept off, more wasting Calamities,
Land-desolating Judgments may be turned away. And still he follows them with
gracious, earnest Calls, and and with sweet encouraging Promises, (if any means
might work on them.) As here, v. 4, 5, 6. Seek ye me, and ye shall live. But
seek not Bethel -- Seek the Lord and ye shall live. And v. 14, 15. Seek good
and not evil, that ye may live; and so the Lord, the God of Hosts shall be with
you -- Hate the evil, and love the good, and establish judgment in the Gate,
etc.

Here is a Sovereign Remedy prescribed to, and for a People in a most dangerous
Case. When judgment was toward them, the Decree ready to bring forth, Sentence
ready to be executed. And it is the Lords own prescription (who is called their
Physician, Exodus 15.26.)

Here Is a threefold Duty required;

1. Hate the Evil. 2. Love the good. 3. Establish Judgment in the Gate.

And Gods mercy held forth, or promised thereupon, [ It may be that the Lord
God of Hosts will be gracious unto the Remnant of Joseph.] Which, tho spoken of
with a [may be] yet all the doubt was, whether they would Repent and Reform;
not whether God would be gracious to them if they did so; See Jer. 18.7, 8.

What needs explanation, I may take notice of as I go on.

These four Axioms, or Propositions I take to lie plain in the Text, that he
that runs may observe and take notice of,

I. It Is Gods express Charge, Will and Command that Men hate Evil.

II. So likewise, That they love that which is good.

III. And that (according to their power and capacity) they establish Judgment
in the Gate.

IV. And this way a People may hope to find Grace and Favor with the Lord, to
the preventing or removing of judgments; and for the continuing and further
conferring of His mercies. That as it is, Jer. 31.23. The Lord bless thee, O
Habitation of Justice, and Mountain of Holiness; the Blessing of the Lord
should be on such a People.

1. To begin with the first of these, That it is Gods express charge and command
that we hate evil.

Quest. 1. What kind of evil are we to understand here?

Answ. Not mere Natural or Penal evil; but Moral or culpable evil. We must kiss
the Rod, accept of the Punishment of our Iniquity, ( Lev. 26.41.) but hate
those ill manners, that are displeasing to the Lord, and are wont, or likely to
bring us under the Rod. Hate Sin which is the evil of evils, the greatest evil.

Quest. 2. How are we to hate it?

Answ. There is a twofold hatred: 1. An hatred of Aversation. Thus we must hate
sin, as having an Antipathy unto it. Hate it so as to shun and avoid it, all we
can. 2. An hatred of Opposition. From an enmity to sin, not barely shunning it,
but striving earnestly against it. Setting our selves against Sin, (as real
enemies to it) both in our selves, and in others. And surely, they that are
reconciled to God, and at peace with Him; they that are Friends to Christ,
cannot but be Enemies to Sin.


Now this, and the two following Duties are included in the very Law of Nature.
These are common Principles of Natural Religion. But we, who have Gods will
more clearly revealed to us in his written word, shall be left more
inexcusable, if we conform not to his will herein. What can be more plain than
that, Psalm. 97.10. Ye that Love the Lord, Hate Evil? So then, none should have
a face to say, They love God, who do not hate Sin in their Hearts. And how
plain is that, Romans 12.9. Abhor that which is evil. Where the word' (...) is
emphatical. Abhor it even a Hell it self.

And great reason for this strict Injunction.

(1.) Forasmuch as God hates Sin. It Is the abominable thing which he hates:
Nothing in the world so odious to him as Sin. May it not be said, that Sin (in
some respects) is more odious than the very Devils? These (as they are Gods
Creatures) have some Natural good in them; whereas there is nothing but evil in
Sin. And propter quod unum quodque tale est, illud est magis tale. It is only
for Sin that the Devils are such odious Creatures in His pure Eyes. Now as God
hates Sin, ought not we herein to be Followers of God?

(2.) We cannot love the Lord in sincerity, if we do not hate Sin. Now this is
the First and Great Commandment, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
Heart. Which is a thing impossible without an hatred of Sin. [Ye that Love the
Lord, Hate Evil.] Sin is such an Enemy to God, so contrary to His most Pure and
Holy Nature, and to His most Righteous will; so opposite to his Interest, to
his Honor and Glory; that if we have the love of God in us, we must
necessarily hate and abhor Sin, for its contrariety to God.

(3.) And certainly it is a great Duty also incumbent on us, to Fear the Lord: [
Thou shall Fear the Lord thy God, and Serve him. Fear ye not me, says the
Lord? If I be a Master, where is my Fear?] But there is no true fear of God
without an hatred of Sin, Prove. 8.13. The Fear of the Lord is to hate Evil,
Psalm. 36.1. The transgression of the wicked says within my heart, that there
is no fear of God before their Eyes.

(4.) And it is as certain, that without an hatred of Sin, we shall do no
execution on it. Now Sin is such a deadly Enemy, that here we must Kill or be
Killed. Oh, it warreth against our Souls! And till we hate it, we shall at most
but Fence or Skirmish with it, not Fight in good earnest against it. What is
it, only to scratch its face, to raise its skin? This will not endanger its
Life at all.

The surface of a mere outward Reformation is far short of the work of
Mortification. There is no wounding Sin to the Heart, till we hate it. Indeed
the love of Sin is the very life of it: But hatred seeks the destruction of its
Enemy. And without hating Sin, we shall not be for mortifying it. And if we are
for sparing the Life of Sin, our Lives must go for its Life.

(5.) We cannot have the Complacential love of God, till we hate Sin. There is
at least a Secret League with Sin, till we come to hate it. Never till then,
that our league with sin is broken: And it is certain that till our League with
Sin is broken, God and our Souls are not agreed. While in League with Sin,
there is no Reconciliation, no Peace with God. See Isa. 1.16, 18. and chapter 59.2.

(6.) Upon the whole, this is a Discriminating Note and Mark, necessary to
distinguish true Converts (such as indeed turn from Sin unto God, to difference
them) from the wicked, from Hypocrites. These may abstain from many Sins; but
not from a right principle. A wicked Man may refrain from the outward act of
many Sins, either upon some pang and horror of Conscience, or upon some Worldly
account; when he is far from loathing and hating them, He has a love to them
still: But fear of wrath to come; or fear of loss, shame or other punishment in
this world lays a restraint upon him. It Is part of the Description and
Character of a wicked Man, Psalm. 36.4. He abhors not evil: And it is enough
to prove one wicked still. A bare abstinence from Sin, will not prove one a
true Convert; but there must also be a real abhorrence of it.

Use I. That the Lord has given such express charge to hate evil; then is it
not manifest that they are here condemned, who indeed are direct Antipodes to
this Divine Command, who stand in Diametrical opposition to it? I mean such as
hate the good, instead of hating evil. Alas! how many hate the Light, because
their deeds are evil? How many that hate him that rebukes in the Gate, and
abhor him that speaks uprightly? (As here v. 10.) How many that hate
Instruction, and that hate Reformation? (even hate both the Name and Thing!)
How many that hate Holiness, and hate Gods Saints and Servants for that for
which the Holy Psalmist professes his great delight was in them, ( Psalm.
16.3.) their excelling in Virtue? Bear witness, (Sirs) bear witness: Are not
such notorious Despisers of Gods Command: Yea, do not such show themselves
haters of God? Oh, what height of Impiety is this!

Use II. This should put us upon serious Self-Examination, and on a strict
Enquiry into our Hearts whether we indeed hate evil. And great need of an
impartial search here, that we be not deceived and mistaken Then,

(1. Have we an hatred of sin, as sin? As it is an offense against God, a
transgression of the holy Law of God, our Creator and Redeemer. As right sorrow
for Sin is (...), according to God, (2 Cor. 7.9.) So the true hatred of Sin is
with respect unto God. To have an Aversation from some sinful practices; not as
forbidden in Gods word; but upon other Foreign Accounts, ( v. 9.) As such
practices would cross our worldly designs, and interfere with our carnal
interests; this will not prove that we hate Sin; but only that we love our
Credit and Reputation, our worldly profit and the like. Again, some that have
no detestation of Sin, yet dare not take that liberty in sinning as formerly;
being checked with a fearful apprehension and expectation of the Punishment
threatened and due to Sin. It Is one thing to hate Sin; and another to dread the
sad and bitter consequents thereof. The Conscience of a Natural Man is
sometimes startled and awakened, while his will is not renewed, his heart not
changed.

(2.) Have we an hatred of all and every known Sin: A quatenus ad omne -- If we
hate Sin as Sin; then it will follow that we hate all Sin, known to us. (...).
Hatred is against the whole kind. One that hates a Toad as venomous, cannot but
hate other Creatures, that he knows to be likewise venomous. Here is one
difference betwixt a Natural and a Regenerate Man; viz. A Natural Man may
abstain from some Sins, though he does not truly hate any Sin; which is
evident, in that he freely allows of other Sins, he knows are no less
forbidden; yea, he will not part with them: But a Regenerate Man, though he
cannot live here free from Sin; yet he does not live in any known Sin; for that
Sin is the evil he hates, and that he would gladly get rid of.

(3.) A real hatred of Sin is abiding and constant. This is one difference
betwixt Hatred and Anger. If one is only angry at another, the angry fit may be
over in a little time. As two Friends may fall out sometimes; and yet soon be
very good Friends again. But where hatred is, that admits not of
reconciliation. And if I be not mistaken Dr. Preston has this expression, It Is
an ill Sign to fall out with Sin, and grow Friends again. Some indeed under
present gripes and pangs of Conscience, seem to be for putting away their
Lusts: But that sick, shaking fit is no sooner over, than they return to 'em
again, as the Dog to his vomit.

(4.) Hatred is implacable, and deadly. It seeks the destruction of that we
hate. So if we hate Sin indeed, we are for pursuing it to the Death. We cannot
rest while it has a being in us. We set our selves against it, to mortify it
more and more.

(5.) If we hate Sin indeed, we cannot but be moved when we see it breaking
forth in others As Lot we shall vex our Souls at the sight, and at the thoughts
of that abounding wickedness in the World, in this our Land. And as we have
occasion and opportunity, we shall reprove Sinners, and endeavor to give check
to Sin, what in us lies; as Psalm. 75.4, 5. I said unto the Fools, deal not
foolishly; and to the wicked, lift not up the Horn. How can we say we hate Sin,
if we care not though sinners go on in their Evil ways; if we will not endeavor
to put a stop to them when we might?

Use. III. This Use, with the next Proposition (though prepared) I did but
glanse at in the Sermon Preached to the Society.
Be we exhorted to hate Sin? And if we do hate it, labor after a more intense
degree of hatred, to have our Hearts more set against Sin. O Christians, as you
love the Lord, and as you love your selves, and as you love England, hate evil.

(1.) If you love the Lord; how can you but hate Sin? If we have the love of
God, shall we not then fear to offend him? And shall we not hate that which we
know to be an Offense to him? And shall we not be grieved to see others
dishonor and provoke him? And shall not our Hearts rise at any indignities
offered to him? As it was with the Prophet, Isa. 7.13. Will ye weary my God
also?

And if we love him, then shall we not hate Sin, as that which formerly
separated betwixt God and our Souls? And as that which would obstruct or
interrupt our Communion with him, and may provoke him to withdraw, may deprive
us of his most comforting presence? And are we not like to lose the sense of
his love, if we are abating and more remiss in our hatred of Sin?

And if we love him, then shall we not count his Enemies our Enemies? And be
heartily displeased at the wrongs done to him, as at any injuries done to us?

(2.) If you love your own Souls, must you not then hate Sin? Why, you have no
such Enemy in all the World again. We suffer more by Sin than by all other
Enemies (Men or Devils.) All that they can do would but Exercise us; not really
hurt and endamage our Souls; so long as we are not instigated or drawn to Sin
by them.

But this is most certain, till we hate Sin, we are Enemies to our own Souls.
We are in league with our Souls utter Enemy. And without turning from our Sins,
we shall die in our Sins. Now there is no real turning from Sin, without having
our Hearts turned against it, without hating it. While the heart goes out
secretly after any Lust in Gods sight, and account we live in that Sin; though
our outward carriage may be such that Men may not have the least suspicion of
our being guilty of it.

And then except we hate Sin, our iniquity (surely) will be found to be
hateful. When the Lord shall at last reckon with us, reprove us, and set our
Sins in order before our Eyes; Oh! then we shall see how we did but flatter our
selves; and see how woefully Sin deceived us; see how hateful and odious a thing
Sin is, notwithstanding we were very fond of it; or though we thought there was
no great harm in it.

(3.) If you love the Land and Nation, if you wish well to England, hate Evil.
Alas, do not our great culpable Evils, our high provocations threaten to return
upon our Heads; and fall upon the Land in sad penal evils, in sore and heavy
Judgments! It Is a notable passage that Bishop Hall relates of a noble Captain,
who was earnestly solicited to take on him the Defense of a strong City,
stored with Plenty of Ammunition, and fortified with impregnable Walls: Yea,
but (says he) have you any covering betwit it and Heaven? Have you any defense
against the Vengeance of that God whom your Sins have provoked? The Application
of the story is this, In vain shall we think to secure our Selves and our State
from Earth, if we irritate Heaven. And let me tell you, Englands Sins are more
dangerous and likely to be more mischievous than any Foreign Enemy could be.
For our manifold Sins and Provocations (without a more General Reformation than
is yet to be seen amongst us) the Lord, the Lord God of Hosts may be provoked
to become our Enemy. And where are we then? What will become of us if we have
him our Enemy? As it follows, Amos 9.5. The Lord God of Hosts is he that
touches the Land; and it shall melt, and all that dwell therein shall mourn,
etc. See Nehem. 1.5, 6. I must tell you, if you do not hate Sin, if you are not
Enemies to Sin; you can be no true Friends to England. But I may dwell no
longer on this; and must have over the second Proposition, which follows.

II. We are as expressly charged and commanded to love that which is good. As
it is not enough to leave off, and shun evil practices; but we must hate the
Evil: So it is not enough to do good actions; but we must love the Good.

Quest. 1. What are we to understand by [Good] here?

Answ. Not any false or Fantastic Good, Not what is only good in show and
appearance; or in a Sinners deluded fancy: Not the Covetous Worldlings good:
Not the Sensualists good. No need of a Command to love Earthly Riches, or
Carnal Pleasures, which Carnal Hearts are too much in love with: But need
enough of a Caution or Prohibition against setting our Hearts on these. Which
indeed we meet with again and again in Gods Holy Word.

But the Good we are required to love, stands in opposition to the Evil we must
hate. Therefore look as whatsoever the Law forbids, we are to hate as Evil: So
whatsoever He requires we are to love as Good. Whatsoever is right and good in
Gods Eyes should be so in ours. He that is Wisdom it self, and Goodness it
self, cannot deceive or misinform us concerning what is Good.

Indeed he is the prime good, to be first and principally loved. For that he is
Sum Bonus, and summum Bonum; superlatively, most transcendently good; the
chiefest good. He is Essentially, Originally, Infinitely, Immutably Good. He is
Goodness it self. And here is the Root of the Matter. To lay a right
Foundation, we must see that we begin at the love of God, begin at the love of
God in Christ, in whom he has discovered and made himself known, as infinitely
amiable: And then we must love other things, according as they are conform to
his perfect Holy Nature, and so far as is agreeable to his Good and Righteous
will.

Quest. 2. What is it to love the Good?

Answ. In short, loving the Good is the complacency of the Soul in that which
is good, whereby the Soul embraces, and cleaves to that which is good, is knit
to it as one with it, and would by no means be parted from it; but still
follows that which is good, and has a care to hold it fast. Here you have a
brief Account of the Affection together with its proper Effects.

Now what could be more reasonable and equitable than this Precept, Love the
good?

(1.) Great reason for it from the very Nature of the thing. Indeed these
Precepts in the Text are such common Principles, as all, who would not outface
the very light of Nature, must necessarily yield their Assent unto. All that
would show themselves Men, must grant, that there is no place at all for
Hatred; if it should not be turned against that which is evil: so no place to
be found for love; if not to be set on that which is good. As indeed
contrariorum contraria est ratio; There is as good reason for our loving the
one, as for our hating the other. Nothing more congruous to Reason, than to
love that which is good. Omnis Appetitus fertur in Bonum. And though the
Sensitive Appetite looks at a lower kind of good; yet surely the Will, the
Rational Appetite should look higher. Does not every Man's reason tell him,
that of two sorts of good, the better should be preferred, the greater good
should be chosen? And certainly, where the sensitive Appetite (that should be
under the Conduct and Regimen of Reason) bears sway, will not be ruled, it
shows such Men so far brutified, and without the right use of Reason. And if
that which is truly, really good, should attract our Wills and Affections,
before a mere seeming good; then should not naked Virtue be preferred and
chosen before Vice in its richest Robes. Though Virtue had no dowry here; yet
were she not to be embraced, rather than any vicious course, notwithstanding it
promised one Kingdoms upon Earth, with the glory of them. Surely, Goodness is
the proper Object of Love, the formal Reason of it, the Loadstone of it. And
they that love not Goodness, show themselves monstrously depraved.

(2.) Without loving that which is good, it is certain, we cannot be good. We
may do things good in themselves; but if not from a love to Goodness; but only
for some by ends, out of Sinister Respects, our Hearts may be stark naught.
They that are truly good, have a sincere love to Goodness. They love it propter
se, for its goodness sake. That which is good, is very grateful, pleasing, and
suitable to a good Heart.

(3.) There is no good we do that is pleasing unto God, if it be not from a love
to that which is good. Without this we act not from a right Principle, nor to a
right end. Which things the Lord looks chiefly at, more than at the bare
outward Action.

(4.) Without a love to that which is good, we cannot follow that which is
good, (as we ought to do, 3 Epistle of the Apostle John, v. 11.) neither are we
like to cleave to that which is good, (a Duty required, Romans 12.9.) nor shall
we hold fast that which is good, (1 These. 5.21.) without cleaving to it in
Affection, we are not like to keep close to it in our Practice. Satan, that
grand Adversary, with wicked Men, his Agents, will do all they can to
discourage, and draw us off from that which is good; and to allure, and draw us
on to that which is evil. It Is the property of wicked Men, that they would have
all as had as themselves; and the property of Satan, that he would have all as
miserable as himself: and being void of all Goodness, but as full of Wickedness
as he can hold, hence he envies us, having not any spark of goodness, or any
inclination toward it.

(5.) It is unquestionably our Duty to hate evil (as we heard before.) And it
is by the Love of Goodness, that we come to hate evil. When we hate evil, we
hate it, as being opposite and contrary to the good, which the Lord has
required, taught us to love, has inclined our Hearts to Love.

Now what Use are we to make of this? Though I must be very brief.

Use I. Hence we may infer, That there is a special Love due to those that are
good. A special love due to them, even for the good that is in them, and the
good such do in the World. Such are indeed Benefactors to the World (though
lightly esteemed.) But it is the Duty not only of a Bishop (as it is one
Qualification set down, Tit. 1.8.) but of every Christian as well, to be a
Lover of good Men. True, we ought to love all Men, for so much good as is in
them, and with a Love of Benevolence. Bear no Malice to any Man. Christ has
taught us to love our Enemies. And we must love the Persons of the Wicked, though
we are to hate their wicked Practices. But we are not to love all Men alike.
There is a special Love of Complacence owing to good Men. Our delight must be
in those that excel in Virtue. I question whether Satan was ever at any time
more busy, than in this Age of ours, to divide the Hearts of such. But,
blessed be God, his Name be praised, that we can see the Enemy's Design crossed
any where. That in some places the Primitive Spirit of True Christian Love
seems to be reviving.

Use II. A word of Exhortation. O Love-the Good!

O how ought we to love God, who is Goodness it self! Love him above all; Love
him for himself; Love other Things and Persons only in God, and for him. And
thus all our love should center and terminate in him. Remember the first and
great Commandment, Mat. 22.37. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind. And all is too little: God
being infinitely Good and Amiable, surely he deserves more Love, than our
Hearts can hold, than all the Powers and Faculties of our Souls ever can
express.

And how ought we to love a good and gracious Redeemer, the Lord Jesus Christ!
He is altogether lovely; Full of Grace and Truth. How can we think of his own
Loveliness, as being the Brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the express Image
of his Person, ( Heb. 1.3.) and how can we think of his wonderful unparalled
Love to us, and not have our Hearts enamored of him, enflamed with Love to him
again? Oh! what wicked Hearts have they, that are in love with their vain and
sinful Pleasures; or are doting on the Worlds Riches or Honors; but have not
the Love of God in them; nor do they love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity,
in comparison of whom, nothing in the World is to be loved! But is it not good
to love God and Jesus Christ? And should we not love to love the highest, the
most perfect Objects of Love; to whom our most ardent love, were it raised to
the highest degree possible, were still far from being adaequate?

And then should we not love the good word of God? What servent love does the
Holy Psalmist express to the Word, Psa. 119. Yea, says he, v. 140. Thy word is
very pure: therefore thy Servant loves it. We should be at a sad loss, to know
what is good, were it not for the Word. But there the Lord shows us what is
good, Mic. 6.8. Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil, ( Isa. 5.20.)
And such woeful Mistakes are Men like to fall into, that either have not God's
Word, or regard it not, take not good heed to the word. But if God's
Testimonies are our Meditation, our Delight, and the Men of our Counsel; if we
be not unskilful in the word of Righteousness, but have our Senses exercised
therein; we may thereby discern both good and evil. And observe it, according
to our Love to God's word, such will be our hatred of evil, and our love to
that which is good, Psa. 119.113, 163.

Again, the Lord's Day that is a good Day. A day which God has set apart for
his special Service; and which he is wont to bless (above other days) unto
those, that have a care to keep it Holy. Oh! love and prize the Christian
Sabbath, count it a delight!

Love God's Public Worship. How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts!
Think, how we are priviledg'd above our Brethren in France, etc. How happy
would they think themselves, might they enjoy the like Liberty of attending on
God's Ordinances; and if there were none to interrupt them, or to make them
afraid!

And love Family Worship. Keep that up daily, Morning and Night. Let your
Houses be little Churches: And if you count God's Service perfect Freedom;
sure, you will also delight in secret Duties, where you may have greater
Liberty in Prayer.

Love Holiness and the power of Godliness. Alas, how many take up with a mere
Form of Godliness! but do you take heed of resting there.

Love a Religious Strictness, and Exactness in your ordinary Conversation. Walk
by Rule: A Course that Men generally, yea, too many Professors (I fear) are
very tardy in.

Love Righteousness. Hate all unrighteous Dealing. Such as love Violence (or
Injustice) the Lord hates, Psa. 11.5.

Love the Truth and Peace, (as Zach. 8.19.) Diligite veritatem pacisicam, and
pacem veram, quae ad normam verbi divini, quod est veritas, congruit.
(Tarnovius.) Indeed Peace without Truth should not be taking with us. But so
far as will stand with the Interest of Truth, we should all be followers of
Peace.

Love Mercy. ( Mic. 6.8.) Delight in doing what good you can. Be beneficial to
as many as you can, (as you have opportunity.) Ubicunq, homo est, ibi beneficio
locus est.

I say no more here, but as the Apostle, Phil. 4.8. Whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good Report, if
there be any Virtue, if there be any Praise, think on these things. Apply your
Minds to them, set your Hearts on them.

Which if you do, then know (for your Encouragement,)

(1.) In loving the good, you shall be Followers of God; which (as it is your
Duty, so it) will be your Honor: Is it not an honor to be Followers of God?

(2.) It Is very pleasing to God. This is the good and acceptable Will of God.
And if you love God, certainly it is your unfeigned desire to please him,
(whether others be pleased or displeased.) You will think your selves happy if
you can but please him.

(3.) This will prove you truly good. Here Is a comfortable evidence of your
being in a good Estate, if indeed you love the Good.

(4.) And thus you may be assured, that the Lord will be good to you. He is
good, and does good to such. That your Souls shall lodge in Goodness. And how
great is his Goodness, that he has laid up for such! This is (with Mary) to
choose the good part.

(5.) And if you love, and embrace Goodness, who (but such as are of a
Diabolical Spirit) would seek to harm you? But suppose any should seek you
hurt, for loving and following that which is good; yet you may be of good
Courage. The Lord will turn it to good. Bonis omnia in bonum.

(6.) And if you are Lovers of that which is good, you are in the most hopeful
way to procure, and promote others Weal. You are most likely to help to make
bad Men good, to make evil Times better, to procure much good to the Societies
which you are Members of, and to keep off Public Evils.

But I beseech you, see that you be true lovers of Goodness, even eo nomine as
goodness; and so lovers of all that is truly good. As we must hate all evil,
hate every false way; so must we love all that is good, love every good path.
Partiality would bewray Hypocrisy. When the Heart is indeed gained to the love
of that which is good; it is for the whole of real goodness; not barely for the
Lists or for a few Shreads of it. Thus are Secret Duties good; what the Lord
requires. Then before these, as well as for other Duties wherein others join
with you: And thus you must be for costly Duties, that require more self denial
than ordinary.

And let me mind you of one thing more, scil. That Love is a leading Affection
and an active Principle. As I remember one calls it, The great Wheel of the
Soul, that sets all agoing. Love will carry out the Soul to the thing loved.
Thus if you love that which is good, you will be followers of that which is
good, you will cleave to that which is good, you will be promoters of that
which is good.

And so they that hate the evil and love the good, these are the Men who will
be for establishing Judgment in the Gate.

The Gate of the City was the noted place where the Judges used to sit. As Lyra
says, Sicut praecipitur, Deuteronomy. 16. (v. 18.) ad hoc ut quilibet tam peregrinus
quam civis possit statim Judicis invenire. That as well strangers as Citizens
might know whither readily to go for Justice.

To establish Judgment in the Gate, is to see the due administration of
Justice; that Justice be not neglected nor perverted: but rightly and duly
executed. So I come to a Third Proposition.

III. Gods will is, that Justice and Judgment have place, and a due course
amongst Men.

And though this looks and points more directly, and especially toward Rulers,
Judges, Civil Magistrates; yet others are not to look on themselves as wholly
unconcerned in this matter. Even private persons (upon many Accounts) are
obliged to do what in them lies, that Judgment may be established in the Gate.

Without Question this is a thing that all ought to pray for. All should be
sending up their Votes (their Prayers) to Heaven for Rulers, Magistrates, that
they may keep judgment and do justice, that under them we may lead quiet and
peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty.

Again, many private persons may have a stroke in establishing judgment amongst
us may contribute something toward it, by giving their Votes for persons
rightly qualified, when our Representatives are to be chosen, or any are to be
Elected into Offices wherein they shall have any share in the Government; and
by their place be concerned (more or less) with the distribution of Justice.
And let them look to it, how they will Answer it to God and their own
Consciences, who regard not how they cast away their Votes in such cases, on
persons not fit to be trusted (so that they can but serve their own turns.)

But further, private persons ought (as occasion is offered) to encourage and
be assistant unto Magistrates in the due execution of Justice, in the right
discharge of their Office. And this way may they promote the work of
establishing Judgment in the Gate. It Is a Duty incumbent upon all, to seek
Righteousness, Zep. 2.3. To seek Judgment, Isa. 1.17. And it is an heavy charge
brought in against the Jews, Isa. 59.4. None calls for Justiee. And the
People are not excused, as to the Priests Maladministration, Jer. 5.31. The
Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and my
People love to have it so. And we see in the Text, that the Lord is so for
Justice and Judgment having a due course; that without better care about it, he
would not have them think or hope that he would be gracious unto them.

Now it cannot seem strange that he is so concerned for Justice and Judgment
taking place, if we consider these two or three things following;

(1.) His Honor, (as he is the Supreme Ruler of the World) is here concerned.
As when Judges, Magistrates (on the contrary) wrest and pervert judgment,
bearing down truth and right, as far as they can; countenancing or connivingar
impiety, and profaneness, which they ought to punish and suppress; and
oppressing or discountenancing true goodness and piety, which they ought to
protect and promote; these things are a great reproach and dishonor unto God,
whose Ministers, Officers and Deputies they are: It Is as if they would have the
World believe that God is altogether such a one as they are.

(2.) His love to Justice, Righteousness and Equity; with his abhorrence of the
contrary. He loves Righteousness and Judgment, Psa. 33.5. and 37.28. Isa.
61.8. I the Lord love Judgment: With which compare, Isa. 59.14, 15. Judgment is
turned away backward, and Justice stands afar off --. And the Lord saw it,
and it displeased him, that there was no Judgment. Pro. 17.15. He that
justifies the Wicked, and he that condemns the Just, even they both are
abomination to the Lord. So woe to such, Isa. 5.23.

(3.) His Love to Mankind, and Care of Humane Societies. How ill can these
subsist without Judgment? Therefore he would have Judgment established in the
Gate; because Judgment establishes the Land: Prove. 29.4. The King by Judgment
establishes the Land: Whenas the perverting of Judgment tends to the overthrow
of a Land, both efficiently and meritoriously. God has in favor toward
Mankind, for the Preservation and well-being of humane Societies, ordained the
Office of Civil Rulers, for administering Justice, to keep Men in order, or to
punish Disorders. What were an Army, without Officers, but a Rout? So what were
a Nation, or City, without Rulers, but a Mob, or confused Tumult? And though such
were not assaulted with a Foreign Enemy, yet how likely soon to come to ruin
by intestine Discords? What lamentable Broils and Tumults would arise, without
any way or means to appease them? Yea, such is the Degeneracy and Corruption of
Mankind, that without Rulers and Civil Government, better order might be
expected amongst brute Beasts, than among Men. Thus Men would come to be
oppressed every one by another, and every one by his Neighbor. Yea, thus the
Estates and Lives of the Honestest and Best, would lie continually at the Mercy
of the Vilest and Worst of Men.

But I must think of the special occasion of our Assembling at this time. I am
forced to to be too short on the former Propositions, and prevented going
further; though there is a 4th Proposition in the Text before us, which I can
only speak to by the by. Only there is one thing, which you should all take
notice of. May you not here see the inexcusable Folly, and great Ingratitude of
Rebellious Sinners, of a Wicked World, that will not be governed by God's Laws?
Laws so good in themselves, so good for Men, so beneficial to Humane Societies,
were they generally observed. Surely this would be the Wisdom of a Nation to
observe God's Righteous Judgments, Deuteronomy. 4.6. Keep therefore and do them, for
this is your wisdom --. So it should be well with them. But what Miseries and
Calamities does the World groan under, as partly produced, and partly procured
by the Contempt, and Violation of the same?

Use. Now what remains is for Exhortation: And that specially directed unto
you, The Society for Reformation of Manners in this Town and Corporation (though
I would not that others should think themselves unconcerned here) Hate the
evil, and love the good; and do what in you lies to establish Judgment in our
Gates.

Gentlemen, Friends, Brethren, I can truly say, that as my Heart is toward
you, who have offered your selves willingly to this highly necessary Service,
and my poor, yet hearty Prayers have been for you from your first undertaking
it; so it would rejoice my Heart, if now the Lord would so favor, assist and
succeed me, that I might help a little to strengthen your Hands; yea, that I
might strengthen your Hands in God, (as we have the expression, 1 Samuel 23.16.)
Well, (Sirs) take God along with you, look to him, and his holy Word for
Counsel, and aim principally at his Glory, and act from a principle of Love to
God and True Goodness, with an hatred of evil. As though you may not hate any
Man's Person, how wicked soever; yet the wicked Practices and Enormities of
such, you must hate and oppose. And where milder and more gentle means are not
likely to take effect, show your hatred thereof in exposing the guilty to
shame, and such other Penalties, as may be legally inflicted on them. And go on
(Sirs) with your worthy Design, so agreeable to the Law of God, and to the Laws
of the Land. Deal courageously, and the Lord will be with the good, 2 Chro.
19.11. Thus you will be doing your part to establish Judgment in the Gate. And
as your worthy example has influenced some already, it may excite and provoke
more to their Duty, to help forward this good work of Reformation.

Let me lay a few things before you, to engage, and encourage you to hold on.

(1.) Think of the hainousness and odiousness of those sins, which you have a
prospect, you may give some considerable check unto, having your Magistrates
concurrence. As profane Swearing and Cursing, called those detestable sins, in
the late Act of Parl. They are a most manifest Breach of the 3d Commandment, in
an Heaven-daring manner. A taking God's Name in vain, with a most heavy Accent.
Though the Lord has threatened, That he will not hold those guiltless (but
without Repentance, will surely punish them) that take his Name in vain.

And the sins of Drunkenness, and Uncleanness, how odious and abominable are
they! Each of them a Reproach to Human Nature. They that serve such filthy,
brutish Lusts, may seem to have put off Humanity, to have degenerated into
Beasts, though in humane Shape (which is the more monstrous.) Such Practices are
vile in Heathenish Countries; how much more abominable and intolerable in a
Christian Kingdom! And what is the open Profanation of the Lord's Day less, (I
say, what is it less) than Men's publishing their Impiety, an open proclaiming
of their Irreligion? I suppose none of you could have been satisfied to inform
against those Religious Meetings, where nothing was taught contrary to the
Doctrine of the Church of England; and where other parts of Worship were the
same for substance with the Worship used in the Church of England, only
differing as to some accidental Modes: Whereas in the late Times Informations
were frequently given in against such Religious Meetings; while profane
Persons might, even on the Lord's Day, have frequented Taverns, Alehouses,
etc. Without any fear of being disturbed. But I question not, you can readily
distinguish betwixt that case, and the present case that lies before you. And
you find Nehemiah contended with the Nobles for profaning the Sabbath Day;
when they suffered others to profane it, chap. 13.17. What evil thing is this
that ye do, and profane the Sabbath Day? He declares against it, as very ill
done of them, that they would connive at, or suffer such profanation of the
Sabbath.

And then, as to disorderly Houses, how mischievous, what infectious Places are
they! Seminaries of Sin and Wickedness. Nets of unclean Birds. Is it not a good
work to help to pull down those Nests (I mean, to put down such Houses?) Places
of Infection. Yea, were it not less dangerous to go into a common Pesthouse;
than to haunt such Houses? It Is a worse plague that many catch in such Houses,
to their Souls everlasting ruin.

Indeed you must hate all evil: but then should you not manifest an abhorrence
of so great Evils; and that when you are in a good Capacity to check and curb
them?

(2.) Think of the necessity of your Assisting your Magistrates, if you would
have the Laws against Profaneness vigorously executed, and would have Justice
take place against such notorious Offenses and Offenders. Certainly, good Laws,
if not put in Execution, would signify nothing; would be as a Bell without a
Clapper. And Magistrates of themselves, (though never so desirous to be faithful
in their Office, and true to their Oath in punishing Offenders, yet) can do
little or nothing, without others giving proof of Offenses and Crimes
committed. Without making use of others Eyes and Ears, their Hands could seldom
or never strike. Therefore as there is Honor due to them, in regard of their
Place and Office, so likewise that help and assistance must needs be due,
without which they should but bear the Sword in vain. And so I make no doubt,
but fully conclude, that others are as well bound as you are, to inform
Magistrates of notorious Offenders known to them; even as all ought (in their
Places) to promote the due Execution of Justice; but you have a great advantage
of other single Persons, as being associated, and having got into so good a
method. That any single Person may say here, What am I able to do in comparison
of you? (though others are not hereby excused, who will do nothing.) Now you
doing your part, offering, or giving evidence against such Offenders, if a
Magistrate shall neglect or refuse to punish them, the sin will lie at his
door, not at yours. But blessed be God, you have Magistrates, who have
countenanced and encouraged you in this necessary work, from your very first
undertaking it.

(3.) Consider, are you not under the Obligation of Divine Precept to discover
such Sin and Wickedness, and expose it to due Punishment? As an eminently
Learned Man observes, The charge of punishing great Offenders is given to the
Community. Thou, every individual, Exodus 22.18. Thou shall not suffer a Witch
to live.

And has not God made that which you have undertaken, a Duty, where the
contrary is forbidden or condemned; and where other plain, unquestionable Duty
cannot otherwise be performed. The Israelites were expressly charged not to
conceal an Enticer to Idolatry, Deuteronomy. 13.8. Neither shall thou conceal him. And
the reason against concealing notorious Offenders is the same here, as there;
viz. if such be connived at, and suffered to go on in their Wickedness, their
wicked Practices and Impunity together, will certainly tend to corrupt others,
and encourage others in the like Wickedness. Again, where the People are
reproved, that none called for Justice, Isa. 59.4. this is very obvious, that
if it were not a Duty to call for Justice on Delinquents, if not a Duty to
bring Offenders to Justice; there had been no just cause to lay this to their
charge, as their sin, as a culpable neglect, that none called for Justice.
Again, what Man is there (that believes his Bible) that can deny, but those
sins, which you endeavor to get suppressed, if they commonly go unpunished,
make way for God's dreadful Judgments to break in upon a Land? Then, ought you
not to do what in you lies to make up the Hedge? And are you not this way
standing in the Gap for the Land? Now can you at all question, whether that be
not your Duty? Are you in any doubt or suspense, whether that be more than the
Lord requires, more than needs? then consult, Ezekiel. 22.30.

Again, is it not God's express charge, that we partake not of others sins;
that we have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of Darkness, but rather
reprove them, Ephesians. 5.7, 11. And it is not enough that you join not in Fellowship
with the wicked; but you must show your dislike of their wicked Courses, and
that in the most likely way to stop them. Now mere verbal Reproof is not likely
to do good on Beastly, Stupid, Hardened, Obstinate Sinners; but like enough to
do hurt, to work contrary to Intention, where Sinners are full of Malignity. In
which cases that general Rule takes place, Matthew. 7. v. 6. Give not that which
is Holy to the Dogs, neither cast ye your Pearls before Swine. And see Prove.
9.7, 8. He that reproves a Scorner, gets to himself shame: And he that
rebukes a wicked Man, gets himself a blot. Reprove not a Scorner, lest he
hate thee. Here more good, a better effect may be expected, by putting such
under the Rebukes of Justice, and the Civil Magistrate, at least more benefit
to others. Pro. 19.25. Smite a Scorner, and the simple will beware. chap.
21.11. When the Scorner is punished, the simple is made Wise. Certainly, where
Sinners are hardened and obstinate, a verbal Reproof is not enough; nor will
excuse those from partaking of their sins, who might do more to restrain them,
and do it not. See 1 Samuel 2.23, 24. compared with chapter 3.13. When all you can do
is little enough to restrain that Wickedness, which has so long abounded;
Mourning in secret is not enough, nor a private Reproof, where you may meet
with a Sinner, that seems not incapable of receiving it. Alas! how many
desperate, impudent Sinners may you meet with, that would laugh at your
Reproofs, as Leviathan is said to laugh at the shaking of the spear: But as,
Qui non prohibet, cum potest, jubet. He that does not prohibit a thing, when he
might, in effect wills and commands: So not opposing Sin and Wickedness, so far
as one might, is interpretatively a maintaining or promoting it

(4.) Are you not obliged to set against sin (in your Places) by your Baptismal
Vow and Covenant: You are Christ's listed Soldiers: And I hope, in the work you
have undertaken, you are sighting under his Banner, owning his Cause, acting
his Interest, and opposing the contrary Interests of the Flesh, the World and
the Devil. And how shall we prove our Loyalty and Fidelity to Christ, if we are
not Enemies to sin?

(5.) And should you not follow your Prayers with suitable endeavors? To pray
for Reformation; but to do nothing to promote it, what is that, but in effect
to un-say ones Prayers? Shall I say, that is to contradict ones Prayers, or to
undo them? To pray, [Hallowed be thy Name] and yet to take it patiently, though
one hears God's Sacred and Reverend Name dishonored and blasphemed: To pray
[Thy Kingdom come] and yet not to appear against the Kingdom of Satan, the
Kingdom of Darkness, as one might and ought: To pray [ Thy Will be done on
Earth, etc.] and yet to suffer bold Heavendaring Sinners to go on in their open
Rebellion against God, and manifest Contempt of his holy Laws without control,
when one might bring them under some Restraint, or Legal Rebukes; how do these
things agree? To pray, that the Wickedness of the Wicked may come to an end,
and yet suffer Men to go on in their Wickedness, when one might put some stop
to them, sure, this is not right; but rather like saying ones Prayers backwards.

(6.) Consider, you have such an opportunity now offered, wherein to be active
for God, and against the abounding Wickedness of the Age, which if you should
not lay hold on, you may never have the like again. How great encouragement you
have to appear for a Reformation of Manners, having such Laws and Rulers,
Magistrates to countenance, and back you! And what excuse could you have, if
you sat still, at such a time as this? Well, think of it, you may never have
the like opportunity and advantage again (as now you have) of serving God and
your Generation.

(7.) And know this, if you act sincerely in this Business, the Lord will take
it well, he will look on you, as serving him in your Generation. And how good
is it to be at work for God? Psalm. 106.30, 31. Then stood up Phineas, and
executed Judgment -- And that was counted unto him for Righteousness. The Lord
accepted it, declared his Approbation of it, as a piece of Service, that should
not go unrewarded. Though it is not in your Hands to execute Judgment, yet it is
something, that you have Hearts to promote the execution of Justice. And while
you are standing up for God against the evil Doers, fear not, but he will be
with you, and stand by you. And shall not your work be rewarded? God would
reward Nebuchadnezzar and the Babylonians, as having wrought for him, serving
his Providence, in being Instruments of inslicting Judgment upon proud Tire;
whenas Nebuchadnezzar, and his Soldiers had no intention of serving God in the
War, Ezekiel. 29.18, 19, 20. May not you hope, the Lord is better pleased with the
Service you have undertaken? And he is the most bountiful Rewarder. And if
greater Judgments should be coming on a sinful Kingdom, such as seek
Righteousness may have hope to be hid in the day of the Lord's Anger. In times
of Public Calamities, they are safest, or may bear up best, who have the
greatest care not to partake of others sins. It may be a great comfort to you
in the worst times, that can come, if you can approve your selves to be clear
in this matter. But if more would join with you, or follow your Example, we
might have some hope, that the Nations Guilt and Danger would be less. And so,

(8.) Consider, you may this way be doing great, good Service unto many others.

[1.] Thus it is possible, that the Sinners themselves, whom you bring under the
Rebukes of Justice, may thereby be brought to a better pass. It may tend to
their Cure: So that they and theirs may fare better for you. Their Families,
Wives and Children may fare better.

[2.] So likewise you may this way befriend others. As you heard before, Smite
a Scorner, and the simple will beware. By your means, many may be preserved,
and kept from falling into the like Exorbitances and Enormities. And I doubt
not, very much sin has been prevented by you, which (had you sat still) would
have been committed in this Place.

[3.] What a Blessing may you be to this Beloved Town? A place the Lord has
long watched over for good, has eminently preserved, favored, and many ways
blessed. Yet Scornful, obstinate Sinners were like enough to set the Town on
fire. For wickedness burns as the fire, Isa. 9.18. It Is of a destructive
Nature, where it prevails, and no care is taken to suppress it: Even for that
sin of Sabbath-prophanation, the Lord threatened to kindle a fire in the Gates
of Jerusalem, that should devour the Palaces thereof, and should not be
quenched, Jer. 17.28. May this Place be long blessed in her Magistrates, and
blessed in you, and others like you, assisting them as good Watchmen, that may
prevent the fire of God's Wrath breaking forth here.

[4.] Yea, England may fare better for you. You may be of the number of
Englands best Friends. Indeed the Anger of the Lord seems not yet turned away
from us. What hopes we had sometimes of plenty, with our Peace? There was hope
sometimes the last Summer of a plentiful, and joyful Harvest: when it has been
a sad Harvest in several places, that we hear of. How long shall the Land mourn
for the Wickedness of them that dwell therein? If the Sword of Justice be not
drawn against sin and sinners, may we not then expect, that the Lord's hand
will take hold on Judgment? A day of Indulgence toward Sinners is a day of
Provocation; and that is like to usher in a day of Wrath and Calamity.

But as it is in the Text, [ Establish Judgment in the Gate; it may be, that
the Lord God of Hosts will be gracious --.] When it is said, [it may be] if we
should take the word as a particle of doubting; yet the doubt is not on God's
part, but on Man's part; or it is an intimation of the difficulty of the thing to
excite them to greater diligence in their Duty: Or it is not to discourage such
as hearken to God's Counsel; but to discourage others, who regard it not. If
the righteous scarcely be saved, what will become of the wicked?

But the due Execution of Justice is one good means to prevent Gods Judgments,
Numb. 25.11. Phineas has turned my Wrath away from the Children of Israel, (
while he was zealous for my sake --.

If any object, There are other Places, Countries in the World, where Sin and
Wickedness abounds as much, as in England, that yet have Peace and Prosperity
for all that.

Answ. 1. What though they prosper at present? yet you know not how soon dreadful
Calamities may come upon them, and a destruction from the Almighty. The Sun
shone upon Sodom that very Morning, before fire and brimstone was shower'd down
from Heaven, that destroyed them all. We use to say, Praise a fair day at night.

2. And has not God from Age to Age declared his Wrath against the Ungodliness
and Unrighteousness of Men, by his Judgments inflicted in one place or other?
As is said of Edom, Mal. 1.3, 4. I hated Esau, and laid his Mountains, and his
Heritage waste: -- And they shall call them, The Border of Wickedness, and the
People against whom the Lord has indignation for ever. And will you make
nothing of those dreadful Earthquakes, that of late made such ruinating work in
some Places? Or will you make nothing of the late Wars abroad, whereby so great
Desolations have been made in the Earth?

3. But further take notice, the Lord will rather, or will longer bear with
other Nations, forbear to punish the Wickedness of other Nations; than the
Wickedness of a Nation, that has been brought nearer to him, and is called by
his Name, and priviledg'd with his Word and Ordinances, etc. Ingentia
beneficia, flagitia, Supplicia. As such a People are under greater Obligations,
their sins have higher Aggravations, and God is more dishonored by them, that
they deserve greater Punishment: And see Amos 3. ver. 2. You only have I known
of all the Families of the Earth: therefore I will punish you for all your
Iniquities. And may not the Lord say thus of us? What Nation upon the face of
the Earth, under the Cope of Heaven, that has been more priviledg'd and more
cared for by the Lord, for whom God has wrought greater Deliverances, to whom
he has vouchsafed greater means, helps and advantages, than we of this Nation
have had, to make us better? These things duly considered, will show our sins
of a deeper dye, and more provoking and threatening. Upon which account, they
deserve well of England; sure they are her most trusty Friends, who set
themselves vigorously against sin. And therefore, I beseech you, let not our
Gracious Sovereign (for whom we pray, that he may long live, and reign
prosperously, let him not) fare worse; let not the Kingdom fare worse for any
Wickedness committed, which you are in any capacity to prevent, or put a stop
to. So far as you can hinder any further Accumulation to the Nations Sin and
Guilt, (which is so great already, and lies so heavy on it) let not your care
and pains be wanting. You are in a way, in an hopeful way, with the
encouragement and concurrence of your Magistrates, to do something toward the
reforming of those evil, Manners of an untoward Generation: Now be courageous
and active. It may be a means to divert Judgment; yea, it may be a Token for
good, that the Lord will be further gracious to us, will be favorable to the
Land.

Now give me leave to speak a little to two or three Objections, and I shall
conclude.

Object. 1. Some count you Busybodies, meddling in matters that concern you
not.

Answ. Now how strange is this? Do such understand what they say? Should you
not be concerned for the Honor of God; and for the Peace and Welfare of the
King and his Realm, for the Land of your Nativity; and for the Souls of others,
even of bold, daring Sinners themselves? Does not Sin and Wickedness, committed
with Impudence and Impunity, strike desperately at all these? Then where were
your Zeal for God, Loyalty to our King, love to your Country, compassion
toward the Souls of Men, if you should look upon your selves as unconcerned
here? But if you set your selves as in the forefront of the Battle, against
the Vices, Wickedness and Profaneness of the present Age; that would seem to
argue, that you have a clearer, deeper Sense of your Duty, than most Men have.
And indeed some must do it, if any thing be done to purpose. And your
Forwardness herein may provoke others to their Duty, who are hitherto lagging
behind.

And as for those who call you Busybodies, for endeavoring to put a stop to
open Wickedness; suppose their Houses were on fire, would they call you so, for
coming to quench the fire? Or would they say to you, (Gentlemen, Friends,) Pray
go Home and look to your own Houses; you have nothing to do here? Now
certainly, the prevailing of Wickedness in any place is of more dangerous, and
worse consequence, than a fire breaking forth in the Town.

Object. 2. You make your selves Informers.

Answ. And what then? It is one thing to inform against Men for Religion, for
Praying, Preaching, Hearing God's Word; and another thing to inform against Men
for notorious Irreligion, and Profaneness, for Cursing and Swearing, etc. It
is one thing to inform against such as were Pious and Peaceable in the Land,
out of Malice or of Covetousness, to prey on their Estates, and raise
themselves on the Ruins of Men, more righteous than themselves; and quite
another thing to inform against gross Wickedness out of Conscience; not for any
worldly Advantage; and seeking the Good of the Offenders themselves.

And I hope, the Objectors will not say, that Joseph did amiss, when he told of
his Brethren, when he brought unto his Father their evil Report, in order to
the Reforming of them, Genesis 37.1. And they that brought the Son of Shelomith to
Moses, for blaspheming the Name of the Lord, and Curling, [ Lev. 24.11.] no
doubt thought it would have been a great sin in them, had they connived at, and
concealed such Wickedness.

And others have well observed, That the Princes thought it not below them, to
be Informers in a case of this Nature, Ezra 9.1, 2.

Again, this is plain, They that are against your informing Magistrates of the
Breach of our good and wholesome Laws, (how, and by whom they are broken) these,
I say, are against establishing Judgment in the Gate. For how should wholesome
Laws be put in execution, without such Information given to Magistrates? The
greatest Transgressors would be far from coming to accuse themselves. They
would think themselves safe enough, if there was no Punishment to be inflicted
on them, but upon their confession of the Fact. And such, if they have a
knowledge of Magistrates, that are for keeping up the Authority of the Law, and
for executing Justice on Offenders; they would be most shy of them, that they
be not taken transgressing within their view. So that Bar Informations, and
then the Sword of Justice might rust in the Scabbard; or however, it would be
so seldom drawn, as to be no Terror to evil Doers. When not one Offender of
Ten, of Twenty, or of Forty, etc. were like to fall under the lash of the Law;
this would be no great terror (to be sure) to an Offender, that thinks it is
forty to one, he shall escape.

Again, let any indifferent Person judge, whether these Men be not partial? No
doubt, they would have you ready to inform them, and ready to witness for them,
and in their Cause, if you knew who had wronged them, who had robbed them, who
had stolen a Horse of theirs, etc. but they would have you to be mute in God's
Cause. Now what is this, but to love and honor themselves above God; and to
prefer their own petty Interests before the Interest of Religion, and before
the Glory of the Great God? As if it was a greater matter, that they should be
injured in the least; than that Religion should suffer, and the Name of God be
never so highly dishonored.

But be you assured, It will be found in the great day of Trial a greater
Honor (as one says) to have been a faithful Informer against Vice, than a base
conniver at it, and a wretched betrayer of the Honor of God and Religion.

Object. 3. Many of your Informations are Clandestine; and Offenders are often
convicted and punished, without knowing their Accusers. What shall we say to
this?

Answ. 1. Here it should be considered, That it may be an Act of real Kindness,
and Charity, to inform against common Swearers, Drunkards, etc. to bring them
under the Rebuke of the Law and Justice (when there is no other likely means to
reclaim or restrain them from their wicked Courses:) but it would be no
kindness, it would do them no good, to let them know that you are the Persons
that informed against them; while it is likely to have such ill effect, as to
fill them with Wrath, Malice and Spite against you; and thus to increase their
Sin and Guilt. Should you not avoid being Accessory to these other sins of
theirs; so far as you can prevent the occasion, without neglecting your own
Duty?

2. It Is both allowable and commendable, to use your best Prudence to keep off
ill Turns, (without wronging Conscience, without staining your Innocence, your
Integrity.) As you may pray to be delivered from wicked and unreasonable Men,
so you should not unnecessarily lay your selves open to their Spite and
Revenge, Pro. 17.12. Let a Bear robbed of her Whelps meet a Man, rather than a
Fool in his Folly. It seems a raging Bear is a less dangerous Creature, than
some furious Fools? It Is good to keep out of their way, when you can, without
declining the way of your Duty. There are Sons of Belial, like Thorns, that
cannot be taken with Hands. But the Man that shall touch them, must be fenced
with Iron, and the Staff of a Spear, 2 Samuel 23.6, 7. There are notorious
Offenders, who sufficiently declare their malignity against, and abhorrence of
any zealous Magistrate, or faithful Minister, or others, that would take them
off from their wicked Courses.

Now it is not fit, that the Crimes of such should be concealed, but that they
be discovered to those, who, by their Place and Office, are to punish evil
Doers. But it is not necessary, that you do it so, as to exasperate and enrage
them against you; when the end may be as well obtained by your giving private
Information.

3. As (I believe) none of you could ever yet be justly charged with giving any
false Information against any one; and there is no reason to suppose, that you
would or durst do it, (which could be no advantage to you; but if the party
informed against, (being innocent, and falsely accused) should enter Traverse,
and prove you perjured, would bring upon you so far greater Punishment and
Damage, than what you can think of bringing him under by your Information
against him) so the Premises being duly weighed and considered, it may be
thought prudent and very commendable, (as our times are) That Magistrates do
not make known the Names of particular Informants, without just and necessary
Cause. Surely it is pity that faithful Informers should be discouraged,
needlessly exposed to others hatred, and ill will, for doing their Duty, and for
their good Will to the Nation in general; yea, and to the Offenders themselves,
whose Reformation is aimed at. Yea, how can a good Magistrate satisfy himself
to do that which he knows the Law does not require, when it is not likely to do
good, but hurt?

4. Were it not to be wished, that they who have nothing to say against your
informing Magistrates of notorious Offenders; but only they would have all your
Informations as open, as the Offenses committed (I say, were it not to be
wished that these) would come in now, and help to break the Ice? Let them now
show their Zeal for the due Execution of Justice, (and the more of them, still
the better.) So let them have the Honor to be of the Thirty; though something
short of the first three. Such would do great Service, when by an open
appearance against those detestable Sins and Vices of the Times, (where they
have the Law on their side) they may provoke others, all that are Eye or
Ear-witnesses of such Crimes committed, and that would not partake of others
sins by concealing and conniving at them, in like manner to appear against
them. Were the Practice more general and common, there would be less occasion
of informing privately; as the private Revenge of Offenders were less to be
feared.

Now to conclud: You are engaged in a good Cause. You have both the Law of God,
and Man's Laws for your Warrant; hold on, be of good Courage. Indeed I cannot
think, how you should have any Enemies; but such as are Enemies to God, and to
the Public Weal. And carrying uprightly, you may be sure, you have God and
Conscience your Friends. You are doing your part to establish Judgment in the
Gate, and thus standing in the Gap, to keep off God's Judgments. You have a
great stock of Prayers going forward for you; that you may have God's good
Providence over you, his gracious Guidance and his Presence with you; and that
you may have happy success in your so worthy Undertaking. Your good Example has
had a good influence upon some other Places; and, I hope, will have on more;
and even on some Country-Towns, or Villages about you. After all, be the
success more or less, yet making it your care to approve your Hearts to God,
being such indeed as hate the Evil, and love the Good, you may rest assured,
That your Reward is with the Lord. But further, may not your acting and going
on unanimously (as others likewise in the Chief City of our Land, and
elsewhere) notwithstanding your being of different Persuasions in some lesser
Matters; I say, may not this be a good Omen, (if the Lord will yet delight in
England) that all such as agree in the main and necessary Points of Religion,
shall come in time (waving their lesser Differences) heartily to unite, so as
to strengthen the true Interest of Christianity against all its Enemies; that
true Piety and Christian Charity may flourish amongst us; that Iniquity may
stop its Mouth, and all Impiety and Profaneness hide the Head. And happy
England, if this War begun against Profaneness, shall be so blessed and
prosper'd, as to end in our Jerusalems Peace. I say again, happy England, if
she should at last become an Example of Reformation, as to Men's Lives and
Practices, unto other Churches Reformed in Doctrine, where yet (as to Manners)
there are many things to be reformed. Were England herein an Example to them,
then, might we not hope, That she should be a Crown of Glory in the hand of the
Lord, and a Royal Diadem in the hand of her God? Yea, so should our Jerusalem
be renowned indeed, be a praise in the Earth.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three
Crowns, the lower end of Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel.
MR. Howe's Sermon for Reformation of Manners.

Mr. Spademan's Sermon for Reformation of Manners.

The Golden Snuffers: A Sermon for Reformation of Manners: Preached by Dr.
Durgess.

Holy Confidence well improved by Nehemiah and the Jews. A Sermon for
Reformation of Manners; By Mr. Sylvester.

All four Preached to the Societies in and about London.

A Sermon preached to the Society for Reformation of Manners, at the
Parish Church of St. Mary in Nottingham: By Mr. Daniel Chadwick, Vicar of
Arnhal, and one of the Lecturers there.

Mr. VVhitlock's Sermon, preached to the Society for Reformation of Manners in
Nottingham.

Sermons and Discourses on several Divine Subjects, Folio; by David Clarkson,
B.D. and sometimes Fellow of Clare-Hall, Cambridge.

-- His Discourse of Saving Grace.

Of Free Justification: Written in Latin by John Fox. And now made English.

The Fountain of Life opened: Or, a Display of Christ in his Essential and
Mediatorial Glory; containing 42 Sermons on various Texts. By J. Flavel.

-- His Treatise of the Soul of Man.

-- His Method of Grace, in bringing home the Eternal Redemption, contrived by
the Father, and accomplished by the Son, through the effectual Application of the
Spirit unto God's Elect.

-- Husbandry Spiritualized, or the Heavenly Use of Earthly Things.

-- His Token for Mourners for the death of Friends.

-- His Saint indeed; [the great Work of a Christian.

-- His two Treatises, First, Of Fear: Secondly, Of the righteous Man's Refuge
in the evil Day.

-- His Touchstone of Sincerity: Or, Signs of Grace, and Symptoms of Hypocrisy.
Being the 2d part of, A Saint indeed.

-- His Navigation Spiritualized: Or, a new Compass for Sea men; consisting of
32 Points of pleasant Observations, profitable Applications, serious
Reflections, all concluded with so many spiritual Poems, etc.

-- His Divine Conduct, or Mystery of Providence; its Being and Efficacy
asserted and vindicated, etc.

A Paraphrase upon the New Testament, with Notes, Doctrinal and Practical,
fitted for the Use of Religious Families. By R. Baxter.

Of Charity in reference to other Men's. By Mr. How.

That Great Duty, and Comfortable Evidence, [Keeping our selves from our own
Iniquity.] Opened and applied in some Sermons upon Psalm. 18.23. By John
VVhitlock, Minister in Nottingham.

A short Account of the Life of the Reverend Mr. William Reynolds. By John
Whitlook. To which is added, his Funeral Sermon; preached by John Barrat,
Minister of the Gospel in Nottingham.

The Carnality of Religious Contention. In two Sermons preached at the
Merchants Lecture in Broad-street. By the Reverend Mr. John How.

FINIS.

