Bishop Barlow's State of the Case, Whether any Books may be lent out of Sir
THOMAS BODLEY's Library? Occasioned by Mr. Selden's soliciting the UNIVERSITY
for certain MSS. out of it.
To the READER.
THE following Case was drawn up by Dr. Barlow, then Head-Keeper of the Public
Library at Oxford, and afterward Bishop of Lincoln, on Account of the Request
made to the University by Mr. Seldom, that they would lend him certain MSS. out
of the said Library. It was well known that Mr. Seldom had one of the most
curious Collections of Books in Europe, and that to deny him would, in all
Probability, be a great Detriment to the Public Library, he having declared his
Intention of bestowing them upon it. But notwithstanding this, the University,
upon mature Deliberation, returned him Answer, that they could not permit the
Books to go out without Breach of Statute, and betraying the great Trust
reposed in them. However, they told him withal, that they would, by Virtue of
the absolute Power lodged in them, obtain a legal Dispensation of the Statute,
that he should have Three out at a Time, provided he would give Bond of 100 l.
for their Restitution. But that was so much resented by him, that he See Bp
Burnett's Life of Sir Matt. Hale, p. 15^6. and compare it with Mr. Wood's
Account of the Matter, in Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Oxon.
struck out that Part of his Will, by which he had given them his Books, and
with some Passion declared, they should never have them. Which when the
Executors saw, they stuck at the Matter a little; but having considered better
of it, they came to this Resolution: That they were to be the Executors of Mr.
Selden's Will, and not of his Passion; so they made good what he had intended
in cold Blood, and passed over what his Passion had suggested to him.

It is thought proper to print this Case for the Satisfaction of such Persons,
who perhaps, being ignorant of the Force of the Statute, may take it as a great
Affront, if, upon Solicitation, they be denied any Book out of the Library,
whereas the Statute is so express, that there is no doubt the University will
never attempt to dispense with it, unless upon Prospect of some such
extraordinary Benefaction as Mr. Selden's, whose Books were of so inestimable a
Value.

CASE. Query. Whether any Books may be lent out of Sir Thomas Bodley's Library?
1. SIR Thomas Bodley's Statute (confirmed in Convocation Jun. 20. Ann. 1610.)
says thus: -- In Append. Stat. inter Stat. Bibl. Bodl. 8.
Statuimus, et in formam PERPETUI Edicti, et INDISPENSABILIS ordinamus; ut
NULLUS de caetero, CUJUSCUNQUE LOCI, AUT STATUS, fuerit (OMNI praetextu, causa,
ratione cessante) QUODCUNQUE Volumen, sive catenis alligatum, sive solutum
(QUANTALIBET praestita CAUTIONE, aut Fidejussoribus, de libro bona fide
redhibendo) datum, aut commodatum habeat. It is impossible to make any
Prohibition more Peremptory, and Categorical; --

1. No Book whatsoever can be lent. 2. Nor any Person whatsoever borrow. 3. Nor
any Caution how great soever be admitted. 4. Upon no Cause assigned, or
Pretense whatsoever. 5. And this Edict is declared Perpetual and Indispensable.
6. And the Reason of all this Rigidness is given in the Preface to the Statute
(by Sir Thomas Bodley, and the University) that they knew by many sad Examples,
that such lending of Books had been a great Loss and Ruin to many Libraries. --
Quoniam variis anteacti temporis exemplis, cum in Academia hac nostra, tum in
aliis hujus regni partibus abundamus, unde nimis edocti sumus, QUANTAM
celeberrimis PLERISQUE Bibliothecis RUINAM, et PERNICIEM, invexerit frequens
Librorum COMMODATIO.
II. It is true the Pious Founder of that Library, (who by the forenamed
Statute would have it perpetually, and indispensably unlawful to lend Books out
of it) has left a supreme Power in the Convocation (or University met there)
to dispense with or alter any (even this) Statute. -- Stat. Bodl. 13. in calce.
Atque penes hanc Domum (Convocationis) interpretandi, immutandi, abrogandi,
innovandi Constitutiones antea latas, et Decreta nostra, simulque illis addendi
detrabendique; in omnem denique eventum Bibliothecae incolumitati multo ante
prospiciendi, suprema authoritas semper esto.

III. So that it is evident that the Convocation has a supreme Authority (when
to their Prudence it shall appear to be for the Behoof and Benefit, for the
Preservation and Melioration of the Library) to dispense with this Statute,
which the Pious Founder calls perpetual and indispensable.

IV. But the University has (hitherto) been so far from thinking it fit to
dispense with this Statute, that she has declared it more indispensable, and
by an express Law, and Statute, made it unlawful for any to endeavor, or to
propose such a Dispensation, no not in the House of Convocation itself. The
Stature occurs in the Stat. Acad. Oxon. Tit. X. Sect. II. 5. De materia
indispensabili.
Book of Statutes; where I observe --

1. The Preface to that Statute, is this. -- Quia ex nimia Dispensandi licentia
grave incommodum Universitati antehac obortum est, Statuit Universitas, ne in
posterum Dispensationes ullatenus proponantur in Casibus sequentibus.

2. The Statute follows, where (amongst other things) it is thus decreed --
Statuit ne circa supremas Benefactorum defunctorum Voluntates, aut Ordinationes
eorum quascunque Universitati commendatas, nec circa Ordinationes aliquas ex
Benefactorum voto vel rogatu cum Universitatis consensu, editas vel edendas,
quicquam postea immutetur, vel de eodem immutando petitio aliqua in V. Domo
Convocationis fieri permittatur.

So that the Obligation of this Statute considered, I conceive it (at present)
utterly unlawful

To lend any Book out of the Library.

Or so much as to propose any Dispensation to that End in the Convocation; for
that is expressly forbid in the Statute.

Dub. But may not the University (having, by Statute, supreme Power to make,
Dispense with, Alter, or Abrogate any Law which concerns the Library) Dispense
with this, about lending Books out of it?

Answ. Yes, Provided that it be done in a Regular, and Legal Way, which is set
down expressly in the Statute. -- Stat. Acad. Tit. X. Sect. 2. 5.
Denique Statutum est, ne in aliquo casu praemlsso, quisquam subpoena
Bannitionis, Dispensationem proponat; nisi Cancellarius Praefectorum arbitrio
rem permiserit; ut de Consilio maturo (in Conventu ipsorum ordinario) prius
habito, ex necessaria, et perurgente aliqua causa (per Vice-Cancellarium,
Collegiorum, et Aularum Praefectos, et Procuratores, vel majorem partem
eorundem approbanda) hujusmodi Dispensationem in Domo Convocationis proponi
permittant.

By these Praemisses it manifestly appears (from the express Words, and Letter
of the Statute)

That the Statute against lending Books out of the Library, is (by the Vid.
Appendicem Stat. inter Stat. Bibl. Bodl. 8.
Will of our Pious Founder) EDICTUM PERPETUUM ET INDISPENSABILE.

And this is confirmed by the University Statute, with the Annexation of an
High Penalty, making it Banishment for any to propose a Dispensation in this
particular.

And though (notwithstanding the Severity of these Statutes) the University (by
her Absolute Power) have Authority to dispense in some Cases, yet never without
that Legal Solemnity, and Formality of Law, which is expressed in the Statute:
that is -- The Chancellor must be acquainted with the Business, and he must
approve, and refer it to the Heads of Houses, else no Dispensation can be
proposed.

And when he has done this, unless the Vice Chancellor, and Proctors, with the
Major Part of the Heads of Houses, approve it too (and that after Mature
Deliberation) it cannot yet be proposed.

And when all this is done, unless the Convocation do approve it, no
Dispensation is, or can be granted.

V. Here it may be further inquired,

1. De Praeterito, Whether the University have Dispensed? And it is manifest
She has not. For though a Dispensation was proposed and granted, yet seeing
that Proposition wanted the necessary Requisits, and Formalities of Law,
expressly required by Statute as Antecedent to such Proposition, therefore, 1.
The Proposition was Illegal. 2. The Proposer (by Statute) Criminal, having
incurred the Censure of Banishment, if the Rigor of the Statute were executed.
3. And the Concession, and Grant of the House, which followed upon these
Illegalities must needs be null.

2. De Futuro, Whether in Reason and Prudence She ought: that is, whether it
may be rationally thought to be, e re Academiae, and for the Public Good of
the University, to dispense with those Statutes (which our Pious Founder, and
wise Ancestors made, and desired they might continue Indispensable) to gratify
any private, and particular Person whatsoever.

VI. And here I shall not be so confident (or impudent rather) as to take upon
me Categorically to determine this Question; that I shall leave (as of right I
should) to the Authority and Prudence of the University; only I shall crave
leave to offer these Considerations, which possibly may not be altogether
impertinent, as to the stating of this Particular.

1. That the University has hitherto esteemed the Founder's Will and Statute
so sacred, that they have denied to dispense with it, though to gratify the
greatest Personages of this Nation. So Anno 1624, Williams Bishop of Lincoln,
and then Lord Chancellor of England, would have borrowed Paulus Benius
Eugubinus de dirimend. Controvers. de great. and Lib. Arbit. but was denied.
Again Anno 1645. King Charles (then in Oxon) desired to borrow Mr. D' Aubigne's
History. Dr. Fell (the Vice Chancellor) sends a Command to Mr. Rouse (then
Head-Keeper of the Library) to deliver it. He goes to the King, and shows him
the Statute, which being read, the King would not have the Book, nor permit it
to be taken out of the Library; saying, it was fit that the Will and Statutes
of the pious Founder should be Religiously observed. And April 1654. My Lord
Protector sent his Letter to Mr. Vice Chancellor to borrow a MS. (Joh. de
Muris) for the Portugal Ambassador. A Copy of the Statute was sent; (but not
the Book) which, when his Highness had read, he was satisfied, and commended
the Prudence of the Founder, who had made the Place so sacred. Now would it be
thought proper to lend to an Inferior Person, and deny my Lord Protector? Or
can we think that Statute will not satisfy any Subject, which his Highness was
so well pleased with?

2. If the University (by her Absolute Power) should dispense with this Statute
(which the Pious Founder calls in dispensable) and give Way that one may
borrow; then by doing this to One, a Gap is open to All (who may be, or think
themselves to be as great and good) to desire the same Favor: and if we
consent and lend all; by this means the Books will be dispersed, and many Books
in private Hands which were intended for the Public.

3. Suppose three Books at a time be lent to any private Man, it is true, he is
furnished, but it is manifestly to the Prejudice of the Public, the University
wanting those Books, while he has them: So that if any Foreigner coming hither
from abroad should desire to see them, or any at home desire to use them, both
are disappointed, to the Diminution of the Honor so the University in the one,
and the Benefit it might have by those Books in the other. And therefore it
seems most agreeable to reason, and the Public Good (and the declared Will and
Precept of our Prudent and Pious Founder) not to lend any Books out of the
Library: for by not lending, private Persons only want the use of those Books
which are another's, whereas by lending, the University wants the Use of those
Books which are her own. Sure no prudent Man can think it fit to gratify
Particular Persons with the public Detriment.

4. The Library is a Magazine, which the Pious Founder has fixed in a Public
Place, for a Public Use: and though his Charity to private Persons is such,
that he will hinder none (who is justly qualified and worthy) to come to it,
yet his Charity to the Public is such that he would not have it Ambulatory, to
go to any Private Person. And sure it is more rational that Mahomet should go to
the Mountain, than that the Mountain should come to Mahomet.

5. Lending Books makes them liable to many Casualities, as Absolute Loss,
either by the Carrier's Negligence or Violence offered him by the Way: or they
may be lost by the Person that borrows them; for (presuming the Person Noble,
and careful for their Preservation, yet) his House may be burned, or (by
Robbers) broke open (as Mr. Selden's unhappily was), or (in case they escape
these Casualities) they may be spoiled in the Carriage; as by sad Experience we
find; for above 60 or 100 Leaves of a Greek MS. (Number. 131.) lent out of
Bibliotheca Borrocciana to Mr. Pat. Young, were irrecoverably defaced. Now what
has happened heretofore may happen hereafter; and therefore to keep them
sacredly (and without any lending) in the Library (according to our Good
Founder's Will and Statute) will be the best way for their Preservation.

6. If the Will, and Statute of the Founder were Religiously kept, and all
lending declared unlawful, it would be a great Encouragement for Men to give
more to that Magazine, when they should see the Sacredness of the Place, and
from thence be sure, that what they gave should be Religiously preserved.

7. Lastly, if the University do ratify the Will, and Statute of our Pious
Founder, and declare against lending of any Book to any Person, in any Case
whatsoever (except for the Press, See Archbishop Land's Hist. of his
Chancellorship of OXFORD, p. 73 and 79.
which Archbishop Laud and Sir Kenelm Digby allow as to their Books, in their
Donations) as this will conduce to the Preservation of the Books, so 'twill
free the University from Solicitations; and if any should solicit for Borrowing
any Books yet he had no Reason to take it ill, if he were denied: seeing it is
impossible that any Person of Honor and Prudence can think our Fidelity to Sir
Thomas Bodley to be an Incivility to Him.


