The Crafts-mens Craft. OR The Wiles of the Discoverers. In abusing and
incensing Authority and the People against innocent and harmless Men, by false
Accusations, and Sophistical Suggestions: viz. because they are not Formalists
they are Atheists: because not Superstitious, therefore Irreligious: because
they are against Tyranny and Oppression, therefore they are against Government,
Magistracy, and Laws: because for good and equal Laws, therefore for no Order
or Distinctions, and for equalling men's Estates. etc. And these Delusions are
here clearly manifested.

By H. B.

And they consulted together that they might take Jesus and kill him.

Mat. 26.4. And the Jews which were of Asia moved all the People, and said
hands on Paul, crying Men of Israel Help, This is the man that teaches all men
every where against the People, and the Law, and this place.

Act. 21.27.28. Be not a witness against thy Neighbor without cause; for will thou deceive with thy lips?

Prove. 24.28. Go not forth hastily to strife, lest thou know not what to do in
the end thereof when thy Neighbor has put thee to shame.

LONDON Printed by J. and J. M. for W. L. at the sign of the Blackmoor, within
Bishopsgate. 1649.

THE Crafts-mens Craft.
BE a cause never so good, and the men never so innocent that promote it; yet
if it cross the stream, and be in dis-favor with Authority; it shall be sure to
bear the brand of the worst Design, and be clothed with the foulest and most
deformed shapes that Ar^ and Malice can invent.

This is so far from being a new thing, that almost every Age, History, and
Country, gives abundant instances thereof: So that though the present Oppressed
Party (usually, but opprobiously, called Levellers) suffer much, yet they
suffer no more then what the Prophets, our blessed Sav^our, his Apostles, the
Martyrs, the Protestants in times of Popery, the Anabaptists, Puritans,
Presbyters, in times of Episcopacie, the Separatists, and Independents, during
Presbytery, have endured before them. And why should not we also taste of that
cup, so many, and so good having drunk deep draughts of it? The Potion may
indeed be bitter, but it is medicinal, and will (by making us watchful and
circumspect in all our ways and actions) preserve us (I hope) from many
frailties and infirmities we might otherways through the pravity of man's
nature, be apt to slip into: So we may say with King David, It is good for us
that we have bin afflicted, for otherwise we had gone astray.

However, the Guilt of Joseph's Brothers, in going about to Murder him, was
never the less, because it proved the means of making him the Preserver of Gods
People in Egypt: the Rods (though Instruments of Chastisements in the Lords
hand) are commonly thrown into the fire. And in Testification of this also,
History, and our own Experience, is very copious.

The times are necessitous, and rewards are to be had, Is it to be supposed
therefore, that officious, needy, or ambitious men will be wanting to
themselves in this particular? what way so easy to wealth, advancement,
offices? The labors of a man's life cannot produce so much, as a weeks time in a
handsome, well-wrought, artificial fiction: Alas! what is thirty pieces now?
it is nothing; every Spy and Intelligencer that is but any thing his
Crafts-master, proposes a greater largess for the Traps and Pit-falls he makes
for innocent and harmless people: And therefore, what wonder is it that our
Friends in the Tower, before their close Restraint, had almost every day some
Visitants, that under the disguise of Friendship, came to Ensnare and Betray;
and that it is already come to that pass, that a man dare hardly trust his
Bosome-Friend, nor communicate himself to any man, without fear and inward
reluctance?

What wonder is it that a busy and subtle People, should make it their work
to vilify and reproach us; to mix with all companies, and scatter false
reports and forgeries of us? hoping thereby first to possess men's minds,
knowing how difficult a thing it is (eradicare errorem) to remove a Bel^ef
(though never so slightly grounded) that has took root in them? For when a
scandal is once entertained, it is afterward reported; and the Parties
reporting, are thereby engaged, not only to stand to the justification of
that, but then greedily to suck in all new calumnies, so to keep down the
injured from ever ha^ing opportunity to right themselves.

What wonder is it to see book after book to fly abroad (like the Spirit of
Delusion amongst the false Prophets) to furnish every man's mouth with a false
Accusation against Us; and, as we have endeavored the good of all, to make us
hated by all; to take away first our Reputations, that so they may the more
easily take away our Lives; to mis-guide and incense Authority, and the People
against Us, by falsely charging us with such things as are of greatest
abomination to Us; that so they may the better cry out, Crucify, Crucify,
Away with such Monsters from the Earth, it is not fit they should draw breath
amongst us? And why all this? But because we are faithful to the sublike
interest, and will not shut our eyes, and stifle our Consciences, but dare still
urge for those good things have bin so often declared for, and promised; and
can by no baits, threats, or allurements, be drawn therefrom.

Much time has bin spent already, and much has bin said for our Vindication;
but there are some men, who hearing, will not hear; and seeing, will not
understand; whose work it is, not to believe, nor to suffer others to be
rightly informed; they should then (^l^um, and operam perdere) lose their
Labor, and peradventure the Recompense of their Reward too. They have now sumd
up all in a Book called the Discoverer, which is for the most part of it, the
old Scandals new modeled; Calumny clothed in a more Scholastical Habit, and
confident (as the Custom is) of easier admittance, because of its finer Apparel.

At first it was ushered into the world by the Recommendation of the Council of
State; I know not whether that Honor was really conferred, or fictitiously
imposed, because in the Copies last Printed, the Council of State is left out,
and the Authors only (and those unknown too) substistuted in their rooms: But
admit the first, it is very usual, all know, for Authority to be misinformed,
especially when they have as yet only heard but the Accusing Party: When the
Jews had said many (and those grieveous) complaints against Paul; questionless,
the Spirits both of the hearers, and of his Judges were very much incensed
against him; but after he had pleaded for himself, the tide was turn^d; Festus
found nothing worthy of death in him, and Agrippa was almost persuaded to be a
Paul. For my part, I make no doubt, but if the Par^iament and Council of State
will in time see how exceedingly we have been in^u^ed by the malevolent Reports
of bad men, and that both the Ends we aim at, are in themselves good and
beneficial to the Commonwealth; and the means we have used for the
accomplishment thereof, very lawful and justifiable: Which that they may, I
shall make bold to do the best I can to discover our Discoverer, his Wilts and
Fallacies I mean; in doing whereof, I shall not trace him in every politic and
extravagant excursion, to which I shall only cursorily and occasionally speak,
but as my main drift, extract so much out of him, as is most material, and
whereto he seems to ^ring's proof; the rest every un-prejudiced Reader will (I
suppose) of himself see thr^ugh, and take, as the customary Stratagems, that
Designing-men use to make others odious.

But before we come to his Particulars, we also shall make one Observation, as
giv^ng light to our present Discovery.

Prudential and ^ood men do well observe, that when a People or Party prove
Obstina^e, that is, constant to their Engagements, and resolute in the
promotion of those things that tend to the good of the Commonwealth; and can
by to means be taken often, or withdrawn, to the promotion of another Interest;
that then the common and politic cu^^om is, to make them odious, that ^o
(since they will not assist) their complaints and opposition shall be as
in-ef^ectual and inconsiderable as may be: And in making them odious, there
particular Ways and Methods (amongst many others) are used.

1. To aggravate every weakness and frailty of any particular man, and impute
is to the whole Party. 2. To contrive, and confidently affix such Scandals upon
them, as are most distasteful to the People, and most difficultly disproved. 3.
To impose upon them the deviations of other men, not of their Party; and yet
make the World believe they are. 4. To Interpret their Intentions, and make
indirect Inferences upon their Words and Act^ons; as, that because they are
against Tyranie and Oppression, therefore they are against Magistracy and
Government; because they are for an Isonomie, Impartiality or Equality in the
Law, therefore they are for no Order of Distinction, and for Equalling men's
Estates. 5. To cry down, and charge them with Hypocrisy, but in the highest
and most visible manner exercise it themselves. 6. To evade the point in
Controversy, or the real Difference; and divert every man's thoughts there
from, by false Accusations, and Reports, for that end raised, and taken up. 7.
To up-braid them with their poverty, and intimating false and groundless
surmises thereupon. 8. To invent nicknames, importing that of which they are
not guilty: To charge them with Heresy, Atheism, Anti-Scripturisme, Sedition,
Treason, etc. and any thing that is of ill Report among men; That these, even
all of them, and many more, both have bin, and are taken up, and made use of by
the Discoverer, and others against us, is as clearly to be seen, as was
Gehazie's leprosy on his fore head; which shall more clearly be manifested in
the following Treatise; and we do desire the Reader to take good notice of it:
For doing so, he shall the better know the Tree by the Fruit.

That we have urged the Removal of Tithes, Excise, Free Quarter, and other
Taxes, and Grievances, is as the Discoverer says, very true: and it is as false
that we have done it either to Ingratiate our selves, or to make the people
disaffected toward the Parliament. If he could truly enter into our hearts, as
he takes upon him to do, he would find, that the only motive engaging us to
press for their Removal, is our sense of the burden, and our compassion toward
those that are more pressed (especially by Free Quarter) then our selves. We see
not but that the Parliament may remove them; and their Declaring so often that
they will, is a motive to us (it being not done) to press them for the doing
thereof. During their Session, what has bin more usual almost in every
bus^ness that ^s in demur or suspense? Why should that therefore be justifiable
in all others, and condemnable in us?

2. For the impossibility of removing them, by which the non-removal is
justified: Under favor, he must excuse us if we see it not: We both see that it
may be done, and how it may be done; and have many things to offer in order
thereunto, but that we can have no favorable acceptance.

3. He urges, That it is by our means burdens are continued. It Is easily said
indeed, but most difficultly (we may say impossibly) proved; for what is not
true in it self, cannot be proved. If one hundred thousand pounds, and twice
the sum too, be spent upon Intelligence, are we to be blamed for it, that have
no other weapons but Prayers and Petitions; and put the Commonwealth to no
other trouble or charge, but what goes to the reading and debating our humble
Addresses?

For the passages urged out of The Picture of the Council of State, the Letter
of Lieut. Col. J. Lilburn, and R. Overton, to the General, and other writings
that concern men so able to write in their own Vindication, I purpose to leave
them to the Defense of their own pens; only I could wish that they and the
Discoverers were upon even terms; and that the one for speaking were not in
hope of a reward, and the other in fear of a punishment.

For those harsh Expressions which have past some of our Friends writings,
though we could wish they had not bin provoked thereunto, or that being
provoked, they had forborne; yet Affliction, Oppression, and that hard measure
they judge they receive in their Sufferings, may well excuse that heat and
tartness that many times comes from them; and we could wish likewise they had
no cause. But on the other side, Has it not bin with Interest returned by their
Adversaries upon them? And does it not strike deeper too? Amounting to no less
than an endeavor to take away their lives: We will agree with you, if you
please, to persuade with our Friends on both sides, to forbear all bitter
language; and desire you that you would press them likewise with those four
Argumen^s which for that end you urge upon us. Sir, We know very well the
disadvantages we^ly under, in that most of you are Politic men, that have
studied the Behaviors and Rules of other Politicians, and have acquired
thereby, an Art of Commanding your Passions; Whereas we engage out of the
Plainess and Singleness of our Hearts, and Desires of Good to the Nation, and
have no Arts of Concealing our Intentions or Passions; Our Spirits presently
rise when we see things done to the prejudice of the Commonwealth; and in this
regard, happily we may have somewhat disadvantaged our selves.

Your Story of Duron, you might have spared; for you know well, our Expressions
were higher before the restraint of our Friends, than since; only I see, you
are willing to show u^ (though not the railing of your Tongue, yet) the Rancor
of your Heart. You are very pleasant with your Fables in other men's calamities;
and like the Harpiae, that sing at the cries of Mariners, and a Shipwreck, so
do you sport your self at the sad afflictions of your Brethren; and are very
Poetical in your Malice, but very ridiculous withal; for otherwise you could
not imagine, that the vehement and hasty Expressions of our Friends, can be
supposed by them to be a means to get themselves out, since in natural
consequence, they must rather be judged the means to keep them longer in: From
whence you may conclude, that they flow from them rather by instigation and
necessity, than any Design.

For the relinquishment is spoke of in the Manifestation, of many good things
proposed; it relates most to the Army, who have relinquisht many good things
presented in their Agreement: Neither do we so much press for Speed in the
doing them, as Assurance that they shall be done.

And though our Impatience be often urged upon us to our prejudice, yet we
could instance a Time, and a Declaration (which the Discoverer has forgot)
wherein these very Grievances of the People, which are not yet removed, were
said to be so pressing, that but so many (and those very few) days, could be
allowed for their Removal. Sed non videmus ie manticae quod in tergo est. In
other men's faults we are like Linceus, in our own Sand blind, and cannot see at
any distance.

You are pleased to give your guess and interpretation of our thoughts, what we
mean by good things: and contrary to your own Rules, p. 27. Interpret all to
the worst. We mean by good things, not what you Surmise; but we Express in our
Petitions, Representation, and Agreement: He that but conjectures at that which
is not, when he may be ascertained from that which is, must either be a weak,
or a wicked man.

We are neither for Delay, where it is Dangerous; nor for Have, where it makes
Wast: But as for good things, so for a fit and convenient season, which we
judge to be now; and if it is not, let us have good reason for it, and we shall
be satisfied. You next come to Particulars, whither I will make bold to follow
you.

You urge, that though you know we profess, and urge our Manifestaon for it,
that we believe there is one Omnipotent God, the Author and Preserver of all
things in the World, etc. yet you suppose us Atheists, and say in our
Profession we are Hypocrites. Alas! How fain would you have us worse than we
are? How sorry are you that we are not so bad as you would have us? What pains
you take to make us seen to be what indeed we are not? Atheists. If so plain
and candid a Profession we have made, and you have recited, and our endeavors
to square our lives answerable thereunto, be not sufficient to confirm men in a
Belief of our Acknowledgement and Submission to a Deity; what else can be? I
profess I know not. What greater Testimony can you give us, of your not being
Atheists? But you have reasons to believe us to be Hypocrites: I pray, let us
examine them. Alas, how you deceive the World! They are Citations out of a Book
none of us own, called, The New Law of Righteousness: What an Inference is
here! A certain man to whom we have no Relation, has wrote a Book wherein are
many particulars: From whence you infer the denial of a Deity (and that but
falsely too, as he will tell you) and therefore we are Atheists. Good Sir, Speak
no more of Incongruities in us, so long as you can pass this over in your self.
But you further urge M. Overtons Book, denying the Immortality of the Soul.
Si^, if you had perused the Book, you would have found, that though he asserts
the Mortality of the Soul with the Body, yet he grant, also, and affirms that
the whole man rises again, and both Body and Soul comes to judgment. So that
the whole controversy in his Book, is only of the nature of the Soul; And his
opinion therein, though different from the common strain, yet when taken
together, and not in piecemeal, it implies, and presupposes a Deity, and a
Resurrection: And therefore here also you demonstrate, either your ignorance,
in not exam^ning his Book, (which since you take upon you to judge, you ought
to have done) or your wilfulne^s (to say no more) in making a false conclus^on,
that the premises no way will hear.

Lipsius in his Politics, and Livie in his History, and some other of the
Heathens, tell you (you say) That Religion, and Gods Worship, is necessary for
the Saf^ty and Prosperity of a Commonwealth. You a^e informed well; neither do
we think otherwise; But what is your inference hence? Nothing verbal, but
tacitly you imply, and you would have the World believe, that we are wor^e
than the Heathens; because we would have no Religion: you suppose you have
proved it before; which whether you have or no, let the world judge. The
Presbyters are against Toleration, though the Independents are for conformity;
clearly this is your Argument; for there it as great disparity between the
opinions of those he cite, and us; as between the Presbyters and Independent.
It Is true indeed, we are not so much for the Formal, or rather Suppo^^tious part
of Gods Service, further than is clear and evident unto us; but for the real
and practical part of his Worship, we wish we could more exactly sq^are our
lives thereunto; and I hope it will be every day more and more our endeavors
that we may: But where we have not sufficient grounds, and certainty in the
things, and judge the essential wanting, who^e we cannot take things upon
^rus^, and a traditional conveyance, as others can; there we suspend our
practice; and from hence, because we will not be superstitious, we are said not
to be Religious. The Ordinances were intended for the Comfort and Confortation
of man; and therefore, certainly for our own sakes, we would not neglect any of
them, where we have plain and certain grounds for exerci^e thereof; But for
conforming our lives and conversation according to the Rules and D^ctates of
Scriptures, which are plain, obvious, and ^ndisputable, (which S. James define
to be Pure Religion) this is pr^ncipa^ly to Honor God; viz When our Light does
so shine before men that they seeing our good works, may glorify our Father
which is in Heaven. Truly Sir, we ever took good life not for the smoke, as you
express it, but the substantial part of Gods Service: Neither do we neglect, or
have any other than precious e^^eem o^ the Ordinances, all things essential to
the^r practice being present; You do us exceeding wrong therefore, and your
self too, to show so much weakness, as to brand us (and that upon so slight
grounds, and no proof) with Atheism; especially considering how far the
prejudice of such a slander will extend against us. A^ Atheist is not fit for
humane Society, for he has no^ty upon him, nothing within to check him from
rushing with greediness upon any evil his lust or advantage can prompt him ^o;
He will say any thing of any man, do any thing against any man to prof^t
himself; No Law holds him, no Promises, no Engagements, where they may safely,
and for his commodity be broken: He says not only in his Heart, but ^n all
his Actions, There is no God: And according to this Descr^ption (which
certainly comes near the matter) The greatest Atheists are Politicians. Not
such as out of singleness of heart do the^r Country Service, and for that end,
expose themselves to all hazards, neglect the Pomp and Van^ty of the World; and
count it better to suffer affliction for a good Cause, than to enjoy the
pleasures of Sin for a season. You have words no question, and fine stories;
and can by a cuning contexture thereof, make any thing of any thing; but when a
right judgment is made, and matters cloe^ly looked into, without the Spectacles
of Prejudice, and the false Optics of your Imagination; we doubt not to stand
right in the opinion of all good people, that take things as they are; not as
they are gloss'd and painted over, with such colors as your ends and interests
engage you to set upon them.

But you have one nail more to fasten Atheism upon us, and that is, That in
all our Agreement, there is not one thing proposed for the holding forth, and
furtherance of Gods Worship and Service; whereas in all other Platforms, you
say, though drawn up by Heathens, Religion always had the first place and
pre-eminence: And the implied conclusion from hence must be, That we are men of
no Religion; for that you are undertaking to prove.

Answ. 1. That the same complaint lies against the Agreement of the Army in
this particular, as against us; For Religion had neither the first place there,
nor was there any platform for the holding forth of Gods Worship and Service,
more there than in ours: So that mutatis nominibus de Vobis Fabula narratur:
His Excellency, and the Officers of the Army, by the same inference, must be
his Atheists.

The Parliament has already established a Form and Method of Religion; which as
they have power to do, so is there no Restriction in the Agreement, but that
they may at all times have the like; For, where they are not restrained, there
they are empowered.

When are we like to have an Agreement, if there must be in it a Platform for
Religion? Considering the un^versal difference and discord^ncie in men's sp^rits
about matters of Religion: We have done as much (we think) in that particular,
as is necessary; in making necessary Cautions and Reserves against Compuls^on
and En^orcement; Further we could not go, without the hazard of having no
Agreement at all, if we had put that into it, to which beforehand we were
certa^n the people could not agree.

For the Parishoners choosing their own Ministers, it is no more but what in most
places they may do already; and where Patrons are that impose, is there not the
same likely h^o^ that they may impose a Turk, or a Jew upon a Parish, as that
the Parishoners should choose one? Will a Patron think you, be more careful of
them, than they are of themselves? Every straw (I see) must be brought to your
Building: Note also what your Inference must be hereupon; We would have the
People choose their own Ministers, therefore are we Atheists, and would have no
Religion: And to itch up this pitiful Argument, the Anabaptists of Munster
(Levellers you now call them) must be brought in: The old trick of the Bishops,
and of every body else, that have Designs on foot; Where Proof is wanting,
there Resemblances are insinuated in their stead; and Comparisons made either
in such things as are true of neither, or e^se, the Party that is to be made
odious, is likened to such as are alre^dy odious, in some particulars not
material; and yet thereby is suggested a similitude in all the rest.

You have their proofs that we are Atheists; which though they promised you
should be clear and certain, out of our own Books; yet you see, when touched,
they fall to dust; like the fair seeming Apples of Sodom, and remain rather as
proofs of their rancor and spleen against us; or else, of their Stratagems and
Designs upon us: Non ut Probant loquntur, sed ut Decipiant: They speak not to
prove, but to deceive.

Their next work is, to make us Levellers; In order whereunto, they cite two
passages in the Manifestation, page 4. As, First. We profess, we never had it
in our thoughts to level Men's Estates; it bring the uttermost of our aim, that
the Common wealth be reduced to such a pass, that every man may with as much
security as may be enjoy his Propriety. And Secondly, Understanding by
levelling, an Equalling of men's Estates, and taking away that Right and Title
that every man has to what is his own: To attempt an enducing the same, is most
injurious, unless there did precede an Universal Assent thereunto, from all,
and every one of the People. Thus far the Manifestation: From whence they make
this Paraphrase; Disc As if they should say the thing is good, only wanting
means and power at present, it must be left, till there be further opportunity
to do it. What is in these men's brain, or what in their hearts, that they can
so confidently abuse us, and the World, yea, and themselves most of all? For
apparent falsehood, are like Arrows shot upright, that fall down upon the head
of the Shooter. What Bars and Bolts have we put against levelling, in our
Petitions, Agreement, and all our Writings? How have we declared it to be
without the Power of Parliament it self to do it, answered the Objections
concerning the Primitive Christians Community? Every thing we have brought to
light, our Proposals, Articles, and Provisions, do all clearly, and evidently
imply and relate to Propriety; and yet to see, when it concerns men that the
World should believe us to be Levellers, how against all light, and apparent
certainty of the contrary, they can urge it upon us.

But they have further proofs, viz. Expressions our of our Writings, that do
imply it as clear as day. I confess the Citations they have brought there, do
not only imply, but express it; But the Expressions cited, and the Books out
of which they cite them, are no more ours, or owned by us, then by them that
cited them: And what dealing I pray is this, to lay other men's infirmities upon
our shoulders? His Inference is, West^s horses came into Gladmens Grounds,
therefore Fields Cattle shall be pounded. This is such a way to make men
guilty, as was never heard of before, I think: A sure way, for allowing it, no
man can be innocent: This is so far from taking doubtful actions in the best
sense, and to make the Fairest and Noblest construction in things dubious,
which is the Discoverers rule, p. 27. that instead thereof, where Actions and
Words are plain, and no ways dubious; he puts a contrary sense upon them, and
will force upon us, things which we utterly disclaim.

Two leaves he has spent in citations of this nature, which we shall not speak
to, because they concern us not; but shall only desire, that the Inferences
and Applications which are made thereupon, may (and we know they will) by all
ingenuous men, have no reflection at all upon us.

But before they leave this, they be think themselves, that our profession
against Levelling, is very plain and s^gnificant in the Manifestation and
therefore they have found a device to enervate and weaken it, as they th^nk;
and that is a special one; you shall hear it. When we say, that Levellihg is
injurious, unless there did precede an Universal Assent in All, and Every One
of the people: First, they object, that we imply that the thing in it self is
good. 2. That by All, we mean All Restrictively; that is, Some and those the
poor Commoners. To the first we answer* that we cannot suppose, nor do we think
any Rational men do believe the thing unlawful in it self; for then the
Primitive Christians d^ unlawfully: But we say, it is unlawful and in^ur^ous
for any sect or sort of men, to impose or enforce it; but that to make it
lawful, there must be an unanimous and ^ndividual assent of every man
thereunto: And for a further Vindication in this point, we refer to our
Manifestation.

The second Objection is the most absurd and groundless surmise, that ever any
men took up; That we should mean by All, only Some; God defend us from such
contrar^ety between words and meaning; between the Tongue and the Heart: May
our da^s be shortened, and the course of our lives expire before its natural
Term, rather than we live to such a degree of Imposture, and wicked
Reservation: There is not any thing our souls do more abhominate; and we desire
a^l men to consider, how extremely in this particular we are abused. It our
writings that are permanent, be thus wrested to a sense contrary to what in
themselves they import; how much more will they, and how much more
indiscoverably may they abuse us in our Speeches and Discourses, which a^e
semper in trans^^^, n^^hing remaining of them to clear themselves, and evidence
the falsehood of the Report. How careful were the Manifestators to express
themselves so plainly, so fully, as to put it past being mis-understood; Unless
there did precede an universal assent from all and every one of the People:
Three bolts they made, as if they had foreseen an intention in the
Discoverers, to force a passage here, into their Reputations; and yet all will
not serve the turn: Paul must be a Pestilent Fellow, Our Saviour^ a Perverter
of the Nation; and therefore, let them bear themselves how they will, and say
what they can; the Bow is drawn, and the Arrow must fly abroad.

However, the Wo^ld may see by this, that it is not Truth that guides these
Discoverers but Design; a handsome Fiction will go as far (they think) as
Verity, till it comes to be laid open, and then (as in tricks of Legerdemain)
the wonderful Art is but cleanly conveyance, and slight of hand: So here, the
whole Accusation amounts to no more, but a Fiction well mou^ded, a Fable
artificially contrived, and told by a voluble Tongue, and an inventive brain*

'Twere well though, that something else were the subject matter of these men's
dexterity, and not their Brethren^ Lives and Reputations.

We have done with their two principal Discoveries; viz. That we are Atheists,
and Levelle^s: which though at first they promised to demonstrate by Reason and
Proof abundantly; yet have they (as many confident Merchant* use to do) failed
in the performance, and made it evident to all, that thereby they intended
only, to pre-occupate the peoples understandings, that men might piece up the
defects and deficiencies of the Discoverers Reasons and Arguments, with their
willingness, and easy credulity.

The next charge is, our Sedition, and raising Discontents, and Differences
amongst the Soldiers, and incensing them against their Officers; by commending
the Goodness and Fidelity of the one, and decrying the Apostacy, Ambition,
Perfidie, and Cruelty of the other; and by making the People out of love with
the Parliament. To th^s we answer;

That the proofs urged for the making of this good, are many of them out of
books not owned by us, and therefore of no validity against us.

The places that are cited out of some of our Books, are cited but piecemeal,
without the preceding and subsequent passages, necessary for the clearing our
intentions, and manifesting the grounds and reasons of those passages: Allowing
this Liberty; it is an easy matter by the Armies writings, to make them
Traitors to the Parliament.

Is it so unpardonable a crime for Inferior men to find fault with such as are
in Authority, as to be judged therefore Traitors, Seditions, Mutineer^* etc.
That they must therefore suffer death for it. Disc. p. 33. Be cut asunder
alive: ibid Be Hanged up in the most noted places of the Land: Nay, and be
killed by any body that meets them? Certainly this Doctrine is but of a late
Stamp and Coynage: At New-marker it was otherwise, at Reading, Hammer smith,
and many other places: If it be considered how much good has arisen to this
Commonwealth by some irregular^ties that in probability but for them, we had
bin ruined; such complaints certainly as the Discoverer mentions, which are far
short of forcible Opposition and Resistance, which has by others bin exercised,
would find a gentles, and more favorable sentence. If a General turns his Canon
against the Soldier, or the Pilot steers upon a Rock; the Soldier may resist
the one, and the Mariner; prevent the intended mischief of the other: So say
the Declarations of the Army; and make themselves Judge of the Parliament:
Declar. November 30. 1648. p. 5. I see Beams are but Motes in some men's eyes, and
in other some, Motes are made Beams. I wish to God there were no ground of just
complaint, and that every jealousy may be presented by an actual performance
of Promise^, and the many good things declared: Would it be so, I should judge
it the happiest time that ever came to England, and the best way to secure all
men that have served their Country, to allay all differences and discontents,
to answer all scruples and objections.

And I do likewise wish, and heartily desire of that party (for so it will be
called) of which I am, that they would Interpret all things to the best; and
allow, that though they see what things ought to be done; yet that they may not
see that only so much, as things stand, can be done; and accordingly to bear
themselves. I speak not this, either for fear, of inf^rmations much less to
administer an excuse for neglects or miscarriages; but only out of my desire
to chalk out to both a way to union, if it be possible; which I think is of
greatest concernme^t to both, and to the Common wealth that may be.

For Expressions that have bin Bitter of either hand, it may be I may be
mistaken, but I judge it best that they be remited and forgotten by both: I
speak without commission, but I think, not without reason, and a due regard to
both.

If words have bin high from some of us, the provocations considered, and that
their speeches have not bin altogether causless; considering likewise, that the
men so speaking, have spent themselves for their Country, and cannot in truth
be said to have other ends, than its Freedom and Safety; having never either
kept the Tract, or used the means to make themselves great or rich, but
slighted both; which is no small badge of their Integrity: These things
considered (I say) it will be no bad advice I believe Recepini canere; to found
a Retreat* and bethink our selves of the impossibility of a perfect ^in on,
unless there be some Rem^ssion of all hands, of the dangers of our differences,
in case the enemy ever appear again: and of many other particulars that might
be urged, but tha^ some will be apt to surmise, that this proceeds from the
apprehension of our present condition and not from a desire of peace, and
strengthening the Nation by a good and well joynted union*

However, it has ever bin counted good advice to the wisest States, to stint
and moderate their fortunes; and in greatest successes, rather to look backward
than forward; and rather to stop the current of dangers ensuing, than to follow
the stream of that Victory, by which they may be more increased* It Is Tacitus
advice, Securitati potius, quam potentiae consulere; to consult rather our
Security, than propose the increase and enlargement of power: This Advice happily
will be dis-relisht; and who can help it? However it is given.

But we urge against Martial Law, and so endeavor the breaking of the Army; For
how can an Army subsist without Discipline? and where is Discipline, if there
be no Martial Law?

Answ. That what the Law is express against, that we may urge against: But the
Law is express against Martial law in time of peace; Ergo* Our Ancestors it
seems knew very well the rigor and severity of that Law that aptness of its
being extended beyond the camp, a chlamyde ad Togam; from the Sould^er to the
Citizen; and many other inconveniences of it; and therefore have expressly
provided against it* exercise in times of Peace. And cer^ainly, other men ought
not to plead for that the Law provides against: Nor ought our Desires to be so
slighted and condemned, that are grounded upon express Law. And whereas the
Discoverers urge, that we have made hurly-burlies, and therefore by our own
Arguments it may be exercised now; We answer, First, That he is mistaken in his
major, and takes that for granted, which we laterly disclaim, and is in it self
false. 2. That allowing it to be true, yet our pleas against Martial Law, were
before the hurly-burlies. 3. His consequence is very infirm; For the meaning of
Times of Peace, is according to Sir Edw. Cook, When the Courts of Justice are
open; in whom is to be had Justice against all Faults and Offenses. Some other
Excursion, and Expostulations are made hereupon by the Discoverers, which we
only desire may be read: we conceive there needs no answer.

For the remaining part of their Book, it is spent in confuta^ion of the first
and second part of Englands New Chains Disco^ered: In doing whereof, I command
their wisdoms for caving out the most, and most considerable parts thereof* as
^ut (...) f^othy, and impertinent passages: they have as safe a combat of this*
a^ he that fenced with the ^ree, and need not fear any steping from beh^nd it:
It Is a hands^m predicament we are in, being made Traitors for holding our peace;
for what cannot Art and Sophistry do? and we should hardly escape he la^n or
Treason, if in this case we should speak. It Is a meritorious work indeed, and a
gloriou^ conquest, first to hold our hands, and then to buf^et us; To ^ag, and
then re^^^e us: Howe^er, we had thought these times, and men pretend^ng to
Freedom* wou^d never have found fault with some things therein; which have from
the b^gini^g of these Distractions bin justified by the ablest and most
ingenuous men. But when is it a better time to condemn things good then when no
man dares appear in their justification? I wish some other way might be found
to unt^ngle those chains; Non respondendo, sed ar^ndo* not by an^wer^ng, but
doing: Herodian. -- The Ey^ are Credulous, when the Ears are not. The Paper
will remain, and when compared with the An^^ers in the Di^coverer, disgusts I
fear, and dis-^at^sfactions will continue; as finding that the Child's Shoe
cannot cover the man's foot: The things desired, are generally confessed to be
good, but the season is dislik^t, and happily the expression: For the last, let
the strong bear with the weak: For the first, It Is not good to be overmuch fixed
and peremptory: Let assurance be given that they shall a^ a better reason be
done, and see whether that will not satisfy. Consider however, that e^ght
years waiting may beget some impatience; and on the other side, that they that
have waited eight years, may tarry a little longer: Thus it will become us all,
one sort and another, to be indeed rather umpires, than parties; to press for
those things that are desired; not as engaged men, or as particularly
concerned, but as Agents or Factors for the Common wea^th; not with heat, but
reason; not with reviling, but perswas^on; The one makes parties and sets us at
variance, the other begets Love and Concord, and will make it appear one to
another (though I would have it be in reality, and not only in appearance)
that though we may differ in the way, yet we really intend one another good. I
pray God in the first place, to incline my heart exactly to fol^ow th^s
Council; and I think it will be needful also for all and every one of all
parties; and above all things, to intend un^on; for as the Discoverer observes,
M Walw^n well know, That by Concord* the least things increase; By Discord, the
greatest come to nothing. And though it is said of us, that we follow the rule
of Divine and Impera, Devide and Reign: yet all impart^al men cannot but
impute the following of that cursed maxim to any, rather than to us. For we
not only have declined all means of rule, having never put our selves forward,
or bin eager in the pursuit of Offices; but our principles also do so bound all
Officers to Express Rules, Limits, and Accounts, as that the gain will not much
over-po^^e the labor; and we could wish it at that pass, and questionless it
would be so, were it not for the large Revenue, opportunity of corruption, etc.
that instead of hunting after them, men should rather desire to dec^ine them,
and that the discharge thereof, should be taken as a Favor, and acceptable
Service to the Commonwealth.

Other Scandals there are dispersed through the Book; but because they are
here^o^ore answe^ed by us, we shall not need to say any thing particularly to
them, but refer the Reader to the Manifestation, the Fountain of Slander
opened; the Charit^ of Church men; desiring only that notice be taken, that
where answers be given (as in that slander against M. Walwyn of persuading the
Woman to make away with her self) the answers are not considered and disprov^d,
but the slanders afresh reported; as if satisfaction were not desired, but
rather slighted, as a means to prevent the intended work of making us odious.

And so we have done with the first part of the Discoverers; only we shall
make one observation; that what our party principally stick^ to, they
altogether decline; viz. Our Mani^estation, and the Agreement: By the one,
unjust Aspersions are wiped on, and we manifest what we are not; By the other,
we evidence to all the World what we are, and what we seek for. Other papers
are personal, and concern happily this or that man, as they have bin by occasion
and provocation necessitated from them; but these do more generally concern us
all, and are own^d by the Party: And therefore, it will do better hereafter,
that men make not excursions a causa, ad non causam; from the cause, to the
accident^: In the last, we say we center and acquiesce, especially in a
constant and frequent Representative; and shall even judge it our duties to
press for the Establishment thereof.

And so till the Second part of the Discoverers, we shall take respite;
desiring that they may well consider the evil effects which have proceeded from
Officious men's incensing and mis-guiding Authority; And that Ahassuerus had
never bin so violent against the Jews, but for the instigations of Haman; Nor
Paul^s Compan^ons suffered so much at Macedonia, but for the Covetousness of
Demetrius and his Crafts-men.

FINIS.

