A SERMON PREACHED At the Funeral of the Right Honorable and most Excellent
Lady, THE LADY ELIZABETH CAPELL DOWAGER. TOGETHER With some brief Memorialls of
her most holy Life and Death. By EDM. BARKER, late Chaplain to her Honor, and
now Rector of Buriton in Hampshire.

Prove. 31. 29. Many Daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them
all. Non moeremus, quod talem amisimus; sed gratias agimus, quod habuimus, imo
habemus; quidquid enim revertitur ad dominum, in familiae numero computatur.
Hieron. Epitaph. Paulae. LONDON, Printed by I. R. for John Williams at the
Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1661.

To the Right Honorable and truly Noble, ARTHUR LORD CAPELL, Baron of Hadham.
My Lord,
THis short discourse being at first conceived, and formed by your Lps special
command, and afterward enlivened and quickened by your noble and gracious
acceptance, is since grown bold to beg a further Boon of your Honor, which is,
that under the Sanctuary of your Name and Patronage, it may walk a little
abroad, and visit the Neighborhood. Indeed I can discover nothing in it,
which I can warrantably and with confidence conceive worthy your Noble eyes,
save only the necessary justice and gratitude of my design therein, (viz.) to
pay all dutiful respects and Honors to the precious Memory of the Best of
Ladies, and to burn a little Incense before her Shrine. And though I am very
sensible what great difficulties I am to encounter with, (for the fame of her
great worth has long since spread it self far and near, and the world does
every where ring of her piety, and her example is solemnly propounded and
quoted by those who are desirous of the Best things, and would fain improve
into Excellent; and peoples expectations do begin to swell and grow big
hereupon, and will not easily be put off with a sparing and slender report,
where so much (in truth) may, and in justice ought to be spoken.) Yet am I
notwithstanding no whit discouraged at all this, but am resolved to go on
howsoever, and to make up such an Offering as I am able, my two small mites,
and a little Goats hair; having an Heart large and willing enough to offer with
the freest, had I but wherewithal. And besides, I must not deny it, that I my
self also am a man, subject to like incidencies of grief and sorrow, of passion
and sadness in common with other people; neither indeed (as yet) have I
thoroughly recovered the free command and use of my Parts, nor perfectly wrought
my spirit out of those huge discomposures and indispositions, which the
apprehension and remembrance of so signal a loss did at first cause in me; yea
and to this very day the wound continues bleeding a fresh upon every uncovering
of it: so that if either my expressions be disturbed, or language indigested,
or style not so even and methodical as is fit: it should rather move
resentments of Pity and Pardon in the Reader, then expressions of Censure and
Anger: and especially there, where the mind (which should prevent, and rectify
all these transgressions) is it self so much out of Order. Howbeit, (my Lord)
if you shall but please to smile Graciously upon this poor and little Oblation,
which I here humbly cast at your Lordship's feet. I shall the less value the
report and censure of the World; as having in some measure fulfilled and
observed your Lp's commands, which were to preach a Sermon, (and that you know,
is confined to Minutes and Houre-glasses,) and not to write a full and complete
history of all the virtuous Acts and Merits of this most excellent Lady. And
yet neither have I been wholly wanting in this latter: for though I have not
indeed spoken of Her, what either in justice I ought, or of my own knowledge
and Observation I might in Truth have said, yet have I said so much, as will (I
fear me) put the greatest part of the World to the blush, and (I hope too)
provoke an holy Zeal and Emulation in all. And now (my Lord) give me leave to
beseech you to reflect a little upon the great advantages of your Relation; You
are Heir to a Blessed Martyr, and the Eldest Son of a most Excellent Mother; so
that Honor and Nobility, and Worth and Piety are (in a manner) intailed upon
you; and you do derive them, and claim them (as it were) by inheritance: and
this must needs (doubtless) provoke very great Emulations, and continue most
earnest desires and endeavors in you, to resemble and be as like these two
Excellent Parents, of yours, as may be. And (blessed be GOD for it) you have in
great measure attained to their perfections already; and those people, who
(knowing you) do not take notice of your singular Temperance and Sobriety, your
rare Humility and Condescension, your exceeding Courtesy and Affability, are
either wilfully blind, or worse. And though I know your great Modesty does not
love to be told of your Virtues; but had rather do things Noble and Excellent,
then hear talk of them: Yet herein do I humbly beg your pardon, if I tell the
World of one, it was so eminent and remarkable in you, and gave such perfect
content and satisfaction to your dear Mother; and That was your signal
dutifulness and compliance with every request and command of Hers, in the time
of Her sickness; and since that too, your most exact and punctual observation
of Her last Will and Testament hitherto, even to the smallest tittles and
minutes: And doubtless you have taken the right course to secure a blessing to
your self and family; for GOD Almighty who is so particularly mindful of our
lesser Charities, and pays us still present money for every cup of cold water
given in his name, will not questionless be forgetful of such signal returns
and demonstrations of filial Duty and Obedience; but will in his time and
manner, abundantly reward them and recompense them; And besides you have the
first Commandment with promise (as the Apostle calls it) for your security,
and you may confidently build upon it, and conclude and argue from it. And
therefore (my Lord) go on still in these pious and noble resolutions, and
recover every day more and more of the likeness and resemblance of your
Parents: and, May the Blessings of Heaven continually descend on you, and
attend you, both in your Person and Relations, and May there never want one of
your Name, and (if it be the will of GOD) out of your own Loins too, to keep up
and perpetuate to the World's end, The Renowned Memory of your famous
Progenitors, which is, and shall always be the prayer of

My Lord, Your Honor's most humble, and devoted Servant; BARKER.

Psalm 90. verse. 12. So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our
hearts unto wisdom.
EVery Christian has two great works to do in the world, to live well, and to
die well; yea to live well, to the end he may be sure to die well; for as a
holy life, has evermore a sweet and comfortable death, so on the contrary, it
is very rare and seldom, that a wicked life makes a good and happy end: And
therefore Tully an heathen Orator could call this, the highest pitch, and
emprovement of the best wisdom, To do those things living, which we would
desire to have done when we are to die: and holy Bernard seconds it with advice
much to the same purpose. In every action and enterprise of thy life (says he)
be still saying over to thy self, Si modo moriturus esses istud faceres? if
thou were to die out of hand, would thou do so and so? And who of us all can
tell, that he is not modo moriturus, to die soon? for life (we know) is
uncertain, and death very ordinarily comes suddenly upon people, and not
always in the preface and solemnity, either af a lingering Consumption, or a
swelling Dropsy, or a tedious Ague, or a growing Fever, or the like, but many
times in the sudden surprisalls of some secret and unexpected accident, which
we could not possibly foresee, until it came to light fatally and mortally
upon us.

And does it not concern us then to be continually numbering our days, and
putting our selves in as great a readiness and preparedness for death as may
be? that so we may rather our selves be said to meet it, then That to come
suddenly and unexpectedly upon us. And to this purpose was this Psalm here
penned, which contains in it (if you mark it well) a relation and narrative,
both of the necessity of our mortality, and also the brevity and uncertainty of
our lives. To the end, that having these things always in our thoughts, and
before our eyes; both the necessity of our mortality, that it is necessary for
us at some time to die, and also the brevity and uncertainty of our lives, that
it is possible for us to die every hour, we might the sooner be awakened out of
our present course of sin and incogitancy, into studious endeavors and
practices of piety and devotion, of abstinence and mortification, of heavenly
mindedness and spiritual affections: in a word, of a wise and timely
provision of such gracious habits and dispositions, which may in some good
measure dress our souls for a fit salute and entertainment of death.

These words (which I have now read unto you) do contain in them the form and
substance of a devout and pious prayer; and whether David was the Author of
it, or Moses; that should not need to trouble us, for to be sure the prayer it
self, is most Divine and heavenly; and the very piety of the prayer does
sufficiently declare the Author (whoever he was) to be highly pious and
religious. In it we have particularly considerable these four things;

First, Quis petit, who it is that prays, or the party praying, and that
indeed is not expressed in terms, but conceived by some, to be holy David,
whose are most of the other Psalms; but presumed by others to be Moses,
grounding their opinion (and that not without good cause) upon the Title and
Inscription of the Psalm. Psalmus Moses viri Dei, a Psalm of Moses the man of
God.

Secondly, Proquibus petit, who they are, whom he prays for; not (if you mark
it) for himself alone, but for others as well, or for himself, conjunctly and
together with others. Doce nos, Teach us.

Thirdly, Quid petit, what it is which he prays for, and that is, negatively,
no worldly advantage at all, no temporal concerment; but (positively) to be
taught and instructed in the mysterious art of spiritual Arirhmetick, to be put
into a right way and method of numbering and counting up our days. Doce nos
numerare dies nostros. Teach us to number our days.

Fourthly, Propter quid petit, the design and end of his prayer, or the
particular reason principally moving him to make this request; and that is,
adductio cordis ad sapientiam, the application of our hearts unto wisdom, or
our spiritual instruction and edification: Sic doce, ut adducamus. So teach us,
that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.

I shall begin with the first of these. The party making the request; and he
(as is generally concluded) was holy Moses, A man of God. So the inscription of
the Psalm styles him. One that was faithful in all his house, so the Author to
the Hebrews reports him, chap. 3. 5. See what what an high character, what a
large commendation here is; some are faithful in this or that, in one or two
particular instances of piety. Thus one man is very temperate, another very
humble, another very patient, another very mortified, another very charitable:
but Moses you see, he was a through proficient, an universal Saint, (...),
faithful in all. Whence be pleased to take away with you this observation,
that the best and most excellent Saints of all, have great need and reason to
pray to be better taught and instructed in duty. And why, in many things we do
all fall short and offend; the brightest Moon has its spots, the richest wine
has its lees, and there are dreggs and much corrupt matter lodging in the best
and most improved Saint of us all.

Well, but mark what it is which Moses here prays for, only to be taught to
number his days. But did he not do this already? was it not his daily work
this, his constant and continual employment? Yes, doubtless it was; yea, and
he did it carefully and conscientiously too. But yet he thought he did it not
well enough, and therefore prays here in the Text to be taught to do better.

See, a good man how little he pleases himself in any action of his life, in
any performance of duty that he does. He can never think that he does well
enough, whatever he does, but still desires to do otherwise, and would fain do
better. There is an affection of modesty and humility, which still accompanies
real piety; and every pious man is an humble modest man, and never reckons
himself a perfect proficient, or to be advanced above a teaching: but is
content and covetous to be a continual learner, to know more then he knows, and
to do better then he does: yea, and thinks it no disparagement to his graces at
all, to take advice, and to seek instruction, where it is to be had.

A proud man is evermore high and lofty in his own conceit, and none is so wise
as he, none fit and worthy enough to teach him: What do thou teach us? said
the Pharisees (you know) to the blind man in the Gospel, John 9. 35. oh! but an
humble man, is ever meek and lowly in his own eyes, and takes it well, yea, and
is glad and desirous to be taught. Accordingly, O teach me, says holy David,
to do the thing that pleases thee, Psalm. 143. 10, and here in the Text: So
teach us to number our days.

S. Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 3. reports it of some, (...), who will not endure sound
doctrine. But such, what kind of men they are, he plainly describes in the same
Epistle. Men that run after their own lusts, men that stear altogether by the
compass of their private fancies and inventions, making their pride and
ambition the sole ground and Oracle of their Religion. The same report does
holy David also make of some such in his time, Psalm. 84. 4. (according to our
Psalter Translation) they will not be learned, nor understand: as who would
say, they are above a teacher, they scorn to be taught, that they may be
instructed, they will not endure to be learned, that they may be brought to a
better knowledge and understanding of themselves; they reckon themselyes wise
enough, and knowing enough, and learned enough.

But did Moses in the Text think so of himself? and yet (you know) he was a man
of men. As to his intellectuals, (...), Act. 7. 22. learned in all the wisdom
of the Egyptians. And then as to his spirituals, (...), faithful in all his
house, and yet (see) as learned a Scholar, and as excellent a Saint as he was,
he disdained not at instruction, he thought it no scorn to entreat, and beg,
and pray to be taught. So teach us to number our days.

In truth it is a matter, this seriously to be laid to heart by us, for
learning is a dangerous snare. And (...), says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8. 1.
knowledge puffs up, and great wits are usually great temptatons, and people
are naturally apt to admire them, and delight in them, as children do in babies
and pictures; not considering, that great wits are many times condemned to
great follies and indiscretions; and that our most refined reasons, and most
studied Philosophy of all, lays (God wot) within a very narrow compass:
neither is there the vilest creature in the world, but is able to pose us, why
such an hair is white, such black; or why such a part of the body is so
figured, such otherwise; and we are forced at last, to fly to the disposition
and nature of the first matter, which is indeed but a sanctuary of ignorance,
and nothing better then a modest confession, that (true indeed) there is a
certain reason of all these things, but it is beyond our reach, and we know it
not. And have we not then great reason to cry out, and pray with Moses here in
the Text, O teach us? Especially, if we consider, how few things (in
comparison) they are which we know, and how imperfectly (as to the manner of
knowledge) we know whatever we know. And to give you a clear proof hereof, I
shall neither carry you up into the heavens to see what is done there, nor down
into the depths to enquire and search what is lodged there: for do but take the
daily and natural occurrences of our lives, and they alone will sufficiently
prove the point. When we are born, we cannot tell whether or no we shall live;
when we live, we cannot tell how long, or how short it may be ere we die; and
if we are so little knowing, and so grossly ignorant of matters which so nearly
concern us, how much more probably of other things? can we think that those
eyes which are so weak and dimsighted nigh hand and at home, should ever see
much afar off and at distance?

Oh! that this meditation were thoroughly settled upon our spirits, for I fear
we do too many of us (to speak in the Apostles language) (...), think not too
highly of our selves, and have our parts and abilities, our wisdom and
knowledge, too much in admiration, which doubtless is a very great bar and
obstruction to spiritual wisdom and understanding: and here (if any where)
the Philosophers opinion holds true, Intus existens prohibet alienum, and to be
sure, the more we fancy that we know, the less will we desire and pray to be
taught.

But did Moses here in the Text so? and yet he was a learned Scholar, a great
proficient, and (no disparagement to our parts) a much better Scholar then any
of our selves. Howbeit for all this, see the request and prayer that he puts up
unto God here in the Text, sic doce, so teach us. Well, but what I trow, what?
some new art, some rare invention? I Will warrant you; To take the just compass
of the heavens, To know the number of the Stars, To tell the exact number of
the sands upon the Sea shore, or the like: Oh! no such curiosities and pleasing
vanities, were much beneath the sanctified seriousness, and mortification of
his piety, he had a weightier business to be resolved in, of more concernment
and importance by far, to his duty and happiness, and that was numerare dies
suos, to be taught to number his days; and this too not notionally only, as
to the bare quotum of the number, but practically and spiritually, as to the
right emprovement and application of the knowledge; accordingly (if you mark
it) it is not barely doce numerare, teach us to number, but with particular
regard and relation to the proper design and end, sic doce, So teach us to
number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. This for the first
part of the Text, the Party making the request.

Proceed we on to the 2d. pro quibus petit, the Parties for whom, and in whose
behalf and name he makes this Prayer, not for himself alone you see, but for
others also; or for himself conjunctly, and together with others, Doce nos,
teach us. See here a good man, of what a public general spirit he is, how he
concludes and wraps in others interests and concernments still together, and in
conjunction with his own; just according to the Apostles precept, Phil. 2. 4.
Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of
others: and see, such as his precept is there, such is his practice elsewhere,
1 Cor. 10. 33. Even as I seek not my own profit, but the profit of many, that
they may be saved, just as we are taught to pray in our Lords Prayer, not in
the singular, but in the plural number altogether; not da mihi, or remitte
mihi, etc. give Me, or for forgive Me, or lead not Me, or deliver Me; but give
Us, and forgive Us, and lead not Us, and deliver Us.

To the same purpose, the Apostle speaking of Christian charity 1 Cor. 13, 5.
(...) (says he) (...), it seeks not her own: How is that? and what a
strange, what an unnatural word is this? does not even nature it self teach
every thing to provide, and take care, and seek for the things which concern it
self? yes, it does, howbeit charity is an addition to, and emprovement of
nature: and so does not overthrow the end, but only enlarge the bounds of
nature: and thefore it seeks its own things too, but how? not solely, not
exclusively, but her own things in conjunction with others. That man cannot be
a right good Christian, who grutches and envies another, for sharing equally in
the same happiness with himself.

In the Firmament there is a multitude of Stars, and every Star is full of
light, and never a Star has ever a whit less light for the brightness and
shining of its fellow: accordingly (if you mark it) the Appostle's exhortation,
1 Timothy 2. 1. Is, that prayers and supplications, and intercessions, and giving
of thanks be made, but for whom? for our selves altogether? or for some few
only? nay, but (...), for all men. A good man never thinks heaven the worse
place for having much company in it: accordingly all his care and endeavor, his
strife and contention, his prayers and desires are (as to fit himself
thereunto, so also) to bring as many thither as may be: he loves not to make a
Monopoly of the Kingdom of heaven, To be the only bright Star there. Hark
what the Apostle says in his own own behalf, Romans 10. 1. Brethren my hearts
desire and prayer for Israel is, that they might be saved. See, the extent, the
universality of his Charity; not for this or that particular Israelite, but for
all Israel; for Israel indefinitely, for Israel universally. Well, but
Israel, take it in the largest extent you can, is but a collective word, and
can comprehend no more then either those of the seed, or at most those of the
faith of Abraham: and here the Apostle thought he had not room enough for his
charity, his great zeal could not be couped up within such a strait and narrow
compass: nay but it must reach, and seek out further: accordingly mark his
profession elsewhere, 1 Cor. 9. 19. (...), I have made my self servant unto
all, not to all Israelites only, but unto all men, No man comes amiss to a
Christians charity; if there be not actual desert and merit in the person, yet
there is hope in the possibility of his salvation: and every good Christian
will be sure to love such a one, and to pray for him, and to wish him well, and
to do him all the friendly offices and services he can, though it be but for
very hopes sake. But I shall not detein you any longer upon this digression,
which was occasioned only from a reflection upon the Parties for whom, and in
whose behalf Moses here prays, not for himself alone, but for others also, or
for himself in conjunction and together with others.

Proceed we now to the third thing considerable in the Text, Quid petit, what
it is which he prays for: negatively, not any worldly advantage, not any
temporal concernment at all, not to be great, or rich, or eminent in the
world: but only to be taught and learnt the mysterious art of spiritual
Arithmetic, to be put into a right way and method of computing and numbering
our days. Doce nos ut numeremus dies nostros, teach us to number our days.
Only (if you mark it) here is a special restriction and qualification, which
passes along with the act; for it is not barely numerare, to number, but sic
numerare, so to number: so seriously, so attentively, so religiously and
conscientiously, in a word, so as sober Christians ought to number them.

Well, but you will say, what need Moses keep all this ado? and pray so
earnestly to be taught a matter so light and easy, so trivial and ordinary?
and why? what Child, what raw Arithmetician cannot (even without a teacher)
number you to threescore years and ten, or if need be, to fourscore years? Nay,
but stay awhile? it is not so light and easy, so trivial and ordinary a
matter this as you make it; I am sure not in Moses his sense. It is true, (I
grant) in Arithmetical numerations we are many of us very expert and skillful,
we can tell how many hours and minutes have run out since the Creation, can
reckon you up how many miles the world is in compass, can tell the height of
the clouds, the elevation of the pole, the positions and distance of the Stars,
and a thousand such like curiosities: Oh! but in the concernment of our selves,
the art and mystery of spiritual Arithmetic, the number of our days, the
account and computation of our lives: herein we are too many of us horribly
stupid and ignorant. And why? it is a melancholy study this, and we have no
mind, no fancy at all to it: but would fain live for ever, and do not love to
hear of an end and number of our days. Yea, should Mathuselahs hundreds of
years be afforded us, yet would not they serve the turn: all would not be
enough to content and satisfy our craving desires and wishes of life, but we
would be as loath and unwilling to die after that as ever. And commonly the
longer we live in the world, the more craving and covetous are we of life; and
none is so ancient and gray headed among us, as to reckon himself too old to
live, but yet thinks he may hold out a year longer? and still we have our
little excuses, and pretenses of necessary work and business to require our
longer stay and continuance here; either children to bring up, or a daughter to
marry, or an estate to settle, or a family to provide for, and the like. Not
considering that God Almighty has long since pointed out our lives to a day,
and peremptorily (in the decrees of his immutable purpose and pleasure) numbered
out our years to the utmost possible minute; and there is no dispensation or
reprieve to be purchased from the grave: but that soon die we must, and be
forced to yield up our lease of life here; and whether willing or not willing,
at leisure, or not at leisure, it is all one to death; for when that once
summons, we must render; when that calls, all business must be laid aside, and
we must go: and this, when, or how long hence, or how soon possibly it may be,
we cannot tell, God knows.

And does it not concern all of us then to be in at Moses his request here? and
to be often practicing this art of spiritual Arithmetic, and continually
counting and numbering up our days? that so considering how many of our days
are already past and gone from us, we may come the more clearly to perceive how
few are yet left and remaining; and that every day we are a drawing nearer to
the full term of our lives.

And then see the advantages of such meditations, they must needs make us more
thoughtful of heaven, more provident for eternity, more indifferent in our
hopes and desires of a long life here: In a word, more frugal of our time, more
wary of sin, more quick at our work; neither will we dare then (as too many of
us now do) to put it off from time to time, and cast it still upon the
uncertainty of another day, not knowing whether possibly that may be ours or
no. And if it should be, yet sufficit diei malitia ejus; every day has work
enough of its own, and need not be charged and burdened with the business of
another day.

Well, but barely to tell the number of our days is not enough; for this we
know is grown a matter of course, and is the common talk and glory of ancient
people, who yet (we have great reason to fear) are not so sensible of the
number of their days as is fit; and to be sure, not in the sense and meaning
of the Text; which looks rather forwards, then backwards: and consists
principally in these three acts.

The first is, consideratio infirmitatis, a serious consideration of the
frailty and infirmity of our natures.

The second is, Meditatio brevitatis, an often meditation of the brevity and
shortness of our lives.

The third is, Recogitatio incertitudinis, a frequent recogitation of the
inconstancy and uncertainty of our beings.

I shall speak particularly of all three; and first of the first. A serious
consideration of the frailty and infirmity of our natures; and this doubtless
is enough to humble every son of man, who has not quite lost his senses, and is
not resolved to contradict the experience of every hour; for it is a matter,
this, for which we need not travel far for proofs and instances of it: for do
but take the last action which you did, and mark how strong it tastes of the
vessel: how much in it do you now wish undone, and how much (were it to do
again) should you have otherwise done: and so it must needs be, where the
vessel is faulty, the liquour will certainly savor of it: where the root is
corrupt and vitiated, the fruit can never have a sound and wholesome taste: and
yet just so it is with us, the imbred frailty of our natures, do also cause
necessary frailties in our civil actions, in our ordinary discourses, in our
religious duties and offices; we cannot discourse without frailty, we cannot
pray without frailty; we cannot set upon any action of life, but still more or
less there will be a mixture of frailty in it.

And should not this make us very humble? should it not quicken us to strive
against this natural frailty, as much as may be; and in time to apply our
hearts unto wisdom, and labor to overcome what we may, and for the rest to
lament and mourn over it?

Well, but this fragilitas actionis, this frailty of action, is not all our
frailty, there is another frailty equally necessary and incident to our
natures; and that is fragilitas substantiae, a frailty of substance, or a
frailty of impotency and insufficiency to keep up our beings, without
continually begging and borrowing subsidiary aids and helps from other
creatures. Thus, from one creature we are forced to borrow heat to keep us from
freezing, from others clothes to cover our nakedness, from others food to keep
us from starving, from others Physic to keep us from perishing, and the like:
Thus, all our substance and maintenance here we are driven to take upon trust,
and borrow it where we can find it: And call you not this a very great frailty,
which necessarily forces us upon the help and courtesy of other creatures,
much ignobler and inferior to our selves? Is it not a great frailty in a
master, to be forced to be beholden to his servants? And yet say whether this
be not just our very condition of being.

See how Nature sends us into the world: not as she does other creatures, in
some measure armed and prepared with weapons and instruments of defense and
provision, but poor, naked, helpless infants; and a long while it is, that we
live upon the mere courtesy and charity of Nurses and Midwives: and afterward
how are we forced to make our way unto life, through the death of other
creatures? and to keep us alive, how many harmless innocent creatures are fain
to be slain and butchered? and call you not this a great frailty, a shameful
infirmity?

But neither is this all, there is yet a third frailty more, equally fatal and
necessary to our natures; and that is fragilitas mortalitatis, a frailty of
death and mortality, of corruption and dissolution; and preparatory hereunto,
of innumerable sicknesses and diseases, of much noisomnesse and putrefaction,
which do naturally breed in us, and have their necessity of being in those very
principles of nature, which do give us humane being and subsistence. And this
indeed is a frailty, which no art can totally prevent, or Physic perfectly
cure; or care and caution, or temperance and and abstinence wholly subdue and
overcome. For see we not very good men, languishing many times under painful
sicknesses, and excellent tempers, corrupting and putrefying into noisome
diseases, and strong and healthful bodies miserably scorch't and burnt up with
Fevers and inflammations: and the least mouth full of infected air, how does it
presently poison the whole frame of nature, though never so equally tempered,
or delicately sifted, or strongly built and fortified? And is not this enough
to humble every son of Adam? to consider what a mass of corruption we have
lodging in us? what a body of sicknesses and diseases we carry about with us?
what abundance of noysomnesse and unsavorinesse lies hid under the purest and
most delicate skins: so that well might the Apostle Phil. 3. 21. call our
fleshly bodies Vile bodies; for where shall we likely meet with more vileness,
then what we carry in us? or spy out more corruption then what is potentially
and seminally in our own bodies? And should not such considerations greatly
deject and humble our present thoughts and opinions of our selves? to see what
becoms of us upon every present fit of sickness! and any little distemper,
what a great change and alteration it begets in us! and our spirits presently
grow dull and heavy upon it, and our thoughts troubled and unquiet, and our
sleep departs from our eyes, and our bodies become unapt and unable for motion,
and we must have some to turn us in our bed, and every posture is uneasy and
painful to us. This for the first importance of this duty of numbering our
days, implying considerationem infirmitatis, a serious consideration of the
frailty and infirmity of our nature

A second importance is meditatio brevitatis, an often meditation of the
shortness and brevity of our lives. What a little respite of stay and
continuance we have here; how soon we are bid (many times) to depart and remove
hence, and shake hands with life, and take our leaves of the world. Hark what
a little account holy David makes of our lives, Psalm. 39. 5. Thou have made my
days an hand breadth, and what a small scantiing is that? well, but read on,
and mine age is even as nothing in respect of thee: See I pray a double account
of our lives, the one absolute, the other comparative: absolutely, and in
themselves they are, dies palmares, but an hand breadth of days; and then
comparatively, and in respect of God and Eternity, nothing so much, Instar
nihili, even as nothing: just as a point to the circumference of the widest
circle, and not so much as the smallest drop to the main Ocean.

Holy Jobs resemblance of our lives to a flower, Chap. 14. 2. is elegant and
very expressive; which in the morning is green and grows up, but in the
evening is cut down, dried up, and withered: see, betwixt green and withered,
flourishing and fading, growing up and cut down, what a small space and
distance of time there is, but the respite of a day at most, the space of a few
hours at longest: just such is the brevity and fadingnesse of our lives here.
Our growing up in the morning of our childhood, our flourishing in the high
noon of our man's estate, and then soon after it grows to be evening with us,
and we begin to fall into our declensions: and first our senses begin to droop,
next our memories to fail, next our strength to decay and grow weak, after that
our heat to retire inward, and thus we continue dying by little and little,
until at length death comes with his Sickle, and cuts down the flower, and we
die for good and all.

Oh that men would think seriously on these things; doubtless it must needs
make them more frugall of their time, and mightily work them off of the world,
and make them less delighted and enamoured with this present life, and daily
more longing and desirous, and thirsting after heaven, where they shall be sure
to have a longer time of stay and continuance, and shall ever be with the Lord,
and not be thus hastily hurried and posted away, as here they are.

When holy David would fain have obtained favor and respite from God Almighty,
he uses this very argument to him, Psalm. 89. 47. Oh remember how short my time
is: In like manner, were I to persuade any man unto piety and devotion, unto
abstinence and mortification, unto a contempt of the world, and a love and
desire of heaven, I should repeat over the same words unto him: Oh man remember
how short thy time is, how few days thou have to live in the world, how little
time to lay in thy provision, and to do thy work and business of Eternity; oh
then, sin away none, idle away none, and (if it were possible) loose none of
this precious time; thou see it is but short at most, but a little in all:
and thou can full ill spare any of it for sin and vanity, which (when best
emproved) is but just enough, if indeed enough for thy work.

Herodotus relates a story of one Mycerinus King of Egypt, who (being told by
the Oracle, that he should live but twelve years longer) used this device with
himself; he sits up all night, and spends that whole time in feasting and
jollity, and thus ((...) says the story,) turning (as it were) his nights into
days, thought by this means he had doubled the number of his years, and so
cheated the Oracle. Now the device of this heathen King I shall not commend
unto you at this time, especially not in this way and manner of practice; but
yet why may we not by the way) borrow a Jewel of this Egyptian, and improve
his policy into an item of seasonable instruction and admonition? And howbeit I
cannot premptorily tell any of you, as the Oracle did him, that yet within
twelve years, and ye shall all die; yet this I think I may say, how soon God
knows; but not long hence, we our selves by experience, and the example of
others, may probably conclude and know, that it will be necessary for us to
die, and give over living any longer. Oh then! let us up and to work, let us
lay out providently, and bestir our selves as speedily as may be, to double the
number of our days, even by turning our nights into days: Not in the manner
of that heathen King, in practices of excess and intemperance, but in
exercises altogether of piety and devotion; turning our nights of vanity, into
days of sobriety, our nights of intemperance into days of mortification, our
nights of slumber and idleness, into days of vigilance and diligence; take it
in the Apostles words, Romans 13. 11. Knowing the time, that now it is high time
to awake out of sleep; let us cast off the works of darkness, and let us put
on the armor of light: Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and
drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying: But
putting on the Lord Jesus Christ; putting on his justifying righteousness by
application of faith, and putting on his sanctifying righteousness by
imitation of practice; and so doing, we shall make a long life of a short. As
holy Hierom reports of one Nebridius a young man (ad Salvinam. Epist. 9.) In
brevi aetate, tempora multa complevit. He continued but a little while here,
but yet lived a long life; meaning (as I suppose) that the piety of his life
did far surpass and exceed the paucitie and tenderness of his years. Let
this also suffice for the second importance of this duty of numbering our
days, implying Meditationem brevitatis, an often meditation of the shortness
and brevity of our lives.

A second importance is, recogitatio incertitudinis, a frequent recogitation of
the inconstancy and uncertainty of our beings; here to day, and gone to morrow:
and what a next hour may bring forth, or do hang over our heads every moment,
we cannot tell, God knows. The utmost that any present comfort or enjoyment can
afford us, is only a probability of hope; for to be sure, certainty it affords
none; and we see the fairest hopes do many times miscarry in their issues, not
unlike promising blossoms, either the frost nips them, or the wind blows them
down, ere they can come to ripen into fruit and maturity.

Speras pecuniam? (says holy Augustine, Enar. in Psalm. 3. 8.) incertum est an
proveniat, speras filios? incertum est an nascantur, nati sunt? incertum est an
vivant, vivunt? incertum est an proficiant, quocunque te verteris, incerta sunt
omnia. Do thou hope to be rich? it is uncertain whether thou shall grow to
be so: do thou expect children? it is uncertain whether they will be born:
are they born? it is uncertain whether they will live: do they live? it is
uncertain whether they will prove dutiful and towardly; whether soever thou
turnest thy self, all things are uncertain.

Holy David doubtless in the midst of his great honor and prosperity thought
himself very secure and certain, for so (if you will believe him) he tells us,
Psalm. 30. 6. I said in my prosperity, I shall never be removed; but yet you see
at what uncertainties he then stood, and how soon the scene was changed with
him; and presently a new face of things appeared upon the stage, verse. 7. thou
did hide thy face from me, and I was troubled.

Oh! that this meditation were deeply engraven on all our hearts, and written
(if possible) with a pen of iron, and the point of a Diamond, Ier. 17. 1. that
so nothing might be sure ever to blot it out; but that considering at what
uncertainties we do here continually live, we might the more seriously and
effectually apply our hearts unto wisdom, and in time seek out and make sure
of somewhat that is certain; and that somewhat, what other is it, but heaven
and happiness, eternity and immortality? yea too, and the way to obtain this,
is sure and certain also, and the holy Scripture have plainly told it us, and
we cannot be ignorant of it, viz. by applying our hearts unto wisdom: by the
exercises of a pious and holy life, the reformation of sinful courses and
practices, the mortification of our earthly members, and the like. This
briefly, for the third and last importance of this duty of numbering our days,
implying recogitationem incertitudinis, a frequent recogitation of the
unconstancy and uncertainty of our present beings.

Come we now to the fourth and last thing considerable in the Text, the design
and scope of Moses his prayer; So teach us, that we may apply our hearts unto
wisdom. See here a good prayer, and for a good end also; and that too not
barely an end of speculation, only to know the certain number of our days and
no more; but an end of practical improvement and edification, so as to be
improved, and grow every day better by knowing, Vt adducamus cor ad sapientiam,
that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.

S. Paul in his Epistles takes notice of several sorts of wisdom, as viz. a
wisdom of words, 1 Cor. 1. 17. again, the wisdom of this world, 1 Cor. 2. 19.
again, (...), fleshly wisdom, or the wisdom of the flesh, 2 Cor. 1. 12. but
neither of these, is the wisdom here in the Text; oh no! This it is, that very
wisdom which the Apostle S. James, chap. 3. 17. calls (...), wisdom which is
from above, or divine and heavenly wisdom; and then the adductio cordis, the
applying our hearts unto this wisdom, consists particularly in these three
things.

First, In minus diligendo, in an holy weanednesse from this present life, in
expressions of less love and affection to the world, every day then other, not
suffering our hearts to be (as it were) glued to it, or our affections over
much set upon it; but loving it, as strangers and Pilgrims do the place and
country of their pilgrimage, with a passing, transient love.

The Apostles advice to this purpose is good, 1 Cor. 7. 29. This I say
brethren, (...), the time is short: the time of our worldly comforts and
enjoyments, that is short; and to be sure, the time of our present lives and
continuance here, that is short: how short, the Lord only knows, we do not;
and then mark what an inference of pious abstinence and mortification he
raises from hence; it remains, that they that have wives, be as though they
had none, and they that weep, as though they wept not, and they that rejoice,
as though they rejoiced not, and they that use this world, as not abusing it.
See these several affections of love, and sorrow, and joy, and possession of
the world, how we are to express them: Loving, as not loving, that is, with
that sobriety of affection, as if we loved not; again, weeping, as not weeping,
that is, with that moderation of passion, as if we wept not; again, rejoicing,
as not rejoicing, that is, with that mortification of joy, as if we rejoiced
not; again, using, as not using, that is, with that indifferency and
unconcerndnesse of desire, as if we used not.

Will thou. says Solomon, Prove. 23. 5. set thine eyet upon that that is not?
Now riches are not, and honors are not; and so in like manner of all our
worldly comforts and enjoyments here, They are not. In actual possession, it
is true, for the present, they are; but in security of continuance, in
certainty of possession and enjoyment, They are not. And so long, let holy
David counsel you, Psalm. 62. 9. If riches increase, (and so also if honors, or
children, or friends, or whatsoever else of the world do increase and come in
flowing upon you) what then? Nolite cor apponere, set not your hearts upon
them; do not covet them, do not love them, at all (if possible) but not
excessively, not immoderately, not overmuch to be sure; for remember, you have
but slippery hold of them, they are passing, transient enjoyments; and when you
enjoy them most, you cannot tell how soon, either they may be parted from you,
or you from them. Cornel. A Lapide's rule (Com. in 1 Cor. c. 7.) is good.
Taliter utenda est res, sicut res est. Every thing is to be used as it is: For
example, if it be a thing lasting and permanent, (such as are only sprituall
and heavenly comforts) then use it lastingly and permanently: Dwell upon the
use of it. But if otherwise, and it be a transient and momentany enjoyment
(such as are life, health, riches, honors, children, and all our worldly
comforts whatsoever) then you know what the Apostles counsel is, Col. 3. 2.
(...), Set not your affections upon it, be not glued in your desires to it, but
love it, and use it altogether in transitu, as travelers do Innes in a
journey, for a short bait, but no long stay. This for the first application of
our hearts unto wisdom, consisting in minus diligendo, in expressions of less
love and affection to the world every day then other.

A second instance lays, In cautius vivendo, in living warily, and
cautelously, in more exactness of duty, in more watchfulness over sin, in
more circumspection and observation of our actions for the time to come. You
know the Apostles Item to this purpose, Ephesians. 1. 15. See that ye walk
circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time. And why, it is
but (...), but a short time you see; but a very little while that we have to
tarry here: oh then! let us loose none of this little, let us loiter away none
of this short time, upon which so much depends; nay, but as our Savior
commanded his Disciples, concerning the broken meat in the Gospel, let us
gather up all these fragments, that nothing be lost; improve every small
portion of our time, in continual exercises of piety and devotion, of
abstinence and mortification: as not having the least assurance of a next day
when this is once spent; or if we had, yet can we not certainly tell whether it
will be a day of grace to us, or no; or that we shall have the heart to repent
of our loss of time, and the sin which we committed the day before: And in
case Death should come hastily upon us, and surprise us, either in the actual
commission of sin, or before we have finished our repentance for our sin.
Consider and tremble, what a sad condition is this to die in, and what think
you shall become of us? when the rich man in the Gospel was busy in building
his Castles in the air, and dreaming of nothing but ease and comfort, and
projecting years of rest and happiness to his life, he little thought (I Will
warrant you) of a summons the same night; and that before morning his life
should have an end put to it, and his soul required of him: And yet so you see
it happened to him: and who of us all know that possibly it may not be his own
case? Oh! how should this quicken us to continual wariness and watchfulness,
to diligent circumspection and observation, to lose as little of our time here
carelessly and frivolously, as may be; but to be sure to throw away none of it
sinfully at any rate. which makes out the second application of our hearts unto
wisdom, consisting in Cautius vivendo, in living more cautiously and warily
for the time to come.

A third and last instance lies in sapientius providendo, in providing more
wisely against the day of our change: when the unjust Steward in the Gospel,
Luke 16. understood that his Lord had a purpose to displace him, and turn him
out of his Stewardship, see how wisely he consults, and projects, and casts
about with himself, verse. 3. What shall Idoe? for my Lord takes from me the
Stewardship: well, I am resolved what to do; yea, and if you mark it too, our
Savior commends this wisdom of his, and chides his Disciples for their lack
of like timely wisdom and prudence: and why? yet a little while and our
reckonings also will be called for, and our selves required to give in our
accounts of our Stewardships, and Then we must be no longer Stewards: and would
it not be wisdom in us, timely to project and cast about with our selves, and
not throw all our provision upon our last minutes, and have our evidences then
to clear, and our assurances of another life to make good, when we are every
moment upon leaving of this?

The Apostle's counsel is very safe, 1 Timothy 6. 19. Laying up for your selves a
good foundation against the time to come. See here, a good foundation, that is
a foundation of good works, the foundation of an holy life, of a pious and
godly conversation: So then good works, they are (you see) in a good sense a
foundation, though not of faith or presumption: though not a foundation, either
to boast off, or to build upon, yet a foundation, to take hope and comfort in:
now a foundation (you know) is that which in great measure supports and bears
up the whole building: in like manner a conscience of good works, it bears up
Faith, it bears up Hope, it bears up Patience; it makes joyful, and willing,
and comfortable in the hour of death. This is our rejoicing, says the Apostle,
2 Cor. 1. 12. the testimony of our conscience: well, but mark further, laying
up in store: but when I trow? or where? why, even in this life, now, presently
out of hand; it is (...) in the present tense, and we must not make altogether
a future duty of it: well, but once more, Laying up in store for your selves,
that is, to your proper use and service, for your own interest and advantage:
See, what ever good works are piously laid out by us, are also providently laid
up for us; we are the chief gainers by them, and we receive the benefit, and we
do reap the comfort of them; in a word, we lay them up for our selves. Well,
but against when do we lay them up? why, (...) says the Apostle, against the
time to come. But what time to come is this? there is a twofold time to come:
the one futurum mortis, the time to come of our death: and so good works are
fundamentum solatii, a foundation of joy and comfort, to support and stay us,
to rejoice and cheer us in that sad and melancholy hour. The other is futurum
judicii, the time to come of the last Tribunal and Judgment: and so good
works are fundamentem fiduciae, a foundation of courage and confidence:
according to that of the Apostle, 1 John. 2. 28. And now little children abide
in him: that is, in your Faith in his Name, in your obedience to his commands,
in a word, in your practice of a holy life: that when he shall appear, we may
have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming. But I see I must
be forced to break off abruptly, and conclude my discourse on this Text here.

And indeed I have another Text still behind to preach upon, and that too given
me by God Almighty: The former was given by the direction of his Spirit in his
holy Scriptures: This latter by the wise order and disposition of his
providence, here exposed and presented before your eyes: the former a legible,
this a visible Text, of that I have hitherto discoursed, and am coming now to
speak somewhat of this also.

A Text affording much plenty and variety of seasonable matter, both for the
more vigorous quickening of your affections for the present, and also for the
future example of your piety. Like a well kept Garden, here is choice of sweet
flowers, but no weeds, no beggary stuff at all: howbeit I shall be very
sparing (in comparison of the plentifulnesse of the subject) and not take upon
me to gather together all the goodly flowers, which sometime grew in this
pleasant Garden: but present you with a small handful only; not intending to
satisfy the curiosity of craving expectations, but to beget a good appetite in
all, and to set you alonging after more.

And indeed, how can it otherwise be imagined, that such a whole life of
exemplary virtue and piety, (as this excellent Ladies was) can be (without
sensible loss and injury) contracted within that scant and little allowance of
time, which is now remaining. He that covets to take up a number of scattered
pieces of Gold in the hollow of his hand, will go nigh to loose many; some will
slip through his fingers, let him be never so wary: however it be, I shall run
the adventure, and choose rather to be silently injurious to her exemplary
piety, (which her living modesty I am sure would have pardoned) then be openly
too imposing upon your patience; So that my work (you see) at present, is not
so properly the part of an Orator, as the office of a Notary or Remembrancer,
not intending to discourse over the whole story of her life at large, (a work
for volumes and ages) but as it were in characters and short hand, to present
you some few memorialls of her signal and incomparable piety.

This most excellent Lady, the Lady Elisabeth Capell, (the solemnization of
whose Funerals, is the sad occasion of this days meeting) was (as to her
natural pedigree and extraction) descended of the right worthy and renowned
Family of the Morisins at Cashiobury in Hertfordshire: One of her progenitors,
was that learned and prudent Knight Sr. Richard Morisin; a person, whose great
judgment and experience in the Civil affairs, and matters of State and
Government, had gained him several times the Honorable Employment of
Ambassador unto foreign Kingdoms and Princes; which also he as faithfully
discharged with as much honor and renown.

Her immediate Father, was that most accomplished and generous person, Sr.
Charles Morisin, One whose singular affability and hospitality, made him
generally beloved of his neighbors; so that he was commonly called the Darling
of his Country, and wanted nothing but the opportunity of a longer life, to
have equalled him in honor to any of his predecessors. This worthy person
joining himself afterward in marriage to the most virtuous and delicate Lady,
the Lady Mary Hicks, second Daughter to the Lord Viscount Cambden, was by her
blessed with the promises of a fair and goodly issue: But (so it pleased God) all
of them, this only excepted, proved but tender Buds, plucked off and gathered
by death, long before they came to ripen into maturity: So that now they had
but one only child remaining, and that a Daughter: and yet could they not
complain for want of children; for in her alone they had the worth and value,
and (I am sure) the comfort and happiness of many children. Am not I more
worth to thee then ten sons, said Elkanah you know to his Wife Hannah, 1 Samuel
1. 8. and if ever Parents might have said so of one single child, They might of
Her. And now having Her only remaining, you cannot but imagine Her to be a
very precious Jewel: accordingly their great care was to have her well set,
with all the advantages of Honor and Luster that could be. This (after she was
grown up to an age and stature, fit and proper for Marriage, and onwards of her
seaventeenth year) made them greatly solicitous and inquisitive after a proper
match for her; and at last (after much search and enquiry, and refusalls of
many) by a most wise and excellent choice, they happily found out one: who (if
the whole Kingdom afforded any) was indeed a fit and proper Husband for her:
And He (a person not to be named, without a preface of honor and reverence)
The truly Noble and Honorable, Arthur Lord Capell, late Baron of Hadham.

One, who had he been cast upon better conditioned times, might happily have
lived much longer, but hardly have either lived or died more honorably; but
the times were too base and unworthie for his generous soul, he could not
endure to behold his Master a Looser, and himself come off Saver; nor hug his
private security, in the choice of an inglorious retirement; when he beheld
the King his Master, exposed to the merciless fury of an armed multitude. He
saw the Arc, and Israel, and Judah now in Tents, and his pious soul did yearn
in him, to be after them, and to share like fortunes with them. And here indeed
(though otherwise the most affectionate Husband of any other, yet) he gave the
world plainly to see, that his zeal and love to his God and Country, was far
superior to his affections toward his wife: A wife indeed is ultimum
relinquendum, the last temporal comfort that is to be forsaken upon earth; and
you know how the command runs to this purpose, Genesis 2. 24. Relinquet patrem and
matrem. He shall leave father and mother; and so also by like proportion,
brother and sister, son and daughter, friends and acquaintance, and
agglutinabitur uxort, and shall leave to his wife. Howbeit, when the dispute
comes once to happen betwixt our zeal to the truth and cause of God, and our
affections toward a wife; then, in such a case, Linquenda domus, and tellus,
and placens uxor: all must be forsaken, yea, a wife together with the rest, and
we must cleave unto the truth.

It is a notable saying of his own to this purpose, which you have in his 102.
observation, (and which gives you in little the true pourtraicture of his noble
spirit.) I will obey my parents, honor my superiors, love my equals, respect
my inferiors: Wife and children shall be dearer unto me then my self, but none
of all these, nay nor all these, shall be prized by me like truth.

These were those pious principles which first engaged him in our late unhappy
wars: Not the ambitious aims of honor and preferment: not any covetous
designs of gain and profit, to enlarge and increase his estate by this means:
oh no! his noble and generous soul was far above these low and little
projects; as he was clear of it himself, so he hated nothing with a more
perfect hatred, then he did a degenerous and mercenary Loyalty. Accordingly, he
freely and willingly (with the first) offered himself, to the help of the Lord
against the mighty; and it was the piety and sincerity of his conscience, the
justice and equity of the cause he engaged in, which drew him into the battle,
and put the first sword into his hands; and which, though (indeed in the end)
it proved fatal to his life here, yet not so to his honor; for by it he has
gained a good report, and his name is as ointment poured forth, and smells
sweet and fragrant to this very day; and people do speak honorably of him; and
the eyes which never saw him, do pay homage to his memory, and he is blessed in
the gates. So that by the invincible courage and fortitude, the active zeal and
resolution of this incomparable Hero, the very name of Capell, is become an
entailed badge, and Title of Honor and Loyalty, upon that numerous family.

Unto this blessed Martyr, was our most excellent Lady here, the fruitful
mother of a plentiful issue: a good part whereof are to this day happily
living and surviving, but some are not. During the whole time of his life, she
was his most loving, faithful, and obedient wife; and when providence had made
her his widow, she then openly declared and manifested to the world, how dearly
she loved his person, by her signal faithfulness to his commands; I mean, her
exceeding care and tenderness of his children, those dear remains and pledges
of his conjugal love.

And here, her first and greatest care of all, was for their education: to
water these tender plants with wholesome precepts and examples, and to infuse
early principles of piety and Religion into their minds. She well knew of what
great importance it is, what liquour the vessel is first seasoned with: neither
could she think it the only part and office of a mother to bring forth
children to her husband! Nay, but (according to the Apostles command, Ephesians. 6.
4.) to bring them up also in the nurture and admonition of the Lord: And in
this indeed she was most exact and punctual; and we live to see the happy
fruits and effects thereof now in their riper years. For my own part, I have
had the honor to live for these eight years last past in that noble family,
and so (you will say) had time and leisure enough, to make out observations of
them; yet to their Honor I report it, and can say it faithfully, and not of
one more then of another; in all this whole time, I did never yet hear or see,
either the least distempered behavior in them, or oath sworn by them, or
unsavory speech falling from any of their mouths, or yet unhandsome action
done by any of them. And having thus virtuously prepared and seasoned their
tender years, her next care was to see them settled in the world; and to
dispose them in such honorable matches, as might no whit lessen or blemish the
unspotted renown and honor of her dear Lord. And herein indeed God Almighty
was pleased most signally to bless her; so that I believe, So many noble and
honorable marriages in one family, can hardly be named to have been, for these
many years. Thus have I given you a glance of our excellent Lady, in two of her
capacities. As a wife, and as a widow.

And now to reckon up particularly the many other virtues of her life, will be
too hard a task, and you must needs excuse me this impossibility; for as soon
may you expect from mean exact number of all the bright Stars in the
Firmament: yet some of them I shall adventure to mention, and do herein much
please my self in my present advantage over most Funeral Orators: I may easily
(I know) fall short of the truth, but to acquit me of flattery, I am confident
I can have compurgatours enough, even as many as have ever either heard or seen
the manner of her holy life and conversation.

In the proper virtues of her sex, as a woman, Sweetness, Modesty, and
Sobriety, in these she was exemplary. in the proper virtues of her relative
capacities; either as a Wife: Obedience, Compleasance, Amiablenesse; or as a
Mother! Care, Tenderness, and Providence; or as Matter familias, head and
governesse of her family: Wisdom, Gentleness, and Vigilance, in these she was
incomparable; and then in the proper virtues of a Christian: Humility,
Patience, Temperance, Devotion, Mortification, and the like; In these she was
excellent. So that a right excelllent person she was! view her in all her
postures and conditions, take her in all her relations and capacities. An
excellent Woman, an excellent Wife, an excellent Mother, an excellent Lady, an
excellent Neighbor, and an excellent Christian.

He that had but viewed her very aspects and countenance, could not choose but
spy out excellent modesty there; or had but happily heard, and listened to her
discourse, must needs have learned excellent gravity from thence; or had at any
time but observed her at her devotions, could not have avoided taking notice of
excellent zeal and fervency in them.

Her Behavior, how meek and humble was it? her Life (even to the most exact
and critical observation) how innocent and unblameable? her Spirit, how even
and well tempered? I dare challenge the whole world: who did ever observe her
at any time, either transported into an unhandsome fit of mirth, or heat into
an excessive passion of anger? And then as for her Charity to the poor, How
large and liberal was it? And here you must give me leave to speak mine own
knowledge: who had the honor for several years together to be her Almoner, and
to distribute much of her charity; I my self know, and God Almighty knows too,
the large sums of money which have passed through my hands (in our late times
of wars and violence) unto poor distressed Ministers and others; and I speak
it in the presence and knowledge of Almighty God, (though to the great honor
of her charity) I was fain many times to hold her hands, they were so ready and
open unto every charitable motion and occasion, even beyond the proportion of
her estate, though otherwise large and plentiful.

She did not drop, but pour out her alms: not in small and little measures, but
in large and full portions; neither needed her gifts to be forced and wrung out
of her fingers by persuasions and arguments, as if she had been loath and
unwilling to part with them; but they came freely and readily flowing from her,
as being glad and desirous to be rid of them, upon the good account of charity.
She knew God Almighty to be a bountiful paymaster, and that whatever receipts
she should charge him with, toward the relief of any of his poor members, he
would be sure to pay off again with plentiful interest and advantage; and so
indeed he did most eminently unto Her, and she lost nothing at all by the hand;
and the comforts and blessings of her life, as they were many, so I am apt to
believe, they were so many the more, upon this very account of her great
charity.

The afflictions and crosses which befell her in the course of her life (for you
must know, her cloud had a black side in it, as well as a side that was bright
and shining, and as her comforts here were many, so were her afflictions and
sufferings not a few, yet) how patiently did she bear them? how piously did she
improve them? what an holy and sanctified use did she make of them? and truly
Gods goodness to her in this particular was very remarkable, and had much of
the miracle of special love and mercy in it, in giving her Baculum cum virga,
a staff with his rod, strength with her sufferings; that notwithstanding the
delicateness of her education, the weakness and tenderness of her
constitution; yet by the help of her God, she was able to leap over these
walls, and to discomfit this host of enemies, and to bear her crosses
patiently, and endure the brunt, and go through with her afflictions; and in
the end digest all into Physic and nutriment.

How regular and punctual was she in her set times of private prayer and
devotion? still allotting and consecrating a constant part and portion of every
day (and that no small part neither) for the pious exercises of prayer,
reading, meditation, and the like: and here also I am able to speak my own
knowledge and observation: for having many sudden occasions to resort to her
closet, it was very seldom, if ever, that I found her alone there, without a
Bible before her; and as she gave her self much to reading the holy Scriptures,
so in the other part of Religion, I mean the devotionall part, she was very
constant and punctual; and prayer was with her to be sure, Clavis diei, and
sera noctis; the beginning and ending, the opening and shutting in of every
day. And what business soever she had besides, or entertainments for friends
to make, to be sure God must be served first with her, and prayer the first
work she went in hand with every morning: insomuch, that her closet was not (as
too many Ladies are) an Exchange only of curious pictures, and of rare and
costly jewels, but a private Oratory (as it were) chiefly designed for prayer
and devotion; neither did she reckon that she enjoyed her self enough, and to
be sure not so much at any time, as when she was retired thither, and was
enjoying actual communion and conference with her God.

One excellency more I cannot pass over in silence, it was so eminent and
remarkable in her: and that was her high esteem and value which she set upon
the Ministers of God, even in these late times of ours, when the rage and fury
of some had lessened them into such unsupportable straits and necessities, on
purpose to render them more proper objects of scorn and contempt. But the fury
of some, could not either abate or alienate her zeal from them; she well
understood and knew whose Ambassadors they are, and what their work and office
is, and upon this very account, according to the Apostles precept, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
13. She esteemed them very highly in love, and evermore held them in reverence
and reputation; Neither was it an esteem only of civil respect and complement
to their persons, but also of dutiful obedience and submission to their
doctrine; bearing always in mind that Command of the Apostles, Heb. 13. 17.
Obey them that rule over you, and submit your selves to them: for they watch
for your souls, as those that must give account.

And now I might further add, her pious and orderly government of her family,
her great civilitie and hospity, both toward neighbors and strangers; her
exceeding courtesy and affability toward all persons, with such an equal
temperament of gravity and sobriety, as I think is is hardly to be sampled in
any other: which makes me often call to mind an usual and familiar expression
of a late Reverend Prelate concerning her; That of all the persons he had ever
seen, he never saw any Become her self so well, as The Good Lady Capell.

Thus lived this precious Saint; unblemished in her Life, unstained in her
reputation, in her discourse affable, in her behavior grave and comely. Never
yet did I see so much gravity tempered with so much sweetness: In her Spirit
exceeding meek and humble, though her condition and quality had placed her in
an Orb and Sphere above most people, yet had she learnt her Spirit to stoop
even to the lowest, and submit to an entertainment of friendship and courtesy
with the meanest persons of all. And why, Are we not all fellow Christians?
have we not all one Maker? they were her own ordinary and familiar sayings.

A severe Censurer she was of her self and actions, still condemning and
faulting somewhat or other in those very performances, which in the judgment
of men, might justly pass for excellent and exemplary. One instance hereof I
shall now give you, by which you may judge of the rest: when about four years
ago it pleased God to try her with a very sore and heavy affliction, the
untimely loss and death of her second Son, that gallant and hopeful
Gentleman, Mr. Charles Capell: She sends for me (as that she would usually do
upon any sad aceident) and being come to her; she uttered her self to me in
these words (I shall as nigh as I can give you her own words, for I took
special notice of them) Sir (said she) I pray be free and plain with me, and
tell me seriously and unfeignedly, what sin or vice did you ever take notice of
in my practice and conversation: for I am sure something is amiss, and
something God would have amended in me, that he does thus continually ply me
with crosses. Now this I speak, to let you see what a severe censurer she was
of her self, and how ready and forward upon every occasion of any sad accident,
to be searching and enquiring into her actions, and propounding to her self
that question of the Jews concerning the blind man in the Gospel, Ioh. 9. 2.
but to a much better end. (...); Lord, who have sinned? what action of mine
have been faulty? wherein have I offended? in what have I done amiss? having
often in her mouth that Prayer of holy David, Ps. 130. 3. If thou Lord
should mark iniquities, O Lord who shall stand? But there is forgiveness
with thee. She had it seems well considered and emproved that Lesson of the
Apostles, 1 Cor. 11. 31. If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged
of the Lord.

A strict accountant she was also of her time, even to minutes and small
parcells: beshrewing and grutching every hour, which was otherwise spent, then
either in the actual service of her God, or at least in some proportion and
tendency thereunto.

For her constancy at her devotions, she was another Anna; for the
unblameablenesse of her life, another Elisabeth; for her frequent and diligent
attendance to the word of God, another Mary; for her charity to the poor,
another Dorcas; for her great civility and hospitality, another Martha; for her
fidelity and obedience to her Husband, another Sarah; and for her wisdom,
gravity, sobriety, temperance, quietness and the like, exactly one of St.
Paul's Godly Matrons.

She was evermore a zealous abhorrer and hater of idleness; a vice, grown of
late years the common fashion and distinction, of too many of her rank and
quality; who, because the plenty and abundance of their estates, do advance
them above the necessity of working for a livelihood, do therefore look upon
themselves as privileged, and marked out unto a life of Idleness; not
considering that God Almighty, who has given Ladies hands as well as others,
does also expect work and action from them (in proportion to their rank and
quality) as much as from any people.

But our Lady here was none of these, she well knew what mischief comes of
idleness, what great advantages it gives our spiritual adversary; whose
fittest times to cast in his Tares of sinful thoughts and motions into us, is,
when we are asleep and idle; and therefore she was careful to be continually
busying her self about some good employment or other, either in her Closet, at
her devotions, or in her Family, about her household affairs, or among her
neighbors, in friendly and charitable visits, that so in case her spiritual
enemy should come suddenly thrusting upon her at any time with his temptations,
she might have her answer ready, viz. That she had other work in hand, and was
not at leisure now to attend him.

Her life as to outward providence, was not unlike Joseph's Party colored
Garment, Tunica varia, a Coat of diverse colors; or like the Prophet Isaiah's
vinum aqua mixtum, Wine mingled with Water: God Almighty thinking it best for
the security of her graces, to Sauce her Passover with sour herbs: and to
train her up under a constant variety and vicissitude of temporal providence;
that neither too many comforts might at any time make her forgetful of duty:
nor too much load of affliction depresse and weaken her spirit into
dispondency: but that one might serve as an allay to the other, And the
sweetness of her comforts, help to promote and further the better digestion of
her crosses. And indeed (for her own part) she evermore made a most Christian
improve of these providentiall intermixtures: and would ever and anon be
chiding the sudden ebullition and motion of an angry passion in her, with holy
Job's calm and pious reply, chapter 2. 10. What? shall I receive good at the hand
of the Lord, and shall I not receive evil? shall I take his judgments
unkindly, and not much rather his mercies thankfully?

A most exact and punctual observer she was evermore of Family duties, and
wholesome Orders; and though in all other respects, a most gracious and obliging
Lady to her Servants, (a pregnant proof and testimony whereof, she has left
behind her to the view of the world, in her last will and Testament) yet
herein, if any of her Servants made a transgression, and she perceived them at
any time absent from Prayers (unless upon the just excuse of necessary
business) they were sure to have a severe and sharp reproof from her. And she
would often tell me, that she never pleased her self in her Family duties, nor
thought she did serve God acceptably, and as was fit, unless she had all her
Family about her; just of Ioshuah's pious resolution for all the world, chap.
24. 15. As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.

I have hitherto given you a character of this most excellent Ladies life,
during the time of her health. I shall come now to her last act of all, her
most Christian carriage and deportment, during the whole time of her sickness:
and here I shall report nothing more, then what mine own eyes and ears were
observers and witnesses of: for as I had the honor to attend her for many
years together, in the time of her health; So in the whole time of her
sickness, I had the happiness to minister to her spiritual occasions, in the
proper way and Office of my Function: And so, as I had the fittest opportunity
of any other, I did in like manner make it my business, to take as exact an
observation of her as I could.

It pleased God indeed (who best knows what is good for his Children) to visit
her with a long and tedious sickness; and that too, sharpened with many bitter
accents of pain and torment, for several months together: But (blessed be his
holy name for it) her patience all that whole while continued equal, and no
whit inferior to her pain: so that Standers by could more easily guess out
the pains and torments which she must needs lie under, by a consideration of
the kind and nature of her disease: then by any either repining language, or
impatient complaints from her own mouth.

One time indeed, (and never but that once) when I was with her, I found her
laboring under some inward conflicts and thoughtfulness, touching her
spiritual state and condition; but those such, as right well became the pious
hope and humility of a Christian: whereupon when I desired her, that if any
particular scruple did trouble her thoughts, and lay heavy upon her spirit, she
would please to ease her mind of it, and let me know it, that I might the
better fit and order my applications to her: To which she returned me this
answer; that she had been very faithful in her examination of her conscience,
and had desired God to assist and direct her in that search, and yet could not
find out any one particular sin which did afflict her spirit more then other:
But however confessed herself a great sinner before God. What an heavenly
speech was here? not one partcular sin more then other, and yet a great sinner;
just in St. Paul's words for all the world, 1 Cor. 4. 4. I know nothing by my
self, yet am I not hereby justified. She was (it seems) very desirous to take
as much shame and guilt to herself as was possible, that so she might leave the
more glory for the free grace and pardon of God.

And accordingly, still as she cast down one eye upon sin at any time, she was
ever careful to keep the other firmly and steadfastly fixed upon her Savior,
the infinite price of his Blood, the alsufficient merit of his Satisfaction:
neither could any either clamours of sin, or temptations of Satan, or
aggravations, and conscience of unworthiness in her self, draw her at any
time out of this strong hold of Faith, or pluck her out of the arms of her
Savior, or force her to let go her hold of the horns of this Altar; resolving
(it seems) with holy Job, chap. 13. 15. Yea though he slay me, yet will I trust
in him. And would very often repeat over to her self the Apostles melancholy
Question, Romans 7. 24. But then with his comfortable resolution annexed to it. O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? I
thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. And this was the right complexion and
constitution of her piety; an equal mixture and temperament of fear and hope,
of humility and confidence; as her hope was evermore a fearing hope, so was
also her fear always a believing hoping fear: She carried too deep a sense of
sin in her conscience, to be proud of any virtue or worthiness of her own, and
was always (even under her greatest conflicts and agonies) too good a
Christian, to despair of pardon.

Toward the latter end of her sickness, for the better settling and
strengthening of her Faith, She twice received that heavenly viaticum, the
blessed Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, and both times with
mavelous expressions and significations of devotion and reverence; and
particularly the first time, which was some while before her decumbency; when,
(though her strength was very much decayed, and her pain at the same time very
fierce and sharp upon her, yet) would She not otherwise be persuaded, but would
needs receive upon her knees, resolving (as she told me) so long as God lent
her the use of her knees, to use them in that solemn service, as a testimony of
her unfeigned humility and reverence of the majesty and dreadfulnesse of those
sacred mysteries.

During the time of her decumbency, though she had constantly sent for me
before, yet then she more frequently repeated her messages to me: She now saw
and felt the time of her departure drawing nigh, and so was very loath and
unwilling to lose any time, but be continually dressing and fitting her self
for her change.

Three days before her departure, She desired, and accordingly received the
Churches last comfort and blessing, the comfort of absolution; which She took
with very great thankfulness and satisfaction; and I could sensibly perceive
in her a present return of most heavenly comfort and perfect quietness of mind
thereupon.

This I add the rather for the example and practice of others: These great
Offices of holy Church, have doubtless more virtue and efficacy in them, then
ordinary apprehensions do rate them at; and though (living) we do contemn
them, and set light by them; yet dying people do feel the benefit, and receive
the comfort of them. And questionless that peremptory promise, Ioh. 20. 23.
Quorumcunque peccata remiseritis, whosoever sins ye remit, they are remitted,
do signify much more, then the bare complement of an indifferent usage and
Ceremony.

The same day she departed, (which was January 26. about three a clock in the
afternoon) she sent for me four several times to go to prayers with her,
thrice in the morning, and once in the afternoon; at which last time all her
children (one only excepted which was not in Town) were present, and joined in
prayers together with us: Soon after that, I was called to her again, to
perform my last Ministerial Office, the recommendation of her soul into the
hands of Almighty God; and then indeed (and not before) her senses began to
fail her; and within few minutes after, in much peace and sweetness, she
concluded her last breath.

I do here willingly pass over many other most remarkable carriages of hers,
during the time of her sickness; as her most Christian Charity, her constant
Devotion, her stupendous Silence and Patience, even to a miracle, and the
amazement of beholders, Her perfect Weanednesse from the world, her continual
thoughts and discourses of the joys and happiness of heaven: and indeed in
this latter, God Almighty was exceeding gracious to her; for she would often
wish, that if it might stand with the good will and pleasure of God; as he
dealt with his servant Moses, and gave him (a little before his death) a sight
and view of the land of promise; so he would also (some time before her
departure hence) vouchsafe her some sensible tastes and feelings of the joys
and happiness of heaven: And truly in this she had her request granted, and
God was (in most signal manner) as good to her as her desires: for her soul was
full of the glory of God, and of the joys and happiness of heaven; and she
was (in a manner) caught up into Paradise, and saw in her spirit strange
sights, and heard words of joy and peace not to be uttered; and did sensibly
feel new comforts every day breaking in fresh and more upon her soul; and lived
to see all her former fears vanished, and doubts satisfied, and objections
answered, and scruples resolved, and hopes evidenced, and (in a word) her whole
mind most sweetly composed and settled, into a heavenly posture of pious
confidence and assurance, so that now she had nothing left to do, but to
resolve with holy David, Psalm. 4. 8. To lay her down in peace, for the Lord had
graciously made her to dwell in safety. Accordingly a few days before her
death, she was pleased to utter her self to me in these (or I am sure such
like) words. Oh Sir, what a gracious God have I! how rich in his mercees
toward me! how favorable in his corrections of me! The thing which I so
greatly feared, (a painful torturing death) he has turned into ease and
comfort, And my wordly cares and thoughtfulness for the provision of my
children, he has also (in great measure) taken off of my hand. And now, what
do I lingering and tarrying here any longer? all my work is done, and the world
has no further need of me, why may I not forthwith go to my God? Is it not
much better for me to be dissolved, and to be with Christ? These and such like
heavenly sayings, were her frequent and usual discourses with me: so that it
was an exceeding joy and comfort to me, when at any time she did send for me;
neither do I know that I ever went to her, and did not learn somewhat
remarkable from her. And indeed every speech and posture of hers, was a most
fruitful Sermon to all those who had the happiness to attend about her, and to
minister unto her, and did either hear the one, or observe the other; the one a
visible Sermon of patience, the other an audible Sermon of devotion. But I see
I am now entered into a large Field, and may say with Elihu in Job, chap. 32.
18. I am full of matter, and the spirit within me constrains me: And indeed I
can very hardly wind my self out; but I must have regard to my promise of
brevity: Take all therefore which I shall add further in these few words; and
believe it, they are not the words of vanity or flattery, but of truth and
soberness, and uttered in the fear and presence of God. I have in my time been
with several dying persons; have seen their piety, observed their patience,
taken special notice of their whole carriage and behavior; yet never in all
my life, did I see such an uniform Samplar of piety, nor a whiter Soul return
to its maker.

One thing was very notable, and I beseech God to make us truly thankful to
him for it, as being a most signal instance and evidence of his goodness to
her, and which indeed (considering the condition of her disease) may justly
deserve the name of a miraculous mercy. It was this: Though her sickness (as I
said before) was very painful and grievous, yet it pleased God, for some days
before her death, to deliver her from any sense of pain at all, so that she had
her thoughts very free and at liberty, and made a most Christian use and
advantage of that freedom: Yea, when we, and her self too (by reason of the
little rest which she took) greatly feared that her sickness might at last
grow into some kind of distemper; It pleased Almighty God to secure her from
that also, so that she enjoyed her understanding and memory, and all her senses
very quick and perfect to the last, even so long as she had any occasion or
need to make use of them.

And thus have I at length given you the whole world in a Map, a brief account
and history of the holy Life and Death of our most excellent Lady: See for all
the world, as she lived, so she died; she lived in peace, and she died in
peace; her whole life here, was (as a man would say) one continued act of piety
and good works; and as for her death, that in like manner was a conclusion of
most heavenly sweetness and comfort. The Lord in mercy give us grace who
survive, so to frame our lives according to the example of her piety, that when
it shall come to our turns to die, we also may share in like feelings of
comfort.

All the farther application which I shall now make hereof, is to you that are
here present, and particularly to those who were her dearest relations, Her
right Noble and Honorable Children; most earnestly beseeching them to consider
and call often to mind these pious Parents of theirs, to endeavor to tread in
their steps, and to follow the example of their piety, and not give themselves
the liberty of committing those sins, which they were so careful to prevent,
or lightly neglect any of those wholesome customs and practices (whither in
their private Closets, or Families) which they made such a Conscienc to
observe. Oh consider (Right Honorable,) that you are born of pious Parents;
Your Father died a Blessed Martyr, and your Mother lived a Precious Saint upon
earth, and you have great reason to believe, that they do now both of them
shine glorious Saints in heaven: Think now (I beseech you) what a lessening of
their happiness will it be there; to understand and know, that you, (their
dear and natural Relations) which came out of their own bodies, Children of so
many Prayers and Tears, of so much care and tenderness, as you have ever been
to them, That you (I say,) after their deaths, should in the least measure
prevaricate and degenerate from the example of their piety.

They were pleasant Vines, oh be not you Thorns and Thistles; They were active
Christians, oh be not you barren and unnfruitfull: Know that they that are born
of pious Parents (as you all are) are born under the greatest possible
obligations unto piety that may be: The bare example of their pious Parents
(which all have not) forcibly provoking and engaging them in like pious
practices.

Would you shine glorious Saints in heaven, as they now do? why then live
Religious Saints upon earth as they here did: and then indeed, you will fare
much the better for their Piety's sake; for every pious Parent, does hoard and
treasure up a stock of blessings for his Children: but then it is upon a
condition of like piety in them, and not oherwise: Remember what the Prophet
Ezekiel says to this purpose, and consider it, and lay it seriously to heart,
Chapt. 18. 20. The righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the
wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him. The soul that sins it shall die.

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be all possible
Honor, and Glory, and Praise, now and for evermore, Amen, Amen.

2 Chronicles. 9. 5, 6. And she said to the King, it was a true report which I heard
in mine own Land, of thine Acts and of thy wisdom.

Howbeit, I believed not their words, until I came, and mine eyes had seen it,
and behold, the one half of the greatness of thy wisdom was not told me, for
thou excellest the fame that I heard.


FINIS.
AN ELEGY Upon the much lamented Death of the Right Honorable and most
excellent Lady, The Lady ELIZABETH CAPELL, DOWAGER.
ANd was it thou not afraid (bold Death) to touch
That Heav'n-inspired Saint, who had none such?
But thou thy hands had first in the martyred blood
Of her Dear Lord imbrued; and so grews't proud
To snatch of his what else did here remain:
Though yet her Death proved more thy loss then gain.
To do her mischief, thou did make her Saint,
And (much against thy will) did her acquaint
With Angels company; where now she sets
And all her Earthen comforts here forgets,
At least not wants them; Rare felicity!
Earth's mud exchanged for Heavens Eternity:
There now she sits, and Queen's it, pitying much
Our sorry Comforts here; which we with such
Hard pains do gather up: (as sometimes were
The Israelites forced to wander here and there,
To pick up Manna in the Wilderness,)
And having got them, call them Happiness;
Hydropick, thirsty Happiness no doubt,
So far from slaking, that th'encrease our drought.
But our blessed Saint is got above these toys,
And scorns them now, feasting on heavenly Joys;
And would not for a World her fingers more
Soil with those dirty Comforts, we adore.
Now Riches, Honors, Friends, and Children are
To her Rich Soul but so much paltry ware.
Strong Mans'ons, Goodly Palaces, Buildings fair
Seem now to her but Castles in the air.
And here they seemed so too: these little things
Were much below her Soul; the lofty wings
Of her desires soared higher; all her Bliss
And Joy was Heaven; which rather then she would miss,
She was resolved to dye; and so she did:
But not as we (low Souls) whose Life is hid,
And buried in the Rubbish of the Earth:
Rather she did depart, to enjoy the mirth
And melody of Angels; withdrew from hence,
To the end she might a glorious Saint commence:
She willingly uncas'd her Soul, that so
She might with swifter pace to Heaven go.
Her flesh was her encumbrance, which to take
Away from her, did but her freedom make:
Her Soul was kept close Prisoner, 'till by Thee
It Was happily released, and so made free.
And whither did it fly, I trow, canst' tell?
If not, I Will tell thee now; It Is gone to dwell
With blessed Saints and Angels, there to sing
Joynt-praises with them to her Heavenly King;
Thus were thou fooled (weak Death) for what by Thee
Was meant a mischief, proved a Courtesy.
Heavens blessed her here with Comforts to her mind,
But nothing like to what she now does find.
Oh that we felt what she feels! then would we
Choose to die too, and bear her Company.
But stay my Friends, Heaven and Happiness
Are costly Pennyworths, If you sweat less
For them then for the world, you will surely miss
Of what she now enjoyes, Eternal Bliss.
She was not born a Saint, no more then we:
No privilege did her Nativity
Give her 'bove us; they were her Piety,
Her virtuous Life, her rare Humility,
Her flaming Zeal, her sober Gravity,
Her yearning Bowels, melting Charity,
Her Faith, her Hope, her Love, her Patience,
Her Meekness, Temperance; Her obedience
To every Providence, not once replying,
Or yet (Oh it is a sore one!) vainly crying;
These made her Saint: these gained her Heaven too:
And would gain't us as well, would we live so:
Compound of Goodness! who by far had more
Graces in thee, then we have names in store;
What Virtue shall we call thee? we cannot tell
Wh'ther this or that? for Thou were all as well:
Thine own sole Rival: For (alas) what were
Failings in thee, they our Perfections are.
And doubtless we should thy Divinity
Have fondly worshipped, had not chose to dye,
And so removed that doubt; But though we call
Thee not a breathing Angel; yet we shall
Strict Votaries resort unto thy shrine,
And pay Thee Honors next unto Divine.
Methinks I see now that Majestic Face,
That Garb, that Presence mixed with comely grace,
Those frowns, those looks of hers, commanding Eye,
Heartbreaking softness, cutting Clemency,
Thus chiding Sin, -- Bold Sinners how dare ye
I looking on, act thus unhandsomely?
How dares the saucy darkness of the Night
Outface the presence of the noonday light?
Thus was she feared and loved alike, whilst they
Who wished the Sin full well, yet chose to obey,
And cease from sin, though but in Reverence
To her grave Aspects charming Influence.
Thus have I seen erewhiles in winter nights,
The wanton Stars sporting with twinkling Lights,
And dancing at the absence of the Sun.
But that no sooner 'bove the Horizon
'Gan to peep forth, but they in trembling wise
Strait hid their faces, and shut close their Eyes,
Astonished at that presence; Thus we are told
By the tell-troth Records of Historians old,
That whilst in Millain Ambrose tarried, there
The Fiend durst not so much as once appear;
His very Absence plainly did confess,
And publish to the world his guiltiness:
He was afraid of that good man: and why?
Not for his powers sake, but his piety:
Thus these Infernal workers of the Night
Shun a Saint's presence, as do Owls the Light.
Mirror of Christians! In whom equally
Both Grace and Nature joined Heads, whereby
To make one piece most Rare and Eminent,
Which should surmount what e're was excellent.
And that was Thee; Every Celestial Grace
Cent'ring in Thee as in it is proper place:
So that who e're would fain come near the best,
Must strive to equal Thee, and that done, rest.
How did thy well digested Family
Resemble to the Life the Economy
Of those Celestial spirits? so that here
A man might see how Angels governed were.
Avaunt Propanness, Lewdness; stand aloof;
Such Vermin must not think under this Roof
To find a nesting place; here is Sanctuary
For none but Saints, and Heavenly Company.
Her Mornings work was first her Soul to dress,
Then next her Body, with such comeliness
As best beseems a Saint: no Painting here,
No Crisping-pins, no Curling of the Hair;
But all that sober dressing which S. Paul
Enjoins his Matrons, and commends to all.
Pictures do shadows need, and art; but nature
Shines most resplendent in her proper feature.
Next to her Mornings work, her Family
Took up the following Time: 'till by and by
Hark the Clock strikes: -- and then to Prayers we go:
(Business must yield to Duty:) It Is not so
In all great Families; but her blessed mind
Could else no Joy, no Satisfaction find:
Nor could she think there would a Blessing be,
Where God has not his Times as well as we.
Religion, which some make a sport and play,
And others worse, a Preface to make way
To base designs; a Silken Mask to hide
What otherwise dares not the Light abide.
Was her Delight, her Joy, her Recreation,
Her work, her business, her negotiation.
An early Saint she was: she did not stay,
Or put off Duty 'till another day;
But fell to work with the first; knowing how vain
It is to wish what cannot be lent again.
And who would spend one minute carelessly,
Did he but understand that possibly
The next may not be his? or seriously
Think what on each depends, Eternity:
Eternity, which grows still as it spends,
Like the oil in the vessel; has nor bounds nor ends.
Blessed Soul! Heroic Saint! who had within
(Besides thy Sex) nothing was Feminine.
Crosses were no new things with thee; the had been
Thy constant Lot for years; thou had does seen,
And felt, what it is to suffer; Suffer sore,
Such sufferings as had scarce been heretofore.
Thy Dearest Lord untimely hurried hence,
Not for his Crimes, but his Allegiance.
He was too good to live; had rather dye
Then act ought which looked like Disloyalty.
Rebellion Rampant could not terrify
His Highborn Soul. Alas what is Victory
(The cause being bad) but thriving Villainy?
Base-Coward Souls, who know not to rise high
But by inglorious acts; a Capell-spirit
Will learn you better arts true fame to merit;
Heroic sufferings will entail a Name:
It Is not the Death, but Cause, which brings the shame.
Scaffolds are Theaters; the cause being good,
It Is no disgrace to wade to Heaven in blood.
He might for's Deathbed chose a Bed of Down,
'T would have been softer (true) but less renown:
Heaven was his aim; which rather then to miss
He chose the Axe to hug, the Block to kiss.
His shortest cut to Heaven (as things now stood)
Lay strait along through th'red sea of his blood.
See how his Family thrives upon it, how all
Do court Relation to that Name, which shall
Survive in honor; when others memory
Shall rot in the grave of lasting Infamy.
Could Tears retrive his precious Life, we would
Threaten another Deluge, and weep blood.
But they are not Tears will weep him out of's Bliss;
Spare then your sighs. -- He Is better as he is,
With Charles the great, stout Strafford, Canterbury,
Bold Lucas, daring Montross; Company
Which would an Angel from his seat of Bliss
Invite, though but to enjoy such Happiness.
Rest then, Blessed Soul! be Happy still and still,
Go on to enjoy of them, and Heaven thy fill.
And since we cannot with tears re-call thy Fate,
We Will strive by Acts thy Life to imitate:
Our Almanacks (rather then want a Tomb)
Shall tell it forth -- Great Capell 's Martyrdom.
And was not that a Loss without compare,
Which with one fatal stroke did such a pair
Part from each other? Yet, hold, not parted quite,
They Are met togeth'r again: Death to requite
That spightfull loss dispatched her to her Bliss,
And married them both again in Happiness.
And now, great GOD! whose Ruling Providence
Does reach to hairs, and all thing here dispense;
Whose are our lives, in whose hand are our deaths,
Who lengthen'st out, and stop'st (at will) our breaths;
Make the great Samplar of her Virtuous Life,
Of all our cares and thoughts the only strife.
Let Us not (for she did not) our selves content
Barely in being good, but Excellent;
That of her Life a pious Imitation,
May bring us also to her habitation:
And sharing with her in like Graces here,
We may with her shine in her Glories There.
FINIS.

