To all that observe Days.
THe Lord is a witness against all your Idolatry who are following Idols, and
observing days, and times, and seasons, which is idolatry. Oh London! what,
art thou falling back into Popish Idolatry again? which sometime there has
been a spirit in thee which has denied? What, have you lost your zeal for the
Lord? and is your zeal quite dead which once was in you against the practices
of the whore of Rome? Alas, what do you mean, in your observing the Popish
Mass-dayes, in observing Christmas, as you call it. I had thought that spirit
had been banished; And I looked e're this, that observing of days would have
been quite extinguished; and I hoped that your minds and hearts would have
inclined to better things, and would wholly have forgotten and left off all
your superstitious practices, which had any foundation or savor of the Popish
Church. But alas, I see your zeal for God is grown dead, and the spirit of
Idolatry cleaves fast unto you; even so fast is it seated in your hearts, that
an Act of Parliament, or any outward teaching or profession can separate you
from Idolatry; and I perceive there is nothing till the just judgment of God
fall among you, because of your sins that can work out of your hearts, the
spirit that runs after Idols. You seem to be joined to Idols, as if an Idol
were your God; is not this idolatry? As if you kept days wholly to the Lord,
you keep your Shops shut, and you forbear all manner of work, and you put on
your fine apparel; and yet you go into vanity, into pride and wantonness, and
commits great wickedness in the sight of God, in pleasures, in sports, and
lusts, and drunkenness, and idleness, and all this is idolatry. And thus you
keep your holy days, as you call them, spending your time in vanity, both
Masters and servants, Parents and children; And ye say ye will keep Christmas,
and ye are greatly offended at them that will not, and cries against them, and
scoffs at their godliness; and thus are you glewed to the old customs of the
Romish Church, that whore, from whence you have learned these things; for she
was the first that ever instituted and practiced these cursed abominations; and
her practices which she was the author of, are you zealously performing even in
London, the place of great Reformation as you profess: And thus are you doing,
that call your selves the Reformed Churches, and that seems in words to deny
her; yet are you treading in her steps of idolatry. What, observing Christmas
in London yet? What, ye of the Reformed Churches? What, ye that have seemed
some years since to turn away from these things, are ye even again observing
these things? Oh! hypocrisy and deceit fills your hearts. Oh ye hypocrites!
that cries against the Romish Church, and yet are observing of her practices,
in feasting and ryoting and ryotousness, in drinking and wantonness, in
idleness and sports, and this ye call keeping the holy days. Oh wretched
idolatry! The Lords judgments will come upon these things, the Lord is a
witness against you. What, is all your profession come to this? Have not some
of you cried against the Pope and his inventions these many years? and are you
sitten down in the practice of his inventions? It seems you are but reformed in
words, and only has denied the Pope in words, but are beholding to him for an
invention, that ye may keep Holydays as ye say, which ye keep unholy; and
manifold abominations in those days do abound to your shame. Therefore repent
ye Idolaters, the time is at hand when the Lord will overturn, and overthrow
all your idolatrous ways, and practices. As for the Quakers, they fear God,
and they dare not join with you in these abominations; and therefore you
despise them, and say in your hearts, who shall control you; for these things
will ye do, and none shall prevent you. And thus is the Popish spirit of
Idolatry showed forth in thee, oh London, and thy reformed peeople are guilty
of Popish superstitions and vain idolatries, till the judgments of the Lord
enter upon you, and smite you, you will not regard nor return.

F. B.


