God's Love to Man, AND Man's Duty toward God: MANIFESTED In several
Discourses on the COVENANTS OF Works and Grace.

Wherein diverse Propositions are laid down, and sundry Cases resolved.

By JOHN BARRET, Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for S. R. and are to be sold by Jonathan Robinson, at the
Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXXVIII.

TO THE READER.
AS in the Apostles days, some were Exceeding Zealous about the Law,
understanding neither what they said, nor whereof they Affirmed; There are some
in our days, who have the Covenant of Grace and the New Covenant much in their
mouths, while yet they understand little of it, yea, are under very great
Mistakes about it.

Perhaps (Reader) thou will wonder to see a New Treatise of this Subject, upon
which there are so many Extant. Yet it were to be wished, that in some of them
there were not Multa Corigenda, foul Errata's. And besides, let who will Write
of it, instead of putting to it a Finis, he may conclude with a Nonnulla
Desiderantur, there are some things yet behind.

Indeed the Subject is exceeding Copious, and withal, a necessary Subject to be
often Inculcated. Without some knowledge of Gods Covenant, Men can neither
understand God, nor Jesus Christ, nor Themselves aright.

Touching the Occasion of this present Discourse being in Company with a Worthy
special Friend, I was Speaking my Thoughts, That most of the Prevailing Errors
of our Times, were from Ignorance of the Covenant of Grace, or not being right
in the Doctrine of it: Whereupon he willed me to apply my Thoughts to that
Subject. When Considering further with my self the dangerous Tendency, and fad
Consequences of some Mistakes about it, I was ready to say [I also will show my
Opinion.] Now to make way for my Intended Discourse on the Covenant of Grace.
it was very Requisite to Premise something of Man's State under the Covenant of
Works.

Many Points relating to these Two Covenants, I wittingly pass by, to Insist
more largly on what I conceive very Needful at this Day, that might be an
Antidote against Prevailing Errors, and a means of Establishing Souls in the
present Truth.

I conclude beforehand, some will account this Discourse a Dry Piece, to wit,
Such as look only at the stirring of Affections. But woeful Experience may Teach
us, that it is as well a Christians Duty to see to the right Ballasting of his
Judgment; for want of which, we have seen many sadly Tossed to and fro.

The Scripture is Profitable for Doctrine, 2 Timothy 3.16. This is one end and use
it serves for. And if the Doctrine herein laid down be Sound, and according to
the Scriptures of Truth, I shall hope, it will not be Unprofitable.

Further, I must expect, others will be Prejudiced, and take Distaste, meeting
with some things here Cross to the Opinions, which they have Espoused. Yet I
can say, the Discovery of Truth is my Endeavor and Design, (and not to lay
open the Nakedness of any of a different Persuasion, further than it might
serve that Way.) And sure I am, Truth ought to be dearer to us all, than our
Credit, or Worldly Concerns.

Upon a Review of the whole, I especially commend to thy serious Perusal, the
Twelfth, and Thirteenth Proposition of the Covenant of Grace, beginning at Page
225. and ending at 297. showing the Terms and Benefits of the Covenant of
Grace, wherein every man's Grand concern lies. Reader, if thou have a mind to
see, there I have Endeavored to show thee the things that belong unto thy
Peace. Diog. Laert. in Socrate. l. 2. p. 111.
As Aeschines said to his Master Socrates, (...), etc. I am poor, and have
nothing else, but I give thee my self: And it took with his Master. We have
nothing to give to God worthy of his Acceptance; yet if (with the Believing
Corinthians, 2 Cor. 8.5.) we would now give our selves to the Lord, it would be
very Acceptable to Him, and every way Advantageous to our Selves. We should
come better out of his Hands; Yea, He would be ours (our God, and Portion) if
we are willing, and resolved to be His. Methinks, the Lord says to Sinners, as
Jehu to Jehonadab, 2 Kings 10.15. Is thine heart right as my heart is with thy
heart? If it be, then give me thy hand. O how glad should I be, if this
Discourse might promote that Holy and happy League betwixt God and Souls!
Indeed, I am not without hope, but through the Blessing of God, it may be of
Good use to some. And otherwise no Reasons should have moved, no Persuasions
should have prevailed with me to yield to the Publishing of it. The Success (I
know) depends wholly on His Blessing.

(...),
(...).
I write with Calmness, and would be Sorry this should Raise the least Storm in
any. Where then can not Assent with Judgment, yet Dissent with Affection. Let
us follow the Truth in Love. If thou find any Light and Warmth here,
acknowledge the same to come from the Father of Lights. Let Him have the
Praise: And forget not to Pray for one, who is greatly Ashamed, that he has so
little served God, and his Generation, who without a better Head, and a better
Heart, is still like to do little Service,

J. B.

Addenda and Corrigenda.
PAge 3. Line ante penult. add. [There is par ratio, why this First Covenant
should be so called, though it should not be directly intended in that place.]
p. 9. l. 14. r. External. p. 11. l. 29. r. flowing. p. 12. l. 31. for but, r.
be. p. 13. l. 10 blot out or. p. 14. l. 14. r. owed. p. 15. marg. (...) is put
for (...), p. 18. l. 29. r. Law, p. 21. l. 10. r. had, p. 24. l. 7. r. he. l.
9. r. commonly use, p. 25. l. 6. r. as a moral, p. 33. l. 8. r. goods, p. 34 l.
10. r. Judge p. 41. l. 12. r. carried, p. 24. l. 4. r. in, and l. 31. r. Niti,
p. 61. l. 2, r. so we. p. 73. marg. r. mod. div. p. 76. marg. r. quicquid
mandat. Calv. p. 93. l. ult. (...) p. 137. l. 16. r. without, p. 152. l. 12.
after grace that in marg. to some, etc. p. 162. l. 1. r. cur p. 164. l. 31.
Cocceius, p. 174. l. 20. r. ac. l. 21. r. in eo quidni, p. 213. l. 11. blot out
be, p. 232. l. 16. r. guileless, p. 233. l. 27. blot out the Law of, p. 235. l.
9. r. justifaction, p. 245. l. 13. r. by Faith, p. 247. l. 25. r. many, p. 253.
l. 15. r. godly sorrow, p. 279. l. 18. for of, r. to, p. 282. l. ^13. r.
Hendiadis, p. 285. l. 25. for long, r. large, p. 300. l. 13. for now, r. nor,
p. 306. l. 32. blot out the stop at Faithful, p. 307. l. 9. after Preached, r.
so explicitly, p. 321. l. 7. r. Opponitur, l. 8. r. Externae, p. 322. l. 22.
r. includes, p. 326. l. 18. r. Incompossibilia, p. 424. l. 26. r. dispense, p.
429. l. 7. r. quatefaciendam, p. 405. l. 7. r. Maymony. One reference of good
use is omitted. p. 385. l. 4. marg. scil. Mr. Baxt. of Infant Bapt. p. 98, 99.
Other literal Mistakes, and false Pointings, which I hope will not much hinder
the sense, the Ingenuous Reader will pass by.

OF THE COVENANT OF WORKS.
Part I.
Genesis 2.17. But of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil thou shall not eat of
it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye, or dying
thou shall dye.
I Design (God assisting) to Discourse of the two Covenants betwixt God and
Man. The Introduction.
The right opening and understanding whereof might help to set and keep our
Judgments right in many points of Divinity, and prevent our falling into many
dangerous and prevailing errors. And as Luther said (as I remember) upon his
understanding of the point of free Justification by Christ's righteousness,
that thereupon he thought himself apertis portis in ipsum paradisum intrasse,
to have strait way entered into Paradise: And ibi continuo alia mihi facies
totius Scripturae apparuit, forthwith the whole Scripture appeared to him with
a new face; so it would no doubt to many, could they attain to a right and true
notion of the Covenants.

Now I have made choice of this Text of Scripture, whereupon to ground my
Discourse of the Covenant of works: As this was part of it; part of that first
Covenant, God was pleased to make with Man in innocence.

I confess the Covenant of Works made with Adam in innocence, is more darkly
spoken of than the Covenant of Grace.

And the Reason is obvious, because the first Covenant was soon broken, on
man's part, that he can claim no privilege or benefit by it. In this respect
it is, as if it had never been. All man's hope of happiness depends wholly on
that which is called the Covenant of Grace.

Therefore the promissory part of that first Covenant is not mentioned here,
not spoken of expressly: but only employed, and included in the threatening. The
Text indeed runs in the Form of a Law with a threatening. As we have no more
expressed here; but,

1. A Precept, not to eat. --

2. The Sanction or penalty threatened, death in case man did eat, contrary to
the charge, and precept God had given him.

Yet there is more included and employed here: As,

1. A Promise: A promise of the continuance of Adam's life and happiness, upon
Condition that he continued his Obedience.

When it is said [If thou disobeyest thou shall dye.] it fairly intimates thus
much, Poena enim denunciata inobedientiae non expectatur, ubi est obedientia.
Cocceide soed. c. 2. Sect. 24. p. 29.
[ If thou will be Obedient in this thing, and whatsoever else I command thee,
thou shall surely live still, and be happy, thou shall not dye.]

2. The Tenor of the first Covenant is included here, that it was [ Do this and
live, disobey and dye.] That the Stipulation, or Condition required of man in
the first Covenant, was his perfect obedience to the will of God in all things,
not only to the Law of Nature implanted in him, but also to any further Command
of God's giving Forth.

As we see in this positive Law, where the thing forbidden was lawful in it
self, and only sinful because forbidden, and forbidden, to prove and try his
obedience. As this was indeed a fit trial of it, by a Law to restrain him from
that, whereunto he had a Natural inclination, as unto other fruits in Paradise
( Genesis 3.6.) and which was indifferent, (within man's liberty to take and eat)
before the giving of that Law.

But I say the Condition of the first Covenant was obedience to the will of God
in all things; therefore it is rightly called the Covenant of works. As Romans
3.27. we read of a Law of works contradistinguished and opposed to the Law of
Faith. The Tenor of it being [do this and live] employed here in the threatening,
If thou disobeyest in any thing, be it but so much as in tasting of this fruit,
(which here to try thy Obedience, I forbid thee to eat of) Thou shall dye. As
Grotius (de Satis. c. 3.) per unam Speciem peccati omne peccati genus
indicatur, ut exprimit Lex eadem clarius explicata, Maledictus qui non manserit
in omnibus praeceptis Legis, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal. 3.10.

This [ In the day thou eatest thereof, dying thou shall dye, means as much
as that [ Cursed is he that continues not obedient in all things.

3. That the Law of works, the Law given to Adam, was more than a penal, and
praemiant Law, more than a Law with a promise, It is true Gods Law with its
Sanction may be called his Covenant, before man's consent, as containing the
matter of it; but it is most properly a Covenant when it is consented unto,
having then also the form of a Covenant.
and threatening annexed, that it was also a Covenant. I have this to say
further, viz. that we cannot but suppose, that innocent Adam did fully consent
to, and readily and thankfully accept of Gods Terms and proposals here [Obey
and live, Disobey and dye.] When God had done so much for man in his Creation,
making him a reasonable Creature; in, or after his own Image, able to yield
perfect obedience, and when the said obedience was indisputably, indispensably
his duty, whether God promised such a reward or not, to suppose now that man
was not fully consenting to the Terms offered, (which were most just and
reasonable) for the continuation of his happiness, were to suppose that man was
not what he was indeed, (i. e. reasonable, and innocent,) This were to suppose,
that God did not make man upright or perfect, but rather perverse, and to
suppose that man lay cross to his Maker, even before he fell, which is (no
doubt) prodigiously false.

4. One thing more included here, and to be inferred, is, that this Covenant,
and Compact, was not made with Adam alone, but with him, and his posterity
together. Their want of perfect conformity to Gods Will and Law, (the thing
required, and insisted on in the Covenant of works) rendering his posterity
guilty of death, even as if they had set their teeth in the forbidden fruit.
The penalty threatened to Adam's breach of Covenant, we see inflicted on his
posterity, that certainly they were involved in the Covenant with him, to be
dealt withal upon the same Terms. Even Infants, who have not sinned after the
similitude of Adam 's Transgression, yet through his disobedience ( mediante
corruptione, their nature by that means being corrupted) are subjected to the
same death, and punishment.

Though Corrinus takes it thus, Cens. Amat. Arm. c. 9. p. 138.
death being threatened unto Adam that very day he sinned, therefore his
posterity could not but partake of his punishment. As they must all of
necessity dye in him, who were in his loins. Yet by his leave, this account he
gives of the matter is utterly short of that account the holy Scripture gives
of it. The Apostle concludes further, Romans 5.12. That by Adam's Sin, all the
world of mankind became subject unto death; so as they are subject to it, not
only to dye vertually in him; but formally to undergo the Sentence of death in
their own persons.

Now hence I lay down this Doctrinal Conclusion.

Doct. That God was pleased to Covenant with man at first, when in the state of
innocence, promising to give him eternal life, upon Condition of his obeying
perfectly and constantly; withal threatening death, if in the least point he
should disobey.

And to help your understandings, and to lead you on to a clearer conception,
and apprehension of the Nature of this first Covenant, I shall proceed by
certain steps, laying down several propositions about it: humbly begging the
Spirit of truth so to guide me, that I may not mislead you here.

Sect. 1. PROP. I. God the maker of all things, created man a rational being,
after his own Image, he being created to know, acknowledge, love, worship,
obey, and enjoy his Maker.
COncerning the Image of God wherein man was created, it is, questioned,

1. Wherein it did consist?

Ans. 1. Not in the form and fashion of his body. Homo non est imago Dei ea
part, qua bestiis similis est. Coccei. For God is a Spirit, and has not any
bodily shape, as the Audians, or Anthropomorphites of old dreamed. Therefore
his Image most properly or primarily consists in something spiritual. It was a
fond conceit of Osiander, that man was said to be created after Gods Image,
because the Son of God was to assume Man's Nature. But Christ was not the
express Image of God in this respect.

That Text Heb. 1.3. where he is called the express image of his Fathers
person, Christus quum factus est homo, dicitur factus esse nobis similis per
omnia, dempto peccato. Illius igitur corpus ad imaginent nostri factum for
matumque potius fuit, quam nostrum ad illius, Zanch.
does certainly respect his Deity, not his humanity. His being incarnate.
Christ's taking man's Nature on him, was his being made like to us.

Again, the Scripture affirms this of man before his fall, that he then had
the Image of God, and had he continued in that first Estate of integrity, there
had been no occasion for the Son of God to be incarnate, to take man's Nature
on him.

2. But the Image of God in man, consisted in those things, which advanced him
above the Inferior Creatures, representing some Divine perfection, which
according to our way of conceiving of God is formally predicated of him, or
properly attributed to him. Which is either, 1. Ratione substantiae hominis,
and imprimis animae. The Natural Image of God in man. As God is a Spirit, and
so the Soul. God is immortal, and so the Soul is immortal. Or, 2. Ratione
dignitatis, and (...), Mr. Baxt.
which a Learned man of our own calls the Relative Image of God. So man in
that dominion which God gave him over the inferior Creatures, (that were made
for him) represented God, the Lord of all, being as a little God upon Earth.
Thus Magistrates are called Gods. [I said ye are Gods.] Or, 3. Ratione donorum,
seu qualitatum moralium, the moral Image of God. Those habits which represented
God's wisdom, holiness, justice, goodness, and truth.

Now as the Moral Faculties (to wit) those which are the proper seat of moral
Good or Evil) are the chief, Imago Dei in principe animi facultate proculdubio
principem locum obtinuit. Suffrag. Britan. de 3 and 4 Art. These. 1. p. 94.
And as Moral Good is more Excellent than Natural, and Moral evil worse than
Natural (as Christ, was subject to a world of evil of this last sort, and yet
retained the Image of God, most fair, and unspotted, being free from the least
touch of Moral evil:) Thus the Moral perfection of the faculties of the Soul,
is man's highest perfection. And herein chiefly and eminently did God's Image
in man consist. And nothing more opposite to the Image of God, than Moral
pravity. As God has more to do in Natural Evils, than in Moral. He freely
owneth his being the Author of Natural Evil, (is there any evil in the City,
and the Lord has not done it?) but it were blasphemy to make him the Author of
Moral Evil, or Sin.

The Image of God consists not only or chiefly in the Essence of the soul: nor
only or chiefly in the powers and faculties of the soul (supposing there were
any real distinction of the faculties from the Essence) which some make to be
Speculum Trinitatis, the Glass of the Trinity. The Essence and Natural powers
of the soul remain, now that the Image of God is defaced. Nor only, or chiefly
in dominion over other Creatures (as some would have it) This would rather seem
to be an Adjunct. (or however a less principal part of it) Genesis 1.26. Let us
make man in our Image -- and let them have dominion. And that it is a thing
distinct, and separable too, from the Image of God, from what is principally
intended by it, seems to follow from hence: that both Adam and Eve are said
to have been created in the Image of God, Genesis 1.27. They were created both a
like in the Image of God: but they were not both alike in dominion, the Woman
being made for the Man, is subject to him. Again, the Angels (surely) had the
Image of God in as eminent, or an higher degree, than Man had; yet were not
they made Lords over this lower world, (as man was, Psalm. 8.6.) that we can any
where find. The Angels were made after Gods Image, to whom the dominion over
inferior Creatures did not so properly belong, as unto men.

Indeed the Image of God seems more properly to denote some inward frame and
complexion of soul, rather than any such Eternal privilege or prerogative, as
Lordship over the Creatures.

Therefore we take the Image of God, especially and eminently to consist in
those spiritual Endowments of Knowledge, Righteousness, and Holiness. That
inward Rectitude of man's Soul, God made man upright, Eccl. 7.29. where
(whatsoever Socinians say) we must understand, upright in respect of Moral
rectitude; (as Moral pravity is opposed to it) [finding out many Inventions.]
Now what is the Moral Rectitude of the Understanding, but found Knowledge, and
Wisdom? what is the moral rectitude of the will, but Righteousness, and
Holiness?

Thus upright was man, when he came first out of Gods hand, no error in his
understanding, no irregularity in his will, no disorder in his Affections. A
sign of which we see, Genesis 2.25. They were both naked, the Man and his Wife,
and were not ashamed. No uncomely motions to cause shame, such as they were
sensible of after their fall, Genesis 37.10. Naked innocence was Glorious, but
naked sin and turpitude a thing most ignominious.

See what is meant by the Image of God, Ephesians. 4.24. That ye put on the new man,
which after God is created in Righteousness, and true Holiness: such as the
Saints are by spiritual Renovation, such was man at first by Creation, viz.
Righteous and Holy; so much also is hinted in the word [renewed] v. 23. And be
renewed in the spirit of your mind: Implying that man had such a frame of
Spirit once. He was created after God in Righteousness and Holiness of truth,
that Image of God which is in some measure, renewed or restored in the Saints;
see also Col. 3.10. Those spiritual endowments, wherein a man comes nearest to
God, that it appears God is his pattern, (as to be Righteous, Holy. Be ye holy,
for I am holy, says the Lord) these must needs be most properly Gods Image,
this is to be made partakers of the Divine Nature, or of a God-like Nature,
(though Gods Essence, and Attributes are incommunicable) to have those
qualifications, which are the fairest representation of Gods perfections, which
can be seen and found in any Creature.

By the way, what a luster is here put upon Holiness, to commend it to us? Gods
Image principally consists in this; would you be like God? Be holy, as he is
holy. Though you cannot be as holy as he is, with an [as] of equallity; you
may, and ought to be holy as he is holy, with an [as] of Similitude, and the
more holy, the more God-like. No wonder, that the Saints are called the
excellent ones in the Earth, Psa. 16.3.

But what prodigious wickedness is it for any to scoff at Holiness? He that
mocketh the poor, reproacheth his Maker: How much more he that scoffs at
purity? What a Diabolical disposition is that, which cannot but express an
Antipathy, and Indignation against Holiness? surely they are very ill affected
toward their Prince, that cannot endure to see his Picture, but will disgrace
and throw dirt upon it.

2. Another Question here is, whether the Image of God in Adam was natural, or
supernatural?

Ans. Here the Sociniaus take away the subject of the Question, as we
understand it; They understand no more by the Image of God, than that dominion
man had over the Inferior Creatures; denying, that Adam had any such thing as
Original Righteousness, holding that he was created in a middle state without
any moral rectitude, or righteousness, which should more incline him to good,
than evil. So some of the Popish Schoolmen would have man created, in paris
Naturalibus, meaning without Grace, Holiness, or Righteousness; but the
Scripture has determined otherwise, God made man upright.

And that Righteousness or uprightness concreated with (him, though if we take
an Estimate of it, from what man is now since his fall, it is to be called
supernatural, as being quite above Man's Nature now corrupted, by Sin, and not
to be attained to by the power of Nature,) Man is restored to it only by
supernatural grace; yet considering man in his primitive state, as he came
first out of Gods hand, it was Natural to him; Not as following from his very
Nature, Essence, or Faculties, Physico modo, nor as an essential part or
property of man, naturally considered; nor only as perfecting, or adorning
Man's Nature, as Bellarmine grants it may in this respect be termed Natural.
But as not above the Condition of Man's Nature at first, though it be above
corrupt Nature; yet it was not supra naturam integram, above Man's Nature as at
first. Nay it was conditio Moralis Naturae illi debita. It was a moral
endowment or perfection some way due to man, considering the end for which he
was made. Not due by way of Merit, but of condecency, or congruity to Gods
wisdom and goodness (as some express it) As the Natural Faculties of
understanding and will were due to him, if God would have any reasonable
Service from him. And if God had not conferred on man at first this moral
Rectitude of mind, and will, together with his being (without which man was not
fitted to acknowledge, serve, obey, and honor his Creator) he must needs have
missed of his End, for which he made man a reasonable creature, and not a
bruit; so this work of his had not been very good. The Creation of man little
to his praise, if he was, made to serve God, and not furnished with sufficient
abilities to serve him. Suppose man created at first without Original
Righteousness, and do you not thereby impute folly to his Maker? Is not this to
impeach the Wisdom and Holiness of God? Yea, how could the Psalmist so much
admire what the Lord had done for man at first, making him a little lower than
the Angels, Psalm. 8.5. when if he was made without true wisdom and
understanding, he was little better than the beasts that perish, Psalm. 49.20.
And let it be considered whether the want of holiness and righteousness in a
Creature capable thereof, but not sinful; and consequently whether to suppose
man created without the same, be not to make God the Author of Sin. Vacuitas
Justitiae Originalis malum quoddam est, privatio Scil. summi boni. Number igitur
panae vel culpae? Si paenae: cujus peccati? Si Culpae: cujus personae These.
Salmur. de. stat. Adam. ante laps. Sect. 22. p. 195. vide etiam Sect 21. So let
it be considered, whether to deny that man at first had Original righteousness,
be not to suppose Natural concupiscence (which is now in every one contrary
thereto) to be from God and Nature, understand pure Nature) and therefore good
in it self, not sinful, carnal, inordinate, concupiscence, or that propension
in men to things forbidden is natural indeed, speaking of Man's Nature, as it
is corrupted by the Fall; yet it was not natural speaking of Man's Nature, as
it was at first before he fell. Though as he had a body, he was inclined to
things of sense, yet the Sensitive appetite was in perfect subjection to the
higher powers of his Soul had he attended to hold the same in subjection. It
was his Sin to suffer the sensitive appetite to rebel and rule in him. But had
there been any such thing as inordinate, concupiscence or Rebellion of the
sensitive appetite against reason, in Man's pure Nature as it came from God,
this supposed, there would be a necessity of holding with the Papists, that the
Motions of the same were not Sin, any more than hunger and thirst; otherwise we
should make God the Author of Sin.

Again, attend to this Argument, to prove that Adam was created with Original
Righteousness. Either Adam was created righteous, or unrighteous, or in a middle
state betwixt righteous and unrighteous, one of these you must hold. But
certainly he was not created unrighteous; for that were again to make God the
Author of Sin. That would be to say, God made man unrighteous, contrary to
plain Scripture, and to the common sentence of all that are right in their
senses, neither could he be in a state of Indifferency betwixt righteous and
unrighteous; because man a reasonable creature was bound to be righteous, as
soon as ever he had a being. And the least deflection in this Nature from the
Rule of righteousness, would be unrighteousness in him. It is impossible to
conceive that man should be in medio negationis here, neither righteous, nor
unrighteous. And further, if we suppose man set in such a state by God, still
this foul and horrid consequence would follow, that God was no more the cause
of Man's holiness and happiness had he stood, than of his sin and misery, when
he fell: That he should no more have owned any praise and thanks to his Maker,
had he chosen and persisted in the way of righteousness; than he can justly
charge God with his sin and perdition.

But thus I hope it sufficiently appears, that Adam had Original Righteousness
concreated with him, and connatural to him. This Original Righteousness was
then Natural, as opposed to Supernatural. It was not above the Condition of
Man's Nature then, but requisite for the state, wherein he was, and the end for
which he was made. Again, this Original righteousness in Adam was Natural in
another respect, as opposed to what is merely personal. (as Original Corruption
is Natural.) It should have been derived and conveyed with his Nature to his
Posterity; had he kept it. Holiness and righteousness is not Natural to the
Saints, that have God's Image in some measure restored. It is supernatural to
us now, that we cannot convey it to our Children. But it was Natural to Adam,
at first, and and so, that had he not lost it, it should have been propagated
to his posterity, as now the Corruption of his Nature is propagated.

Ah! How is man changed from what he was at first? How are we sunk in our kind?
Man was upright at first, but now miserably depraved, he that was little lower
than the Angels by Creation, by his own degeneration is become like the beasts
that perish. Of all our losses the loss of Gods Image; this, this is the
greatest. A loss ever to be lamented. The Crown is fallen from our heads, woe
unto us, that we have sinned.

Sect. 2. PROP. II. The Great and Glorious God being Man's Creator, it follows
by necessary and undeniable consequence, that he is the absolute proprietor,
owner, and disposer of this his Creature, Man's Sovereign Lord.
IT is he that has made us, and his we are, Psalm. 100.3. As there is a twofold
reading of the words. In the Margin it is (...) ipsi, vel ipsius; though in the
Text it is (...) non. He is the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end of
all things. All things made by him, and for him, Prove. 16.4. The Lord has made
all things for himself, (...)
ad responsum suum, as some render it. All his Creatures are to be as Servants
at his beck, ready to answer to his call to do whatever he appoints, or
commands. We having received our beings from him, and moving, and having our
beings still in him, therefore surely we owe to him, Omne quod sumus, and omne
quod possumus, all we are, have, and can do, and ought ever to be at his
dispose, and at his Command. An Independent creature is a thing most abhorrent
from reason, the greatest Monster that can be conceived, or thought of.

Sect. 3. PROP. III. God having made Man a reasonable Creature, endued with his
own Image (as was showed before) not only capable of knowing, but of yielding
Obedience to the Will and Law of his Maker, Moral Obedience immediately becomes
due, from such a Creature to his Maker.
AN Obligation to obey our Creator, is a Natural resultancy from our Condition,
as we are Creatures. He that gave being to us, has undoubted Authority to give
Laws to us. He that said what we should Be, to him it certainly belongs to
say what we should Do.

While Man is Gods Creature, it is impossible that he should not owe all
possible Subjection and Obedience unto God his Maker. Est ordo immutabilis, ut
creaturae Deo obtemperent.
He must first cease to be a Creature, or God cease to be his rightful and
supreme Governor, before this Obligation to obey God can cease. Though
Creatures may forfeit their beings, God can never forfeit, or pass away his
Right in his creatures. It Is impossible that God should leave the rational
creature at liberty, to take his own swing, to live as without Law. It is
impossible that God should resign up his right to any creature to rule (as in
his stead) without being at all accountable to him; he cannot cease to govern
the world: for thus he should deny himself, and give away his Glory to others.

Now what should we think of such Divinity as this? Mar. of Mod. Div. p. 154.
That Believers are not concerned with, nor obliged by the Law of God, as
delivered by God Creator, but only as delivered and confirmed by Christ, or God
in Christ, our Redeemer; That they are no more to look, at the Moral Law as in
the hands of God-Creator, or as in the hands of Moses; but only as in the hands
of Christ, to receive the ten Commandments only, as they are the Law of Christ.

I cannot but look upon such Doctrine as very dangerous, tending to subvert the
very foundation of true Piety and Religion. I take that to be very sound
(Assemb. Confess. of Faith, c. 19. Sect. 5.) The Moral Law does for ever bind
all, as well justified persons, as others, to the obedience thereof; and that
not only in regard of the matter contained in it, but also of the Authority of
God the Creator, who gave it.

Yet I grant, we are to receive the Law not only as delivered by the Creator,
or as delivered by him immediately without a Redeemer; neither are we to
receive it from Christ, the Redeemer only, as excluding the Authority of the
Creator.

True it is, We are under no Law here, but what is the Law of Christ, as being
(jure Redemptionis) the Universal King. (As Learned Mr. Baxter) The Law of
Christ is, First, The Law of Nature-redeemed in his hand. Secondly, His
peculiar super-added remedying Law. The former is now part of the precepts of
Christ, and binds us to perfection, necessitate praecepti; though not medii,
in regard of the pardoning promise. Yet this does not take away all Authority
from God, as if the Law was quite taken out of the Creator's hand, when it was
put into the hand of Christ. We read Joh. 5.22. The Father judges no man, but
has committed all judgment unto the Son. And yet in 1 Pet. 1.17. The Father
judges without respect of persons, according to every man's work. Though he
judges not executively, so as Christ does, who shall pronounce the Sentence in
an audible manner; yet he judges Authoritatively, in, and with, and by Christ.
The Father is not stripped of his right, and Authority of judging, by
committing judgment to the Son. That is not the meaning of [The Father judges
no man:] but that he judges not himself alone without the Son, but with, and
by the Son; so though the Law be in the hand of the Redeemer, yet it is not
thereby quite taken out of the Creators hand; It is not the Son only, that
rules and governs by his Love; but the Father in, and by him. And let it be
considered, whether the damned are not so under the Law of God-Creator, that
all their hatred of God, and blasphemy against him, is sin? And when Christ
shall have delivered up the Kingdom to the Father, whether the Saints in Heaven
shall not be under the Law of God Creator? so that if they should not continue
to obey perfectly, they should sin. And whether never till men come into the
other world, they come under this Law of their Creator, or were they not under
it before?

That the Law of God as Creator should not oblige all men, as they are his
Creatures, is a wonderful strange Paradox to me. If Gods Commands, as they are
his Commands, do not constitute and determine Man's duty, and lay a necessary
tie upon man to Obedience, then God has lost his Authority over man (this is
plain) or man is advanced above the condition of a creature. But do not the
holy Angels obey the Commands of God, as the Commands of their Creator (Psalm.
103.20.) and shall we think man is exempted from Obedience in that respect? Has
man a privilege here above the Angels in Heaven? And what will be their duty
to Eternity, to love, praise, serve, and worship God, and observe his pleasure,
as being their Creator; can this be a sin, and weakness in believers; we read
John 5.23. That all men should honor the Son even as they honor the Father:
But they that hold the Law of God binded them, not as it is Gods Law, but only
as it is the Law of Christ, would seem to honor him, not as the Father, but
above the Father. And of whom does the Apostle James speak, Jam. 4.12. There is
one Lawgiver, who is able to save, and to destroy: Is it not the same with
^im, that said, Do not commit Adultery, that said, Do not kill, Jam. 2.11. The
same with him that ^ave the Law in Mount Sinai, where if you understand Christ,
as God, you necessarily include the ^ather. If you understand Christ, as
Mediator, then you suppose the Law given in Mount Sinai, to be given from the
hand of Christ, as Mediator.

Now grant this, that the Laws and Commands of God are immediately constitutive
of man's duty, or Obligatory, even because, or as they are the Laws and Commands
of God, (and grant this you must, or you quite overthrow the course of Nature,
utterly confound the order of beings, make the creature independent, and sui
juris, Lord of it self, you deny Gods Dominion and Authority, and thereby race
the foundation of all Religion, and cannot glorify him, as God, but rather
deny him to be God.) But, I say, granting the commands of God, his Laws
certainly binding to his creatures, even because they are his, and then
(methinks) the dispute [whether the Law of God oblige, as given by Moses] may
be waved, we should agree in this (sure) that the Law of God, howsoever, or by
whomsoever, promulged, and declared, is binding to his creatures. And therefore
if the Decalogue, or ten Commandments given to Moses, and by him immediately to
the Jews, be declarative of the Commanding will of God, as a Copy and
transcript of the Law o^ Nature, that standing Law of perpetual right,
comprehending the duty which God requires of man^ as man; it is for us, and
all the men in the world, t^ look into it, to observe it, as well as it was for
the Jews. It is the Duty of all men, who are Gods creatures, and his subjects,
to use all possible means o^ coming acquainted with the will of God their
Sovereign Lord. And so far as the Writings of Mose^ and the Prophets, do reveal
and declare the wi^^ of God concerning us, what he requires of us and all men,
as well as of the Jews; so far w^ are concerned with what they wrote, as well
as the Jews.

And whatever the writer whom I have had here last to deal with, says of the
Law-binding believers, only in the hand of Christ; yet he clearly confutes and
contradicts himself in several passages, cited with approbation out of many
sound Divines. I shall take notice of two or three. Marrow p. 11.
Perfect and perpetual Obedience was due from man unto God, though God has
made no promise to man (concurring with Dr. Reynolds) That Man being Gods
Creature ( N. B.) by the Law of Creation he owed all obedience and subjection
to God his Creator, which is all that I plead for. Again, he cites Dr. Bolton,
That the Moral Law was given of God to be a true and eternal Rule of
righteousness for all men of all Nations, and at all times. p. 153.
Again he cites the same Author, p. 155.
together with Mr. Perkins, saying, The ten Commandments being the substance of
the Law of Nature Engraven in the heart of man in innocence; and the express
Idaea or representation of Gods own Image, even a beam of his own holiness,
they were to have been a Rule of life (N. B.) both to Adam and his posterity,
though they had never been the Covenant of works.

Now if by the Law of Creation man owes all Obedience to God, and God has
given the Moral Law to be an Eternal rule of Righteousness, which should have
been a rule to Adam and his posterity (as they were Gods Creatures) though
there had never been a Covenant of works; what follows, but that the Moral Law
is binding to believers, as they are Creatures, and this is the standing Law of
their Creator, though it is also further binding to us, as confirmed by Christ,
and in the hand of Christ.

And thus that distinction of a Threefold Law, viz. [The Law of Works, the Law
of Faith, and the Law of Christ,] as he explains, and applies it, may appear to
be very weak and unprofitable; yea, unsafe; though he lays so great stress
upon it, as to tell us, That so far forth as any man comes short of the true
knowledge of this threefold Law, so far he comes short both of the true
knowledge of God, and of himself.

But, 1. One would think, that the Law of Faith (to speak properly) should be
the Law of Christ; yet he distinguishes between the Law of Faith, and the Law
of Christ.

2. The Apostle distinguishes betwixt the Law of Works and of Faith, Romans
3.27. but never betwixt the Law of Faith, and the Law of Christ.

3. I think the common distinction of a Covenant of works, and of Grace; or as
others express it, The old original Law, and the new Remedying Law, much
clearer, and to better purpose.

4. His opposing the Moral Law, as in the hand of God-Creator to the same Law
as in the hand of Christ, and holding that believers are only bound by the Law,
as delivered by Christ, is intolerable. It is granted, that we are not under
the Law, only as delivered by the Creator, not under the Law of Nature, as
merely created, or as given at first to man in innocence, but he opposes those
as contraries, which ought to be conjoined. As if we could not be bound by the
Law, both as it is the Law of our Creator, and as it is the Law of our
Redeemer; but are free from it in the former respect, if bound in the latter:
This seems intolerable. For so it follows,

1. That Believers are not redeemed unto God by his blood (as Rev. 5.9.) but
rather redeemed from him, not to owe that subjection to him, which they did
before.

2. That through the redemption of Christ, they are advanced above the
Condition of Creatures. For by the Law of Creation, as Creatures, they are
bound to obey the Law of their Creator. But certainly Christians in being
redeemed by Christ, do not cease to be creatures. I say you do not cease to be
creatures, when you become Christians, nor does God lose the Right he had in
you before, to require Obedience from you; but he has now a further right in
you. The old Obligation by your creation is not taken off, but still in force,
when this new Obligation, by your Redemption is further added, and laid on you.

3. According to what this writer lays down, it is the privilege of
believers, not to have any after Sins pardoned, and remitted as to the guilt of
everlasting punishment; but only as to the prevention, or removal of some
temporal chastisements. They are under no Law, but the Law of Christ; and
Christ's Law threatens no other penalty than Fatherly chastisement. Page
154.1^9, 200.
That [if need be] you shall be as sure of Temporal correction, as an
Unbeliever of Eternal damnation. And to be corrected if need be, is not so much
a penalty, as a mercy. I am sure, the contrary is sometimes threatened, as a
sore Judgment, [Why should ye be smitten any more? I wi l not punish your
daughters when they commit Whoredom. Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him
alone.] But however a believer must not conceit, p. 202.
that till his Sin be pardoned, he is liable to be condemned for it. So the
matter is brought to this Issue, that for the Sins which a man commits after he
believes, he has no need of pardon, nor can be (with understanding) pray for
the pardon of his sins, not only in that more famous sense, that we use the
word [pardon] in: But even in the lowest sense, wherein the word is ever used.
He has no need of pardon to free him from Condemnation, because no sin can
make him liable to Condemnation. Again, he has no need of pardon, to free him
from Temporal chastisements; because it is not threatened, but when there is
need for it; and when there is need for it, a sanctified cross has more of
mercy in it, than an unsanctified Comfort, where a person is not by any Law
liable to any punishment, such a person (sure) has no need of pardon.

But I should think that believers as they are creatures, are bound to obey God
in all things, and that Christ came not to take off the obligation to duty and
obedience, but to take off the obligation to wrath and punishment. That their
sins are properly sins, as against Gods Law, and deserve punishment, deserve
hell in their own Nature, as well as the Sins of others. Only they have this
relief by the new Covenaant, they shall not be condemned for them.

Thus much of the third Propoposition, viz. Man being a reasonable Creature, he
owes Moral Obedience to his Maker. Now it follows.

Sect. 4. PROP. IV. Therefore God rules and governs man after another manner,
than inanimate things, and brutes, are governed. His Kingdom rules over all.
Natural Agents are ruled by his power and providence. But man he rules also a
moral Agent, by Precepts, Promises and Threatenings.
ANd if the Lord had not designed in the Making of Man, thus to govern him,
then might not one use the Psalmist expostulation (though in another sense)
wherefore have thou made all men in vain? wherefore has he endowed us with a
Faculty of discerning right and wrong, good and evil? And why has he given us
a capacity to look backwards to reflect on our ways and actions, a power of
setting up a Iudgment-seat, within our selves, to call our selves to account?
And why has he given us a capacity of looking forwards, to consider with our
selves whether our present course tends, why has God placed such a power as
Conscience in men, Conscience, I say to check curb, and restrain us from Sin,
to spur on and quicken us to duty, to accuse, or excuse, to Prophecy good or
evil, to give Sentence for us or against us; and why has God planted such
affections in men, as Desire, Hope, Fear, all respecting some absent, remote,
future good or evil! How is it, we can dread evil threatened, or have any hope
of good promised, if it were not the will of God, that we should be governed,
not a^ Bruets, that are led on to things by a mere Natural instinct, without
reason; but as rational Mora^ Agents, by such Moral means, as Laws, Promises
Threatenings.

And here again I cannot but enter my dissent, and declare my dislike of what
that writer, with whom I had to do before, lays down so confidently, that a
true believer is to obey; Marrow p. 209.
yea, does obey, without fear of Hell, or hope of Heaven. And so far forth as
they eschew evil, p. 172. 176, 177, 178.
or do good, for fear of Hell, or hope of Heaven, their obedience is but
slavish.

Now I shall not say much here concerning the fear of punishment, because I
shall have occasion to speak of that afterward.

And to prevent misunderstanding, I shall lay this down, That a true believer
does not obey God merely out of such self-respect, as for fear of punishment,
or hope of reward. No, he has a true love to God, and a love to the Law of
God. As the Apostle says, Romans 7.22. I delight in the Law of God after the
inward man.

But as he has a love to God, and obeys in love, so he has, and ought to
have a love to himself too. And although gracious Souls in some holy raptures,
have the Love of God so far prevailing in them sometimes, that for the present
they would seem quite to forget themselves, and to set aside all respect to
their own Souls, as it was with holy Paul there, where (had it been possible)
he could have wished himself accursed from Christ -- Romans 9. Yet it is not thus
with them ordinarily, neither yet may we say, that so far as Christians look,
and aim at their own happiness, so far they degenerate and act like Slaves, not
like themselves. All love of the reward is not a mercenary love: but when men
only respect the reward. Now a Child of God has a love to his work, as well as
to his reward, Gods commands are not grievous to him; but indeed this is
grievous to him, that he is no more conformed to Gods commands. And were it put
to such an ones choice, he would not desire any liberty to transgress them, but
would have more power to keep them. But what a gross mistake is this, because
men are not only to obey for fear of punishment, or only in hope of reward, to
conclude thus, therefore they are not at all to regard either what God has
threatened, or promised.

And if it were so, that men were not to obey with any respect to what God has
promised them.

1. How great a part of Scripture is given to us in vain, but all Scripture is
profitable -- to make the Man of God perfect, and to perfect the Godly man,
that he may be thoroughly furnished to every good work. Shall we think that God
has made so many promises in vain. That those great and precious promises in
Scripture are but Ciphers, and stand for nothing?

2. Is it not horrible pride for men to think themselves more perfect than
innocent Adam was, to conceit that they yield obedience unto God upon more pure
and spiritual grounds and motives? This is evident, that the Law given to
innocent Adam, was backed with a threatening, and a promise. And so it was his
duty both to dread the threatening, and to have regard unto Gods promise.

3. I can boldly say, that to have no thoughts (...) our own everlasting
happiness, not to look at tha^ is such a strange piece of self denial as the
Lord (...) where allows; much less does he command, o^ commend. Is it not
contrary to such Scriptures (...) these, Seek first the Kingdom of God, work
out you^ own Salvation -- Lay hold on eternal life? It is (...) carnal
Self-love, and self-seeking, which is men's s^ and shame too. As what can be
more absurd, an^ irrational, than for men to care for the body, b^^ neglect
their precious immortal Souls, to labou^ for the meat that perishes, and not
to be at any pain^ for that meat which indureth to everlasting life? T^ be
wholly taken up with things present, things be^ low, that are but temporal, not
regarding the thing above, which are eternal.

4. And if true Believers are supposed to be o^ such a strain, as to obey
without eying the promise^ reward at all; then it follows they are better tha^
Moses, the man of God. For he had respect unt^^ Recompense of the reward. Heb.
11.26. And ye^ you are to observe, he is their commended for so doing. And this
is made an expression, and effect o^ his Faith, v. 24, etc. Yea, this would
seem to b^ an out-doing of the blessed Apostles. We run an^ strive to obtain a
Crown incorruptible, 1 Cor. 9.25. we look at the things which are not seen, 2
Cor. 8.14. (...). These are the marks we aim at. Yea^ which I even tremble to
mention, this would mak^ Christians better than their Masters, would set the
Servant above their Lord. Do we not read o^ Jesus Christ, that for the joy that
was set before him he endured the Cross, Heb. 12.2.

5. How glorious a pretense soever men may have for their setting aside all
respect to the promised reward; yet it is really and indeed a sinful
sleighting, and contempt of Gods Grace, Bounty, Goodness; so the Sadduces had
their fair pretense, that God was to be loved for himself, which is a certain
truth: but (mark it) this is not the whole truth. For God is also to be loved,
served, for what he is, and would be to those that love him. We ought to love
God, not only because he is infinitely worthy of love in himself (in regard of
his own infinite excellencies, and perfections) but also because he is so
loving, and gracious to, and such a bountiful rewarder of them that seek him,
and love him. Where is the Mouth that dare deny, that God is even in this
respect also to be loved, served, honored of his creatures?

6. Though men will sometimes talk at random, without weighing or considering
what they say; yet the truth is, it is impossible that one right in his wits
should not have a desire of his own everlasting happiness. And certainly it is
very great rashness for any to make that a (...), a distinguishing sign of a
true believer, which would rather prove one not a man, or reasonable. The
Service which God requires of us, is reasonable Service; but it is
unreasonable, when God has revealed and propounded to us inconceiveable,
everlasting happiness, that we should not believe it; or that believing there
is such happiness to be had, and obtained, we should not most earnest desire,
and indefatigably pursue and press after the attainment of it. And what can
sound more strangely than this, that it is not a Christians duty, but rather
his Infirmity by patient continuance in well-doing to seek for Glory, Honor,
Immortality, Eternal life?

7. What is the happiness of Heaven, but the most full and glorious enjoyment
of God? That to obey in hopes of Heaven, is indeed to obey and serve God for
himself. Are we to seek after the enjoyment of God in every Duty and Ordinance,
as when we pray, hear, etc. Is his presence to be sought on earth, and not much
more to be desired in Heaven? Much more I could say here, but I hope this may
satisfy: All is not Gold (Sirs) that glisters; nor all those Notions Gospel
Doctrines, which many pretend to be so.

What is here said, I hope may help (through Gods blessing) to deliver some
poor doubting trembling Soul out of one great snare, that some, who mean well,
yet being unwary lay before them.

Certainly, I should tremble to think of making this the Touchstone to try my
own, or your Faith, by, scil. [Doing what the Lord requires, without any hope
of Heaven, or eying of the promised reward.] You may follow virtue (holiness)
and virtutis amore, and mercedis amore, both from a love to virtue it self, and
to the reward of virtue, so much I think is employed in Romans 6.22. Ye have your
fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life. And to follow after
holiness, as that without which we cannot come to the enjoyment of God, and
happiness, is to attend to the Scripture direction, Heb. 12.14. and therefore
cannot but be safe. If holiness be the way to happiness, by Gods appointment,
and happiness the end of holiness; then certainly we ought to follow after
holiness, not only for its own sake; but also for the tendency it has to true
and everlasting happiness. And though there be a truth in it, that virtue and
goodness is a reward of it self, and to be loved for it self; yet it is not
true, that where this is, a man desires no other reward, looks no further, Heb.
10.35. Cast not away your confidence, which has great recompense of reward.
This Consideration should move us to continue in faith and holiness, that there
is great recompense of reward; That to quicken and encourage our selves, on in
a way of holiness and obedience, by the thoughts of what the Lord has
graciously promised thereunto, this is (you may clearly see) according to the
Scripture; and the other way, wherein men pre^end to do all out of pure love to
God, without any ^egard to their own happiness, is a being religious and holy
above the Scriptures. But certainly they overshoot themselves, that pretend to
an higher way, a more spiritual and excellent way, than that which is shown us
in the Scriptures.

Sect. 5. PROP. V. It is evident and undeniable, that sundry (...) Gods Laws
(comprised in that which (...) called the Law of Nature) are of Mora^ perpetual
right, and equity, commandin^ what cannot but be man's duty, requirin^ such
things, as have an unchangeable goodness and comeliness in them. Forbiddin^ such
things as have an unchangeable horri^ness and odiousness in them. Some thing
are good, and some things are evil in their own Nature, and therefore are so
perpetually, invariably, necessarily; that it is impossible that a righteous
and holy God should not command the one, and prohibit, an^ condemn the other:
Such precepts (as some well observe) depend on Gods righteou^ Nature, rather
than on his Sovereign Will
THerefore upon the Question, whether God a^ any time has dispensed with the
Law o^ Nature, or with any purely Moral precept, I should incline to those that
say (notwithstanding those Instances that are brought seemingly contrary) The
Law of Nature was not dispensed with, no chang^ in the Law; only their was a
change in the matt^ or Object, and that immutatio materiae made b^ God not as
Legislator, but as Dominus, as Proprietor, or Owner. That when God commanded
Abraham to Sacrifice his Son, he might do it from the absolute Dominion he has
over all men's lives; and if Abraham had Sacrificed him upon God's command, it
had not been Murder. but the highest Act of Obedience. The Israelites taking
away the Egyptians Gods; when God had altered the property of them, (as Lord
and Judge proceeding against the Egyptians in justice, as against Delinquents
that had forfeited the same, and making over (by his free donation) the right
and title to them to his people; I say the Israelites possessing themselves of
what was no longer the Egyptians, but indeed their own, by Gods disposition
and free gift) this cannot be accounted Theft. And may it not be thought, that
according to an Equitable construction of the Law: Such Instances, or Cases as
these, were no more prohibited, than works of Piety, Mercy, and Necessity are
forbidden (in the Law) on the Sabbath ^ay (compare Exodus 20.10. with Matthew.
12.5.7.)

Thus the Matter, or Object, about which the Law was conversant, may be
changed, when yet ^he Law it self, is not changed, but as obliging as ^ver.

Again, some commands there are in the Moral Law, the very matter whereof is
unalterable (the foundation never ceasing or changing) as some In^ance in the
Three first Commandments of the De^alogue. Thus it is Man's duty for ever to
fear, love, ^elieve, serve, honor God. Thus it cannot but ^e horrid
wickedness, for any one to blaspheme, or ^ontemn God; to doubt of his truth,
power, etc. ^ow this is of Immutable Equity, that what is Morally good, and
cannot be otherwise, should be commanded, and the reasonable creature bound to
it that what is morally evil, and cannot but be evil should be forbidden. And
to affirm that God may cease to command, or approve of what is so
intrinsecally, necessarily, everlastingly evil, is to set u^ his absolute
Sovereignty in such wise, as to just^^ out his infinite goodness, purity, and
holiness; tha^ is, to set his glorious Attributes at variance on^ with another.
But certainly the Judges, and Rector of all the world can do, and command
nothing but that which is right. Plutarch had rather me^ should have said,
Nullum esse Plutarchum, qua^ malum esse Plutarchum; That there was no suc^ man
as Plutarch, than that Plutarch was a wicke^ man; and so he held it worse, De
Deo male sentir^ quam Deum esse negare, to entertain any wicke^ opinion of God,
than to deny God. This is (n^ doubt) a very monstrous conception of him, to
imagine that he should not will, and command virtue and holiness; or that he
should not utterly disallow of vice and wickedness. It Is part of the Charg^
brought in against the wicked, Psalm. 20.21. Tho^ thoughtest that I was
altogether such a one as the self: But (says the holy one) I will reprove rhe^
for it, Well therefore let this be laid down, as a^ everlasting truth, that
there are some things which God can no more deny to be Man's duty, than h^ can
deny himself. There are some precepts of u^alterable force, and obligation,
never to be repeale^ abrogated, or dispensed with. The Lord can n^ more
dispense with men's acknowledging, loving reverenceing Him, that these should
not be the duty, and the contrary sinful and damnable in the own Nature, than
he can deny his own Divine goodness, and infinite perfection; so he can no more
approve of what is evil in it self, than he can do evil, or be evil; he can no
more approve of men's lying and deceit, than he can lie, or deceive men Himself.
He can no more approve of Atheism, Profaneness, Hypocrisy, Pride, Envy,
Malice, Covetousness, and the like; than he can change, or cease to be what he
is, an holy God of purer eyes than to behold iniquity.

Sect. 6. PROP. VI. To the unchangeable Law of Nature, God (our Sovereign Lord)
may add what Positive Laws his Divine Wisdom judges meet, whereby to try his
Creatures Obedience. And there is no positive precept of His, given to Man, but
Man is immediately bound to obey it; even by the Law of Nature, which requires
this in general, that we obey God in all things.
THe Law of Nature (as we have heard) in special enjoins what is good, or
forbids what evil in their own Natures.

Positive Laws are conversant about things neither ^ood, nor evil in
themselves, things of a middle nature; which yet become Good when commanded
(...) God, and evil when forbidden. Because it is ^od to obey God in all
things; but very evil and sinful to disobey God in any thing. The goodness o^
God would never command any thing evil in it self. And what the Lord commands
though indifferen^^ before, yet being commanded (in regard of hi^ Sovereign
Authority and Dominion) it becomes a necessary duty. As what he forbids,
though lawful enough before; yet being under a Divine prohibition, it becomes
sinful. Of such purely positive precepts we find this one given to Man in the
state of Innocence for the trial of his Obedience Scil. this [of not eating of
the tree of Knowledge o^ Good and Evil,] whether any more are to be found that
were purely positive, and given to Man in tha^ state, I know not.

And amongst all those Commands which ou^ Lord Jesus Christ has laid on his
followers in the Gospel; some Inquisitive men have been able t^ discover no
more than two (to wit, concerning Baptism and the Lords Supper) that are merely
positiv^ institutions. And these two appointed not only t^ try our Obedience;
but for other high ends, an^ gracious purposes, to be Seals of the new and
bette^ Covenant, and special helps and furtherances unt^ Christians (through
Gods blessing upon the due u^^ of them) as means of promoting both their Grace
and Comfort, and a strong engagement on them t^ Duty and Obedience. So that
they are not mee^ Arbitrary impositions, showing only the will and Authority of
him that appointed them, but also pledg^ of his Grace and favor toward us;
and are ou^ great privileges: As the promise in the New C^venant speaks forth
the wonderful Grace of God, (...) does his instituting and annexing these
Seals, (...) strengthen our faith in what he has there promised.

As for the Law of the Sabbath, there has been enough written, to prove, that
it is not a purely positive precept. When God has given us all our time, to
Question, whether a considerable part of it be not due to his special solemn
Worship, and Service, seems very unreasonable. Nay, it would seem to be but
Occasional, viz. in regard of man's present state in this world, the
necessities of the outward man, that call him to earthly employments, that he
has an allowance to follow these ^ecular employments, when if it were not for
this, his whole time would be due to God's more immediate Service; as the
Saints in Heaven keep a perpetual, everlasting Sabbath.

Now what is noted here, may show us the wonderful goodness of God toward us
in Gospel times, in freeing us from the Law of Ceremonies, from such a
multitude of burdensome impositions as the Jews were under. How easy is the
yoke of Christ, compared with the yoke which was upon the necks of the Jews? So
we may see here the reasonableness of the Christian-Religion. The Lord requires
nothing of us in the Gospel, but what is indeed good in ^t self, or at least
good for us; imposes nothing on us in the Gospel, merely to show his absolute
Authority over us: Even the Positive Institutions of the Gospel are such as
speak his gracious conde^cension toward us.

Again by the way, we may here reflect upon the Tyranicalness of the man of
Sin. What a multitude of strange impositions has he brought into the Chritian
Church, as envying Souls that liberty we have under the Gospel.

Sect. 7. PROP. VII. God our supreme and absolute Lord and Governor, to
manifest his Divine Goodness and benignity, together with his Sovereign
Authority and Greatness, was please^ to his Law, given to Man at first, to ad^
and annex a gracious promise of Future lif^ and happiness.
HEre ( Genesis 2.17.) is employed upon condition of his obedience, the promise of
eternal life, whereof the Tree of life was a sign, Genesis 3.22. Ainsworth.

To encourage men to yield free Obedience, Go^ bound himself by his free
promise to reward it.

Here take notice of Gods gracious Nature. H^ would not rule man with rigor,
but made the yok^ of his Subjection as easy as man could possibly expect, or
reasonably desire. Besides the strong Engagements that lie on the Creature to
obey God the Lord was pleased to give man all encouragemen^ that might be.

There is a Question, what life was promise^ unto Adam?

Whether to live still in statuquo, to be continue^ upon earth in that happy
state, wherein he wa^ created, or whether after some time he should no^ have
been advanced, and translated to a more glorious estate in Heaven?

Now some very worthy and Judicious Divines (I confess) are for the former,
denying the latter. And others I know look upon the Decision of the Question
(which way soever it be decided) as an unprofitable speculation; but I cannot
so slight it, because if it appears to be an Heavenly happiness, that was
promised, it further sets off the Grace of God toward man, which must needs
have laid him under a greater obligation to obedience, and thankfulness; so it
does the more set forth and aggravate man's sin and ingratitude, whom such
cords did not, could not bind. Besides that it may be of some service against
Socinians, who would have Adam subject to death by Creation, not by Sin.

Now to the Question.

1. Those Divines that hold a life of happiness upon earth, only promised unto
Adam, do grant the promise of life to be employed in the threatening of death:
Now if the threatening [dying thou shall dye] did not only intend a privation of
the life which Adam then enjoyed, but everlasting punishment in hell; Then it
seems to follow, that the life here implicitly promised is not to be
understood only of the continuation of that life, which Adam lived in Paradise,
but of everlasting life in Heaven.

2. That eternal life which the Scripture opposes unto death (the wages of
sin) Romans 6.23. there is none that questioneth, but it is a life of happiness
in Heaven.

3. Was not the Earthly Paradise a type of Heaven, and the tree of life there,
a type of Eternal life in Heaven ( Rev. 2.7.) Had Adam the type of Heaven, and
was it not to teach him what to expect, to look after a life of happiness in
Heaven? unless you will say, Those were Types only since they were lost, not
while they were, and might have bee^ enjoyed.

4. Was not innocent Adam as capable of Heaven^ happiness, as believers are
now? And would it not be strange, that though he had kept his Integrity and
innocence, yet he should never have enjoyed the chiefest Happiness and
perfection, he was made for, was created capable of.

5. If Adam had continued innocent and obedient, may we not suppose, he should
have had as many Children descending from him, as have sprung from him since
the fall, who might have stood and been happy with him: Now whether seems
more improbable, to suppose a translation of men up to Heaven (Successive, and
suo ordine) by degrees and in their order, as it should please God to translate
them; or to suppose their continuance all together upon earth, where if we
should suppose all the Generations of men that have been since Adam already
existent here together; Answ to Bishop of Rochest. Letter. p. 86, 87.
it is hard to conceive how the Earth should bear them all, though Dr. J. T.
would hence conclude that Dissolution of Soul and Body should have been, if
Adam had not sinned, which I can see no Reason to admit. Yet (as he says) the
world would have been too little to have entertained those myriads of men, which
must in all reason have been born from that blessing of [Increase and Multiply]
which was given at the first Creation, and to have confined Mankind to the
pleasures of this world in case he had not fallen, would have been a punishment
of his innocence.

Another Question here, whether it was of Grace, or of Justice, for God to
promise Adam life, and happiness (as he did) upon his continued Obedience?

Answ. Of strict Justice it could not be; because he might have promised less,
yea, might have promised nothing at all de futuro, without any Injustice. (...)
readily grant it inconsistent with Justice to punish, or afflict an innocent
Creature eternally. Yet Justice does not require that the service, or obedience
of a Creature be rewarded with everlasting, that is, infinite happiness. True
it is, if Adam had tarried as he ought, doing well, he should have been
accepted, continuing his Obedience, he might have expected the complacential
Love of God his Creator toward him, so long as the Lord was pleased to
continue him in being; that while he was innocent, God would look on him as
such, not hold him guilty. but it sounds strangely to say, God cannot make a
rational innocent Creature, and annihilate, or unmake it again, if he pleases.
To hold that he is bound to perpetuate the being and happiness of such a
Creature, till (by some misdemeanour) it comes to forfeit its being and
happiness; is to deny that God has such power over his Creatures, as the
Potter has over the Clay, as Mr. Ball of the Covenant, p. 273. withdraw that
voluntary Covenant, and who doubts not but that had the Creature kept his
Innocence a Thousand years, God was free to have annihilated him.

Indeed God cannot be injurious to his Creatures, because of his Essential
Justice, which is instead of a Law to him, and is himself, neither can he be
beholden or properly indebted to his Creature; because of that infinite
plenitude of perfection in himself, (...) which all the Creatures in the world,
can make (...) Addition; as also because of his right and propri^^ in his
Dominion and Authority over his Creature^ Thus Innocent Adam could never by the
most pe^fect, unsinning Obedience have merited in a stri^sence; that is, in the
way of commutative Justic^ the continuation of his life and happiness. Whi^ he
did only pay the debt, which was indispensib^^ owing to his Maker, it is most
unreasonable (...) think, he could this way oblige God to him, mak^ that God to
whom all was due, his Debto^ Again, as (if Adam would merit) what he gave (...)
God ought to have rationem indebiti, it must not (...) due before (which was
otherwise, he could give (...) God no more than his own) so it should also ha^
rationem Lucri, be some way profitable unto him at whose hands he would merit.
But who ha^ given to him, and it shall be recompensed to hi^ again, Romans 11.35.

Again, we may cast in this as Overplus, here wa^ no proportion betwixt the
work and the promise^ reward, what proportion betwixt a finite Creature's
giving up its self to the Service of its Make^ and God's giving back himself to
be everlastingl^ enjoyed? What proportion betwixt a Creature^ obedience,
continued for a time, while he was in (...) probation-state, and God's
remunerating it wit^ happiness, Coccei de faed. p. 35.
beyond time, even to Eternity. Turpis Error est, promissiones denisi
proportione officii. It was congruou^ to the Divine goodness indeed to promise
so much to an innocent, and obedient Creature, it was (...) promise worthy of
him that made it, though his Creatures Obedience could not be properly worthy
of that which was promised.

So I conclude it was not of strict Justice, or natural Equity, but of grace
and bounty, that God promised to Man's finite Service, and Obedience already
due, a future, everlasting, infinite reward.

Now if innocent Adam could not properly be said to merit the promised reward,
though he had performed unsinning obedience, how absurd is it to talk of the
Saints meriting ex condigno by their imperfect Obedience, Exodus 20.6. Showing
mercy to them that love me, and keep my Commandments. All that God does for
such, is of his mercy. Yet I do not deny, but that if Adam had obeyed
perfectly, it had been rewardable at the Bar of Gods distributive, legal
Justice; as the obedience of the Faithful is rewardable at the Bar of Grace;
but neither in the way of commutative Justice.

Sect. 8. PROP. VIII. Gods promising to man life and happiness, upon Condition
of perfect Obedience [Do this and live] was his part of the Covenant with Adam.
GOd in his Covenant holds forth the way how his Creatures might be sure of his
favor, and attain to the Fruition of him. And thus God's Covenants are not
like Men's Covenants (as one notes) Homines enim de mutuis beneficiis: Deus
(...) suis foedus facit. Men that Covenant one with another, aim each at their
own advantage; but God (...) Covenanting with his Creatures, does not expe^ any
benefit, or advantage by them, but does it t^ show how willing, and ready he is
to communicat^ his benefits to them.

Sect. 9. PROP. IX. Innocent Adam as he was bound, so he could not but accept
of the Terms, or Condition, upon which God proposed, and promised the
perpetuating of his happiness. And thus Man consenting to Gods terms, God and
Man were formally and actually in Covenant.
A Mutual Engagement of parties, is all that is essential to a Covenant. This
is the difference betwixt a Promise, and a Covenant.

A Promise is that which binds one party singly; A Covenant is that wherein
both parties are mutually bound.

To the Covenant betwixt God and Man, it was no way necessary, that Man should
indent with God, or make his own Terms; No, he was bound to accept of such
Terms as it should please his Lord and Maker to set down, and offer; whatsoever
God required of him, would bind him immediately, as a Law, without his consent,
or liking of it. And before Man could have the liberty of making his own Terms
with God, he must first satisfy and take off that Obligation on him, as a
Creature to obey his Creator in all things, which Obligation a Creature can no
way possibly take off, or be freed from, while he is a Creature.

Thus in the Covenant betwixt God and Man, God is to propose the Terms, and Man
is obliged to accept of them, as proposed by Him.

In the first Covenant, the Covenant of Works, where the Condition was perfect
Obedience; the Lord required no more, than what was due from Man, though God
had not promised any further favor thereupon.

Now the condescension being wholly on Gods part, in offering to enter into
Covenant, and the benefit accrueing, or likely to accrue, being solely unto
Man, it could not be just or reasonable, that Man should withhold or deny his
consent.

Thus Man at first was taken into Covenant with God, Faederatio constat
stipulatione and promissione.
Man engaging to obey God in all things; and God engaging amply to reward his
Obedience, in an endless life, and felicity. We should not once doubt (as the
Socinians) whether Adam was under any Law but this, [of not eating of the tree
of Knowledge of Good and Evil,] The Moral Law being written in his heart, and
that in so fair a Character, that he needed not to have delivered it to him
either by word, or in writing.

Sect. 10. PROP. X. Though the agreement and consent of both the parties was
enough to constitute the Covenant; yet for the further solemnity an^
ratification of it, the Lord was pleased t^ appoint a visible sign or signs, as
a seal annexed to it.
AS Paradise and the tree of life, was to confirm the promise, that if Man
obeyed, he should live and be happy; and some would have the tre^ of Knowledge
to confirm the threatening, that if he sinned he should dye. The former to
signify the reward of Obedience, the latter to signify the punishment of
disobedience. The one a Sacrament of life, the other of death. But this which
is said concerning the tree of Knowledge is more Questionable. Fuit Arbor haec
non proprie Sacramentum, Coccei de Foed. c. 2. Sect. 19. p. 20.
neque vitae neque mortis, sed signum dominii and subjectionis, and materia
explorationis.

The Signs and Sacraments, God has used to annex unto his Covenant, have been
such as represented the blessings promised in the Covenant. This is evident in
the Covenant of Grace. And that Pradice was to signify Heaven; the tree of
life to signify eternal life to Adam, seems very plain; Heaven being called
by the name of Paradise in Scripture. And the tree of life so called (as some
good Expositors have noted) because it was to be a ^ymbole and Memorial to Adam
as often as he tasted, or ^eheld it, of his receiving his life and happiness from
God, that he had not these in: and of himself. His eating of this tree was to
be an Acknowledgement of his dependence upon God for life and hap^iness, and,
Se non propria virtute, sed Dei unius ^eneficio, vivere, and perpetuo victurum,
si obe^iret, etc.

Here by the way, observe, God thought not ^acraments useless to man in
innocence. Yet some amongst us think themselves above Sacraments, and
Ordinances, those means and helps God has appointed under the Covenant of
Grace.

Sect. 11. PROP. XI. Being agreed about the thing, there can be no great Reason
why we should contend much about the Name.
THis first Covenant is called Foedus Amicitiae, a league of Friendship, by way
of contra^istinction to the new Covenant, which is Foedus ^econciliationis
inter inimicos; The first Covenant was made with Man in the state of Innocence,
when God and Man were Good-friends.

Again, it is called Foedus operum, the Covenant of works, sinless works, and
obedience-every-way-perfect, being the Condition, the thing stipulated, and
required in this Covenant.

Again, it is called Foedus Naturae, the Coven^ of Nature; as the following
Covenant, Foedus G^tiae, the Covenant of Grace. Yet there seems^ be some doubt,
whether it be so rightly called (...) Covenant of Nature: Though the Law of
Nat^ bound man to obey his Creator in all things, whi^ was the same that the
Covenant of works bou^ him to, that we must say the preceptive part of t^
Covenant was natural; yet I dare not say, that t^ Promissory part of the
Covenant was so, that G^ was bound to promise all he did upon Man's Ob^dience,
or bound to promise any thing at all; say, it was not juris Naturalis, that God
shou^ make such a promise, I dare not say, that there w^ an intrinsecal,
natural, necessary connection betwi^ a Creature's Obedience, and everlasting
life a^ happiness; so that God had not been just, if (su^posing) Adam's
Obedience continued a 1000 year^ he had not thereupon confirmed his Creature
in^ state of endless happiness. If it had been injusti^^ to have denied such a
reward to Man's Obedien^^ so that Man might have concluded upon it from (...)
common natural principle (as that God cann^ be unjust) then there was no need
to have pr^mised it, or to have entered into Covenant about it would God have
made a Covenant to do that, which his Essential justice bound him to? If he was
no^ bound in Justice, so to reward his Creature's Obedience, then it was his
free goodness (or Grace) t^ promise, and Covenant to do it.

Now let it be considered, if it was thus of God^ Grace, and condescension to
enter into the first Covenant with Man, if it was doing more than he was bound
to, then I say, let it be considered, whether it be fair for any to censure
him, as if he had ^een over-rigorous, had he dealt with any according ^o the
terms of that Covenant, or that God could ^ot have held men to it.

Sect. 12. PROP. XII. God by Covenanting with Man, had a further right in him,
a new title to his Service, and Obedience. First, he might have commanded man
jure creationis, as he was his Creature, had this Covenant never been; Again,
he may command him jure foederis, vel foederationis, upon Account of the
Covenant betwixt him, and his Creature.
THis new right was accumulative unto, not destructive, or exclusive of the
Former right. Man's being obliged de novo to obey God, by what ^he Lord
promised in the Covenant to do further for ^im; cannot take off, or cancel that
Obligation on ^im from his Creation, from what God had done ^or him already.

That I may say here (without contradicting the Apostle) The Law ( i. e. the
Law of Nature) which was in force (at least, in order of Nature) before ^he
Covenant, the Covenant did not disanull it. My meaning is, Gods condescension
in Covenanting with Man, did not derogate, or take off any thing from his
Authority as Lawgiver, Gods Law (...) still binding as a Law, as the Law of
our Maker otherwise it would follow, that Man being take (...) into Covenant
with God, he could not properly (...) guilty of disobedience, no disobedience
but is repugnancy against the Law, or will of a Superio^ whom we ought to obey.
But in case the Law o^ God should lose its Authority and obliging force, (...)
Man in Covenant with God, then a Man doing contrary to his Law, could only be
charged with tre^chery, falseness, breach of Covenant, or ingratit (...) (as
one equal may have occasion sometimes to charg^ another, who has no Authority
to command, or ca^^ the other to account.) Where there is no Law, the^ is no
Transgression.

But Adam's offense, his breach of Covenant, w^ properly disobedience, Romans
5.19. That the Cov^nant made with Adam, did not take from the for^ of the Law,
which he was under, as a Creature; b^^ indeed added this further aggravation to
his sin, th^^ it was not barely the transgression of Gods Law, b^^ the
violation of his Covenant: as it was an affron^ing of Gods Sovereignty and
justice, (a dreadf^^ thing indeed) so it was a notorious flighting of God
wonderful condescending love and goodness, shamef^ ingratitude, to be abhorred.

But this is a principle which it concerns us all (...) be very clear in, that
God in entering into Covena^ with Man, did not set aside his Authority, did no^
cease to be man's Sovereign; no verily, while M^ is his Creature, God cannot
cease to be his rightf^ Governor, or the Law of God cease to bind M^ to
obedience, even because it is the Law of (...) Maker.

Sect. 13. PROP. XIII. As a clear and certain evidence, that God in Covenanting
with man, did not lay down his Sovereignty and Authority over him; He annexeth
to his Law or Covenant the just threatening of a dreadful penalty, Death in case
of disobedience. In the day thou eatest, (sinnest) dying thou shall dye.
AS God has first of all jus praecipiendi, a right of Commanding. So if his
Commandments are not in every thing obeyed; he has thereupon jus puniendi, a
right of punishing. Where due Obedience is denied to a Superior, much more
where it is denied unto him, who is the Supreme, God over all, punishment is
justly exacted, and righteously inflicted by him.

Now there is a Question, when God threatened death to Adam, if he disobeyed,
what kind of death it was, whether the same kind of death was threatened under
the Covenant of works, as under the Covenant of Grace?

Ans. I suppose the same kind of death threatened under both Covenants. If the
same kind of life and happiness was promised under the Covenant of Works, as is
promised under the Covenant of Grace, we may in reason conclude the same kind
of death, and punishment was threatened in both Covenants. But the former would
seem true as w^ heard before.

Again, what think we? Do any suffer, as a^ judged to death by the Covenant of
Works? If w^ suppose any sinners in the world proceeded against and punished,
as Violaters of that Covenant, w^ read no where in Scripture of two different
Hel^^ prepared, one for those that are guilty of breaking the first; the other,
for such as are guilty of breaking the succeeding Covenant. We find the sam^
Vengeance threatened to them that know not God and to them that obey not the
Gospel, 2 Thessalonians. 1.^ The Sinners of Sodom suffer the Vengeance of Ete^nal
fire, Jude v. 7. the same vengeance which (...) threatened to Sinners in Sion. I
say the same punishment for kind ( i. e. Hell Torments) though not the same
degree of punishment; but if a different d^gree of punishment should make a new
kind of punishment, it seems to follow, that, since of tho^ that sin against
the Covenant of Grace, some (...) more hainously than others, more openly and
desp^rately than others contemn it, and therefore shall (...) thought worthy of
much sorer punishment ( He^ 10.29.) so there should be diverse kinds of
punishments; for the breakers of the Covenant of Grace which I know none that
will assert.

Again, I suppose it will not be denied, but beli^vers are delivered by
Christ's satisfaction from the condemnation of hell. As I suppose, it will not
b^ affirmed; that Christ satisfied for the penalty threa^ned in the Covenant of
Grace, properly as the^ threatened; but for that which was threatened an^ due to
sinners under the Covenant of works. An^ so will it not follow, that the
condemnation of He^ was threatened, and due to sinners under the Covenant of
works.

Only, one thing seems to make against this, viz. Supposing a temporal death
or separation of Soul and Body, to be one thing included in the threatening
here, [dying thou shall dye] it would seem that the resurrection of the body is
a proper fruit of Christ's death, and resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.21, 22. And if
there was to have been no resurrection of the body, had not Christ dyed and
risen again, then it would follow, no such punishment could be threatened at
first, as is now threatened to unbelievers, who are to be punished everlastingly
both in Body and Soul.

Ans. The forementioned Text seems to speak of the resurrection unto life, the
resurrection of those that are Christ's, v. 23.

Again, though Christ Mediator, be the cause of the resurrection of all (both
just, and unjust) at the last day; yet it follows not, that there had been no
resurrection, if Christ had not been given a Mediator; we know what he says,
Joh. 5.22.27. All ^udgment is now committed to the Son of Man, yet surely
sinners should have been judged, though he had not been incarnate, had not been
the Son of Man. Qui resurrectionem impiorum Christi merito attribuunt, ignorant
hominem pro peccato and temporalem, and aeternam mortem in toto supposito
perferendam debere, Coccei de Foed. c. 2. Sect. 2. p. 46.

Another Question, whether the truly righteous man is awed with the threatening.

Ans. That the righteous ought to be awed with divine threatenings is very plain
from hence, that righteous Adam was to make use of this threatening, to keep him
from sin. And the best of Saints while upon earth, are short of innocent Adam,
many degrees below him, being renewed and sanctified b^^ in part, having but
(as it were) a first draugh^ of Gods Image, which Adam had complete; But,

1. Some will say, Believers have no need of the threatenings to keep them from
sin.

Ans. What are they greater than our Father^ Adam, more perfect than Adam was
in the state (...) integrity. He had need of the threatening, and hi^ not
attending to it so as he should have done, was cause of his, and our sin and
ruin.

Again, why are there so many threatenings in the Word, directed to believers in
special, if they a^ not to be heeded, and if such have no need of them surely,
the spirit of wisdom speaks not in vai^ Therefore said the Wisdom of God,
Luke 11.4^ what the written word says, that the wisdom of Go^ says; so God in
his infinite wisdom, thought^ needful to awe his people with threatenings, an^
not only to feed them with promises. Then can be any other than folly for any
to think, his threa^nings needless, Romans 8.13. If you live after the fle^^ you
shall dye. This is spoken to those, of whom h^ says v. 15. Ye have not
received the spirit of bonda^ again to fear, Heb. 10.38. The just shall live
(...) Faith, (...), but if he draw back, (...) soul shall have no pleasure in
him. Parallel to Ez. 18.2^ Heb. 10.26, 27. If we sin wilfully after that (...)
have received the Knowledge of the truth, etc.

Not that these Texts will prove the Apostasy (...) Saints; but only that upon
supposition of their t^tal final Apostasy, they should perish even as other If
you can suppose a Saint to fall away finally, I (...) suppose that Saint to
fall into condemnation, and to perish everlastingly; and such threatenings are
to caution them, as means appointed and blessed by God, to prevent their total
Apostasy, and consequently to prevent their Perdition too. And as one observes
well, there is a threatening virtually contained in every promise. As when it is
said [Whosoever endures to the end shall be saved.] It implies that whosoever
does not endure, and hold out to the end, shall not be saved. But further some
will say, Adam it is true might fall from the Condition of the Covenant of
works, and so fall under the curse and threatening, but believers cannot fall
from the condition of the Covenant of Grace, that they need not fear the
threatening, seeing they cannot fall under it.

Ans. That a Believers standing is surer than Adam's was, it is not because he
is stronger in himself, for he is much weaker than Adam was; but because he
has those props and supports, which Adam had not in the state of his
integrity. There is Gods immutable purpose and promise to uphold him, Christ's
undertaking, and interceeding for him, etc. But as the Lord has promised, the
Elect shall persevere; so he has provided means in order to it, (as was hinted
before;) so he keeps his people close to himself, not only by working love,
but also by putting an holy fear in their hearts, Jer. 32.40. I will put my
fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. This may be set forth
by a comparison which Mr. Rutherford has, thus, As a Child in his Fathers Arms
threatened to be cast over a sharp rock into the Sea, may fear, and cry out for
fear, and yet believe such is his Fathers love and compassion, that he will not
throw hi^ into the Sea, that the threatening is not intended t^ be executed; but
to cause him to take faster hold and clasp his Arms about his Father's Neck.

2. But here some again will say, to be awed with threatening, is slavish; this
is from a Spirit of Bondage and contrary to our acting out of love.

Ans. We may see the contrary in Adam; H^^ was to fear the threatening, yet was
not of a slavis^ spirit, notwithstanding the threatening against dis^ obedience,
yet he obeyed in love too, while in the state of Integrity. So the Apostle
says, 2 Cor. 5.14. The love of Christ constrains us, and in the sam^ Chapter
v. 11. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men. To Act only
from fear, i^ the property of a slavish spirit indeed; but so o^ the other
hand, to cast off all fear is the property o^ a vain, secure, and wanton
spirit. But observe, we do not think it enough for men to act in Religion only
from fear; you never hear us say (as the Papists) that Attrition, as distinct
and separate from contrition; that sorrow for sin merely for fear of hell,
without any sorrow for it, as an offense against God, (if accompanied with
confession to a Priest) is enough for ones Salvation.

If that Text of the Apostle John 1 Epist. 4.18. be objected.

Ans. Love here is not perfect, as it will be in the world to come.

2. By Fear (which love is said to cast out) the Apostle means not a
reverential fear of God, which quickens unto duty, and helps to compose the
heart aright in duty; but a slavish fear. Or,

3. He means not the Fear of God, and of his wrath or displeasure, but the
fear of man, of man's frowns, of man's rage. Indeed this has torment in it;
and greatly disquieteth, and disanimateth men, in whom it prevails.

Briefly to dispatch this point, are we allowed to ^ear any thing? If any thing
in the world be to be ^eared, surely then Gods wrath is to be feared, ^oming
into the state of the damned, to be for ever ^eprived of, shut out of God's
presence, and laid under his burning Indignation for ever, is a thing (...) be
feared: not that believers should conclude posi^ively, and absolutely of their
falling into condem^ation (for there is no condemnation to them that are ^n
Christ Jesus) but upon supposition; thus, If I ^^ve after the flesh, I shall
dye. If I should draw back from Christ, it would be to my own perdition. If I
should wickedly depart from God, forsake him, he would cast me off for ever.
Pray Sirs think of it: Has not God told us so much in his Word, and are we not
bound to believe the truth of what he there ^eclares? And if we are bound to
believe these things to be true, are we not exceedingly to dread ^east they
should be verified in us; how should we ^read that course and state which we
are sure to ^erish in, unless the Word of God prove false! And thus to apply
the threatenings of the Word, is a good way to prevent the evil threatened. Such
an Application of Divine threatenings tends to promote an holy care, which is a
necessary duty, rather than to beget slavish fear, that Soul- misery. They that
quite cast off these reins, which the Lord has laid on us, to curb, and keep
under our Corruptions, I should ^ook for no other than that they would soon wax
wanton, and kick against God.

One consideration more, I cannot pass by; (...) vine threatenings show us what
Sin deserves, (...) the greater sense we have of our danger by (...) the more
we shall prize redemption by Christ. T^ more we understand the desert of sin,
the more (...) shall come to know our Obligation unto God, (...) pardoning
grace. They are clearly mistaken the^fore, that would not have believers hear
the thre^nings of the Word. Surely they do not understa^ themselves, that think
this is a way to damp the Child-like love, the Gospel requires, rather a d^
consideration of Gods threatenings against Sin a Sinners, would help to raise a
believers love God, and Jesus Christ, and blow it into a great flame, Mary
loved much, because she had m^^ forgiven. And the more we see what sin deserv^
the better we shall know what it is to have forgiven, and the more we shall
apprehend, w^ an Obligation lies on us, to love God t^^ pardons our
iniquities, and to love Je^ Christ, a dear Redeemer, upon whose acco^ they are
forgiven.

Sect. 14. PROP. XIV. From the foregoing Proposition (to look no further) it
evidently appears, the Covenant betwixt God and Man was not inter pares, sed
impares, not betwixt equals, or persons equally un-engaged to each other, and
so that it was not a pure Covenant, but mixed, partaking also of the Nature of
a Law.
HEre was a Law with a threatening, as a Covenant with a promise. And the matter
being betwixt God and his Creature, betwixt the most absolute Sovereign, and
his Subject, it could not be otherwise, unless the Majesty of Heaven and Earth
would have laid aside his Crown and Scepter, except he had given away his
Supremacy, and ceased to be the Rector of the world.

Sect. 15. PROP. XV. This Covenant therefore which God made with Man at first,
was the perfect, Adaequate Rule, both of all which God then required of Man,
and of what Man might expect from God. It contained the Rule of Man's
Obedience, and the ground of his hopes.
THe Stipulation or condition required, was no less than the whole duty of Man,
obedience to the will of God in all things.

The promise of life (belonging to this Covenant) included in it all good,
agreeable to Man's present state, and everlasting happiness, at the end of
Man's probation-state.

The death threatened upon Man's disobedience, we see explained in part, what it
was in those evils, which sin has brought upon the world of Mankind, manifold
miseries, in this life we feel; we all naturally fear, and look for temporal
death, (The living know that they shall dye.) And which is inconceivably more,
sin subjected to all miserie^ Spiritual, and Eternal.

Thus the first Covenant determined both of Man's duty, and of his Condition,
as to felicity, or misery, as to life or death, according as he performed, on
failed in his duty. If he was Obedient in all things, then he was sure of life
and happiness, if he failed in any the least point of Obedience required, then
he could look for nothing, but to have the threatened penalty inflicted. Some
find, as soon as Adam had sinned, he was afraid, and hid himself, Genesis 3.20.

But whether the threatening of the first Covenant did properly belong to it, as
a Covenant, or a Law, I leave to others to determine.

Sect. 16. PROP. XVI. In this first Covenant there was neither need of, nor
place for a Mediator.
FIrst I say, there was no need of a Mediator here, at the making of this
Covenant, God and Man were very good friends.

Again, there was no place for a Mediator here. The condition required in this
Covenant being perfect, personal obedience. If Adam obeyed not in his own
person, this Covenant is broken, irreparably broken. And thus it becomes
impossible that ever Man should attain to life and happiness by this Covenant,
if once he fails in the least point of duty required of him, upon the least
breach of Gods Law, he is immediately sentenced to death by the Tenor of this
Covenant. And there is no thought of escaping condemnation in this case, except
it please the Lord (of his infinite grace and mercy) to come upon new terms
with Man.

There is a Question whether Christ be not a Mediator on the behalf of the
Angels that have kept their station.

Some suppose Christ a Mediator to them, thoug^ not for reconciliation (that
they acknowledge were needless, because there was never any breach betwixt God
and them.) Yet for confirmation; bu^ there is no probability, that I can see in
that opinion* It appears altogether improbable for the like reason to that now
mentioned, upon which it will b^ granted, Christ is not to them a Mediator of
reconciliation; viz. they need not such a Mediator. For if after such a trial
as the Lord would please to make of the obedience of Angels and Men, they were
to be confirmed in their happiness and obedience for the future, to make good
the promissory part of the Covenant of works, then there was no need of a
Mediator for confirmation either of Angels or Me^ under the Covenant of works.
His Creatures confirmation in a state of happiness (upon their goo^ carriage in
their probation-state) was Gods part o^ the Covenant, what he promised, and
would have effected; no need of any to undertake for Gods part of the Covenant.

That this was Gods part of the Covenant is clea^ The creature was not to
expect confirmation in happiness, without performing the condition on h^^ part,
that is, carrying obediently, and as a creatu^^ ought to do in all respects
toward its Maker in vi^ or in its state of probation. And this condition b^^
ing performed, God would never have failed t^ perform the promise on his part;
that is, to confir^ such a creature in patria.

And to say otherwise, that a Mediator was necess^ry for confirmation under the
first Covenant, without whom, Man, or Angel could not persist in Obedience, is
interpretatively to deny, that they we^ created upright, and with sufficient
Abilities to have kept upright; which is to suppose their fall was from a
debility of Nature, from a want of some inward principle and help necessary to
their standing, and not from the ill use of the liberty of their own wills. And
this consequently denies the goodness of God, which he vouchsafed to these his
creatures in special; denies what he did for them, making them after his own
Image, and casts the fault upon God, that they fell necessarily, not being
created with ability to stand.

Again, suppose Christ a Mediator for confirmation, to undertake on the
Creatures behalf, to help them to perform the condition; then it would seem
strange, that Man was not confirmed. What? was Christ wanting, negligent, or
unfaithful in his office? Surely no, therefore that Man was not confirmed, it
seems sufficient to clear it, that Christ was not intended of God to be a
Mediator for confirmation to Angels, and Men, under the Covenant of works.

Sect. 17. PROP. XVII. God was under no tie, or Bond, to make Man immutably
holy.
IT is very unjust, and unreasonable, for any to complain, that God did not set
Man in such a state at first, from whence he could not fall. That Man was
endued with such power at first whereby he might have stood, and had stood (had
he not been shamefully wanting to himself) this is, (no doub^ sufficient to
vindicate the honor of his Make^ though he gave him not that special grace,
from which one cannot fall.

It is too much for a creature to be immutable (...) its own Nature. To suppose
such a thing of Man, (...) far as this property and perfection reaches, is
(...) make Man equal unto God. Therefore though Man was created holy, yet was
he mutable, his holine such as might be lost.

Now when God made Man upright, and then p^ him upon the trial, whether he
would stand upright he did no injury to man at all, Quum Deus homine permisit
sibi, injuriam non fecit homini, sed gloria^ suam asseruit sibi. Jun. Surely
the Lord had do^ his part, enduing Man's soul with knowledge, right^ousness,
and holiness, engaging Man to himself b^ so many favors, as by so many strong
Band which his goodness and bounty had laid on him promulging, and making known
his Law, the R^^ Man ought to live and walk by, backing the sam^ with a
dreadful commination, to warn and deter hi^ from sin, and with a very ample
promise to exci^ and encourage him to obedience. Thus no more means were
wanting, or denied to Man's preserv^tion; what could Man reasonably have
desired th^^ God would do more for him; If now man misca^rieth, the fault
cannot be in his Maker, but in himself. Had he used that power, and those means
give him, as he might, and ought, he had been for eve^ happy. God did not deny
him any thing, which was congruous to his present state. I know not ho^ we can
say that there was Gratiae substractio^ [nam, ut vellet constanter non peccare,
Nulla^ Adamus acceperat, Lapsus desertionis, non desertio lapsus causa fuit.
ut autem posset non peccare si vellet vel nulla indiguit, cum peccandiratio in
volendo sita sit, vel ea non substract a potuit peccare. These. Salmur. de laps.
Ada. Sect. 25. p. 203.] God did not take from Man any ability to perform
obedience, given him in his Creation; but only gave not in (as he was not
bound) a new supply of further grace.

Certainly, it was no hard or unjust thing, that God should try his Creatures
obedience, who stood obliged to him by such wonderful ties and engagements: and
if God would try Man's obedience, Man is supposed not to be in a state of
Impeccability: It would not have become the Divine Wisdom to give Man a Law
purely for trial whether he would obey, if it was impossible for him to disobey.

Thus indeed while Man was Viator, in a probation state, we must grant, he had
a power to obey God in all things, and it was also possible for him to disobey.

Yet observe this, there was no evil inclination, no propensity to sin in Man
before, as is found in him now since his fall. That pronity, which is now in us
all, to what is forbidden, is certainly sinful: that should we suppose any
inordinate concupiscence natural to Man at his first Creation, it would infer,
that he came sinful out of Gods hand. This would be to impute folly to our
Maker, and make God the Author of Sin. In the regenerate there is a lusting of
the Flesh against the Spirit; but in Adam there was no such lustings, and
contrary inclinations (while he kept his innocence and integrity) But his
natural inclinations were in an absolute subjection to right Reason, and the
Rule which God his Creato^ had given him. As Aquinas says well, the Act o^ the
concupiscible faculty is only so far to be accounted natural, as it is subject
to right reason, when it rebels and transgresses the bounds of reason, the^ it
is contra naturam, and Vulnus naturae. So thi^ was not in Man before he sinned.
That natural in clination in Man to eat of the fruits in Paradise was
Physically or Naturally Good, morally indiffe^rent, neither good nor evil. It
was in his Nature as convenient to it, being to live on the fruits of the
Earth. But when God by a special positive La^ had restrained Man's Natural
liberty, forbiddin^ him to eat of such a fruit, what might have bee^ desired
Naturally, and innocently before, cannon be desired now without sin; because
Man is boun^ to subject all his desires to the Divine Will an^ Law. That he had
a natural power of eating the forbidden fruit, was no way culpable, or sinful
but that he exerted this power against God Law.

Now though a good account may be given, wh^^ Man was not created immutably
good, he being a^ first in Statu viatoris, non comprehensoris, a pr^bationer
for Heaven. And therefore his obedien^^ being to be tried; (though he had power
to pe^form sinless obedience, yet it was also possible for hi^ to disobey) yet
it will not follow, as ( Corvin^ would have it) that glorified Saints, who are
con^prehensors, because they are fully confirmed in good cannot properly be
said to obey, or to be under an^ Law. [Vt vero liberum arbitrium tollatur ab
eo, c^lex praescribitur, etiam fieri non potest, quia ubi ill^ non est legi
locus non est, Quare etiam sequitur, i^ qui jam in bono sunt confirmati,
proprie Legem ferri non posse, neque item eos Deo obedire proprie dici posse,
etc. Corvin. Censur. Anat. c. 6 Sect. 1. p. 101.]

This is strange Divinity sure; though it would seem needless that such as are
confirmed in a state of ^appiness and perfection, should be under any Law
^^eerly for trial. (It would be Actum agere, to give them such a Law, which the
wisdom of God would not do.) Yet it will not follow, that therefore they are
lawless. Ergo, inquam, is non vult qui non potest non velle; tu ergo, ne vis
quidem tibi esse been, quia non potes velle tibi esse Male. Nam quae voluntatis
eadem est obedientiae ratio, etc. Camero Defens. c. 12. p. 205.
And if they cannot ^e said properly to obey, (...) why are we directed to
^ray, that the will of God ^ay be done on earth, as (...) is in Heaven? why are
^^ey made patterns of obedience to us? But sup^ose that Angel, who was sent
Acts 12. to deliver Peter out of Prison, had refused ( Jonahs like) to go, when
God sent him; would it not have been proper ^isobedience? And what reason can
be given, but that his going upon Gods errand was an Act of Obe^ience?

And this further, Jesus Christ who was anointed ^ith the oil of gladness
above his fellows, to whom ^od gave not the Spirit by measure, was certainly ^s
much confirmed in Good, as any Saint or Angel (...) Heaven can be; yet who can
have a face to deny, ^at he truly obeyed? Obedientia non est necessitatis, ^^d
libertatis. says Corvinus. We say though obe^^ence cannot be both free and
forced, yet it may be ^ee and necessary too. It may be in some respect
^^cessary, and yet most free. Saints and Angels in ^eaven cannot but love God,
they see so much excellency and amiableness in him, for which they m^^^ love
him to eternity; and yet they love him m^^^ freely. As on the contrary, the
Devils sin nece^sarily, can do no other, through that insuperab^^ Malice and
Wickedness which acts them, y^^ they sin freely. According to Corvinus his
way reasoning, the weak, imperfect, obedience of b^lievers, should be more
perfect obedience, and mo^^ worthy to be called obedience, than that of Ange^^
and Spirits of just men made perfect; which sounde^ strangely. As if that
obedience was not most p^^fect, that had most of the will in it. But I for^^ my
self.

Sect. 18. PROP. XVIII. God (as he was not bound to prevent Man fall) had holy,
wise, and good ends permitting him to fall.
THus he takes occasion of manifesting his pu^^tive justice, holiness, and
hatred of sin; as a^ of displaying his rich, and free grace, his wond^^ful
mercy and compassion toward sinners, up Man's breach of the first Covenant. He
bringing a new and better Covenant, God has concluded under sin, that he might
have mercy upon all. (...) the Creation he showed his power, in bringing
so^^^thing. Yea, a world of Beings out of nothing; here manifests his wonderful
goodness, in bringing g^ out of evil; yea, the greatest good out of the great
evil.

Sect. 19. PROP. XIX. The Sin of our first Parents in eating of the forbidden
fruit, how light a matter soever it may seem to many; yet was indeed exceeding
heinous, full of dreadful Aggravations.
THe blasphemy of Pope Julius the third is ever to be abhorred, who said, since
God was so angry with our first Parents, Szeged Spec. Pontif. 75.
propter pomum, for an Apple, he had more cause (being his Vicar) to be angry
propter pavonem for a Peacock.

But that Man brake with God for so small a matter, Quo levius Mandatum eo
gravius peccatum.
it made the sin so much the greater; and the easier it was for him to have
obeyed Gods command, the more inexcusable was his disobedience. That he had
more power than ever Man had since, to have resisted the temptation, his sin
and transgression appears hereby to have been the more wilful. So the dignity
of his state makes his sinful fall the more shameful. As the wonderful favors
God had heaped on him, added the odious stain of ingratitude to his sin of
disobedience. And what a causeless Jealousy and base distrust of God was here,
even of that God, who had been so good and kind toward him; that he despised
Gods counsel, trusting to his own inventions, and shifting for himself. And
what horrible pride, Heaven-dari^ Ambition, in affecting to be as God? wherein
a^peared his wretched discontent at the good con^^tion God had set him in,
over-looking that glor^ and honor the Lord had crowned him with, an^ envying
at the Divine perfection of his Maker, wha^ a notorious contempt was here? a
contempt of h^ Sovereignty and Authority, slighting the prohibiti^^ given him,
a contempt of Gods power and justice slighting the commination; a contempt of
Go^ bounty and goodness, slighting the promised life an^ happiness. And as
Samuel said, Disobedience is (...) the Sin of witchcraft, and as the iniquity
of Idolatry was there not Atheism, Infidellity, Blasphemy, Id^latry here; in
believing, yielding to the Devil, pr^ferring his lying suggestions before the
Word (...) God? Besides sensuallity, indulging his appeti^^ contrary to Gods
command; yea, Murder, an^ the greatest cruelty toward his posterity, doing
wha^ in him lay, to ruin and undo them for ever.

These with many other sins, were contained (...) the first Transgression.

One more I must not let pass un-named, viz. tha^ it was a direct breach of
Covenant. Breach (...) Covenant with God, horrid perfidiousness, n^^ merely the
breach and transgression of Gods Law but also the violation of his Covenant,
and so shameful requital of Gods gracious condescentio^ Had it been an enemy or
a stranger, that had ca^ried it thus, there had been less of wonder and
strang^ness in it; but that a friend, and a confederate should deal so
treacherously with God, may not Heaven and Earth be astonished at this?

This (I say) was a direct breach of Covenant with God, an irreparable breach
of that Covenant. An utter renouncing of it. As it was a breach of that Law,
God had given to be the Test of Man's obedience (and perfect obedience was the
condition of the first Covenant) so it was as an open profession of
disobedience, It was the transgression of that precept which God had given for
the trial of Man's obedience, and so was an absolute denial of subjection, and
renouncing of obedience; as the observance of it had been an open profession of
submission and due obedience. Ball of Meditation. p. 213.214.
and declared renouncing of his Covenant.

I know it is a great Question, how our first Parents could so strangely
overshoot themselves?

But that they did so, is plain, and out of Question. Some Question whether the
sin of pride, or incredulity was first in the fall of our first Parents? But
methinks we must conceive them something declined from God, and their duty,
before they could be guilty of either that pride, or incredulity. So it would
seem that incogitancy, and not retaining God in their thoughts, as they ought
to have done, was the first step to their ruin. That through incogitancy, they
came to be seduced by the Serpent, drawn into error, and incredulity, and so to
an inordinate appetite after the forbidden fruit, and next to eat, which was
the completing Act of their sin.

What need then have we all to look well about us, watch and pray, that we
enter not into Temptation. Give not the water a little passage, least it prove
as a breach of the Sea, that cannot be repaired, that fire which at first one
might stamp out with his foot, that spark which might be put out with a wet
finger, being let alone, does soon become a devouring flame, consuming all
before it.

Sect. 20. PROP. XX. This is the direct and dreadful consequence, the sad and
woeful effect of Man's sin and breach of Covenant, that thence forward he can
lay no claim to the promise, but immediately falls under the curse and
threatening annexed to it.
THe condition of the Covenant of works being nothing less than perfect
obedience, one sinviolates it on man's part, as well as a Thousand. Thus by one
Act of disobedience man quite forfeited all his right and title to all good and
happiness, which he had in present possession, or hoped for in regard of Gods
promise, by one act of disobedience he brought himself under the curse. That
according to the Tenor of this Covenant, after once he had sinned, he could no
more expect any goo^ at Gods hands for ever. And thus by sin man ruined
himself, cast himself out of Gods favor, of a friend made himself an enemy,
became subject to Divine wrath and vengeance, to all the miseries of this life,
to death spiritual, and temporal, and eternal.

Here I may speak something to the Question, How far the Covenant of works is
abrogated?

Ans. Here I fear not to assert, that we are all still bound to what the
Covenant required; that is, to obey perfectly, though we are not bound up to
it; that is, so bound up as to fall under the Sentence of Death unavoidably,
and to have no hope of happiness, if we do not obey perfectly. I say we are ^ot
thus bound up to it; because there is a new Covenant set on foot. But that in
some sense it is still ^n force, we must all grant, as roundly and confidently
as some assert the repealing, and nulling of it.

1. As concerning the preceptive part, what God required of Man in that
Covenant; it was no other than the Law of his Creation. As we are Men, as we
are reasonable creatures, it is our indispensible duty to obey God in all
things. I say by the Law of Creation we are bound to obey God in all things;
and that Law continues to oblige us, so long as we are creatures.

Some tell us believers are freed not only from the condemning, Mar. of Mal.
die. p. 148.
but from the commanding power of the Covenant of works. Now I would ask such,
Is it not every Man's duty still to obey God in all things? If so, then by what
Law? Does the Law of Faith insist upon perfect obedience? Or is not this the
demand of the Law of works? Though we are not bound to keep the Law of God in
all things necessitate medii, as the condition of life, yet we are bound
necessitate praecepti, so that we sin whenever we transgress it in any thing:
And either believers are under the commanding power of the Law, requiring
perfect Obedience, (though Christ has power again, according to his superadded
Law of Grace, to suspend and take off the Penalty) or they do not sin, in not
yielding perfect obedience, and so need no pardon. Where there is no Law, there
is no transgression and where is no transgression, there needs no pa^don. So
Christ should not have procured pardon for the sins of believers, but rather
this privilege of exemption from the strict Obligation of the Law, that what
are sins in others, are no sins in believers. If it be said, the Law requiring
perfect obedience is still in force, but only as it is in the hand of Christ. I
answer, it did not cease to b^ Gods Law, in becoming the Law of Christ.

But thus you must say, the preseptive part of the Covenant of works (being the
Law of Man's Creation) is still in force. It being eternally the bounden duty
of a Creature to obey its Maker in all things.

2. As to the minatory part as it threatened death to every sin, determined and
declared the punishment due to sin and sinners. (And a threatening as (...)
threatening, does no more, does not necessarily predict the event) we must say
this is still in force or deny that sin now deserves legally what Go^ threatened
unto Adam. It is a very gross mistak^ for any to think that the sins of
believers do no^ deserve hell and wrath. The reatus simplex, a du^ness of
punishment to sin, is ever inseparable from sin. And so by the Old Original
Law, that punishment is due to the person of the sinner. Only he^steps in a
Remediant Law, a Law of Grace, tha^ says, if thou art a true believer, if thou
art o^^ that truly repents, the punishment is not to be i^flicted upon thee;
for Christ has satisfied, and h^^ satisfaction God has accepted for thee; But
I pra^ mark it, if the old Original Law be not in force, (...) charge guilt
upon us, we have no need of a discharg^ in, and from the Gospel, what need of a
discharge from that, which no Law can charge us with? so we must say, a
believer has no sins to be pardoned. For a pardon does necessarily and
essentially import a dissolving of the Obligation to punishment. Now there can
be no Obligation to punishment, where the penal Law is no more in force: And
where there can be no Obligation to punishment, there cannot be properly any
dissolving of that Obligation; and so properly there can be no pardon.

Thus you see to what issue the matter is brought, if we should deny the old
Law in force, as threatening death to every sin, scil. consequently we deny that
there can be such a thing as pardon.

3. As to the promissory part of the Covenant of works, or Law of Innocence,
that cannot be said to be abrogated, but only cease, cessante capacitate
subditi, since the fall Man is no capable subject. For a Man to be a sinner,
and yet to be capable of claiming life and happiness by the Law of Innocence,
is indeed a plain contradiction. Such a Law, or Covenant, when once the
condition becomes naturally impossible (as learned Mr. Baxter somewhere notes)
transit in Sententiam, it cease to promise in this case, and instead of that,
passes Sentence upon men. Yet cannot sinners blame God, that righteousness and
life come not this way, as if the failure was in his promise. No, it is in
themselves, their not answering the condition; when Christ (a capable subject)
came, the Law of innocence justified him, and so it would justify us,
supposing we were, and did all, which the Law requires. So much seems to be
employed in that speech of our Savior to one that desired to justify himself,
(saying, what shall I do to inherit Eternal life, whereupon, Christ to give him
enough, refers him to the Law, [This do, (obey perfectly) and thou shall
live.] Luke 10.25.28. not that any man ever did, o^ ever can attain to life and
happiness by the works of the Law. Certainly, the Romanists are quite mistaken
in the scope of our Savior's speech here, who cry out, Hear, O ye Lutherans,
the Lord Christ says not, Creed and vives: sed, fac hoc, Not [believe, and
live] but [do this, and live.] Daring wretches, that to stablish their own
prou^ Opinions, would have Jesus Christ to contradict himself. Rather the
design of our Savior's speech was to convince a man of his own inability, to
save himself. And yet this seems to be employed in it, that if there was any
one in the world, Lex non falso salutem promittit suis cultoribus, si quis
plene observet quicquid. Mandat. Coelo.
every way such as the Law of God requires to be, suppose such an one as is
failing and deficien^ in nothing, and then [Do this, and live] would entitle
him to life and happiness, such an one should attain to happiness without
Christ, or pardoning grace, in as much as he had no need of a pardon. But
seeing it is naturally impossible, that sinners (and we are a^ sinners) should
ever attain to the condition of the Covenant of works, which is full conformity
and perfect Obedience to Gods will, therefore that promise is indeed ceased as
to us.

But to think that Man's sin could abrogate the Covenant, that God had made, is
very unreasonable. As if a man could satisfy and discharge a Bond by
forfeiture. As if a subject by breaking the Law, could make himself lawless. He
may thereby deprive himself of the benefit and protection of the Law, it is
true, but cannot exempt himself from the Duty of Subjection to it. Again, to
think that God would abrogate it, and take Man's failing in his duty, as a
ground of excusing him from his duty, is as unreasonable. Then might one not
have said, Noli ergo imperare, now give up the Government of the world.

Again, to think that Christ would give himself, and improve his interest for
the abrogation of it, would be an unworthy reflection on him. As if in his
office and undertaking, as Mediator, he had not carried equally, indifferently
consulting the Interests of both parties, with the like real tenderness. As if
he had not been as true to his Father's honor, in preserving his right in, and
authority over his creatures, as to his peoples safety; but did too partially
incline to us, though the offending party.

It was enough for the securing of the salvation, and happiness of his redeemed
ones, that he procured a new Law of Grace written in his own blood, [That all
that believe in him should be justified, and saved,] notwithstanding the old
Original Law continued still in force.

Nay, I tell you Christians, this does advance and set forth the free Grace of
God, and exalt the praise and merits of your Redeemer; that for his sake, your
sincere, though weak, imperfect obedience is accepted, from whom yet perfect
Obedience is is as due to God, as from any; and that for his sake your sins are
pardoned, which are as properly sins, and as truly deserve hell and wrath as
the sins of any.

Thus I say, there is no reason to think, the first Original Law is made void
by the after remediant Law. For both may stand in force together; as that
strict Law given to the Commonwealth of the Jews, for putting Transgressors to
death; to which was superadded this Law of Grace, that in such and such cases
the Lawgiver, the Rector did admit of a Commutation, that upon offering a
Beast in Sacrifice, the Transgressor's life should be spared (though forfeited
by the Law) Lev. 5.17, 18. So this Original Law, whosoever stands indebted to
another, shall satisfy his Creditor, or be liable to an arrest, and to be cast
into Prison, remains in force; notwithstanding we suppose such a relieving Law
as this made afterward, That if any person in Debt, shall serve in the Wars,
etc. while they are so employed for the public, they shall be protected from
any arrest. These instances may help to clear the Question I am upon,
especially the former.

Many think, that because the Law of works serves not to the same use and end,
for which it was given to Man in the state of Integrity, therefore it must
needs be abrogated, that we are no more obliged by it. Not considering that the
reason why righteousness and life cannot come by the Law, is not any weakness
in the Law, but our weakness and incapacity to fulfill it. The Law of Ceremonies
indeed cannot justify, because of its weakness. (For it is not possible, that
the blood of Bulls and Goats, should take away sins, Heb. 10.4.) But the Law of
righteousness, which I am speaking of, were it not for Man's weakness, would
justify. Therefore that we cannot be justified by the Law of works now, let us
not lay the fault on the Law, but on our selves.

Truly, I cannot but wonder at some, that would have this a Question of great
difficulty, but of little moment whether the Law of works, given to Adam,
continue in force to all Mankind; methinks it is of very great moment, so that
if we suppose the abrogation of it, we give the Antinomian no little Advantage.
And methinks it is very plain, that it must continue to bind Man (obedience to
God in all things being no more than he is for ever obliged to, as he is a
creature) though for nonperformance of such obedience as that Law requires,
God is not bound to Man by that Law.

I conclude therefore the Law of works is still in force, that none of us can
say, If we obey God sincerely, we pay him all we owe, he requires no more; we
cannot say that our sins do not legally deserve Eternal death; but only that
though the Law of God looks upon us as sinners, and condemns our sins, as well
as the first sin of Adam, yet this we may plead against the Execution of the
sentence, and condemnation of the Law. There is also a new Law of Grace, an Act
of General Indemnity and Oblivion which Christ has procured, which God has
passed, that frees us from the curse and penalty of our sins, if we repent,
believe, obey the Gospel, i.e. if we lay hold on the Grace offered to us, with
an unfeigned desire and resolution to live and be, as this Grace that brings
Salvation teaches us.

Sect. 21. PROP. XXI. When God threatened man, [that in the day sinned, or
disobeyed, he should surely dy^ or dying he should dye,] this will not pro^ the
full execution of the threatening, (...) immediately to attend Man's first
tra^gression; but that Death, and all miseri^ included in it, were immediately
due Law.
THat he should be punishable. Illud [morie^ non significat. Actum moriendi sed
debitu^ As we must not understand the prohibition [T^^ shall not eat] as a
prediction or declaration, touching matter of event. But the meaning (...) thou
may not eat, it shall not be lawful for the so neither are we to understand
the threatening, [(...) the day thou eatest, dying, thou shall dye] as a
p^^diction of what should immediately come to pa^ Nec enim statim mortuus
Adamus (...) sed statim tamen reus mortis factus, Whittak. de Peccat. Orig. p.
39.
(...) morte dignissimus. When Solomon thre^ned Shimei, 1 Kings 2.37. [on the
d^^ thou go out, thou shall surely dye] the meani^^ is, thy life shall be
accounted forfeited.

Though I grant, as soon as Man had sinned, (...) became mortal, and began to
dye, yet the threatni^^ as a threatening, does not foretell certain matter
event; but only declare what punishment was due. And suppose the Death
threatened here, was to have been immediately inflicted, as soon as our first
Parents had sinned, then there had been no natural generation. Then the guilt
and punishment had no way reached his Posterity; because so he should have had
no posterity.

Here you may observe a great difference between (...) threatening and a
promise; he who has a promise made to him, may lay claim to the thing
promised; ^e has a right by virtue of the promise. Men ^ometimes sue upon a
promise, and Justice gives them the thing in kind, or value, the promise being
proved; one is bound to do, as he promises, not ^lwayes to do as he
threatens. There may be ^eason to relax the punishment, that was threatened.

Rector that has power in his Laws to set down and determine what punishment
shall be due to the Transgressors; he has also power above the Law (...) some
cases to respite, or take off the punishment; ^therwise there could be no such
thing as Pardon. No Rector can be said to pardon an offender, but when he
remits the punishment legally due.

Yet I grant, it becomes not the Wisdom of a Go^ernour to relax his Laws
(supposing them good and Just) to remit the penalty lightly, or without ^ood
consideration; for so the Law would soon lose ^s Authority; Men would be
imboldened to trans^ress, the end of Government would not be carried ^n. It is
a clear case, that God the righteous Go^ernour of the world, would not remit
the penalty without a most valuable consideration; as Christ must ^ye in our
stead.

And one thing further must be granted, that sometimes threatenings do not only
declare meritum paen^ in peccante, and jus puniendi in comminante, a dese^^ of
punishment in him that offends, and a right ^^^punishing in him that commands
and threatens but also the irrevocable decree, and purpose of the Rector to
inflict the said punishment. Thus God threa^ned Eli and his house, Ahab and his
house; thus the sin (...) blasphemy against the Holy Ghost is threatened; an^ so
all that continue finally impenitent and unbelie^^ing are threatened: Such
threatenings are not a me^ Sanction of the precept, but a signification, or
Revelation of Gods purpose, showing not only what (...) justly may, but what
peremptorily he will inflict.

Sect. 22. PROP. XXII. The Penalty threatened in the Covenant works, was neither
fully executed (f^^ then all Mankind had been utter^^ ruined) nor absolutely
remitted (f^^ then none were liable to Death a^^ Condemnation by that
Covenant.) b^ relaxed.
THe Penalty taken off in some part from Man general; whence it is, that
sinners, such (...) are under the Covenant of works, have some lin^ments (as it
were) of God's Image, some remai^der, or remembrances of it still, and some
commemercies. And the penalty more fully taken off from believers. And that
upon most wise, and ^eighty Reasons, the satisfaction of Christ being a
^ufficient Motive, and the manifestation of Gods ^ich and free Grace, a
glorious end of his so ^oing.

Now whether the Reprival of sinners be a fruit ^f Christ's satisfaction, and
whether they owe all their common mercies to Christ's Mediatory under^aking, I
will not take upon me to determine; But ^^at any of the Sons and Daughters of
Adam are ^ardoned and discharged, that believers are justi^^ed and saved, this
must needs be ascribed unto Jesus Christ, the second Adam, and his meritorious
sa^^sfaction.

Sect. 23. PROP. XXIII. ^or, Adam 's breach of Covenant was not only to his
Personal prejudice; but so mischievous to all his posterity, that descend from
him by Natural Generation, that it subjects them all to a state of sin and
wrath.
HAd he kept his Integrity he should have begotten Children, not in a state of
sin, but in a ^^te of innocence: The Image of God, that Ori^^nal righteousness
which was concreated with him, should have been conveyed and derived from him
^his Children, together with other blessed privi^^ges appertaining to that
state. But when Adam by his sin, had deprived himself of Original
rig^teousness, he could not derive that to us, of whi^^ he had deprived
himself. Nemo dat quod non habe he could not communicate that to us, which he
hi^ self had lost.

I find some of great Name that deny the Cov^nant was made with Adam and his
posterity, t^^ better to deny Original sin, [Though the Doctri^^ of Original
corruption (as I conceive) will (...) found to hold true, abstracted from the
considertion of that Covenant made with Adam. And learned pen has noted this,
that many bring t^^ Doctrine of Original sin into doubt by laying a upon
Covenant Relation, and de^^ing, Dr. J. T. Ans. to Bishop of Roch. p. 106.
or over-looking the Natu^^ proofs.] If there had been such Covenant (says
one) it had be^ but equity that to all the persons interested, should have been
communicated, and cauti^^ given to all who were to suffer, and abiliti^^ given
them to prevent the evil; for else it is no^ Covenant with them, but a Decree
concerni^^ them. And it is impossible that there should be Covenant made
between two, when one of t^ parties knows nothing of it.

But it is neither impossible, nor unequal to ^^volve and include Children in
Covenant with the Parents, when they understand nothing of it. The are parts
and appendices of the Parents, and at the Parents dispose, before they know how
to disp^^^ of themselves. And who questioneth but in tak^ a Lease one may by
Covenant bind not only hi^ self, but his Children after him to certain Ter^
which yet the Child knows nothing of? And d^^ ^ot that Covenant which Moses
made betwixt the Lord, and the Children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 29. take ^n their
little ones, v. 10, 11, 12. Yea, the Children that were to be born of them, v.
15. who were in^entionally in Covenant, though not actually; ^ea, the very Law,
and light of Nature teaches ^^en to Covenant for their Children, when they do
^ut engage them to their duty, and may probably by ^^at means, procure them
some considerable benefit and advantage.

As to that plea, [It would not be equal, if the posterity had not caution
given what they might suffer by the breach of the Covenant, and ability given
to prevent the evil] that this is a mere flou^ish, a sound of words without any
strength of Reason, is thus demonstrated, viz. This would make ^s much against
Gods decree concerning Adam's ^osterity, as against the Covenant with him, and
his ^osterity.

Now it is granted on all hands (and this learned writer will not deny) that
the Posterity of Adam ^ave lost and suffered much by the fall. And may ^ot one
argue against Gods proceedings herein, just ^s he does against the Covenant
with Adam and his ^osterity; saying, It had been but equal that caution should
have been given to all who were to suffer, and abilities given to them to
prevent the evil.

But that you may understand what Man's con^ition is by Nature, through the
fall of our first ^arents.

1. Take notice, that Adam by his fall lost his ^riginal rectitude, and became
universally de^raved in the whole Man; see the blindness of his mind, together
with crookedness of will, and di^order of affections, Genesis 3.8. When they hear^
the voice of the Lord God walking in the Garden^ the cool of the day, Adam and
his wife hid the^ selves from the presence of the Lord God, amo^^ the trees of
the Garden. And if they had not thoug^^ of God, till they heard of him, where
was Cons^^ence? In a dead sleep sure. And was not their unde^standing now
darkened, darkened with a witnes^ when they thought to hide themselves from Go^
presence among the trees? But whether can a cre^ture flee from his presence?
Again, how strange were their wills perverted, and affections disordere^ who
now exceedingly dread, and cannot endure (...) presence of God; whereas, before
they had sinne^ he was accounted the chiefest good, they could n^ but have
delighted in his presence before, as the highest happiness.

And what was Adam's fall but a turning fr^^ God to the Creature, preferring
the lust of the ey^ the lust of the flesh, and the pride of life bef^^^ God and
happiness; preferring a false seeming g^ before the chiefest good. V. These.
Salmur. de Statu. hom. laps. Sect. 19, 20. p. 208.
Thus (...) changed his ultimate end: And have changed his ultimate end, he w^
wholly changed as to his Mora^ there being no more of moral go^ness in any
means or end, that a Man propounds himself, than there is of respect and
subordi^^tion to the ultimate and highest end. And therefo^^ when Man turned
from God the chiefest good, a false good, being led away with his sensitive
app^tite, (through his own incogitancy, and the tem^ter's subtilty) thereupon
he became animalis ho^ wholly carnal; I say, thus he became a vain, sensual,
carnal man. Hence came that woeful disorder into his Soul. All things turned
upside down with him. The sensitive appetite, (which was the lower faculty,
inferior to the will, and understanding, and to be ruled) came to rule in Man,
the other powers loving and liking to have it so. Thus the nearest end of the
lowest faculty (as things of sense) the things of the flesh, the having and
enjoying of those things, became the last and highest end of the superior
faculties. What horrible confusion was here brought into Man's Nature by sin?
That if you look upon him in a Moral consideration, he was no longer such a
Creature as God made him, but quite another thing; though he had the same
Natural faculties after his fall as before, yet the moral qualities of those
faculties were not the same, but directly contrary. God made man upright, with
an appetite in perfect subjection to right reason, with a clear understanding
of the chiefest good, with a will sweetly closing with that good; but when
through inadvertency (as I said before) he fell from God to a false good, all
these faculties were immediately corrupted, and depraved, the rectitude of them
quite lost.

If any one should say here, but as Adam when he fell, turned from God to the
Creature, and to a false good; might he not of himself turn from that false
good unto God again?

Ans. No, not of himself, when he has lost that rectitude of Soul, which is
absolutely necessary to ones choosing God, and taking him for his last end and
chiefest good; nor is the case alike: It is easy for one to fall, or cast
himself down from an high pinnacle, not so easy for him to rise again, when b^
that fall he has broke all his bones As it is observed, These. Salm. ubi supr.
Sect. 33. p. 211.
Haec rerum qu^ corrumpi possunt naturalis est Cond^ tio, ut facile corrumpi,
corruptae i^ integrum restitui vix unquam possint: This is the Natural
condition of things which may be corrupted, that they may easily be corrupted,
but being once corrupted, can scarce ever be restored to their perfection
again. But of this in another place.

2. Adam by his fall having lost his Origina^ righteousness, and his whole
Nature being corrupted, he begat Children like himself, destitute (...)
Original righteousness, and so indisposed to all tru^ goodness, but prone to
all which is evil.

That the corruption of Nature is propagate^ unto all, that naturally descend
from him, is ver^ evident. Adam had lost Gods Image, and wa^ corrupted, and
sinfully inclined, when he is sai^ to have begotten a Son in his own Image,
Genesis 5.3^ observe, the Scripture opposes the Image of Ada^ to the Image of
God, Ephesians. 4.22.24. to the Imag^ of Christ, 1 Cor. 15.47, 48, 49. what is Adam
Image, but the flesh, Joh. 3.6. the Old man, Col. 3.9^ All men naturally bear
the Image of Old Ada^ Does not that prove corruption natural, and propogated to
them?

Again, how plain is that of our Savior, Joh. 3.6^ That which is born of the
flesh is flesh. By this a^gument he there proves the necessity of regeneration,
of a new birth, without which there is no e^tering into the Kingdom of God. For
that which i^ born of the flesh is flesh, as Job 14.4. Who can bring a clean
thing out of an anclean? The answer is, no^ one. No man can do this. So Romans
5.19. By one Man's disobedience many were made (constituted) sinners. [Many]
Some would have the Apostle speak thus, cautelously, because that all simply
and absolutely were not made sinners by Adam. Eve was a sinner, yet not made so
by Adam's means; she was first in the transgression. Jesus Christ, the Son of
God, was made Man; yet was not a sinner. But admitting these two special
exceptions, the (...) here, these [many] are as much as all, v. 12. The All
here meant indeed, were many, and the many here spoken of were all. But the
word [many] seems to be used here, because it was to come in again in the other
part of the comparison. [made sinners] (...) constituted sinful, to understand
this of their being only used as sinners, is a private interpretation, and not
according to the Analogy of Faith.

How strange a passage is that one has, Dr. J. T. Ans. to Bishop of Roch.
Letter, p. 11.
I was troubled with an Objection lately, for it being propounded to me; why it
is to be believed that the sin of Adam could spoil the Nature of Man, and yet
the Nature of Devils could not be spoiled by their sin, which was worse, I
could not tell what to say, and therefore held my peace.

But methinks one need not study much for an answer to it. The Devils were not
the root and fountain of other Spirits. God did not say to them, as to our
first Parents [Encrease and Multiply.] But Man being to propagate his kind, it
seems not so unaccountable, (once supposing our first Father to have sinned
away Gods Image, that his Nature is destitute Original righteousnes^ and
tainted with a contrary principle, Natura enim humana (quae in primis
parentibus tot a erat) per peccatum tota corrupta est -- unde non nisi
corruptos, injustos, and mortales silios generare potuit. Meth. Confess. Edit. a
De Soto. fol. 4.2.
habi^ disposition, or inclin^tion) that he should b^ get Children in li^^
manner viciously inclined. It is natural for cre^tures to beget their like.
Haec est Naturae Lex, (...) sui quaeque res similem gignat, homo hominem, vit^
sus vitiosum, Leprosus leprosum. (plac. de Imp^^ pri. pec. p. 160.)

And, as is the Root, so the Branches; as t^ Spring, so the Streams. You would
not expe^^^pure and wholesome streams, to flow from a corr^ fountain.

Obj. If all descending from Adam be corrupte^ how was Christ Jesus clear from
Native corru^tion? was he not conceived, and born of a Daug^ter of Adam?

Ans. All that descend from Adam by Nature Generation (the Virgin Mary not
excepted) deri^ Natural corruption from Adam. But Christ d^scended not from
Adam by Natural Generation, b^ Generation and conception was miraculous. H^
came into the world, not by virtue of that prim^tive benediction [Increase and
Multiply] but (...) make good that special promise [The seed of t^^ Woman shall
break the Serpents head.] He was tha^ seed of the Woman conceived by the power
of the Holy Ghost in the womb of a Virgin; and so the Holy One indeed, Luke
1.35, This very much co^firms the truth of the point I am upon, scil. the
pr^pagation of Natural corruption to all that natural^^ descend from Adam, that
Jesus Christ to free him from the said pollution, must not come into the world
by Natural Generation, but by a most miraculous conception.

Obj. But you will not deny, but Adam after his Fall was restored by
Repentance, and renewed by Grace.

Ans. Grant him to be renewed, sanctified, yet it was but in part, that he had
Gods Image restored in him. And this, of Gods wonderful special Grace, and
therefore it was not a quality that was naturally to descend. When he begat a
Son, he did this, as a man, not as one renewed and created again. He begat a
Son after his own Image, that is, sinful like himself; not after Gods Image,
which in man's lapsed state, is purely supernatural.

Obj. But you cannot tell how this Natural corruption is conveyed from the
Parent to the Child.

Ans. Nor do we know how the bones do grow in the womb (Eccl. 11.5.) of her
that is with Child. But we must not deny that which is plain, because we cannot
understand that which is difficult. We have seen plain Scripture for the
derivation of corruption from Adam to us all.

Obj. But may not the Scripture mean, we are made sinners by imitation of Adam,
rather than by the propagation of corruption from him? May we not understand it
thus, that we are corrupted by his evil Example?

Ans. No, That were not to interpret but to pervert the Scripture. That which
is born of the flesh is flesh. Does not this speak plainly of Natural
Generation, and nothing of imitation. So Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was shapen in
iniquity, and in Sin did my Mother conceive me. Certainly, David is here
confessing his own sin. Not the sin of his Parents, but that which he had cause
to be ashamed of, and humbled for, as his own Sin, not another. So that Text
[by the Disobedience of one many were made sinful] If it meant by imitation
only, then it should have been said, that we were made sinful by the Serpent,
by Satan, or by the Woman, Eve, rather than by Adam; or why is the speech
limited to the disobedience of one, when the world is full of pernicious
examples; great multitudes there are, that draw others to sin by their evil
Examples. And multitudes that are drawn to sin this way, who never read or
heard of Adam. And those that have heard of his sin, have also heard of his
punishment; that should rather deter them from sin. And plain experience
shows, that not his particular example, which is so remote; but nearer examples
have the most malignant influence upon men. And that Children in the most
religious families, where are the best precepts, and examples both, do bewray
corruption of Nature, as soon as ever they can put forth any Acts of reason. Oh
what strangers are they in Israel, yea, strangers in the world, yea, strangers
to their own hearts, that see not the first rise of sin and wickedness that is
in the world since the Fall, to be from an evil inclination within men, and not
from an observation and imitation of others. And I know not well, what can be
replied to that, if we are made sinful by the disobedience of one Adam, only by
imitation, then may we not be said (by a parity of reason) to be made righteous
by the Faith of one Abraham, we walking in the steps of his Faith?

3. The next thing I would clear to you is, That this Natural inherent pravity,
or Original corruption is sinful. It makes us really guilty before God,
obnoxious to his wrath and curse for ever. I purposely wave speaking of the
guilt of Adam 's first transgression, the imputation of it to his posterity
immediately, and antecedently, or irrespectively to this corruption of Nature,
propagated from him, leaving it to the sober consideration and discussion of
the Godly-learned.

But though we hold Adam's sin propagated, Non peccatum personae, sed peccatum
Naturae; not his personal sin, not the transient action; but the sin of the
Nature of Man, the corrupting of his Nature; for so it was an inherent,
permanent, Evil quality: this alone suffices to condemn any one in the world.
In regard of this inherent pravity and corruption, which is in every one from
his very birth, yea, from his very quickening in the womb; we all deserve death
and condemnation, deserve to be dealt withal and punished, after the same
manner, as if we had done what our first Parents did.

Now this is very plain and evident from Scripture, Ephesians. 2.3. and were by
Nature Children of wrath, even as others. Nothing but sin could subject us to
Gods wrath, to which yet we are all obnoxious by Nature, one as well as
another. And if obnoxious to Gods wrath by Nature, then sinful by Nature. So
that there is sin and guilt in our very Nature, before ever we come to the
practice and commission of sin.

Again, what an undeniable proof is that, Romans 5.12. By one man sin entered
into the world, and death by Sin; and so death passed upon all men, (...),
which whether you will read it relatively in quo i^ whom, or causally, eo quod,
because or in as much as all have sinned, I shall be content. These thing are
plain however.

1. That death came into the world by sin.

2. That all on whom death passes, have sin.

3. That many on whom death passes, (as infants) have not actual sin.

4. Therefore it follows that they have sin derived from Adam with their very
Natures. That Original corruption has the true Nature of sin; otherwise
according to the Apostles arguing, Infants should not be subject to death.

But here we are told by no mean writer, that Man was created Mortal, Un.
Necess. p. 371.
and i^ Adam had not sinned he should have been immortal by Grace, i. e. by the
use of the tree of Life.

Yet elsewhere the same hand lays down this assertion contrary to the former,

Dissolution of the Soul and Body should have been, Ans. to the Bishop of Roch.
Letter. p. 86.
if Adam had not sinned] which if so, how then should he have been immortal by
grace, i. e. by the use of the tree of life? what he adds there by way of
proof; For the world would have been too little to have entertained those
Myriads of Men, which must in all reason have been born from that blessing of
[Increase and Multiply] has no strength at all, but lean^ on this weak and
false prop; that without the dissolution of Soul and Body, Man could not have
been translated from Earth to Heaven. Take this away, and what he says comes
to nothing.

But though Adam was not immortal, as the Saints are after the resurrection;
yet neither was ^he Mortal as we all now are. These. Salm. de Stat. Ada. ante
Laps. Sect. 32. p. 197.
Tam naturalis erat Adamo facultas non moriendi, quam non peccandi. To say,
that he was created Mortal, is to deny that immortality was any part of Gods
Image, wherein Man was created. Again, death was threatened only in case of
disobedience, as we see here, Genesis 2.17. Does not that imply, he should not
have dyed, if he had not sinned. As the Apostle tells us, death entered by
sin, and passes upon none but Sinners; Infants dye as well as others, and
therefore they are sinners.

And yet further to evince it, take this Argument; Either Infants that dye in
infancy, and are saved, are saved by Christ, or not; now surely there are none
that have the face of Christians, can have a face to say, any in the world are
saved without Christ; for there is salvation in no other. Therefore I hope we
may take this for granted, all Infants that are saved, are saved by Christ. And
if saved by Christ, then Christ dyed for them. If Christ dyed for them, then
they were really guilty; truly, properly sinners in themselves; otherwise they
are none of them saved by Christ.

Yea, indeed if Infants, or any in the world were innocent and guiltless before
God; such would have no need of a Savior, no need of pardoning Grace and
Mercy; such must go to Heaven another way, not by the satisfaction and
redemption of Christ. He had dyed in vain so far, had he dyed to purchase Gods
favor for those, who no way merited his displeasure. Justice it self would not
condemn, but clear all that can plead (...) guilty.

Methinks, though the Remonstrants would have natural corruption merely penal,
not sinful; y^ they (of all others) should grant this Argument, wh^ would have
the death of Christ intended for all and every one alike, to make the remedy
provided^^^ Christ, the second Adam, adequate unto our mal^dy and misery, that
came by the first Adam. No^ what need that Christ's death should be intend^^
for Infants, to reconcile them to God, if they we^ not obnoxious in themselves
to his wrath?

Obj. But says Corvinus, If the Law does n^ require that a Man be born wit^
out sin, Cens. Anat. Arm. c. 8. Sect. 7. p. 121.
if it requires not Orig^ nal Righteousness, a man sinne^ not in that he is
born without i^ therefore the want of it cannot properly be call^ sin.

Ans. Though it is true (as Rivet says) veta^tur futura, In Exodus 20. p. 314.
non praeterita aut praese^^ tia? quae jam in actu sunt; yet fac^ mala
arguuntur a Lege, improbant^ and damnantur. And so this, prava dispositio, etc
rentia Justitiae damnantur a Lege. It is contra^ to the Law, and condemned by
it. The Law pr^perly forbids things to come, but reproves, disallow^ of things
present, contrary to it. As this Nati^^ inherent corruption (including an
indisposition, a^^ averseness from what is truly good, and pron^ ness to evil)
must needs be contrary to the La^ That which is the cause of all actual sin,
mu^ needs be (...) sinful sin indeed.

Again, was not Man obliged by the Law of his Creation to be, and continue as
holy, good and perfect, as God made him? In this respect may we not be born
guilty Creatures, Rei debendi, licet ^on agendi, we are guilty before God, if
our Na^ures (as well as Actions) be not perfectly conformed ^o Gods will, and
Law.

Obj. But says Corvinus, after the fall, obedience is required by a new
Covenant, wherefore Man is considered as fallen, not as upright still.

Ans. I have showed before, the new Law of Grace does not hinder the old
Original Law (which ^equires perfect Obedience and exact conformity to ^he will
of God in all things) from being still in ^orce; otherwise we do not sin in not
obeying per^ectly, and have no cause to be humbled, and to ^ue to God for
pardon and forgiveness upon that ^ccount.

Obj. This corruption of Nature in Infants is not ^^eirs, by an Act of their
wills.

Ans. Though it be not a voluntate, yet it is in ^oluntate. Are sinful habits
no sins, because they ^re not sinful Acts? It comes not by the Child's ^ill,
it is true, for it comes by Nature, is conveyed ^aturally. The Child born
sinful, because descended ^om sinful Parents: Yet this corruption is
princi^ally and eminently seated in the will, and from the ^ill it acts, and
shows it self as soon as the will ^an act. The sin of Infants is not in Action,
but in ^is evil disposition. We must say this of Children, ^^en unborn, or
newly come into the world, that ^ey do not actually will the committing of this
or ^at sin, it is from natural impediments, the let and hinderance is a
natural incapacity; otherwis^ there is that pravity of will even Natural to
them which would break forth into all manner of Sin ((...) God withheld his
restraining hand) the Nature Impediments of Action being but removed. A^^ is
not this enough to make them Objects of God wrath, and worthy of Death? How can
an infinite^ holy God but loath, and abhor such vile Creatures whom he sees
(even by Nature) so wickedly e^clined, if he look upon them, as in themselves,
an^ not in and through his Son Jesus Christ? as Creatures that have evil
qualities by kind, are the more offensive to us, because those qualities are
Nature to them. As Wolves for their ravenous disposition Toads and Serpents for
their poisonous quality before such quality or disposition be put forth into
act.

What I have delivered concerning Natural corruption, and the sinfulness of it,
it is no other Doctrine, than is laid down in the 39 Articles, Art. 9 as also
in the Articles of Religion agreed upon a Dublin in Ireland, 1615. Sect. 23.
Original (...) stands not in the imitation of Adam, (as the Pelagians dream)
but is the fault and corruption of the Nature of every person, that naturally
i^ engendered and propagated from Adam: where by it comes to pass, that Man is
deprived (...) Original righteousness, and by Nature is be^^ unto sin, and
therefore in every person born into the world, it deserves Gods wrath and
dam^nation.

What could be spoken more plain for the prop^ gation of corruption to every
one naturally de^ scended from Adam, and that this corruption i^ properly Malum
culpae non paenae, that it is not a ^eer languor, or frailty of Nature, but a
pravity ^^d fault, a moral defect; and so that it lays every person born into
the world, under Guilt, ob^xious to wrath and condemnation. How strange it that
any should subscribe, and declare their un^igned Assent to so plain truths, and
yet afterward any them?

Sect. 24. PROP. XXIV. ^e Condition of Man by the Fall, being such as has been
described, viz. being both under the Guilt, and power of Sin, it is twice
impossible (as I may say) that ever he should be saved by himself, or by the
Covenant of Works, and equally impossible, that he should not be cast, and
condemned by this Covenant.
THe Covenant of Works promised life only upon perfect conformity to the Law,
and will of ^d, threatening death to any sin: Now when once ^n had broken Gods
Law, and lost Gods Image, (...) had his Nature vitiated and corrupted, he could
more lay claim to life and happiness, but imdiately was laid under the Sentence
of Death, (...) did lie open to Gods wrath.

^ow if the penalty threatened, and incurred, ^nflicted on the Sinner, this
gives him enough, this sets him fast for ever. Intolerable torment and
endless miseries become his portion to Eternit^* If he would think of making
satisfaction for wh^ is past, he cannot. He can never suffer any thi^
equivalent to everlasting death. And if he cou^^ yet he should not be saved by
the old Covena^^ without some new Agreement, wherein it shou^^ please God to
admit of a satisfaction. Satis^^ction is not given to the Law, (as one note^^
but to the Lawgiver, as above Law, who (...) accept of the solutio tantidem,
vel aequivale^^ alias indebiti. But there is no provision in t^^ Covenant of
Works, how a Man may escape a^^ avoid the penalty, after once he is a sinner.
N^^ther is there any more possibility of his clai^ing and having right, and
title to happiness (...) the promise in that Covenant; the conditi^^ whereof we
neither have fulfilled, nor can (...)* And in these respects (as I said) it is
utte^^^ impossible that ever sinful Men and Wom^^ should attain to life by this
Covenant. Ala^ we are all Children of wrath by Nature and (...) of death, dead
in Law, under the Sentence death. And dead in trespasses and sins, in anoth^^
sense, sin reigns, as death reigns; all Men N^turally are under the power of
it. Naturally (...) are without strength, no more than a dead m^^ can raise
himself, are we able of our selves to h^^ our selves out of a sinful state,
which leads death Eternal.

Application.
I Shall now conclude this Discourse concerning Man's estate under the Covenant
of Works (both ^s it was before, and since the Fall) with a few practical
Inferences.

1. What cause is here to admire divine conde^ension! That ever God should
vouchsafe to ^^ter into Covenant with his own Creature, whom he might command
at pleasure. What an honor was it unto Abraham, to be called the ^riend of
God? So it was an honor (sure) to ^dam, to be taken into a League of
Friendship ^ith God; Lord what is man that thou should so ^^gard him?

2. What cause is here to blush at Man's Ingrati^de, and most unworthy dealing
with his Maker? ^os. 6.7. But they like Men, or like Adam, have ^^ansgressed
the Covenant, they have dealt trea^erously? Oh Adam's treacherous dealing,
A^^m's perfidiousness, breach of Covenant with God, that indeed which all his
posterity had need to (...) told of, have cause with sad hearts to remember ^d
to be ashamed of.

3. What cause to tremble with astonishment, ^hen we speak, or hear, or think
of Man's Apo^acy from God, and of the woeful, dreadful effects, and consequences
of it. The Crown is fallen from our heads, and woe to us, for we have sinned.
The Man who was created for the special Service a^ fruition of God, now has
his back turned up God; neither fit to serve, nor to enjoy him. M^ that at his
first Creation was a Favorite of Go^ since, by his fall and degeneration, is
become an (...) my of God.

4. O what need now that we look to it, the we get our Tenure changed! That we
get out of t^ first, into the second Adam, without a change state, and a change
of Nature, we are miserable^ ever. O better we had never been born, than (...)
to be born again. As we are Adam's Offspring, (...) inherit nothing but
corruption, can lay claim to (...) thing but hell and wrath. And woe to us now,
God deal with us according to the tenure of (...) Covenant of Works.

Perhaps you will say, O but we are under (...) Gospel Covenant, which is
unquestionably a C^^^nant of Grace.

I grant you are so externally; but as to y^^ Eternal state, you will be never
the better, if y^ refuse to come up to the terms of this better ^^venant; that
is, if you don't in a real sense your sinful and undone Condition without Ch^^
now heartily give up your selves to him, to taught and guided, to be ruled and
governed, well as to be saved by him; or which is all one you are not really
willing to be saved by the L^ Jesus Christ in his own way.

I tell you, if you do not come up to the term the Covenant of Grace, you do in
vain exp^ you cannot have any saving benefit by it; no, in that case it leaves
you to the condemnation of the Covenant of Works; I say, it leaves you where
it found you.

The wrath of God still abides on you; yea, this will increase it, that to the
breach of the Covenant of Works, you add this great provoking sin, of slighting
and contemning what the Lord is pleased to offer in the Covenant of Grace. This
is the Condemnation; verily you will find it so, you that neglect and slight
that great Salvation, offered in the Gospel.

5. O what cause to pity poor Children, who are so miserable in themselves
without Gods free mercy in Jesus Christ! Since our first father has sinned,
and brake Covenant with God, his blood was tainted, his whole race and
offspring corrupted. This corruption though it came first from Adam, yet
immediate Parents are the next cause of the derivation of it. How should this
turn our Bowels toward our poor Children? Are they Children of wrath by
Nature, and should they not be our Benoni^s? Oh how should our hearts ache for
them! and how should we pour out our prayers, and tears daily before the Lord
for them? O that Ishmael might live in thy sight! should not tender Mothers
travail in birth again, till they may see Christ formed in their Children.

And how should Parents fear entailing a new Curse upon their posterity! There
is a curse in the house of the Swearer, a curse in the house of the Thief, and
the unjust person, the fraudulent dealer; many take care for nothing but only
to lay up riches for their Children: O but take heed that you do not lay up a
curse with those riches. That would spoil all.

Again, how should Parents fear corrupting their Children more and more by a
bad example; thoug^ corruption comes not into the world merely by imitation,
yet evil examples do very much encreas^ wickedness in the world. Aetas parentum
pejor avi^ tulit Nos nequiores, etc. Hor.

Lastly, though our Children are by Nature in sinful miserable estate; yet
there is a remedy provided in Christ, and set forth in the Gospel; an^ how
should we fear depriving our Infants of that O^dinance they are capable of,
even in infancy! Infants circumcision under the Law pointed at the co^ruption
of the Naturul birth; so does Infant Baptism under the Gospel. They that deny
thi^ Ordinance to Infants, would make Christ less fa^vourable to the Children
of Believers under the Gospel, than he was to the Children of his peop^^ of
Old. Though we do not suppose Grace necess^rily tied to the outward Ordinance,
as if whosoeve^ did partake of the one, must necessarily partake (...) the
other; nor think, as the Papists, that Origina^ sin has the Nature of sin,
only before, not afte^ Baptism; yet surely, we ought to prize any e^pression of
Gods Favor toward our poor Children; and as we would not seem to slight his
mercy we should fear to deny Children this Ordinance which the Lord allows
them, which they are capable of; yea, which is the only Ordinance, an^ outward
means that Infants are capable of. And a^ we should fear to deprive Children of
this Gospe^ Ordinance, so how should we fear to deprive the^ of the Gospel it
self! Rejecting Christ and the Gospel, was that which brought wrath, to the
uttermost, on the Jews; should we sin away the Gospel, then we deprive poor
posterity of the means of Grace and Salvation, and set them in such a state ^s
is described there, Ephesians. 2.12. to have no hope ^n the world; Ah Sirs, the
despising of Gospel Grace, may bring uttermost wrath upon us and ^urs.

The End of the First Part.
OF THE COVENANT OF GRACE.
Part II.
2 Samuel 23.5. Although my House be not so with God; yet he has made with me an
everlasting Covenant ordered in all things and sure, for this is all my
Salvation and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.
I Come now (according to my promise) to give you an account of my
Apprehensions, Introduction.
concerning the Covenant of Grace. An excellent subject, yet attended with
difficulties. Some things I confess would discourage me from adventuring on it,
and particularly the variety of apprehensions, and the multitude o^
controversies concerning it. But that the noblenes^ and necessity of the
Doctrine of the Covenant o^ Grace, together with the great danger of Men^
mistaking, and the dreadful consequence of many mistakes (too common about it)
do on the other hand press and engage me to it.

Indeed I cannot expect to find you all concurring in the same apprehensions
with me; yet sure I am in the main we must agree, and hold together here, or
the error will be very gross and dangerous.

As for any points more disputable (I am not o^ an imposing spirit) I shall not
desire your assent o^ giving Sentence with me, beyond the merits of the cause,
and strength of the proof you shall see produced. Touching what has been
delivered concerning the Covenant of Works; (that first Covenant God made with
Man) this is the sum, viz. That God having made Man, had a right to rule and
command him; and might only have enforced his commands with threatening of
severest penalties. Yet to show forth his infinite Goodness, as well as his
Sovereign Greatness, to his Laws he annexed a free and large promise of endless
life and happiness. Now Man being created a reasonable and innocent creature,
could not but consent to the terms God propounded. Thus God promised life and
happiness to Man upon condition of perfect obedience, and Man engaged to obey
God in all things.

Adam notwithstanding soon transgressed God's Command, violated his Covenant,
utterly disabled himself from performing that obedience the first Covenant
required, and so deprived himself of all right and title to that happiness
there promised. Lastly, Adam, being the root of Mankind, and having by his
sinful fall corrupted his Nature, and begetting Children like himself, unclean,
fleshly, corrupt, and guilty before God, it became utterly impossible that any
of his posterity should attain to happiness by the Covenant of Works. Thus in
discoursing of the Covenant of Works I have showed you.

1. What was Man's estate by Creation, viz. holy and happy. 2. What it was by
the Fall, viz. Sinful and miserable. Now 3. I am coming to show, what it may be
by Grace, in and through Jesus Christ.
This is declared and made known in the Covenant of Grace.

Thus the Covenant of Grace is our last and best refuge. It is like a plank
after a Shipwreck, or like a fair haven in a storm.

Sinners, who are exposed to all woe and wrath by the breach of the Covenant of
Works, may find shelter; yet in and under the Covenant of Grace. Sinners, whom
a deluge of miseries does threaten to overwhelm, may yet be safe and happy,
getting into this Ark.

The Gospel holds forth a pardon to sinners sentenced and condemned by the Law.
If we look into the Covenant of Works, there we shall only see matter of
terror and ground of despair: but coming to the Covenant of Grace, here we may
find opened a Door of hope. Hither must we come, here must we rest, as ever we
would be happy, of which we should every one say as holy David here, This is
all my salvation, and all my desire.

These are the last words of David, Verse 1. viz. That David spoke as being
divinely inspired. The last words of a dying man are often worthy o^ a special
remark: how much more are the last words of a dying Prophet to be regarded!

When persons are ready to faint away, then they would call for their strong
waters, or make use o^ the best Cordial they had. Gods gracious promise and
Covenant was the choicest Cordial to this holy man of God; he desired no other.
Here he had strong consolation, whether his troubles arose from within, or from
without; still he could fetch in relief and comfort from this Covenant.
Although my house be not so with God] q. d. Though I and mine are not so as we
should be, so exact and even in our walking before God, so steadfast in his
Covenant; yet he abides faithful, though I am too inconstant. He has made
with me an everlasting Covenant. Though I cannot but see sad disorders both in
my self and others, both at home and abroad, yet his Covenant is well ordered
in all things. Though I am subject to change, though my outward condition be
often changing, though I be at great uncertainty in respect of any worldly
prosperity; yet God's Covenant with me that is sure, and there are sure mercies
(Isa. 55.3.) contained in it. I can be satisfied with that provision the Lord
has made for me in this his Covenant, however things go with me and mine here
in the world. Though my house here should not grow and flourish; yet I can
cheer up my heart with the thoughts and hopes of those better things, God has
promised in his Covenant. O this is all my Salvation, and all my desire. This
by way of Preface.

Now in speaking of the Covenant of Grace, the saving Covenant, the everlasting
Covenant, the better to open the nature, tenor, and use of it, I shall take the
same liberty I did before, in setting forth the Covenant of works, viz. lay
down such ^ropositions, as seem to be especially needful, and that as plainly
and distinctly as the Lord shall enable ^ne, to clear your apprehensions
concerning this ^veighty and excellent subject.

Sect. 1. PROP. I. There are but two ways to be thought of, how Man should
come to the enjoyment of God and happiness; that is, either, 1. By a perfect
conformity to the will and Law of God, by unsinning Obedience; Or, 2. Supposing
Man once guilty of sin, then in this case by pardoning Grace and Mercy.
Or thus, There are but two ways to Heaven, viz. Either by the Covenant of
Works, or by the Covenant of Grace.
NOw since it is utterly impossible to attain to happiness in the way, or upon
the terms of ^e Covenant of Works. [Do this, and live] can ^fford no benefit,
hope, or comfort to those who ^nnot obey perfectly, who are already fallen short
of ^e glory of God. Since all are concluded under sin, the whole world become
guilty before Go^ whosoever are saved, must be saved in the way, a^ upon the
terms of the Covenant of Grace, by Go^ free pardoning Grace.

Certainly, it is a most senseless, irrational conceit, as absurd a fiction as
ever wild fancy frame to imagine that any Creature, that is a sinner, a^
therefore can only lay claim to hell, as his portion (who if he were condemned
to everlasting tormen^ had but his just deserts.) that such a Creature shou^
ever properly, and in a strict sense, merit any thi^ of God for himself, much
less satisfy and supererr^gate for others. Even Bellarmine himself bei^ Judge.
Mereri simul aeternam vitam and mort^^ aeternam repugnantiam includit: Et
proinde qui ta^ esset, deberet vivere in aeternum, and non vivere (...)
aeternum; mori in aeternum and non mori in aeternu^^ l. 5. de just. c. 12.

It implies a contradiction, that one should bo^ deserve eternal death, and
also deserve everlast^^ life. And therefore the Papists have no way to sa^
themselves here; but by flying to that false disti^ction of sins, that some are
mortal, some venial. (...) if there were any such peccadillo's against God,
(...) either deserved pardon, or did not deserve death what deserves pardon,
does not deserve to (...) punished.

Mereri, and non mereri poenam, includit repu^^nantiam.

What deserves no punishment, must be counte^ no fault.

So likewise Christ needed not to die for those sin^ which do not deserve
death. Then why does the ^postle say, 1 John 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ
cleanses us from all sin?

Sect. 2. PROP. II. When the Covenant, by which alone is Salvation, is called
the Covenant of Grace, you are to understand, it is so (...), by way of
Eminency.
NOt as if there was no grace in the first Covenant made with Man. I have
showed before that it was of Grace, That God (to whom all possible obedience
was immediately due from his Crea^ure; of Grace) that He was pleased to engage
and promise to do any thing for Man, for the future; and yet further of Grace,
that he promised to do so ^uch. But this new Covenant deserves especially to ^e
called the Covenant of Grace, in regard of a more ^ignal Discovery of Gods rich
and free Grace in this, ^han was in the former, that was first made with Adam;
was it not a Testimony of Gods wonderful Grace to provide and appoint Jesus
Christ his Son, ^o be surety and Mediator of this Covenant? so ^as it not an
high expression of his Grace, that God should come to so low terms with Man, in
this Covenant; requiring no more than Man's sincere and ^earty service and
obedience, and promising to ^ccept, and graciously reward the same, though ^eak
and imperfect? That the Lord should accept ^f this, when perfect sinless
obedience was eternally (...) due debt from Man, as he was a Creature; was
(...) not of Grace? Again, the benefits and blessings held forth and promised
in this Covenant, are the^ not such as do aloud proclaim his Grace? Th^^ pardon
of sin, a fundamental blessing it is impossibl^ it should be otherwise, than of
Grace. In that the Lord is a God that pardons iniquity, transgressio^ and
sin, it proclaims and speaks out fully, tha^ he is gracious, and merciful,
Exo. 34.6, 7. A^^ does it not speak out Gods abundant Grace, that (...) this
Covenant there are greater privileges he^^ forth in and by Jesus Christ; than
innocent Ada^ could have claimed by the first Covenant, Scil. ^^fluences of
Grace promised (whereby the faithful (...) perform and persevere in the
performance of wh^^ this Covenant requires) and some new addition^ degrees of
glory. Happiness was not so sure (...) innocent Adam under the first Covenant,
he bo^^ might and did fall from it. They that are in Chri^ have a firmer title
by the Covenant of Grace, (when perseverance is one thing promised) and ha^
ground to expect some higher degree of happ^ness. And is not this wonderful
Grace indeed, (...) only to recover Man fallen out of a state of mi^^ry, but
further to raise him to an higher happiness.

Heb. 9.15. Mediator of the New Testament.
Sect. 3. PROP. III. The Covenant of Grace is sometimes called, and partakes of
the Nature of a Testament.
THis Covenant (in both administrations of it, scil. under the Mosaical, and
under the Gospel administration) is called a Testament. So Heb. 9.15, 16. As it
was dispensed before Christ's coming, is called the first Testament Unless with
Mr. A. we must take the first Testament to mean or intend that Political
Covenant made with the Jews, merely as it was political. Vid. Discourse of the
2 Covenants, Cha. 4. p. 73, etc.
: (not the first Covenant: for the Covenant of works made with Adam, was
doubtless before it.) As it ^s dispensed since, it is called the New Testament.

Now this seems to be one considerable difference betwixt the Covenant of
Grace, and that of Works. The Covenant of Grace is called a Testament, as ^he
Covenant of works was not. The Covenant of Grace is the Lord Christ's last Will
and Testament, ^oncerning his Children and Heirs; what God ^equireth in this
Covenant, is in Christ's hand to ^ork in those, who are given him of the
Father; and what God has promised here, is also in Christ's hand to give.
Christ is the Author and finisher o^ faith, wherever it is, and the Donor of
the Crown of life, promised to the faithful, Joh. 10.28. Rev. 2.18. Nam sit
quod vis, Christum, quatenus servus, damnatus, etc. jus testamenti faciendi non
habuisse; annon erit Christus testator quatenus (...), annon testamentum
moriendo condidisse dicetur, cum infinito illius mortis precio and efficacia,
destructa morte, salutem, and vitam nobis pepererit, nobisque omnibus
transmiserit (...), Guisard. apud Lud. Tena in Hebr. p. 823. a.
The Covenant of Grace. I say, has the Nature of a Testament where Christ is
the Testator; Believers the Heirs or Legataries; the Goods Legacies, or
Portions bequeathed; the enjoyment of God the chieft good, perfect happiness
(our highest end) togethe^ with all things conducing thereunto. A testamen^ is
confirmed by the death of the Testator; so this b^ the death of Christ. It is
the Testament in his bloo^ It was confirmed of old by the blood of Christ (...)
types and sacrifices, Heb. 9.18, 20. and since b^ the blood of Christ actually
shed. The blood of Christ his death has sealed and ratified this Testament.

That it is both a Covenant, and a Testament several respects, Cum varia and
diversa sit, hujus dispensationis ratio, annon variis and diversis nominibus
insignienda? Guisard. apud Lud. Tena. p. 816. a. A forma conventionis inter
Deum, and homines factae, Foedus, a modo sanctionis, Testamentum, ib.
seems plain enoug^ Tota dispositio te^^mentariam habet r^^tionem, etc. Ames
Coron. Art. 5. c. 2. p. (mihi) 296.
T^ whole disposition ((...) frame of it) has (...) Nature of a Te^^ment, as
simply considered (says Ames. whether (...) be taken in the whole, or
according to its parts; (...) if the benefits bequeathed be compared one w^^
another, then one is a condition to another; and in this respect it is
propounded ad modum foederis, after the manner of a Covenant. Or take it thus,
In respect of God, as he propounds it, and men are bound to accept it, as
propounded by him; thus it has the Nature of a Covenant. Though, in respect of
Christ, as that which God promises, and Man engages to here, was all
purchased by Christ for the Elect, and by him bequeathed unto all those that
come to partake of the saving benefits and blessings of the Covenant, so it is
a Testament.

Now here I might propound this Question, to be considered, whether the promise
of the first subjective discriminating Grace, or of working of the condition,
Jer. 31.33. Heb. 8.10. belong to the Covenant of Grace, as a Covenant, or as a
Testament. It seems not to be formally included in the conditional Covenant of
grace, nor properly to belong to it as such, but rather as a Testament; but of
that afterward.

I confess one of great note, straineth this term too far. Making a Testament
and a Covenant opposites in this respect, that a Covenant has conditions, but
a Testament is an Instrument of mere bounty, citra ullam conditionem, without
any condition; yet Nihilominus testamento non repugnant conditiones pacti, quia
potest testator imponere conditiones, quibus deficientibus, haeres non possit
adire haereditatem. Tena in Heb. 8. diff. 4. Sect. 1. p. 310. b.
(pace tanti viri) may one not bequeath a Legacy in his Will and Testament, not
to be enjoyed, but upon a certain condition. (As for Example, I give A. B. so
much, provided he Marry C. otherwise not.) Again, Heb. 9.15. we read, Christ is
the Mediator of the New Testament; that by means of Death -- they which [are
called] might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. This Text which
speaks expressly of the New Testament, does not exclude, but include a
condition. Who are they that receive the Eternal inheritance, bequeathed in
Christ's Will and Testament? They that are called, says the Text; where
doubtless we are to understand effectually called, so called, as that they come
into Christ upon the Gospel-call.

And upon this account I should not restrain the consideration of it, as a
Testament to the Elect only, (as Dr. Ames before cited, seems to do.) But
supposing it a Will with a Condition, it is of the same extent with the
Covenant; being both one and the same. And so Expositors need not perplex
themselves (as some of them seem to do) to reconcile Moses (Exo. 24.8.) with
the Apostle ( Heb. 9.20.) For thus they are fairly agreed, Moses enim loquitur
de pacto, sed non quovis, nisi dandae haereditatis -- Paulus vero de
testamento, non quovis, sed conditionato, quod eo ipso est pactum: Ergo sine
ulla improprietate a pacto ad testamentum transivit Paulus in hac materia, quia
simul utriusque rationem habebat. Tena in Hebr. c. 9. Diffic. 12. Sect. 3. p.
412. b.) Moses speaks of a Covenant, not of any kind, but of giving an
inheritance -- Paul speaks of a Testament, not of any kind, but conditionate,
which in that respect is a Covenant; therefore without any impropriety, Paul in
this matter passes from the word Covenant, to the word Testament; because it
had the reason (or form) of both.

But that the Covenant of Grace is properly a Covenant, and has Conditions
(though no such conditions as make it ever the less of Grace.) I question not
to clear and prove hereafter, the Lord permitting.

At present take notice only, that when the Covenant of Grace is called a
Testament, the reason is not, because it is absolute, unconditional; for so it
is not; but because it is firm, unalterable. Confirmed now by the Testator's
death. Though it be but a Man's Testament; yet if it be confirmed, no man
disannulleth, or adds thereto, Gal. 3.15. Now the New Testament is confirmed,
by the Death of Christ the Testator, that there is no adding to it, no
disannulling any part of it, Neither as to matter, nor form; that this shall be
changed any more to the end of the world; no third dispensation to be looked
for, whatever some fancy.

Here then we may all see what our portion is like to be. The first Adam threw
himself out of a very fair estate indeed, undid himself and his posterity; our
first Father breaking, he left only a stock of corruption to his Offspring,
that as we descend from Adam, we are Children of wrath, and have the curse, due
to sinners, entailed on us. That we are ill provided for, if not adopted into
Christ's family, if not of the Household of Faith. There are none rich toward
God, but they that are heirs of him, who is the heir of all things; what has
Christ done for thee? Has he remembered thee in his last Will and Testament? Art
thou one of those, to whom he bequeathed himself, his body, and blood, and all
his saving benefits? say not here, how should I know that? say not, who shall
ascend into Heaven to inform me? the word is nigh thee. Have tho^ not a Copy
of of Christ's Will and Testament in the hand? this blessed Book may resolve
thee. A^ thou one of those that hear his voice? follow him Art thou led by the
spirit of Christ? art thou one (...) those, that are given him of the Father?
how sha^ that be known? thus; if thou have given up thy se^ to him. Art thou
conformed to Christ? crucifie^ with Christ and the like?

1 John 3.23. This is his Commandment, that we should believe.
Sect. 4. PROP. IV. The Covenant of Grace is sometimes called (...) Law, and
has the force of a Law.
IT is called the Law of faith, Romans 3.27. It is the Law of life, and the Law
of liberty.

The will of God at any time made known to his Creatures is immediately
obliging; whatsoever God reveals to us, we are immediately bound to believe;
whatever God requires of us, we are immediately bound to obey. As in the
Covenant of Grace there is something that God requires, (and not only what God
promises,) it must needs have the Nature of a Law.

Since the old Original Law of works given to Man at first, is broken, and all
Mankind laid under a curse, under the Sentence of Death by that Law, it has
pleased the Lord (of his infinite mercy and ^ompassion toward poor perishing
Creatures) to ^ake and set forth a new Law, a remediant Law, a Law of grace,
holding forth remission and salva^^on to rebel-sinners, upon their humble
submission, and hearty return to God; yet withal, threatening ^eath without
remedy; yea, and much sorer con^emnation to sinners that hear of this Law of
grace, and come not in upon it. The Gospel has the ^rdinary Sanction of a Law,
it is backed with a ^reatning. Yea, it thundreth out the most dread^^l Anathema,
denounces the greatest woe to those ^at have the Gospel published and made
known, ^d yet obey not the Gospel. Ah sirs, this is the ^^ndemnation.
Gospel-condemnation will be found ^ore intolerable than Law-condemnation. The
^ospel does not only promise, but it commands, ^reatneth, and condemns.
That I cannot but ^onder any should question, whether the Gospel ^ave the
Nature of a Law. I would fain know that is essential, and proper to a Law, that
does ^t agree to the Gospel.

I say, the Gospel is a Law, [Believe, and thou ^alt be saved] is properly a
Law; as well as [Do ^is, and live.] Do this, and live, was the old Original
^aw, first given to Man, and the matter or con^nts of the first Covenant God
made with Adam. Do this, and live] i. e. obey perfectly, and so ^ou shall live
by thy own righteousness. This was ^e old Original Law. Now [Believe and thou
^alt be sayed] this is the new Law of Grace, which ^od has given to Man, as a
Remedying Law, ^ince the violation of the former) and this is the ^atter, and
sum of the Covenant of Grace. As when men accept, and consent to the terms of
^^ Gospel, whether in heart, or in profession, it becom^ a formal actual
Covenant. Though it binds a^ Law, at least in order of Nature, before men a^
bound by it as a Covenant. [Believe, and thou she be saved.] i. e. come up to
Gospel-terms, and thou^ thou art a sinner, and deservest to dye, yet thy ^
shall be pardoned, and thou shall live, for the righ^ousness of another; thou
shall be saved by Je^ Christ, who is a believers righteousness.

Here I have given you a brief account of the ^ Law. And that it has the
proper binding f^ and power of a Law, to me seems the easiest th^^ in the world
to make out. Thus, all that hear of^ terms of the new Covenant, be they
heathen, they strangers to the Covenant, yet are immediat^ bound to come up to
these terms, and immediat^ punishable upon this very account, if they do (...)
come up to these terms. This is plain as can (...) Mar. 16.15, 16. Go ye into
all the world, ^ preach the Gospel to every Creature -- and he ^ believes not
shall be damned. In this Text it is ^^dent, the Law of faith has the sanction
of a thre^ning, as well as of a promise. And wheresoever^ Gospel is preached,
all are bound to believe and according to the Gospel upon pain of damna^^^ So 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. The Lord will take vengeance them that obey not the Gospel] that
implies a ^^manding power in the Gospel, sure where the^ no command, there can
be neither obedience, disobedience. If the Gospel ought to be obey then it has
the force of a Law. If it be a sin, (...) to obey the Gospel, then the Gospel
has the Nat^^ of a Law; for where no Law, there no transgre^^ ^gain, [taking
vengeance] on them that obey not ^^e Gospel, implies most strongly, that it
has the ^^rce of a Law; would the Lord, the righteous Lord ^^ke vengeance for
no Law broken? would he punish ^^r no crime? Then how should he judge the world
righteousness?

That is therefore a very gross mistake of him, that ^lds the Gospel "a
Doctrine teaching, A. E.
not a Precept binding. Do we not read the ^ain contrary, 1 John 3.23. This is
his Command^^nt, that we should believe on the name of his Son ^^sus Christ:
What? is his Commandment no ^ding Precept? How strange is it, that this should
^t grate upon, and offend any Christians ears? certain^ to distinguish here
betwixt a Doctrine teaching, ^d a precept binding, is as groundless as that
Popish ^^stinction of Commands and Counsels, on which ^^y build their
monstrously absurd Doctrine of ^rks of Super-errogation.

But says the same writer, "No Man is bound ^o believe absolutely, but
conditionally, viz. if he will have any benefit by Christ. As a man is bound
within the time limited in the pardon, to sue it ^ut under the Broad Seal;
which if he neglect to do, he breaks no Law of the Kings, but only ^eprives
himself of the benefit of the pardon, and of the Kings favor therein.

Answer. I will not say, that all are absolutely and to believe in Christ; that
is, whether they ^er heard of Christ, or no; for the negative unbe^ of those
that never heard of Christ, is not their (...), but their misery. But upon
supposition that ^n have once heard of Christ, and the Gospel, ^n it
immediately becomes their duty to believe. And they are most severely
threatened, if they (...) obey the Gospel-commands, and continue in (...) belief.

But to say we are bound to believe only con^^tionally, that is, (as he
explains it) if we wo^ have any benefit by Christ; is to say, we are (...)
bound to believe in obedience to Gods Comman^ but only out of self-love, with
respect to (...) selves, and the benefit that comes by it. As if should say, we
ought to believe in point of pruden^ as that which is good for us; otherwise
there is (...) tie upon Conscience.

He that believes not -- the wrath of God abid^ on him, Joh. 3.36. That is, as
he says, mincing It does not come upon him, but he remains un^wrath, which
faith would have freed him from Yet v. 18. we read, he that believes is
condemn^ already, because he has not believed in the Na^ of the only begotten
Son of God.] That unbelie^ a sin; and properly a cause of condemnation; y^ more
certainly a cause of condemnation than o^ sins; other sins are damnable, this
is damning. Tho^^ wrath came upon men at first by the breach of first Covenant;
yet a further degree of wrath co^^ upon men by the breach of the new Covenant,
by sinning against this new Law of Grace.

Well Sirs, be clear in this; that the Gospel, new Covenant has the Nature of
a Law, is a vine Law, immediately, and indispensibly oblig^ all to whom it is
made known. By the very La^ Nature, of our Creation, we all stand eternally
liged both to believe and obey God, and in revel^ and in revelandis, whenever
God reveals his (...) and will to any of his Creatures, that this he requ^^ ^f
them, and on these terms he will be gracious to them, this revelation of the
will of God does neces^^rily infer the creatures obligation to observe it. and
before a Man can be bound by any act of his ^wn, he is under a previous
obligation, naturally and necessarily resulting from his very being and re^tion
to God, as a creature, to attend to the will and ^leasure of God, to act and
order himself accor^ingly. And how much more that man is bound to ^ccept of,
and submit to such a Law as this, intended and provided for the remedy and
recovery of a poor ^st creature: a Law of Grace, wherein Gods free race and
infinite mercy shines forth so illustriously, ^s it is apter to be taken
notice of, than his Sove^aignty and authority. Yet you must know God ^oth not
stand here to Man's courtesy, or need his ^oncurrence or consent, to make his
word of force, and obligatory.

Nothing can be more certain, than that God in co^enanting with men, does not
forgo or pass away ^is authority or right of commanding.

They that under pretense of advancing God's free grace, dethrone his
Sovereignty; they that level or ^essen his authority to set up his clemency and
mercy, ^eal not fairly with him; they have very low ^houghts; short,
inadequate, and unworthy appre^ensions of him.

For my part I know no stronger Argument against Antinomianism, than this; that
it denies that subjection to God, which is naturally, necessarily Man's duty,
as he is a creature, from which he can never possibly be discharged, while he
is a creature; or that ^t would deprive God of his authority over his
creatures. They that would have a believer free from the obligation to obey God
in all things, let them ask him the Kingdom also.

But attend to this I beseech you; what the Go^ requires, God requires; and
what God requires, creatures are bound to observe and perform. A^though
Ministers use to pray and beseech you to reconciled, entreat you to come in to
the Lord Je^^ Christ; yet we have authority also in the name God, to charge and
command you. Now G^ commands every one of you to repent, and this his
Commandment, that ye believe, that ye rece^ Christ Jesus the Lord, that ye kiss
the Son. A^ slight and despise him at your peril, reject him your peril.
[Believe, and be saved] binds ev^^ one to whom it is published, as a Law;
even s^ as are not under the bond of the Covenant. And y^ more especially, who
have given your consent, least by an outward profession. You are bound believe,
not only by virtue of a divine Command, (...) also as being under the bond of
the covenant. O w^ a crying sin is your unbelief! As it is a breach o^ divine
Law, it must needs be damnable in its o^ Nature; and further as it is a breach
of such a L^ of Grace, a breach of the new Covenant, that ho^ forth the only
way wherein you can be saved, so^ is the damning sin indeed; not only damnable
in (...) own Nature, but certainly damning in the eve^ Sinners that are
condemned by the Law of Work^ yet may be discharged from that condemnation
(...) harkening to, and obeying the Gospel, Romans 8. But if condemned by the
Gospel, how should su^ escape?

Genesis 17.4. Behold my Covenant is with thee.
Sect. 5. PROP. V. The Covenant of Grace is betwixt God and Man, not betwixt
God and Christ.
NOte, I am not speaking of that which Divines call the Covenant of Redemption,
or Media^ory Covenant. Though, whether that can be any ^^ing, but the eternal
decree of God, concerning Man's redemption and Salvation by Jesus Christ, in
which eternal decree, the will of the Son must needs ^e supposed in the will of
the Father, both having ^e and the same essence, and will: (not only a like^ess
and agreement, but an identity or oneness of ^ill) let the Godly-learned
consider. And whether ^ose Scriptures that seem to hold forth a Covenant, ^r
agreement betwixt the Father and the Son, are not ^ be taken as speaking after
the manner of men; ^here there could no way possibly be any the least ^istrust
on either side; where there was not the least ^eed of engaging one another for
the further satisfa^ion of either party, there would seem to be no oc^sion for
formal entering into covenant. What ground ^e have to conceive a formal
Covenanting betwixt ^e Father and the Son, where we cannot conceive ^w the
proper end of covenanting could have place; Whether the promises in Scripture
that run as made Christ, might not be recorded as that voice came from Heaven,
Joh. 12.30. for his peoples sakes, (...) one compares them: These are things I
would le^ to them that are able, to weigh and determine.

Yet I make no question of it, but those that h^ a Covenant of Redemption
betwixt the Father a^ the Son from all eternity, and others that see not h^^
that can be so well maintained, but think it is a si^^ decree, in which decree
the will of all the three Persons, Father, Son, and Spirit, is included; do ho^
ever both agree in the thing aimed at, though the expressions vary. And they
that think it is me^ properly a decree from eternity, than a Covena^ from
eternity; yet will say, in this decree the w^ and manner of our redemption and
salvation is surely, firmly ordered, determined, and provid^ for, as if it had
been by way of Covenant, and ^ most solemn mutual engagement of both parties.
(...) both come to one in the end.

But of this, (whether Covenant or Decree fre^ eternity,) Reader, since the
writing of these notes, I am taught by one, whose judgment I cannot but highly
value, and reverence, that Besides the eternal decree of God, there is a Lex
Mediatoria (a Law of Mediatorship) that Christ is under as man, whereby God made
Mediatory Acts his duty, and promised him his reward, of w^^ the certain
Salvation of the Elect was much. And this L^ was also a Covenant mod^lly. And
of this I suppose those ^^verend and Learned men, that compiled the larger
Catechi^^ must be understood to speak, when they say it [was made (...) Christ
as the second Adam.] which they call the Covenant Grace, taking in that other
Covenant made with man (when faith and repentance are conditions) as being
founded thereupon*
I am not enq^ ring; but when I speak of (...) Covenant of Grace, I me^ that
which stands in dire^ opposition, and contra-dist^ction to the Covenant works.
And though I kno^ many very reverend, eminently learned, holy and worthy men
conceive otherwise, yet many cogent Arguments enforce me to conclude this
Covenant made betwixt God and Man, not betwixt God and Christ. For,

1. Christ is the surety and Mediator of this Covenant, Heb. 7.22. and 12.24.
And therefore not ^he party whom God here covenanteth with. For ^f so, he
should be a surety for himself, and Media^or on behalf of himself. As for Moses
he was not ^roperly a Mediator, but improperly, a type of Christ, ^he true
Mediator. Christ as a Mediator comes be^wixt the two parties Covenanting. Upon
his un^ertaking, upon account of Christ's satisfying, or ^ndertaking to
satisfy for our breach of the first ^ovenant made with Man, the Lord was
pleased to ^nter into or make another Covenant with us. This ^ovenant indeed
was confirmed in Christ. But I cannot see how it can be said to be confirmed
with Christ. It was (...), ^onfirmed, ratified of God with respect unto Christ,
^ooking at Christ, as some.

Some argue that the Covenant was made with Christ, because he is made the
surety and Mediator ^f it; but I would argue on the contrary. Because ^e is the
Mediator of the Covenant, therefore he (...) not properly a party which whom it
is made. What place is left for Man in this Covenant if Christ ^e both
principal, and surety? Or can the same ^erson be both principal and surety in
the same ^ond?

2. If this Covenant was made with Christ, then (...) was made with him, either
as God, or as Man, ^r as God and Man, or Mediator. But it was not made with
Christ, as God: For so he makes o^ party with the Father. Consider him as God,
a^ so the Father cannot be one party, and the Son another; but are both of them
to be looked on as o^ and the same party. Nor was this Covenant man with
Christ, as Man; none will say the Christ as Man was under the Covenant of wor^
not under the Covenant of grace. Was the Cov^nant [Believe, and thou shall be
saved] made to (...) Man Christ? Or that which is sometimes called the new
Covenant [I will give you a new heart, t^ away the stony heart, forgive your
iniquiti^ was the Man Christ taken into this Covenant?

Nor was the Covenant made with him as God (...) Man, or Mediator; but rather
was procured (...) him, so that in this respect, it is his Testam^^ His
Testament, not made to him, but made or pr^cured by him. The New Testament in
his bloo^ Indeed if we consider Christ as Mediator, so he properly no party: if
we consider him as a pa^ in this Covenant, so he and his Father are one part
and Man the other.

3. The very terms and tenor of the Covenant Grace (hinted at even now) do
plainly show w^ whom it is made. [Believe, and thou shall be save] which is
expressed in other words and phrases und^ the Old Testament, as Isa. 55.3.
Incline your (...) and come to me; hear, and your souls shall live. (...) not
this the Covenant that succeeded the Coven^^ of works [Do this, and live.] If
the Covenant (...) Grace be made with Christ, then it follows wh^ God requires
in the Covenant of Grace, is requir^ of Christ. That he must believe, and must
repe^ and turn to God.

4. The benefits and blessings promised in the Covenant of Grace, are such as
are proper to us men, us sinners, and are promised unto Us; not unto Christ.
Will any say, that pardon, and free ^ustification was ever promised of God to
Jesus Christ? were it not blasphemy to say, that Christ had any sin to be
pardoned? And though he was acquitted, and justified before God, yet not of
free Grace; but he fully satisfied the highest demands of justice, before he
received his discharge.

5. If the Covenant of Grace be betwixt God and Christ, not betwixt God and
Man, then no Man upon earth can be charged with breach of Covenant ^ere, or
condemned, and punished, as a violater of ^^e new Covenant.

Object. 1. We read Gal. 3.16. the promises were made to Christ, that Christ
was the seed.

Answ. There we are to understand Christ mysti^al, not Christ personal. As Beza
in his larger ^otes, they that think Paul disputes here of the ^erson of
Christ, are in an error, when rather he ^eats of two people, i. e. Jews and
Gentiles, ^rought into one mass, or body of the seed of Abraham.

Object. 2. Tit. 1.2. we read of eternal life, pro^ised before the world began;
But there was none before the world began, to whom this could be pro^ised, but
Jesus Christ our Mediator.

Answ. 1. Some read (...), not before ^^e world began, but before ancient
times. Eter^al life was promised long ago, Calvin. See Ball of Covenant, p. 40.
a ^^ltis retro seculis, for many ages ^ast.

2. Otherwise by [promised] we are to understand appointed, or decreed;
purposed it was, b^ not promised before the world began.

3. How incongruous is it to say, Christ was M^diator from Eternity, before the
world began? I^ true, as God he is from Eternity, but not as M^diator.

4. If we could understand it no otherwise, the that Eternal life was promised
before the world ^^gan; yet it will not follow, that this was promi^ to Christ
Mediator: Dr. Kellet, Trican. p. 258.
As one, W^ may I not say, it is an holy Tria^ gisme of the Father, Son, and H^
Ghost, sweetly consenting and concording in (...) way of Man's Salvation before
Man had a being somewhat like that, Let us make man in our (...) Image, Genesis
1.26.

Object. 2. God promises to give Jesus Ch^ for a Covenant, Isaiah 42.6. and
49. of Isaiah therefore the Covenant of Grace was made w^ him.

Answer. It follows not, but rather the contra^ if Christ was promised of God,
as the great bles^ of the Covenant, it implies the Covenant was m^^ not with
Jesus Christ, but with them to wh^ he was so promised; the Covenant of Grace i^
Covenant concerning Christ, a Covenant of hi^ showing how, or upon what terms
we may be^ terested in him, and made partakers of his sa^ benefits. How then
can it be a Covenant of (...) with him? The promises are Yea, and Amen, him, 2
Cor. 1.20. not to him. Or if when (...) promised for a Covenant, we understand
for a ^^diator of the Covenant, that implies still the ^venant was not
properly made with him, but betwixt God and those who have him for their
Mediator.

Object. 4. But fallen Man was unworthy, and unmeet to enter into Covenant with
God.

Answ. I do most freely grant it, I heartily yield this; yet without any
prejudice to the Position I have laid down, methinks it is evident, this sets
it off as a covenant of Grace indeed; that it is a covenant with fallen Man. O
wonderful free Grace! that the Lord should make another covenant with Man after
Man's violation of that covenant, made with him at first; it was not so
wonderful gracious condescension, that God vouchsafed at first to take an
innocent creature into covenant with himself, as that after Man has proved
false to God; yet the Lord should please to treat with him again, and enter
into another covenant with him. That God should make a covenant with fallen
men, with sinful creatures. Methinks no more need to be said, to prove it a
Covenant of Grace. And certainly whatever covenant was made with Christ (as
made with him) was not a covenant of Grace, but rather of Justice; and whatever
we find promised to him, was but a just reward of his obedience and
satisfaction. A reward not of Grace, but of Merit.

But that God should any more covenant with poor sinful creatures, as David
says [Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me an
everlasting covenant.] O this we can never enough admire! And verily I cannot
foresee any inconvenience, or ill consequence like to attend this assertion,
that the covenant of Grace is made betwixt God, and Men; (still supposing
Christ to be the Mediator of it) but rather that it does further advance, and
set forth the free grace of God, an^ lay a stronger obligation upon Men, than
that opinion does, which it opposes.

Romans 10.9. If thou shall confess, etc.
Sect. 6. PROP. VI. The Covenant of Grace, having the true Nature of a
Covenant, is not without Condition.
MAny (I know) deny the Covenant of grace to to have any condition, yea, make
this a mai^ point of difference betwixt the Covenant of works, and the Covenant
of grace, that (as they hold) the covenant of works was conditional, whereas
the Covenant of Grace is absolute. Yea, they will not stick to say, that if you
suppose the Covenant of Grace conditional, you turn it into a Covenant of Works.

Yet many who deny the Term [condition] will readily yield the thing. Yea, all
that have not their judgments woefully corrupted, that have not drunk in the
very dreggs of Antinomianism, must grant the thing, however they take offense
without cause at the term, condition. Certainly, all that have not sucked in
desperate principle of Error, must yield, and assert the necessity of faith,
repentance, and sincere obedience, as without which there is no Salvation;
which indeed is all we mean, when we say they are conditions of the Covenant,
and of salvation therein promised.

Some call them qualifications disposing the subject, as I grant they are: but
when we are speaking of the Covenant, and what it requires, we cannot use any
more apt and proper term, than the word condition. And what is the condition of
a Covenant, but that, without which the benefit promised cannot be expected,
and upon which it may.

When another promises this or that to you, not simply and absolutely, but
upon Terms, upon such or such a Condition, this you know is a Conditional
promise. And that upon which the performance of the promise is suspended, is
the condition of the promise.

Now the Lord promises life and salvation to us, but if we believe, if we
unfeignedly repent and turn to him, if we resolve and set upon a course of
sincere and new obedience: and if we will not come up to these terms, he tells
us plainly, there is no salvation for us, but we shall dye in our sins. Now is
it not plain, that these are conditions of the Covenant, and of the promised
salvation, without which men can have no interest, right, or title to what is
so promised, Undoubtedly they are Conditions, whether men call them so, or no.

I am very confident, that many are prejudiced against the term condition, upon
a mere mistake. As they think, the word either aims at the setting up of the
power of Nature, or the merits of men's works, or both: when there is no such
thing. A^ I hope sufficiently to clear it to you, before I have done with this
Subject, that this Covenants cond^tions are neither meritorious of salvation,
nor to b^ performed by the power of Nature, or of a man own free will.
Certainly, the Covenant of Gra^ knows, or admits of no such condition, as will
(...) stand with the honor of free Grace, But the hono^ of Gods free grace is
not only secured, but pr^claimed here, 1. That he would go so low, th^^ he is
pleased to accept of sincere obedience, when he might have exacted perfect
obedience from (...) his creatures. 2. That he has promised, and do^ work the
condition in his people. 3. That he ha^ made so large and ample promise to, and
does so gl^riously reward his own grace, and workings in h^ people.

These things premised to prevent unjust prejudic^ I come to the proof of the
proposition, that the Covenant of Grace has some condition, or it is properly
no covenant. A Covenant is mutuus contra^ctus per sponsionem and stipulationem;
It is a mutual engagement of parties, including a promise on the one part, and
a stipulation, or condition to be performed or required on the other part, on
which the promise is suspended, And this is the difference betwixt a simple
promise, and a Covenant; A promis^ binds one party, to wit, him that makes
it: a Covenant binds both parties. Thus all Covenant do necessarily imply,
and include a condition.

It is a very weak and frivolous exception, to say we confound the Covenant of
works, and the Covenant of Grace, if we make this conditional.

Pray observe this, the Covenant of Grace having a condition, it follows that
it has the Nature ^f a covenant, has that which is proper, and es^ential to a
Covenant: but it will by no means ^ollow, that it is of the same kind with the
Covenant of works, unless the condition were the ^ame

I grant indeed sometimes the word [covenant] (...) used for an absolute
promise, where there is no sti^ulation: but then I say it is used improperly.
As in Genesis 9.9. to ver. the 14. That which is there ^ermed a Covenant
(probably to show its firmness and stability,) yet in strictness of speech is
no more ^han an absolute promise. Now if men will compare ^he Covenant of Grace
and the Covenant of Noah, ^ot only in regard of firmness, sureness, but of
^bsoluteness too, as equally, with condition; then ^hey must say, that to speak
properly, there is but ^ne Covenant made with man, viz. the Covenant of Works;
but as for that, we call the Covenant of Grace, it is properly no more, than an
absolute ^romise, properly no Covenant.

But if the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace are distinct Species,
they must necessa^ily each of them partake of the nature of the genus, that is,
have what is essential to a Covenant in gene^al, as this is essential, even a
promise with a stipula^ion or condition; in this they must both agree, or they
cannot both be Covenants, But then the difference ^f the conditions required in
these two Covenants, that is the thing, which makes the distinction be^wixt
these Covenants.

I hope now you will be able to go along with me ^ere, that to deny the
Covenant of Grace has any ^ondition is to deny that it is a Covenant. I hope
Sirs, you will not deny, that there is any Cove^ of Grace, to deny conditions.

2. What is a Condition in a Covenant, but (...) upon which the promise is
suspended, which be^ put, we may lay claim to what is promised, (...) without
which we cannot claim what is promis^ Now is it not the Covenant of Grace that
(...) forth and promises salvation; and it is not the p^mise of salvation so
suspended upon faith, repe^ance, and sincere obedience, that all who have the
same now mentioned may certainly expect salv^ on, may lay claim to it, (not
indeed as a thing t^ merited by them, but only merited by Christ (...) them,
and graciously promised of God to the^ Such, and none but such (I speak of
adult person can hope to be saved. And is not that a condition the promise, and
of the Salvation promised, (...) if we have it, then salvation is ours by
promise: if we have it not, it is none of ours, we can cl^ no such thing; One
would think that one Text al^ were sufficient to decide this controversy, as
g^ a controversy as it is, Romans 10.9. If thou shall (...) fess with thy mouth
the Lord Jesus, and believe (...) thy heart, thou shall be saved. Those with
wh^ we have to do in this controversy, will gr^^^ hope, that it is only the
Covenant of Grace wh^ holds forth salvation, that is, happiness as att^able to
man fallen. Now we see here, as evide^ may be, salvation held forth
conditionally in (...) Scripture, [If thou believe with thy heart, etc.]
therefore the Covenant of Grace holds forth sa^ tion conditionally.

3. I may argue otherwise from this clear tr^^ which I hope they would be
ashamed to deny, That we are saved by Faith. Now if we are saved (...) Faith,
we are saved by it, either as that unto which (though not for which) God has
promised salvation, ^^d thus it is apparently made a condition, upon which the
promise of salvation is suspended: or ^^e we are saved by faith, without
respect to Gods ^acious Covenant and promise, which if so; then ^ith should
save of it self, by some intrinsic me^^, or Virtue of its own; which I hope
they that any conditions in the Covenant, would not dare (...) assert. So

4. If faith, repentance, and sincere obedience, be ^t conditions required in
the Covenant of Grace, I ^ould sain know, by what Law or Covenant they ^e
required, is it the Covenant of Works; or of ^race, that says, whosoever
believes shall be saved? (...) it the Covenant of Works, or of Grace, that ^th
repent that your sins may be blotted out. If ^is be the Tenor of the Law, and
Covenant of ^orks, Then the Law, and Covenant of Works ^veth Life: But if this
be the Tenor of the Cove^nt of Grace, if men will grant that, then it is
^ident, that the Covenant of Grace is not abso^te, but conditional.

5. Suppose the Covenant of Grace absolute, with^nt condition, and then how is
it possible for any ^an, or woman in the world to know, they have an ^terest in
the Covenant, and the blessings thereof ^^thout extraordinary divine
revelation? So there ^uld be no such duty, as the Apostle Peter exhorts
^^ristians unto, to make their calling and Election, ^^d Salvation sure. If
there be no conditions in the ^^venant, then all would seem to have an equal
^^re, or no share at all in it. If it be said, God did not intend it for the
benefit of all alike yet (...) withstanding, it is impossible that those to
whom (...) does intend the benefits and blessings of the Co^ nant, should know
any such thing (since they are n^ expressed by name) if there be no conditions,
(...) qualifications deciphering the persons to whom the^ special blessings do
belong. Christians, take he^ of entertaining this opinion, as you would not su^
vert the true ground of spiritual peace, and con^^lation. This opinion is very
prejudicial to all sou^ solid, Scripture-hope, and joy.

6. We have proved before that the Covenant (...) Grace, does partake of the
Nature of a Law; the^ fore there must needs be something required. If were all
promise, it could not be a Law. We so^^ times read of Gods commanding the
Covenant Psalm. 111.9. He has commaded his covenant (...) ever. Surely he does
not speak this of the Covenant of Works; for that is not the everlasting
covenant the Scriptures speak of, As one observes. The^ is mention made of a
covenant promised, Deuteronomy. 7.1^ and there is mention also of a covenant command^
(Deuteronomy. 4.13.) not to imply two Covenants, (...) two parts of the same Covenant,
and pray tell (...) what is the Bond of the covenant, if it lays no^ upon man?
we read, Ezekiel. 20.37. of the Bond^ the Covenant; And surely (as one says)
there is condition in that Bond.

In Psalm. 25.10. to keep Gods Covenant, and (...) Testimonies, are made all
one. Covenant (...) Testimonies are Synonyma's, meaning Legem (...) re
sancitam. The Ark was called the Ark of (...) covenant, because there was kept
the book of (...) covenant, Gods Law, which by Covenant the^ were bound to
observe. [ All the paths of the Lord ^re mercy and truth, unto such as keep his
covenant and his Testimonies. This text cannot speak of the ^ovenant of Works,
sure. 1. Because there are ^one, that keep that Covenant. 2. Because (...)
mercy belongs to that Covenant. No mercy ^s to be expected, upon the Terms of
that Covenant.

Again, Psalm. 103.18. To keep his covenant, and to remember his commandments to
do them, are put together, the latter as exegetical of the former. And ^er. 17.
the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting ^o everlasting upon such as keep his
covenant. The covenant of works cannot be intended here, The Psalmist speaks of
a covenant of mercy; which is yet a covenant requiring duty. There are
commands, as well as promises belonging to the covenant of grace. Commands to
be observed on our part, as well as Promises to be performed on Gods part. We
must remember and consider, God is a God, that enters into covenant with us;
and we are his Creatures, we that are taken into covenant. And how can it seem
strange that a God in covenant requires duty and subjection of his creatures.
But this will be further cleared when we come to show, what the new covenant
conditions are.

7. Seventhly. If the covenant of Grace has no condition, then none could be
said either to keep it or to break it. Then none could be guilty of
transgressing, or forsaking it. There is no thinking, that any man should keep
the covenant of works. And if the covenant of Grace have no condition; then
there is nothing in this covenant for men to keep. If the covenant be absolute,
there can be no breaking of it on man's part. If there are no conditio^^
required, there are none to be observed. If m^^ are bound to nothing in this
covenant, then thou^^ they do nothing, they cannot be said to fail in
^^^thing, to transgress and break this covenant. (...) yet men are sometimes
charged, Deuteronomy. 29.25. Isa. ^.5. Psalm. 78.10.37. pray think a little seriously
this; If you say the Covenant is absolute, then cannot be broken on man's part;
then if it be b^^ken, it should be broken by God himself. But it (...) horrid
blasphemy to charge the Lord, that is fai^^full, with breach of covenant. The
objections th^^ are usually made against conditions in the Coven^ of Grace,
have been answered already in what premised. To say. that a condition here
would ^^^rogate, from the perfection and fullness of Christ^^ merit, or from
the freeness of God's Grace in ^^stowing Covenant-blessings, has no show of
re^^son, unless some meritorious condition was plead^^ for. Those texts, Jer.
31.33. Heb. 8.10. wh^ some urge; I shall speak to, under the ninth prop^sition.

Well. I hope you have seen it cleared, and und^niably proved, that the
Covenant of Grace ha^ its Conditions. Now would you bring this tru^^ home to
your hearts, and consciences; Sirs, wh^^ can you say for your selves, to
evidence your rig^^ and Title to the blessings promised? Are you tru^
believers, or not? Are you sound converts, or not Are you upright walkers, or
not? Such you mu^^ be, otherwise you cannot escape the condemnation threatened,
incurred by the breach of the Covena^^ of Works, or enjoy the salvation held
forth, and promised in the Covenant of Grace.

I may expect, that this Doctrine will not be pleasing to some. They have been
called Legal Preachers, and Duty-mongers, etc. that have held, and maintained
the Covenant of Grace to be condi^ional. But I have been wont still to suspect
those ^ayes and opinions, which a carnal corrupt heart na^^rally complieth
with. It is too probable, that ^uch are false ways. How pleasing is it to
flesh and ^ood, to tell sinners of an absolute Covenant, where ^od has
promised to do all, requiring nothing of them. Christ died to save sinners,
and if you are sinners, ^er is no more to be said or done, but he died to save
^^u; would not such doctrine please the vilest and most ^^aceless wretches. As
I remember a ranting Antino^ian, that preached such Doctrine as this, about
^ambridge, That Fornicators, adulterers, effeminate, ^ieves, covetous,
drunkards, etc. are the only ^ieces cut out for heaven, Though certainly, it
was ^treme blockishness, or something worse than block^hness, not to take
notice, that when the Apostle yes, 1 Cor. 6.11. [such were some of you] he
im^ediately adds, but ye are washed, but ye are santified. If this were the
message, Gods ministers ^ad to deliver, were we to tell the drunkard, the
un^ean wretch, the covetous, and unjust person, go^g on to satisfy their
lusts, that the promise of par^on and salvation was theirs, as much as any
ones; that Christ and heaven did belong to them, as much (...) to any other;
that their Right and Title, is as good (...) any ones; this could not but be
welcome news ^o them. And if this were Gospel light, I wonder ^ow it is
possible that Sinners should hate the light. ^ndeed I connot conceive how one
that loves his ^usts, should not love such preaching. But alas what is it, but
to sow pillows under men's arm-hole^ This is to strengthen the hands of the
wicked, the he should not return from his wicked way, by pr^ mising him life.
This is to prophecy peace, but so (...) the false prophets were wont to do.
This is (...) smooth way indeed, but such as leads into the broad way. Take
heed of it. This is not buildi^ souls toward heaven, but rather to hell, to
lay foundation for security and presumption. I would fear to lay principles of
despair or presumption either. As I durst not but encourage the greate^ Sinner
amongst you to leave your sins; but say, (...) the Apostle, Act. 3.19. Repent,
and be converte^ that your sins may be blotted out: So I durst not (...)
courage any of you to live in sin, as if ye might continue in sin, and yet hope
that Gods aboundi^ Grace would extend it self to you in the pard^ of your sins.
No, if ye live after the flesh ye sh^^ dye: but if through the Spirit, ye
mortify the dee^ of the body ye shall live, Romans 8.13.

Mark 1.15. Repent ye, and believe the Gospel.
Sect. 7. PROP. VII. The Condition of the Covenant of Grace is (...) performed
by God or by Christ for us; (...) by us; (the Lord enabling us.)
SOme that will not hear of the Covenant of Gra^^ having any Condition, yet
that they may not^ thought enemies to faith, repentance, new obedience, would
fain salve the matter thus, Mr. Patient, Did. of Covenants, p. 30, 31.
It is a Covenant without all condition required in the creature, but what God
himself performs.

Now though I freely grant no man would perform the condition of the Covenant
of Grace, without special grace and help from God; yet to say, It is without
all condition, but what God himself performs, is a rash, unsound assertion.
For,

First, It is self- contradiction. It is to say the Covenant is absolute, and
not absolute; without all condition, and not without all condition required in
the creature.

Secondly, It is indeed blasphemous to say that God does believe in us, repent
in us, obey in us. He gives the grace and ability, but it is man that
performs the Act. He gives his people that special help, whereby they come
to believe, repent, obey. But it is one thing for God to enable us to perform
the condition, and another to perform it himself. It is below the Majesty of
God to perform the condition for us; as it is above us, quite above our
strength, to perform it without him.

Thirdly, If there be no condition required in the creature, but what God
performs, then the Covenant should run thus, I the Lord do promise remission
and salvation unto you, upon this condition that I give you an heart to believe
and repent, upon condition that I perform this in, and for you. Thus God should
require the condition of himself not of us. Which is most absurd.

Fourthly, Thus men should not deserve to suffer for nonperformance of the
condition; it being that which God is to perform, and otherwise not required
in, or of the creature. If the Covena^ lies wholly on Gods part, then how are
men puni^ able for not keeping Covenant? This is eviden^ that such as have the
Gospel preached to them, a^ do not come up to the Terms of the new Covenan^ (do
not believe, and repent,) they not only d^ prive themselves of the life and
happiness there pro^mised, but also incur the penalty threatened. No^ will God
punish any for unbelief, when faith w^^ not required of them; or not required,
till the Lord performed it in them? If that position I a^ disproving, were
true, the Gospel should new threaten condemnation for unbelief. Where Go^
performs this for any, that they believe, they a^^ freed from condemnation
upon that account; and (...) for others, who have not this performed in them,
is not required of them, God requiring no mo^ than he performs. By this time
I hope you a^ sensible, that it a dangerous assertion, to say, (...) requires
nothing in the Covenant of Grace, but (...) he performs.

And so it is as false to say, that the condition of (...) Covenant is
performed by Christ.

It is enough for us (says one) to belie^ that Christ has repented for us,
Saltmarsh.
b^lieved for us.

But it is not required of Christ, but of us sinne^ to repent, and believe.
Jesus Christ was made ^^der the Law, and kept it to a tittle, fulfilled (...)
righteousness, he performed the condition of t^ (...) Covenant. The Covenant of
Works, whi^^ (...) brake, Christ fulfilled. But he was not un^ the Gospel, nor
was he concerned to perform the co^ dition of the Covenant of Grace, but only
to see that his people the heirs of salvation do perform it.

To advise souls that doubt of their Gospel sincerity, to see it in Christ (as
Mr. Saltmarsh does) to see it in Christ, who has obeyed perfectly, is
miserably to confound the conditions of the two Covenants, which ought to be
most carefully distinguished. And it implies thus much, as if such were
troubled about what does not at all concern them. Why should any trouble
themselves about the condition of the Covenant of Grace, to find it in
themselves, if Christ has performed the same for them? As if souls should
disquiet themselves, that they cannot see how they can satisfy Gods justice
for their sins, when Christ has done that, and it is not expected from them.
If Christ has performed the condition of the Covenant of Grace for us, then it
belongs not to us to perform it. It is done already to our hand. And we
should not presume to take Christ's work out of his hand.

And if Christ fulfilled the conditions of both Covenants for us, then it
follows, that even as he made us without us, so he saves us without us;
contrary to Phil. 2.12. So likewise it follows, that all for whom Christ has
satisfied (whether they were all mankind, or all the Elect) are immediately
justified, actually discharged from all sin, and condemnation, immediately
interested in the benefits and blessings of the Covenant of Grace, in a state
of salvation, as soon as ever they are in being; there being nothing required
to their interest in the same, but what Christ has done for them. So it
follows, that such were never children of wrath, but always in a state of
reconciliation with God, contrary t^ Ephesians. 2.3. And so again, that we are not
justified b^ faith: but before faith, and without it, contrary t^ Romans 5.1. And
then, what should hinder, but that me^ may be justified and saved, who never do
believe contrary to Mark 16.16. He that believes not sh^^ be damned. But that
the condition of the covenant^ Grace is not performed by Christ, but by us,
appea^^ from that Proposition cleared and proved before That the Covenant of
Grace is not betwixt God an^ Christ, but betwixt God and us, or betwixt Chr^^^
and us.

Joh. 6.44. No man can come to me, except, etc.
Sect. 8. PROP. VIII. Though we are to perform the condition of the Covenant of
Grace, yet we should never perform it of our selves, without the help o^
special Grace.
THis appears,

1. From the consideration of man's nature condition: what we all are without
Grace. Nat^ rally we are without strength, Romans 5.6. under the power of Satan,
Luke 11.21, 22. blinded and le^ by him, 2 Cor. 4.4. Ephesians. 2.2. unable to disce^^
spiritual things aright, 1 Cor. 2.14. Our minds a^ wills at enmity against God,
so ill disposed, that they cannot subject to, cannot but rebel against the Law
of God, Romans 8.7. and we all found dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.1, 5.
Col. 2.13.

Hillary wrote to St. Augustine of many in France, who thought, In natura licet
vitiata, residuam esse talem facultatem, quae suo conatu possit medicum
quaerere, i.e. incipere. A likely thing, that dead souls should seek to the
Physician of themselves; or that they should come upon a bare external call.
Suadela non sufficit, sed opus est medela. They have too slight thoughts of the
corruption of man's nature, who see not special grace of absolute necessity to
conversion. That corruption which has depraved all a man's faculties, which
renders man an enemy to God, and his own souls truest good, where this ill
constitution of soul is become natural, it must needs be a mighty work indeed
to subdue this corruption, to turn the soul from darkness to light, and from
the power of Satan unto God.

2. From the Scripture expressions used, to set forth the first inward
discriminating grace, that without which there is no believing, no repenting,
or obeying aright.

The Father's drawing, Joh. 6.44. No man can come to me, except the Father draw
him: and I will raise him up at the last day. Hereupon says our Amesius. It
would seem to be of no less power this drawing men to Christ, In Coron. Art. 4.
c. 8. Sect. 5. (mihi) p. 252.
than raising them from the dead: otherwise Christ should attribute the lesser
work to his Father, and the greater to himself. Sure it is, the Fathers drawing
must denote some inward efficacious work, not mere Moral suasion. For all that
are drawn of the Father (in the sense of this Text) they come to Christ, (see
ver. 45.) but all that have moral suasion do not come. Those carnal Jews,
Christ was preaching unto there, ha^^ moral suasion; yet did not come, not
being draw^ of the Father. And is it not as plain, that the Fathers drawing
determines man's will, is not determined by it? Otherwise he should not so
properly be said to draw men, as to be drawn: he should not lead, but follow.

It is giving a new heart, Ezekiel. 36.26. Does Go^ give a new heart to all?
Surely no. Therefore thi^ intended something more, than any common help
afforded to all. All have not a new heart given them. If no more were included
in it, than moral suasion then Ministers might be said to give men a new heart,
when they persuade them to get their hearts renewed. But that an inward
efficacious heart-changing work is intended in that expression may appear from
Deuteronomy. 29.2. Yet the Lord has not given you an heart to perceive] when as he
had given them (besides their natural faculties) his word, miracles, abundance
of means, fitted to work on them objectively, morally. And certainly Gods
putting his Law in our inward parts, and writing it in our hearts, Ezekiel. 36.27.
is more than bare revealing it, more than offering it to our understanding.

Besides the illumination of the understanding, it must needs include a
renewing of the will. And there is no obeying God aright, till he give us this
heart to obey. No believing in Christ, till the Lord give us an heart to
believe.

Thus Faith is the gift of God. Ministers may preach the necessity of faith,
may persuade to it, but cannot give it.

It is Gods taking away the heart of stone, and giving an heart of flesh, Ezekiel.
36.26. The stony heart of man would never yield of it self, or relent of it
self.

It is called regeneration, Joh. 3.3. A being born again, born from above, born
of God. And no believing till we are born of God, Joh. 1. v. 12, 13. We must be
spiritually alive otherwise we cannot act spiritually. No believing without
regeneration, therefore no believing without special grace. Will any say, that
regeneration is no more than moral suasion? or that it is common to all? Is
this their gratia sufficiens, which they would have given to all? Then if all
have regeneration, if all are born of God, it follows, all are the children of
God, and all are believers; for so are all that are born of God. Methinks this
i^ plain, All are not born of God; but it is of his special grace that any are
thus born again. Yet no believing without being born of God: and so no
believing without special grace.

Not that we are to suppose any intervall, or distance of time betwixt the Act
of Gods Grace, irradiating the understanding, and renewing, rectifying the
will, and the enlightened and rectified mind and wills act of closing with
Christ: but that Gods Act is first in order. His drawing in order of nature
before man's coming.

Again, It is (...), and, (...), Ephesians. 1.19. (...) exceeding greatness of his
power, the ener^^ (...) the might of his power, which he puts forth,
^^^enabling souls to believe. Now were it not nee^less, that he should put
forth this extraordinary, (...) natural power, if men could believe of them
selves, without any special grace, or help from him?

So it is called a new creation, quickening or resurrection from the dead,
Anast. Sinait. d. rect. fid. dog. l. 1.
Ephesians. 2.5, (...) Neque enim ab alio aliquo potes recr^ ari, praeterquam ab eo
qui initio te creavit. To create, quicken, raise from the dead, these are
special works of divine almighty power.

3. To some, which implies, that they have it not of themselves: but must have
it from Him. Promisit enim quod ipse facturus fuerat, non quod homines; quia
etsi faciant homines bona, ipse facit, ut illi faciant quae praecepit; non illt
faciunt ut pse faciat, quod promisit, Aug.
From the promise God has made of giving Grace. When the Lord promises to
circumcise their heart, to love him, Deu^ 30.6. does not this imply that a
natural uncircumcised heart cannot love him (the uncircumcised heart cannot
love God, as the uncircumcised ear cannot hearken to him, Jer. 6.10.) And that
no man can circumcise his own heart, no^ can any creature so prepare, and
dispose the heart o^ another to love God? But that this must be the work of the
Lord God. [ The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, etc.] So Ezekiel. 36.26.
I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh. The Lord needed not to have
made such promises, if sinne^ could do the work of themselves.

4 If men may believe, and repent of themselves, Frustra^n. and stulte ab alio
petimus, q^od vel jam habemus, vel quod sic in nostra positum est potestate, ut
ab alio dannum, seu faciendum non expecte mus. D. Ward. (Great. Diserim.) p. 343.
without the special help of Divine grace then what need they to pray to God
for Grace what need they pray for that, which is in their own power already? As
S. August. notes of the Pelagians, Destruunt etiam orationes quas facit
Ecclesia, sive pro infidelibus, and doctrinae Dei resistentibus, ut
convertantur ad Deum: sive pro fidelibus, etc. de haeres. c. 88.

I cannot understand how they can heartily pray for grace for themselves or
others, that assert the liberty of man's will, in opposition to the special
determining grace of God. How shall they pray to the Lord to turn them, (as
Jer. 31.18.) to change their hearts, to order their steps in his word, to
incline their hearts to keep his Laws, who hold that all God does is to set
man's will in aequilibrio, in an equal poize, not that he ever determines man's
will so by his grace, but leaves it free to determine it self?

And if we must hold, that God gives to all men that are alike in their
carriage, like grace, in common; not to one more, to another less; then how can
I pray or hope, that he should do that for me, which he will not do for every
one in the world, of the like condition and capacity with me? Yea, why should
men pray at all? If this be the inflexible rule of his dealings with the
children of men, there would seem to be no more ground for prayer here, than
that we should pray that the ordinances of heaven, and Gods Covenant with day
and night might continue to the end of the world, that sun and moon might still
keep their course, or on the other hand pray for an alteration of the most
settled course of nature.

Thus all our prayers for grace should signify no more, than such a
declaration as this, Lord, thou have given man freedom of will to choose, or
refuse life and happiness, and such means and m^tives thou have vouchsafed and
given, the bett^^ to direct him in his choice. Now this is all that or any one
can expect at thy hands, that th^^ would assist my natural faculties in that
genera^ way, as thou do assist the faculties of all me^ notwithstanding which
general help there is n^ one of many, but chooses death and misery before
everlasting life and happiness; yet I crave (...) more, and look for no more,
but that comm^^ help thou would not deny to any one in (...) circumstances,
and let it be left to my own will, (...) take what course it pleases. Now is
this to pr^^ for converting grace, or rather is it not to declar^ we have no
need of it, or no ground to pray for in yet, This is the Result of that
opinion, which se^ up the Liberty of man's will, or power of nat^ against the
special grace of God; which wheth^^ it be not very horrid, let those that know
wh^ prayer is, and what their own hearts are, how co^rupt and ill inclined, and
that know what grace (...) consider seriously of it, take advice, and speak
the^ minds.

5. Take away special Grace, deny that, an^ you must say, believers are no way
bound to prai^ God in special, above other men. How are the^ obliged to praise
God above others, for whom (...) does no more, than he does for others? But
does n^ this sound very harshly, that they that believe, a^^ are saved, are no
more beholden to the Grace^ God, than such are, who reject Christ and the
Go^pel, and so dye and perish? yet so it must be, God give but the same help to
those, which the^ other had. Nec dici potest Petrum ideo accepisse majus
beneficium quam Judas, quod habeat gratiam adjuvantem per modum concursus, quam
Judas non habet. Nam praeterquam quod Petrus sua acceptatione sese a Juda
antecedenter discrevit ad gratiae adjuvantis cooperationem; haec ipsa gratia
adjuvans aeque parata est ex eorum hypothesi Judae atque Petro, ac proinde hac
ex part aequale est beneficium cum ex aequo utrisque paretur, and offeratur,
Dr. Ward [Grat. Discrim.] p. 328, 329.
Yea, for as much as many that are now amned did once enjoy more ^f the means
of salvation, ^ore common helps, more ^f that they call sufficient ^race, than
some that are ^ved; if there be not some ^ecial grace vouchsafed to ^^ese,
which the other had ^ot, they should be less obli^ed unto God, which one ^ould
tremble to think of. That some do believe, when others believe not, if you any
special grace, you must ^y, it is not because God did more for the one, than ^r
the other: but because by the free act of their ^wn will, the one did improve
that grace and help ^ouchfafed to men in common, which the other sort
^eglected, would not improve. Thus indeed the ^ill of man is made the direct,
true, and proper ^use of his first conversion and coming unto Christ; and the
divine grace and help no more than barely an ^ntecedent, or a faint causa sine
qua non, That which being put, yet it was altogether uncertain, ^hether the
happy effect would follow; which had ^en in vain, and utterly lost, but that
the free ^ill of such thought good to determine the matter ^n its side. Thus a
man should owe the praise of ^s own conversion, not so much to Gods Grace as
(...) his own free will; his willing to accept of, and ^prove that same
exciting grace, which others had (...) common with him, and rejected, or
resisted. Thus a man makes himself to differ, even in the main, that highest
point of difference, true savi^ grace. Surely common grace (which they supp^^
vouchsafed to all upon equal terms) this can^^ make the difference: therefore
it must be either Go^ special Grace, or man's free will. If you deny these mer
of these, you give the praise of that to the^ter. What a graceless opinion is
that (Sirs) wh^^ tends to make men so ungrateful to Gods grace Once we find
the Pharisee brought in, as givi^^ thanks to God, that he was not as the
Publican. (...) if they that are converted, had not stood o^^ as well as
others, but for some special grace vou^^ safed to them, which was denied to
others that sta^^ out, they cannot (with understanding and serio^^ness) give
thanks to God for making that differen^ which not his grace, but their own free
will make.

Though some may say, They owe this to G^^ that he has given them such liberty
of will. A^ noble, Seraph. Love p. 117.
and ingenious writer speaks of Jew, that thought men owed more God, than the
very Angels do; (...) this reason, that whereas God without any go^^ work of
theirs, Was not that a blasphemous saying of Seneca, nigro carbone not andum,
(Epist. 53) Est aliquid quo sapiens antecedat Deum; ille naturae beneficio, non
suo sapiens est.
but p^^ out of his goodness confe^^ on them that blessed conditi^^ they enjoy;
by giving (...) a free will, by the goodn^^^ of which he may glorify (...)
maker, when by abusing it is in his power to dishonor him, he allows (...) that
highest satisfaction, and privilege of coope^^ting to his own felicity. Thus
the Jew.

But here I digress a little, only in him we may ^^e our own hearts naturally,
we are proud, loath (...) be beholden, would sacrifice to our own nets.

But that which I was saying, is, that it is not ^ough for men to acknowledge
themselves indebted unto God, for giving them such power and freedom ^f will;
though it is true, thus it appears to be ^^iginally from God, that any do
accept of Grace ^^dered. ( Pelagius that was all for setting up the ^ower of
Nature, yet ad frangendam invidiam, and ^ beguile others, would call it grace.)
But grant ^^at the power is from God At vero inquies, habuit a Deo id posse. At
vero inquam, habuit a Deo posse and in malum ferri, idque ex vestra senientia,
nempe, (...). Ergo non aliter erit a Deo quod voluntas fertur in bonum, quam
quod in malum, Camer. Defens. cap. 20. p. 277.
^et if that be all that God ^oth in converting a sinner, (...) give him this
natural ^ower, and some common ^ace besides; and so does ^ave it to a man's own
will (...) strike the concluding ^eak, it follows, God is ^ut the remote
cause of a ^ans conversion; and man's ^ill the immediate cause; yea, the only
cause of ^^e difference, that one man is converted, when others remains
unconverted, to whom God vouch^^fed equal means and help. This is an opinion
^^erefore, that robs God of the praise due to his ^ame, to give undue praise
to man. Of the Covenant. p. 24.
^s Mr. Ball says well, "That man (...) believes, this he owes unto God, and
(...) that not simply alone, but comparatively (...) in respect of others, who
believe not.

6. If faith were of our selves, if we should be^^eve without any special
Grace, then have we something of our own, whereof to glory. But we h^^ nothing
of our own to glory of. Boasting is ^^terly excluded by the Law of faith, Romans
3.27. 1 C^^ 4.7. The good use of common Grace (which (...) most abuse) is a
consid^^^ble something Quod ergo minus est, voluntas accepit a Deo; nimirum, ut
poneretur in indifferenti quadam medietate, ut crederet, vel non crederet; quod
autem majus est, ipsumque eventum specificat, sibi ex se praestitit voluntas
ipsa, nempe, ut actu crederet. Suffrag. Britan. de 3. and 4. art. these. 3. p.
140.
. And here something which the ad^^^saries of special grace (...) deny, that
men receive. Th^^ will grant men receive (...) posse credere; but To cred^^
(which is a great deal mo^^ that we use that power (...) common grace better
the others, this we do not ^^ceive, but have it of our selves, our free will.
(...) yet the Apostle tells us, God works in us, To (...), to will, as well
as to do.

Now I come to answer some objections against special grace; and its efficiency
in the work of sinners conversion.

Object. 1. Does not this overthrow the nature man's will? The will is free, and
cannot be forced.

Answ. The will is not compelled, but enclin^ and determined by grace.

Man's will (considered in his lapsed estate) is (...) morally free, not free
from a vicious sinful incl^^^tion. All that do not deny original sin, must
gr^^^ this. Now hence it follows that without a spec^^^ work of Grace, turning
and changing the natural be^ and inclination of the will, a man cannot break
(...) his sins, give up himself to obey God, to be (...) and governed by Jesus
Christ. That a man left himself would do nothing but sin, would never le^^ the
trade of sinning, Genesis 6.5. Every imagination of the thoughts of his heart
being only evil continually. Jer. 13.23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin,
etc. Now it is the work of divine grace to enlighten the mind, and renew the
will, to heal it of that corrupt inclination, to take off that strong
propension of the soul to sin, and its prejudice, perverseness, and obstinacy
against God and Jesus Christ. And as this is taken off, the soul is coming on
toward God, of unwilling is made willing to believe, repent, obey. And the
more that the former sinful inclination, and perverse disposition is taken
off, the more willing and free is the soul unto these gracious Acts.

Now if you can but distinguish betwixt the natural power, or faculty of the
will, and the moral vicious habits and inclinations of the will, you will see
clearly that Grace does not overthrow the nature of the will or of its Acts:
but only is contrary to that evil inclination brought in by the fall. They
that suppose Gods Grace goes thus far with all, as ^o set their wills in an
equal inclination, to good as to evil, they will not deny (sure) but that
without this grace, man's will was only inclined and determined unto evil. Now
if when man's will was wholly, and only inclined unto evil, the Grace of God
could work thus far on it, as to bring it to an equilibrium, to an indifferency
or hovering betwixt two (whereas it was only one way bent before) I say, if
Grace could thus far turn the bent of the will without overthrowing the nature
of the will, and intrenching on its Liberty, let any man give us a reason, why
the grace of God may not go one step further with the will, so as to incline
and determine it to good, (that the prevailing bent of the will should be that
way) still without infringing (...) Liberty.

I cannot see any danger, or inconvenience in gra^^ing [that men have a natural
power to believe a^ obey] rightly explained. That when God commands us to
believe, repent, etc. he does (...) command what is naturally impossible, what
we ha^^ no more power to do, than to cause the sun a^^ moon to stand still, or
to remove mountains with (...) word. No, God has given man those faculties,
(...) powers of understanding and will, which are a^^ to obey, and receive his
Commands, if they we^^ not hindered by an evil disposition, and inclination at
first contracted by the fall, and further increas^^ strengthened and rooted, by
the abuse of them (...) the practice of sin, but though men have the natur^^
powers, or faculties, for want of a right constituti^^ of them, they would
never produce any graci^^ Acts of themselves. A mere natural power is (...)
enough here, where there is no moral power, (...) true disposition and
inclination to that which is tr^^ spiritually good. And there is no such
dispositi^^ or inclination without Grace. Now as men ha^^ a Natural power to
believe and obey, but no true ^^clination thereunto without Grace, so we may
(...) on the other hand, men have a natural power to rep^^ Christ and his
commands, where special grace vouchsafed Note, that the Anti-Arminians grant
both resistibilitatem connat^^ natural power of resisting (inseparable from the
will, as it is a (...) faculty) and resistibilitatem adna^am, which is more
than a power resisting, even a proneness to resist, arising from the
depravation of will; yea, and actualem resistentiam, some actual resistance,
a^^ from that vicious adnate power or proneness to resist; they only (...)
actualem resistentiam vincentem, to be consistent with converting gr^^ Vid. Dr.
Ward. ubi supra. p. 270, 271, 199, 303, 306.
, but they are otherwise inclined, the see that in Christ and the Gospel, and
have their wills so far rectified by grace, that they would not for a thousand
worlds reject him. The prevailing bent of their wills now is fully, heartily,
thoroughly to close with, and cleave to him.

But by this which has been said, I hope it is not hard to understand, how God
by his special grace enclineth and determines man's will after such a manner,
that the will does also determine it self. That his people become willing in
the day of his power, Psalm. 110.3. As Mr. Ball solidly and judiciously.
Repentance is the Gift of God, Of the Covenant, p. 344.
but the Act of Man. God is the cause of willing, efficient, but not formal;
the cause external and effective: but not vitally efficient etc. plainly thus,
It is man that repents, believes by the help of Gods Grace. And grace ^oes
so move and incline the will to believe and repent, as does admirably agree
with the nature of the will, According to that speech of one of the An^ients,
Gratia Dei humanum non aufertur, sed sana^ur arbitrium: non adimitur, sed
corrigitur, non ^vacuatur sed adjuvatur. Certainly, the will never Acts more
freely, than when made free by Grace. I will run the way of thy Commandments,
when thou shall enlarge my heart. Draw me, and we ^e will run after thee. Yet
take this along with you, that as the influx of divine grace, is very sweet in
the souls conversion, So it is very powerful and efficatious. As it does not
oppose the wills acting freely, So neither does it leave the will at
un^ertainty. Turn thou me and I shall be turned; for thou ^rt the Lord my God,
Jer. 31.18. Necessario pec^at homo ante gratiam, neque tamen haec peccandi ne
cessitas pugnat cum Naturali voluntatis liberate, ^^potius cum eadem pugnabit
been volendi necessitas ^^gratiam? (Testard. d. Not. and great. Sect. 25^ p.
211, 212.) As a Learned man observes. (...) is so ordained of God (as general
Law of Nature That betwixt the object appointed, Amyrald in These. Salm. par. 2.
de fide p. 101. Sect. 40.
to certain fac^^ties, and the faculties themselves rightly constituted there
should be such a ce^tain proportion Which I see Arminius sometimes grants,
Orat. de Aut. and fine Theol. Sequetur intellectus dilatationem ampliatio
voluntatis -- ex nativa intellectus and voluntatis convenientia, acingenita
utrique analogia. etc.
, answer ableness and consent, the if they be fitly applied (...) one another,
it cannot be b^ there should hence proce^^ a suitable operation. The (there is
as he says) inter intellectum ac veritatem is luctabilis analogia, such an
unavoidable proport^^^ and sutableness betwixt the understanding and tru^ that
the understanding rightly disposed, cannot b^ assent to truth demonstrated. And
there is no (...) agreement inter bonm and appetitum, that the rat^^nal
appetite rightly constituted cannot but cleave good clearly apprehended, and
duly presented to certainly it must be granted that the understand cannot
assent to that which is false, sub ratione (...) as false; nor can the will
choose that which is e^ sub ratione mali, as evil. As I told you before, (...)
incogitancy or inadvertency was the first step to (...) fall, want of a due
application of the object to (...) faculty. Thus on the other hand serious
consid^^^tion is the first step to recovery. Spiritual thi^ spiritually
discerned would produce spiritual affe^^ ^^ns, and put upon gracious
endeavors. It is true, that there is no proportion or agreeableness betwixt
(...) carnal mind and spiritual things. But it is as natural for the soul
prepared by divine grace, freely ^o close with Christ offered, and to submit to
his Laws (as desirous in all things to be governed by ^im;) as it is natural to
carnal unregenerate men to ^n freely, who are only that way inclined, Though
grant there is a contrary corrupt inclination still remaining in the
regenerate, who are renewed and sanctified but in part, yet the prevailing bent
and in^lination of the soul is toward God and Christ.

But

Object. 2. Where is the justice of God, in re^uiring faith of men, and
condemning men for un^elief, if it be so, that they have no power to be^ieve
without special grace?

Answ. 1. I should fear advancing and honoring ^ne Attribute of Gods in such a
way, as would ne^essarily deny, or dishonor any other of his Attri^utes. As it
is sinful to set up and advance grace after such a manner, as is inconsistent
with Gods ^oliness, or justice. This would be but to reproach ^ur maker. But
certainly Gods justice is to be ^leared, without the clouding or ecclipsing,
without the denying or diminishing of his Grace. ^or.

2ly. Is not God just in requiring perfect obedi^nce of fallen man? And are not
sinners obnoxious ^o punishment for every sin, and act of disobedi^nce? Now
Arminius will grant ^ou, Resp. ad. 9. quest. f. 176.
that a man cannot keep the Law ^f God perfectly, secundum rigorem, ^ut only
secundum (...). Corvinus I think stretches the Lawyers saying too (...) Lex
aut ad obedientiam, obligat, aut (...) poenam, Censur. Anat. Arm. c. 8. Sect.
7. p. 122.
that one is not obliged by (...) same Law both to punishment, and obedience.
Which must be taken wi^^ restriction, in reference to the same act. For a La^^
may oblige to punishment for past disobedience, a^ yet oblige to obedience for
future, too; yet says b^^ when therefore man lay under the curse, (...) was no
further obliged to obedience, ibid.
because God would no longer be served by him. F^^ that God will be served of
his creature, it is (...) favor. But as Mr. Ball says. It is altogeth^^
undecent, Ball of the Covenant, p. 289.
especially to the w^^dom and righteousness of Go^ that that which provokes the
ex^cution, should procure the abrogation of his Law^ That that should supplant
and undermine the Law for the alone preventing whereof, the Law w^^ before
established. The truth is, it cannot but (...) the creatures duty to serve God,
and obey him (...) all that he is pleased to command. It is but rig^^ and just
that God should require this of all, even (...) sinful creatures. The creatures
guilt is no fair pl^^ against Gods right. It is against all reason that ma^^
disobedience should discharge him from a tie to ob^^dience, that his
transgressing Gods commands show^ void Gods right of commanding. Shall the
cre^tures running into rebellion, deprive God of (...) Sovereign Authority,
justle him out of his Thron^ As Corceius reasons well, d. foed. c. 4. Sect.
71. p. 76.
si (...) lato praemio and introducto reatu p^^cessaret obligatio, then it
would see that man from the beginning could be bound by (...) Law, but what he
voluntarily would accept of. For ^f by a man's choosing to undergo the guilt and
pun^shment, rather than to perform obedience, the obligation be disolved, it
would seem the Obligation was rather arbitrarily taken on him, as in a free
contract betwixt a servant and his master: not that he was naturally,
necessarily bound to obey God, from his very being; as he was his Creature. And
besides it would follow (as the forementioned Author also notes) that there
should be no actual sin, but only the first sin of Adam.

Thirdly, To come closer to the objection, I would not say simply, that a man
has no power to believe, but no will to believe, without special grace, posse
credere naturae est hominum; velle credere gratiae est fidelium. Or thus, we
must distinguish of power (as was ^inted in the Answer to the former objection)
power ^s either Physical, i.e. Natural; or Ethical, moral. That in Joh. 6.44.
No man can come to me, may be well explained by that, John 5.40. ye will not
come ^o me, ye cannot come, because ye will not: ye will not come, without
special grace draw and incline you to it: But if men's wills were to it, they
should not be kept off for want of power. Did ever any thing hinder any soul's
coming unto Christ that was truly willing to come.

But (you will say) sinners cannot will to come to Christ, but I would ask you
again, why can they not will to come to him? If they have Christ held forth,
and hear the Gospel inviting sinners to him; what is it but a wicked perverse
disposition, and inclination of will, that keeps them from him, as Mr. Of the
Covenant, p. 244.
Ball says well He that refuse^ to come, refuses not through inab^lity, as
unable, though willing and desirous to i^brace it, but willingly preferring
some base inferi^^ good before it. And again, That man believes, p. 245.
this he owes unto God, and th^^ not simply alone, but comparatively in
respe^^ of others who believe not: but that man ref^seth the promises of mercy,
this is of himself, n^^ of simple or Natural infirmity which might precure
pity, but of his own perverseness and low to some inferior good, etc. (you may
see more i^ him to this purpose, p. 343.

Object. 3. Do you not make God as one the mocketh, in the tenders of his
grace, offering mercy to sinners on such terms, and conditions, as they cannot
attain to without special grace which i^ vouchsafed but to a few of many.

Answ. No. God does not mock sinners but is a^ serious as may be, telling them
on what terms he wi^^ be gracious to them. That if they will come i^ they shall
find mercy; otherwise not.

Thus the Covenant of Grace holds forth a pos^^bility of Salvation to
sinners, condemned by the Law and Covenant of works, and is there no grace in
this? Again, here the Lord requires less, than i^ strict justice he might
require, less than the law o^ works, (which all men naturally are under) does
exact. And is there no grace in that?

And what he requires, he has absolute^^ promised to work in some. And is wont
to work i^ his people by the calls, invitations, promises, etc. (...) his word
and Gospel. His grace and spirit concurring, and is there no grace herein.

But let God be true, and every man a liar. Is He not beforehand with sinners?
Did he mock the world, when he gave his Son to be the Savior of ^ll, and every
one that would believe in him? Does ^e mock men, in calling, and persuading
them to Christ in the Gospel? should any one of them be re^ected, if they came?
yea, does he not ordinarily concur with the word and outward means, in some
sort to prepare men for converting grace? And can it be proved, that ever he
deserted any one in the way to conversion, till provoked by their neglect of
him, and rejecting of his grace offered? As one of the Ancients, Qui and
priusquam deseratur, neminem deserit, and multos desertores sepe convertit.
Does he not complain of sinners, Because when he called they refused, Prove.
1.24. Now what an unjust, and unworthy thing is it, for any to charge God, as
if he dealt not cordially with us in the offers of his grace, when he denis
special grace to none, but such as have first neglected to improve common grace.

And certainly, men may as soon persuade believers out of their senses, to
conceit the Sun is a dark spot, that snow is black, and fire cold, and honey
bitter, As that God in the Covenant of Grace does merely pretend and make show
of grace and mercy to sinners: but that in very deed he only mocks them.

O that sinners would try, whether God is not serious. Let the wicked forsake
his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord
and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God for be will abundantly pardon,
Isa. 55.7. As I live says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the
wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live, Ezekiel. 33.11. O sinners
will you try, whether the Lord be not serious, O that you could b^ persuaded
to try! you would never repent of the repentance, Turn to the Lord and you
would the resolve, (by the help of his grace) never to tu^^ away from him more.

If now you will say, Alas, we cannot turn. (...) must tell you from God, then
you cannot live. A^ it is as if a malefactor taken and reprehended should say,
I cannot leave this course of mine, I cannon leave my trade of thieving,
robbing. A moral cannot, that is indeed a will-not. It is very true, tha^ the
(...) velle, the moral power is not vouchsafed to al^ God does not work in
every one [to will] yet h^ vouchsafes means for the removal of impotency
natural; So they that have Gospel-calls, have (...) posse si velint. They might
come if they would. A^^ the hindrance is in themselves, in their perver^^
wills. As Mr. Ball (p. 343.) The invitation is no^ so hard, that a man cannot
fulfill it, if he would but such as if man would, he could not but execute. Now
will you say God is not serious, when he calls you? But one day it will
appear, tha^ you only were guilty in this respect, that yo^ would not be
persuaded seriously to attend to God^ most serious offers, indeed sinners will
not be serious, but tempt Christ, mock God most shamefully and yet think to
excuse themselves by charging Go^ foolishly, as if he mocked them, and dealt
not truly and sincerely with them.

But seeing the reason why men do not turn t^ God, is not that the thing
required is unreasonable (what can be more reasonable, than that a sinner wh^
deserves to be for ever damned should judge and condemn himself, acknowledge and
turn from his iniquities, and most heartily and gladly lay hold on, and embrace
Mercy and a Pardon offered, prising it above any thing in the World.) Since it
is thus, God does not require any unreasonable thing of men, but the true
direct and proper cause of their standing off, is the unreasonable wickedness
and perverseness of their own wills: It is evident that men are in all the
fault, that they do not turn to God, and that their Destruction is of
themselves.

And though God takes hold of some by his Grace, and Spirit (as the Angel took
hold of Lot, who otherwise had perished in Sodom) thus the Lord by his special
Grace prevents some (whom he has Elected unto Life) that they should not run
upon Eternal Ruin, with the generality of the World; yet this is a most free
Dispensation of his rich Grace. And had the Lord done no more for these chosen
Vessels, than for the basest Potsheards of the Earth, yet they could not justly
have blamed him, as any way behind-hand with them: Had he left all Mankind to
perish in their Sins, God had been Righteous and the whole World without Excuse.

One thing more, They Argue thus, what is it, but to Mock men, for the Lord to
Invite and Call on them to come, who (he knows) will not come without Special
Grace, which yet he gives not to the far greater part of men Invited. They
might as well Argue thus against Divine Prescience: Number, obsecro te, non novit
certo qui parituri, qui Minus? Deus igitur etiam vestro judicio fuerit
Hypocrita qui vocat quos scit non parituros. Non potuit Deus hanc contumaciam
emollire, and penitus abolere? Deus igitur vo^is quidem arbitris, Tyrannus.
Camero. Defens. c. 16. p. 273.
If God certainly foresees who will not come in upon the Gospel-Call, why does
he once Invite them? Are not all Gospel Calls vain to such, as he knows will
never hearken them, and worse than in vain (because the Agg^^vation of their
Sin and Condemnation?) Will the say, that those gracious Calls will further
cle^ Gods Justice in the Condemnation of such ungra^^ful, sinful wretches as
despised them, that thus the will be left the more without Excuse? So we (...)
say the same.

Object. 4. Do you not evidently make God Respecter of Persons, if he gives
that special Gra^^ to some, which he denies to others every (...) equal to the
former.

Answ. I think that it is a good a^ necessary Distinction here to Disti^guish
between a Benefactor and Judge, Vid. Cameron. Defens. c. 15. p. 227, 228, 229,
230.
or Rector. Consider God^ Rector, and Judge, and so he is (...) respecter of
persons, he gives one Law to all, la^ down the same Rule for all; he commands
all m^ every where to Repent. And according to the sa^^ Law he Judges, 1 Pet.
1.17. Who without ^^spect of persons Judges. God is an Impartial Jud^^ In
matters of Judgment it is a fault to respect Persons, and this cannot be
charged upon God, (...) dispenses both gracious Rewards, and just Punis^ments,
according to those certain, known Rules la^ down in his Word; he gives Reward
unto (...) Servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and the^ that fear his
Name, small and great, Rev. 11.1^ So in that Text, Acts 10.34. God is no
respect^ of persons, but in every Nation he that fears hi^ and works
Righteousness is accepted of hi^ He that Believes (of what Rank or Condition
so^ver) shall be saved. On the other hand, he that Believes not ( be he who he
will, how High or Rich, or Great soever) shall be Damned; God will Judge
righteous Judgment, and render to every one according to his work. Tribulation
and Auguish upon every Soul of man that does evil, that obeys
unrighteousness, Romans 2.5, 6, 9.

But then secondly, Consider God in those special Acts of Grace and Bounty
wherein he is not to be looked on as Judge, but as a Free-Doner, or Benefactor
only: And who can say, that here he may not respect some, more than others? As
a Benefactor may dispense his Favors where he pleases. May not God do what he
will with his own? Indeed what is any man's by promise, he will not ^lien, or
take away. He has promised Pardon and Salvation to every true Believer, and
will be as good as his word. Every true Believer shall have them; and none but
such may expect them. But ^s for the working of Faith, and giving of the
Condition to which Heaven and Happiness is promised, ^e has not so bound up
himself. But it is certain, ^e does that for some, which he denies to do for
others, their Equals, or Betters. Here he will have mercy on whom he will have
mercy, see Romans 9.11.13, 14, 15, 16. Mat. 11.25, ^6.

Object. 5. What is that special Graces you tell as of you know not what.

Answ. 1. I have proved undeniably that there is such a thing. Now because we
have not an Accu^ate Knowledge of it, shall we therefor not acknowledge it?
Motum hunc sentiunt pii, modum ignorant. Camero. Defens. p. 90.
Gods ways we read, Romans 11. ult.) are past ^nding out. As the ways of his
Judgments, so the ways of his Grace, Thou va^^ man, that would know, how
the new Cre^ture, the babe of Grace, is first formed in the hear^ or thou will
not believe it to be a work (...) grace, but the mere product of a liberum
Arbi^^^um, the pure conception, and motion of a man's o^^ mind and will; Let me
ask thee do thou know wh^ is the way of the Spirit, or how the bones do gr^^
in the womb of her that is with child; so neithe^ know thou this wonderful
work of God.

Secondly, Though we cannot define it, yet that i^ is a supernatural working,
but congruous and sui^able to the nature and faculties of the rational
cre^ture, we are not to doubt. It is a sweet drawing, (...) a powerful and most
surely, and prevalent persw^ding of the soul to Christ. It is divine teaching
that is, teaching to purpose, Gods giving an he^^ to perceive; every one thus
taught of God, cann^^ but learn, That divine light which strikes the
u^derstanding, and breaks in upon the soul in the wo^^ of conversion, it
necessarily, infallibly, irresistably produces a new apprehension of things,
where^^ the soul was blind before, now it sees clearly: It w^^ in a state of
darkness before, but is now light in the Lord. This illumination of the mind is
the found^tion-work of the souls renovation and sanctification Powerful and
through conviction the beginning (...) conversion. All sides are agreed that the
Lord can a^^ does often shine in upon the understanding with the clear
manifestation of the truth, and of the chief^^^ good, and of the only and
necessary means cond^cing to the enjoyment of it, that the understandi^^ is
necessarily captivated by it, cannot but give i^ full Assent. That to believe
the contrary were to believe a lie and falsity under the Notion of a lie, and
falsity, which is impossible.

Now this may give us to understand the way and method of Gods grace so far as
it is necessary for us to know it, scil. that he draws with the bands of a
man, deals with man as a reasonable creature, works upon the will by the
understanding first enlightened. And thus we may see how the word commands,
calls, exhortations, promises of the word, are means of conversion, That the
demonstration of the spirit is the improveing of Scripture Arguments driving
them to an head; (...) b.e. (...), utego quidem certe illum locum accipio,
Camero Defens. p. 90.
the urging and fastening of saving Truths on the mind, applying them so close
and home, as no creature can do. And we must needs think, there is a great
difference betwixt the discovery of truth by the mere light of natural Reason;
and the evidencing of it by the demonstration of the Spirit, as there is a
difference of seeing things by the dim light of a candle and of seeing them in
the clear light of the Sun: Though there is a common illumination of the
Spirit, yet there is also a special illumination. It is true the common
illumination leaves men but almost persuaded to be Christians; but the special
illumination causes through sound conversion. As the mind and understanding is
never thus spiritually enlightened, but the heart is touched, the will
rectified. As the soul at first was corrupted by the understanding, so by the
way of the understanding it is renewed.

Thus I hope you have seen this last Proposition of the necessity of special
grace cleared. I cannot pass from this point, without hin^ing what special use
(...) to be made of it.

First, It should make Christians very humble an^ very thankful. O sirs, it
would become the best (...) you all to have very low thoughts of your selves,
be exceeding high thoughts of God, and his free, an^ powerful distinguishing
grace.

For my own part: I can say, ever since I came (...) understand any thing to
purpose in Religion, an^ Christiany, I could not but have a suspicion, th^^
those opinions were not right, that tend to set up the power of man, and lessen
the grace of God in the work of his conversion, and Salvation. And when first
met with that of Grevinch^^'s I make my self to differ, Quis se discernit? in
promptu ca usa est. Ego me ipsum discerno.
I cou^^ not entertain it but with abho^rence, As still it seems to me (...)
very impudent, arrogant and graceless speech What he adds does not at all
qualify it, I think.

Quum enim Deo, ad prae determinationi divinae resi^^ ere possem, non restiti
tamen, at qui in enim quid in li^ at mihi tanquam de meo gloriam? Quod enim
potui D^ quidem miserentis est, quod autem volui, quum poss^^ nolle, id meae
potestatis est. He should have said nu^ virtuis. q. d. That I have a power to
be good, th^^ is of God: but that I am better than another this i^ of my self

He would only acknowledge, that God gav^ him the power, but that he had a
will to use it a righ^ this he had of himself and might glory of it, as his ow^
Such men may seem to give the first fruits to God but clearly rob him of his
Tenths. The first frui^ under the Law might be one of sixty. The Tithe^ must be
one of Ten. They devide unhandsomly, and take the greater share to themselves,
and what is most Praiseworthy, giving God the Lesser share; whereas indeed the
whole work of Conversion is his, the will of man never inclining to God, till
inclined by his Grace.

O Christians! be very sensible of the strength of Natural Corruption, and of
the Freeness, and Power of Gods renewing Grace. Indeed a right sense of the one
would help you to a clear discerning of the other, and a due Apprehension of
both would tend to make you more humble and thankful. As the state of Jerusalem
is described, Ezekiel. 16.3. etc. Such is thy Estate by Nature, so Poor,
Miserable, and Helpless were thou, O Christian, thy Birth and thy Nativity as
that of the cursed Canaanites, thy Father as an Amorite, thy Mother as an
Hittite, and thou all polluted in thy own Blood: Yet when it was thus, the Lord
passed by thee, and looked with Compassion on thee, and said to thee, When thou
wast in thy blood, Live; yea, he said unto thee, When thou wast in thy blood,
Live: He passed by thee and behold thy Time was the time of Love, and he spread
his Skirt over thee, and covered thy Nakedness: Yea, he swear unto thee, and
entered into a Covenant with thee, and thou becamest his.

Art thou Implanted into Christ? When thou wast a wild Olive Tree, did thou
Ingraft thy self into the good Olive Tree? Certainly, this is every whit as
strange, as for an evil Tree to bring forth good Fruit. Boast not, Christian,
thou bear not the Root, but the Root thee.

Art thou a Child of God? Quis credat parieti si se dicat parturire radium,
quem suscepit per fenestram? Aut si glorientur nubes, quod imbres genuerint,
quis non irrideat? Bernard in Cant. Ser. 13.
It was his Spirit and Power that Regenerated and hi^ Grace that Adopted thee.
How had thou thy Ne^ Birth; certainly not of the will of the flesh, nor (...)
the will of man, but thou wast Born of God, Jo^^ 1.13. Born of the Spirit, John
3.5. Art thou new Creature? Who made thee so? Surely tho^ wilt not say, or
think, that thou art thine own Cre^ture: If a man of his own will, without the
special Grace of God did Convert and change himse^^ then should he be his own
Creature. But the Ap^stle has taught us otherwise, Ephesians. 2.10. We (...) Gods
Workmanship, Created in Christ Jesus. T^^ make a new Creature is the Work of
God, not (...) any mere Creature. And to think what a chang^ Divine Grace has
made in you that are Renewe^ what a difference from your selves, from what yo^
were before, and what a difference from others it should not puff you up with
any high Thoughts (...) your selves, but lift you up in praise and thankf^^ness
to God. I admire free and special Grace, the has made such a difference
betwixt you and other where it found none. This is the Lords doing, a^^ ought
to be Mavelous in our eyes.

Secondly, You that are under the Influence^ Gods special Grace, let it appear
more in your live^ you should carry it as a peculiar People indeed. Wh^
singular thing do you? What do you more the others? If the Lord has done that
for thee, whi^^ he does for few in the world, does but for a few comparison; he
expects that thou should do m^^ for him. Thou should carry it so as few in
the w^^ do. O that you would not think it enough wi^^ your Tongues to own, and
plead for special Grace but that your Lives might be a good proof of i^
Christians, Experimental Philosophy takes with many now of late: O that more
were for Experimental Divinity, Experimental Christianity! And so for this
Point of special Grace, I wish that you and I could give the world Experiments
upon it, clearly to convince them, that there must be such a thing indeed. O!
let others see the Grace of God among us. As was seen there, Acts 11.23. Let
the world see that in you, (Christians) which corrupt Nature, which Flesh and
Blood would never produce. If you have known and felt the Influence of special
Grace, I beseech you, let it appear, that you have not received this Grace in
vain. Let it appear in your more singular Piety, exemplary Strictness,
Holiness, Humility, Self-denial, Mortification, Contempt of the world,
extraordinary Fruitfulness in good Works.

Thirdly, They that are yet short of Grace may see, whither they are to go for
it: Faith and Repentance, (those better things that accompany Salvation) are
not of our selves: No, they are the Gifts of God, and of his special Grace.

Sinner, How is it? Art thou convinced of the Necessity of Faith, Repentance,
Holiness, without which thou can have no true Hope of Future Happiness? And
do thou see thy self short of these; and so still under Condemnation, being
Sentenced by the Law and Covenant of Works, and not coming up to the Terms of
the Gospel and Covenant of Grace (the only way to get freed from Condemnation?)
And art thou sensible, not only of thy coming short of what the Covenant of
Grace requires; but of thy own Insufficiency to attain to it, as of thy self?
Do thou see a wretched Indisposition, and Aversness to thy Duty, a Cross and
Crooked perverse Inclination to what would Ruin thee? Yet do not despair,
there is hope in Israel concerning this thing. And if thou art sensible of thy
own wretchedness, and can be persuaded to apply thy self to God, the God of
a^l Grace, there is hope concerning thee: That God who has been often found of
them that seek him not, if now thou would seek and sue to him, it may be
hoped, he would not deny to be found of thee, see Isaiah 65.1. Mat. 25.27. He
that had but one Talent is blamed and condemned, that he went not with it to
the Exchanger, that is, says one, to the Promiser, wh^^ might have furnished
him with a Foreign supply Seek to God in the use of means: None will deny but
it is in thy power, to use the means, where God is wont to work Grace. It Is
good being in the way as Jesus, passes by. That Grace which is n^^ in thy
power to command, yet thou have encourag^ment to Beg; in as much as it is
promised to some and for any thing thou know, to thee among the rest; and
this brings me to another Proposition.

Ezekiel. 36.26. A new Heart also will I give you, etc.
Sect. 9. PROP. IX. God has Promised to some that Grace, whereby they shall
perform the Condition of the Covenant.
THat which some, not only Schoolmen, but other sound Divines of our own, call
the first Grace, who have taught me to call it so some^imes, meaning thereby
the first Inward-Special-Discriminating Grace. Though I see the Term is (...)
allowed by others. As a Learned man notes, (...) There is before it, 1. The
first Universal Grace, which gave the world a Savior. 2. The Fundamental Grace
of Impetration by Christ. 3. The Grace of the New Covenant, or Testament made.
4. Common applying Grace, Preaching, etc. with Divine concurse. 5. Inward
common Grace, an effect of the former, (of which see Suffrage ^ritan. de 3. and
4. Art. de anteced. ad conv. Sect. p. 100.) which I do not deny.

But see Jer. 31.33. Heb. 8.10. Ezekiel 36.^6, ^7. Concerning which Scriptures, it
is true, there ^^th been much Dispute.

1. Some would have Jer. 31.33, (which is ci^d Heb. 8.10.) to be the only
proper Gospel Covenant, or New Covenant. And so make thi^ a special Note of
difference betwixt the Covena^^ of Works, Marrow of Mod. div. p. 118. and 119.
and the New Covenan^ that In the second Covenant God i^ on both sides.

In the Covenant of Grace not (...) Condition to be performed on man part. No,
there is no more for him to do, b^ only to know and believe, that Christ has
d^^ all for him.

This is downright Antinomianism: And obser^^ he plainly contradicts himself:
First, saying, [In (...) Covenant of Grace there is no condition to be
perf^^med on man's part.] And then presently unsaying (...) again, [No, there is
no more for him to do, b^ only to Know and Believe, that Christ has done (...)
for him.] Where he seems to grant Faith to required of man, only he gives an
unsound D^scription of it.

But does not Gods taking away the stony heart, (...) giving a new heart, imply
his giving Faith and (...) pentance? And his causing some to walk in his
S^tutes, imply his enabling them to yield sincere O^dience? And what Laws are
meant, which the L^^ does promise to write in the Heart? Are they (...) the
same Laws, which were written in Table^ Stone? And to what end does God promise
to this for some, but that he might be their God, (...) they be his People?
Thereby showing what is quired of those, who would have him for t^^ God, and
would be his People. Certainly, the is no Condition required of us in the
Covena^^ Grace, which is not here implied; where this also Expressed, that God
himself has underta^^ for some, to vouchsafe that Grace to them, whereby they
shall certainly perform the said Conditions.

As Dr. Preston, of the New Covenant, p. 389. speaking of Repentance, he says,
It is part of the Covenant both on Gods part, and on ours. The condition
required of us in the Covenant, is Doing ^f this, the Action. But the Ability
whereby we perform that which is required, is part of the Co^enant on Gods part.

Therefore if any ask,

Quest. Whether these Scriptures do not contain ^he substance of the Covenant
of Grace?

Answ. Yea, as Genesis 2.17. contains the Co^enant of Works, where some part of
it is expres^ed, and the rest included and implied. Or as Isa. ^8.6, 7.
contains a true Fast, that is, under^^anding what was taken for granted. Or
as Faith (...) defined in John 8.24. and 11.27. where it is set ^^rth as an
Assent to this Proposition, [that Jesus is ^^e Christ, he that should come,
etc.] Supposing what was taken for granted, and expressing what ^as then most
questioned.

The truth is, the Jews were a self-confident people generally; confident of
their own Ability to ^eep the Law (not understanding the extent of the ^aw) as
they were confident of their own Righte^asness, if they kept the Letter of the
Law. They ^ere not come to see, and say, as Isa. 45.24. Sure^^ in the Lord have
I righteousness and strength. If ^^ey were but Righteous according to the
Letter ^f the Law, they thought that enough. They ^^nerally rested in outward
circumcision. They ^^ought it enough to offer the Ritual Sacrifices, not
regarding to offer unto God that more pleasing Spiritual Sacrifice of an
humble, broken, obedient hea^ And thus they brake the Covenant, which yet the
gloried in. Therefore the Lord declares, that (...) days should come, when
there should be a clea^ Discovery of the Nature, true intent and meani^^ of his
Covenant, that he was not a Jew, who (...) one outwardly, nor was that
Circumcision, whi^^ was outward in the Flesh, etc. (as Romans 2.28, 2^) And shows
here that there should be more abund^ Grace given out, where they should
perform w^^ the Lord required in his Covenant, that as they (...) the Law
written in Tables of Stone before, so the should have it written in their
Hearts. And this called a New Covenant here, as the Command (...) Love one
another is called a New Commandme^^ though it was given of old; being now more
(...) striously set forth and commended to us, by the ^^stance of Christ's Love
to us. So had the L^^ promised before of old to Circumcise their Hea^^ Deuteronomy.
30.6. which is the same in sense with the promise of Writing his Law in their
hearts: B^ though it was promised of old, yet it is here sp^ken of, as a New
Covenant; because it was to (...) Communicated to more, and in a larger Meas^^^
under the Gospel. As it might well seem New, (...) like being never seen before.

But is it not fairly Employed here, that they the would have God for their God
indeed, must ha^ new Hearts, must be new Creatures, must wa^ in his Statutes,
must lead new Lives? which b^ cause none would attain to of themselves, and y^
God will have a people in the world, therefore (...) undertakes to prepare them
for himself, and to wo^^ that in them, which elsewhere he plainly requires of
them. And therefore we must conclude, it is a Wresting of these Scriptures, for
any hence to Argue, that the Covenant of Grace is absolute, which evidently
supposes Conditions. And by the like Reasoning one may conclude, that
Justification, and Remission of sins is promised absolutely, from Isa. 43.25.
I, even I am he, that blotteth out thy Transgressions for mine own sake, and
will not remember thy sins. Here Pardon of sin is promised, and no condition
expressed; yet they are very greatly mistaken, who have hereupon ranked this
among absolute Promises. It Is a most free and gracious promise, yet not an
absolute promise. There is a condition always understood, which other
Scriptures clearly express. Surely, we may not exclude Christ's satisfaction,
and say that God pardons sinners without any respect at all had to that,
because there is not any mention of it here; neither may we exclude Faith,
Repentance from being Conditions of Pardon, because not expressed here.

I hope these things considered it will appear, that Jer. 31.33. Heb. 8.10.
will not prove the Covenant of Grace absolute.

2. Some, yea and those men of singular worth and eminency, will not allow this
of God's giving a new heart, etc. to be so much as a promise; because quoad nos
without any determinate object: none can claim by it, or plead interest in it
till such time as it be fulfilled. Yet methinks it is sufficient, that it is a
signification, or declaration of Gods purpose to bestow such grace upon the
Elect, that his truth and faithfullness are engaged to bestow it on them,
though the Lord only knows who they are.

When the Lord promised unto Abraham, to b^ his God, and the God of his seed,
was not here a promise to the seed of Abraham, when yet God ha^ the determining
of the object? The Lord had se^ down which of his seed they were, that should
have him for their God. As Abraham had other sons besides Isaac; yet God
restrained the promise to hi^ seed by Isaac, Romans 9.7. As afterward it was
restrained to the posterity of Jacob, was not Esau Jacobs brother? And yet that
the purpose of God according to Election might stand, it was said; [Iac^^ have
I loved, but Esau have I hated,] Romans 9 11, 12, 13. So when God promised, Genesis
13.15. to giv^ the land of Canaan to the seed of Abraham, yet sti^^ he had the
determining of it, unto which of his see^ he would give it. They were of
Abraham's see^ whose carcases fell in the wilderness.

Again, when God promised unto David, that (...) would set up his seed after
him, 2 Samuel 7.12. shall we say, this was no promise to his seed, because th^^
individual person was not directly determined, be cause it was not said
expressly whether the eldest, or the youngest, or which of his sons it was,
tha^ should succeed David in the throne?

Again, though the elect unregenerate cannot lay claim to the promise under
consideration, as intended in it, any more than others; yet certainly Jesus
Christ may claim for them. As, if a friend has promised to settle an estate
upon your child, though the child may not be in a capacity to plead the
promise, yet you can plead it for him.

Again, when that which some call the first grace is given unto any one
according to that word [I will write my Law in their hearts] may we not th^^
claim an interest in the same, for continuance in grace and perseverance? And
should we not look upon it as a promise now? And if it be acknowledged a
promise, when it is fulfilled, it seems something strange, it should not be so
before. Promises are promises before they are made good and accom^lished, And
not because they are accomplished.

Methinks this is plain, that [I will write my Laws in their hearts] is more
than a bare declaration of Gods work, what his work is about the conditions of
the Covenant of grace, what God can do. I say more than a declaration, that
without his Grace those conditions cannot be performed. Is it not clearly a
revelation of his gracious purpose, and pleasure, signifying not only what he
alone can do. but more directly what he will do for some [I will] does more
directly refer to the purpose, than to the power of God. Now though as this is
a discovery of Gods purpose, so far it agrees with a prophecy or pre^iction;
yet as it is a discovery of Gods purpose of working grace, of bestowing good
upon some of his Creatures; in this respect it is more than simply (...)
prediction, it has the nature of a promise.

3. Some are troubled to know whither to reduce the promise of this first,
special, inward, discriminating grace.

Here methinks it were very strange, should we wholly exclude such promises
from having any relation to, or connection with the Covenant of Grace, which do
so clearly evidence it to be a Covenant of Grace indeed. What a wonderful
expression of his grace is this, that God engages to work the conditions in
his people! He did never undertake thus for (...) under the Covenant of Works.

Now First, Supposing that Covenant betw^^^ God the Father and his Son Christ,
God-man, (...) Mediator; and it is clearly reducible to that Covenant. Many
Divines suppose (and I shall not oppose) a foederal transaction betwixt the
Father (...) the Son, called the Covenant of Redemption, where in God the
Father is conceived to have given a ce^tain number of Elect ones to Christ the
Son, to (...) brought on infallibly to grace here, and glory her^after; upon
condition, and in consideration, the he would redeem and satisfy for them: on
the other hand, Christ is supposed to accept of these term^ being willing to
make his Soul an offering for (...) that he might see his seed and bring many
sons (...) glory. According to this hypothesis, the promise (...) the first
grace should refer to Gods engagement a^^ promise to his Son Christ. And though
it be an d^solute promise in respect of these, in whom the fir^^ grace is
wrought; (no condition being required i^ the Elect unregenerate, to interest
them in it) yet i^ respect of Christ it was conditional; he being (...) give
himself a ransom for them, and so to purchas^ grace and glory for them.

2ly. Others distinguish betwixt an absolute Covenant, and the conditional
Covenant. The absolu^^ Covenant they make to be this in Jer. 31. Heb. 8. (...)
which we are now speaking. The conditional C^venant, the proper
Gospel Covenant, [Believe (...) thou shall be saved] But though we may grant it
a^ absolute promise, it cannot be a Covenant if abs^lute.

3. Of Attrib. the second part. p. 86.
Dr. Preston distinguishes betwi^^ a single Covenant and a double Covenant. A
single Covenant, such as God makes with visible Church Members, viz. If you
will believe, repent, walk in my ways, you shall be saved: where if men break
the condition, God is free, he is bound no further. But then there is a double
Covenant, into which the Elect are taken, which is to this effect, If you will
believe, and repent, you shall be saved; and that this my Covenant may not be
made void, and of none affect to you, I will give you an heart to repent, etc.

And this he holds is the everlasting Covenant that cannot be broken, which
has sure mercies for all those who are included in it.

But Mr. Rutherford would rather have it called the Covenant by a Metonymie
[This is the Covenant that I will make] that is, these are choice effects,
fruits and blessings of the Covenant, which I shall by my effectual and mighty
Grace work in them. Rutherf. of the Covenant, p. 347. Again,

4. Mr. Rutherford distinguishes (but more darkly) of the Covenant,
considering it, in abstracto, vel in concreto. 1. In the Abstract, as holding
forth the way of saving sinners, that is, if they believe: Containing only the
will of precept. 2. In the concrete, as the Lord carries on the Covenant
commensurably to his decree of Election. So the Lord promises to the Elect,
not only forgiveness and life, provided they believe; but also a new heart and
grace to believe. Thus including his will of purpose. And the same Writer again
distinguishes, and says, the Covenant may be taken two ways, either 1. As
declared, Rutherf. of the Covenant, p. 340.343.
according to the approving will of God: Or 2. as fulfilled, according to Gods
Decree of ^lection, and will of purpose. Thus I have give^ others thoughts of
it: or,

5. Why may we not say that the promise (...) working grace in some, belongs
to the Covena^^ of Grace, considered as a Testament, rather than (...) a
Covenant? Amas. Coron. p. 296. So Buroughs Gospel Worship p. 270.
Tota dispositio (s^^ deris scil.) testamentariam h^^ rationem, etc.

Here all is promised, not only pardon, and S^^ vation upon Repenting,
Believing, but the Condition, an Heart to repent, and heart to believe and
perseverance in the same is likewise promis^^ Though considered formally as a
Covenaut, it speak^ only on this wise: If you Believe, Repent, y^^ shall be
saved; yet as a Testament, it has this su^^ there to say. And as for such as
are given to Christ of the Father, you shall have his Grace and Spirit to turn
your hearts against your sins, and incli^^ then toward the Lord Jesus.

6. Add, that these absolute promises are a pr^per means to bring men within
the Bond of the Covenant, and lead men a good step toward the obtaining of
what the Covenant of Grace promises Here is set forth the spiritual Excellency
of the Blessings promised in the Covenant of Grace, a^^ the way how they may be
attained and come by^ What is here promised absolutely, would m^^ way for all
that good and happiness, which is prom^^sed upon such conditions. As they that
look no^ after this Grace promised, they that care not though they miss and
fall short of this; care not to frustra^ to themselves the Covenant of Grace,
to all its (...) ving intents and purposes. Miss of this Grace, and you miss of
all subsequent Benefits and Blessings, which depend on it.

4. The last thing I shall speak to, concerning these Promises, is, what use
may be made thereof, though no Unregenerate person can possibly say that ^e is
there intended. Now to the Question.

Quest. What use can Unregenerate men make of ^hese Promises, who know not that
they are intended in them?

Answ. I shall premise two or three things, and then show of what use they are,

1. The promise of a new Heart, etc. is an absolute promise. I have told you so
again and again, and will now spend a little time to clear it. When God
promises to give a new heart, he promises this absolutely. This must either
be promised absolutely, or not at all. Gratia prima, quae preveni^^s, itemque
operans dici solet, omnimoda est gratuita. -- Omnes actus, and dispositiones
nostras praevenit and an^^it, -- ut pote quae ex Deo tantum, non etiam ex nobis
^endet. Alting. Elenet. p. 800. Or else we must ^^old with the Semi-Pelagians,
Initium a nobis, in^rementum a Deo, If there be no true spiritual good in a
man, till the Lord works it, how can we possibly imagine any condition required
to his ^giving this Grace, except we would have Gods own Act, the condition of
his further Actings. Non de nostrae voluntatis potestate, sed de sua
praedistinatione promisit, promisit enim quod Ipse factu^^s fuerat, non quod
Homines. Quia etsi faciunt ^omines bona quae pertinent ad colendum Deum, ipse
^^it ut illi faciant quae praecepit, non illi faciunt ut ^^se faciat quod
promisit. Aug. de praedest. Apud Bedam ad Romans 4. f. 20. H.

Certainly, here the preparation of the heart (...) of the Lord. The heart of
stone would never prepare it self for Mollifying Grace. They that would make
the promise conditional thus, I will tak^ away the stony heart, if you do not
put a Bar, would make just nothing of it. As if God should say, (...) take away
the stony heart, if you do not put a ston^ heart in my way; I Will do it, when it
is done to (...) hands. The work shall be properly yours; yet^ will have the
praise. Do not they wrong our gracious God, who would put such a sense on his
gracious Promise, as if he promised no more, than (...) take away the heart of
stone, and give a new heart if we put no Bar; Alas, it is plain, he must give
(...) new heart, before we shall cease putting the Bar^ a stony, and rebellious
heart in his way.

And what sense is this, I Will write my Law in your heart, if you have it in
your heart to keep my Law^^ If you have a will to obey, I Will give you a will
(...) obey. I Will Circumcise your heart to love me, (...) you put not the Bar of
an Uncircumcised heart (...) my way. That is as if Divine Grace only made such
willing, as it first found not unwilling.

As our Divines, who were present at the Syn^of Dort, Promissiones Dei aliae
sunt de fine, alia^ mediis ad finem; promissiones de fine, v. 9. de sal^^ sunt
conditionatae [crede, and salvaberis] Esto fide^^ ad mortem (seu persevera) and
dabo tibi coron^^ vitae.] Cum autem nemo par sit conditionibus pr^^ standis,
Deus quoque promissiones fecit liberrimas and absolutas de dandis ipsis
conditionibus; quas ipse (...) nobis efficit, ut per ipsas, tanquam per media,
possi^^ ad finem pertingere. Deuteronomy. 30.6. That is, The promises of God are some
of them con^rning the end, Suffrag. Britan. de* 5. Art. these. heterodox. 1.
page 222.223.
some concerning the ^^ans (necessary in order) to the ^^d. Promises of the
end, as of sal^ation are conditional. Believe and ^u shall be saved. Be thou
faithful unto death (or ^ersevere) and I will give thee a crown of life. But
^hen none is able to perform the condition, God al^hath made most free and
absolute promises of giving ^e conditions themselves, which he works in us,
that by them, as by the means, we might attain to ^e end, Deuteronomy. 30.6. The Lord
thy God will circum^se thine heart, etc.

Object. But none have ground to hope that God ^ould work Grace in them, who
will not attend on ^e means of Grace, and will not seek and sue to ^im for
Grace. Then are not these Conditions?

Answ. I confess, attendance on the Word and ^rayer, etc. are necessary, which
Natural men must be called unto: Being 1. Part of the Crea^ures Duty. Some of
that Homage all men owe (...) God. 2. The ordinary way and method, where^^ God
works upon the souls of his Elect. And upon the former account, to neglect the
means ap^ears to be a Contempt of God: As upon the latter ^^t apppears to be a
tempting of him.

And yet that these are not conditions of Gods ^estowing the first Grace is
very evident, For, 1. ^f this was Conditio cum qua, God should never ^eny his
Grace to them that attend on the Outward ^eans, use Prayer, etc. 2. If it was
Conditio sine ^ua non, he should never vouchsafe Converting Grace to any, who
do not wait on the means. Now ^oth these are false. Sometimes God is found even
of them that seek him not. Though this must (...) be acknowledged the ordinary
Method and wa^ wherein Gods Grace is bestowed; that they the come to the Means,
etc. are not so far from (...) Kingdom of God, as others, who are Despisers
(...) the Word, and neglect Prayer, etc. Yet som^^ times the Lord goes out of
his ordinary way, as (...) see in the Apostle Paul's conversion. The Lord (...)
with him, when he was Running away from hi^ or rather running furiously upon him.

2. God having absolutely promised this Gra^^ it shall certainly be conferred
on all those, who (...) intended in the Promise. Otherwise God sho^^ change his
mind, or his word should fail. There (...) no saying here, that men may put a
Bar. If G^^ should fail of performing what he has absolute^ promised; then
where were his Power, or Tru^ or Immutability?

And therefore I cannot but wonder, that (...) should deny the special Grace of
God determi^^ man's will in Conversion. Mark the consequence^ it. If when the
Lord has done all, which (...) cerneth him to do, to convert a sinner, it
still (...) pends upon the sinners free will to determine (...) business, Quod
hic convertatur, ille non, est ex liberate voluntatis. Jo. Arnold.
whether to turn to G^^ or not; and it may be, that t^ Persons have equal
preve^^ Grace, and the one turns to C^^ and the other does not, will not
follow, that God promises to do more, that^ can perform? Which I hope they
would drea^ say, and abhor as blasphemous.

And yet I can see no way in the world to av^^ the Consequence, admitting their
Doctri^^ Positis omnibus operationibus gratiae, Vid. Suffrag. Britan. de 3. and
4. Art. These. Heterodox. 3. p. 139.
quibus Deus in conversione nostra ^uti posset, manet tamen conversio ^ita in
nostra potestate libera, ut possimus non converti, hoc est nos met ipsos
convertere, ^aut non convertere. Joan. Arnold. apud pelt. har.

Were it thus indeed, that when God has done all he can to convert a sinner;
has done as much for me, or thee, this way, as ever he does, or can do for
any; yet he must ask our leave to make his Grace Efficacious and Converting,
and if we please, all he can do this way, shall be to no purpose, the work
shall not be done; I dread to say what would ^ollow hereupon. How could he
either promise, or predict this concerning any, that they should ^urn to him?

This way which many are so taken with, most certainly leads to one of these
strange conclusions. Either, 1. That men may have a new heart given them, and
Gods Law written there, and yet not turn ^o God, or be in a state of Grace; Or,
2. That ^otwithstanding God has promised concerning some that he would give
them a new heart, and put his ^aw in their inward parts; yet it might so fall
out and happen, that not one in the world should ever ^ave this new heart
given, or the Law of God In^raven in him.

And whereas they will not allow the new heart ^romised to the Elect, as a
Fruit of Electing love, ^ut rather make it a ground of Election, make ^lection
to depend on it; how Inconsistant is their Method with Gods Method, with the
Scripture-Method? John 6.37. All that the Father gives me ^^ll come unto me.
John 10.26. Ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep. My sheep hear my
Voice and follow me.

Observe hence, The sheep of Christ are they, that are given him of the Father.
And they tha^ are given him of the Father are his sheep. These are Reciprocal
terms. Again, all that are the sheep of Christ, that are given to Christ, shall
come t^ him, shall believe in him. Again, these only d^ come to him, none but
these come on to Faith in him^ Again, men are not given to Christ, or his sheep
by coming to him, or because they believe in him^ But because they are his
sheep, given to him of the Father, therefore they shall come, therefore the^
shall hear his Voice, and follow him. Neque ov^^ dicuntur, quam Deus previdit
credituros, nam and her oration nimium dilata esset, vos non creditis, q^^ Deus
non previdit vos credituros, nam contra, De^ praevidit non credituros, quia non
sunt credituri.

3. Therefore the Elect are the Persons direct^ and fully intended in this
promise of Gods giving^ new heart, and it is sure to be fulfilled and ma^^ good
to them.

4. Yet they can no more lay claim to this promise, as made for them, than
others may do, wh^^ they are Unregenerate. And the reason is plain, because
while they are Unregenerate, they cann^ know that they are of the number of
Gods Elect.

These things premised, I shall briefly declare (...) use of these absolute
promises, in these followin^ Conclnsions.

1. They are of use to all alike for Convictio^ As implying man's Insufficiency
to perform his d^^ here of himself, in regard of his moral, inseper^
indisposedness, and aversness thereunto. No (...) tural man can amend his own
heart, or make it new. Was the Law in our hand, there had been no need for God
to promise, that he would give a new heart.

2. These promises are of like use to all for direction. As showing, whither,
and to whom we must go for Grace, when sensible of our desperate corrupt estate
hy Nature. Our only way is to repair to the God of all grace. As Ephraim did,
Jer. 31.18. Turn thou me, and I shall be turned. Tanta est ejus misericordia,
ut sit primus in Conversione, and adjutorio nostro, juxta illud. Thren. 5.21.
Est ta^en ultimus in desertione, etc. Tena in Heb. p. 640. b.

3. They are of like use to all for general Encou^agement. They hold forth the
same general Encouragement to others, as to the Elect unregenerate, They are so
proposed, that as none are expressed, none are expressably excluded. As no
unregenerate person can positively conclude, that the Lord has this Grace in
store for Him, intended for Him in particular; so none have ground utterly to
despair, unless they were sure, it could not be.

The promise of giving, or working Grace is so contrived and proposed, that it
leaves men without excuse, who do not seriously, and in good earnest seek to
God for it,

There is no laying the blame on Gods Decree, that the Lord never intended to
give you Grace, and therefore it would have been but in vain, for you to have
applied your selves to him. Certainly, here is enough to stop your mouths.

1. That God has Commanded you to use the means for the obtaining of Grace. As
one observes: to Gods bare Command is a sufficient encouragement to him that
obeys it, to hope, that it shall not be in vain. Especially when God denies
no man the grace to believe, but those that by abuse of former helps do (sensu
Evangelico) deserve that denial.

2. That God has promised to give his saving, sanctifying Grace to some. This
is some more encouragement to seek special and saving Grace in the use and
improvement of Common, Preparatory Grace.

God has promised absolutely to bestow his Grace on some; and you were never
told the contrary, but that he might have this Blessing in store for you. And
therefore it is manifest, if you look not out, if you cry not to God for it,
you will be most justly condemned for your gross negligence and carelessness,
yea, for a plain contempt of his Grace, in not putting forth your selves to the
utmost of your power, to obtain it.

As you are Creatures, it is your duty to attend to the Will of God revealed,
and to carry it sutably thereunto. And here, in the case before us, should we
not take notice of the least gracious Hints, he gives us, and improve them to
the furthest?

This is plain, men are not put to a stand in worldly matters, they will not
demur upon it, whether they shall Labor in their Callings, or no; because they
know not, whether God has Decreed to Bles^ and prosper them. Why then do any
frame suc^ an Objection against themselves, to take them o^ from looking out
for saving Grace, which is of inconceivably greater concernment to us to look
after, than any thing in the world besides.

And, as an able Pen expresses it: Though God have not flatly engaged himself
to Unbelievers, Mr. Baxt. Direct. for getting peace. p. 62.
so as to give them a certainty of hearing their Prayers, and giving them true
Grace, on the improvement of their Naturals; yet he has not only appointed
this and other means to get Grace, but also given them half promises, or strong
probabilities of speeding. -- For as he appoints not any vain means to man,
so no man can name that man, who did improve his Naturals to the utmost, and
sought God in Prayer so far as a Natural man may do, who yet missed of Grace,
and was rejected. This is the true mean (says he) between Pelagianism, and
Antinomianism in this point.

And any of you, that begin to feel sin a burden, and are sadly perplexed in
spirit, seeing your selves born down with the strength and prevalency of your
Corruptions, and Temptations together; yet be not utterly discouraged. Consider
what Grace the Lord has promised, he would vouchsafe to some, without any
thing in them foregoing, as a condition, or meet qualification. And is there
not ground of hope concerning thee, if now thou have a heart to look out after
his Grace?

Certainly, there are many exceeding hot in their pursuit after worldly things,
and yet lose their Labor quite, have their designs frustrated, and miss of
their expectations. But can you tell of any one Soul, that has sincerely, and
in good earnest sought for Grace, and yet been disappointed? Many seek it
remisly, and heartlesly, and miss of it; but the more diligent and earnest we
are here, the more ground to hope, we shall obtain it.

Now to close this Discourse. You have heard of our Misery by the Breach of the
Covenant of works; of our Insufficiency of our selves to perform the condition
of the Covenant of Grace, from whence alone is our remedy: Now let your want,
and need of Grace, engage you to a serious and diligent attendance on the means
of Grace, and quicken you in good earnest to apply your selves to the Throne of
Grace for it.

Object. But if the promise of working the first Grace be absolute, Friendly
Debate. p. 45.
it is more than needs, nay, than is good: For we ought to have no respect to
these things, but to the Freeness of the Promise.

Answ. This which I call you to, is no more than needs, in other respects;
though it is not any thing an Unregenerate man can do, that will give him a
Title to the Promise, neither is there any Merit of Congruity in this. Yet it
is the Duty of men Unregenerate, which they are all tied and bound to, though
God is not tied and bound to them upon it, so much as by promise. But there is
more hopes of your Conversion, if you are in the way, wherein God is often
pleased to meet with sinners, and to bring them home to himself. More hopes, He
will be found of those that seek, than of those that do not seek him. Though
God works Grace, without any Merit in, or any Condition required of, the
Creature; yet not without means. Therefore they that use the means, are nearer
to the obtaining of Grace, than those that neglect the means.

Heb. 12.2. Jesus the Author and Finisher of Faith.
Sect. 10. PROP. X. That Grace whereby the Elect performs the Condition of
the Covenant, was purchased by Christ for them.
THey that go the high Arminian way, hold that Christ Died for all, and every
one alike; that is, that by his Death he Impetrated Remission and Salvation for
all men, if they Believe: Not that he purchased that Grace for any, whereby
they shall certainly Believe. And so with them, [ Fieri potest at impetratio
sarta tecta maneat, suisque numeris perfecta constet, etiamsi increduli omnes
manentes nulli forte essent, qui fructum ejus impetrarionis obincredulitatem
suam propriam perceperent. v. Pelt. Hac. p. 131. Notwithstanding all that
Christ has procured by his Death, it might so fall out yet, that not one in
the world should be saved.

Now these, howsoever they may seem to enlarge the extent of Christ's death, yet
they really enervate the merit, and weaken the efficacy of his death. If this
be all that Christ impetrated by his death, that God might salva justitia, with
safety to his justice, and honor, make a new Covenant with fallen man, come
upon new terms with him, and save him, if he believes, and sincerely obeys;
I say if this was all, then Christ might attain his end in dying, and the death
of Christ might have its full effect, and yet not one soul saved by it. Now
what a faint cause (...) salvation must that needs be, which being put, ye^ it
does not follow, that any one in the world sha^^ certainly be saved? yet thus
it must be, if the death of Christ, extends not further, than to make th^^ a
truth, that [whosoever believes, shall be saved] without purchasing for any
the grace whereby they shall believe.

And as much as they think, that their way tends most to the honor of Christ
our Savior, yet i^ truth it tends to his great dishonor. For so they would
make Christ a Savior, Nomine non re, a t^tular Savior, purchasing a Salvation
for all, without any full and certain intention of applying it to any. To say
that he would be a Savior as well, though^ not one should be saved by his
death; is not this to mock Christ, as they mocked him who put on him a scarlet
Robe, and put a reed in his hand, and said, Hail King of the Jews? And thus
they that believe and are saved, should not owe one jot more to the merit of
his death, than they who perish, and are damned; now is not this a wrong to
Christ? If Christ in dying, had not an eye to the salvation of one more than of
another: but had respect to all alike, impetrated for all alike; if he merited
no more for the Elect than he did for Reprobates; then the one are no more
bound to him, for his Love in dying, tha^ the other. Which I wonder how a true
believer should hear with patience, and without abhorrency.

Though I confess, they that go the middle way, do not (that I can find) so rob
Christ's death of its virtue and efficacy, or deny its proper causal influence
into our salvation, holding, that Christ dyed for all so far, as to procure a
conditional pardon for them; and this Law of Grace, that whosoever believes
shall be saved: but withal, that in dying he had a further aim, a special eye
of respect toward the Elect, to procure their certain performing of the
condition, and so their salvation infallibly. That he died not only that men
might be salvable, Sed ut reapse and certissime semen ex sanguine videret, that
those who were given him of the Father, might be certainly redeemed, actually
saved by him Christus Moriendo genuit. Media morte sua nobis contulit vitam
gratiae, Joh. 12.24
.

Now while so much is granted us, we will freely grant, that the death of
Christ is a satisfaction abundantly sufficient for all the sinners in the
world: ^here needs no other satisfaction to be added, to make it avail to
the redemption and salvation of more. God is so well pleased with the Sacrifice
of his Son, that for his sake he is ready to be reconciled unto any that come
to God by him. And no sinner perishes for this cause, that the satisfaction of
Christ was insufficient, or not of so large extent, as ^o reach him: but
through his own default, falling short of what is required to our having Actual
benefit by Christ's Satisfaction. The blood of Christ ^s sufficient to cleanse
every one of us from all our ^ins: only they deprive themselves of the saving
benefit of his death, they render it ineffectual as to themselves, who trample
it under foot. The most Sovereign remedy does the Patient no good, not being
applied and made use of.

But notwithstanding, sinners dye, not because ^here is no remedy for them, no
possibility of Salvation, but because they do not apply themselv^ to the
Physician, nor seek to be saved in that w^ wherein alone they can be saved; yet
Christ died (...) alike for the salvation of all. Christ laid down (...) life
for his sheep, with another manner of inte^^ on, than he laid down his life for
the world. He (...) so the Savior of his body the Church, as he is (...) the
Savior of the world.

That he laid down his life for his sheep, not one^ to purchase remission, and
salvation for them co^tionally (scil.) if they believe: but to procure
^mission, and salvation for them most certainly (...) infallibly, and so to
procure the working of the ^^dition of salvation in them, to me seems plain
(...) clear, from plentiful testimony of Scriptu^ Isa. 53.10. When thou shall
make his soul an offer^^ for sin, he shall see his seed. As sure as Christ
(...) made an offering for sin, so sure it is, that he shall (...) his seed, as
a fruit of his death, This is contrary (...) what some teach, that Christ might
have his de^^ in dying, and his death attain its end, and have (...) full
effect, though what Christ did impetrate sho^^ not come to be applied to any
soul in the work^* Now if it were so, how should Christ see his see^* And no
doubt, but Christ merited so much, the his labor should not be in vain, nor
his strength (...) spent for naught, and in vain: but that Israel sho^^ be
gathered by him, gathered to him, and that (...) should be for a light for the
Gentiles, and for sal^^tion to the ends of the earth, Isa. 49.4, 5, 6. (...) he
says, Joh. 12.32. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth will draw all men
unto me; where by lifting (...) from the earth, we are to understand, not his
Asce^sion, but his Crucifixion (as is evident from ver. 3^ ^o the drawing of
sinners unto Christ, even of all ^at are drawn is made a fruit, and consequent
of his ^ath.

Tit. 2.14. Who gave himself for us, that he might ^deem us from all iniquity,
and purify unto himself (...) peculiar people, zealous of good works. He died,
^t only that all who turn from iniquity, might ^e redeemed from wrath to come,
but also to re^eem his people from iniquity, and so from wrath (...) come.
Therefore his Name was called Jesus, be^use he was to save his people from their
sins. He ^as to destroy the works of the devil: and did spoil ^rincipalities
and powers, triumphing over them (...) his cross, when his heel was bruised,
(when he ^ffered in his humanity the lowest part of him,) ^en he brake the
Serpents head.

He died, not only to purchase happiness for his people in the end, but also
to procure holiness for ^em, as the way and means, necessarily conducing to ^^t
end. He gave himself (as we hear before) (...) Purify to himself a peculiar
people, Zealous, ^^c. He is made unto us Sanctification, as well as
^ighteousness, 1 Cor. 1.31. He gave himself for ^e Church, that he might
Sanctify it, Ephesians. 5.^5, 26. We owe it unto Christ that any of us are
^anctified, as well as that we are justified. Christ ^ed his Blood, for his
people to wash in, and be ^an. As from his side pierced, there came forth ^ood
and Water, John 19.34. This shadows ^^t the Virtue and Efficacy of his Death,
his shed^ng of his most pure, and precious Blood, being ^t only for the
Expiating of Guilt and purifying (...) the Conscience; but also for cleansing
the heart, ^phes. 1.4. Elected in Christ to be holy. That seems to intimate,
that it is only in and through Ch^^ that any come to be Sanctified. And though
(...) are not Elected for Christ, yet we are renewed (...) sanctified, and so
may be said to be Elected (...) Holiness through and for him. That God ne^^
intended to bestow saving, sanctifying Grace on a^ of us, but upon the account
of Christ, see 2 T^^ 1.9. The holy calling is given in Christ Jesus, a^ Grace
given in Christ Jesus, see Tit. 3.56. Ch^ is the Author both of Salvation
begun, and of S^vation perfected, consummate. All Spiritual b^^sings are in,
and from Christ. Blessed with (...) Spiritual blessings in Christ. Ephesians. 1.3.
Is (...) Faith a Spiritual blessing? Is not (...) pentance a Spiritual
blessing? then they are de^^ only through Christ. He is the Author and Fin^^er
of Faith, Heb. 12.2. He is the procurer of (...) That Faith is given to any, it
is given on the be^^ of Christ, or for Christ, Phil. 1.^^. So Repentance is
from Christ; (...).
fr^^ Christ, as a Savior: Repentance is as well f^ him, as Remission of sins,
Acts 5.31. By him (...) are brought into a state of Grace, Romans 5.2. A^^ when
he led Captivity Captive, he received G^^ for men, yea, for the Rebellious
also, that the Lo^^ God might dwell among them, Psalm 68.19. (to wh^^ the
Apostle Peter seems to allude, Acts 2.33. And we read of Christ's sending the
Spirit, John ^^.26. The Comforter, whom I will send unto y^^ from the Father.
And John 14.26. He is sent (...) Christ's Name.

And may we pray for the Spirit in Christ's Na^^ may we pray for Grace, ask
Faith in Christ's Na^^* If so, would not it imply, it was purchased by Christ
for some?

Whatsoever we ask, we should ask in the Name ^f Christ, we must ask in his
Name, if we would receive, John 14.13. and Chap. 16.23. Now what (...) it to
ask in the Name of Christ, if it be not to ^ead, insist, and depend on the
Worthiness, and ^erit of Christ, with allowance from him, for the ^taining of
what we want, and desire? When ^e ask in his Name, we eye him in his Mediatory
^ndertaking. As he is the Son of God, and very ^od, equal with his Father, so
we pray to him, ^^d he properly answers Prayer. But as he is Me^atour, so we
put up our Prayers not to him, but (...) God through him; I say we pray to him
as God. We do not pray in his Name: as Mediator, we ray not to him, but pray in
his Name. Now if we ^ay pray for Grace in the Name of Christ Media^r, that
Argues it is a thing merited by him.

Object. It was purchased, but conditionally; that (...), if men resist not
Gods Call, and thus put a Bar (...) his Grace.

Answ. Will any say so? That is to say, Christ ^^th purchased the Grace for
men, whereby they ^all believe, upon condition they shall be dispo^d to believe
of themselves. They that do not re^t Gods Call, obey it: And they that obey
Gods (...) all to believe, do believe. Thus if Christ should ^^ve purchased
Faith for us only Conditionally, if ^e do not resist Gods Call; the meaning
were, and it ^ould come to no more but this, he ^th purchased Grace for us,
Vid. These. Salmur. par. 4. p. 142. sect. 14.
where^^ we should come to Believe, if we ^elieve.

Again, may we suppose, that Christ Inter^deth on the behalf of any? as Psalm.
2.8. Ask of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine (...) heritance.
John 17.17. Sanctify them through (...) truth. Ver. 19, 20. For their sakes I
sanctify (...) self, that they also might be sanctified through (...) Truth.
Neither pray I for these alone, but for th^^ also which shall believe on me
through their w^^ Luke 22.32. I have prayed for thee (Pete^ that thy faith fail
not. Now if these are things (...) which Christ intercedeth, they are things
Meri^ by him. Christ's Intercession is like an Advoca^^ pleading, who has Law
and Right on his side, (...) like a Beggars craving, Heb. 9.24. Is not (...)
Appearance in Heaven a continual real Plea^ for his people? How? As a
presenting to his ^^thers view and remembrance, what he had done (...) suffered
upon Earth, for the Redemption and Sa^vation of his People. Has not his Blood a
Voi^^ Yea, a louder Voice than the blood of Abel; (...) it speaks better
things, Heb. 12.24. If Chri^ Intercession be nothing else, but a pleading of
(...) Merits, then what he Intercedeth for, he Meri^ Those Divines that are for
Christ's Interceding (...) Heaven by an Express and open Representation his will
to the Father: Yet make his Death (...) ground of his Intercession. That Christ
ferve^ and immoveably wills and desires this and (...) of the Father, for
the sake, and Virtue of (...) Death, and Sacrifice. So that if he Intercede
(...) the Conversion of any, he Merited their con^^sion; if he Intercede for
the sanctification of (...) and for their Confirmation in Grace to the end, the
their Faith may not fail, he Merited so much for the^.

And so no doubt, that Jesus Christ, the Etern^ and only begotten Son of God,
who was One Essence, and Equal in Power and Glory with the ^ather, that he
should take Man's nature on him, and give his Life a Ransom for many; even he
who was worth Ten Thousand Worlds of such as we are, that he out of his Zeal
for the Honor of God, to ^ear and satisfy his Justice, and to make way for
the ^lorious Manifestation of his Grace and Mercy, and ^lso out of Love and
Compassion toward poor pe^ishing Creatures, (such Love as was stronger than
Death;) I say, that he upon such principles and ^onsiderations, should so
willingly Die for sinners, and bear the wrath of God, which sin deserved, to
^ake way for sinners Reconciliation unto God, and their Eternal salvation: This
was such a worthy ^ndertaking, and so highly well pleasing unto God, ^s
deserved indeed, that his Labor and Sufferings should not be in vain, as to
the Actual Redemption and certain Salvation of some. Nor is it to be ima^ined,
that Christ would lay down his Life merely ^o make men salvable, but that he
had good assu^ance, that it should be to the certain salvation of ^any, that
his Blood should not be as Water spilt upon the ground. Can we think that he
would ^ave Died upon such Terms, as it should be pos^ble for men to be saved by
him; and yet contin^ent and doubtful, whether any one in the world should be
saved? It is not a mere possibility of Re^emption, but Actual redemption, that
the Saints ^n Heaven praise and extol him for, Rev. 5.9.12. Worthy is the Lamb
that was slain, to receive Power, and Honor, and Glory: For thou wast slain,
and ^ast redeemed us to God by thy Blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and
People, and Nation.

And if Christ did not (in dying for them) intend their certain Actual
Redemption, he only intend^ a lesser kindness, to wit, what was extended to the
that perish, in common with them: but the (...) greater kindness happens to
them besides his Inte^tion, which they might probably enough have (...) sed of,
for any thing that Christ did peculiarly (...) them; and which the other might
as well have go^ away withal.

Hence says one, Methinks an Arminian (...) hardly bear a part with the
Redeemed in that T^^umphant Song, while he thinks in his heart, (...) is no
more beholden to the Lamb (...) his Redemption, Lyford sensus Exerc. p. 278,
279.
than Cain, or J^das, and the Damned crew.

One thing more I pray take not^ of. He that could satisfy for others, could
as w^ Merit for others. It was as much, to satisfy (...) our sins, as to merit
and purchase saving Grace (...) us: It was as easy for the Lord Jesus Christ
to p^^chase that Grace for the Elect, whereby they shou^^ Infallibly be brought
on to Faith, and so to Sal^tion; as to purchase Remission and Salvation (...)
men, upon condition that they believe. And m^ thinks, it was necessary to make
him a comple^ and perfect Savior, that he should do the One, (...) well as the
other. And they would seem not (...) consult the Honor of our Redeemer so much
a^ they ought, that make his Death a Satisfacti^^ for sin, but deny it to be
Meritorious of Grace. (...) was a Meritorious satisfaction. As it was
satisf^^ctory for sin; so it was Meritorious of that savi^^ Grace, without
which his people could have ha^ no benefit by his Death, as a satisfaction. As
(...) was satisfactory, it was to Exempt and Delive^ us from the great evil and
misery, we were Obnoxious unto; as it was Meritorious, it procured that Good
and Happiness, we want. Thus Christ's Death was not only to redeem us from the
Curse due to sin, but to redeem us unto God. His Blood was not only to pay our
Debts, but to purchase a new Stock, and a surer Estate for his People, than
that we had lost.

Since the writing of these Notes, I met with one, J. H. Middle Way of Elect.
and Redempt. p. 29.
quite of another persuasion, who holds that the Merit, or purchase of
Christ's Death, or the Price he laid down for our Redemption, was not offered to
the Father, to procure of him, that he should give Faith, and Repentance to
any; but that he should give Remission to those that repent, etc. For which he
Argues modestly thus, 1. The holding otherwise makes Christ's Redemption a
double thing. Answ. And so the Scripture seems to make it. Teaching in some
places, that he gave himself a Ransom for All, for the whole World, and tasted
Death for every man: And in other places, that he laid down his Life for his
Sheep, for those whom the Father had given him, that he gave himself for the
Church. 2. It goes quite against the hair to reason, that Christ should procure
the benefit upon condition, and not otherwise; and yet that he should procure
also the performance. To what purpose do we make such a labor about, as this?
Answ. It is no more against the hair, then that Christ should have the Elect
especially ^in his Eyes; or then it is against the hair, that ^he should
deliver them from wrath to come, by sa^ving them from their sins. It was no
Labor about, when Christ died with a special intention of redeeming the Elect
effectually, and of being the Autho^ of certain Actual Salvation to them, to
take in, and intend the necessary means leading thereunto 3. Then there is
nothing in man's salvation but (...) purchase, and we shall be beholden to
Christ for all, and to God for nothing. Answ. We a^^ never the less beholden to
God, for that he ga^^ his son Jesus Christ to be our Savior, and to do a^^
this for us. Surely, the Father is to be acknowledged, and praised for all that
Christ has done i^ order to our salvation, see John 6.38.39.40. an^ Chap. 17.4.
Christ came into the world, to do (...) Fathers will, and finish the work, that
his Fathe^^ gave him to do. And are we not beholden to Go^ for the pardon of
sin? which this Writer grants, (...) have been purchased by Christ's Death for
tho^^ that Repent, and Believe. And Heaven, I hope, is Gods Gift,
notwithstanding Christ's purchase 4. The Death and Redemption of Christ is for
All, for every man, etc. Answ. What w^^ said in answer to his first Reason,
will take off wha^ he says here. There was a general, and lesser be^nefit
extended to the world by Christ's Death, again there was a special and greater
benefit intended to the Elect by it. The latter contains the former, no^ vice
versa: In regard of the former, he is the Savior of the World, in regard of
the latter, the Savior of his Body only. p. 30. Gods sending his Son is one
thing, and his sending his Spirit (...) other. Answ. Yet the sending of his Son
wa^^ to make way for sending of his Spirit. And the Spirit is sent in Christ's
Name, with what it implies, I have shown before. Ibid. Let it be tr^^ on the
one hand that Christ by his Redemption, has indeed procured no more for Paul
and Peter, than for Judas and the Reprobate. Answ. But that is scarce true,
when Paul says, Gal. 2.20. Who loved me, and gave himself for me. I cannot
think, he meant no more, than so as he loved and gave himself for all the
Reprobates in the world. This would not keep up the Honor of his Redemption to
the height, as he there pretends.

Page 31. It is true, we come in the Name of Christ, to ask his Spirit and
Grace; that is, we ask it through Christ's Merits. A fair concession, (which one
would think was no less than giving away his cause: But he distinguishes
here.) There is the Merits of his Person, as well as the Merits of his Death.
Answ. That there was any Merit in his Death, it was from the Worthiness of his
Person. But why could not Christ have procured our Reconciliation to God, and
Salvation, by the Merits of his Person, as well as the effectual Vocation? And
thus would not this Writer make Christ's Death and Oblation, as he insinuates,
that others make some part of his Mediatorship, more than needs.

Page 33, 34. I must offer moreover, If Christ had purchased Faith and
Repentance for some, which all have not, the Reprobate might here have
something to say, etc. Answ. No more to say, than against Gods Decree of
Election, which yet he maintains. Will he allow the Reprobate to say, That the
reason why he repented not, as the Elect did, is because God had decreed to
give Repentance to one of them, and not to the other. According to his
Reasoning here, in regard of Gods decree of Election (which he holds with us)
Christ's Purchase and Redemption should as well be a mock to the Reprobate. But
as God has intended and promised, and Christ has purchased Faith and
Repentance for the Elect, so that they come certainly to believe and repent;
they owe it unto Gods Grace, and Christ's purchase. And as for others that fall
short of Grace here, and so of Salvation hereafter, it is through their own
fault. God, and Christ have done enough to leave them all without Excuse.

Other things I pass by, being spoken to before.

Now this Proposition, that Christ is the purchaser of Grace, may be of good
use. As

(1.) This speaks encouragement to poor destressed souls, who have a deep sense
both of their own weakness and unworthiness. Though thou art never so unworthy
of Grace, yet Jesus Christ is worthy, for whose sake it may be freely Imparted
to thee. Grant, that thou art unworthy, that he should own thee; yet surely he
has deserved to have a people in the world, that should own him indeed,
believe on him and submit to him. He is worthy to have a people to serve and
Honor him. And he has taught us to pray, [Thy Kingdom come,] though we are
unworthy to be Translated into his Kingdom. He is worthy to be our Ruler,
though we are unworthy to be acknowledged by him, as his Loyal Subjects. He
that has Fought for us, Died for us, is worthy to be our Head, though we are
unworthy to be his Members. Well, here is Encouragement for such as begin to
enquire after him, only they fear, they should have no part in him, sear that
they shall be rejected of him: Rather if thou can not be satisfied without
Christ and his Grace, it is a sign, the Lord has begun with thee, to bring
thee over to himself. It is to be hoped thou art part of Christ's purchase,
which he will not lose. Converts are the Travel of his soul. And he is
abundantly satisfied, to see this Fruit of his sorrows. When souls become
willing to bow to his Scepter. It is the day of Christ's Power, Psalm. 110.3. It
is the day of Christ's glorious Conquest, and Triumph; it is as a Coronation day
to Christ, Cant. 3.11. The day of the gladness of his Heart. Let the thoughts
of thy former unworthy carriage and disposition be humble, but not discourage
thee. Remember, that he has received Gists for men, yea, for the Rebellious
also, that the Lord God may dwell among them. He has subdued many a rebellious
Creature by his Grace, and made them Loyal Subjects. And if now thou art
lamenting after him, it is to be hoped, he is at work with thee.

Object. But they are so very few in comparison, that ever attain to an
Interest in Christ, and saving Grace, that I know not how to hope, it should be
ever so well with me.

Answ. If they were never so few, yet while there are any, and so long as the
thing is possible, thou art to seek it above all things in the world: And if
thou must die and perish, yet thou should resolve to die and perish in
pursuit after Christ, and Grace. If any place of Profit or Honor be to be
disposed of, many will presently put in for it, will make Friends, and employ
their Wit and Interest to obtain it; many will seek, though but one can go away
with it: But here all that seek Christ and Grace aright, are in the way to find
him.

(2.) You that are partaking of Christ's purchase, that have received some Grace
of his Fullness; remember where you had it, and be, 1. Humble. 2. Thankful. 3.
Watchful.

1. Be Humble, you may not say, my hand has got me this wealth: Now I live,
says the Apostle, yet not I, but Christ lives in me.

2. Be Thankful, O how thankful should you be for Christ, and how thankful to
him? What praise is due to him, who has loved us, and washed us from our sins
in his own Blood, and sanctified us?

3. Be Watchful, to preserve Grace. Remember what it cost: As David said of the
water of the Well of Bethlehem, Is it not the blood of the men, that went in
Jeopardy of their Lives? O precious Faith, which cost the precious Blood of
Christ, to purchase it! when you are careless of maintaining and preserving
Grace received, would not this Argue, that you have very low thoughts of the
purchase of Christ's Blood? Did he not think it too much, to shed his Blood, to
procure Grace and Peace for thee: And do thou think any pains too much to
preserve thine? Does not that deserve to be cherished with our Prayers and
Tears, which cost the Blood of Christ, to procure it for us?

Ezekiel. 36.32. Not for your sakes do I this, says the Lord God, be it known
unto you.
Sect. 11. PROP. XI. There is nothing required in the Covenant of Grace, or
that the People of God can perform, which can Merit at Gods Hand, but what the
Lord promises upon such or such condition, is as much of Grace, as if it were
bestowed without any Condition.
INdeed a Learned man observes, that according to
Distributive-Governing-Justice, so Adam might have been said to Merit, doing
all that could equally be required of him; that is, keeping the Law of
Innocence. Yea, understanding Merit, or worthiness, as nothing else but a Moral
aptitude for the reward; the Fathers are not to be condemned, that speak of
[the Merit of good Works] meaning only according to the Distributive,
Governing, Paternal Justice of God in the Law of Grace. But according to the
terms of Commutative Justice (which gives one thing for another, as in Buying
and Selling) no Creature can possibly Merit at Gods hand, ( vid. Mr. Baxt,
Christian Directory, p. 129. sect. 3.1.2, 4. And Preface to Mr. Allain's
Discourse, etc. p. 10, 11.) Merit in this last sence^ would utterly exclude,
and deny Gods Benignity, and Mercy. As Beza in Luke 17.10. Sed and ipse^ Leg is
contextus omnem merendi dignitatem excludi^^ Nihil nisi prorsus gratuitam
benignitatem promitten^ ipsam observantibus: Cum ipsum quoque legale pactum non
aliunde quam a mera Dei benignitate proficiscatur.

But further to cut off occasion from our Adversaries here. We grant the
Obedience which the Faithful perform by the help of Gods Grace, is not to be
reckoned among their sins. For coming from (...) right principle, and being
directed to a right end, (...) has what is Essential to an Action
Morrally-good; though not coming up to that degree of perfection, which the Law
in its Rigor does require, it is not perfectly good. But this Imperfection is
but gradual, and not such as specifieth in an evil action, for the kind of it.

Again, The faithful are worthy, (...), Rev. 3.4. God accounts them worthy, in
his righteous Judgment, accounts them worthy of his Kingdom. But how worthy?
Surely not in such a sense as would Derogate and take off from his Free Grace,
and Christ's Merits. They are not worthy absolutely, considered strictly in
themselves: But worthy for Christ's sake, and worthy comparatively. Of the two,
the Saints are more worthy than sinners. They are rewardable, being in that
state, and capacity, to which the reward is graciously promised. And as there
is some convenience betwixt the Seed, and the Fruit, or Crop; betwixt holding
out in the Conflict, and wearing the Triumphal Crown; betwixt running out the
Race, and bearing away the Prize; betwixt the Means, and the End; so betwixt
the Obedience of the Faithful, and promised Happiness. We may grant, they have
Dignitatem non-repugnantiae, and dignitatem condecentiae. (As Mr. Fenner.) They
are not contrarily Affected, and Inclined, but in some measure disposed and
made meet for Heaven. Though they have not Dig^itatem equivalentiae: They can
do no service proportionable to such a reward, Romans 8.17. So they are not
worthy in strict Justice, without any thing of Grace or Favor shown them; only
it is worthy of God to reward them, not according to their slender service, but
according to his own Bounty and Munificence.

Note, 1. It is of special Grace, Vid. Maldonat in John 15.16. collat. cum
Gerhard. Har. c. 177. p. 1025. a pr.
that any do perform the Condition. And therefore the Creature cannot thus
Merit any thing at Gods hand; but rather the contrary, upon this account God
merits the greatest Love, and highest praises from such of his Creatures.
Indeed they are hereby most deeply indebted to him, Deo autem nunquid dicimus,
read mihi quia dedi tibi? Quid dedimus Deo, quando totum quod sumus, and quod
habemus boni, ab illo habemus? Nihil ergo ei dedimus. Aug. Cum duo sint ad se
invicem relata, meritum and debitum, profecto meritum est solius Dei, debitum
vero Hominis est: licet adversarii haec invertant, Doceantque debitum esse Dei
meritum vero Hominis. Rolloc.
as they cannot but acknowledge to Eternity, Ephesians. 2.8. By Grace ye are saved
through Faith, and that not of your selves; it is the Gift of God. Nonne hoc
modo and liherum Arbitrium, and bonae intentiones, and preparationes fictitiae
and meritae, and satisfactiones conticescant opportet. Calo.

This Faith upon which Salvation is promised, (...) the Gift of his Grace,
Phil. 1.29. (...); therefore Salvation, cannot but be of Grace too. When the
Condition is of Grace; the benefit promised (...) not but be of Grace. How
should that Merit (...) us, which is the free Gift of God, which he ((...)
special Grace) was pleased to bestow on us?

2. (As we have heard also) Christ has purchased saving sanctifying Grace for
all those, who a^ tain to it as well as Salvation thereupon. And hence it
follows, that there is no proper Merit (...) in Christ. We are to thank Christ,
both that (...) have Faith (any of us) and that Salvation is sun^ to them that
believe. And one says well: How far is the performance of the condition from
Meriting the thing promised, Great. prapit. p. 198.
when Christ Died for the end, that God might justify and save them th^^
perform it. Be thou faithful unto death, say^ Christ, and I will give thee a
Crown of Life. An^ how impossible is it, that our being faithful un^ death
should Merit the Crown of Life from Christ, since it was he that purchased our
Faith and Perseverance? Surely Christ is beforehand with us here; nor can we
come ever even with him.

How absurd is it to say, that Christ has Merite^ this for us, that our works
should Merit? The^ instead of being saved by Christ, we should rather be our
own Saviors. So we might say, to the works of our own hands, (dipped in Christ's
Blood) ye are our Saviors. And what needed Christ to have Merited Heaven for
us, if we were to merit it by our own works? see Gal. 2. ult. It is called the
Purchased possession, in regard of what Christ has done; not that we could
purchase it by any ^ing, we can do. And if it was purchased by Christ ^r the
Faithful, then surely there is no need, that ^ey should purchase it anew. If
they must merit ^eaven, this would deny Christ's having merited it ^r them: I
say, this were a denial of the merit of Christ, or a denial of Gods Justice in
not giving ^eaven to them, when it was purchased for them, ^ccept they will
purchase it over again. Or else ^ey must think, that God is behind-hand with
^em, if Christ has Merited Heaven for them, and ^ey merit Heaven themselves;
one Heaven should ^t be enough. What enemies are they to the ^race of God, how
hard would they make him, (...) take a double price for the same Possession?

Yea, the Opinion of men's merits would make jesus Christ the Redeemer indebted
to his redeemed ^es. O prodigious absurdity. Is it not plain that (...) has
power to give eternal life, that he gives ^ernal life, Joh. 17.2. And would it
not be a strange ^ingling of heaven and earth, (horrible confusion) (...) a
believer to come to Christ, and demand of him, ^rd give me the life and
happiness, which I have ^rited at thy thy hands? Rather is it not he, that
^erited for his people, and so has it put into his ^^ds to give them?

Object. But if salvation was purchased by Christ, (...) believers, will it not
follow, that it is not of ^eace?

Answ. No: it is given for no merits of theirs; ^ough for the merits of Christ.
Indeed it is of ^stice to Christ, because he has merited salvation (...)
believers: but of grace to them, because they ^uld no way merit it. But if one
supposes any merit in them; he therein denies, and directly (...) poseth that
of the Apostle Paul, That they are sa^ by grace. If of grace, then not of their
own (...) rit; If of their own merit, then not of grace.

3. How utterly impossible it is, and there^ incredible, that the most eminent
Saint should (...) heaven, who must (with Jacob,) acknowledge (...) self less
than the least of mercies, and for the ve^^ least of his sins deserving no less
than hell? Tho^ his sins are pardoned, that he is not bound over (...) hell and
condemnation; yet the reatus simplex (...) maineth, that we must say of such a
pardoned sinner; if God should deal with him according to (...) deserts, he
could look for nothing but hell.

If a believing, repenting sinner, if the most hum^ mortified sinner in the
world should merit forgi^^ life and happiness; then their must be more g^ ness,
necessarily supposed in his faith, repentance obedience, than there is evil in
his sins: But there more evil in one sin, than there is good in them perfect
obedience of any creature. And if the was more good in a Saints obedience, than
evil his sins; then what need had such of the satisfacting of Christ; Then
Christ dyed in vain for them w^ might have satisfied for themselves.

Again, while the sins of a believer do in the own Nature deserve hell, if he
could merit hea^^ on the other hand by his obedience, then it would (...) low,
that the same person, at the same time sho^ deserve both to be pardoned, and to
be condemne^ should both deserve heaven and hell, so the penite should be
saved, but the sinner damned.

4. How impossible is it that the condition of (...) Covenant of Grace should
be meritorious, when this ^ever necessarily included, indispensible required,
is part of the condition, that we do utterly renounce ^ur own righteousness,
disclaim all self-merit, ^elf-worthiness, that we see our misery and despe^ate
lost estate without the free grace of God in Christ, that we freely acknowledge
our iniquity, and ^deservings at Gods hand, and put no confidence (...) the
flesh. Yea we should be ashamed, and con^ounded in our selves, even when the
Lord is pacifi^d toward us. And Jesus Christ has told us: Every one that
exalts himself, shall be abased, and he that humbles himself, Theologi
Reformati merito vocem meriti repudiant, quia sonat aliquid superbum. Le Blank
Theses. Quomodo fides justificet, Sect. 57. p. 22.
shall be ^xalted. And has taught us, when we have done what is com^anded, to
say, ( i. e. to believe ^^d acknowledge seriously) that ^e are unprofitable
servants, and deserve not so much as ^hanks from our Lord and master. Luke
17.9, 10.

And could men do all, the Co^enant of Grace requires, Si quis devotus, si
quis solicitus, si quis spiritu fervens, caveat sibi ne suis fidat maritis, ne
suis in nitatur operibus, alioqui nec hujuscemodi quidem animum intrat gratia.
Bernard. In Annum Dom. ser. 3.
the Co^enant of Grace requires, that is ^epent of sins past, turn from sin,
^^d set upon a strict course of obe^ience for time to come, etc. and only fail
in this one point of saclaiming self-righteousness, and ^elf-merit, to abide by
the merit ^d righteousness of Christ alone, ^procure their acceptance with
God, and salvation; I say, could men do all, that ^e Covenant of Grace
requires, besides this: but (...) stead of denying, and going out of
themselves, ^ould rely and depend on their own righteousness as meritorious of
the favor of God, etc. they wo^ find this but a smoother and cleanlier way to
hell (...) know not how better to express it, than in the wo^ of a late Writer.
As Works every way per^ and meritorious (supposing their were any (...) would
in themselves hinder pardon by Chr^^^ death, being essentially (in their own
Natures) (...) consistent; so a man's conceiting his works me^rious, is by Gods
Law of Grace, excluded (...) any interest in this propitiation, for he has
(...) it a part of the Condition, that men be sensible their unworthiness and
undone estate with Christ and pardon. Thus let men go never so (...) do never
so much, yet an opinion of merit were nough to spoil all they do, and enough
to de^ them utterly of all saving benefit by the Cove^ of Grace, they not
coming up to the condition o^ To stand upon our own worthiness, is to fall
(...) Grace, Gal. 5.4.

5. To hold the best works of the most grace souls meritorious, is to deny the
Covenant of Gr^^ A Covenant of Grace it cannot be, if it requ^ and insists upon
meritorious works. Grace and (...) are (...) inconsistent. Though Grace will
(...) well enough with Christ's merit, yet not with (...) merit of Saints (as I
showed before.) If Salvation^ by meritorious Works of our own, then not of G^^^
If it be of Grace, then not by Meritorious w^ of our own. And to talk of
meriting Ratione (...) ti: Si opera merentur vitam Aeternam ex pacto and
ordinatione Dei; non merentur eam inerinsecasua dignitate. Alting. Elenct. p.
801.
By virtue of Gods (...) venant and Promise, W^ is it, but clearly to sub^ the
thing they would word^ blish? What is it but to (...) upon their own Swords, to
contradict, and confute themselves? That good works are not meritorious of
deaven and Happiness of themselves, but only the Lord has promised Life and
Happiness in that way, (let them talk what they will,) this is a plain ^roof,
that they merit not at all by way of Condigity, or in respect of Commutative
Justice; but (...) is of Gods free Grace to promise such a reward, ^ndeserved.

Indeed the Popish Doctors Hobble miserably in their Disputes about the Merit
of men's works. ^ome of them teaching, that good works Merit by ^irtue of
Christ's Merits; others, by virtue of Gods ^romise, and compact. Some holding
that they me^it ex justitia, of strict Justice; others, that they ^erit ex
gratitudine, as if God was bound, at least ^ a way of Gratitude to reward them
so. Direct^^ contrary to Luke 17.9, 10. But no wonder that ^hese Babel-builders
have their Language thus con^onfounded.

I know the word [Merit] has sometimes been ^ed very improperly to signify no
more, than sim^ly to obtain. As in the speech of Cain, [mine Ini^ity is
greater, (according to the Vulg. Lat.) ^^am ut veniam merear. See more in
Bishop Mortons Appeal for Protestants, l. 2. c. 2. sect. 3, 4. and Antidot.
contra merita. c. 3. sect. 3.
] When ^thing is more abhorrent from ^eason; than that sin, any sin ^ould
deserve, or merit forgive^ss. What? Both deserve par^on, and deserve
punishment? what ^n be a plainer contradiction? Does the same ^ountain send
forth sweet water and bitter, salt wa^r and fresh?

Use. Get a clear apprehension of this certain truth, that there is no merit in
what the best of m^ can do. There is a vast difference betwixt the condition of
Salvation, and the Meritorious cause (...) Salvation. ANd yet sometimes
Antinomians, (...) are so much against Conditions, seem to befrie^ Popish
Merits, saying, That Christ gives perfection to our works, and we fulfill the
Law in Chri^ and our works are perfect, and free from sin, (...) Christ's
Actions were. Yea, Eaton has this sense less saying, Justification is
meritorious of all the Favor and Blessings of God.

But let us learn to distinguish betwixt a Condi^onal and a Meritorious cause.
We are Justified (...) Saved by Faith, saved in the way of Repentance,
Obedience. We are not saved without them (Christ is the Author of Salvation
only to those that believe in him, and obey him) that these are necessary
Conditions. Yet we are not saved for Faith, or for (...) Repentance, Obedience,
for any worth or dese^ in them, but only for the merit of Christ: The^ are
necessary Conditions of salvation therefore but no Meritorious cause. An Error
here, is (...) Error in the foundation of Salvation. It was the Jews overthrow,
their seeking to establish their (...) Righteousness. As it is enough to ruin
any in the world, To build off from Christ, the only Foundation, is Ruinous
work, such foolish building won^ undo any man. There is salvation in no other
(...) Christ. No hopes, that ever we should get to He^ ven, if we come not unto
Christ: No coming (...) Christ, if we go not out of our selves.

Ezekiel. 18.25. Here now, O House of Israel, is not my Way equal?
Sect. 12. PROP. XII. The Condition of the Covenant of Grace not being required
properly to Merit, and purchase the Blessings promised; it follows, that it is
only required to make Way, and qualify us for our Enjoying and partaking of
them.
NOw after man had broke with God, one would be apt to conclude, that God would
never take him into a new League, unless it was upon some higher, and harder
terms; as it is usual among men. Yet it is quite otherwise in the Covenant of
Grace. God condescends to as low terms as it is possible for any man reasonably
to desire. As if the Lord should treat sinners thus: Poor Creatures you have
destroyed your selves; but in me is your help. You are a company of Rebels,
that deserve to die, yet I am ready to pardon, and to be reconciled to you, in
and through my dear Son, (who in tender compassion toward you, willingly
interposed betwixt you and Justice, and died to satisfy for, and save as many
of you as should own him for their Redeemer, and return to their Allegiance to
me.) Now here I offer to be at peace with you; only I must secure the Honor of
my Free Grace, and my Sons Merits, as I must also keep up the Reputation of my
just Authority, Holiness, hatred of sin. (As I cannot but hate sin, though I am
willing to be Reconciled to sinners.) And I must have you at some better pass,
not to sin wilfully, as those that neither fear to offend God, nor regard at
all how they wrong their own souls. Now, what say ye? Are you ready heartily to
acknowledge your sin and wretchedness, to accept of a gracious pardon, and
Salvation offered, standing no longer in your own Justification, but utterly
renouncing your own Righteousness? And do you resolve to be subject to my
Authority, to obey my Commands for time to come, unfeignedly grieving and being
truly humbled for your coming short, and failing in any part of that duty you
owe to me your Creator, Redeemer, Owner, Governor? That is, in short, are you
really willing to give up your selves to me, to be Guided and Governed by me,
and saved in my own way?

Then I here, faithfully engage, upon the word of the ever Living God, the
Faithful God that keeps Covenant, that I will be your God, your Portion, your
Exceeding great Reward. I will be, and do all that can be desired, to make you
for ever Happy.

Now is not this a fair proposal? Is it not wonderful, that the Great God
should ever make such a gracious offer to sinful, provoking Creatures? Suppose
an Earthly Prince offering a Pardon, and promising his Princely grace and
favor to a company of condemned Traitors, and Rebels, if they would seriously
confess their guilt, acknowledge and accept of his Princely grace and clemency,
and promise Loyalty and subjection for time to come; Would you not say these
were very fair, easy and equitable terms? And that in wisdom and honor he
could require no less? And what does the Lord require more of us? O sinner!
thou that have been a rebellious wretch, what does the Lord require of thee,
but only to acknowledge thine Iniquity, to accept of Christ the only Savior,
and give up thy self to be governed by him, heartily bewailing and mourning for
it; when at any time thou have forgotten him, and that Love, Duty, Service, and
Thankfulness, which thou for ever owe unto him? And is it not wonderful
Grace, that on these terms the Lord is ready to receive thee? Does he promise,
that [If the wicked turn from his wickedness, and walk in Gods Statutes, he
shall surely live;] his sins shall not be mentioned unto him, (as Ezekiel. 33.14,
15, 16.) And will any deny this to be a gracious promise, because conditional?
Is it not plain, that what the Lord calls for here, is of Right, and a due
Debt from us? But that he promises to receive sinners opon their return; this
is not of Debt, but of Gods abundant Mercy, and Free Grace.

And how should he in Honor go lower than he does, or in Faithfulness to the
Interest of the souls of his people?

These three things therefore make up the Condition of the Covenant of Grace.

1. Repentance toward God, without this no Remission or Salvation: Except ye
repent, ye shall surely perish. But on the contrary, If the wicked turn, he
shall surely live, he shall not dye, Ezekiel. 18.21.

2. Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. If ye believe not, ye shall dye in your
sins, Joh. 8.24. But, Believe on the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, Act.
16.31.

3. A resolution to perform sincere, and new obedience, 2 These. 1.8. The Lord
Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, to take vengeance on them that obey not
the Gospel (that yield not evangelical obedience:) But he is the Author of
Eternal salvation (...) them that obey him.

Under these three, (Repentance, Faith, and sincere Obedience) is included
whatsoever the Covenant of Grace requires, and where one of these is, there
are the other. They are inseparable: and where one is named, the other are
understood. As what goes under the name of faith working by love, Gal. 5.6. is
called a new creature, Gal. 6.15. and keeping the commandments of God, 1 Cor.
7.19.

Under the old Testament the condition of the Covenant of Grace is ordinarily
expressed by turning to God, (Ezekiel. 33.11. Seeking him (Amos 5.4. Prove. 8.17.)
walking uprightly, (Genesis 17.1. Psalm. 84.11. keeping his commandments, (Psalm.
103.18.)

In the New Testament it is more ordinarily expressed by faith, faith in Jesus
Christ, Mar. 16.16. Joh. 3.36. etc.

Not but that all that were saved before Christ came in the flesh, were saved
by him (who was the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, (...) some take
that in Rev. 13.8.) not but that it was for his sake, that any were accepted of
God, and save^ before: see Ast. 15.11. but after his coming in the flesh, then
a more explicit faith in Christ, was required of all that would have salvation
by Christ And therefore the Gospel was written (as the Eva^ gelist John says
of the writing of his Gospel, Chap. 20.31. that we might believe that Jesus is
the Christ the son of God, and that believing we might have lif^ through his
Name. Not that [believing Jesus to be the Christ, the Son of God] was the only
thing required, or all that was necessary to our having life through his Name:
But this added to what was before required in order to Salvation: Before his
coming there was no pointing at him, so as John Baptist did, Joh. 1.29.36.
Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world. But Christ being
come, he could say, If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins;
and he saves those that come unto God [by him] others he will not save.
Therefore he says, Joh. 17.3. This is life eternal to know thee, the true God,
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. So Ioh. 3.36. He that believes on the
Son has everlasting life, he that believes not, shall not see life. So
observe what the Covenant of grace requires for the honor of Christ as
Redeemer, and of Free Grace.

I am not ignorant, how some have argued, an explicit knowledge and belief of
Christ's death and satisfaction, not to have been absolutely necessary to the
salvation of those, that lived before Christ's coming

And yet methinks, it is plain, that the faithful, that lived and died before
Christ's coming in the flesh, as they had some means of attaining to the
knowledge of a Redeemer, so they had some knowledge of a Redeemer, though it
was more general and confused, not so clear and distinct, as what Christians
now have: But the doctrine of man's Redemption was preached to Adam immediately
after his fall [The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head] And Job
could speak of his Redeemer, Job 29.25, 26, 27. I know that my Redeemer lives,
and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth. And faithful
Abraham, Christ testifies of him, Ioh. 8.56. Your Father Abraham rejoiced to
see my day: and he saw it, and was glad. And Jacob invocates the Angel of the
Covenant, Genesis 48.15, 16. God before whom my fathers, Abraham, and Isaac did
walk, the God which fed me all my life long unto this day: [The Angel which
redeemed me from all evil] bless the lads. This Angel was his Redeemer, (And so
the Messiah is called, Isa. 59.20.) Again, the same Patriarch, when he lay a
dying, breaks forth into this sweet note, Genesis 49.18. I have waited for thy
salvation, O Lord: which the two Chaldee Pharaphrasts explain thus, (as
Ainsworth notes) our father Jacob said, I expect not the salvation of Gideon
son of Ioash, which is a temporal salvation; nor the salvation of Samson son of
Manoah, but the salvation of Christ the son of David, who shall come to bring
to himself the sons of Israel, whose salvation my soul desires. The Patriarks
that dyed in the faith, saw something in the promise, which they did not live
to see fulfilled, Heb. 11.13. Though it was a far off, yet by faith they saw
it, and dyed in the Faith, and confident expectation of it, as Jacob that said,
I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord. As Christ told his disciples, that
many Prophets, and righteous men, and Kings have desired to see the things that
ye see, and have not seen them, Mat. 13.17. Luke 10.24. So he says, that the
Scriptures of the old Testament testified of him, Ioh. 5.39. and ver. 46. Had
ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for he wrote of me, Luke 24.44,
etc. And to him gave all the Prophets witness, Act. 3.18.20, 22. and 10.43.
Luke 1.69, 70, 72, Act. 7.52. 1 Pet. 1.10, 11. As the Sacrifices under the Law
pointed at Christ the Lamb of God, the true Sacrifice, that takes away the sins
of the world. So it was foretold, that he should make his soul an offering for
sin, and bear the iniquity of his people, Isa. 53.10, 11, 12. And Dan. 9.26.
After sixty two weeks shall Messiah be cut off. Thus it was revealed, that he
should be put to Death; yea, and that he should rise again, Psalm. 16.9. Thou will not suffer thine holy One to see corruption. And Psalm. 110.1. Sets
forth his glorious Exaltation, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right
hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool. Now when so much of him was
revealed before, methinks it is strange, if the Faithful then should know
nothing of him. Was the Spirit of the Lord so straightned then, as not at all
to own and bless his own means here?

But though I confess, it is not in me to determine, how much Knowledge of, and
Faith in the Messiah was necessary then; and though I grant the generallity of
the Faithful then might know very little, (if any thing at all) of the way and
manner of the Messiahs procuring Redemption and Salvation; of which the
Prophets themselves were put to enquire, and search diligently, 1 Pet. 1.10.
Yet methinks, this is very clear.

That Pardoning Grace was not a thing unknown to them, but plainly declared,
that they might know, Salvation was not of Works, but of Grace. As the Lord had
proclaimed his Name to be The Lord, the Lord God, Merciful and Gracious,
forgiving Iniquity, and Trangression, and Sin; and that will by no means clear,
(...).
Mundando non mundabit, h. c. neminem per se pro mundo and Innocente habet, sed
quos mundat and Justificat, mundat ex sola sua gratia. (F. co.) Omnes egent Dei
misericordi^ (Menock.) apud M. Pol. in Synops. Exodus 34. 5, 6, 7. so Psalm.
130.3.4. If thou (Lord) should mark iniquities; O Lord, who shall stand? But
there i^ forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared Isa. 55.7. Let the
wicked for sake his way, and return to the Lord, and he will have mercy on him,
and will abundantly pardon. That the Faithful of old had a sense of their need
of pardoning Grace, is evident. As David describes Blessedness, Psalm. 32.1, 2.
Blessed is he, whose Transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered. Blessed
is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, and in whose Spirit there
is no guile. (i. e.) No guile allowed, but lamented and abhorred. So this was
plainly taught, that the true Israelite, the guiltless person, the upright man
could not attain to Blessedness, but by the way of pardoning Grace. So they
that offered the Sacrifices of Righteousness, might not trust in their own
services and sacrifices, but in the Lord, Psalm. 4.5. And David (a man after
Gods own heart) acknowledges Gods Forgiving-mercy, Psalm. 103.3. Who forgiveth
all thine iniquities. And Solomon prays for them that should return to God
with all their beart -- that he would forgive, 2 Chronicles. 6.38.39. And Hezekiah,
that the good Lord would pardon every one that prepares his heart to seek God,
2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19.

And thus far the condition of the Covenant of Grace was all one under both
Testaments, to secure the Honor of Free Grace. (And they are utterly unworthy
of any Grace and Favor from God, that will not acknowledge it.) O! How is Gods
Freegrace, and Infinite mercy magnified in the Pardon and Salvation of a sinful
Creature? Free Grace is ^he Attribute that God delights to Honor, and ^oth
Honor especially in a sinners Salvation. And ^e will have this right done unto
it, by all, that would attain to Salvation; he will have them see and
acknowledge, that if ever they be saved, it must ^e by Gods Infinite
Free Grace. Quod and si nos puerili animositate gratis salvari nolumus, merito
non salvamur. Excludit miseriae dissimulatio miserationem: Nec dignatio locum
habet, ubi fuerit praesumptio dignitatis. Bernard. In Dedic. Eccl. Ser. 5.
(I am speaking of the Adult.) As ever any of us would be saved, we must be
sensible of our own unworthiness (as Jacob, that acknowledged himself less than
the least of mercies, Genesis 32.10.) We must renounce our own Righteousness, (as
Job 9.20. If I justify my self, my own mouth shall condemn me. As the Church
confesses in Isa. 64.6. We are all as an un^lean thing, and our righteousness
as filthy rags.)

There was never any Saint, or truly Righteous person in the world, accepted,
and saved for any ^^herent Righteousness found in him: But only of Gods
Free Grace, through the satisfaction of Jesus Christ, eyed, and accepted of God
for him. And we read of the Jews, Romans 9.31, 32 which followed after the Law of
Righteousness, that they ^^tained not to the Law of Righteousness: Because ^hey
sought it not by Faith, but as it were by the works of the Law.

This therefore is essential to the condition of the Covenant of Grace, that we
acknowledge all that God does for us, according to this Covenant, or all that
he here promises to do, to be of Grace, of Free Grace. And if men could do
all, that the Covenant requires besides this, and then rest in the same, as a
satisfaction to God for their sins, and (...) compensation for his Favors, as
making him (...) mends; this were to turn the Covenant of Grace i^ a Covenant
of Works.

This you are to note, (and I pray you observe it^ The condition of the
Covenant of Grace, is not (...) satisfy for our breach of the Covenant of
VVor^ but to Interest us in Christ's satisfaction. It be^ so agreed betwixt, or
decreed by God the Father and his Son Christ, that none shall be pardoned a^
saved upon account of his Satisfaction, but (...) such as come up to the Terms
of the Covenant (...) Grace.

And truly the Design of the Covenant of Gra^ is so clear for advancing Christ,
and Free Grace (...) that after many deliberate thoughts, I am afraid (...)
give any more to Faith it self, in the business of (...) sinners Justification
and Salvation, than our sobe^ Divines give to Repentance, and other Grace^ Upon
serious thoughts, I dare not contend for a^ Causality, or Efficiency in Faith
it self; no not (...) the least and lowest Degree. If in any respect (...) is
to be preferred to other Graces, it is in the (to use the phrase of a Learned
Divine) that (...) is the sinners Self-denying acknowledgment of (...) sin and
misery, and inability to help himself. N^ that Faith could of it self procure
our Pardon a^ Justification: But only God has promised to the^ that believe,
an Interest in Christ, and his Righteousness. How does Faith Interest us in
Christ a^ his Righteousness for Justification, and Salvation Certainly, not by
any Intrinsic virtue of its ow^ but by virtue of Gods gracious promise. The
Papist would have Faith to Justify, as it is a Grace dispo^^g ad justitium,
and as a part of our Inherent Righ^ousness: Justificatio sine dubio motus
quidam est ^peccato ad justitiam, says Bellarmine. So he un^standeth that of
being Justified freely by his ^race, Romans 3.24. Per gratiam, idest, per
justi^on ab illo donatam, and infusam. But if we ad^it of their notion of
Justification (more proper^^ Justification) then we should be Justified
naturally and necessarily upon the Working, or (to use ^e common word) Infusing
of a principle of Grace, (...) Righteous habits. As it follows also, that we
(...) only be said to be justified in part, till such time (...) our Inherent
Righteousness be perfect. And ^^squently that in part we are all Unjustified;
and (...) all should be liable to Condemnation still.

Others speak of the To credere, the condition of (...) Covenant of Grace,
Justifying, God taking ^^d accepting of it, as if it were a perfect fulfilling
(...) the Law. Thus Faith by Acceptilation is suppo(...) to stand in the place,
and stead of Perfect, Ex(...) Legal Righteousness and Obedience. And I ^^sess
the Expression of Faith being counted for righteousness, Romans 4.3, 5. would
seem to coun^ance such an Opinion, at first blush. But we ^^st not put such a
sense on this Text, and expres^^ of Scripture, as would overthrow other
Scrip^^s. We read 1 Cor. 1.30. That Christ is made (...) God unto us
Righteousness. Where Bellarmine ^^ts, Non esset absurdum, si quis diceret
nobis im^^ri, Christi justitiam and merita, cum nobis do^^ur and applicentur,
ac si nos ipsi Deo satisfecisse^^ Though it be a giving up his cause. But they
(...) place Faith in the room of perfect Obedience, teaching that by Gods
gracious Acceptilation (...) one is reputed for the other. they wrest the
Scripture, and deny the gracious Imputation of Chr^^^ Righteousness to them
that believe.

So far as I am able to apprehend, that which (...) swereth to the
Righteousness, and Obedience, (...) quired in the Covenant of Works, is the
Righ^^ousness and Satisfaction of Jesus Christ alone, ((...) is called, The
Lord our Righteousness, who is (...) of God unto us Righteousness, our Pro-le^
Righteousness, as one.) As also we are said to^ made the Righteousness of God
in him, 2 Cor. ^.21.) That as man should have been Justified, (...) for ever
Happy by the Covenant of Works, for (...) own Righteousness inherent in him,
and wro^^^ by him, had he obeyed perfectly: So that (...) man is Justified, and
saved now, it is not for (...) imperfect Inherent righteousness of his own,
(...) for the Righteousness of Christ alone. his comple and full satisfaction
to Gods Law and Justice. (...) now if you ask, How the Righteousness, and
^^tisfaction of Christ becomes ours, to Justification and salvation? Or how it
comes to be imputed (...) the Justifying of some, when it is not imputed
others? The answer is, because the Lord has (...) down in the Covenant of
Grace upon what tear^ or in what way the Righteousness of Christ (...) become
ours to Justification, and salvation; and (...) come up to those terms, others
not.

And so the expression of faith being accoun^ or imputed unto righteousness]
must either be an^ pallage, (as Beza, etc.) meaning that righteous^ is imputed
to them that believe, Romans 4.11. or (...) must be put there for the object of
faith, Christ (...) prehended and received by faith, or else the words ^ay be
understood thus, that faith is that, which in ^e eye of the new Law passes for
righteousness, sub^^dinate to Christ's righteousness. Being all (sum^arily)
which is required of a man himself, that he ^ay be just in the eye of the new
law of Grace, or ^e Gospel, or that he may have a right and title to ^e
righteousness, which consists in the remission of (...) through Christ, (see
Mr. Allens Discourse, p. 48. ^9, 50.) But the words cannot possibly be intended
^y the Apostle, to exclude Christ's Righteousness im^uted to them that believe,
for that would make him contradictory to himself.

And so I conclude, that faith is not instead of per^ect Legal righteousness:
but the righteousness of Christ, which is imputed to us, (made ours) when ^e
believe, come up to Covenant-terms. So we ^ead in Romans 10.4. Christ is the end
of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes, and Chap. 8.^.4. what
the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his
own son in the ^keness of sinful flesh, (...), and a sin-offering; or a
sacrifice for sin, (as it should have been ^ranslated, and I wonder Beza should
oppose it, when (...) his note upon Heb. 10.6. he is contrary to himself and
reads (...), sacrifice for sin. (But God ^ending his own Son, to be a
sacrifice for sin, thus ^^e) condemned sin in the flesh; That the righteousness
of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk ^ot after the flesh, but after
the Spirit. As if he ^ad said, The Law and justice are no Losers by us, who are
in Christ Jesus. Though our obedience be ^^perfect and short of the Rule; yet
Christ's satisfaction is full and perfect, which by Gods gracious promise and
Covenant, is freely made over to (...) that believe.

But thus you have heard how the design of the ^^venant of Grace is to advance
Gods free grace, and (...) merits of Jesus Christ, and accordingly it is a
main^ sential part of the condition of the Covenant, that (...) acknowledge
free grace the moving, and Christ's t^ teousness the meritorious procuring cause
of all (...) good, and blessedness proposed, and promised in (...) Covenant. As
they are altogether unmeet to (...) take of such benefits, as will not
acknowledge fr^^ whom they receive, and how they come by them.

Now to apply this, before I proceed to that (...) of the condition, which is a
recognizing of Go^ Authority, and swearing fealty to him.

Let me ask, what spirit you are of? Have y^^ high thoughts of your selves, and
would you (...) something in your selves? or have you learnt to d^ny your
selves, and to have admiring thoughts (...) Christ, and free Grace? Luke 18.9.
etc. The^ our Savior put forth a parable to certain that tr^^ed in themselves
that they were righteous. Two (...) went up into the temple to pray, the one a
Pharise the other a Publican. The Pharisee stood and pra^ed thus, God I thank
thee, that I am not as oth^^ men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even
this Publican. I fast twice in the week, etc. (...) he trusted in this, thought
this enough to comm^^ him to Gods acceptance, and to procure his salva^^ on. He
looked no further. The poor Publican^^ stood afar off, and would not lift up so
much as (...) eyes to heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying God be
merciful to me a sinner. He saw himself lost undone creature, unless it would
please the Lord to show forth his wonderful free mercy. He ^^d a deep sense of
his own wretchedness, and un^orthiness. Now says our Savior, ver. 14. I tell
^ou, this man went away justified, rather than the ^^her. For every one that
exalts himself shall be ^based, and he that humbles himself shall be
exal^ed. Now Sirs, how is it? Are we for exalting our ^elves, or for exalting
Christ, and grace? It is true, ^aturally we are all for establishing, and
setting up ^ur own righteousness; and are loath to own our ^overty and
wretchedness, to be so great, as indeed ^is; are loath to think of being so much
beholden to ^^s Christ, and free Grace, as indeed we must be, if (...) we be
saved. But know this, it is as certainly ^^^ning for men to trust in their own
righteousness, (...) to go on impenitently in sin and wickedness. It may (...)
because thou art not so bad as others, thou think ^y self too good to go to
hell: that thy sins do not de^^ive hell; or it may be thou have been humbled
after a (...), and have reformed many things, have left thy swear^^g, cursing,
lying, thy drunkenness, thy open Sabbath ^^of a nation; and now thou live
after another fashion, ^^ou art a diligent hearer, have set up the worship of
^^^d in thy family, art just in thy dealings, etc. and ^^^refore now thou
think, thou deservest well at ^ods hand. But alas, one thing thou lackest,
thou must (...) all, and come to Christ. Thou must count all ^^ings dung, thine
own righteousness filthy rags, and ^^^tre only to be found clothed in the
righteousness (...) Christ. Alas, alas, while thou trustest in thy (...), as
having such a righteousness of thine own, ^^ou art upon a false bottom, thou
art but a proud ^irisee, and many Publicans are more likely to enter (...)
heaven, than such self-righteous ones. If when we cannot deny, but we are
sinners; instead (...) humbling our selves before God, and suing to (...) for
Grace and pardon, in and through Christ ((...) way that he has set forth,
wherein alone sinne^ may be reconciled to him.) We will go our (...) way (as
if Gods way were too low) so we (...) think to make God amends some other way;
what this, but to deny Pardoning, Gospel Grace, (...) (as one says) to spit in
Christ's face? What this, but to make the Death and satisfaction Christ
needless? As what needed Jesus Christ Die for sinners, to satisfy Gods
Justice, if any thi^ that sinners can do, may satisfy? Well sirs, (...) to
it: Christ's satisfaction was never intended, provided for such, as think
themselves sufficient satisfy, and make God amends; such as hope the sins are
not so great, but they may be Expiated their good prayers, works of Charity, or
Right ousness, that they have done. Were it so inde^^ then Jesus Christ might
very well have spared (...) great pains taken, and undergone about it.

The truth is, there are very gross and danger^^ mistakes both ways: Too many
that would (...) Christ's work out of his Hands, as Self-justiciari^ others
again would cast that, which is their o^ proper work, upon Christ, as
Antinomians. (...) sound Christian must warily avoid both these Ro^^ both
Extremes.

Indeed Christ has satisfied for us, for our bre^ of the Covenant of Works,
if we perform (...) condition of the Covenant of Grace. But he (...) not
performed the condition of the Covenant Grace for any (though he has purchased
that G^^ for some, whereby they shall perform it.) (...) Christ was made under
the Law, to fulfill the Law: Not under the Gospel, to perform the condition of
the Gospel. He has not repented for us, believed for us. Had he done these,
then there were nothing at all for us to do; but he should save us altogether
without us.

Christ's satisfying for man's breach of the Covenant of works, will not exempt
us from a necessity of performing the condition of the Covenant of Grace. As
our performing the condition of the Covenant of Grace, is not that which
satisfies for our breach of the Covenant of Works. Sirs, be very clear in
these points: Certainly, they are of very great weight. Suppose I am
questioned, as being a sinner; what have I to plead here, but the satisfaction
of Christ? But then suppose my Interest in Christ's satisfaction questioned; in
this case I have nothing to plead, but the condition of the Covenant of Grace.
If I truly repent, and believe, then by Gods promise, and Covenant, I am
assured of Remission and salvation by Christ. But for us to place any Act,
Grace, or Duty of ours in the ^oom of Christ, is a most dreadful presumption,
and an undoing mistake. They that here would turn Christ out of Office may
indeed expect, that he will turn them off to shift for themselves. They that
are ^ot willing to be saved by him, and saved in his way, cannot be saved. So
necessary it is, that we all come to a deep sense of our own wretchedness, and
unworthiness, and to be heartily willing that Christ and Free Grace should have
all the Honor of our Justification, and salvation. As a personal wor^hiness,
so a conceit of such worthiness in our selves, will not stand with a Covenant
of Grace, or with salvation by Grace.

Pardon, and peace with God, and Heavens ever-lasting Happiness, are too
precious Privileges and Blessings, to be cast away on such, as have no sense
what it cost Jesus Christ to purchase them, and such as make light matters of
them; and such as are so well conceited of themselves, as to look upon al^ as
Deserved, and Due to them. The Water of Life is for souls that are a thirst.
And Christ's Wine and Milk for them that have no Money to buy. They that come
with the Prodigal, Give me the portion of Goods that falls to me; that think
they may lay claim to Heaven, as their own, as a due Debt, shall go without it:
They have no part, nor lot in it. Rather it is meet to come to God with the
returning Prodigal, heartily confessing; Father, I have sinn^ against Heaven,
and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son, or to have any
portion, or Inheritance among the children. Job 33.27, 28. He looks upon men,
and if any say I have sinned and perverted that which was right, and it
profit^^ me not: He will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life
shall see the Light. Now,

2. I come to speak of the condition of the C^venant of Grace, to show what it
requires, (...) keep up Gods Authority; and evidence his ^^rity, Holiness, and
Hatred of sin. (As I ha^^ told you, though he is willing to be Reconciled (...)
sinners, yet he can never be Reconciled to sin. (...) I also told you in my
Discourse of the Covenant^ Works, that God in entering into Covenant wi^^ man,
did not lay aside his Authority, and co^ manding Power over man.)

I confess I meet with one of very great wor^^ that makes faith the only
condition. Faith, Mr. Obad. Sedgw. of Covenant, page 183.185.
and no other thing.

Yea, faith considered only as uniting us to Christ; (which he says is a point
as difficult, and weighty as any that he meets with) Faith as justifying, does
not bring us into Covenant, (says he) for our justifying follows our being in
the Covenant, etc. where by being in Covenant, (as all along in his Treatise)
he means, being internally in Covenant, or keeping, and standing to the
Covenant, so that one may lay claim to the blessings promised in the Covenant.

But I would fain know, whether souls are united to Christ by any other faith,
than such a faith, as justifies, and sanctifies too?

And elsewhere the same Author tells us, All-though forgiveness of sin be
not the effect of man's repentance, (for then we should forgive our selves, yet
repentance is required to the obtaining of forgiveness; citing those texts,
Isa. 55.7. Ezekiel. 18.21. If the wicked will turn -- where it is plainly made the
condition: And, if faith be any more, if remission and justification be the
effect of man's faith, (then as he says) we should forgive our selves, and
justify our selves.

Again, where he is proving a condition, expressly determined in Scripture, (as
agreeing to the Covenant of Grace,) amongst other texts, requiring faith, he
cites these, Act. 2.38, 43, 19. Repent and be converted, that your sins may be
blotted out, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. Come out from among them -- and touch not the
unclean thing, and I will receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye
shall be my ons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty;] which Scriptures make
repentance, and conversion, as well the condition of the Covenant.

If now you should say, that you know not what to think of the Condition of the
Covenant of grace. And Ministers distract your minds, saying sometimes it is
this thing only, and sometimes it consists of other things, as well as that.

Yet know, we are all agreed thus far, that where one grace is in truth, there
are other graces with it. Where saving Faith is, there is repentance, and a
disposition and resolution to perform sincere obedience. They are inseparable.
As Moralists speak of a concatenation of virtues So the Stoics, (...). Diog.
Laert. in Zeno. l. 7. p. 513.
, there must needs be^ concatenation of saving graces.

Indeed the seed of God includes all graces in it. And all graces make one new
creature. The new heart is both a believing heart, and an humble; a penitent
heart, and a pure; and a loving heart, and a thankful heart; etc. And so he
that will have Faith, and no other thing, the condition of the Covenant of
Grace; yet afterward tells you what it is, to wit, "the bringing of the
heart into Christ.

Because I have long had the same apprehension touching this matter, I will
recite his words at large, thinking them very well worthy of your observation
when he is speaking of the principle of grace, renewing, saving grace; says he,
According to the several ways of working, it has several names (e. g.) As it
is the turning of the heart; it is called conversion. As it is the humbling of
the heart; it is called godly sorrow. As it is the the turning of us from sin,
it is called Repentance. As it is the bringing of the heart into Christ, it is
called Faith, etc. As it is the abasing of the heart, it is called Humility. As
it is the gentle tempering of the heart, it is called meekness. As it is a
submitting of the heart to God in sufferings, it is called patience, etc.

Now if you attend to this; that all grace is radically, or virtually in that
seed of God, you will know what to say to those nice questions, whether faith
or repentance be first? And whether we are first united to Christ by; and then
receive sanctifying graces from him? It quite cutteth off such questions as
these. As that faith, which uniteth unto Christ, supposes the understanding
enlightened, and the will set right; that is, the soul renewed. So that
question, whether faith be seated in the understanding, or in the will? would
appear to be an impertinent question. As many Philosophers of late can see no
reason to suppose those faculties really distinct from the soul.

Methinks, this may ease your minds of any perplexity, that the seeming
difference among sober Divines, about the condition of the Covenant, may
occasion. Take notice of this I pray; they that make faith the only condition,
yet are far from supposing that faith goes alone; No, it has the whole train
of graces attending on it. The new heart, that which the Apostle Peter calls,
a divine, or Godlike Nature, has them all.

Another sound Divine I meet with, Bulkley of Covenant, p. 334. etc.
makes faith the whole condition of the Covenant of grace, but there he takes
Faith in so large a sense, as to include sincere Obedience. And so he tells
us, when God says in the Covenant [I will be your God,] the meaning is not
only, that he will be a God of Mercy to us, to pardon and bless us; but a God
over us, to Rule and Govern us: And that Faith closes with him in both
respects.

He grants, The Covenant betwixt God and us, is, like that between a King and
his People. Faith sets God upon the Throne, and says, Reign thou over me.

And again, If he do at all make a Covenant with us, he will be a God to us, as
well to Rule us, as to save us; to say, Live as ye will, yet you shall be
saved, is the Devils covenant, not Gods.

Now I would not take such for Adversaries, who agree in the thing, only they
differ in words, in the manner of expressing themselves.

Faith indeed is the only Receptive condition. As in its own Nature it is an
Accepting or Receiving of Christ offered in the Gospel, in which respect it is
chosen and appointed by God, and is the great Summary condition of the Gospel:
But then besides Faith, (the Receptive condition) there are other Dispositive
conditions, which are either necessarily implied, and included in Faith, or are
necessary Attendants on it. For which see what the Lord required of Abraham,
Genesis 17.1. I am the Almighty, or All-sufficient God, walk before me, and be
thou perfect. Or be sincere, upright. Or [be thou perfect] though thou art not
already perfect, yet be pressing on toward Perfection. As it is a constant
Note of Sincerity and Uprightness, to strive after Perfection. And no less is
required of us, 2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these Promises, (wha Promises?
Those Covenant promises mentioned, Chap. 6.16, 17, 18.) let us cleanse our
selves from all Filthiness, and be perfecting Holiness, (...) in the fear of
God. Though we are not perfect in Holiness, while here, yet we must be
perfecting Holiness: This is required of all Gods Covenant People. And who are
they that deal not falsely in his Covenant, but such as walk uprightly, whose
hearts depart not from him, Psalm. 44.17, 18. Who are they that keep his
Covenant, but such as give themselves to keep his Testimonies, Psalm. 25.10.
Keep them, as Zacharias, and Elizabeth his Wife, Luke 1.6. As David, who
desired to have a respect to all Gods Commands, would lay all Gods Judgments
before them: Though they cannot yield sinless Obedience to any one Command, yet
their desire is to Obey all Gods Commands. They Obey his Laws Impartially,
though but Imperfectly, Psalm. 15.1, 2. Lord, who shall dwell in thy holy Hill?
Who shall go to Heaven? The Answer is, He that walks uprightly.

And what can be more plain, than that this is part of the condition of the
Covenant of Grace; even from those very Texts. which may plead and urge against
all conditions. They who have God for their God, whom he owneth for his People,
have his Law put into their Inward parts, and written in their hearts. View
over again, Jer. 31.33. etc. with the other Texts, Para^lel to it, which I had
occasion to speak of before, under the Ninth Proposition.

So Mich. 6.6, 7, 8. VVherewithal shall I come before the Lord, will the Lord
be placated, appeased with thousands of Rams, or with ten thousands of Rivers
of Oil? Shall I give my Firstborn for my Transgression, the Fruit of my body,
for the (...) of my soul? He has showed thee, O man, when is good; and what
does the Lord require of thee, but to do Justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk
humbly with thy God.

And surely, it is meet to be said unto God, I will not offend any more: That
which I see not, teach thou me; If I have done iniquity, I will do no more, as
it is Job 34.31, 32. Is it not meet, that when a sinner comes to God, desiring
conditions of peace, be unfeignedly sorry for sin past, and resolved against
sin for time to come, fully purposing not to persist i^ any way of sin: Surely
it is meet to be said unto God, Lord be at peace with me, and by thy Grace I
will now break my former League with sin; O! I would no more return to Folly. I
would not that other Lords should any more have dominion over me.

Thus now you have heard, what are the tearm^ of the Covenant of Grace, as to
secure the Honor of Gods Free Grace, and of Christ's Merits, so to assert Gods
Authority over us, and evidence his Love to Holiness, and hatred of sin. And as
ever you would enjoy the Blessings therein promised, as ever you would have the
pardon of sin, and an Interest in God, and Eternal happiness, you must come up
to these Terms: And be it known unto you all, that if you do not like well of
these Terms, you may stick to the Covenant of Works, and from thence receive
your Doom: But certainly, you cannot claim any part in that Happiness, held
forth in the Covenant of Grace. God cannot in Honor condescend to any lower
terms. Should he pardon Offenders, who had a purpose to Transgress again, to
go on in sin? would not this be an emboldening of sinners? Would not it be a
stain to his Righteous Government? A great blemish to his Infinite Wisdom, and
Goodness too? Most true it is, his Grace is Dispensed freely, yet not
promiscuously. Though the Pope is prodigal of his pardons which cost him
nothing, and indeed are nothing worth; though he grant out Pardons and
Dispensations for sins to come, Sins to be committed, yet the Wise and Holy God
sets more store by his Pardons. He cannot but account highly, of what was
purchased at no lower Rate, than the most precious Blood of his dear Son. Of
all things in the world, he cannot endure to have his Grace in Christ abused.
Though he is a God that pardons Iniquity, Transgression and Sin, yet he will
by no means clear the Guilty, or acquit the Wicked, as it is, Nah. 1.3. Ita
misericors, ut maneat justus, and Sanctus. They shall not have a pardon from
him, who would not care how they abused it. But only such as would say with
Ezra: Should we again break his Commandments? He heals their Backslidings,
whom he freely loves, and graciously receives.

O sirs, we (as we are Gods Messengers) should sear to conceal any part of our
Message: As we are his Ambas^adors, we should fear to hide from you any part of
our Ambassie. Would it not be unsaithfulness to God and to your souls, did we
shun to declare all the Counsel of God concerning you? Well, I must tell you
what you are every one of you to trust to, God has Sworn by his Holiness, and
he will not Lie, he will never alter this thing that is gone out of his Lips;
he has given you Propositions of peace in writing, you have the Tables of his
Covenant, signed with his own Hand; Sealed in the Blood of his Son: You have
heard the Contents what it is that the Lord requires of you. Now what say you?
Are not his Ways equal? Are not the Terms very fair? Are not his Offers
exceeding gracious? If you are not pleased with them, you may take your course;
yet I must say, refuse them at your peril. As I must warn you, and in the Name
of the Lord, I warn you this day, that you never look that he should offer
Mercy to you upon other Terms than these. I call Heaven and Earth to record
against you this day, that you have had Life and Death set before you, and I
warn you every one, that you do not presume of any part in Christ or Salvation
purchased by him; or that any of the saving Benefits, and Blessings held forth
in the Covenant of Grace, are yours, if you are not indeed sensible of the evil
of sin, and truly humbled for sin if you do not truly renounce your own
righteousness, and really resolve to forsake all known sin, to practice all
known Duty, to walk before God, and be upright.

How is it possible, that they should be true to their League with God,
faithful in his Covenant, who yet continue in League with any Lust, any known
sin, Gods declared enemy; and who refuse to come under any known Law of his?

Know this, that as a Pharisaical righteousness cannot, so neither can an
Antinomian faith save any of you. The Apostle James would tell the Libertines
of his days, that the Devil had a faith as well as they. Indeed Libertines
have another Gospel, not the true Gospel of Christ. Therefore they must ^eeds
have another faith, not the true Faith of Christ.

Some would persuade themselves, and others too, that Christ has done all:
That they must see their Repentance in Christ, and Gospel-obedience in Christ,
which is a very short cut to Heaven. But how smooth and specious soever this
Doctrine may seem to some, yet it is most false, corrupt, and dangerous
Doctrine. Christ never satisfied for our full and final breach of the Covenant
of Grace, though he did for our breach of the Covenant of Works. Not but that
sins against the Gospel are pardoned for the sake of Christ. Not but that
Christ satisfied for sins against the preceptive part of the Gospel, and
Nonperformance of the condition for a time; but these are pardoned to none,
but those that come to perform the Gospel condition, that is, Believe and
Repent in time.

Show me one Text, that will prove, there was ever any sinner in the world,
pardoned and saved in a state of impenitency and disobedience. Christ has told
us, what is the portion of Hypocrites and Unbelievers, Mat. 24.51. Luke 12.46.
And if any of you continue such, there you may read your Doom. Look what
sentence he gives forth now in his word, he will not contradict, but fully
ratify in the last and great day.

And see what he says, Mat. 7.21. Not every one that says unto me, Lord,
Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but he that does the will of my
Father which is in Heaven. And Luke 19.27. Those mine enemies which would not,
that I should Reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before ^^e. As
Jeptha said to the men of Gilead, Did ye not hate me, and expel me? and why do
ye come to me when you are in distress? Such as reject Christ now, will find
such welcome to him another day, that they shall be rejected of him. [If I
deliver you, shall I be your Head?] Christ will not be our Savior upon other
terms. He will certainly refuse to be our Savior, if we refuse him as Lord.
Hi^ God has exalted to be a Prince, as well as a Savior. Him God has
appointed not only to be a Deliverer, but also a Leader and Commander, Isa.
55.4.

And thus I have spoken of the condition, of the Covenant of Grace. 1. As
securing the honor of Christ, and free grace. 2. As securing the honor of
Gods Authority and Holiness, Now

Thirdly, I will add a few words concerning the condition, as it respects the
Interest and benefit of souls, Are not his ways equal, when he requires
nothing, but what is for our advantage? See Deuteronomy. 10.12, 13. And now Israel
what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to
walk in his ways and to love him, to keep the Conmandments, which I command
thee this day for thy good, So Deuteronomy. 6.24.

Is it not good, that such weak imperfect creatures as we are, have our help
laid on Christ, who is mighty to save? Is it not better that we have such an
Alsufficient Savior to lean upon, than to stand on our own Legs? Tutissimum
est, (As Bellarmi^^ was forced to say at last, after a great contest against
it) propter incertitudinem propriae justitiae, and periculu^ inanis gloriae,
fiduciam totam in sola Dei misericordi^ and benignitate reponere; would not any
enlightened conscience choose and think it safer to abide by the perfect
righteousness and satisfaction of Christ our surety before Gods bar; would
not such an one much rather desire to be found in that long white robe, than to
be found in the short covering of his own imperfect righteousness? That to
despise, slight, and reject Christ, is exceedingly to wrong our own souls?

Again, is it not good that the heart be humbled for sin, broken for sin, the
more to loosen it from Sin, and to engage it the more against sin for time to
come? And though worldly sorrow is a burden causing the heart to stoop; yet
certainly you that know what Godly sorrow is, you find much more hearts ease in
it: Have you not many times gone awy with lighter hearts, hearts more at ease,
from prayer, from the word, from a Sacrament, when you have had them kindly
melted into Gods sorrows?

And is it not good to be divorced from sin? what are ye the better for any
lust, you have harbored in your bosoms? Have they not been Delilah's to you?
What fruit, what fruit of those base lusts? Oh how may you be ashamed! All that
kindness you have shown to your lusts, has it not been great cruelty to your
own souls? How have they robbed you of your strength, of your peace, true peace
and comfort, of sweet communion that you might have had with the Father, and
with his Son Jesus Christ, and with the Holy Spirit the Comforter! O what have
you lost, to enjoy your base lusts? when the Prophet says [his soul is not
right in him] Non est recta anima, Hab. 2.4. The Apostle has it thus, Heb.
10.38. My soul shall have no pleasure in him, yet to the same sense, quia
rectitudo animae, in semet^sa consistit in eo, quod placeat Deo, and e contra,
to ipso quod placeat Deo, in se est recta. Lud. Tenu. in Heb. 10. dip. 7. Sect.
2. page 473. b. And after all sin would rob you of your souls and ruin them
so^ ever.

Would you have Christ and your Lusts together? Heaven and your lusts together?
But that is impossible, Abstracting Gods decree, and positive constitution, it
is impossible in the very nature of the thing [What communion has light with
darkness?] If it be good for souls to contract with Christ, to receive Christ,
it is then good to break with sin, and part with sin. As Christ cannot endure
his greatest enemy to be his corrival; so neither can one heart be i^ League,
in love with two, so contrary; while you love the one, you will despise, yea
hate and be at Enmity with the other.

And what should you do with your Lusts in Heaven? You would find no company
there, fit for you, no Objects there, no entertainment there fit for you. How
miserable is Dives in Hell, with his perpetual scorching, parching thirst,
while he cannot obtain a drop of water there, to cool his Tongue? And would it
not be a Torment to sinners to be in Heaven, with their craving Lusts, where is
nothing suitable to satisfy them? No fuel for Lust i^ Heaven; no Work, no
Employment in Heaven fit for you. O sirs, without new hearts, What should you
do in the new Jerusalem? Without clea^ hands, and pure, holy hearts, What
should you do in Gods holy Hill? If the enjoyment of Heaven be a thing
desirable, then also it is desirable that w^ be sanctified, made meet for that
Inheritance of the Saints in Light. It is impossible in the Nature o^ the
thing, that we should be happy in the Fruiti^^ of God, till first we are made
Holy, and conform to him.

And you that have no delight in the Service of God, in holy Duties, to whom
the word is a burden, and Prayer a burden, and Sabbaths wearisome days: Alas,
what should you do in Heaven? Would those Carnal hearts of yours like well to
keep an everlasting Sabbath there, that are so weary of these short Sabbaths
here; saying, When will the Sabbath be ended? How would you like to be
continually admiring, and adoring, and extolling God and his Infinite glorious
Perfections, Christ and his Incomparable, Matchless Love and Grace; as those
that think Eternity too little to take the Height and Length, and Breadth and
Depth thereof. Thus it may appear that what God requires in the Covenant of
Grace, is plainly necessary in order to the Rectifying and Healing of man's
corrupted Nature, to make it capable of true Blessedness; to make it capable of
what the Covenant of Grace does hold forth and promise.

O my Friends, how easy were it Expatiating here, and to show what enemies
they are to their own souls, and what Brutish, unreasonable Creatures they
are, that think what God requires in the Covenant of Grace, is very hard.
Surely they know not what is good for themselves. Consider once again, what it
is the Lord requires of us, and is it not, as if he should bespeak us after
this manner.

Poor Creatures, though there is cause as you are Degenerated, and Apostatised
from me, just cause indeed that I should sentence you to Hell, to depart from
me, as accursed for ever; yet for my son's sake, and to manifest my Rich Grace
and Mercy; I do here declare, I am ready to receive you again into favor, that
your souls should live for ever in my Sight, and that upon as good Terms, as
ever you could possibly wish for your selves. You have seen when I had put
Righteousness into man's own hand, he soon lost it, to his undoing; well now it
is in a safer hand, my Son Jesus Christ has brought in everlasting
Righteousness; and though you have no Inherent Righteousness of your own that
can justify you in my sight, yet come to my Son Christ, and he has that for
you, wherein I cannot but be satisfied, and well-pleased.

Your sins have been very Injurious to you, defacing my Image in you, and
exposing you to my Wrath, separating betwixt you and your God depriving you of
my Gracious presence; but now heartily acknowledge and bewail them, watch and
strive, and resolve against them; and though you cannot Live absolutely free
from sin while here yet your sins shall be pardoned, and sin shall not have
Dominion over you, nor hinder your communion with me. Do but continue Fighting
and you shall have the Victory, and Triumph a^ last in Glory.

You have been walking contrary to me, wearying your selves for very Vanity: O!
but now a last bethink your selves, consider your Ways and return to me; O!
forsake not your ow^ Mercy. As averse as you have been from hear^ening to my
Commands, yet if now at length you would incline your ear to me, you shall find
the my Commandments are not grievous; no, m^ Yoke is easy, my Ways are Paths
of Pleasantness Not one that ever served me in Truth, that w^^ say they have
served an hard Master. O sinners; as ever you wish well to your selves, either
here or hereafter, shake off your sins, that have corrupted and would ruin
you, and take up my Yoke, and and ye shall find rest for your souls.

And now, Sirs, what can you say why you should not accept of Gods Terms? What
can you say, but that If here you turn a deaf ear to him, you indeed forsake
your own Mercy to follow lying Vanities, and choose Death rather than Life?

It may be some will think I have used more words than needed, in a case so
plain: But this is a Matter of as great Concernment as any thing I can possibly
speak of, and therefore not to be slightly passed over.

Till you come to apprehend and accept of the Terms of the Covenant of Grace,
there is no peace ^etwixt God and your Souls. Do you ask: Is it Peace? I must
tell you: No. What Peace, so long as you slight Christ, the only Peacemaker?
What ^eace, so long as you will not lay down your Arms, ^^andon your Lusts, and
submit to Gods Righte^s Scepter, will not be governed by his Laws, ^at is, so
long as ye will continue Rebels? Alas, ^hile it is thus, there is no peace. And
hitherto (...) Treaties and Offers of Grace, all Gods gracious Parleys with
thee, all the Beseechings, Pleadings, ^arnings of Gods Messengers and
Ambassadors ^ave been in vain, as to thee, who art not yet per^aded to quit all
thy Carnal confidences, to forsake (...), and come in to God.

Yea, there is no possibility of thy Salvation upon ^ther Terms than these,
except the Lord Jesus ^^rist would come again into the World, and Die once
more, to save thee in and with thy sins, as he has dyed to save his from their
sins. But that can never be, Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more;
and there remains no other sacrifice for sins, or would thou have God set
forth a new Gospel, and some other Covenant, but that he will never do for any
sinner in the world. No: this is the everlasting Gospel. This is the new
Covenant (the terms whereof you have heard opened to you) the new Covenant,
that shall never wax old, to give place to another. Oh that self-confident,
secure, and presumptuous sinners might be convinced and awakne^ by what has
been said.

As on the other hand, the poor in Spirit, the humble, and contrite ones should
be encouraged and comforted.

Thou that art so much, so often discouraged at the thoughts of thy own sinful
vileness and unworthyness; rather be encouraged, that thou see thy o^^
vileness, a thing which the most neither do, n^^ have any mind to take notice
of. It is not a sinne^ unworthyness that bars him from Christ, but one
presuming on his own worthiness. If now thou he such a sense of thine own
unworthiness, as hu^bleth thee, and heighteneth thy esteem of Jes^^ Christ, and
raises thy heart, and desires up to h^^ that it is the constant cry of thy
soul to God, O gi^^ me Christ, or I dye, and am undone for ever; T^^ is a good
hearing, this is comfortable, and be (...) good cheer, the Master calls thee,
Ho! every (...) that is athirst, come; And come all ye that are w^^ry and heavy
laden. Are thy sins now a burden thee? But come to Christ, and he will ease
the^

And though thou can not say, I have made (...) heart clean, I am pure from
my sin; yet it is thine earnest suit unto God, that he would creat a clean
heart within thee. And thou art so far from indulging and allowing of any
lust, that thou criest out, O wretched man, or woman, when shall I be
delivered! O that this thorn in the flesh were once plucked out! Is there no
member of the old man, that thou would have spared? No, not the right eye,
not the right hand?

And though thou fallest short in thy obedience, yet thy will and desire is to
follow God fully, and his commands are not grievous. Thou do not account it a
grievance, that God requires so much but this is the grief of thy soul, that
thou do no more. And how would it rejoice thy heart, could thou serve him
more, and serve him better? well, thy unworthiness, thy wants, and weaknesses
should not so much discourage thee, as the riches of Gods free grace in Christ
ought to encourage thee. Is thy heart right with God? Then surely he will give
thee his hand, his gracious helping hand; yea as thy heart is for God, and is
now against sin, God will also be for thee, yea, his heart is toward every
one, that offers himself willingly. And so, as much as thou art wont to
complain of unworthiness, and weakness, yet surely thou may say, in the Lord
have I righteouseness and strength; poor troubled heart, now encourage thy self
in the Lord and in his gracious Covenant. This is all thy salvation, and here
is all that thou can desire, surely thou shall be satisfied with favor, and
full of the blessing of the Lord. To thee belongs all the good and happiness
included, and promised in the Covenant of grace, of which thou may hear
something in the next proposition.

2 Samuel 23.5. All my salvation, and all my desire.
Sect. 13. PROP. XIII. The benefits and blessings promised in the Covenant of
Grace, and sure to all that perform the aforementioned condition, are exceeding
great and many, are indeed inexpressible, inestimable, and inconceivable.
O That I could borrow the tongues of men and Angels for a while! what need of
the tongue of the Learned here? yea, of that wine of the Kingdom, which would
cause the lips of those that are asleep to speak? might one of us poor mortals
have the priveledge (with him in 2 Cor. 12.4.) to be caught up into Paradise,
to hear how those blessed ones above set forth, and magnify
Covenant-blessings, continually praising and adoring that Free Grace of God in
Christ, that brought them to a participation thereof, should we not hear (...),
such lofty strains of heavenly Eloquence, as our low capacities would not be
able to repeat after them?

As when Jacob first heard of his son Joseph's honor and advancement in Egypt,
his heart fainted^ so it might be astonishing news to us, to hear wh^^ great
things God has promised, if we come up to Covenant-terms. As when the Queen of
Sheba had seen the glory of King Solomon, there was no more spirit in her: how
ravishing should it be to the souls of the faithful, to see and hear what glory
God holds forth to them in the Covenant of Grace. Here are riches of glory on
the vessels of mercy. O the riches of the glory of this mystery! unsearchable
riches indeed. See Romans 9.23. Col. 1.27. Ephesians. 1.18. and 3.8.

It is not to be thought, that any man on earth, much less that such a worm as
I, should make a full discovery of all the Blessings, and glorious priveledges
contained in Gods gracious Covenant. Indeed, eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared
for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. As we cannot by searching find out God to
perfection, ( Job 11.7.) so neither can we fully know, or describe the
happiness of those, who have a special interest in God. As one says, we shall
never see the Covenant of Grace fully unfolded, till (according to Heb. 1.12.)
the Heavens come to be folded up; or rather till we see Heaven it self opened.

The Grand promise here is [I will be their God] a promise containing all the
rest. A promise containing Him, whom the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain.

Who is he that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his servant, let
him no more walk disconsolately; but encourage himself in the Lord his God.
Well may thou rejoice in thy portion. Deus meus, and omnia. O rejoice in his
Highness ^or ever.

Obj. But was not God the God of Ieshurun? as Moses said, none like unto the
God of Ieshurun. And yet Jeshurun forsook God, and lightly esteemed the Rock of
his Salvation. And when the Lord saw it, he abhorred them, because of the
provoking of his sons, and of his daughters, Deuteronomy. 32.15, 19. To the Israelites
in common pertained the Adoption, and the glory, and the Covenants, as the
Apostle says. Yet with many of them God was not well pleased; but overthrew
them in the wilderness. Yea, sometimes he said of them, you only have I known
of all the families of the earth: therefore I will punish you for all your
iniquities, Am^s 3.2.

Answ. Grant all this, yet it is no denial, or diminishing of your happiness,
who have a special propriety in God; nor should it be any damp to your joy, and
rejoicing in Him

As there is a twofold call, so there is a twofold relation to God; as a
twofold manner of being in Covenant with God, so a twofold interest in Him.
Observe it, there is a common, external, and ineffectual; and again there is a
special, internal, and effectual call to God: So there is a more common
Relation to God, and a more special Relation to Him. A Common intrest in God,
and a Special intrest in him.

Indeed a great privilege it is to be a people near unto the Lord, to be so
much as externally in Covenant with Him. Yea, it is far better to be continued
in his House and Family, though under the discipline of the Rod, than to be
driven out of his house and heritage, though it were with Babylon, to fit as
Queen in the earth. Better to suffer affliction with the people of God, to
enjoy his word and ordinances, the ordinary means of salvation; than to enjoy
the largest share of worldly Pleasures, Plenty, and Prosperity, without them.
Thus Englands Mercies (were the Land more Impoverished than it is, yet) are to
be prized above the Treasures of both Indies. That was a desperate profane
speech of him, that said, He would not change his part in Paris, for a part in
Paradise. The Barrenest part of Gods Hill, is to be chosen before the fatest
Valleys, where God dwells not. So Lot found: Surely, they have cause to say,
The Lines are fallen to them in pleasant places, and they have a goodly
Heritage, that dwell in Emmanuel's Land. Happy are the People, that hear, and
know the joyful sound: The Damned, with whom God will parley no more, count
such happy. The Heathen, that are without God in the world, and strangers to
the Terms and Tenor of his Covenant, did they understand their own Estates,
would count such happy. But as it is the Misery of those without, generally,
not to know their Misery; so of too many within the Church, not to know, or
consider their own happiness, what Advantages they have for Heaven above
others. As our Savior, weeping over that sinful City, that rejected him and
his Grace; that chose rather to Die and Perish, than to be gathered under his
healing Wings: [O, if Thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day,
the things which belong unto thy peace, Luke 19.42.] If thou had known these
things, then might thou have been for ever happy.

But therefore thou that have attended to the things of thy peace, and have
come in upon Gods Call, thou art happy: Now is Salvation come to thy soul. And
if there be enough in God, in Christ, in Heaven to make thee happy, thou shall
be for ever happy. Others have had Life and Salvation offered, but could not
see to take it. But happy thou indeed, who have (with Mary) chosen that good
part, which shall never be taken from thee. To thee this everlasting Covenant
(which I am opening) shall be a spring of Everlasting Consolation.

Now you may look upon God, as your God indeed. I say, God is yours. And though
this be a short Sentence, soon uttered, yet is it so Copious a Subject, as you
might be Meditating on all your days, and yet never be able fully to comprehend
the Happiness included in it. When I say, God is yours, I have said all, I can
say no more: For all Happiness is implied, and included in it.

The misery of the Damned is comprised in two particulars, scil. In poena
Damni, and In poena Sensus, in what good they have lost, and are deprived of
for ever, and what evil they feel, have Inflicted on them, and must ever lie
under. On the contrary, the happiness of the Faithful is sum'd up in these two
Points, to wit, Freedom from Evil, and Fruition of Good. And how safe are they,
who have God for their Shield? How Rich are they, who have God for their
Portion, an All-sufficient God for their Reward? O exceeding great Reward! As
holy David says here, This is all my Salvation, and all my desire: Or as some
read it, He is all my Salvation, and He is all my desire.

[1.] That now you have a special propriety in God, this is all your Salvation.

(1.) It speaks you freed from the guilt of sin. So Jer. 31.33, 34. Where the
Lord promises to be their God, he adds: [For I will forgive their Iniquity,
and I will remember their sin no more.] Sin unpardoned separateth betwixt God
and souls: Therefore God evermore forgiveth their Iniquities, unto whom he
gives himself. Now what a blessed Privilege is this, to have your sins
pardoned! Even as David describes Blessedness, Psalm. 32.1. Blessed are they
whose Iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man
to whom the Lord will not impute sin. What would not a condemned Traitor, or
Malefactor give for the Kings pardon? And what is a Pardon from God worth then,
which could no other way be Purchased, but by the most precious Blood of his
dear Son? But you who have felt what a burden sin is, and have sometimes cried
out of that burden, as Intolerable; certainly, you cannot but account the
pardon of sin a Mercy and Privilege inestimable. O blessed change indeed, for
one that was a Rebel, sentenced to Death by the law of Heaven, to have the
black Sentence reversed, and to become a Favorite of God: For a Child of Wrath
to become a Child of Love. The pardon of sin carries Redemption in it, Col.
1.14. In whom we have Redemption (through his Blood) even the Forgiveness of
sins. The pardon of sin connotes, Justification, or is all one with it. The way
of Justifying one that has been a sinner, an Offender, being by the pardoning
of all, wherein he has offended. The pardon of sin speaks peace, and
Reconciliation with God, 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ Reconciling the World
unto himself, not imputing their Trespasses unto them. The pardon of sin
infers Adoption, Gal. 4.5.

(2.) It speaks you delivered from the dominion of sin. Though your
Corruptious will be a Disturbance to you while in this Imperfect state, y^^ sin
shall not have dominion over you: For ye are not under the Law, but under
Grace, Romans 6.14. You are not barely under a Law commanding, be under a
gracious Covenant, which as it requires Duty, so it encourages with a promise
of Grace, and help to perform it. The Lord has promised, as to Forgive, so
likewise to Subdue the Iniquities of his People, Mic. 7.18, 19. Though there be
some Life in the Members of the Old Man, as yo^ feel to your sorrow; yet it is
wounded at the heart, of which wound it shall never recover. So

(3.) It speaks you safe from the final Prevalency of Temptations. Your God
is greater tha^ all: Neither Men, nor Devils are able to pluck you out of your
Fathers hand, John 10.29. Therefore the Gates of Hell shall not prevail. You
are still liable to be tempted, yet being in firm League with God, you shall
have seasonable succor from him. As Saul encouraged the men of Jabesh-Gilead,
Tomorrow by that time the Sun is hot, ye shall have help. So God is faithful,
who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able, 1 Cor. 10.13. He
will quench Satan's fiery darts, before they shall have quite drunk up your
spirits: Yea, the God of Peace shall bruise Satan under your Feet shortly.

(4.) It assures of a seasonable Deliverance out of spiritual Troubles, so it
may support one under present sad disertion. You have now shot the Gulf, you
are passed from Death to Life. And though you may be full of Fears sometimes,
and passing sentence against your selves; though your condition for the present
may not be so comfortable, yet it is safe. You may sometimes walk in Darkness,
yet the Lord will be your everlasting Light: Your days of Mourning shortly will
be ended. The Lord will be a Sun as well as a Shield, to the Upright.

(5.) It speaks Exemption, or Deliverance from outward Troubles, when it may
be good for you. God is known in Zions Palaces for a Refuge, God is in the
midst of her; God shall help her, and that right early. And because thou have
made the Lord which is my Refuge, even the most High, thy Habitation: There
shall no evil befall thee, Psalm. 91.9, 10.

(6.) Or it speaks Deliverance from the evil of Affliction. You may be
Afflicted but not Forsaken, Psalm. 89.32.33, 34. I will visit their iniquities
with stripes. Nevertheless, my loving Kindness will I not utterly take from
him, nor suffer my Faithfulness to fail. My Covenant will I not break, nor
alter the thing that is gone out of my Lips. Yea, as it is, Neh. 13.2. Our God
turned the Curse into a Blessing. Your God will do as much for you, will turn
Crosses into Blessings. No evil shall befall you, but what has Rationem boni,
what God will turn to good, Romans 8.28. As it is, Ezra 8.22. The hand of our God
is upon all them for good, that seek him. Yea, even his Afflicting hand too:
His Afflicting hand is never on them, but for good. So I may allude to that
Passage, 1 Samuel 16.4, 5. When Samuel came to Bethlehem, the Elders trembled at
his coming, and said, Come thou peaceably? And he said, Peaceably: I am come
to sacrifice unto the Lord: sanctify your selves, and come with me to the
sacrifice. So indeed you may be set on trembling, when Sickness comes, when
Poverty com^ when such an Affliction comes you may fall a tre^bling; whereas,
if you stay and enquire about t^^ end of its coming, you may be satisfied, that
comes peaceably. It is not the Wound of an E^^ my, nor the Chastisement of a
Cruel one: But Call from God, your Father, to sanctify your selve^ and offer
up some Lust, some sin, or other, a Sacrifice. It may be Sickness comes as a
Cure of the spiritual Indisposition, security, and Deadness it may be crosses
in Estate come, to cause thee (...) offer up thy Pride, Luxury, Sensuality,
Coveto^^ness. As when David would know of the Children of Benjamin, whether
they came indeed (...) help, or to betray him: They answered (1 Chr^^ 12.17,
18.) Thine are we, David, and on thy side^ Peace, peace be unto thee, and peace
be to thine helpers; for thy God helps thee. O the happy estat^^ of those
that are at peace with God! He will caus^ the very stones of the Field, and the
Beasts of the Field, and what was most likely to offend, and annoy them, to be
at peace with them. Great peac^ have such indeed, nothing shall offend them.
Afflictions come not to harm, but to help them. A^ they said, We are thine,
David; so if God be yours, then all things are yours. All changes tha^ come,
are on your side, your helpers.

(7.) It speaks your security from final Apostasy, and so from final
Condemnation. Now your condition is safe indeed, safe to Eternity. Though you
may not therefore give way to sinful Security, which is opposite to an holy
fear, and cautiousness. No, but therefore your estate is safe, because God has
promised to keep you in his fear, Jer. 32.40. I will put my fear in their
hearts, that they shall not ^^part from me. And they that have his Grace, ^^t
to depart from him here, shall not be sentenced (...) depart from him
hereafter. You that are brought (...), and kept close to God here, shall not be
banish^^, separated from God hereafter: You whom God Justifies here. he will
not condemn hereafter. The Lord knows them that are his, and will own, ^^d
openly acknowledge them before the whole world at the last day.

Thus you that come up to Covenant Terms, and (...) have the Lord for your God,
you are delivered (...) the greatest evils; and delivered by lesser evils, ^^at
come upon you. I say, by lesser evils, God delivers you from greater, who
will deliver you from all evils at last. Thus God is your Shield, and ^ll
others are but as Paper-shields, or Painted-shields, compared with the Shield
of thine help. Salvation (...) of the Lord. All Salvation; if God be for us,
who, (...) what can be against us? No such Guard against ^^il in all the world,
as God, the chiefest Good. ^ee here the safety of those, who are in firm League
^ith the Almighty, under the special protection of God most High. See the
wonderful Immunities of such, as have him for their Protector and Governor:
Well might David say of it, This is all ^^y Salvation.

[2.] Yea, further in this special propriety in God, there is included all
Good, that a gracious ^^ul can desire, Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but
thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire ^esides thee. You that have
the Lord for your God ^deed, how can you desire more, than God has ^romised to
be unto you, and to do for you? You have all, in having him, who has all
things, and can do all things.

Not that you are Godded with God, as some have spoken blasphemously. But
remember ye wha^ followed the Ambition of our first Parents, their affecting to
be as Gods, sacrilegious Ambition. Th^^ the Devil lifted them up by his
Temptation, tha^ he might bring them down, to be like himself Such
Heaven-daring pride as that, must needs have a fall. As Tyrus is threatened,
Ezekiel. 28.2.6.8. Because thine heart is lifted up, and thou have said I am God.
Because thou have set thine heart as the Heart of God: They shall bring thee
down to the Pit, and thou shall die the death. Such high-flo^^ spirits, as talk
of the fullness of the Godhead dwelling bodily in the Saints, are not the
Children o^ Light, but the Children of Pride, Erratick stars to whom (without a
self-abasing sight of themselves) is reserved the blackness of Darkness for
ever.

It Is true, God gives himself to his People, to b^ enjoyed, and glorified of
them; but not so, as (...) be Debased, and Degraded in them, to the condition
of his Creatures, nor so as to Exalt, and Rais^ them above the condition of
Creatures. He communicates his Mercy freely, but his Glory he wi^^ not give to
another. As Pharaoh heaped Dignities and Royal Favors upon Joseph: Only (said
he) in the Throne will I be greater than thou. Go^ will do wonderful things for
his People: But a^ for those that talk of their being Godded wit^ God, they
would un-God him, and deifie themselves.

But I come to you, who have a special Interesti^^ God.

(1.) God is yours in the sweetest Relations. God ^s your Shepherd. And what
does the Psalmist in^er from thence? The Lord is my Shepherd, therefore I shall
not want, Psalm. 23.1. God is your Teacher, John 6.45. And there is none that
Teaches, like him. God is your Father, as Christ said, John 20.17. I ascend
unto my Father, and your Father, and to my God, and your God. If your God, then
your Father. 2 Cor. 6.18. I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons
and Daughters, says the Lord Almighty. And what a privilege is this, to have
God for your Father, and to be owned as his Children. The Children of God can
never be left Orphans. The Sons of God can never want an Inheritance. Surely,
Heaven is enough for all Gods Children. In our Fathers House there is Bread
enough, and there is Room enough, John 14.2. God is your Husband, Hos. 2.16,
19. O happy Match for thee, to have thy Maker for thy Husband. He is a meet
help indeed. An All-sufficient God is a meet help indeed for poor Indigent
Creatures; only we are infinitely unworthy of him, not meet for him of our
selves. It Is his Infinite Free Grace that accounts, and makes us meet.

(2.) All Gods Attributes are yours. There is no Attribute, or Property of his,
but may speak Terror unto, and will set against all those, that are, and keep
at a distance from him. Even the Patience of God, which such have abused, will
plead, and witness against them; the Grace and Mercy of God, which they have
slighted, and rejected, will rise up in Judgment against them one day. On the
contrary, there is no Attribute of Gods, but speaks good to them that are at
peace with God. O what a rich Storehouse of Comfort is here, to have all Gods
glorious Attributes engaged, and at work for you! His absolute Sovereignty, and
infinite Power engaged, and at work to uphold, protect, and defend you. His
perfect Wisdom, and Omniscience, to see to you, and to order all things for the
best, that concern you. His tender and never failing Compassion, to pity you.
His rich Mercy, and boundless Love, to relieve you. His constant Truth, and
everlasting Faithfulness, to perform all the good promises that he has made
unto you. His Holiness to Transform you into the same Image, to Assimulate you.
His Justice, to avenge you of your Enemies, to execute Judgment for you. His
Omnipresence, graciously to accompany you. His Unchangeableness, and Eternity,
to continue his loving Kindness to you, and to Crown all he does for you in
endless Happiness.

As when the Spouse had given a Lively, Lofty, and Lovely Description of her
Beloved, Cant. 5.10. etc. My Beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefe^^ among Ten
Thousand. His Head as the most fine Gold, his Eyes as of Doves. His Cheeks, as
a Bed of Spices. His Lips like Lillies, dropping sweet smelling Myrrh. His
Legs as Pillars of Marble, set in Sockets of Gold. His Countenance a^ Lebanon,
excellent as the Cedars. His Mouth most sweet; yea, he is altogether Lovely.
The^ she concludes thus exulting, and making her boa^ of him, ver. 16. This is
my Beloved, and this is my Friend. So you who have now given up your selves to
be the Lords, after the largest survey of the Divine perfections, you can
possibly take, you may sit down, and rest in this sweet close, This God is our
God; and he will be our Guide even unto Death, yea, unto Glory. This Almighty,
All-commanding, All-wise, All-knowing God, this Immense Being, this Holy, Just,
Loving, Gracious, and Merciful God; this Faithful, Unchangeable, Eternal God,
is our God for ever and ever. This, this is the Heritage of the Servants of the
Lord, and their Righteousness is of me, says the Lord: So likewise their
Bliss, and Happiness.

(3.) If God be yours, his Christ is yours. Indeed it is in, and through
Christ, that God is yours.

Though they speak not the words of Truth, and Soberness, but like men forsaken
of God, and Reason too; like men given up to strong Delusions, who talk of
their being Christed with Christ. And that is a weak, and frivolous Objection,
(which might seem to befriend them.) scil. If Christ and his Righteousness be
made over to Believers, then they should be Mediators, Saviors, as Christ is.
It follows not. As the Husband gives himself in Marriage to the Wife, but that
makes not the Wife an Head, or Husband. Christ and his Righteousness is made
over to us, to a certain end, that is, to our Justification, and Salvation, not
to make us Saviors: He is made unto us Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. but ^^e are
never said to be made Redeemers by him. Aliud est justitia Christi Mediatoria
quoad officium: ^^iud est justitia Christi Mediatoris quoad Meritum. As Dr.
Arrowsmith. Or it is for the sake of Christ, with respect to his Righteousness,
and Satisfaction, that we sinners come to be Pardoned, Justified; not that we
are as perfect, as Christ himself: But being interested in him, we have his
Satisfaction interposing betwixt us and Gods Justice, and procuring Pardon for
us.

Now blessed art thou above Millions of Men, and Women, who may say, Christ
is mine. Yea, this is Inconceivably more, than if all the Kingdoms of the world
were thine. He is the Pearl of greatest price. All things in the world, but
Loss, and Dung, compared to this Pearl. O the precious Blood, and precious
Benefits of Christ! O the unsearchable Riches of Christ! O the Fullness of
Christ! In him all fullness dwells. There is an Infinitefulness both of Merit,
and Grace in him.

He is and has all that souls stand in need or ca^ desire, to make them happy.
He is the great Lord Treasurer of Heaven. And, O the Treasures of Wisdom,
Righteousness, and Strength, that are with him! Ho, every one that thirsts
come, Isa. 55.1. Whosoever will, let him take of the Water of Life freely, Rev.
22.17. There is enough i^ Christ to fill, and satisfy all the thirsty souls in
the world; enough in Christ for every one that wi^^ come, be they never so
many. One Christ is enough for all the Faithful: Yea, Christ alone is enough
for them. For whom I have suffered the loss of all thing (says the Apostle) and
do count them but dung that may win Christ, Phil. 3.8. All things were
accounted nothing in comparison of Christ; better want all thing than want
Christ. He is All in all, yea, he is All eve^ out of all. Though you should
have nothing here yet enjoying Christ, you may be happier, than i^ you
possessed all things in the world. He is the Hundredfold Father, and Mother;
as Mr. Vines used to say. He is the Hundredfold House and Land the
Hundredfold Estate spoken of, Mark 10.29, ^0. And you would not count him a
poor man, that had put off his Lumber and Trash, and turned ^is Estate into
Gold and Jewels, things of the greatest value.

Have thou a Christ? why then thou have the Heir of all things, even him, who
will be all things to thee, 1 Cor. 1.30. He is made unto us Wisdom, and
Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption. If Christ be ours he will be
our Prophet, to ^^struct us, our Priest to Expiate our sins, and Sanctify us;
our King to Redeem and Save us.

Thou that have Christ, thou have the true Light: ^^d he shall give thee Light,
when others still abide (...) darkness.

Thou have the Sun of Righteousness risen on thee, while others are under the
power of the Prince of ^arkness. O the glorious Apparel of the meanest ^aints
clothed with the Sun! Every true Believer ^ines in the Beams of this Sun of
Righteousness, ^^d is far more richly arrayed therewith, than He^^d, was in his
Cloth of Silver, glitter^ng in the Sun. Josephus.


Thou that have Christ, thou have the true Bread ^^at came down from Heaven.
The Bread of Life, while they that are strangers to Christ, feed upon ^^es,
feed upon Husks, things which can never ^^tisfie. Thou that have Christ, thou
have the Well (...) Life: Thou may drink freely of the Water of ^^^e, while
others (alas) have only broken Ci^erns, and stinking Puddles to go too.

What a full Christ is this? Our Light, and our ^ighteousness, and our Peace,
and our Life; in a lord, our All.

(4.) If God be yours, then his Spirit is yours* Indeed some speak of the
Person of the Spirit, being given to, and the Person of the Holy Gho^^ dwelling
in the Faithful; which yet they thus Ca^tion. You must not conceive that
thereby (...) does make us one Person, with himself, or tha^ he does
Communicate unto us any Personal, (...) Divine property of his own (for that is
Incommunicable) Lyford senses exterr. p. 141. No^ such as go this way must not
be ranked in o^^ thoughts with those I speak of before, men of corrupt minds,
and profligate principles.

Though I confess I have some doubt, whethe^ the Expression of the Spirits
personal In-dwelling i^ the Godly, be safe, as they lay it down. For e^ther it
would seem, not to hold forth enough, sci^ To import no more than that he is
essentially prese^ in them, and so he is every where present, Ps^ 139.7.
Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy presence.
Thus the wick^^ have his presence, what ever they are doing, whe^soever they
are: Or else it would seem to impo^^ too much, scil. a personal Union of the
Holy Gho^ and Believers, which all that are sober must den^ Otherwise they must
hold the Spirit Incarnate, (...) well as the Son, and that the Spirit and a
Believe make but one Person; and so (as Christ the Son^ Mary, was the Son of
God, the Humane Natu^^ being taken into the Person of the Son of God) ev^ry
Believer should be the Holy Ghost. Again, (...) read as well of God the Father,
and Christ's dw^ling in the Faithful, and making their abode wi^ them. And what
reason there is to imagine so^ peculiar way of the Spirits In-dwelling differe^
from that of the Father, and the Son, I am not able (...) apprehend.

But you that have given up your selves to God, How is his Mercy magnified
toward you? They ^re not mean things that he gives to you; No, he ^ives you
Himself, he gives you his Son, he gives ^ou his Spirit. O thrice happy
Creatures! who ^ave a special Interest in God, the Father, Son, and ^oly Ghost.
O unspeakable Gift! O infinite Gift! ^s when God made promise to Abraham,
because ^e could swear by no greater, he swore by Himself. ^o, when he
promises himself, his Son and Spirit, ^e must say he could promise nothing
greater. As ^raunah gave like a King; what God gives to is people is like a
God: as Christ is called the gift ^f God, Acts 8.20. Certainly God could give
no^ing more like himself, ( John 10.30. John 5.7.) As Christ said, Whether is
greater the Gold or ^e Temple that sanctifies the Gold? Whether is ^eater, the
Gift, or the Altar that sanctifies the ^ift? The holy Spirit is such a Gift as
sanctifies all ^her Gifts; and so of all Gifts the greatest. The ^angelist
Luke, for [good things] inserts [the holy ^^rit,] in Mat. 7.11. How much more
shall your ^eavenly Father give [good things] to them that (...) him. Which is
thus, Luke 11.13. How much ^re shall your Heavenly Father give [the holy
Spi^^^^] to them that ask him. Gods giving the holy ^^irit to any, is the
giving of all good Things, in ^gnore. His giving the Spirit is an Earnest and
^dge of more, that he intends to give. It is a ^^ding Blessing, that comes to
make way for more. ^is given to prepare you for Mercy, to prepare (...) for
Glory. Think of those sweet and excellent Properties and Appellations given him
i^ Scripture.

He is the Spirit of Truth, and so he will lead yo^ into all necessary Truth,
John 16.13. He is the be^ Teacher, 1 John 2.27. Ye need not that any ma^^ teach
you, but as the same anointing teaches you O! there is none teaches like him.
He is the be^^ Guide. Men may be deceived, and may deceiv^ others, may mistake
and mislead others; so ca^^ the Spirit of Truth, you that are Lead by the
Spi^rit, you have a good Guide indeed, a faithful guid^ that will not suffer
you to Err damnably, will a^ suffer you finally to miscarry; he is the Spirit
(...) Wisdom, the best Counselor.

He is the Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10.29. A^ Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering,
Gentlene^^ Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, are the Fruit of the Spirit,
Gal. 5.22, 23. And what a^ the most precious Fruits of the Earth, to the Frui^
of the Spirit? Now let not the Eunuch that ha^ joined himself to the Lord, say,
Behold, I am dry Tree. Instead of the Bryer, shall come up (...) Mirtle-tree.
Of a dry Tree the Spirit of Grace can make a fruitful Bough; like Joseph, can
m^ a Tree of Righteousness, full of good and pleas^^ Fruits. His presence is
enough to turn a De^^ into an Eden, a Wilderness into the Garden (...) God.

He is the Spirit of Power, that though we (...) weak indeed, yet we may be
strengthened in (...) Inner man by the Spirit, Ephesians. 3.16. May (...) enabled
to tread down strength, to mortify our ^^ruptions, through the Spirit, Romans
8.13. The we are enabled to discharge Duties, the Spirit b^ing our Infirmities,
Romans 8.26. Thus we are enabled to walk in Gods ways, Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put
my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes.

He is the Spirit of Life: The Quickening Spirit, Romans 8.11. Can these dry Bones
live? Yea, if the Spirit of Life enter into them. David often prays for
quickening. Such as are alive in a spiritual sense, should desire and pray to
be more lively. Well, it is the Spirit that quickens, as it was with the
Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 3.24. The Spirit entered upon me, and set me upon my
feet.

He is the Spirit of Liberty. The Free-spirit, Psalm. 51.11. Uphold me with thy
free Spirit, where the Spirit of the Lord is there is Liberty, we are often
straightened, alas: But it is because we are a-wanting to our selves, and
because we do not entertain the Spirit of his good likeing, cherish his
Motions, follow his Councels; we are straightened in our selves, but the Spirit
of the Lord is not straightened.

He is the Spirit of Glory, the Comforter. And you that carefully attend to his
quickening Counsels shall in the end attain to his chearing Comforts. And what
is the Joy of Harvest, to that Joy in the Holy Ghost? What is the Joy of them
that divide the spoil, to the Joy of Gods salvation? As we read of the Spirits
helping Believers in Prayer with groans unutterable, Romans 8.26. So will he in
due time furnish them as well for the work of Praising God, filling them with
Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory, see Romans 14.15.

And such (as you have heard) is that good Spirit of God, which is given unto
all those, who truly give up themselves to God. O blessed souls indeed! O
thrice happy Creatures! To whom God gives Himself, his Son, and Spirit, Rejoice
in the Lord ye Righteous, and again, and again, I say rejoice. Let not the
Consolation of God seem small to you. If there be any Consolation in the God of
all Consolation, if any Consolation in Christ, if any Comfort to be had in the
Spirit, the Comforter, it is for you. Gladness it is for the Upright in heart.
What more can be wished to make you happy, than is included in the Apostles
Valediction, or Benediction, 2 Cor. 13.14. The Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ,
and the Love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all. Now
these are all with you indeed, and shall be ever with you. As Crist promised,
John 14.16, 17. The Spirit of Truth, the Comforter, shall dwell and abide with
you for ever. O happy Creatures, that have the good Spirit of God your Guide,
and Counselor, your Companion, and Comforter; The Spirit of Truth to teach
you, the Spirit of Grace to sanctify you, the Spirit of Power to assist and
help you; the Spirit of Life to quicken; the Spirit of Liberty to enlarge you;
the Spirit of Joy and Peace to revive and comfort you; the Spirit of Glory to
rest upon you. Though earthly Friends may fail, may forsake you; yet here is a
Friend indeed, that will stick to you, and abide with you for ever.

(5.) The good Providence of God is still at work for you. My Father works
hitherto, and I work, says Christ, John 5.17. Gods attributes are still at work
for you. His Eyes at work. Behold the Eyes of the Lord is upon them that fear
him, upon them that hope in his Mercy. The Eyes of the Lord run to and fro
throughout the whole Earth, to watch over those, whose hearts are upright
toward him, His Hands are at work: The good Hand of our God is upon all them
for good that seek him; yea, many times his Arm is made bare, his Arm is
stretched out. That the Heathen, and their Enemies are forced to acknowledge,
The Lord has done great things for them* It shall be said of Israel, What has
God wrought? Who raised up the Righteous man from the East? O how great is his
goodness, which he has laid up for them that fear him, and which he is also
laying out on them, which he has wrought for them before the sons of men!

The Providence of God is twofold, there is a common Povidence, and a special
Providence.

A Common Providence over the Creatures in general, as they are Gods Creatures.
A Special Providence over the Faithful, as in nearer Relation unto God, his
Children, his Friends, and Confederates. As God has a Special propriety in
them, so he has a special care of them.

We read he preserves Man and Beast, Psalm. 36.6. But more especially that he
preserves the Faithful, Psalm. 31.23. He is the Savior of all men, but
especially of them that Believe.

Yet even the Common Providence of God is a special ground of Encouragement to
his People, That he is the Preserver of all things. If he provideth for the
young Lions, and the Ravens that cry; much more that he will provide for the
Sheep of his Pasture, and for his Lambs; while he Feeds his Enemies, he will
not let his own Children starve.

Again, That he Governs all things, without whom no man can lift up Hand or
Foot in all the world, without whom not a Dog that can move his Tongue. He that
rules in Jacob, over-ruleth all t^ the ends of the Earth.

But come we to his Special Providence over the Faithful. So, all the Paths of
the Lord are Mercy and Truth unto such as keep his Covenant, Psalm. 25.10. By
the Paths of the Lord, there we are to understand, not the Paths of his
Precepts, wherein he would have us to walk, but the paths of his Providence,
wherein he walks toward his people: The way of his proceedings.

And what is said of these paths? They are al^ [Mercy and Truth] which some
make an Hendigdis, like that Jer. 22.3. Execut Judgment and Righteousness; that
is, Execute righteous Judgment. So here Mercy and Truth, i. e. Mercy indeed. Or
we may take them as distinct, as holding forth thus much, that God does not
only begin with them in a way of mercy, but goes on with them as he had begun.
His mercy to such is constant. He continues his loving Kindness to these, even
of his truth and Faithfulness; or thus, Truth has reference to some word that
God has spoken: Not to the word of threatening here, because Mercy is joined
with it: What can it refer to therefore, but the word of Promise? signifying
Gods performing promise, keeping Covenant with such as keep Covenant with him?
So the meaning is, in all the passages of Divine providence God is still
intending good, and extending Mercy, and performing promise to his people.

His Patience may be exercised toward others; but his special Grace and
Favor, his loving Kindness and tender Mercy is drawn out toward you.

God may show some Mercy to wicked men, in some of his ways. But alas, their
Mercies are not pure Mercies, No, there is wrath also mixed with their Mercies.
As the murmuring Israelites had Quails and a Curse. But you have real Mercies,
a blessing with Estate, a blessing with Health, etc. Gods special Love with
Common Mercies, greatly Enhaunsing and Raising the Value of them. They come not
as Wind-falls of common Providence (as one expresses it) but are sound Fruits,
growing on the Promise. So there is Mercy in all Gods Paths toward you. You
shall meet with it at every turn, Mercy shall prevent you, and follow you, and
compass you about. Yea, in the end you shall find Mercy in the crossest Paths
of Providence, wherein at present you may apprehend nothing but Severity.

Again, whatsoever Mercy God shows to sinners, yet they have no assurance
thereof. How soon may Gods Patience be turned into Fury, and his Goodness into
Severity? But God has promised that he will not turn away from you, ( Ier.
32.40.) to do you good. But you who have a care to walk before God in sincerity
and truth, you shall find all his ways Mercy and Truth. And this leads me to
another Privilege of yours.

(6.) The Promises are yours, exceeding great and precious Promises. You are
the Children, and Heirs of the Promise. Promises are held forth to others; but
they are also made over to you. To the Jews in some sense pertained the
Covenants, and the Promises, Romans 9.4. God had written those great things to
them, and offered those great things to them, yet they not looking after the
Condition required of them, it was in effect as if God had made no such
promise. But you that can plead the Condition is performed, nothing can bar
your right to the Promise? God will never plead a [Non est factum] against
those who may plead the Condition is performed. As the Lord said to Abraham
concerning the Land of Promise, Genesis 13. Lift up now thine eyes, and look from
the place where thou art, Northward, and Southward, and Eastward, and Westward:
For all the Land which thou see, to thee will I give it. So I may say to you
concerning the word of the Kingdom (as the Gospel is called, Mat. 13.19.) The
word of Promise, look it through from the beginning to the end, search this
good land that flows with Milk and Honey, a Land of Brooks of Waters, of
Fountains, of Depths, that spring out of the Rock Christ; where are both the
Upper Springs, and the Nether Springs, Promises concerning this Life, and the
Life to come; a Land of Vines, and Fig Trees, and Pomgranates; Dig into its
Mines, full of hid Treasure, more precious than Gold that perishes, all is
your own. The whole Land is before you, this Goshen, this Paradise, is given
you, till you come to be Translated to the Heavenly Canaan. Your Joseph sends
you these pleasant, and precious Fruits, to revive and cheer your spirits, till
you come to a fullness of joy in his presence, come to the sight and Fruition of
Christ in Glory. Look up to Heaven, are you able to number the Stars of Heaven?
Neither can you take the just sum of what the Lord has promised you; They are
called the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10. Here are deep Mines, deep
Mysteries, who shall lead us into these hid treasures, unknown to the World?
What need of the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation to enlighten our minds, that
we may know what is the Hope of his Calling, and what the Riches of his
glorious Grace?

O precious Promises indeed! promises of more Grace. To him that has more
shall be given, and he shall have in abundance, Mat. 25.29. God gives more
Grace to the humble, Jam. 4.6. Promises of perseverance in Grace, Jer. 32.40.
John 4.14.

Again, there are Promises made to Grace, of which I could easily recite many:
But after one has used his utmost skill to open these Treasures, and to give
you an Account, how much is contained in them, he must end with [an etc.] After
all, he must acknowledge there is much more behind undiscovered, like that Path
( Job 28.7.) which the Vultures eye has not seen, as may allude to the
Expression. It is quite beyond our Arithmitick to find out the Total of the
Divine Promises. So its impossible that any true Believer should know how rich
he is in the Promises. O! the Promises are a long Field indeed, and much hid
Treasure in this Field; yea, an unknown Treasure.

(7.) Gods Ordinances are yours, especially intended for you, and blessed unto
you. Ministers are yours, as 1 Cor. 3.22. Whether Paul or Apollo, or Cephas,
all are yours, given to the Church, for the perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians.
4.11, 12. To be helpers of your Faith and Joy. Ministers are Gods Stewards
appointed to give you Meat in due season. Gods Servants to conduct you into the
Presence Chamber of the great King. Ordinance, they are the Chariots your
Joseph sends to bring your souls nearer to him.

And O how amiable are his Tabernacles! O the pleasures of his House! O the
sights of God, that you have sometimes in his Ordinances! Sights of his Power,
sights of his glorious Grace. Have you not seen his Goodness pass before you?
Have not his Footsteps dropped Fatness into your Souls? How often that coming
from the Word, or from Sacraments, you might have said as they, Luke 5.26. We
have seen strange things to day. God manifesting himself to your souls, so as
he does not to the World. All the Paths of the Lord are Mercy to his People, as
we heard before, but in the Paths of his Ordinances, in the Walks of his
Courts, there they are wont to find his choicest Mercies: There especially the
Lord commands the blessing. Blessed they are in the House, and in the Field,
but more blessed in Gods House, more blessed in his holy Mountain. There is an
Expression, Deuteronomy. 11.21. [As the days of Heaven upon the Earth,] i. e. (Quamdiu
mundus durabit,) which I only allude to here. The days we spend with God in his
Courts, are as the days of Heaven upon Earth. Blessed are they that dwell in
thy House, they will be still praising thee, a day in thy Courts is better than
a thousand elsewhere, Psalm. 84. To enjoy God here, this is Heaven upon Earth.
Is not this the Mount of Transfiguration? The Gate of Heaven? The Mount of
Blessing? Is it not good to be here?

Well, you that have a special Interest in God, have a special right to the
Ordinances of God; and may expect a special blessing on them, may look to enjoy
God in them: Or if the Lord should see good to cut you short of
Sanctuary-priviledges; yet you should still enjoy the God of Ordinances, he
would ^ea little Sanctuary to you.

(8.) Gods Creatures are yours. As Jehoshaphat, [My People are as thy People,
and my Horses as thy Horses.] When God is for you, what Creature of his can be
against you?

Angels the best and noblest Creatures, are your Friends, Heb. 1.14. And full
little do you think how many ways they do Befriend you, how many ways they are
Ministering, and helpful to you: True, there is no ground for the Invocating of
Angels; but there is ground enough, why you should give thanks to God, for the
Angels Ministering unto you.

Again, Devils and wicked men (the worst of Creatures) are your servants.
Though it be quite besides their intention, sore against their will and
Indination. Though they intend evil against you, God will turn it to good.

So likewise other Creatures. The World is yours, 1 Cor. 3.22. The World is an
appurtenance of your Inheritance, of that Estate which God by Covenant, and
Deed of Gife has settled on you, and confirmed to you. If Inferior Creatures
had a Tongue to speak, would they not say as Hushai, Whom the Lord shall choose,
his will I be? Or as the men of Benjamin, and Judah, We are thine David, ^e are
on thy side. It is a burden and bondage to ^he Creatures, to serve those who
are Enemies to their Maker. The Earth groaneth under such, and of God would but
give the word, it would immediately open her Mouth, and swallow them up.

I do not deny but wicked men have a right to their Estates, and to the use of
the Creatures. But ^he People of God have a better right than they.

That is certainly a mistake of some, that think all wicked men Usurpers of the
things they enjoy. If they have a right before God: I ask (says one) by what
Covenant. Is it by the Covenant o^ Works? Then they must fulfill it? Is it by
the Covenant of Grace? But they are not within it, cannot claim by it. Answ. It
is true, they fulfill neither Covenant, and therefore have not a rig^^ by
Covenant. But their Enumeration here is not full enough: Dater tertium. These
things may be passed over, and men may have a right to them, and not by
Covenant, Deuteronomy. 25. I have given Moun^ Seir unto Esau for a possession, ver. 9.
I have give^ Ar unto the Children of Lot for a possession, without any
Indentures drawn betwixt God and then. By his Providence he determines the
Bounds o^ men's Habitations. He that gives unto all me^ Life and Breath, gives
them Food and Raiment. Though wicked men shall be called to account for their
Mercies, yet not as Thieves, or Usurpers; but as ill-users or abusers of them,
as unfaithful Stewards.

Wicked men therefore have a right to their Creature Comforts; but not so good
a right as you They have [a right by actual Collation, De presenti (As Mr.
Baxter somewhere) but nor by promise, De futuro.] They have a right by common
providence, you by Covenant, and Compact. They have a right as Servants to
their daily Bread, you have the right of Sons. Not indeed that any deserve the
least Mercy at Gods Hand, as the Laboring Servant is worthy of his Meat; but a
Servant may take his Masters allowance, and has a right to the Clothes his
Master gives him; only he has no assurance of being provided for by his Master
still. The servant abides not in the House for ever, but the Son abides ever,
John 8.35.

You that are earthly Parents, know how to give good things to your Children:
And much more does your Heavenly Father, and he has enough to give, The earth
is the Lords, and the fullness thereof. Says the Father, Be a good Child, and
while I have any thing, thou shall not want. And so says God to you, You that
fear me you shall never want any good thing; your Heavenly Father knows what
is good for you, and has promised, you shall never want, what is good for you.
And how can you desire more? What? Would you have more than enough? when enough
is more than all? Dimidium plus toto. Would you have more than is good? That
were to wish evil to your selves.

(9.) Heaven is yours, if God be yours, his Kingdom your everlasting Home, and
Inheritance, Luke 12.32. As he said, Son, thou art ever with me and all that I
have is thine: So, if the Children of God, then Heirs of God; then you shall be
ever with him, ever with the Lord, and Inherit that everlasting Kingdom,
prepared by the Father, purchased by the Son for you. Of which Kingdom we have
many things to say, and hard to be uttered. Indeed as high the Heavens are
above our Heads; so high above our understanding, and apprehension is the Glory
and Felicity of Heaven. No greater difference betwixt the Throne, and the
Footstool, nor so great indeed as betwixt the Kingdom of Heaven, and the most
flourishing Kingdoms upon Earth. What is said of Mount Sion (the Type,) Psalm.
48.2. Beautiful for Situation, the joy of the whole Earth is Mount Zion: The
like may much more be said of Heaven; Beautiful for Situation, the Joy, yea,
the Glory of the whole World. Here is the City of the great King. O the
serenity of Heaven! no scorching heat, nor piercing cold there. Here is a
glorious Kingdom indeed, above the Clouds, yea, above the Stars.

O the Lightsomeness of Heaven! no Night there. And no need of the Sun there,
Rev. 22.5. O the pleasures of Heaven! Paradise was but an obscure Type, a dark
shadow of it. No pricking Brier, or grieving Thorn there. In this Kingdom there
(...) nothing to offend. No sorrow nor crying there* No pain there, no feeble
person among the heavenly Tribes: There is health without sickness, and jo^
without sorrow, and pleasures without pain. Ther^ is hidden Mannah, and Rivers
of pleasures, and never fading Crowns of Glory.

O the riches of that Kingdom, there are Treasures that fail not. Solomon made
Silver to be (...) Jerusalem as stones, 1 Kings 10.27. But the ne^ Jerusalem is
described and represented, as if it were all Gold, and precious stones, Rev.
21.18, 19, 2^ Many a poor man goes to Heaven, Iam. 2.5. Many poor in this
world, yet rich in Faith, and He^ of the Kingdom. But that Kingdom will for e^
enrich all that come to it. There, and there o^ is the enduring substance. So
now it is poor Di^^ poor Dives, who is shut out of Heaven, but ri^^ Lazarus. No
poor to be seen in the streets of t^ New Jerusalem, no complaining in those
streets.

O the peaceableness of that Kingdom! no Se^pent in the Celestial Paradise, no
Cananite in the Land of Promise, neither the Alarm of War, (...) the Voice of
the Oppressor that shall ever be heard there. No hurting or destroying in that
holy Moun^ain, no possibility of a Foreign Invasion. There is a great Gulf
fixed, Luke 16.26. No fear of In^estine Divisions in that Kingdom. There Love
shall be perfect. There Luther, and Calvin are agreed. There is the sweetest
Harmony without the ^east jarring Discord. There the Faithful dwell at ^ase,
and delight themselves in the abundance of Peace.

O the Stability and Permanency of this Kingdom! And this Crowns all the rest;
it is an everlasting Kingdom: The New Jerusalem lies four square, (...) it is
a Kingdom that cannot be moved) the Length ^^d the Breadth, and the Height of
it are equal, ^ev. 21.16. it is ever like it self. The Glory of ^eaven shall
never suffer the least Eclipse. O bles^ed state indeed, to be ever with the
Lord!

But after all, I must tell you, we have but a very short sight of those things
that are within the veil. ^deed did Believers fully apprehend the Riches of ^^e
Glory of that Inheritance reserved in Heaven for ^^em, they would stand in need
of more patience, (...) be willing to stay their time, God has appoint^d them
upon Earth, (though they should live in ^e most flourishing and prosperous
Estate here;) ^an ever the Martyrs stood in need of, to endure ^e most grievous
Tortures, and cruel Deaths.

Thus you have heard something of the First and ^and Covenant promised [I will
be your God] how ^onderful comprehensive it is. It is as high as Heaven, What
can thou know? The Measure ^ereof is longer than the Earth, and broader than
^e Sea.

Again, the second is like unto it, scil. [Ye shall be my people,] Jer. 31.33.

It is true, sometimes this imports our Duty, and the Condition of the
Covenant. And if we would have God for our God, we must be his people, we must
give up our selves to Him, and account ou^selves no more our own. But to be his
People, a^ well holds forth the exceeding great Priviledge^ and Happiness of
those, that indeed give up themselves to God, that come up to Covenant Term^
That God will own, and acknowledge them for (...) people indeed, and will carry
it toward them (...) such, will remember them with the Favor that (...)
bears to his People.

His Professing people, who have given up the^^ Names, but do not give up their
hearts to hi^ yet have some privileges above others, that are no^ called by
his Name, much more that his willin^ and Obedient people are privileged. The
Lo^^ knows them that are his, (2 Timothy 2.19.) a^ will own them. And

1. This speaks their freedom from other Lord Those cruel Taskmasters, and
Tyrants; Sin, t^^ World, and Satan. Gods owning them for (...) will cut off
others claims; Sin, the World, and (...) tan, can no more lay claim to you, if
ye be (...) Lords.

As that eminent Saint, and Servant of God, (...) Joseph Allein, (in his Life,
p. 92.) did thus re^ Satan in his last Conflict: Trouble me not ((...) he) for
I am none of thine, I am the Lords: (...) by Covenant, I have sworn my self to
be (...) Lords, and his I will be, therefore be gone. if the Lord says of
thee, such a soul is mine, Title (no doubt) will hold good against Satan, and
all the World.

O what a comfortable thing it is, if indeed you are the Lords, then you are
Redeemed unto him from among men. You are no longer Satan's captives, no longer
slaves to Sin, and the World; as it is Isa. 62.12. They shall call them the
holy people, the redeemed of the Lord. And Isa. 43.1. Fear not, for I have
redeemed thee, -- thou are mine. You are his, as Redeemed by him; you are the
Portion which he took out of the hand of Satan, with his Sword, and with his
Bow, Deuteronomy. 4.34. Has God ^assayed to go and take him a Nation from the midst
of another Nation, by Temptations, by Signs, and Wonders, by a mighty Hand and
stretched-out Arm, and by great Terrors, according to all that the Lord your
God did for you in Egypt? O the exceeding Greatness of his Power to usward
that Believe; delivering us from the power of Darkness, and Translating us into
the Kingdom of his Dear Son.

2. This puts an Honor, an Excellency upon any. Since thou wast precious in
mine Eyes, thou ^ast been honorable: What a great Honor is it unto any, for
the Great God to own them, as in ^ear Relation unto Him? What she said of
Solo^ons servants, is much more true of Gods servants, 1 Kings 10.8. Happy are
thy men, happy are these thy servants, which stand continually before ^ee. As
there is no God like him, so no People in the World like his People, 1 Chronicles.
17.20, 21. Deuteronomy. 32.9. The Lords portion is his People. Exodus 19.5. A peculiar
Treasure unto him, Mal. 3.17. His Jewels. Does not this commend them indeed, as
the Excellent ones in the Earth, that God accounts so highly of them? Psalm.
4.3. Know that the Lord has set apart, him that is Godly for himself. Set
apart, or, as some Translate it, Mirificavit; or Insignem vel eximium fecit.
The difference God puts betwixt his People, and others, the Godly and the
Ungodly, is Notable and Wonderful, The wicked he will put away like Dross, but
the Godly he esteems as his Jewels; these he accounts his peculiar
Treasure: He sets great store by them.

3. Gods peculiar People have his special Favour^ And what happiness in this?
The Psalmist desired no more, but that the Lord would remember hi^ with the
Favor that he bears to his People, Psalm. 106.4. The Lord takes pleasure in
his people, Psalm. 149.4. These only have his Complacential Love. Those whom he
calls his People, at other times he calls his Chosen, his Sons and
Daughters, his Beloved; yea, the Apple of his Eye: Relation and Propriety is a
potent Exciter of Love. The world that is full of Malice, yet loves its own.
And shall not God love his own? Yea, he loves them with an everlasting Love.

4. For God to say of any, they are mine, i^ speaks Safety. He will have a care
of his own. His Inheritance is Hedged, Fenced about with hi^ special
Providence. His People shall have his protection. A dangerous thing it is for
men to meddle with them. What mean ye that ye beat my people to pieces, Isa.
3.15. Do ye know what ye do, Isa. 52.5, 6. What is here to do, That my people
is taken away for naught. God will Judge and Plea^ for his People, Deuteronomy. 32.36.
Isa. 51.22. Joel; 2, 4. You would not see your Children wronged. And will not
God avenge his own Elect? He is very tender of the Apple of his Eye: And the
Beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety by him, yea, the Foundation of God
stands sure; the Lord knows them that are his. And the very Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against them.

5. His People are sure to be well provided for. Does God take care for Oxen?
Does he give the Beasts their Food, and will he not much more provide for them
of his own Household? His Blessing is upon his People, Psalm. 3.8. My people
shall be satisfied with my Goodness, says the Lord, Jer. 31.14. Yea, others
must not see the Good he will do for them, they have Meat to eat that the World
knows not of.

6. His People shall have his special presence, Ezekiel. 37.27. My Tabernacle
shall be with them: Yea, I will be their God, and they shall be my people. So
in other places, where the Lord promises to own any as his People; he does
further promise to dwell among them, and walk among them, Lev. 26.12. 2 Cor.
6.16. etc. Where should God dwell, but in the Lot of his own Inheritance?

7. When you hear of Gods Tabernacle being with them; you must not understand
it, so, as if he were Flitting, or Removing from them again. No, The Lord will
not cast off his people, neither will he forsake his Inheritance, Psalm. 94.14.
God has not cast away his people whom he fore-knew, Romans 11.2. He will not
cast any of them away. He will not lose one of his Jewels. None shall pluck
them out of his Hand. He will keep them safe, till he set them in a Crown of
Glory.

And so lastly, They that are his indeed, it does not yet appear what they
shall be; but this is certain, they shall at last appear with him in Glory.
Yea, the Lord will be for ever glorified in them, as a Bridegroom adorneth
himself with Ornaments, and as a Bride decketh her self with her Jewels. And
what Glory that is, to be like the Angels of Light as to our souls; and to have
our vile bodies made like unto Christ's glorious Body, no Tongue can express.
Solomon in all his glory, not like one of these. When Christ was Transfigured
in the Mount his very Raiment was shining, exceeding white as snow: So as no
Fuller on Earth can white them, Mark 9.8. His very Raiment received Light and
Luster from his Body. His Face shone as the Sun, Mat. 17.2. And if the
appearance of Christ was so Glorious in that Mount, which was but a Landscape of
Heaven; What a glorious Body has he now in Heaven? Well? The bodies of the
Saints are to be Fashioned like his glorious Body, never to change that Fashion
more. O the Luster that God will put upon his People, when the Righteous shall
shine forth as the Sun, in the Kingdom of their Father, Mat. 13.43. And if the
Body the earthly part of them, shall be so full of Splendour, How Glorious
within, think we? Will not God polish the Jewel, when the Ring where it is set,
is so Enamelled, when the Cabinet has so rich work bestowed on it?

And now my Friends, consider of what has been said, and show your selves men.
You have heard what the Lord requires of you in the Covenant of Grace; nothing
but what is your Indispensible Duty; nothing that you can deny, or be backward
to, if you be not enemies to God, and your own souls' which should prevail with
you, though there were nothing more to be said. But further you have also
heard, what the Lord has freely and graciously promised here, even all that
you can desire to your salvation and endless Happiness; yea, even more than you
can conceive of. Now what say ye? Will ye be the Lords? Will you now from this
day forwards give up your selves to God in Christ, to be Ruled by him, and
saved by him in his own Way? O that there were such an heart in you all! Sirs,
what say you? Though I be the unworthiest of Gods Messengers, yet I come in his
Name, and the Lord expects your answer. Ah, Sirs, Have you not Delayed, and
Dallied with God too long already? Whosoever thou art that shall deny to
consent to Gods Terms this day, for ought thou know, this is the last time
of asking: The Lord may never offer thee so fair again: That if this day thou
do not hearken to his Voice, the things that belong unto thy peace, may be
for ever hid from thine eyes. If now you will be the Lords, then he will be
your God, and own you for his People indeed, Jer. 30.21, 22. But if otherwise,
do not say, but you have been fairly offered: And how will you for ever repent
it, and Rue your folly, that you did not take Gods offer? O madness indeed,
that you should like it to have the Bramble reign over you, rather than come
under the shadow of the Almigh^y! Do you not choose sin, and the world, to your
own Confusion? This know, God has no need of you, he can be happy without you;
though without him you are miserable to all Eternity.

Sect. 14. PROP. XIV. The Coventut of Grace is one and the same for Substance
in all Ages. Though it may seen to have Varied, yet the Difference is but in
Circumstances, and manner of Administration.
THe Covenant made with the Jews (of which is the greatest Doubt, or Question)
was (...) Covenant of Grace, (the same for substance with that we are under)
with a Covenant of Peculiarity, or a Political Covenant added to it.

Quest. When did the Covenant of Grace fir^^ take Date?

Answ. Immediately after the Fall. In that threat^ning to the Serpent, Genesis
3.15. was a Promis^ of Salvation to man. That as we read, Gal. 3.^. the Gospel
was Preached before unto Abraham (which was enough to the Purpose, and Business
the Apostle had there in hand.) So it was Preach^^ before that to Adam. For
this cause as the Learn^ Mede supposes, it is called The everlasting Gosp^^
Rev. 14.6. (...), not so much in respect of the Future Time, as the Time past.
That which wa^ promised (...), a Seculo, or from the Begi^ning of the World,
the Ancient Gospel. That pr^mise, [That the Seed of the Woman, should brea^ the
Serpents head.] Was the first Draught, (...) Epitome of the Gospel. Here God
promised the destruction of Satan's Kingdom, and Salvation of Fallen man, by
Jesus Christ, the Seed of the Woman. That all the true Seed of the Woman, the
Faithful, (opposed to the seed of the Serpent,) should overcome through him,
who is the Seed of the Woman eminently, and in a more famous sense, and
peculiar respect. Thus Cain and Abel were directed to offer Sacrifices,
agreeable to that Dispensation of the Covenant before Christ's coming. And God
speaks to Cain, Genesis 4.7. If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted: Which
certainly cannot but refer to the Covenant of Grace, q. d. If thou did serve
me with the like sincerity, as thy Brother does, should not thou be accepted,
as well as he? Now how could sinners look to find acceptance, whose best
services are imperfect, and therefore deserve to be rejected, unless God reveal
himself in a gracious promise, or Covenant to that purpose. By Faith Abel
offered unto God a more excellent Sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained
witness that he was Righteous, Heb. 11.4. This is evident, that Remission of
sin, Justification, and Salvation (the great benefits promised in the Covenant
of Grace) were granted out to some, before the Covenant made with Abraham. So
Abel was righteous before God: So Enoch, who walked with God on Earth, and was
Translated, and taken up to God, Genesis 5.24. So Noah was Heir of the
Righteousness which is by Faith, Heb. 11.7. The Kingdom of Heaven was prepared
for the Faithful, from the Foundation of the World, Mat. 25.34. Witness Enochs
translation thither. By the way take notice, they that were acquainted with the
History of Enoch, could not be ignorant of an happiness to be enjoyed of the
Saints after this life: Yea, Eternal Life was promised from the beginning of
the world, (...).
or before Ancient times, as that Text, Tit. 1.2. should be read. Thus God had
a Seed to serve him, from the beginning of the world, and was a God in Covenant
with them, was their God in Christ. So some understand, Rev. 13.8. as referring
to the grand Ancient promise, Genesis 3.15. The Lamb slain from the foundation of
the world. How slain? Not only Figurative, in Type, and Representation (as Dr.
Lightfoot) The first thing that died in the world was a Sacrifice, or Christ in
a Figure. Now only Dispositive, in Decree and Intention: Secundum dispositionem
totius Trinitatis, as Luther, (see 1 Pet. 1.19, 20.) But also Virtualiter, the
Virtue and Efficacy of his Death extending backward, to Times past, as well as
forward, ( Romans 3.24, 25. Heb. 9.15. and 10.4. and 13.8.) Or if we should read
these words [From the Foundation of the World,] Rev. 13.8. as having Relation
to the Writing of the Names in the Book of Life, not to the slaying of the
Lamb; as there is a parallel place in the same Book, Rev. 17.8. It makes as
well for my present purpose holding forth the writing of the Names of some in
the Lambs Book of Life, from the beginning of the world. Or it is a Periphrasis
of them that are saved. None are saved, but such as are written in the Lambs
Book of Life, such as are given to him. And if none ever were, or shall be
saved, but such whose Names are written in the Lambs book of Life, then none
ever were, or shall be saved but by Christ, and according to the Covenant of
Grace.

And Mr. Ball would have the Apostle to refer to that ancient famous promise of
Victory to the seed of the Woman over Satan, and all spiritual Enemies, both in
2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us, and called us, with an holy calling, not
according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was
given us in Christ Jesus, (...) (not before the world began, as we have it
Translated there, and in Tit. 1.2. but) before ancient times. And 2 These. 2.13.
God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation, through sanctification of
the Spirit, and belief of the Truth. From the beginning (...), which phrase, as
he says, never imports from Eternity in Scripture. Of the Covenant, p. 41.42.


And certainly, these were ever necessary to salvation from the beginning
[Sanctification, and belief of the Truth.] As we read of Abels Faith, and that
his works were Righteous, (a proof of his sanctification.) We read of Enochs
Faith, and of his constant care, to walk with God, and to please God. We read
of Noah's Faith, and that he was a just man, and upright in his Generations,
walking with God. Neither were any of the Fathers saved without such a real,
practical, living, operative Faith.

Though we have much revealed to us in the Gospel, which was hid from them, (
Ephesians. 3.9. Col. 1.26.) yet they heartily assento Gods Truth, and complied with
his will; as the Lord was pleased then to reveal it. Though as Camero says Si
ante certum tempus praestitutum a Deo, mysterium salutis uostrae, seu regnum
caelorum suit obscurius revelatum, omnino consequens est ut fides adhibita
revel^tioni fuerit confusa. praelect. p. 76. col. 1.
That methinks it is plain, they were saved the same way even as we. Though to
whom much is given, of them more is required; yet they had the same spirit of
Faith. And had they been under the same Circumstances with us Christians, had
they lived in Gospel Times, they would have been Gospel-believers. As Christ
says, John 7.17. If any man does his will, he shall know of the Doctrine;
whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self. As such whose hearts were
right, and sound, the Gospel being revealed to them with such clear Evidence,
and proof, that it was of God, they could not but embrace it. As that Faith by
which Abraham obeyed Gods call to leave his Country, and Kindred, and Fathers
House, to go he knew not whither; would have enabled him to leave Father and
Mother, House and Land, for Christ's sake, and the Gospels. That same Faith,
which made him so ready to offer up Isaac at Gods command, would have made him
as willing to take up the Cross and follow Christ, as the Apostles and
Primitive Christians did, had he lived in their days. The like may be said of
the Fathers before him, who obtained a good report through Faith. Thus it
appears, that there is no real difference, betwixt the Faith of those
Worthies, who lived in former Ages, to whom God spoke (...) at diverse times,
and in diverse manners, and the Faith of Christians, to whom God has spoken by
his Son.

Now though I have jumbled things together something confusedly in this
Discourse: Yet ye may observe these two things cleared sufficiently, that the
same substantial Benefits, which the Gospel promises, were held forth to the
Fathers; and the same kind of Faith, Holiness, and Obedience required of them,
and therefore they must needs have ^een under the same Covenant for substance.

And is not this a Crediting of the Gospel? And should it not confirm our Faith
in the Gospel? This is the good old Way indeed, many are greatly addicted to
Antiquity. You make great account of your old Deeds and Evidences. Let me tell
you, you do not conceive aright of the Gospel, nor of Gods Grace, if you
confine it to the Time of the New Testament, as if it was under 1700. years
old. Even the Covenant of God made with Abraham was 430. years before the
Mosaical Law (as the Apostle urges against those, who were ready to adhere to
the Law in opposition to the Gospel.) And though that was sufficient for his
purpose there, yet the Covenant of Grace was long before Abraham, even from the
beginning. This way God had set forth soon after Man was placed upon the Earth,
immediately upon his fall. And it is questioned, whether Adam stood one day,
whether he lodged one night in that Honor, to which he was Created.

O how should we reverence the Gospel! how should this advance the Grace of God
in our thoughts! It is the ancient Gospel, the everlasting Gospel, like the
everlasting Hills; even from the beginning, God set forth this way of
Salvation. The Gospel delivered by Christ, and his Apostles, what is it, but
that good old Charter, granted to Man upon the Fall, graciously renewed? When
almost the whole Race of Mankind had forfeited, and lost their Charter, Christ
comes, and renews, and Confirms it.

But here another Question falls in.

Whether the Covenant of Grace was made with all in Adam?

Answ. I think we must yield to this, Perpetua est foederis Dei ratio, quod
filii in parentibus comprehen^danter and censeanter: That this is the perpetual
way and manner of Gods Covenant, to include and reckon the Children with their
parents. Thus the Covenant of Grace was made with Adam, and his Seed, such as
were to Descend from him, till such time as any of them Degenerated into the
seed of the Serpent, and by their wilful Apostasy from God, and his VVayes,
they did cut off themselves, and theirs from the Covenant. As afterward the
Covenant was made with Abraham and his Seed; and as now, under the Gospel the
Covenant is made with the Faithful and their Seed: So was it at first with Adam
and his Seed. But as now if any that are taken into Covenant upon the account
of their Parents, being in Covenant with God, if when they shall grow up, they
shall wilfully reject Grace offered, and manifestly renounce their Covenant
with God; they should thereby break off themselves from their former
Covenant Relation to God: So this has been the case of the far greater part of
Adams Posterity.

Though whether the Law of Grace may not extend further, even to such as are
not in Covenant, in the fullest sense, as it implies a mutual consent; that is
another Question.

But so much of the Covenant, or Law of Grace, as it was given to Adam.

That God might reveal more concerning it to the Fathers even before the Flood,
I know no ground t^ deny. We read of Enochs Prophecy, Jude 5.14, 15. That God
was manifesting himself to some o^ his Servants in those times extraordinarily.

But the next Edition of the Covenant, that we find extant, was that made to
Abraham. And this latter Edition of the Covenant of Grace was larger, and
clearer than the former. That Channel of Free Grace, which first brake forth in
Paradise immediately upon Man's Fall, ran down to Abraham in a broader stream.
Here Christ is spoken of, as the seed of Abraham, who was spoken of more
generally before, as the Seed of the Woman. And blessedness is promised in and
by him, Genesis 22.18. In thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed.
Which blessedness before was more obscurely hinted in that phrase of breaking
the Serpents head.

And here is express mention of Gods Covenanting with Abraham, Genesis 17.2, 4, 7,
9, 10. Whereas Gods Covenanting with Adam, and others of the Faithful before,
is not plainly laid down, but only to be gathered, and deduced from Scripture
by way of Inference. Though methinks, it is plain enough to all, that are not
minded to Cavil, that there was a Covenant betwixt God and Adam, etc. they
being mutually engaged. God engaged to Adam by promise, and Adam engaged to
believe God, and worship God, according as he did rereal himself. But whereas
the Covenant was more tacitly and darkly held forth, betwixt God and Adam, it
is most expressly delared betwixt God and Abraham, so that there is no room for
any Cavil.

Now that the Covenant made with Abraham was the Covenant of Grace, the same
for Substance with that we are under, is evident.

1. The Gospel was preached to Abraham in that Covenant, which is proved by the
Apostles express Testimony, Gal. 3.8.

2. The Covenant with Abraham was confirmed in Christ, Gal. 3.17. Therefore a
Covenant of Grace.

3. The Covenant with Abraham has not yet been disanulled, as the Apostle there
shows; and thence proves, the blessing of Abraham is come upon the Gentiles
according to the tenor of that Covenant.

4. Abraham was justified by Faith in that promise, confirmed or renewed in the
Covenant, (...) 17.4. That he should be a Father of many Nations, see Genesis
15.5, 6. Now hence it will follow either that the Promise, and Covenant made
(...) Abraham was a Covenant of Grace, or that Abraham was not justified by a
Covenant of Grace, b^ some other way. Either the Promise, and Cov^nant made to
him, was the same for substance wi^^ that we are under, or he was justified and
saved (...) a quite different way from us.

5. And then why should he be called the Father of the Faithful, Romans 14.11,
16, 17. Or w^^ should Gospel Believers be called the Children (...) Abraham,
Gal. 3.7. He is not the Father of such in respect of Natural Generation, or
Spiritual Regeneration, does not beget or produce Faith (...) them; but only by
similitude and proportion, as famous Pattern and eminent Example; as lo^^ what
way Abraham found acceptance with Go^ and was justified before God, and we may
exp^^^ the Favor of God, and free Justification in (...) same way. But
certainly you take away the Fo^^dation of the agreement, and Relation betw^^^
Abraham, and the Faithful. Now, if you de^ that to be the Covenant of Grace,
which was m^ with Abraham: Can they be of the same Fai^^ who are not under the
same Covenant?

6. Do we not read, Gal. 3.14. That the bles^ing, which is come upon the
Gentiles through Je^us Christ, was first the blessing of Abraham. It ^as first
the blessing of Abraham, and from him, and through him, (as a prime subject,
though not (...) a cause) it descends upon us. The Gospel, or the glad Tidings
of Christ, and blessedness in him ^as first preached to Abraham, [In thy Seed
shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed.] And thus by ^aith in the
Promise he saw the day of Christ, the blessias coming, though it was at a great
distance; ^et he believed it would come, and be a happy day ^^deed, the
fore-thoughts whereof made him glad ^t heart, John 8.56.

Object. 1. But some tell us the Covenant made ^ith Abraham, was not the
Covenant of Grace; ^^t that is one and the same to all the Faithful: But (...)
this Covenant with Abraham are special promises, ^^greeing only to him and his
Family, or Natural Offspring, as that the Messiah should come of his ^eed,
Even He, in whom all Nations should be bles^ed; and that God would give the
Land of Canaan (...) his Seed.

Answ. We must distinguish betwixt the Essen^ls of the Covenant of Grace, and
the acciden^s. As the Covenant of Grace holds forth the ^ay of Salvation for
Fallen Mankind of Gods Free^ace in Christ; so it is the same Covenant, that
^braham was under, and the Faithful now are un^r. And as to the now-mentioned
Differences, ^^ey were but Circumstantial, and accidental. This ^^stinction
must be granted, or else we must hold (...) Tribe of Judah, and House of David
were interested in one Covenant, and the other-Tribes, with all the Jewish
Proselytes in another Covenant; whereas the Scripture Involves and Comprehends
them is one and the same Covenant.

Object. 2. Others say, God made a twofold Covenant with Abraham, in Genesis 17.
Scil. A Covenant of Grace, in the beginning of the Chapt^^ and a Covenant of
Circumcision, ver. 9, 10. etc. which they make a Covenant of Works.

Answ. But this is a mistake sure, for so it wo^^ follow, 1. That whereas
Abraham is acknowledge to be taken into a Covenant of Grace before, he (...)
the privilege after this, to be taken into the Covenant of Works; which is no
privilege. 2. T^^ must say, that Abraham was at the same time (...) under a
Covenant of Grace, and a Covenant (...) Works. But these same persons at other
times any, that one can be under both Covenants together 3. The Apostle is
express, Romans 4.11. That A^^^ham received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of
(...) Righteousness of Faith. So that if the Coven^ to which Circumcision did
belong, was a Covenant of Works (as Mr. P. would have it:) the Righteousness of
Faith should belong to the Covenant Works. 4. Genesis 17; Does not speak of a
(...) fold Covenant made with Abraham, but sets (...) both parts of the
Covenant, scil. What the (...) promised to Abraham, and what he required of
Abraham. He promised to be a God unto him, (...) to his Seed after him, ver. 7.
And required Abraham to walk before him in Integrity, ver. 1. A^ful mit to the
Ordinance of Circumcision, (...) Which at that time he appointed to be the
(...) the Covenant: He calls it [My Covenant.] (...) methinks it is strange,
that any Protestant should stumble at the Expression. It is a Sacramental
phrase, ^ike that 1 Cor. 10.4. That Rock was Christ. And (...) Cor. 11.24. This
is my Body.

Again, look at the Spiritual meaning of Circum^ision, as it was a bloody
Sacrament, intimating the purging away of sin by the Blood of the Covenant, and
pointing at the inward Circumcision of the heart; what can be more plain, than
that it must refer to the Covenant of Grace? But I may have occasion to speak
more of this by and by.

Lastly, That there was but one Covenant estalished with Abraham, this appears
(as Mr. Whi^on notes p. 36.) From the constant phrase of Scripture, always
(where speaking of the Covenant made with Abraham) speaking in the singular
number, the Covenant, and not in the plu^al, Covenants.

Now I might go on to show how God repeated ^is Covenant with Abraham, as it
were Commenting upon it, in which respect it may be called the Promises, Gal.
3.16. so Genesis 12.1, 2, 3. and 15. ^. 5. and 17. and 22.17, 18. And I have heard
(...) Learned man observe from Gods commanding ^raham to offer up his son
Isaac, that on Gods ^art it was a further Exhibition of the Messiah to ^^raham.
Isaac must be the blessed Seed, or the ^rogenitor of it, because of that
Promise, Genesis 11.12. In Isaac shall thy Seed be called. Now Isaac's usage
(being appointed to be offered up a Sacrifice) holds forth to Abraham, that the
Messiah should be offered up a Sacrifice for sin. Dr. W.
(So that here was more of Goodness in God to ^braham, than of Obedience in
Abraham to God.) Again, there was a determinate place where Isaac, should be
offered, Mount Moriah, on which place afterward the Temple, the place of
sacrifices, was built. Again, Isaac was laid on the wood, and Abraham's hand
stretched out, to slay him: Yet Abraham's hand was stayed, Isaac was not
Sacrificed, but God provided a Ram for a Sacrifice; this teaches Abraham that
the time of Messiahs coming was not yet: But in the mean time God would be
content with Sacrifices, as Pledges of the Messiah, which should Supponere
locum Messiae, should be Typical, Significative, and Representative of him.
Here I have given you another thoughts of that Mysterious passage, of Gods
commanding Abraham (...) offer his son Isaac. But whether indeed Abraham had a
distinct apprehension of these things, as we may have, since they have been
cleared, and illustrated in the Antitype, I do not determine; but leave to
others Judgments.

I come next to speak of the Covenant made wi^^ the Children of Israel. Here
some distinguish (...) the Covenant made with them under Moses, (...) their
return from the Babylonish Captivity, and the Covenant made with them after the
Captivity. B^ that I may not run out too far, I shall only speak (...) the
Mosaic Covenant: as indeed of that Covenant is all the Question, whether it
was a Covenant of Grace, the same for substance with that, whi^ Christians are
under. Now I shall endeavor (...) clear this, That the Covenant of God made
(...) Moses with the people of the Jews, was a Covenant of Grace, the same for
substance with the Gospe^ Covenant: The way of Life and Salvation he^ forth in
it.

It is granted, or if any should deny or question it, we have seen it proved
before, that the Covenant made with Abraham, was a Covenant of grace; But the
Covenant made with Abraham, took in the Jews, as his seed, Genesis 17.7. And the
Covenant made with the Jews, was a carrying on and establishing of the same
Covenant; (though with a new ^^dus, some things peculiar to the Jewish Church
and Commonwealth, being added to it,) Deuteronomy. 8.18. Thou shall remember the Lord
thy God, that he may establish his Covenant, which he swear unto thy Fathers.
And Deuteronomy. 7.12. If ye hearken to these Judgments, and keep and do them, the
Lord thy God shall keep unto thee the Covenant and Mercy, which he swear unto
thy Fathers.

2. That Covenant which was Sealed with the son of Circumcision, and had a
promise of Heart-Circumcision, was a Covenant of Grace. But the Covenant made
with the Jews, was sealed with the (...) of Circumcision; and further, had a
promise (...) Heart-circumcision.

What did the outward sign of Circumcision signifit? That we learn, Deuteronomy.
10.16. Circumcise ^erefore the Foreskin of your heart, which has (...)
accomplishment in Christ: Veteres Hebraei in (...) fuerunt sententia, quod
tempore Messiae Circum^^^ Spiritualiter, non Carnaliter amplius fieri de^^^.
Fag. apud M. Pool. in Synops. Col. 2.11, ^^. In whom ye are Circumcised with
the Circum^^on made without hands, in putting off the body (...) the sins of
the flesh, by the Circumcision of Christ, buried with him in Baptism. Where
me^inks the Apostle intimates thus much, that Mo^'s Circumcision, the outward
circumcision made with hands, did point to Christ's Circumcision, the inward
Circumcision not made with hands, [The Circumcision of Christ.] i. e. That
which he effected by his Spirit. And this further we may take notice of, that
he seems to compare Circumcision, and Baptism, as signifying the same thing,
[Buried with him in Baptism.]

Here let me Recite a Passage out of a Late Writer. Disc. of the (...)
Covenants. p. 37.
[It is not unlikely (says he) but that as Heart-circumcision under the Figure
of Literal-circumcision, was, together with Faith, made the condition of the
Covenant then: ( Genesis 17.10. with Deuteronomy. 10.16.) So Spiritual Baptism, which is
a death unto sin, and a living unto God, is under the Figure of Water Baptism,
joined with believing; as the condition of the promise of Salvation now. Mar.
16.16. He that believes and is Baptized, shall be saved. According to which,
the Apostle Peter having spoken of Noah's Ark, says, The like Figure whereunto
Baptism now saves us; not the putting away of the filth of the Flesh, but the
answer of a good Conscience toward God, 1 Pet, 3.21.] But this is one thing
considerable, if Circumcision signified the same thing that Baptism does, scil.
The Mortification of sin, and laid (...) Engagement on them to put away
Filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit both; it must be the same Covenant for
substance, to which both those Sacraments referred.

Hereunto add, That the Jews had a promise o^ Heart-circumcision, Deuteronomy. 30.6.
The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of the seed, to
love the Lord thy God. This is an evident promise of Grace, where the Lord
undertakes to work, what elsewhere he requires, as Deuteronomy. 10.16. Jer. 4.4.
Object. But then why is the House of Israel said to have been Uncircumcised in
heart? Answ. They were so generally, This Promise (like those Jer. 31.33. Ezekiel.
36.26, 27.) was fulfilled only in some of them, not in all, (its true) and yet
laid down in so general Terms as might have encouraged any of them to apply
themselves to God, for the bestowing of that Grace upon them.

But there is an Objection against this Argument from Circumcision, from Gal.
5.3. Every man that is circumcised, is a Debtor to do the whole Law. And
consequently, circumcision should rather have reference to a Covenant of Works.

Answ. It is a mistake, to confound the Law (of which the Apostle there
speaks) with the Covenant of Works, or covenant made with man in Innocence.
The Law to which Circumcision bound men, was the written Law of Moses, which
though it is sometimes called the Law of Works, yet is really distinct from the
Law of Innocence, or Covenant of works made with man at first. Indeed the
Mosaical Jewish Law, taken in the Political sense, as it was the Instrument, or
Rule of Government of the Jews Commonwealth (as one notes) promising Temporal
benefits to the strict observation thereof, Discourse of the two Covenants. p.
75.
and threatening Temporal penalties to the Transgression and Violation of the
same: So far it was a Law of Works. A Law of Works (...). As the Apostle says,
Gal. 3.12. The Law is not of Faith: But the man that Does them, shall live in
them, (as Lev. 18.5.) Which as it had reference to the Law in the Political
sense, is to be understood of a long and prosperous life upon Earth.

Further, as the false Apostles and carnal Jews expected Justification, and
Salvation, upon the External Observation of the Law, as if Circumcision, and
other works of the Law were highly Meritorious ( Romans 9, 32. and 10.3.) Thus it
was to them a supposed Law, or Covenant of Works. Not that God did so intend
it, but they did so misapprehend it. Not that Circumcision did indeed bind men
to the strict Terms of the proper Covenant of Works.

But the Apostle there speaks of Circumcision, in the sense of the false
Apostles, and as they abused it. They urged it as necessary to Justification,
as a work of the Law, setting Moses against Christ: And would have it still
practiced, when by Christ it was abolished. Against these, the Apostle argues,
if you will keep up circumcision still, by the same reason, you must keep up
all Jewish Ceremonies, and observe the whole Mosaical Law, to which
Circumcision did oblige them.

But observe it, the use of Circumcision as instituted by God, was not to bind
them to Legally perfect, and sinless Obedience; nor did Abraham, or any
faithful Jew so understand it. So indeed it would have been no privilege at
all; Romans 3.1.
so it would have been no happiness or advantage, but a misery; and terror for
them to have been taken into Covenant with God by Circumcision. But though
compared with the more easy Institutions of the Gospel, circumcision was a
Yoke, binding them to that more burdensome way of Service, which God at that
time had appointed; yet comparing their estate then, with that of the Heathen,
circumcision was an Honorable Badge of them, whom God owned as his peculiar
people. And though as Circumcision had relation to their political Law, it
bound them to the strict Observation of those Statutes, Judgments and
Ordinances, which God had given them in special: Yet as it had relation to the
covenant made with Abraham, and his Seed, which was still on foot, it only
bound them to serve and obey God in sincerity and truth, in what he then
revealed to be his Will; and so much is (no doubt) required of every one in the
Covenant of Grace. Again,

3. That covenant which holds forth Salvation to Fallen man, cannot be the
covenant of works, but the covenant of Grace. But the covenant made with the
Jews, held forth Salvation to them, John 4.22. Salvation is of the Jews: So it
was while they were in covenant. And upon this account the land of Judah might
be called Emphatically, The Land of the Living. Theirs was the Land of the
Living, and the Valley of Vision: Whereas other People fat in Darkness, and in
the Region and sha^ow of Death, Psalm. 132.16. I will clothe her Priests with
Salvation: Ministerium eorum reddam salutare populo meo: Id quod eis erit
honorificum, non secus ac elegans Vestis. Piscat.
By their Ministration (standing in his council) they might both save
themselves, and others, Jer. 23.22. And they that were aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenant of Promise, are set
forth as having no hope, and without God in the world, Ep. 2.12. Implying, 1.
That the Gentiles had no grounded hope of future Happiness. 2. The Jews ^ad or
might have had such hope. 3. What grounded hope they had of future Happiness,
it depended, or was built and bottomed on the Covenant, then on foot. Called
Covenants, being diverse times renewed, though otherwise for substance, it was
but one. So again, Romans 9.4. Vna fuit promissio, si rem ipsam spectes, Beza.
sed saepius sancita. It was at several times renewed, and though the Matter
and substance of it was the same, yet it was delivered in sundry forms in
various Expressions. Or if by [Covenants] we understand, Et foedus gratiae
communis, and faedus peculiaritatis: Both the general covenant which God makes
with all his People, chiefly about their Eternal Happiness; and that special
covenant made with the People of the Jews, about their prosperity in Canaan,
the Land of Promise; the latter was but an Appendix, not a thing opposite to
the former.

Now if Salvation was of the Jews (as is already proved) it undeniably follows,
that the Covenant of Grace was made with the Jews, as well as with us
Christians. Surely, none that consider what they say, will dare to affirm that
they might have Salvation, though under a Covenant of Works, and not of Grace.
And as the way of Salvation was always one and the same, to wit, through a
Mediator; so the covenant of Grace in all Ages for substance, was one and the
same. Jesus Christ, the same yesterday and to day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8.

Here (by the way) observe, how grossly they are mistaken, that hold, the Jews
had only Temporal promises. A bold-fac'd Assertion, contrary to plain
Scripture. If the Jews had no promises, but only of Temporal things, what shall
we make of that Text, John 5.39. Search the Scriptures, (where certainly our
Savior speaks of the Scriptures of the Old Testament, the Scriptures of the
New Testament (not being then Extant) Search the Scriptures (says he) for in
them ye think ye have Eternal Life; and they are they that testify of me. And
what would they make of that Promise, [I will be their God!] The Psalmist
speaks of it as a far greater Matter to have the Lord for our God, than to
have and enjoy the world, Psalm. 144.15. And the Apostle seems to say, that
God would have been ashamed, to be called, Their God in so low a sense; as
including merely some outward Temporal privileges, and Enjoyments, and no
more, Heb. 11.16. This would have been little for his Honor: This would not
have been to promise, or give like himself, like a God. Those words spoken to
Moses [I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob,]
prove them not only in being still, but in a state of happiness. And so the
Import of the Phrase, Rev. 21.7. He that overcomes shall Inherit all things,
and I will be his God. And certainly, the blessings of an earthly Canaan were
not all, that God promised under the Old Testament; but Canaan it self was to
them a Type of a better Country, that is an Heavenly. And if the Doctrine of
future Happiness after this Life, was not sufficiently Revealed unto, and
commonly apprehended, and known among the Jews, one would wonder how such an
one, as that Thief on the Cross, should be acquainted with it, who prayed,
Lord, remember me, when thou come into thy Kingdom.

4. That Covenant, which had the Spirit and Grace of God attending the
Administration of it, was undoubtedly a Covenant of Grace. But the covenant
made with the Jews, had the Spirit and Grace of God so attending it. The Spirit
was promised, and Exhibited then, though not in so large a measure, as under
the Gospel, Hag. 2.5. According to the word that I covenanted with you, when ye
came out of Egypt, so my Spirit remains among you, Mich. 2.7. Is the Spirit
of the Lord straightened? Are these his doings? Do not my words do good to him
that walks uprightly? Those high Encomia given to the Law, Psalm. 19.7, 8, 9.
The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: The Statutes of the Lord
are right, rejoicing the heart: The commandment of the Lord is pure,
enlightening the eyes, agree to it only, as the Spirit does accompany it.

There was the same Spirit of Faith given out under the Old Testament, though
not the same measure of Faith. And it was a Prayer, which a Saint under the Old
Testament put up, Psalm. 143.10. Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God,
thy Spirit is good: Lead me (i. e. by thy Spirit) into the Land of Vprightness.
And there was the same Love to God, to his Word and Worship, to his Saints and
Servants in the faithful of Old, as is in Believers, under the Gospel. And they
obeyed from the same gracious Principle, as is evident from Heb. 11.

5. The Jewish Sacraments did represent and signify the same thing, as
Gospel-Sacraments do; from whence it would seem to follow, that the Covenant
made with them is for substance, the same with that which Christians are under.
Methinks it is plain, that the Apostle makes Circumcision and Baptism, the same
in signification, Col. 2.11, 12. and 1 Cor. 10.3, 4. They did all eat the same
spiritual Meat, and they did all drink the same spiritual Drink: For they drank
of that spiritual Rock, that followed them, and that Rock was Christ. Would any
one imagine, that Christ should be held forth Represented, or Typified, in
Sacraments relating to the Covenant of Works? That their Sacraments did Typifie
Christ to come, and ours do set him forth as already come; will not prove two
Covenants Essentially different, but only two different Administrations of the
Covenant. As it will not prove two Christ's, one that was then to come, and
another that is since come. Surely, there is but one Christ, though thus
variously set forth and discovered.

6. That Covenant which was capable of being renewed, after it was broken, must
needs be a Covenant of Grace, and not of Works. But the covenant made with the
Israelites, was capable of renewing. The covenant of Works being once broken,
is irreparably broken, because it requires absolute, perfect Obedience. But
the People of Israel were often called to renew their covenant with God, which
shows it was a Covenant of Grace. Moses, Nehemiah, etc. who truly feared God,
and full well knew their own and others weakness, and utter inability to
perform sinless Obedience, would never have been so forward to engage
themselves, and others in a covenant of Works; which was impossible for them to
keep, whereby they could expect nothing but a curse.

The covenant of Works admits not of Repentance, promises not Remission
thereupon: But there was place for Repentance, and a promise of Pardon and
Forgiveness in that covenant made with the Israelites, Lev. 26.40, 42. Deuteronomy.
4.30, 31.

There was a way appointed under the Old Testament for the Expiation of sin.
The Sacrifices under the Law were Types of Christ, and to signify our
obtaining Remission by his Blood. Does the covenant of works admit of
Sacrifices for sin? What a veil is over their eyes, in reading the Old
Testament, that make it a covenant of works, when the great thing pointed at by
its Types and Ceremonies, is Christ, and Redemption by him! Will any say, the
covenant of works, was Typical of the covenant of Grace?

7. That Covenant which had the same condition with the Gospel Covenant, viz.
Sincere Obedience to Gods Commands; is for substance the same covenant, that
is, a Covenant of Grace. But the covenant made with the Jews. had this same
condition. The covenant of works would not take up with Sincere Obedience, but
strictly requires, and exacteth Perfect Obedience.

But as God in his Covenant with Abraham, required his walking uprightly. So
this was the thing required of Israel, Deuteronomy. 10.12. And now Israel, what does
the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul? Where the phrase [To serve him with all the
heart, and with all the soul] is to be understood, by comparing it with other
Texts, where the like phrase is used. As Deuteronomy. 30.6. Where God promises to
circumcise their heart, to love him with all their heart, and with all their
soul. And 1 Kings 14.8. Where it is said of David, that he followed the Lord
with all his heart And the like of Josiah, 2 Kings 23.25. Not tha^ they did all
that God in his Law required of them: But God in the Covenant made with them,
did accept of their sincere and hearty Service, and Obedience, though it was
Imperfect; which the Covenant of Works would not admit of.

Phrasis illa [ex toto Corde] in multis locis Scripturae apponitur hypocrisi,
Chemnit. Loc. Com. de Lege Dei. p. 9. Col. 2.
and externi simulationi, manifestum est [toto corde] seu perfecto cord,
opponi duplici cordi. This of loving God with all the heart, and soul, and
strength, Truman against some prevailing Opinions. p. 92.93, 94.
must be considered either strictly, -- and so it requires the utmost of a man's
Natural ability; so that if he fails in the least degree of this, he fails so
much of love due to God by the Law, and is under its Curse. In this strict
sense, no mere man in this Life, not Josiah himself, ever loved God with his
whole heart, so highly as he ought. 2. These words may be considered as the
condition of the Remedying Law, as taken with Gospel-lenity, as if they love
God with the prevailing bent of their souls, or above all things, etc.

So that when you read, Lev. 18.5. Ye shall keep my Statutes, and my Judgments,
which if a man do, be shall live in them. (As in Neh. 9.29. and Ezekiel. 20.11.)
You are not therefore to conclude, that this was a covenant of Works. Though it
run in such a form, and though it is true; the carnal Jews with their
Pharisaical Teachers, turned it into a covenant of Works. [Do this and live,]
if you understand it, speaking of a Legal exactness, a perfect fulfilling of
the Law; if you take it as a ^romise of Life, only upon condition of perfect
unsinning Obedience. So (its true) it is the plain Voice of the Covenant of
Works. But as the Lord spoke thus to the People of Israel, whom of his mere
Grace, and Favor he had taken into Covenant with him; the words are rather to
be taken in a Gospel-sence, as requiring sincere Obedience, and promising Life
thereupon. And so the Faithful understood them, Psalm. 51.6. Behold, thou
desire truth in the inward parts, ver. 16, 17. Thou desire not Sacrifice,
the Sacrifices of God are a broken spirit. Psalm. 40.8. I delight to do thy
will, O my God: Yea, thy Law is within my heart. Psalm. 44.17, 18. We have not
dealt falsely in thy Covenant, our heart is not turned back, etc. Yea, it is
most plain, that such a keeping of Gods Commands was meant, as had a promise of
Gods Keeping-mercy unto them, Deuteronomy. 7.12. and of his Shewing-mercy, Exodus 20.6.
Where there is need of Shewing-mercy, that plainly shows, the Obedience
performed not to be exactly Legal, every way perfect. Shewing-mercy here,
seems to intend, at least it concludes, Pardoning-mercy. As it stands in
opposition to Gods visiting Iniquity, ver. 5. But supposing Obedience every way
perfect, there is no room for, no need of such Mercy. Sincere Obedience was no
less accepted under the Old Testament, than under the New, ( Mal. 3.17.) As it
is no less required under the New Testament, than under the Old, Mat. 7.21. Not
every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father whit^ is in Heaven. Romans 2.7. To
them who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for Glory, Honor and
Immortality, Eternal life, ver. 13. For no^ the Hearers of the Law are just
before God, but the Doers of the Law shall be justified, and James, 1.25.

And so the Harmony betwixt the Old Testament, and the New; betwixt Moses, the
Prophet, and the Apostle Paul, Deuteronomy. 30.11, 12, 13, 14. with Romans 10.6, 7, 8.
The Obedience of Faith required by both, ( vid. Truman against some prevailing
Opinions, page 35, 36.) As Mr. Ball, Of the Covenant. p. 114.
What word was that which Moses says was near, even in their hearts, But the
Law which the Lord gave upon Mount Sanai, and promised to write in the hearts
of his People under the Covenant of Grace. It should be under the New Covenant
of Grace.

And though some may be ready to Object that of the Apostles, Romans 10.5. For
Moses describes the Righteousness which is of the Law, that the man which does
those things, shall live by them; which would seem to make Lev. 18.5. and other
the like Texts, a Covenant of works, of a contrary Te^our to the
Gospel Covenant. Yet the difficulty is solved, if we attend to what another
has observed. Truman against some prevailing Opinion. p. 36.
It is apparent (says he) that the Law of Moses, though it was given designedly
(as to the end of the Revelation of it) as a Covenant of Grace, and Pardon,
even for the Salvation of sinners; yet it was given (subserviently still to the
same end of Salvation) also to Reveal the Law, in its utmost exacting Rigor.

And elsewhere Paraphrasing upon the place, [for Moses describes the
Righteousness of the Law.] Append. to great Propitiation. p. 59.
That is, these words of Moses taken in the strict Law-sence, as a Law, and in
the sense you understand them, set forth the way you stick too for
Justification. For it is apparent, that those very words (Lev. 18.5.) and the
whole body of the Mosaical Law, were a Covenant of Grace, as they were given
from God by Moses, and understood (or intended by God) and ought to have been
understood by the People: The meaning was, if you endeavor to do all these
sincerely, and lament your falling short, you shall live and be blessed. Though
he would not deny, but freely grant, that the same Mosaical Law, that is,
Materially the same, was also given to Rule them, as a Commonwealth; according
to the Observance, or Transgression whereof, they might look to prosper, or to
be punished in this World.

8. That Covenant whereby the People of Israel came to have a special Interest
in God, and special Privileges above other People, could not be a Covenant of
works, but of Grace. They could have had no Special privilege by a Covenant of
works, wherein naturally all are equally concerned, and which lays sinners
under the Curse, under an Intolerable burden. It Is impossible that sinners
should come to have an Interest in God by the Covenant o^ works. Yet this was
the Jews privilege: The Lord was their God, Genesis 17.8. and Psalm. 144.15. and
33.12. To them pertain the Adoption, Romans 9.4. And they have God nigh to them,
Deuteronomy. 4.7, 8. And had the advantage clear of all others, that were strangers to
the Covenant, Romans 3.1, 2. Had i^ been a Covenant of works, they should only
have had God against them, not with them, or for them what is spoken to them,
Exodus 19.5, 6. is applied to Believers under the New Testament, 1 Pet. 2.9.

What I have added here, (...) to show, that the Covenant made with the Jews,
was not a Covenant of works, is to show some, how grossly Mr. Patient is
mistaken; whose loose Discourse deserves not a large Refutation. Yet as weak as
it is, it has taken with some Friends of mine, whom I cannot but pity. But,
Lay all these things together, and I wonder if you can have any doubt, whether
the Covenant made with them, was a Covenant of Grace, the same for substance
with the Gospel Covenant.

Yet because this is the (...) of the Anabaptists, the grand Mistake, which
they lie under, and which leads them further out of the way; for the further
clearing of the Truth, I shall answer all that I can think of, which may be
Objected.

Object. 1. That the Covenant made with the Jews, was but a
Subservient-Covenant. Not the Covenant of Grace, but subservient to it.

Answ. 1. It could not be Subservient to the first bringing in of the Covenant
of Grace, which was in the world before this. The Covenant of Grace was made
with Adam, immediately upon the Fall, and renewed with Abraham. And how could
the Covenant made with the Jews, be subservient to the being of that, which was
long before it? 2. Granting it was subservient to the Gospel Dispensation of
the Covenant of Grace, and preparatory to it, (as it is Gods usual Method in
the works both of Nature, and Grace, to proceed from that which is less
perfect, to that which is more perfect) yet this will not prove it no Covenant
of Grace, but only that it was not so clear a Dispensation of the Covenant of
Grace, as the Gospel Covenant. 3. It certainly tended to the same end, which
the Gospel aims at; to wit, the Salvation of souls, and had the same effect,
attained this end in the Faithful among the Jews, and therefore certainly was a
Covenant of Grace, the same for substance with the Gospel covenant, and not
merely subservient to it.

Object. 2. It was a mixed Covenant.

Answ. Though one has raised a great dust, about the Covenant made with
Abraham, and his Seed, calling it a Mixt-covenant: Of what Principles was it
mixed? Was it a Mixture of the Covenant of works, and the Covenant of Grace? A
compound of both these? But at other times, they will say these two are
Incompassibilia, things that will not mix, and consist together; you may as
soon mingle Heaven and Earth together. If Justification and Salvation be of
works, then of Debt, and consequently not of Grace: So one of these plainly
excludes, and overthrows the other. That either they must bring it to a
Covenant of works, and not of Grace, or vice versa, to a Covenant of Grace and
not of Works. Or was it a mixed Covenant because it contained Temporal
promises, as well as Spiritual; yet observe, this could not hinder its being a
Covenant of Grace. For, 1. Those Temporal good things promised were Typical of
higher, and better, even of Spiritual things. An earthly Canaan was a Type of
Heaven. And long Life promised to the Obedient, was promised as an earnest to
Eternal Life, And whatever some say and think, this consideration would
commend, and set off those outward Temporal blessings promised to the Faithful;
that they were Types and Pledges of Spiritual and Heavenly things. That they
might say, as David, 2 Samuel 7.19. And this was yet a small thing in thy sight,
O Lord God, but thou have also spoken of thy servants for a great while to
come; have spoken what thou will do for us hereafter, in another world. How
great is thy Goodness which thou have laid up for them, that fear thee, besides
all that Goodness of thine laid out upon them here.

2. The Gospel it self contains promises of Outward, Temporal-blessings, as
well as Spiritual. Christ has promised, Mat. 6, 33. All these things shall be
added, to them that seek the Kingdom of Heaven first. And still that holds good
to the Faithful, [I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, Heb, 13.5, 6.
Godliness not only heretofore had, but still has the promise of the Life that
now is, as well as of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. Now shall we therefore
say, The Gospel is a mixed Covenant, and not a Covenant of Grace.

If it be replied, that in the Covenant made with Abraham, and his Seed, the
Land of Canaan was ^^omised, which is no where promised to Believers (...) the
Gospel.

Answ. If upon this account it must be held, a ^ixt Covenant, in Opposition to
its being a Coveunt of Grace; then that which made it a mixed Co^enant, must be
either that this was a Temporal ^romise, or that it was a promise peculiarly
belong^ng to Abraham and his seed; but neither of these ^ould make it such a
mixed Covenant. Not the former For by this Reason, the Gospel, which promises,
that the meek shall Inherit the Earth, Mat. 5. should be a mixed Covenant. That
the promise of an Earthly Canaan should make such a mixed Covenant, and no other
promise of the Earth, or Earthly blessings do it; is such a groundless Fancy,
as will never be proved while the Earth stands.

Nor the latter. For so the Gospel should be a mixed Covenant too. As the Land
of Canaan was promised in special to Abraham, and his seed; and as it was
promised, that the Messiah should come of his seed: So in the beginning of the
Gospel, there was a special promise of Miracles, to credit, and encourage the
Faith of those, who first believed in Christ, Mark 16.17, 18. These signs shall
follow them that believe. In my Name they shall cast out Devils, they shall
speak with new Tongues, they shall take up Serpents, etc. Which promise
belongs not to us, as those signs are not to be expected now: Must we
therefore say, that was a mixed Covenant made with those Primitive believers,
different from the Covenant of Grace we are under? Surely it is called the
Covenant of Grace, from the main essential promises of Grace, and Salvation: I
say, it has its Denomination from those Grand promises, which God made to his
Church and People in all Ages; and which make it the same Covenant for
substance, notwithstanding a difference, and change in certain accessions and
circumstantials.

So if it alleged, that the Old Testament does more abound with Temporal
promises.

The Answer is ready, Magis and Minus non variant Speciem. More and Less show
different Degrees, not different Kinds. Though the Jews had more of the Earth
promised, and Christians more of the Spirit, this will only prove Christians
under a better dispensation of the Covenant; it will not disprove the Jews
being under a Covenant of Grace, since besides their temporal, they had also
spiritual Promises.

Obj. 3. Had the Covenant made with the Jews been a covenant of Grace, the same
for substance with the Gospel covenant, then Christ should have been the
Mediator of it; but Moses was the Mediator of that Covenant.

Ans. 1. Inasmuch as that Covenant made with the Jews, did admit of a Mediator,
this shows it was not a covenant of works. The covenant of works has no
Mediator.

2. Moses as he was Mediator was a type of Christ, therefore Christ was the
true Mediator, even then as well as now, Heb. 13.8. Jesus Christ the same
yester day, and to day, and for ever. Indeed Christ is called the Mediator of a
better Covenant, Heb. 8.6. Not wholly to exclude him from having to do (...)
the former covenant, but because as the Law came by Moses, and he was made use
of to report it from God to the Israelites, Acts 7.38. (in which respect he is
called a Mediator, Gal. 3.19.) So the better covenant was delivered, the better
dispensation of the covenant was set forth by Christ himself, (as Heb. 1.2.) as
it was fit he should have the Honor of it. But as Remission of sin, and
Recon^liation unto God was attainable under the first covenant, so Christ was
the Mediator then, and not Moses. Indeed, in all Ages Christ was both Prophet,
Priest, and King to his Church; though he was not so clearly revealed in these
his Offices before, as he is to his People under the Gospel.

Obj. 4. The Old Testament was dedicated with the blood of Beasts, not of
Christ, Heb. 9.18, 19.

Answ. The virtue of Christ's blood did certainly extend to the times of the Old
Testament. And was not that Blood, wherewith the first Testament was Dedicated,
Typical of the blood of Christ? Now how absurd is it to talk of a Covenant of
works typical of a Covenant of Grace, (as Mr. Patient, holds it is, who makes
this Objection.) How strange were it, if a Covenant of works should be so
Dedicated, as to represent Christ and his Benefits; which is the soul and
substance of the Covenant of Grace. Indeed, as a Modern writer notes: Mr.
Truman endeavors to Rectify some prevailing Opinions. p. 151.
In the sense wherein it did Typifie things to come, it was neither the strict
Law of work, nor the Law of Grace, or Gospel promising pardon as to Conscience
and future Happiness upon Repentance, and sincere Obedience, but the Jewish
Political Law.

But the Book of the Law in the Temporal sense, Ib. p. 27. Margin. And the like
again, in the Margin, p. 83.
(as it was the Instrument of the Jewish policy,) being sprinkled with blood,
was a pattern of the Law in the Eternal sense, sprinkled with a better
Sacrifice.

Object. But the Covenant which God made with the Jews, and the Covenant made
with Believers under the Gospel, are spoken of as two Covenants; one called the
First, and the old Covenant; the other the New; and the second Covenant one
said to have been faulty, the other called a better Covenant, Heb. 8.6, 7.

Answ. 1. The terms Old, and New, First, and Second, will not prove them
essentially Different, or different Kinds of Covenants; (nor were they, unless
we restrain the Covenant made with the Jews, to that part of it, which was
merely political) but only various Dispensations of one and the same Covenant.
In Deuteronomy. 29.1. We read of a Covenant made with the Israelites, besides the
Covenant made with them in Horeb; not that these were two Covenants
specifically different (as some have very groundlesly supposed) but the same
Covenant renewed.

The Gospel Covenant is called a new Covenant; not but that the Covenant made
with the Jews of old, was the same for substance, as otherwise Salvation had
not been of the Jews: But because though these were the same for substance, yet
they were diverse in respect of Administration. Faedus novum non substantia,
sed forma.
So a man is said to take a new lease, or to enter into a new Bond, when the
Former and the Latter are the same for substance. The same Law of Love is
called both an Old and a New Commandment. That which is called the new
Covenant, Spark. Mist. of Godliness. p. 64.
is not (as one says) a Covenant upon new conditions, but a New condition of
the old Covenant. Or as another, Statham Reviler rebuked. p. 91.
that which the Scripture expressly calls the Old Testament, or Covenant, Heb.
8.20. was but the old Administration of the Covenant of Grace, the old Copy of
Christ's will: That which it calls the new Covenant, is the old for substance,
though new for the Administration, the new Copy of Christ's will.

2. When the first Covenant is supposed by the ensuing Alteration, not to have
been faultless; the plain meaning seems to be, that it was a less perfect
Dispensation, than that in Gospel Times, not so clear, not so powerful, etc.
The Old Testament-dispensation was but as a first draught. We have the lively
Representation of those things in the Gospel, which were more darkly shadowed
out before, Heb. 10.1. The Old Testament was as a preface, or Introduction to
the New.

Or else the Apostle calls that the first Covenant, which the Jews then took
to be the Covenant; to wit, the mere External part of it under the former
Dispensation, which was but as the Shell or Husk; which yet the carnal Jews
were most taken with, rejecting the Kernel.

3. The Gospel Covenant is called a better Covenant, established upon better
promises; because a better Dispensation of the Covenant, where there are
clearer promises of Spiritual blessings, and which is fuller of such promises.
Spiritual promises were more sparingly set down in the old Covenant. As was
hinted before, it was most congruous, that Christ the Mediator of the Covenant,
should have the honor of bringing in the best dispensation of it. That the
best Dispensation of the Covenant was deferred, till the Mediators coming in
Person.

Or else the Gospel Covenant is called a better Covenant, comparing it with the
covenant made with the Jews, only so far as it was political, and a peculiar
dispensation given to them, which the far greater part of them sinfully severed
and divided from the Covenant of Grace, and stuck to, in opposition to the
Gospel; which was an higher, and a better Dispensation of the Covenant of Grace.

Object. 6. One whom I mentioned a little before, Objecteth, Ezekiel. 16.59, 60,
61, 62. where God opposes, Their Covenant to His Covenant. Thy Covenant, ver.
61. and My Covenant, ver. 62. Who would hence draw this wide and wild
conclusion, that the Covenant made with the Jews, which God there calls thy
Covenant, was a Covenant of Works, quite opposite to that which He calls [My
Covenant] that is, the Covenant of Grace.

Answ. But may we not think, that they are put to their shifts, that are forced
to such Allegations, as have nothing like a Proof, or Argument. And take Notice
of ver. 60. there you may see, how well this place agrees to their purpose,
Nevertheless, I will remember my Covenant (made) with thee in the days of thy
youth, etc.] The Covenant made with the Jews, God calls, My Covenant, (as
Jer. 31.32.) And promises to remember it. Dixerat Paulo ante, [memor ero
foederis mei,] jam dicit, [Non ex foedere tuo.] Conciliat igitur quae contraria
videbantur, ostendit faedus illud irritum and abolitum esse ex part populi,
firmum autem ex part Dei, qui eorum superavit malitiam, and faedus suum erga
ipsos iterum erexit. Calo. in pol. Synops.
And was it a Covenant of works, that he would remember? Surely, such a
Covenant would have made nothing for them, but against them.

Rather as Oecolompadius notes, Habes hic locum memorabilem de duplici faedere,
etc. Here you have a memorable place concerning a twofold Covenant; one with
Israel alone, the other with all Nations. And there is this difference betwixt
the New and Old Testament; that one was more obscure, and communicated but to a
few, the other is more clear, and spread abroad, Propagated in the whole world.
So he, or else, as Dr. Lightfoot somewhere, Fall of Jerusalem ( in Har. on the
New Test.) p. 154. the 12.
God made a twofold Covenant with their Fathers, viz. The Covenant of Grace,
and the Covenant of Peculiarity. And the latter (N. B.) was but a manner of the
Administration of the former. The covenant of Grace was made with Adam, and
belongs to all the Seed of Christ, before the Law, under it, and after it, Jews
and Gentiles. Now the Economy of Moses was such an Administration of this
covenant of Grace. as made Israel a peculiar People.

And may not this teach us how to understand ver. 61. [I will give them unto
thee for Daughters, but not by thy Covenant.] That [thy Covenant] here, should
rather be explained by this covenant of Peculiarity, a certain Mode of the
covenant of Grace, as at that t^me dispensed; than by the covenant of Works.

Object. 7. It is further Objected from Jer. 31.31, 32, 33, 34. If that new
Covenant which God there promises to make with them, be a covenant of Grace,
then the former Covenant was not. And so they must needs differ in Kind and
Substance.

Answ. Blake vind. Foed. p. 216.
As a Learned man observes, that Text has been very much vexed, and wrested,
several Parties would writh it to their several Opinions, and press it to serve
several purposes. As the Antinomian would hence prove the covenant of Grace, to
be absolute without condition, God promising to put his Law in their hearts.
The Familists hence cry down the Ministry, and Gospel Ordinances; because it is
said, they shall Teach no more, every man his Neighbor, and every man his
Brother. (But these plainly contradict themselves; and while they insist on the
bare Letter of the Text, which if it be against Teaching by Man, it is more
against Brother teaching Brother, and Neighbor teaching Neighbor; (which is a
thing they allow and practice) than against the Teaching of men in Office; of
which the Text says nothing.) Others again urge this Text to prove, that only
the regenerate are in covenant, and have a right to Church Priviledges, and
Ordinances. To all which I may add one sort more: The Anabaptists, that hence
conclude, the Covenant made with the Jews, was not a covenant of Grace, and of
Salvation; but a Covenant of Outward and Temporal Privileges, or as the more
Ignorant sort of them, a covenant of Works. And so Mr. Patient will have it.
But, 1. If that Covenant made formerly with the Jews was a covenant of Works,
not of Grace, then God was Married unto them by a covenant of Works: As ver.
32. he says, He was an Husband unto them. But it is not to be imagined, that
God should be Married unto sinners, by a covenant of Works. 2. That which is
here called a New covenant, means only a New dispensation of the Covenant,
which should be at the Messiahs coming in Gospel Times. Called New, for the
great change there should be for the better in manner of Administration, in
which respect it might seem to be a New covenant indeed. 3. The truth of this
second particular will appear, if we consider what this New covenant is: [ I
will put my Law in their inward parts: etc.] which is spoken comparate, non
absolute. Not as if God had not done this for them before in some measure; but
that he would do it in a further measure: [I will put my Law in their inwards
parts.] This God had done for some of them before, as he had promised this
before, Deuteronomy. 30.6. There was some among them that could say as the Psalmist,
Psalm. 40.8. I delight to do thy will, O my God; yea, thy Law is within my
heart. But that Grace which was more rare under the Old Testament, is promised
to be extended to more, more plentifully, diffused under the New. And this is
the meaning of [I will make a New covenant -- not according to the Covenant
that I made with their Fathers.]

Object. 8. That Covenant made with the Israelites, they are said to have
broken, Jer. 31.32. Ezekiel. 16.59. But it is impossible, that the New covenant
lying wholly on Gods part, should be broken.

Answ. This supposes what is not to be supposed, that the Covenant of Grace
lies wholly on Gods part, and nothing is required of man therein. But I have
undeniably proved before, that the Covenant of Grace has Conditions,
conditions not required of God, but of men: As it is not required of God, but of
man to Believe, Repent, Obey, sincerely. And if any of us do not come up to
these Terms, and Duties, whereunto we stand bound, we are guilty of breach of
covenant. If God and Man be not mutually engaged; if all lies wholly on Gods
part, and Man is to do nothing, then it is an absolute Promise, not a Covenant.

Dr. Of Attrib. 2^ part. p. 87.
Preston indeed speaks of a double Covenant, which cannot be broken, where God
engages to work the condition in some, but that is restrained to the Elect.
Others reduce it to that which is called the Covenant of Redemption, betwixt
God and Christ. But the Covenant properly with Man, that covenant, according to
the terms and tenor whereof, we are to look for Remission and Salvation, is
conditional; and in the tenders of it, common both to Elect and Reprobate. And
as for all those that profess to own, and embrace the covenant, and yet come
not up to the terms of it, they are guilty of breach of Covenant with God; and
continuing such, shall be judged and condemned as covenant-breakers. Where the
condition of the covenant ought to be performed, and is not, there (it is
manifest) the covenant is broken.

Yea, I do not question but Believers themselves are generally to be humbled
for this sin, that they have broken covenant with God. They may have been
guilty of breaking covenant with him for a time, who yet do not finally break
covenant with him.

Further, I would ask one that is of Mr. P's persuasion here (whether
Anabaptist, or other) whether all in their societies be not persons entered into
Covenant? And next, whether there be no Hypocrites in their societies? And
then, whether any Hypocrite, while an hypocrite, keeps Covenant.

Certainly the Covenant that Christian Churches are taken into, which is sealed
in Baptism, may be broken, and is broken by some, if there are any Hypocrites
within the visible Church, that is, if the visible and invisible Church be not
all one. It is as little to be doubted, that there are persons in covenant, who
yet break it, and shall be judged as Violators of it; as that there are
branches in Christ that bear not Fruit, and therefore shall be cut off, and
taken away, Joh. 15.2.

Therefore they must search out some other meaning of these words, Jer. 31.32.
Which my Covenant they brake. And not make this a Note of Difference betwixt
the Covenant made with the Jews, and the Gospel Covenant, that the former might
be broken, not the latter. As to the Elect it is true, they do not totally and
finally break Covenant; and that Grace enabling to keep the Covenant, is given
out to a far greater Number than before; but we cannot say simply and
absolutely, that the Gospelcovenant is never broken.

Obj. 9. The Covenant of Grace never cease, it is the everlasting Covenant,
but the Covenant made with the Jews is vanished, Heb. 8.13. Now what is
vanished away, cannot be the same with that which is to remain.

Ans. 1. As Tena, Novum Testamentum non tam abolitio, quam impletio prioris.
The New Testament is not so much an abolishing, as a fulfilling of the Old. 2.
Where the Apostle speaks of the Old Covenant, as that which was to vanish away,
we are to understand it of that part of the covenant which was peculiar and
proper to that Dispensation. The Ceremonial-Law given to the Jews, is vanished
Circumcision is vanished, yet the Covenant of Grace, made with Abraham, (to
which Circumcision then did appertain,) remains still the same for substance,
which Believers are taken into. The Judicial Law which was given to the Jews,
is vanished, so far as it did peculiarly respect their Commonwealth: but not
the Moral Law, I hope, which the Lord has promised to write in the hearts of
his People. Do we make void the Law through Faith? God forbid (says the
Apostle) yea, we establish the Law, Romans 6.31. Neither are all Old Testament
Promises vanished, 2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these Promises, (dearly
beloved) let us cleanse our selves -- These Promises: what Promises? why, those
before mentioned, chap. 6.16. which you will find, Lev. 26.12. I will walk
among you, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people.

Obj. 10. If the covenant made with the Israelites, and the Gospel covenant, be
one and the same for substance, how comes it to pass, that the Apostle so often
opposes these two Covenants, as Gal. 4.24. etc. why does he make the Law and
Gospel, and works of the Law and Faith Opposites?

Ans. That late writer, whom I had occasion to make use of before, (in the
Answer to the fourth Objection) distinguishes of the Law given by Moses, thus
(though not in these very words, yet to this sense) to wit, Mr. T. Endeavor to
rectify, etc. p. 23. to 37.
That it is to be considered, either as respecting the Jewish Commonwealth, or
as respecting Conscience; either in a Political or in a Spiritual sense. 1. As
respecting the Jews commonwealth, so this was the Law of the Land, by which
they were all to be governed, as a Commonwealth. And this Law was twofold, to
wit, 1. The strict Original Law, exacting Obedience to all Gods commands,
whether Moral, Judicial, or Ceremonial, upon pain of death; so a violent
temporal Death was due to every one that failed in observing any external
Precept of the Law. 2. The Remedying Law answering to it, which appointed a
Sacrifice to be offered in most cases, upon which the Offender and Transgressor
was discharged from the aforesaid temporal Death threatened.

2. The same Law (that is, materially the same) is also to be considered, as
respecting conscience. And here we are to take notice likewise, 1. The Original
Law here was so wonderfully strict, and dreadfully severe, that it threatened an
eternal curse, everlasting death, to any the least transgression whatsoever. As
it had to do with Conscience, it threatened Death Eternal to every Sin, even to
inward secret sins, in heart or thought; such things as it did not take notice
of, or threaten with a violent temporal Death, as it was their Commonwealth
Law. 2. The Remedying Law answering to it, and given with it, which was to this
purpose, that notwithstanding they were, all of them, many ways guilty of the
breach of Gods most holy Law, and so obnoxious to the curse; yet such was his
Grace, that upon their sincere Repentance, and real and hearty Endeavors to
obey God in all things, their sins should be pardoned, and their Souls saved.

Now taking the Law in this last sense, as it held forth pardon and salvation
to sinners upon their hearty return to God, and sincere Obedience, so there is
no Opposition betwixt this Remedying Law, and the Gospel. The Apostle speaking
of it, calls it the word of Faith, the same which we preach, Romans 10.8. So it
was the Salvation of the Jews, Joh. 4.22. the means of salvation to those that
were saved.

As it was their commonwealth Law, it typified higher things. First, in that
it threatened every transgression with Death, it showed the wonderful
strictness of Gods Law, as in an higher sense, threatening eternal Death to
every sin. Again, as there was a Remedying Law, given with it, appointing in
most cases, a Beast to be slain, to prevent the Death of the Offender, it was a
typical Gospel, shadowing out the Reconciliation of sinners by a more excellent
Sacrifice.

Again, there is another distinction I would have you take notice of, to wit,
that we must distinguish betwixt the Law, as it was given by God, and as it was
mistaken and perverted by many of the Jews.

Now as the Law was given by God, we may be sure, as Mr. Allen has well noted,
It was not to cross, or confront the Promise, Discourse of the two Covenants,
p. 55.
or Gods design in it, but to be subservient to it. Gal. 3.21. Is the Law then
against the Promises? God forbid. For it is not to be thought that God would
prevaricate in his Design. So that when he had once made a new Law of Grace,
for the saving of Fallen man, he would yet afterward give any Law, but what
should one way or other subserve to the same end, if men do not deprive
themselves of the intended Benefit, by perverting it. And therefore to be sure,
God did not intend to revive the Old covenant of works made with Adam in
Paradise.

Now to apply these things to our present purpose, when the Apostle makes an
opposition betwixt the Old Testament and the New; the Law and the Gospel; the
works of the Law, and Faith; we are either to understand him, as speaking of
the Law, so far as it was political, concerning the Jews Commonwealth: Thus
indeed it made nothing perfect, it was but a shadow, and was to give place and
vanish, the Substance being come: Or else he speaks of the Law in a strict
sense, abstracted from those gracious Promises that were given with it to the
Jews. And thus it was a copy of the Law of works, requiring absolute perfect
Obedience.

Thus it was opposite to the Gospel, as the Jews severed it from, and set it up
against the Doctrine of Gods Grace; and so it gendred to bondage, Gal. 4.24.
and was the Ministration of Death and condemnation, 2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 9. So there
was no being justified by the Law; or if men could have been justified by it,
they had not been justified by Grace, there had been nothing of Pardon in it.

But otherwise the Apostle makes the Doctrine of the Old Testament all one with
the Doctrine he preached, as we heard before.

And if at any other time he uses any derogating expressions, when he is
speaking of it, we must understand them as spoken comparatively, that is,
comparing that darker and more burdensome administration, with this clearer and
more comfortable dispensation of the Covenant of Grace under the Gospel.

Quest. If you ask, how could the Law given to the Jews be considered both as a
Law of works, requiring perfect Obedience, and also as a Remedying Law, taking
up with sincere Obedience?

Ans. Had the strict Original Law been given to them intentionally to bind them
up to it, to expect Life and Happiness, only upon those high terms of doing
all things therein contained, and obeying perfectly; then had it been plainly
exclusive of a remedying Law: But it was not given thus, but the very intention
of publishing the strictness and severity of the Law of works (which all men
naturally are under) was to commend and set forth the Graciousness of the
Remedying Law, to make it more welcome and acceptable. How gladly and
thankfully ought they to have submitted to that Law of Grace, which held forth
pardon and acceptance with God, upon their believing in him, and obeying
sincerely, of whom God might (in Justice) have required nothing less than
perfect, sinless Obedience.

And therefore it was a most horrible perverting of the Law, when the
Pharisees, and other selfjusticiaries, expected Righteousness, and Life from
the Law, in their sense, and in opposition to the Gospel, For, 1. As it was the
Law of the Land, as it respected their Commonwealth, so (it is true) it was
possible for them to keep the Law, Phil. 3.6. They might not be guilty of any
such external breach of the Law, as legally deserved a violent temporal death,
and such as could not be expiated by Sacrifice, but all this could not justify
them before God. As it was their Commonwealth Law, it was never given for that
end; but to keep them in order, and to shadow out greater and higher things.

2. As it held forth the strict Law of works, requiring perfect sinless
Obedience, so they could not possibly keep it, to be justified by it; but were
all transgressors of the Law, and so condemned by it; which should have moved
them to embrace, and submit to it in a Gospel-sence. And in keeping the Law
sincerely, heartily bewailing the sinful defects in their Obedience, and
having recourse to the free grace and mercy of God for pardon, they might have
found acceptance, and an exceeding great reward.

Obj. 11. If the old Covenant was a Covenant of Grace, then why are the Jews
said to have been in bondage under it? why is the Spirit of Adoption restrained
to the time of the New Testament, if the former was the same Covenant of Grace,
(for substance) with the latter.

Ans. 1. One way how the former Covenant gendred unto bondage, was hinted
before; to wit, carnal Jews, (men of base, servile Spirits) did misinterpret,
and misapply it. 2. The faithful under that dispensation might in another
respect be said to be in bondage, Gal. 4.1, 2, 3. As they were under a more
burdensome way of Worship, than Believers under the Gospel. As they had not so
much liberty, nor so much of a Spirit of Adoption, as the faithful have under
the Gospel. As some, The Church at that time was as an Heir in its minority.
Ball of the Covenant, p. 27.
As an heir it was free, Statham, Reviler rebuked. p. 93. Ball, p. 35.
but as an Infant, or in its minority, it was but as a Servant, under Tutors,
and Governors. As Heirs, the faithful then had the Spirit of Adoption and
Liberty,, but mixed and tempered with this Spirit of Servitude, as they were
Infants, or children under the yoke.

Obj. 12. You will not deny but the Covenant made with the Israelites, may be
considered as Political, and why might it not be only or merely political?

Ans. The highest, most noble, and primary end of the Law given to Israel, and
the Covenant made with them, seems to be to direct, and engage them in the way
to Life and Happiness. That it was but a secondary, and less principal use, or
end of it, to govern them, as a Theocracy, or holy Commonwealth.

1. As the Covenants, and giving of the Law are set down among the Jews
Privileges, Romans 9.4. Psalm. 147.19, 20. yet the giving of the Law was tothing
near so great a Privilege, taken in the temporal sense, (respecting their
Commonwealth; as it was in that higher Notion, and consideration,) as it was
to convert the Soul, and to direct in the way to true and eternal Happiness.

2. I should think, that the Israelites covenanting with God, did oblige them
to keep his Law, not only as it was the Commonwealth Law, and for fear of
temporal punishment, and in hope of a present temporal Reward, but from a
filial fear, and love of God, in sincerity and truth, the thing required in the
Covenant of Grace, sc. Deuteronomy. 5.29. and 10, 12, 13. Heart-obedience was required
in that Covenant made with the Jews.

3. That Covenant made with the Israelites contained Spiritual, as well as
Temporal Promises. Compare Exodus 19, 5, 6. with 1 Pet. 2.9. and Lev. 26.3, 11,
12. with 2 Cor. 6.16. So also Deuteronomy. 29.12, 13. Jer. 11.4. But this was proved
before, that the Covenant made with the Israelites was a Covenant of Grace, the
same for substance with the Gospel Covenant; therefore not merely political.

Now this point having been sufficiently cleared, That the Covenant of Grace is
one and the same for substance, under the Old and New Testament; it may be of
good use.

Use 1. This shows us how the Church is One. There is one catholic Church,
consisting of diverse parts, Cant. 6.9. My Dove, my Undefiled is but one. There
is one Body, as one Spirit, one hope of our calling, one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, Ephesians. 4.4, 5. One Church-catholick, constituted by one Grand Charter,
or Covenant of Grace, (though it is true, the Church of the Jews had a special
clause in their Grant and Charter concerning them as a Commonwealth, which is
not in the Christians charter.) So the Ordinances and Privileges of the Church
are given and granted by this Charter, to the whole Church primarily, and to
particular Churches consequently and secondarily, as parts of it.

And methinks it is very rational, what some have offered, that it is
occasional, and accidental to the Universal Church, Dr. Stillingfleet. Mr.
Hudson.
that there are particular distinct Congregations, in regard of the multitude
and distance of Church Members; for could we conceive, that all the Members of
the whole Church could meet together, to partake of the same Numerical
Ordinances orderly and to Edification, then the reason for their meeting in
several places should cease. David would praise God in the great Congregation,
among much People. And the more public the Assembly is (Caeteris paribus)
other things being alike, the more solemn the Worship is, the more for Gods
Glory, and his Peoples benefits, quickening, and comfort. (Though it is true,
sometimes Gods People have not had the Liberty to meet openly, when the Church
was to be sought: Non in tectis, and exteriori pompa, sed potius in carceribus,
Hillary.
and speluncis.

Some good men I know will not admit there is such a thing, as an Universal
visible Church, for fear of bringing in the Pope, or an Universal visible Head
of the Church, though this no way follows upon the other. But however Good men
may dissent in such Points here; yet when they meet at last in that General
Assembly, spoken of, Heb. 12.23. There shall be no Dissenters then among them.
In the mean time I would ask, What Church that was to which so many Souls were
added, even Three Thousand in one day? Acts 2.41, 47. See also Chap. 4.4. and
5. and 14. Could it be a particular Congregation?

And what Church that was, wherein God set Apostles, Prophets, etc. 1 Cor.
12.28. Were the Apostles set in particular Churches? Or were they ^ot general
Officers unto, and over the whole Church?

And what Church does Baptism declare, and signify ones admission into? Is it
only a sign of Admission into a particular Church? Suppose a Minister cast
among a company of Heathen, and one, or more converted by him, should not such
be Baptized upon the Profession of the Faith of Christ, though there was no
particular Church constituted there, into whose Fellowship they might be taken?

2. This may serve as an Antidote, against the Error of the Anabaptists, who to
out the children of professing Parents of their Interest in the Covenant, would
fain persuade men, that the Covenant made with the Jews (wherein children were
comprehended with their Parents) was not the same for substance; but quite of
another kind. Now since we have proved the Old and New Covenant, the same
Covenant of Grace for substance; their Foundation is shaken, and so what they
would build upon it, not like to stand. If children were capable of being in
covenant with God, with their Parents heretofore, why not now? Either they must
say, our children are more incapable of a covenant Interest in God, than the
children of the Jews; or that God is less Merciful, bears less respect to the
children of his People now, than he did to the children of the Jews: Both which
are loaded with absurdity. But more of this afterward.

3. This may help to keep up in us a reverent, and high esteem of the
Scriptures of the Old Testament; Wise men would not throw away their old
Evidences. What you have heard, may let you see an Harmony betwixt the Old and
New Testament: Yea, Christians though they are not to keep up Jewish
ceremonies; yet they may make better use of the Ceremonial Law, than the Jews
ordinarily did, who rested in the Letter of the Law, and were taken up with the
outward shadows, not looking to the end of that which is Abolished. We may see
the End, and Scope of the Ceremonial Law more clearly, than the Jews themselves
did, having so fair and plain a Comment upon it in the Gospel: As Prophecies
are best Interpreted by their accomplishment; so Types by the coming of the
Antitype, and comparing them together.

There are some that slight, and reject the Scriptures of the Old Testament.
This they never learnt of Christ, or his Apostles. We find Christ Expounding
Moses and the Prophets to his Disciples even after his Resurrection, Luke
24.27. And are those Scriptures unworthy of a Christians perusal, which Christ
thought not unworthy of his Expositions? The Apostle Paul tells us, Whatsoever
things ^ere written aforetime, were written for our Learning, Romans 15.4. And
all Scripture given by Inspi^^tion of God, is profitable, 2 Timothy 3.16. He
Vindicates his Doctrine, and confirms it from the Scriptures of the Old
Testament, Acts 26.22, 23. And we find the Bereans commended for their
searching those Scriptures, and trying Doctrines by them, Acts 17.11. The
Doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, (as we learn, Ephesians. 2.20.) are one
Foundation of Faith. Christians are there said to be built upon the Foundation
(not Foundations) of the Apostles and Prophets. That to take away the
Scriptures of the Old Testament, is to take away part of the Foundation. We
have a more sure word of Prophecy, (says the Apostle Peter) whereunto ye do
well, that ye take heed, 2 Pet. 1.19.

4. This may further confirm us in the belief of the Gospel. That it is no new
Doctrine, but the Substance of it was held forth of old by Moses, and the
Prophets; upon which account there is less Occasion to suspect the truth of it.
The main Doctrine of the Gospel is non other, than what God has Owned, and
Delivered to his Church of old, Acts 26.22. Antiquity is a thing which many
would pretend to follow. Well, this is the ancient Gosspel: And it is proved to
be of God; as by the Miracles wrought to confirm it, with other Arguments; so
by the writings of Moses and the Prophets, John 5.46. Acts 3.24. It has double
confirmation. We have old Evidences to show for it, to make it good. As God
spoke by the Mouth of his holy Prophets, which have been since the world began,
Luke 1.70.

5. Hence we may see cause to admire Gods gracious dealing with us, under the
Gospel Dispensation of the Covenant. The Jews were highly Favored, in being
taken into that Covenant God made with them; though it was a darker
Dispensation of the Covenant of Grace. Now God has done more for us, than he
did for that his antiently-beloved People, taking us into the same Covenant for
substance, (it is true, but) in a clearer, a better Dispensation of it. Many
Kings and Prophets, and Righteous men among them, desired to see the things
which we see, yet did not see them. The Jews heretofore were privileged above
any Nation in the world; yet we are privileged above them: we that live in
Gospel Times, we have the Covenant of Grace, in the last and best Edition of it.

6. This shows what ground Christians have to apply Old Testament Promises,
such as are of a common concern: as the Apostle Peter tells them, they should
be no loosers by submitting to the Gospel, Acts 2.38, 39. Repent and be
Baptized. -- For the Promise is to you, and to your children; and (not only to
you Jews, by Birth or Profession, but) to all that are afar off, even as many
as the Lord our God shall call. What ever promises are included in that [I
will be their God;] and belong unto it, to make it good, the Covenant being the
same for substance in both Testaments; such promises, though found in the Old
Testament do also belong to the Faithful under the New. See an Instance, Heb.
13.5. Be content with such as you have: For he has said, I will never leave
thee, nor forsake thee. Where has he said this? See Josh. 1.5. of Deuteronomy. 31.8.
So the like Instance you have, Heb. 13.6. So that we may boldly say, The Lord
is my Helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto me, Upon what ground
may we say thus? Why ^n as much as the Psalmist could say thus, Psalm. 118.6.
We who have an Interest in God, as well ^s he, may say the like.

Sect. 15. PROP. XV. There is a twofold manner of being in Covenant with God,
viz. A being only Externally in Covenant, and a being also Internally in
Covenant with him.
IGnorance of, or not attending to this Distinction, is a cause of very gross
Mistakes; as may be seen in that Pitiful, Loose Discourse of Mr. Patients, and
others.

Some Distinguish betwixt an Outward, and an Inward Covenant; but that seems
to be attended with great Inconveniences. Neither may we think, that God has
made with Men a Covenant, which contains only outward Privileges, upon the
condition of an outward visible Profession; that he has made any such
Covenant, distinct from that which is called the Inward Covenant, that holds
forth Pardon, Justification, and Salvation, upon Souls return to God, and
hearty acceptance of Jesus Christ. One that sometime uses this distinction,
Blakes Covenant sealed. p. 125.
yet expresses his meaning thus The Covenant is but one and the same, but all
are not in the Covenant after one and the same manner. Some ar^ only in it by
outward Profession, to the present participation of outward Privileges; but
some by cordial acceptance, to the enjoyment of savin^ Benefits. Therefore it
is much safer and cleare^ to distinguish of the manner of men's being in
Covenant, which is different; as some are only outwardly in Covenant, others
also inwardly. Then to distinguish of the Covenant as either outward, or
inward. As Mr. Ball, Of the Covenant, p. 24. where you may see more to this
purpose. As also, p. 202, 203.
Externally this Covenant is made with every Member of the Church, -- but
Savingly, Effectually, and Special manner it is made only with them, who are
partakers of the Benefits promised.

They that are only Externally in Covenant, barely enter into Covenant, and do
not stand to, or continue in it, Heb. 8.9. They continued not in my Covenant,
and I regarded them not. Which yet (by the way) implies, that the Covenant
before made with the Jews, was a Covenant of Grace; which if they had observed
according to the true Tenor of (...), God would then have accepted them, and
would ^ave had a Gracious regard to them. They that ^re Inwardly in Covenant,
are such as heartily close ^ith Gods Terms, and have his Laws written in their
hearts, and have a right to the Inward, Spi^itual, Saving Benefits; and
Blessings of the Co^enant.

That there are these two ways of being in Covenant with God, is a thing so
plain, as methinks I ^eed not spend many words to prove it.

1. There is a Twofold manner of being in Christ, ^^d therefore a twofold
manner of being in Cove^nt. For all that are in Christ, are in Covenant. ^ow
some are in Christ only Externally, such as ^e to be taken away: Others also
Internally, such shall for ever abide in him. There are Fruitless branches, and
there are Fruit-bearing branches, John 15.2.6.

2. All that are called, are within the Church, and within the Covenant. Now
some are called only Externally, others are also called Effectually: Many more
are called Externally than are chosen ones, called Internally and Effectually,
Mat. 20.16. and 22.14.

3. They that are Sanctified by the Blood of the Covenant, must needs be
supposed in some sense within the Covenant. Now the Apostle supposes of some,
who were Sanctified by the Blood of the Covenant, that they may be guilty of
treading under foot the Son of God, and doing despite to the Spirit of Grace,
Heb. 10.29. Now such as he there speaks of, were never real Saints, never
Internally in Covenant. They were Sanctified: How? Not Internally, but
Externally, in being separated from the world of Heathens, visible Saints;
called out of the World, and devoted to God, and his Service.

4. All that are within the Visible Church, are in Covenant, as Ephesians. 2.12.
Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers to the Covenant of
Promise, were all one; so Vice versa, within the Church, and within the
Covenant. But all within the Visible Church are not Internally in Covenant.
Otherwise you must hold, there are no Hypocrites, no Graceless, Unconverted
persons within the Church. Certainly, we have no ground to think, that all
within the Church of Corinth, or other Churches, we read of in the New
Testament, were true Believers, real Saints. No doubt, with many of them, as of
the Israelites of Old, God was not well pleased. They would be in Heaven before
the time, that look for a Church consisting of ^one but real Saints. I wonder
how or when that Scripture was, or will be fulfilled, [ Isa. 19.25. Blessed be
Egypt my People, and Assyria the work of ^^y Hands, and Israel mine
Inheritance.] If there are not some outwardly in Covenant, and the People of
God by an outward Profession, who yet are ^ot Gods People by a real and hearty
Resignation of of themselves to him. If the Church admit not of some, who are
Christians only outwardly, and the People of God by External profession, then
Egypt, Assyria, Israel; yea, all the Kingdoms of ^e World at some time or
other, have been, or ^^all be, all true Believers, and real Saints, see ^ev.
11.15. For the Scripture cannot be broken, John 10.35. The Word of God cannot
fail.

Object. Romans 9.6, 7, 8. They are not all Israel, which are of Israel. -- These
which are the children of Flesh, these are not the Children of God: (...) the
Children of the Promise are counted for the ^^ed.

Answ. 1. Some urge this against the Children (...) professing Christians,
being in the Covenant. ^ence they conclude, that the Natural Seed, as ^^ch,
has no privilege under the Gospel.

But, 2. If it determines against the Children of ^^lievers being in Covenant,
it determines against ^y being within the Covenant, but such as are the
^^ildren of God by Faith; the Children of the Pro^^se.

3. But indeed, both these are quite besides the ^^e of the place, which is
this: The Apostle be^^g to speak of the Rejection of the Jews, for their open
Rejection of Christ and the Gospel, shows how such a thing might stand with
Gods truth. Though he had promised to be the God of Abraham, and of his Seed;
yet his Seed were either his Natural seed, or his Spiritual seed, or Seed by
Analogy. Such as were merely his Natural seed, might be cast off: They
continued not in my Covenant, and I regarded them not, says the Lord, Heb.
8.9. This we see verified in Ishmael, and Esau: But as for such as were also
his Spiritual seed, Children of the Promise, not only in that larger sense,
Acts 3.25. But in a stricter sense, as here, Romans 8.9. Gods Covenant stood fast
with them. And that Grace which others had offered to them, but wickedly
rejected, these willingly embraced, and were blessed in. Besides that common
Election of the Jewish Nation, whereby they were chosen and separated from
among other Nations; there was also a Special Election of some of them from
among the rest. And these God did not cast away, Romans 11.1, 2, 5. These
obtained that Grace and Mercy, which the rest missed of. So the Apostle
shows, that while the generality of the Jewish Nation for their Infidelity,
were to be Rejected, God would yet continue his Covenant with the Elect among
them; and with the believing Gentiles, the Children of Abraham by Analogy, who
were to be graffed into the like Covenant-state from whence the other were
broken off, Romans 11.17, 19. So the Apostles intent is to deny to the Natural
seed of Abraham, that which was the Privilege of the Spiritual seed only, (not
to deny to the Spiritual seed such Privilege as was even common to the Natural
seed,) so likewise in Romans 2.28, 29. the Question the Apostle speaks to here,
is not whether only true Believers are in Covenant, or whether the Parents
being in Covenant, their Children are not in Covenant with them; but rather,
whether they that are only Externally in Covenant, may not be broken off.

Now to show the Use of this Distinction of a being Externally in Covenant, and
of a being also Internally in Covenant:

1. Hold to this Distinction, and you will easily Answer what some urge with
great Vehemence, and Confidence against the Jews, having been under a Covenant
of Grace. Because it is said, Deuteronomy. 19.4. The Lord had not given them an heart
to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear. But this was necessary only to
their being Internally in Covenant, not to their being Externally in Covenant.
Whereas some suppose it a strange absurdity, to say, God entered into a
Covenant of Grace with them, to whom he had not given an heart to perceive,
etc. It is no more than to say, All who are Externally in Covenant, have not an
heart to be^^ve, an heart to Repent, do not come up to Covenant-terms. It is no
more than to say, that all ^ho are called Externally, are not called Inwardly
^^d Effectually. No more than to say, that there ^aints now by an External
separation, and Visible ^^ofession, who are not Saints by a Spiritual
Reno^tion* And as heretofore there was a Seed, after (...) Flesh, and a Seed
after the Spirit, even so ^ow.

Again, whereas the same Persons tell us, that (...) the Children of Believers
be in the same Covenant ^ith Believers, then they must all certainly be Saved,
as he that believes, shall be Saved. This will not follow. Though indeed I see
no reason, or ground to doubt of the Salvation o^ the Children of Believers;
such as die in their Infancy, while they are pure Appendices of their Parents,
when actual Faith and Repentance, is not required of them, while they have no
will of their own, the Parents will and act, stands for their will and act. It
would seem that in what sense God has promised to be the God of believers, he
has also promised to be the God of their Seed, while they are to be looked on
purely as their Seed; for so they are Interested in the Covenant upon the
Parents account, without any thing more required of them, But now the Covenant
made with believers and their seed, has such and such Conditions, required of
all that are of Age, and not naturally incapable of performing the same. Now
supposing a true believer to fall from the condition, i. e. That he cease to
be a believer; it would certainly follow, that the Covenant of Grace would
cease to justify him, that he should not be saved. So the Children of
believers, if as they grow up, they do not come up to Covenant-Terms; that
Covenant that would have justified them, dying Infants, requiring no more of
them at that Age, than what might have been pleaded for them; yet that same
Covenant will condemn them as Violaters of it. And if when they are of
capacity, they do not perform the condition which is then required of them in
their own persons, with profane Esau, they Sell their birthright, and cut off
all claim to the special benefits and blessings of the Covenant, by their own
Act and Deed.

If I have been mistaken in what is here said of the salvation of believers
Children, that die in their Infancy; yet I can say, I desire to Learn, and am
willing to see my mistakes. But though I know not, that the Scripture, which
affirms, Ephesians. 3.2. That we are all Children of wrath by Nature, does any
where hold forth the Salvation of all that die in Infancy; which to assert,
would seem to imply, that Gods destroying the old World, and Sodom, etc. were
eminent Acts of Mercy, rather than of Justice, where in such multitudes of
souls were sent to Heaven together; who if they had lived, had probably (at
least, for the greatest part of them) gone to Hell. And how it may be
Reconciled with that Reason, God gives the angry Prophet, for his sparing
Nineveh, Jon. 4.11. That there were more than Sixscore Thousand persons that
could not discern betwixt the Right hand and the Left, I am not able to
discern; if these (supposing Ninevehs Destruction, and their Fall in the Ruin
of it) had all then been certainly saved, and not one of many of them
(probably) saved, their Lives (with the rest of the City) being spared. Yet
methinks it should be granted, that there is more hope of the Salvation of the
Infants of believers, than of Pagans. Now that there is so, it must be because
of their Interest in the Covenant, There were no more hope of the Salvation of
the one, than of the other, if they were both alike Interested in it.

2. That there is a being only Externally in Covenant, as well as a being
Internally: This would teach us not to expect a Church upon Earth, wholly
Constituted, or consisting only of Real Saints. Certainly, all whom the
Apostles themselves Baptized, and admitted into Christian Fellowship, and
Communion, were not true Converts, or real Saints. And when Three Thousand were
admitted, all in one day (as in Acts 2.) how was it probable, or indeed
possible, to take a particular account of each one, touching a work of Grace,
and to enquire after the soundness of their Conversion. The Visible Church is a
Field that has Tares, as well as Wheat. It Is not to be expected, that all the
Tares, should be gathered out, till the end of the World. Then it is, that the
Son of man should send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his
Kingdom all things that offend, and them which do Iniquity, Mat. 13.40, 41.
That such are said to be gathered out of his Kingdom then, it implies there
are, and will be such in his Kingdom till then. Again, ver. 47. The Kingdom of
Heaven is compared to a Draw-net, which here encloseth Fish, both good and bad;
and I would fain know, what Church we may find in all the New Testament, that
was constituted by the Apostles themselves, all whose Members were to have been
accounted real Saints, such as had true saving Grace.

3. That there are some only Externally in Covenant with God, and not
Internally; this should teach and warn us, not to rest in the former. As John
Baptist said to them. Mat. 3.9. Think not within your selves, we have Abraham
to our Father: So, think it not enough, to have been born of believing Parents,
or that you have been Baptized, or that you are Gods People by External
profession; but walk in the steps of the Faithful, and as you have given up
your Names, so give up your selves ^o Christ. As I may allude to that of the
Apostle, Romans 2.28, 29. He is not a Christian, who is so only outwardly,
neither is that Baptism, which is only an outward washing of the Flesh: But he
is a Christian indeed, who is so inwardly, and that is Baptism indeed, where
the heart is cleansed, and where there is the answer of a good Conscience
toward God. And the Covenant of Grace may well be compared to Noah's Ark; as it
was not hanging on the outside of the Ark, that would have saved any of the Old
World, but getting within the Ark, as Noah did. So our being Externally in
Covenant with God will not avail to our Salvation, unless we are also
Internally in Covenant, coming up to Covenant-Terms. There are Children of the
Kingdom, that shall be cast out.

Romans 3.1, 2. What Advantage then has the Jew? Much every way: Chiefly,
because that unto them were Committed the Oracles of God.
Sect. 16. PROP. XVI. They that are only Externally in Covenant, yet are
privileged far above those who are strangers as to the Covenant.
COvenant-Priviledges are not like the Common benefits of the Sun and Rain; but
are Special and Distinguishing Favors. As was said of Israel of Old, Deuteronomy.
4.7. What Nation so great, who has God so nigh unto them? It must needs be a
great Dignity and privilege to be a People near unto the Lord. A great
privilege for People to have the Tabernacle of God with them. The Ark, where
were the Tables of the Covenant, was Isreal's glory. The Apostle makes this, the
chief privilege of the Jews, that unto them were committed the Oracles of God.
The Word is a Treasure to be chosen before thousands of Gold and Silver: This
is a Treasure highly to be valued, though brought to us in earthen Vessels. The
Word and Ordinances are choice Privileges, belonging to those who are in
Covenant, Romans 9.4. It Is a greater mercy to have thy spiritual Manna, than to
have the greatest abundance of Corn and Wine. Better is the Fatness of Gods
House than the precious Fruits of the Earth. How much better are the Rivers of
pleasure that run there, than Rivers of Oil? Yea, the gleanings of Gods holy
Hill, is better than the Earths Vintage. As the Soul is of more worth than the
Body, so are means of Crace to be prized above Means of outward Subsistence.

As Gods Oracles and Ordinances belong to those that are in Covenant, so that
choice part of the Word, The Promises. Children of the Covenant, are Children
of the Promises, Romans 9.4. To all within the Covenant the Promise of Salvation
is offered, though but conditionally, yet sincerely. And if we fall short, the
fault is only in our selves.

But the greatness of these Covenant-priviledges will appear in the sad and
deplorable Estate of those that want, or are deprived of them. See what it is
for men to be strangers to the Covenant, Ephesians. 2.12. Such are said to be without
Christ, without hope, and without God in the World. How doleful is their
condition, who can never hear the joyful sound. To want the ordinary Means of
Salvation, is a want indeed: Ordinarily, Extra Ecclesiam non est salus, Acts
2.47. Where no Vision is, there the people perish. Such sit in Darkness, and in
the Region and shadow of Death.

How miserable was the state of the Jews, when they were unchurched, when God
called them Lo-ammi, would no longer own them as a people in Covenant with him.
Then wrath is said to have come upon them to the uttermost. It made the Apostle
sad at heart to think of it, Romans 9.1, 2, 3, 4.

Now what is said of the Privileges of those who are but so much as externally
in Covenant with God, should quicken us to Duty, not breed, or nourish
security. The greater our Mercies, the greater our Engagements. The higher our
Privileges, the greater Gods Expectations. Isa. 5.4. What could have been done
more to my Vineyard, that I have not done in it? Wherefore, when I looked that
it should bring forth Grapes, brought it forth wild Grapes? To be lifted up to
Heaven (with Capernaum) and not into Heaven, will occasion our greater
downfall, and sink us deeper into Hell.

Acts 2.39. The Promise is unto you, and to your Children.
Sect. 17. PROP. XVII. Besides those personal Benefits and Advantages accruing
to men in Covenant, there is this comfortable privilege also concerning their
Seed, that they are involved and taken into Covenant together with the Parents.
As this is the Tenor of the Covenant, I will be thy God, and the God of thy
Seed.
NOw to clear this, observe,

1. This has been Gods Way and Manner all along, when he has taken Parents
into Covenant, to take in their seed with them. You shall not find, that ever
heretofore God entered into Covenant with those that were Parents, singly by
themselves, excluding their seed.

The Covenant of Works was made with Adam for himself and his Posterity, I
suppose that will be readily granted. And when the Covenant of works was broken
on man's part, that there was no possibility of attaining Happiness that way,
God made another Covenant with our first Parents, promising Salvation by the
Seed of the Woman, that is, Jesus Christ, who was to be born of a Virgin, which
was the first Edition of the Covenant of Grace, as I showed before.

And here the seed of Adam were not excluded, but included; till such time as
any of them cut off themselves from Gods Covenant by their own Act and Deed.
Who are we to understand by the Sons of God, spoken of Genesis 6.2. but the seed
of godly Parents, such as were descended from Seth, Enoch, etc. who are called
the Sons of God, not merely as they were his Creatures? for so they should not
have been opposed to the Daughters of men, as there they are. Have not all one
Father? Has not one God created us? Mal. 2.10. Nor are they called the Sons of
God, as being regenerated, and made new Creatures: For no such thing appears in
the Context, but rather the contrary. But they are called the Sons of God as
the Israelites are called the children of the Lord their God, Deuteronomy. 14.1. being
within the Church, and in Covenant Relation to God. Vid Aynsworth.
As by the Daughters of men there, are understood such as were of wicked Cains
cursed posterity, such as were without the Church.

Again, when God took Abraham into Covenant, his Seed were taken in with him.

This is evident, Genesis 17.7. so God owneth the Children of the Jews for his
Children, his Sons and Daughters, Deuteronomy. 32.19. with Ezekiel. 16.20. Yea, observe,
the Church in Abraham's Family consisted most of strangers, yet their children
must all be circumcised, even such as (in the opinion of our Opposites) were to
have no Lot or part in the Land of Canaan, Genesis 17.12, 13. So the children of
Proselytes, that joined themselves to the Church os^^e Jews, were taken into
Covenant with their Pa^ents.

Thus it was from the Beginning, that Children ^ere taken into Covenant with
their Parents. And why should it seem strange to any, that they should be taken
in now?

(1) I would know of any man, if Children ^ere capable of being taken into the
Covenant of ^urks with Adam, what makes them incapable of ^eing taken into a
Covenant of Grave with their Parents now? And if children are capable of
deriving Original corruption from their Parents, together with those manifold
miseries that attend it, why ^re they incapable of Covenant-priviledges, to be
^onveyed from Parents, taken into a Covenant of Grace? May we think, God's
Justice is more con^^cuous in the Covenant of Works, than his Grace ^s in the
Covenant of Grace.

(2) If the Covenant made with Abraham, and ^he Covenant made with the people
of Israeel, was ^he same for substance with the Gospel Covenant, ^d the seed
then was taken in with their Pa^nts, what should exclude the seed of Believers
^ow?

(3) Why should it seem strange, that God accept^th the Act of the Parent to
enter his child into Covenant, for the Act of the child, so long as the ^^ild
is at its Parents dispose, and the Parent cannot truly and heartily devote
himself to God, and is service, without being willing to devote all that (...)
his to Gods service? Why should it seem strange, that here God accepts the
will of the Parent for ^he will of the child, till it comes by its own will to
cross and revoke what the Parent had done for it?

And here methinks, no Anabaptist, but if he be serious, instead of opposing
our Doctrine of childrens Interest in the Covenant with Parents, so hotly and
earnestly as they are wont, should so far incline to it, as to wish it true,
and be willing to hear all that may be brought to prove it, and desire to see
it cleared, both for their own comfort, and their childrens benefit. What a
strange thing it were, if a godly man should not desire, and account it a great
privilege, to have his children in Covenant Relation to God? and that one who
has truly devoted himself to God, should not desire by all means possible to
engage his to God too?

Now what is already said, makes it at least probable, that children are taken
into Covenant with their Parents still; they were taken in of Old, and the
Covenants are the same for substance, and childrens capacity the same, that
except God bear less respect to his People and their seed now, than heretofore,
they have the same privilege of being in Covenant together with their Parents,
as heretofore.

Indeed what was noted before of Proselytes and their seed being taken within
the Covenant, proves it was not any specialty, peculiarly belonging to Abraham's
Natural seed. Yea, was it not a figure of, or a Praeludium unto the calling of
the Gentiles. A forerunner of that which is foretold, Isa. 49.22. I will lift
mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the People, and they shall
bring thy Sons in their Arms, and their Daughters shall be carried upon their
shoulders.

2. Whereas our Opposites cannot deny, but children were in Covenant together
with their Parents under the former dispensation, they can never prove Children
excluded from the Covenant now under the Gospel. And as Dr. Stilling fleet well
notes, If it had been Christ's intention to exclude Infants, Account of the
Grounds of the Protestant Religion, p. 108.
there had been far greater reason for an express prohibition, than of an
express command, if his intention were to admit them; because this was suitable
to the general Grounds of Gods dispensation among them before. And so Mr.
Baxter: In one of his Epistles to his Book for Infant Baptism.
If Christ had revoked Infants, Churchmembership, (and Interest in the Covenant
together with their Parents) whether is it possible, that no word in Scripture
should once mention it? nor one Apostle either question or discover it? or that
the Jews, 1. Who were in present possession of it, 2. And were so hainously
offended at the Non-circumcising of their Infants, Acts 21.21. would not once
open their mouths to object against the total unchurching of them, which were ^
an hundred times more? that neither the believing Jews should once scruple it,
nor the unbelieving charge it on Christ, nor the Council, Act. 15. reveal it,
even when those that taught Circumcision, did take it for granted, that Infants
were Church Members, or else they could not have said they must be circumcised.
Is there a possibility of all this, if the Scripture be perfect?

The Anabaptists use to demand of us express Scripture for the Right of
Infants; but we have more reason to demand of them plain Scripture, excluding
them from the Covenant, and denying their ancient privilege of
Church Membership. And had Children been cut off from that their ancient
privilege, it must needs have been one of the grand Questions in the Apostles
days, and so would have been as clearly decided, as that Question about
Circumcision, Acts 15. But observe this, when it is plain and undeniable, that
Infants were taken into Covenant, and Church Members, if their Parents were in
Covenant; they that would deny Infants this privilege now, ought to bring as
plain proof of Gods rescinding and revoking this privilege of theirs, as we
can bring of his granting it: which they have never yet done. Before any dare
to affirm, God has rescinded this ancient privilege, they ought seriously to
consider, how they can prove it, that they be not found false witnesses of God,
as the Apostle speaks in another case.

3. We are able sufficiently to prove that the Gospel still supposes Children
to be in Covenant together with their Parents. What say you? will you be
satisfied, if we can produce as clear Scripture Proof for Infants being still
in Covenant, as Christ himself produced for the Resurrection Matthew. 22.32. Then
I doubt not but you shall b^ satisfied.

(1.) That Text, Act. 2.39. if there were n^ more, should satisfy you, [For
the Promise is unto you and to your Children, and to all that are afa^ off,
even as many as the Lord our God shall call. These words are brought in by the
Apostle, as ^^tive to persuade his hearers to repent of their ^reat sin in
crucifying Christ, to own him as the ^romised Messiah, and to submit to the
Gospel^y, showing that neither they nor theirs should (...) loosers by it. That
whereas they had impreca^d Gods Curse on themselves and their children, Matthew.
27.25. and were now in danger to be cast ^, yet coming in upon the Gospel-call,
they should ^ave the Promise still continued to them and theirs. That is, as
with respect to Christ, God had promi^^ to be the God of Abraham, and of his
seed, ^d that in Christ, who was to come of Abraham's ^^d, all the Families of
the Earth should be blessed, Acts 3.25.) this ancient and famous promise should
(...) hold good to them, as it was now also to be ex^^ded to the Gentile
Nations with them.

Some would have [The Promise to you and to (...) Children] to refer unto
that, Genesis 17.7. ^ere God promised to be a God unto Abraham, (...) to his seed.
Others understand that Promise, (...) 12.3. and 22. v. 18. mentioned Act. 3.25.
In (...) seed shall all the Kindreds, or Families of the ^th be blessed. But
indeed both these come to ^^. It was in that seed (in whom the Nations, Kin^ds
and Families of the Earth were to be blessed) ^t is, in Christ, and with
respect unto Christ, that ^d promised to be a God unto Abraham, and to seed. So
the Covenant with Abraham (as the ^postle says, Gal. 3.17.) was confirmed of
God in ^^rist.

Again, the blessing of the Nations, Kindreds, and ^^milies of the Earth in
Abraham's seed, that is, in ^^rist, was taking them into Covenant, (that God ^s
their God, and the God of their seed) the same Covenant for substance with that
made wit^ Abraham. As the blessing of Abraham came upon the Gentiles through
Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.14. Tha^ God is our God, and the God of our seed, as h^
before promised unto Abraham.

So that this is the plain meaning of the Apostle The Promise is to you and
your Children, if you d^^ not cut off your selves by standing out against
Christ and not to you Jews only, but to the Gentiles, t^ all that are afar off,
as many of them as the Lo^^ shall call, to them, and their Children. And taking
the words thus, you may see the harmony of the Scri^tures, and how the Families
of the Earth are blessed (...) Christ; how Believers under the Gospel are
blesse^ with Faithful Abraham; how the blessing prom^sed to Abraham, [I will
be a God to thee and (...) thy seed,] is come upon the Gentiles; and ho^
Abraham was made the Father of many Nation^ He was the Father of many Nations,
in that sen^ relating to the Covenant, wherein he was the F^ther of the Jewish
Nation: That as all the Natu^^ seed of Abraham, his seed by propagation, till
the wilfully forsook and rejected the Covenant, w^ included in it, they and
their Children; so the (...) ritual seed of Abraham, his seed by proportion,
(...) called Gentiles, were privileged, as his natu^ seed, being taken into
the Covenant, they and the Children.

Exception 1. It is not said, The Promise is to y^ and to your Infants, but to
you, and to your C^^^dren, which might be of grown years.

Answ. When God promised to Abraham, I be a God to thee and to thy seed, this
took in Infa^^ though they were not named: So, The Promis^ ^ you, and to your
Children, must comprise Infants. None will deny, but Infants are Children;
though ^ll Children be not Infants.

Exception 2. Some by the Promise here, under^^and that, Joel 2.28. recited in
this Chapter, Act. ^ 17. And to strengthen this Interpretation, they ^^rge the
foregoing words, v. 38. Repent and be ^^ptized -- and ye shall receive the Holy
Ghost. For (...) promise is to you, and to your children --

Answ. 1. This Interpretation is quite overthrown ^y the following words, [For
the Promise is to ^ou, and to your Children, and to all that are afar ^, even
to as many as the Lord our God shall ^ll.] Now that Promise in Joel 2. is not
made to that are called. Have all the Spirit of Prophecy? ^ave all the gift of
Tongues?

2. Neither has Baptism reference to the confer^ng of extraordinary Gifts of
the Holy Ghost, ^^ough these followed the Baptism of some in the ^imitive
times, for a special reason: but it has ^^ation to the Covenant made with all
that are called, (...) the Seal of it.

Except. 3. Some turn the words thus, The pro^se is to you, and to your
Children, that is, such of ^em as the Lord shall call.

Answ. 1. Then these words [and to your children] ^e plainly superfluous.
Unless they grant Chil^ren to be called in their Parents call, there should ^no
more promised to their children here, than to (...) the men that were, or
should be in the world.

2. We cannot think, the Apostle would speak ^llaciously, with a mind to delude
his Hearers. How these his Hearers knew, that their Children ^ver till now, at
least, were accounted Children of the Promises, and within the Covenant. And
when the Apostle affirms the Promise to be made to them, and to their
children, how should they understand him otherwise, than as asserting their
ancient privilege in reference to their seed?

3. Taking the words otherwise, instead of being a motive, they would rather
have been a disswasive; a Discouragement, instead of being an Encouragement to
their submitting to the Gospeldispensation. It had been a better Argument to
have kept them in the Synagogue, than to have called them to the Christian
Church, Of Baptism, p. 49.
as Dr. Jer. Tailor. What could have been more likely to prejudice the Jews
against the Gospel, than to rank and put their Children into the state with the
Children of Heathens and Idolaters.

4. (...), as many as the Lord our God shall call] cannot refer to Children,
(...). They are not of the same gender. This is ad homines, as they will not
allow (...) them, to refer to the word (...), Nations, Matthew. 28.19. because
they differ in gender. Though indeed we can produce clear instances in
Scripture of the same codstruction. See Rev. 2.26, 27. and 19.15. and Act.
26.17.

(2) Childrens Interest in the Covenant and Church Membership, may be proved by
a series of Texts, Romans 11. v. 15, 16, 17, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24.

Methinks these things are very plain,

1. That the Apostle speaks there of a breaking off from, and of being graffed
into the visible Church. For, 1. There is no breaking from the invisible
Church. If a member of the invisible Church may be broken off, then a true
Believer may fall away from Grace. 2. The breaking off here mentioned, was from
that Church, of which the unbelieving Jews were natural branches, v. 24. Now
they were natural branches of the Visible, not of the Invisible Church. 3. That
Church into which the Community of the Gentile-professors were graffed (in the
the room of the Jews that were broken off,) was the Visible Church; for many of
them were not members of the Invisible Church. They that were most apt to boast
against the natural branches, and were in danger of being cut off, as well as
the natural branches, v. 18, 21. were no better than Fornalists, and outside
Christians, who had only a standing in the Visible Church.

2. Not all, but some of the Jews only were broken off, v. 17. And if but some
of the Jews were broken off, then some of them remained branches of the Olive
still.

3. They that were broken off, were broken off, they and their seed, from the
Church, and from the Covenant: They that were not broken off, continued, they
and their seed, within the Church, within the Covenant. For,

4. None were broken off, but because of Unbelief, v. 20. scil. their own, or
their Parents. Therefore the Infants of the believing Jews were not broken off.
They could not be broken off because of their Parents unbelief, when their
Parents were Believers; nor for their own unbelief, when they were not capable
of rejecting Christ and the Gospel, in their own persons. How could those
Children which were within the Church, and Covenant, before their Parents
embraced the Gospel, be cast out, and cut off before they came actually to
reject Christ and the Gospel. If the Children of the believing Jews were not
continued in the Olivetree with their Parents, to partake of the root and
fatness thereof, then it will follow, that they were in the same state with
those broken off. Now how strange is it, that they who were once in Covenant,
and within the Church, received for their Fathers sakes, should be cast out
again, without any fault of their own, or their Parents? would God revoke such
a privilege granted his people for their seed, unprovoked?

5. That Unbelief which brake off many of the Jews, was not barely the
privation of true, saving, justifying Faith; but a positive, open, wilful
rejection of Christ and the Gospel. Which is plain thus, viz. Because diverse
who were not broken off were unbelievers in that first sense.

6. What State and Privileges the unbelieving Jews were broken off from, unto
that state, and to those Privileges, the main body of that People were again
to be restored, v. 23, 24, 25, 26. The Apostle teaches, they were to be
graffed again into their own Olive Tree. Now if their Children were not to be
taken in with them, it would not be their own Olive, they were graffed in; but
a Church of a quite different constitution, from what it was before the
breaking off.

7. If the Children of the Jews that kept their place in the Church, and of
them that were afterward to be taken in, must be looked on, as in an opposite
state to that of the off-broken branches; we must say the same of the children
of the Gentile prosessors. The believing Gentiles are graffed into that state
from whence the unbelieving Jews were broken, ver. 17.24. And there is now no
Partition Wall; but Jew and Greek, are all one in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.28. The
Jews have no privilege now above the Gentiles. And besides, this was not the
sole privilege of the Jews before, but of any of the Gentiles as well, that
became Proselytes, if they were Proselytes of the Covenant; their Children were
taken into the Church, and into the Covenant.

Object. 1. If the believing Gentiles were graffed into the same Visible Church
with the Jews, then they were to be Circumcised, as the Jews.

Answ. It follows not. 1. As one says, The House may be the same it was,
though there be a new Door, or Porch to it. We must distinguish betwixt the
Essentials, and the Accidentals of the Church.

Abraham's Family was a Church before Circumcision, and Circumcision did not
change the Species of it.

2. If there was any strength in this Objection, ^t would follow, that the Jews
could not be graffed unto their own Olive Tree again, but they must be
Circumcised. See here, who they are, that would ^ring in Judaism.

Object. 2. The Gentiles are said to be graffed in way contrary to Nature, into
the Olive Tree, ver. ^4. But your way would make them as the Na^^ral branches.

Answ. They were wild before their Ingraffing, ^ot after; but being Engraffed,
then they come to ^ave the privilege of the Natural branches. What ^he Apostle
says, [If thou were cut out of the Olive Tree, which is wild by Nature; and
were graffed contrary to Nature, into a good Olive Tree.] Is to be understood
of those Gentiles, who were called out of Paganism, Heathenism, whose immediate
Parents were without the Church, strangers to the Covenant. But these being
graffed into the good Olive Tree, their Children are buds, or Sprouts of the
same Olive; as well as the Children of the Jews, the Natural branches, were.
And yet we acknowledge it a great Favor of God toward such Children, that
they are descended of Parents, that are within Gods Covenant, and so
comprehended in the Covenant with their Parents.

3. Another Text plain, and full for my present purpose, is that, 1 Cor. 7.14.
Else were your children unclean; but now they are holy.. This is a third
Scripture I produce for Childrens Interest in the Covenant with the Parents: In
the mouth of two or three witnesses, the truth of what I last laid down, shall
be established. These words are brought to remove a Scruple, which it seems
troubled the minds of some of the believing Corinthians, scil. whereas some of
them had unbelieving Yoke-follows, the doubt was, whether living with such were
not a defiling of Conscience, a thing unlawful; whether the Infidel Husband
should not be deserted; and the wife remaining a Pagan, or Infidel, should not
be put away? Which the Apostle resolves in the Negative, that they should not
refuse Cohabitation, and Society with their unbelieving Yoke-fellows, ver. 12,
13. For the unbelieving Husband is sanctified by, in, or to the believing Wife:
Else were your children unclean, but now they are holy, ver. 14. Here note, 1.
That by the Wife, by, in, or to whom the unbelieving Husband is sanctified, we
are to understand the believing Wife; and by the Husband, by whom, or in, or to
whom, the unbelieving wife is sanctified; we are to understand the believing
Husband. For, 1. It is such a Wife as is opposed to an unbelieving Husband. And
otherwise it had been enough to say, Only the Husband is sanctified by, or in
the wife, and the wife is sanctified by, or in the Husband. And the Term, or
Epithet [Vnbelieving] would be superfluous in both places. But it is too great
boldness for any to say, the Apostle adds this word Superfluously. 2. The same
parties are called, a Brother, a Sister, ver. 15. Again, 3. When the Apostle
says, ver. 16. What know thou, O wife, whether thou shall save thy Husband?
Or how know thou, O man, whether thou shall save thy wife? It is only the
believing wife, or Husband, that he would put in some hopes of gaining their
unbelieving Yoke-fellows. 4. The Apostle would not say, that the unbelieving
Husband is sanctified by, or to the believing wife, or by, or to the wife,
though an unbeliever. He affirms the contrary, Tit. 1.15. To the unbelieving
nothing is pure, or sanctified. If nothing be sanctified to them, then no
Relation is sanctified.

2. That when he speaks of their Children being holy, he speaks of Believers
Children, as such. To call the Children of Pagans, and Infidels, holy, is a
strange, uncouth speech; and such as the Scripture is not acquainted with. But
that the Children of Gods People are an holy Seed, this the Scripture owneth,
Ezr. 9.2.

3. Therefore when he calls their Children holy, he must necessarily mean
more than Legitimate.

For, 1. The Children of Infidels, if begotten in lawful wedlock were
Legitimate, as well as theirs. But what the Apostle says here, he says only
of a believers Children, not of the Children of Pagans, and Infidels. Here the
Apostle supposes, or grants, that if one of the Parents had not been a
believer, and so the other Parent sanctified (by virtue of the Covenant) in, or
to him, then the Children indeed had been unclean, not holy.

2. They that take [holy] for Legitimate, must take the word [sanctified] for
made lawful; in the foregoing clauses. But they will never find the word
[sanctified] used only for that which is lawful. Besides, so the Apostle should
argue weakly, that it is lawful for the believer to live with the unbelieving
Yoke Fellow, because it is lawful. Again, this of the unbelieving Husband being
sanctified by, or to the believing Wife; they that are not minded to wrangle,
may see plainly is made an Effect, or consequent of her being a believer; but
that which was not lawful before, cannot be made lawful by ones believing: Or
if it was lawful before, then it is not ones believing that made it so.

3. Taking [holy] for Legitimate, the Apostle should go about to prove Ignotum
per ignotius: To clear one thing doubted of, he should bring in another; which
might possibly be more doubted of: Which is going about indeed. Might not one
of these believers have less doubt, whether such an Infidel was his wife, than
whether the Children were indeed his children? The Apostle argues here as from
an acknowledged Principle, that they were well satisfied of; that their
Children were not to be accounted unclean, but holy. Now would any man think
the Apostle so weak, to go about to prove, that such a Couple were lawful man
and wife, because their Children were Legitimate. Or that the Corinthians were
so senseless, as to doubt whether they lived not in Fornication, while they
lived with their unbelieving Yoke-fellows; and yet to have no doubt, but that
the Issue they had by them was Legitimate.

4. We shall never find the word [holy] used for Legitimate. Then is not that
likely to be a private Interpretation, that takes it so here? And is it to be
imagined, that when the Apostle is writing to satisfy scrupulous Consciences,
he would use a word in that sense, they were none of them likely to understand;
as being never used, and taken in such a sense before, and that without any
thing to explain it?

5. Taking the word [Holy] for Legitimate, it would follow, that the Apostle is
besides the Question, and does not speak to the Corinthians scruple. Have not
they a strong fancy, who can conceit such a thing, that diverse of the
Corinthians, because their Yoke-fellows remained Infidels, were afraid, if they
Lived with them still, they should be guilty of the sin of Fornication, and
defile their bodies? But we have no ground to think this troubled them, as if
they feared, this were to be dishonest: No, Marriage is honorable among all,
Heb. 13.4. And yet though Marrirge be lawful in it self, they might scruple
notwithstanding, whether to live in society with such as were Idolaters, and
open Enemies to God, and Jesus Christ; might not be Irreligious, and a defiling
of their Consciences. Now this being their scruple, not the other, What
satisfaction could it be, to tell them, that their Marriage was lawful on a
civil account, so that their Children were Legitimate, not Bastards?
Notwithstanding that, they might fear Spiritual defilement in it.

Lay all these particulars together, and I hope, when the Apostle says of these
believers Children, that they were holy, you will be satisfied; he must mean
something more, than that they were not Bastards.

4. And therefore how can we understand it, but that they are holy in relation
to God, holy as separated to God. Holy, by virtue of his Covenant with the
believer, I will be thy God, and the God of thy Seed. So if but one of the
Parents be within the Covenant, it takes in the Seed with him: Till the
opposite party can find out some other sense, and make it out to be the sense,
this must stand.

All must grant, that the general use of the word [holy] is for a thing or
person separated to God. Which Mr. Baxter, Of Infant Bapt. p. 81.
clearly and fully distinguishes thus: 1. A Thing or Person may be Holy, or
separated to God, either in state and standing Relation, or only for some
particular Act, or Use. Infants, while Infants, are not capable of any such
work for God: Therefore it is an Holiness of state, which is ascribed to them.

2. Those that are holy thus in state, are either Holy by mere Separation and
Relation; or else they are also qualified with Endowments suitable to the state.

3. There is a Sanctifying, or Separating to God, either Directly and
Immediately: So every believer, and so their Children are sanctified. and there
is a Separating, or Sanctifying to God remotely and secondarily. Thus the
unbelieving Husband, or Wife, is sanctified to the Believer; both as being
separated to one who is separated to God, and as an Husband, or Wife, they
make up that Conjugal state which is more directly for God: And if they beget
an holy seed, it is one of the Uses, that they were sanctified to.

4. Sometimes Persons, or Things, are sanctified Actively, -- and sometimes
Passively. --

And as he notes, All these Distinctions are but from several ends and degrees
of separation. The common Nature of Holiness, is one and the same in all; that
is, a separation to God.

Now the word [Holy] constantly denoting a Thing, or Person separated to God,
either in State, or to some particular Act, or Use; and Children being called
holy, who are not capable, while Infants, of the latter way of separation to
God, but were known to have been separated to God the former way, to stand in
the same Covenant Relation with their Parents, and called an holy Seed; as when
the People of the Jews are often called an holy People, (Deuteronomy. 14.2. and 26.19.
Dan. 8.24.) We are to understand not only the Adult, but the Children; the
Infants among them, were a part of that boly People: These things considered,
we have no ground to understand what the Apostle says here of a believers
Children being holy, otherwise, than that they are in Covenant Relation to God,
as the Seed of his People formerly were; holy in state, separated to God. I
say, we have no ground to understand the Apostle here otherwise, nor were the
Corinthians likely to understand him otherwise, unless he had otherwise
explained himself; or some evident Reason could be brought, that the word
[holy] cannot be so taken here.

Surely that sense of the word which fully agrees with the Use of the word in
other Scriptures, and best suites with the Scope of this place; that ought to
be acknowledged the sense here. But to take the word holy, as we do, fully
agrees with the use of the word in other Scriptures (as they, the Opposite
party cannot but acknowledge) and best suites with the Scope of this place.

Now that it best suits with the scope of this place, appears thus; that here
the Apostle would satisfy, and remove a scruple of some of the Corinthians,
whether to live with their Yoke-fellows, who remained Infidels, were not
Irreligious; and that that would defile their Consciences? Now for the Apostle
to tell them, that their Children were Legitimate (which is the sense the
Opposite party must stick to, and the best sense they have, to bring in
opposition to that we lay down) this would not come up to the Corinthians
scruple, as I have showed; but ours does, proving that it was not Irreligious
for believers to continue with their Unbelieving Yoke-fellows, since they were
sanctified to, or by them, and their Children holy, or separated to God.

Object. 1. Would not this prove it lawful for a believer, supposing him
guilty of Fornication, to Live with the Fornicatrix, if the Child so begotten
be holy, and within the Covenant?

Answ. This Objection is so commonly taken off by almost every one of ours that
urge this Text, that I might pass it by, without mentioning. Mr. Baxter, has
spoken to it fully, and deared this Text so, Of Infant Bapt.
that (as Learned Rutherford, says,) The Dispute now is at an end. Indeed, I
should be of his mind, if men were not Prejudiced, Conceited, or minded to
Cavil. Though the Child of a Believer, as it is his Child, may be taken into
Covenant (though it was gotten in Fornication;) Yet is not that a larger
Measure of Charity, than the Word allows of, to suppose that one may live in
Fornication, and be a Believer, or be so Reputed? We think such an one ought to
be cast out of the Church; and consequently, his Children, as such, should have
no right to any Church Priviledges, nor be reputed holy. That if such Children
be admitted, it should be upon the account of some other, who has not
For^eited his Covenant-right, and has the Child at his dispose.

But more directly, to the Objection: It is no ^etter Reasoning, than the Devil
used, to persuade our Savior to cast himself down from the Pinnacle of the
Temple; saying, [It is written, He shall give his Angels charge concerning
thee.] Leaving ^ut the condition, [To keep thee in all thy ways,] ^ee Mat. 4.6.
with Psalm. 91.11. The Apostle teaches this indeed, that they that were lawful
Man and Wife, might Live together as Man and Wife, though the one was a
Believer, and the other an Infidel, without crossing the Rules of Reli^ion;
which he clears thus, Gods Law or Covenant, which availed to the putting of
the Issue of such Parents into an Holy, or Church State, as Children separated
to God; would as well avail to the sanctifying of the unbelieving Yoke Fellow,
to the believers use in a Conjugal-state. And that if they held it a profane
thing, to Live still with such as were Infidels, they had as much reason to
account the Children they had by such, unclean; and in no better state, than
other Children; where both the Parents were Pagans and Idolaters. Now what the
Apostle says here, to prove that a believer may without Impiety, Live still
with his Yoke Fellow, upon this account; that such a Yoke Fellow is sanctified
to his lawful use in Marriage, cannot be stretched to the case of Fornicators,
who are not sanctified one to the others use; nor lawful Man and Wife, as the
other are presupposed to be. What is not lawful, cannot be sanctified. A state
of Incest, or Fornication, cannot be sanctified, because sinful. Of Infant
Bapt. p. 98.
And as Mr. Baxter says, God sanctifies not sin in, or to any (though he may
bring good out of it.)

Object. 2. What is said of the Children here, the like is said of the
unbelieving Parent. As the Children are said to be holy, so the unbelieving
Parents are said to be sanctified?

Answ. (...), and (...) are not alike. Many things are sanctified in, or to a
believer, that are not therefore holy. Afflictions are sanctified, Food is
sanctified, 1 Timothy 4.4, 5. yet not holy. When the Apostle speaks of the
unbelieving Husband being sanctified, he is careful to limit it, and shows in
what respect, to whose use he is sanctified; that is, to the believer: But
there is no such Restriction, or Limitation, when he speaks of the Children
being holy; If they are holy, they are holy to God: If not Inherently, yet at
least Foederally, and Relatively. So the Children of a Proselyte before, stood
in Covenant Relation to God, as an holy seed, though it might so happen, that
the other Parent would not come in, as a Proselyte.

2. If sanctified, and holy here are all one, and mean only a civil Holiness,
(as some would have it) or lawful to use, it was lawful to the unbelie^er to
use his Child, as his Child, as well as to the believer; and yet to the
unbelieving nothing is sanctified.

3. Or if Children are called holy; In respect of ^holy, sanctified use to be
made of them, it would ^^llow, that the Apostle had no Special reason to ^ing
in their Children here, but that they come in ^omewhat oddly; when it had been
as much to his ^urpose to have named any thing else. And so he ^ight as well
have said, your Acquaintance, Kin^ed, Neighbors, are holy; that is, you may
^ake an holy use of them, your Callings are holy, ^d what not?

4. If by sanctified, and holy, in this place the postle only intends a
Matrimonial, and civil Ho^ss; opposed to Fornication, Uncleanness, and ^tardy
(as some tell us;) then they must hold, that (...) Apostle allows us to say,
That all lawfully ^rried persons, keeping to their own Husbands, Wives, are
sanctified; and that he allows us to ^all that are not Bastards, or
Illegitimate, Holy, Saints.

Here now I cast mine eye upon what one of note, (...) much cried up among the
opposite ^^y, has lately written. H. D. p. 191.
There is no such holiness in the New Testament, as a Foederal holiness
belonging to children.

(1) Because it contradicts the Gospel Dispensation, as before.

Answ. By foederal holiness of Children, we mean their standing together with
Parents in Covenant Relation to God. That this is agreeable to the
Gospel Dispensation, I have proved before. It is Abraham's Covenant, that the
believing Gentiles are taken into. In which Covenant God promises to be a God
to his people, and to their seed, Act. 2.39. And if the Root be holy, so are
the Branches.

(2) Because such Apprehensions intail Grace^ to Nature, Regeneration to
Generation, in contradiction to that of our Savior, Joh. 3. Tha^ which is born
of the flesh is flesh. And that we ar^ all children of wrath by nature, Ephesians. 2.

Answ. 1. How many Anabaptists, that plainly contradict these Scriptures,
denying that Infant^ have any sin, who thence conclude, that they have no need
of Baptism?

2. The Children of Believers under the Old T^^ stament were flesh, conceived
in sin, and broug^ forth in iniquity, children of wrath by Nature, y^ were they
in the Covenant.

3. Therefore, to be Children of wrath by Natu^^ considered as the corrupt
Offspring of fallen Ad^^ and to be children of the Covenant by priviled^ and
Grace, as they descend from believing Paren^ to whom God has promised, I will
be your G^^ and the God of your seed; these two are not o^ tradictory to one
another.

(3) Because it contradicts all the Exp^ ence, both of former and later times,
when godly men have had wicked children, etc.

Answ. 1. Observe again, this Reason would overthrow the Covenant-holiness of
the children of the Jews under the former dispensation; wherein be contradicts
himself, and the whole current of the Old Testament.

2. Here he grossly mistakes, and confounds ^oederal, relative holiness, with
real, personal, inherent holiness. Many of those who are called the holy seed,
Ezr. 9.2. in regard to Gods Covenant made with them, and their relations to God
upon that account, were yet in another respect unholy.

(4) Because it necessitates an owning the Doctrine of Falling from Grace. Ib.
p. 192.


Answ. 1. How many Anabaptists that are not afraid to own that Doctrine? I have
sometimes lived amongst many of that way, where were more Arminian-Anabaptists,
than Antinomian-Anabaptifts; and scarce one that I could hear of among them, a
mere Anabaptist, that held that Error alone.

2. As for the Children of Believers that growing up, do not stand to the
Covenant, we cannot say they fell from Grace, which they never had. Though many
do suppose the Infants of Believers that die in Infancy, renewed, and
sanctified, to fit them for glory; yet as for those that live till they come to
be of capacity, there is more required of them in the Covenant, as the Parents
are bound by their Covenant to train them up for God, so the Children are bound
to receive Instruction, and to comply with other Gods Means, in order to a
sanctifying, savi^^ work. As a learned Writer notes, Infants (...) in Covenant
with the holy Ghost conditionally as their Parents are, Christ. Directory. p.
821. sect. 9.
-- The holy Ghost is promised in Baptism to give the Child Grace in his
Parents and his own faithful use of the appointed means.

3. The unbelieving Jews before their breaking off, were foederally holy. And
if their breaking off will not necessitate an owning the Doctrine of Falling
away from Grace, neither does what we hold infer it.

The same Author goes on to prove that The Text intends a Civil or Matrimonial
Holiness (as he calls it) in opposition to Fornication, Uncleanness, Bastardy.

This he says, is proved, 1. From the scope of the place. Implying, that the
Question propounded by the believing Corinthians, which the Apostle here
resolves, was, Whether they could continue Marriage-society with their
unbelieving Yoke-fellows, without being guilty of Fornication? Yet as he lays
it down, no such thing appears, but it is well, he had told us his meaning
before. Now he would have the Apostle here to argue ab Absurdo. P. 193.
Inasmuch as they had no question of their childrens Legitimacy, neither had
they any cause to scruple the other, that is, that they were lawfully married.

Answ. This would make these Corinthians as absurd men as were ever heard of,
to doubt whether their Marriage was lawful, in opposition to Fornication, and
yet to have no doubt, but their Children were legitimate. For it is impossible
to know the children are legitimate, without knowing first, that the Parents
were lawful Man and Wife. And they that doubt whether they are lawful Man and
Wife, cannot but doubt, whether their children are legitimate. And they that
have no doubt of the Legitimacy of their Children, take it for granted, or
necessarily suppose, they are lawful Man and Wife.

He goes on, The Believer had least ground to doubt hereof, because to him all
lawful things are clean -- which is all the Holiness I conceive can be meant
in the Text, agreeable to the Holiness, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3, 4. and Mal. 2.15. The
Bastard being among the unclean, Deuteronomy. 32.2.

Answ. Then in his Opinion, to the Believer all lawful things are only
lawful. When we read they are pure, and sanctified to the Believer, is the
meaning only this, they are lawful? Are they not lawful to others too? When
the Apostle says, To the unbelieving nothing is pure, can his meaning be, that
nothing is lawful? Then we must persuade them never to marry, nor eat, nor
drink, nor work, nor sleep. For it is not lawful for them to do any of these.

2. That Text, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3, 4. This is the will of God, even your
sanctification,] is not to be restrained to a Civil, or Matrimonial Holiness,
in that Authors sense, but intends all holy Conversation, and Purity of Life,
to which Fornication, and Uncleanness is greatly opposite. But no sound
Expositor will say, that the Heathen, who lived chastely, came up to that, which
the Apostle here exhorts unto. Certainly, there is a great difference betwixt
the Chastity of a moralized Heathen, and Christian ^urity, which is required
here.

3. To that Text, Mal. 2.15. A godly seed, or seed of God. It is not the same
with holy seed. Further, I see not, why it should mean no more than legitimate.
Did he only seek a legitimate seed? Rather, (as Grotius) Hoc unice agebat, ut
liberos haberet qui Deum colerent: vos autem eas praefertis matres quae filios
ad idola deducant; He sought to have Children, who might be true Worshippers of
God, whereas the persons there reproved affected strangers, and such women as
drew their children to Idolatry.

4. To Deuteronomy. 23.2. If Bastards were held unclean, as being so legally, and
typically, yet there is no reason to think, that the Apostle would call them
unclean, when that Law was abrogated, which made them so.

His second Argument is just the same with the second Objection answered a
little before. P. 194.


His third Argument that Children are not to be taken for Infants only, P. 195.
is of as little force. As Dr. Lightfoot notes, when the Apostle says thus of
the Children of a believer, But now they are holy, he speaks in the common
phrase of his own Nation. As the seed of Proselytes were said to be born in
Holiness, that is, within the Religion, not in Heathenism. Yet it was possible
that some of their Children, who were grown up, might not accept of Gods
Covenant, and so not be proselyted with their Parents: Now he may as well say,
that I will be a God to thee and to thy seed, did not hold good to Proselytes,
because some of their seed might still remain Heathens.

His fourth Argument is a strange one, it has many feet, and halts on them
all. This cannot be a New Covenant Holiness, P. 195.
that must qualify and entitle to Baptism; (1) Because that cannot be known;
for if the Parent professing Faith be an Hypocrite, and not in Covenant
himself, then may you baptize a wrong Subject as well as a right one.

Answ. 1. When he views over this again, who knows, but he will be of the mind,
that none are to be Baptized? because that Holiness, which Entitleth to
Baptism, cannot be known.

2. An Hypocrite may be in Covenant Externally, as I have showed before.

3. This makes full as much against their Bapti^ing of grown persons, unless
they have such a Spirit of Discerning as to Discover, and Reject any Hypocrite,
that offers himself.

(2.) Such an absurdity would follow, that no Unbelievers Child is in Covenant
or Elect; which is notoriously false.

Answ. 1. It is a gross mistake to hold, that none are in the baptismal
Covenant, but the Elect. It seems they baptize none but the Elect. That if you
would make your Election sure, you must go over to them to be baptized.

2. He wandreth pitifully, when he Instanceth in Abijah, Ahaz, and Amon (who
were Kings of Judah) as persons out of Covenant. Doubtless, they were not out
of Covenant, not as the Uncircumcised; though it was their great sin, that they
for sook the Lord God of their Fathers, did not keep Covenant, see 1 Kings
15.4. 2 Chronicles. 28.5.

3. The Conditional-Covenant, which was Sealed heretofore in Circumcision, and
is Sealed since in baptism, running to Gods People and their Seed; such as are
neither visibly believers, nor the Seed of such, cannot be adjudged by us to be
within the Covenant. Though some of Gods Elect may be among the Heathen, and
Idolaters, yet they are not within the Covenant, merely because they are within
the decree of Election. They are not in Covenant, till renouncing their
Paganism, they come to know, and worship the true God.

(3.) From the concurrent Testimony, and Confession of many Learned
Commentators, and Parties themselves.

Answ. We must grant a concurrence here among Popish Expositors, taking holy
for legitimate, and we know it is to serve a turn. For taking the word holy
here to import their Covenant Relation unto God, as they are the Children of
Believers; it does not favor their Tenent of the absolute Necessity of Baptism
to salvation: and further gives a sad shake to their Limbus Infantum. But he
can never show a concurrence of Protestant Writers in his sense. It is true, he
names two or three; and no doubt it were easy to add many more, if he deal
but with them as he does with Beza, P. 201.
whom he feigneth to say, what he plainly confuteth, as any one may see, that
reads his Notes upon the place.

Further I desire you to weigh this Argument, to prove Children in Covenant
together with their Parents: Either the children of Believers are taken into
Covenant together with their Parents still, or it is worse with the Faithful,
in respect of their seed, now since the coming of Christ, than it was before.
But it is no worse now with the Faithful in respect of their seed, than it was
before. For that would make the Church a great loser by Christ's coming, whereas
she is a gainer. Then Christi adventu factum fuerit ut obscurior and minus
testata sit nobis Dei gratia quam ante Judaeis erat, (as Calv.) Number post
Christum, factam esse deteriorem parvulorum sortem existimemus? Whitaker. It is
manifest, that those Jews, who embraced the Faith of Christ, if they only had
the Promise, that God would be their God, so that their children were left out,
that God promised no longer to be the God of their Seed, then they could not
but see themselves in a worse Condition, in respect of their children, than
they were before. And how unreasonable is it to think, that when the Scripture
makes cutting off from the Covenant so sad a Judgment, and the fruit of
Unbelief, Romans 11. that the children of the believing Jews, which were in
Covenant once, should be cut off upon their Parents believing (i. e.) cut off
for no fault? And would not this be dishonorable unto Christ, whose coming
certainly was not to lessen, but enlarge his peoples Privileges? and according
to this Doctrine, it should have been a greater privilege to be born under the
Law, than to be born under the Gospel. And how derogatory to the Grace of God,
which he would have to shine forth more gloriously in the Gospel Dispensation?

Whereas one says, This is no more to be esteemed the loss of a privilege,
than our not enjoying literally a Holy Land, City, Temple, a succession of an
High Priest, and a Priesthood by Generation, or Lineal descent.] We can tell
them, we have greater mercies and privileges in the room of these. But it is a
wonderful strange thing, that any Christian Parent should account it no
privilege, for God to be the God of his seed. As heretofore he promised his
people, to be the God of their seed. If the children of Gods people now are out
of Covenant, I wonder what privilege they can have, in lieu of that, which is
denied to them.

And whereas some tell us, The state of the Christian Church is more spiritual,
than to admit of Infants; they may as well exclude all Infants out of Heaven.
Doubtless, the state of the Church Triumphant is as spiritual, as the state of
the Church Militant on Earth. If Infants may be Members of the Church
Triumphant, what reason can be given, but Infants may be also members of the
Church Militant on Earth? Indeed, if they are not of the Church, if they be not
in Covenant, then are they in the same Estate with the Heathen, and the Jews
that are broken off; that for the present we should be without hope concerning
them.

Again, methinks, there is something of weight in this, to prove that our
Children are in Covenant with God, as well as the children of the Jews were
heretofore; because it is as much our Duty to train them up for God, as ever it
was the Duty of the Jews. What God required of the Jews, Deuteronomy, 6 7. Thou shall
teach them diligently unto thy children, etc. The like is required of us
Christians, Ephesians. 6.4. we must bring up our children in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord. Now how strange were it, if God should require us to
train up our children for him, and yet not own them for his? Then we should not
have so much Encouragement to our Duty here, as the people of the Jews had
before. Then the Jews had more help, more to hearten them to their Duty, than
we. Can this be so, and yet we be under a better, a more gracious dispensation
of the Covenant, than they? Surely, in this respect, we should come short of
them. It will not enter into my thoughts, that where the Duty is the same to
us, and to the Jews of old, we should not have equal Privilege with them at
least, and equal Encouragement to what they had.

Lastly, I would ask those that would race our childrens Names out of the
Covenant, What is become of all those gracious Promises of Old made to the seed
of Gods people? That Promise, I will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy
seed. May not Believers plead this Promise still, as well as heretofore the
People of God might have done? And yet how can they do it, if their seed now
are left out of Covenant? Does God make that Promise to any out of Covenant? So
the Lord promises, Isa. 44.3. I will pour out my Spirit upon thy seed, and my
blessing upon thine offspring. And Isa. 59.21. As for me, this is my Covenant
with them, says the Lord, My Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I
have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth
of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord, from
henceforth and for ever. So we read, Psalm. 37.26. The seed of the Righteous is
blessed. And Isa. 61.9. They are the seed which the Lord has blessed. And Isa.
65.23. They are the seed of the Blessed of the Lord, and their Offspring with
them. What shall we say? That the people of God might have pleaded these
Promises heretofore; but they do not concern us under the Gospel? Then
Believers now have no ground to plead them with God, or to hang their
Offspring and issue upon him, as his people had heretofore. And so there was
more grace extended to the Jews under the former Dispensation of the Covenant.
If such Promises do as well concern us Christians, as they did the Jews; if we
may plead these Promises with God on the behalf of our children, certainly they
are Covenant-Promises. And if these Promises belong to our seed, the Covenant
must as well belong to them. Remember that, God promises such things to none
that are out of Covenant. If it be objected, These things are not made good to
all the seed of the Jews: Yet I suppose it will not be denied, but these were
some of those Promises which the Apostle reckons among the great Privileges
of the Jews, Romans 9.4. And the Question is, Whether ever God fails of
performing these Promises, but where there was some gross failure on the
Parents part, or on the Childs, or on both, their not doing their part toward
the accomplishment of them.

I hope enough has been said to evince it, that where the Parents are in
Covenant, their children are in Covenant too.

Now by way of Corollary and Inference, Note the Warrantableness of
Infant Baptism. The Infants of Christians being in Covenant together with
their Parents, and Baptism being the initiating Sign and Seal of the Covenant;
they that are in Covenant, must needs have right to the initiating Seal of the
Covenant. They that are known to be in Covenant, may be declared to be so by
Baptism, (the Sign of entrance into Covenant,) that being an end of Baptism, to
distinguish those that are entered into Covenant with God, from those who are
not in Covenant. Certainly, to be in Covenant with God, is a greater matter
than to have the outward Sign: And there can be no reason to deny the outward
sign of entrance into the Covenant, to those that we can prove entered into the
Covenant, as children are together with their Parents.

And there was no other ground imaginable (I think) upon which such strangers
as dwelt not under the Jews, as their Servants, nor among them, as Sojourners,
but in another Country, such as the Eunuch, Act. 8.27. were circumcised, and
so admitted, and joined to the Church of the Jews. There was no express command
for the circumcising of such Proselytes as were neither Servants nor Sojourners
among them, yet were they circumcised upon that general ground of their entering
into Covenant with the God of Israel, taking him for their God; as if they had
not been circumcised, they had been debarred from joining in Temple-worship.
(See Act. 21.28.) The Covenant, [I will be a God to thee, and to thy seed,] was
the ground of the Command, Thou shall keep my covenant, therefore thou and thy
seed, particularly, every malechild among you shall be circumcised, in token of
the Covenant. See Genesis 17.7, 9, 10.

But against what I have laid down, that the Infants of Christians being in
Covenant, they must needs have right to the initiatory Seal of the Covant, it
is objected:

Objection 1. That all the faithful, from Adam to Abraham received no such
Seal. H.D.p. 205.


Answ. Now what a pitiful Evasion is this? Because persons in Covenant did not
receive any initiatory Seal (that we know of) in that state of the Church, when
there was no such seal (that we know of) appointed by God; therefore persons
within the Covenant, have no right to the initiatory Seal of the Covenant, when
such a Seal is instituted.

Objection 2. H.D. p. 206.
Neither did any Believers out of Abraham's Family, as Lot, Melchisedek, receive
any such Seal, that we read of.

Answ. 1. A particular Exception or two will not overthrow a General Rule. If
Lot, and Melchizedek were not circumcised, there might be some thing
extraordinary in their case: As Gods not intending to settle and continue a
Church in their Families, as he did in Abraham's Family, therefore he might give
and appoint Circumcision to Abraham, and not to them. 2. It is false, that none
out of Abraham's Family were to be circumcised. The Proselytes of the Covenant
could not be so, without Circumcision. And such an one was the Eunuch, Act. 8.
though not of Abraham's Family.

Object. 3. Some to whom the Covenant did not belong, received that, called the
initiating Seal of Circumcision. As Ishmael, etc.

Answ. Ishmael was externally, visibly in Covenant, at that time when he was
circumcised, though he was afterward by Gods Sentence cast out of the Church,
and dis-covenanted. The strangers in Abraham's house, or bought with Money in
Israel, that were Circumcised, were no doubt, some of them Internally, and all
of them Externally in Covenant, and of the Visible Church.

As for that Circumcision which some Gentile-Nations took up from the Jews, De
repub. Heb. l. 3. c. 5.
which Cunaeus, and others, take notice of; it was not the Ordinance, and
Sacrament of Circumcision used among them, but an Apish Immitation.

Object. 4. But some will go further and Object, That if all within the
Covenant have thereupon a Right to the Seal of Admission, then it will follow,
that the whole body of the Jews should have been Baptized, had a right to
Babtism, being within the Covenant.

Answ. I have told you before, that though the Covenant of Grace be one and the
same for substance in all Ages; yet there have been various dispensations of
it. And as the Dispensations have differed, God has appointed different seals
of Admission. And as God has revealed himself more plainly and fully in the
Letter, than he had done in the former Dispensation; so proportionably more
has been required to men's being taken into Covenant in this Dispensation. From
Adam to Abraham, the Promise of Christ was more Dark and Indeterminate. To
Abraham he was promised to come out of his Loins, and that in his Seed all
Nations should be blessed. And under his Dispensation, God required not only
the belief of that general promise given to Adam, that the Seed of the woman
should break the Serpents head; but also that the promised Messiah was to be of
Abraham Seed. After this gracious Revelation to Abraham, this new Article of
Faith was to be received, owned, and professed in the Church, into which
Circumcision was a sign and Seal of Entrance, and admission. And when
afterward God delivered his Law by Moses to the people of the Jews, the Seed
of Abraham, then they that would join themselves to the Church, must not only
profess to believe the promised Messiah, but that he was willing to be Governed
by those Laws. And a Proselyte of the Gate, as he was called, that had liberty
to Dwell, or Sojourn among the Jews, only observing the seven Precepts given to
the Sons of Noah, (as they were called) was not owned as a Member of the Jewish
Church, but distinguished from the Proselyte of the Covenant, that was
Circumcised, and received the Law of Moses. Again, when Christ was come in the
Flesh, then was the clearest Dispensation of the Covenant of Grace. And then
this became a new article of Faith to believe; that this was he. And when he
appointed Baptism a Sign and Seal of Admission into the Covenant, and Church
under the Gospel, the Faith of a Jew, to believe a Messiah to come; was not
enough, where the Faith of a Christian was necessarily required, scil. To
believe that this was he indeed, who was to come, and no other to be looked
for. Now the Jews notwithstanding they were in Covenant before, yet since this
new Dispensation, if they will stick to the former Dispensation, and not admit
of it in that further Declaration, God is pleased to make, they can have no
right to the Initiating Seal: But plainly cast themselves out of Covenant. I
hope this is plain, and satisfactory.

But to strengthen what we laid down before, I shall prove by Scripture, that
Children, Infants, being in Covenant together with their Parents, they have a
right to Baptism, the Initiating Seal of the Covenant.

And, 1. So much is implied in the Commission, Mat. 28.19. Go ye therefore, and
Teach (or, as the word is (...), Disciple) all Nations, Baptizing them. (...)
answers to (...), as the Learned Note, and both sides commonly agree. Now
suppose the Commission had run thus [ Go, Disciple the Nation of the Jews,
Baptizing them.] How could the Apostles once have thought, but they must have
Baptized their Children with their Parents; as Children were a part of the
Nation, and were constantly taken into the Church, and Covenant with their
Parents before? Unless Children had been plainly Excepted in the Commission
here, as they are not, the Apostles must needs take their Commission to reach
unto Children with their Parents still, that all the Children of Parents
Discipled, were to be baptized, as well as their Parents. Or suppose
Circumcision had been continued, as the Initiating Seal, or Sacrament of
^dmission under the Gospel, that the Commission ^ad run thus: Go, Proselyte, or
Disciple all Nati^ns, Circumcising them: Or suppose the like Com^ission had
been granted to the Prophets of old. Go, Proselyte all Nations, Circumcising
them; and ^eaching them to observe the Law of Moses, and ^ll the Statutes, and
Ordinances, which he com^anded you: Must not Children have been taken in ^ere
together with the Parents, except the contra^y had been declared by the same
Authority?

And this is undeniable, that Children are a considerable part of any Nation:
and if Children are not capable of being Discipled, and Baptized, then a Nation
properly is not capable of being Discipled, and Baptized? And so Christ set his
Apostles here upon a Task impossible to be performed.

And methinks, it is very considerable, that [all Nations] here: Examine. p. 130.
As Mr. Tombs himself does not gainsay. Stand in Opposition to [one Nation.]
under the former Dispensation, the Church, and Covenant was confined to that
one Nation of the Jews: But as God had promised of Old, that all Nations should
be blessed in Abraham's seed; so in pursuance of that promise, Christ
Commissioned his Apostles, and Ministers that were to succeed them, To go, and
Disciple all Nations. All the Kingdoms of the world now under the
Gospel Dispensation, were sooner or later to become the Kingdoms of the Lord,
and of his Christ. And if Children are part of those, that were to be blessed
in Christ, there can be no reason, when Christ says, [Go, Disciple all Nation:,
Baptizing them.] to exclude them from being comprehended here.

And further, That the Apostles had reason to take in Children, to Baptize
Infants with their Parents, (unless Christ had expressly excepted) appears from
hence also, that the Baptizing of Infants was a thing well known, and commonly
practiced in the Jewish Church before, when their Parents were Proselyted. A
Proselyte was made with three things, Drus. d. tribus Sect. l. 2. p. 89, 90.
(as Learned Drusius, and others observe,) viz. With Circumcision (a sign of
the Covenant unto which he was received;) with Baptism, (which was required for
cleansing all Gentiles, being held unclean;) and with offering Sacrifice (for
Expiation of sin, to make Atonement for him.) And this is out of Dispute, that
Children were Proselyted with their Parents. Yea, Magmony goes further, saying,
that When an Israelite takes a little Heathen child, and Baptized him for a
Proselyte, behold he is a Proselyte. This Right of Baptizing Proselytes, it
seems, the Jews retain to this day. Hist. of the present Jews. part 5. c. 2. p.
223.
Though Drusius questioneth it, yet Leo Mondena, (a Rabbie) expressly affirms
it.

And as yet, I see not any reason to be of Mr. George Galaspy's mind, who would
have this of Baptizing Proselytes, a corrupt Invention, or Tradition of the
later Jews. Methinks, it might very well be supposed, that the Heathen, who
wanted the Rule to teach them to put a difference betwixt the Clean, and
Unclean, (as Lev. 11.) were Legally unclean; in which case Washing was
prescribed by the Law. And without Cleansing, they were not to come to the
Temple, or to join in Gods Worship there. Before God gave the Law at Mount
Sinai, The Lord said to Moses, Go unto the People, and sanctify them to Day,
and to Morrow, and let them wash their clothes, Exodus 19.10. From this precept
(says Ainsworth) the Hebrew Doctors gather their Doctrine and practice of
baptizing all whom they admit to their Church and Covenant. But if they had
reason to suppose the Heathen Legally unclean, as considering how many ways
that might come about, and how they had Lived before while Heathen, without out
any care to keep themselves clean that way; it was an hundred to one, that any
Proselyte that came and offered himself, had some uncleanness on him: and
considering that the unclean were unclean for ever (and in many cases also
defiled other things and persons) till they were cleansed; if there was one Law
for them of the Congregation of Israel, and for any stranger, that should join
himself to them, (as Numb. 15.15.) there would seem to have been sufficient
Warrant for this practice of their Washing, of Baptizing Proselytes. Not like
the practice of the Pharisees, Mark 7.3. etc. who added unto Gods Command for
washing in case of Uncleanness, and placed Religion in their often Washing,
though they had no Legal uncleanness on them. But what I have offered here
concerning the warrantableness of baptizing Proselytes at their Admission, as
supposing them to have been some way Legally unclean, I submit to the censure
of better Judgments.

Indeed, I just now find in Doctor Hammond [of the baptizing of Infants, page
473. this passage: And that this Custom of washing new born Children, and not
any other sort of Purification, was it; that this Baptism of Native Jews and
Proselytes referred to, may appear by that which in the Gemara, is said of the
baptized Proselyte, that he was made [as an Infant new born.] Which if it
please our Opposites better, I shall not be displeased with it.

But that the thing was in use before, Ainsworth on Genesis See the like in Godwin.
17.12. does not at all question, who says: Hereupon, Baptism was nothing
strange unto the Jews, when John the Baptist began his Ministry, Mat. 2.5, 6.
They made question of his person (or his Authority) that did it, Moses and
Aaron. l. 1. c. 3. toward the end.
but not of the thing it self, John 1.25.

Observe now, as the outward Elements in that other Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, were taken from the Jewish Passover. ( Bread and Wine being constant
appendants to it, and one Cup used at the Pascal Supper, called, The Cup of
blessing; which Expression the Apostle uses, 1 Cor. 10.16.) So concerning the
Initiatory Sacrament of Baptism, what was a Jewish Rite before, Christ sets
his Royal stamp upon, and advances to a Gospel-Ordinance: That by his
Institution, it becomes the Sacrament of admission into the Gospel Covenant,
and into the Christian Church.

And hence there was no such need for the express mentioning of Infants,
supposing Christ would have them baptized, as for the express excepting of
Infants, supposing Christ would not have them baptized; because as Doctor
Lightfoot has well noted: Harm. of New Test. sect. 9. p. 10.
The baptizing of Infants had been a thing ordinarily practiced in the Church
of the Jews before. It was enough to mention, that Christ established baptism,
as an Ordinance under the Gospel; and then, who should be baptized, was well
enough known by the use of it before. He further adds, our Savior would have
given some special Prohibition, if he intended that they should have been
excluded.

Others I know there are, that would have Baptism refer to that washing of
Newborn Infants intimated, Ezekiel. 16.4. Or to that baptizing of the Israelites
under the Cloud, and in the Sea, spoken of 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. Yet in neither of
these respects are Infants to be excluded from Baptism, unless Christ had
excepted them. Questionless there were Infants among the Israelites, baptized
in the Cloud, and in the Sea.

2. Another Text plainly proving what I last laid down, as Acts 2.38, 39. Be
baptized every one of you. For the promise is to you, and to your Children. I
made use of this Text before, to prove that Children are within the Covenant
still. And now I make use of it, to prove that being within the Covenant, they
have a right to Baptism, the Initiating Seal of the Covenant. Those to whom the
Promise here spoken of belongs, to them Baptism belongs: But the Promise
belongs to Children, therefore Baptism belongs to Children. What the
Apostle says here, is as much as if he had said, Be baptized you, and your
Children: For the Promise is to you, and to your Children. If there be any
force in this reason for the baptizing of the Parents, it argues as strongly
for the baptizing of their Children. And if any of this great company had
Children with them, we have no reason to doubt, but they were baptized with
them: Because he says, Be baptized every one of you; for the Promise is to you,
and to your Children. If because the Promise was to the Parents, they were to
be baptized for the same reason the Children are to be baptized, the Promise
being also to them. Are not they sadly blinded with prejudice, that cannot see
here, that such as have a right to the Promise, have a right to the Initiatory
Seal of the Promise? And they that have right to the Promise, are not adult
persons only, but Fathers, and Children.

3. I may add Ex abundanti, that there wants ^ot probable proof, and
Testimony in Scripture, that Infants, or young Children were baptized: When we
read of so many whole Households baptized, it is improbable that there should
not be any ^^ung Child in any of them. And was it not likely (...) prove of
dangerous consequence, to relate the ^aptizing of whole Families, (which does
so clearly point at the former practice of Proselyting ^he whole Family, when
the Head and Governor ^f the Family came to be Proselyted,) if any part ^f the
Family (as young Children ordinarily are a part) be incapable of Baptism now.
It is strange that we should be told of Households baptized again and again;
which according to the ordinary phrase and practice among the Jews, used to
signify the Heads of the Family, and all under them, even ^^ttle ones. (As is
showed before.) It is very strange say, if it be an Error now to baptize
Infants, that ^he Scripture should tell us often of Families baptized, and not
give one Instance of an Household baptized, ^ll but their little ones. When it
was promised of ^ld, that all the Families of the Earth should be ^essed in
Christ; and when Paul and Silas tell the ^aylor: Believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou ^halt be saved, and thy House, (Acts 16.31.) With which may be
compared that speech of our ^avour to Zacheus, Luke 19.9. This day is Salvation
come to this House; forasmuch as he also is the ^on of Abraham. And when
further we find, that upon a persons receiving the Faith, having the Charge and
Government of a Family; that person, and his, or her Family, were baptized
together: What Impartial, Unprejudiced mind would not hence conclude, that the
Covenant, and Initiating Seal, extended to Parents and Children still under the
Gospel, as before. You read of Lydia's household baptized, Acts 16.15. and ver.
33. That the Jailer was baptized, and all his, (...), filii ejus, (as some) his
Children. Or if (...) should not be restrained to Children only, yet it must
necessarily comprehend Children (if he had Children.) And 1 Cor. 1.16. The
Household of Stephanas was baptized. And Acts 18.8. When we read that Crispus,
the chief Ruler of the Synagogue, believed on the Lord with all his House: And
many of the Corinthians hearing, believed, and were baptized. Though I know
some would allege this Text for the baptizing of such only as are actual
believers; yet being narrowly looked into, it may be found to reach further. As
when we read only that Crispus believed with all his House, in the former part
of the verse; yet we are to understand that Crispus, with all his Household,
were baptized. We are to supply the word [Baptized] used in the end of the
verse. And when it is only said in the later part of the verse, that many of
the Corinthians hearing, believed, and were baptized; yet we may very well
think the word [Houshold] is to be supplied here from the former part of the
verse. We have no reason to think, that the Household of Crispus, was the only
Household baptized among these believing Corinthians. The full sense of this
place. therefore seems to be this, that Crispus believed with all his
Household, and were baptized, with all his Household: and many of the Corinthians
hearing, believed and were baptized with their Households; so taking in their
Children, even little ones: As it is no way probable, that there should be no
little ones in any of their Families Herewith compare what the Apostle says, 1
Cor. 7.14. Else were your Children unclean, but now they are Holy.

Now methinks there is something in it, that the Scripture mentions diverse
households being baptized, without excepting the little ones in any one household
baptized, and it is very strange, if none of those households had little ones in
it.

Though some will argue from Act. 16.32. They spoke unto him the Word of the
Lord, and to all that were in his house. It may mean no more, than that they
preached to all in the house, that were capable of hearing the Word taught. So
when Jacob said to his Household, and to all that were with him, Put away the
strange Gods that are among you, and be clean, Genesis 35.2. This will not prove,
that there were no little ones of his household with him. And yet further, they
might be said to speak to all that were in the house in a sense, to which the
Scripture is not a stranger, the Jailour being bound to ^each those things to
the least in his house, as soon as they should be of capacity to understand.
Surely, there is as strange an expression, Hos. 12.4. He found him in Bethel,
and there he [spake with us.] And see Deuteronomy. 29.1, 2, 10, 11. and Deuteronomy. 31.1,
12. Again, it is further objected, that v. 34. it is said, the Jailour
rejoiced, believing in God with all his house. As the like is said of those
Corinthians, Act. 18.8. Many of the Corinthians hearing, believed, and were
baptized.

But methinks, Harm. of N. Test. p. 81.
what Dr. Lightfoot has on another Text, may serve to take off this Objection.
Act. 2.44. All that believed were together, and had all things common. The
children of those that believed, must come in under the Title of Believers too,
or they must famish (or be cast upon others.) If the community of goods reached
them as well as their Parents, the title [Believers,] must reach them too.

Further as touching the Jailour, it is thus in the Original, (...), which may
as well be read, And he believing in God rejoiced in all his house, or he
exulted, expressed his great joy in all his house, after that he had believed
in God. And note, that when it is said of Crispus, Act. 18.8. that he believed
on the Lord with all his house, it is not (...), as here, but (...).

Thus I hope sufficient Scripture warrant has been produced for
Infant Baptism. Many things I have praetermitted, because I would cut this
Discourse as short, as I well may. Yet before I pass from this point, I shall
take notice of the chief Objections made against it, because it may tend to
your further satisfaction.

Object. 1. We have neither express Precept nor Example in Scripture for the
baptizing of Infants.

Answ. 1. A virtual Command there is in the Gospel for Baptizing of Infants.
The Infants of discipled Nations ought to be baptized, as appears from what
has been said. It is employed in the Commission, Matthew. 28.19. Now a virtual
Command is equivalent to an express command.

And when Mr. Tombs (the most learned Advocate the Anabaptists have) grants
Baptism in use, even before John Baptists time, in the admission of Proselytes,
the New Testament mentioning whole households that were baptized (never
excepting Infants, or little ones) we have reason to think, that as the
Children of the Proselytes were baptized before, so the children of the
Christians were baptized too.

2. What express Precept or Example can the Objectors show for Christian
Magistrates in the New Testament? And must all Christian Magistrates therefore
be discarded? Again, what express Precept for the Christian Sabbath? Whereupon
some Anabaptists have returned to the Jewish Saturday-Sabbath. Again, what
express Precept for Women's receiving the Lords Supper? In 1 Cor. 11.28. it is,
Let a Man examine himself? Where though the word (...) be of the common Gender,
and used both for Man and Woman, yet (...), the Word that follows, is of the
Masculine gender, it is himself, not her self.

Again, to speak ad hominem, let one that objects against us the want of
express Precept and Example for Infant Baptism, show us, where he finds any
such Precept or Example for the se-Baptists, that persons unbaptized should
baptize themselves, as they do in the first setting up of their way.

Again, where do they find either Precept, or Example in all the New Testament
for Christians deferring their childrens Baptism, till they come to an adult
age? Thus the Objection falls soul upon themselves.

Certainly, there is a total silence in Scripture concerning the Children of
those that were Christians, not one tittle there of any Christians child having
his Baptism delayed, till it came also to make a personal profession. No doubt
but many of those who were converted to the Christian Faith by the Apostles,
had little ones, who either were baptized upon their Parents embracing the
Faith, or it cannot be known at what age any of them were baptized, and
consequently we cannot tell at what age the Children of Believers now are to be
baptized.

Now certainly, this is a weighty Case, and I wish that they who seem so
desirous to keep close to Scripture-Rule, would seriously consider it. They
that are only for the baptizing of adult persons cannot give a
Scripture-Instance of one child born of believing Parents, whose baptism was
deferred till it came to be adult. And besides, this would cross another Rule,
that all who are discipled, as soon as they are discipled, are to be baptized.
It is true, that they and we differ concerning the Subject, who are discipled;
we holding that the Infants of Christians are discipled, (belonging to the
Church, the School of Christ, and the Parents being bound by the Covenant to
train them up in the knowledge of Christ, and they bound to receive
Instruction, as they come to be of any capacity;) but our Opposites holding
none to be discipled, till they are instructed in the Principles of
Christianity, and make a personal Profession. Now suppose that they were in the
right here, that none were Discipled, and to be baptized but upon a personal
Profession; yet since it is evident, both from Christ's commission, Matthew. 28.
and from all those Examples of Persons baptized, upon Record in the New
Testament, that as soon as any are discipled, they are presently to be
baptized. I would fain know how they either do, or can follow Scripture-Rule in
baptizing the Children of Christian Parents, many years (it may be) after they
were Disciples in their own sense; that is, made a personal profession. We
could give many Instances of little Children, who have been Religiously
Educated, Children of Five or Six years age, See Mr. Whites little Book for
little Children.
that have not only made a profession, but given great Signs and Evidences of
Grace. And should not such be owned as Disciples? And then why not other
Children of that age that can give as good an account, as may be expected from
those Years? And did not Christ, and his Apostles admit all to Baptism, who
made but the least visible profession? Where do we find any rejected? If now
they will not admit persons upon making the least visible profession, but Demur
them, till they have arrived a Degree higher; why may they not defer their
baptism, till they are got one degree higher than that, and so in Infinitum?
And how will they observe Scripture-rule, which is clearly for the baptizing of
persons, as soon as they become Disciples? If I was of their Opinion, that the
baptizing of the Infants of professed Christians, was against Rule, and a
Nullity; I must seriously prosess, I should be altogether at a loss, and not
know when to baptize the Children of such. If they must be baptized so soon as
they make a visible profession, I would fain be informed from Scripture, at
what age they may make such a visible profession, which ought to be taken for
their admission to baptism.

And this further, whereas those whom they Rebaptize, were many of them
Religiously Educated, and seemed to have a love to Religion from their
Childhood, and were acquainting themselves with the principles of Religion; I
would fain know, whether they will say they only began to make a profession,
when they first owned Anabaptism? Or if they were professors of Christianity
before, and so ought to have submitted to the Sign, and Sacrament of their
Entrance, and admission amongst Christians, whether it was not a great sin
against the Gospel-rule, that they did not submit to their baptism before? And
then I ask, From what time, for how long they are to charge this sinful
Omission upon themselves?

Now compare their way, and ours, and Judge Impartially, which is most
agreeable to Scripture-Rule. We are not for the baptizing of Heathens, or any
without the Church, without their having the Gospel first Preached to them, and
their professing to believe it. Now when they receive the Gospel, they receive
it not only for themselves, but for their Children; and were bound to Instruct,
and Educate their Children according to it. And so such Families were
Discipled, and to be Baptized; and what Children they might have afterward to
be baptized, as all of them belonging to the Church, and School of Christ, to
be Trained up in the Knowledge of Christ. And so all along God had put a
Distinction betwixt the Seed of his professing People, and the Children of such
as were without the Church: Not only the Natural seed of Abraham, but the Seed
of the Proselytes, that joined themselves to the Lord, had the Sign of the
Covenant. Thus the way is clear to us, whom, and when to baptize.

Our Opposites are not for the baptizing of the Children of Christians, but
upon their own personal profession. Now that baptism is not unnecessary to be
deferred, after one comes to make profession, they must grant. But how soon, or
how long before a Child's profession, is to be accounted such, as entitleth him
to baptism; they cannot show from any Command, or Example in the Word. Here
they have no Rule, as much as they seem to be for keeping close to
Scripture-Rule.

Now think of it seriously, whether it be at all Credible, that if God would
not have the Children of Christians baptized, but upon their first making a
visible profession, there should yet be no Rule, or Direction, when that might
be. We can easily discern, when such as were Heathens come first to a
profession of Christianity: but when a Child of Christian Parents that has
been Learning the Principles of Christianity from his very Infancy, I say, when
such a Child shall be taken first to make a personal profession, is no easy
matter to determine. Now when the most that they baptize, are such, as they
cannot say, when they first came to make a personal profession, let any that
are Impartial judge, how well they follow Scripture-Rule. Besides, since they
must hold, that to baptize a Child before its making a personal profession,
would make such baptism a Nullity; and to defer to baptize it, after it has
come to make a personal profession, is a sinful neglect, and plain breach of
Gospel-Rule, and Order; and one man may take that for a personal prosession,
which another would not admit to be so: Hereupon it must needs follow, that
their way lays a certain ground of Clashing and Confusion in the Church, and
tends to lead both Ministers and Christians into endless perplexities, touching
the first admission of our Children.

Thus you see in this first grand Objection, that we have neither express
Precept, nor Example for Infant Baptism; they are like a man that rolleth a
stone, which returns upon him that rolleth it. The Objection returns, and
falls heavily on themselves. There is no need of an express Precept, or Example
for the baptizing of Infants born within the Covenant, this being suitable to
the Scripture-way before, (as from the time that God had appointed an
Initiating Seal of the Covenant, the Infants of Parents within the Covenant,
were ever before admitted to the Initiating Seal with their Parents.) But there
is need of express Direction, Rule, or Example, if such Children are not to be
admitted now, but upon their personal profession, to show, when such profession
has been, or may be taken.

Object. 2. But further they will Object, that they can show both Precept and
Examples against Infant Baptism.

1. Precept, Mat. 28.19. Go teach all Nations, baptizing them. They must be
Taught before they are to be baptized: To which agrees, Mar. 16.16, He that
believes, and is baptized, shall be saved. A Rule for believers baptism.
Infants are not capable of being Taught, are not Actual believers.

Answ. 1. As Learning, and believing (according to that Dispensation) was
required of adult persons at the first Institution of Circumcision. Abraham's
servants that were to be Circumcised, as well as he, were such as he had Taught
the way of the Lord, see Genesis 18.19. And afterward none could be Proselytes of
the Covenant, and taken into the Jewish Church, none that were of years, but
they must first know, and acknowledge the God of Israel. Yet all this hindered
not the Circumcising of their Infants. So in constituting the Gospel Church,
they that were of Years, must first know, and profess the Name of Christ,
before they could be admitted as Members of the Church, or accounted
Christians. But this hinders not, but that the Parents being Discipled, their
Children were to be acknowledged, as belonging to the Church with their
Parents. At the first Institution of Baptism, and first Constituting of the
Gospel Church; it was necessary indeed that the first Members of the Church,
and first Subjects of Baptism, were taught and brought to profess the Faith,
before they were baptized, (the Gentiles being generally strangers to the
Covenant, and the Jews strangers to this new Dispensation of it, and none have
right to Baptism, the Initiating Seal of the Gospel Covenant, till they come
within the Gospel Covenant.) And therefore Infants could not be the first
Subjects of Baptism, because it was necessary their Parents should be in
Covenant, to bring them within the Covenant; so the Parents should be first
Baptized, as their right to Baptism in order of Nature, preceded the right of
the Children. But because the Parents were not admitted to Baptism, but upon
their being Taught, and making a personal profession, (which was necessary to
bring them within the Covenant) it will not follow that their Children must be
first Taught, and make a personal profession before they may be baptized. These
being now in Covenant together with their Parents, have also a right to the
Initiating Seal of the Covenant, as well as their Parents. Thus the Baptism of
such adult persons, and of their Infants is but one, and the Ground or Reason
of baptizing both, is one and the same; to wit, their being taken into
Covenant. Only the way of adult persons being taken into Covenant, is diverse
from that of their Infants. When persons come to make a profession of Faith in
Christ, they are taken (at least, Externally) into Covenant, though they were
not born of believing Parents; and such as are the Children of believing
Parents are (at least Externally) in the Covenant, though they are not at
present, capable of being Taught, or of making a personal profession. Thesi
Salm. par. 3. p. 48. Sect. 9.
Nec ab adultis exigitur nascendi conditio, modo credant: Nec ab Infantibus
exigitur ut credant, modo nati sint ex iis qui sese credere profitentur.

2, From Mat. 28.19. [ Go, Disciple all Nations, baptising them.] It will
follow, that all who are Disciples, are to be baptized. As soon as any are
Disciples, (though Incomplete) Ministers, have Authority from Christ to baptize
them. And our Opposites will not deny, but all Disciples are to be baptized. So
that if it appear, that the Infants of Disciples are Disciples too; it will
follow, that they are to be baptized.

And as yet, I could never meet with a clear answer to that Argument Mr. Of
Infant Baptism. p. 15. etc.
Baxter urges from Acts 15.10. They upon whose Necks the false Teachers would
have put the Yoke of Circumcision, are there called Disciples. But the false
Teachers would have put this Yoke, not only upon Christian Parents, but upon
their Children and Infants. It plainly appears from ver. 1, 5, 24. that
Circumcision was the Yoke there spoken of. And it is out of question, that
there were more young Children than adult persons, upon whom those false
Teachers would have brought this Yoke. And since this Scripture only declares
against their laying that Yoke upon the Neck of the Disciples, it follows, that
either the Children, and Infants of Disciples are included in this term
[Disciples] or that the Circumcising of such was not forbidden here; but only
the Imposing of Circumcision upon adult persons.

Neither should it seem strange, that Children, Infants, are called Disciples,
being admitted into the School of Christ, and to be Trained up in the Knowledge
of Christ. Sometimes we send our Children to School, before they can Learn of a
book, and such are numbered among the Scholars, being designed for Learning, as
soon as they are capable. And it is not so strange, that such as are intended
for Learning, and entered into a School, should be called Scholars, before they
have Learnt any thing; as that none should be accounted Christ's Scholars, or
Disciples, till they have made so great proficiency (as some would have it)
that they can give an account of their Conversion, of the Work of Grace being
wrought in them; of the time when, and manner how it was wrought: Scholars are
entered into a School, not because they are already Taught, but that they may be
Taught. And Timothy was Learning the Holy Scriptures (...) from his Childhood,
2 Timothy 3.15. That it is certain from Child-little, he was a Disciple of Christ.
This which is Recorded of Timothy, should Teach all Christians, that have
Children, to begin with them betimes, to teach them to know God, and his Will.
The things of God cannot be Learnt too soon, neither are little Children
incapable Subjects of Divine Illumination, and Grace. But that Christian
Parents are bound to Instruct their Children in the Doctrine of Christianity,
and to Teach them their Duty, as soon as ever they are capable of receiving
such Instruction, and that Children ought to attend to such Instruction; Would
not this imply that they are Disciples? But indeed they that are against
Infants Discipleship and baptism, have been generally against the Instructing
and Catechizing of Little ones. If some of them of late go not so far in their
Opposition, I am glad of it.

Yet further, Is it not as strange, that little Children, and Infants, should
be called Servants, as that they should be called Disciples? Yet such are
called Servants, Lev. 25.41, 42. The Children of the poor Israelite (of what
age soever) are there called Gods Servants. So David professes, Psalm. 116.16.
O Lord, truly I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant, the Son of thy Handmaid.
(i.e.) born thy Servant in thy House, as Ainsworth says. So Psalm. 86.16. David
was born a Servant of God.

3. Suppose we could not prove, Infants included in the Commission, Mat. 28.19.
(as has been proved already) yet that they are not expressly mentioned here as
Subjects of baptism, is not enough to exclude them, unless there were no other
Scripture-Rule but this, to direct us about it, who are to be baptized. As
because this Commission was expressly directed to the Apostles only, to the
Eleven, ver. 16. It will not follow that they only were authorized to baptize.

Now I come to consider that other Text, Mark 16.16. which some I know build
most upon. [He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved.] The Scope
whereof is to show, who alone partake of the saving benefit of baptism, (and
other Gospel Ordinances) being adult. Whiston of Infant Baptism. p. 295.
Or (as one says) Here Christ informs them what the Issue of the Execution of
their Commission should be. -- Those that should believe, and be baptized,
should be saved; but those that believed not, (however they might be baptized,
yet) they should be damned. But that there is no color for making this Text
the Rule of baptizing; or for any to suppose, that it determines who are the
only lawful Subjects of baptism; is evident (I think) from these following
particulars.

1, That it is not said, [He that believes only, shall be baptized.] But, [He
that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved.] He that believes, and is
baptized, is the Subject in this Proposition, of whom this is predicated, that
[He shall be saved.] Hence it is manifest, that these words hold forth the
subject of Salvation, not the subject of baptism. Yet we must not say, they
determine the only subject of Salvation, unless we will hold baptism of
absolute necessity to Salvation, and hold that no Infant (that does not
actually believe) can be saved.

2. That in the Opposite Member, it is not said, [He that believes not, shall
not be baptized.] but, [He that believes not, shall be damned.]

3. If this Text should be taken to determine the only lawful Subjects of
baptism, then it would follow, that the Apostles, and their assistants, were
guilty of Maladministration, and Erred in baptizing many, (such as Annanias,
Saphira, Simon Magus, etc.) who were not believers, in the sense of this Text:
Either such had a right to the outward Ordinance, or not. If they had no right
to it, then it was amiss for any (were they Apostles themselves) to admit them
to baptism, who had no right to it. If they had a right to the outward
Ordinance, then [He that believes, and is baptized, etc.] Does not determine
the only lawful Subject of baptism; diverse having been rightfully baptized,
who were not true believers, such as this Text speaks of.

4. If believers baptism, be the only lawful baptism (in the sense that
believing is here used) then how is it possible for any Minister to dispose
this Ordinance in Faith? He cannot baptize others but doubtingly, of whose
unfeigned Faith, he is not assured. And he cannot be assured, that another
Faith is true and saving, without Special Revelation. And thus without Special
Revelation he should not know who may lawfully be baptized.

5. If this Text concludes against Infants baptism, it concludes as well
against the Salvation of Infants. If you say, They believe not, and therefore
are not to be baptized; it follows more directly from the next words, They
believe not, therefore they shall be Damned. If now to avoid so horrid a
consquence, as that all Infants are Damned, you will have the Text Restrained
to the adult, as needs it must be; you take away the force of the Argument
hence against the Baptizing of Infants. As more is required of adult persons,
than of Infants, in order to Salvation; So that may be required in order to the
baptizing of the adult, which is not required of Infants. And yet I must mind
you, that this Scripture does not determine, who only of the adult ought to be
baptized; but who only of the adult enjoy the saving benefit of that, as of
other Gospel Ordinances. Other things I pass by for brevity-sake.

(2.) They bring diverse Examples as they conceive, against Infant Baptism. As
the Example of the Three Thousands, Acts 2.38, 41. And of the Samaritans Act.
8.12. And of the Eunuch there, ver. 36, 37, 38. And of Cornelius, and those
that were with him, Act. 10.47, 48.

Answ. 1. Note here, that the Socinians, who would have baptism a Temporary
Rite, do in like manner argue from these Instances, that we only Read of the
baptizing of such as were Converted to the Christian Faith; not of such as were
born in it, and had all along professed it.

2. Our reading, that such and such were baptized upon the profession of Faith
and Repentance, and the like, will not prove, that such only were baptized.

The profession of Faith and Repentance might well be required of adult persons
in order to baptism, and yet the Children of such as made a profession, be
baptized without it. As God required Abraham to walk before him in sincerity,
[Walk before me, and be thou perfect. And I will make my Covenant between me
and thee,] Genesis 17.1, 2. Yet this did not hinder the Covenant being made with
his Seed, when they could not so walk before God,

3. If those words, Act. 2.38. [Repent, and be baptized. -- For the Remission
of sins.] Must be so taken, as excluding Infants from Baptism, they must then
be understood also to deny to Infants the Remission of sin.

4. If we may argue from Act. 8.37. Exclusively, that none but such as believe
with the heart, are to be baptized; this Text would make against our Opposites
as well: those that Object it against us. will they say, they baptize none, but
such as believe with all their heart?

5. So if Act. 10.47. must be so taken, as if none were to be baptized, but
such as had received the Holy Ghost, as those had done; they themselves should
be Excluded from Baptism, till it appears, that the Gift of the Holy Ghost is
poured on them, that they speak with Tongues, as these did, ver. 45, 46. Indeed
as the Gift of the Holy Ghost was an Evidence of their being taken within the
Gospel Covenant, (see Mark 16.17.) and so a ground for the baptizing of them:
It will follow, that whosoever can be proved to be within the Covenant, have a
right to baptism. And this will also plead for the admission of the Children of
believers to baptism, we having seen it proved, that they are within the
Covenant.

6. Sometimes we find, upon the Personal profession of the Head of a Family,
the whole Household ^o have been straightway baptized. And therefore ^hey that
tell you, the Apostles baptized none but ^uch as made a Personal profession of
Faith, and Repentance, speak quite beside the Book, say more than they can
prove. Turn to Act. 16, 14, 15. There you will find Lydia, and her Household
baptized; where no mention is made of any one in the family being wrought upon,
but only Lydia her self, Methinks it is observable what one has No^ed: Whiston
of Infant Bapt. p. 281, 282.
How the Holy Ghost does vary his manner of Expression here, when he speaks of
the baptism of Households; he tells us, the Households were baptized together
with their Parents; not giving the least Intimation of the Faith of any
besides, in, or of those Houses, as the ground of their Baptism, but when he
speaks of more General Assemblies, or Concourses of People; he speaks more
Distinguishingly: [ As many as gladly received the Word, were baptized, Acts
2.41.] And why the Holy Ghost should speak so distinguishingly in one place,
and not in the other, is hard to say; unless it should be, because in respect
of such more General Assemblies, and Concourses of People, consisting of Grown
Persons; the personal Faith of each was necessary to their Baptism, but not so
in respect of the Houses of believing Parents.

Further, Some urge the Example of Christ, who was not Baptized till he was
Thirty Years Old.

Answ. 1. What? Would they have had him baptized, before John was sent, or had
authority to baptize?

2. How well do they follow Christ's Example, who are for baptizing persons at
half Thirty Years Age?

3. And the reason of Christ's not being Baptized till he was about Thirty Years
old, could not be to Teach that none are to be admitted to baptism, till they
can make a personal profession. Certainly, Christ had for a long time before,
made a Personal profession. He being a Child was filled with Wisdom, and the
Grace of God was upon him, Luke 2.40. And when he was but Twelve Years Old, he
was able to Dispute with the most Learned Doctors, to the astonishing of all
that heard him, ver. 42, 46, 47.

4. This Example, that Christ went to John to be Baptized of him, rather makes
against their Sebaptists. And the first of their way, baptize themselves.
Surely, they cannot plead Christ's Example for this Practice.

So, some urge the Example of the Romans, Romans 6.3. Of the Galatians, Gal.
3.27. Of the Colossians, Col. 2.12.

Answ. It is certain, all the baptized Romans, Galatians, Colossians, had not
Savingly and Really put on Christ, neither were Really buried with Christ; but
only Sacramentally many of them. And thus in infant baptism there is a putting
on Christ, and a being buried with Christ; some being really Ingrafted into
him, and really partaking of the Fruits of his Death; and all being under an
Obligation, as they shall grow up, to put on Christ, and to Conform themselves
to the Death, and Burial of Christ.

Object. 3. Another great Objection against Infant Baptism, is that it
Frustrates the ends of Baptism, is Unprofitable and Vain; Infants being
Incapable of Understanding, or Improving it.

Answ. 1. Here that is a sure Rule, Instit. l. 4. c. 16. sect. 20.
which Calvin lays down: Quaecunque ad qualifaciendam Circumcisionem argumenta
inclinant, vim nullam habent in oppugnando Baptismo. Those arguments which
would overthrow Infant-Circumcision, (which was an undoubted Ordinance of God)
cannot be Valid against Infant Baptism. There were Spiritual, and Holy ends of
Circumcision, and adult persons were to make that use of their Circumcision,
which an Infant could not make of it. Now shall any hereupon deny, that the
Circumcision of Infants was an Ordinance of God, or deny the Wisdom of God in
appointing it? Since it is Obvious, that what is Objected here against
Infant Baptism, may as well be turned against Infant-Circumcision: May we not
say, to any such Objector, as the Apostle (in another sense) Nay but, O man,
who art thou that disputest against God?

2. Of all those Seven ends of Baptism, which H. D. lays down: I would fain
know which, or how many of them agreed unto Christ's own baptism. Was his
baptism to witness his Repentance, who had no sin to repent of? Or was it to
evidence his present Regeneration, who was Gods holy One from the birth, and
from the Conception? etc.

3. Did all those Ends agree to the baptism of Simon Magus, etc. Did the
baptism of Simon Magus witness his Repentance, and Evidence his present
Regeneratian? Or declare his being buried with Christ? etc.

4. Since baptism is acknowledged a Sign of Gods Covenant, and of entrance into
the Church, and the Infant-Children of believers are within the Covenant, and
of the Church (as has been sufficiently proved) in these respects baptism does
belong to such Infants, as well as it would to others adult, upon their
embracing the Christian Faith, and making a profession. Where the same thing
has several respects, it may agree to one in one respect, and to others in
other respects.

5. Regeneration, and Remission of sin (which is the Inward Baptism) are things
that Infants are not incapable of, if they be not incapable of Salvation: Why
then should they be thought incapable of the Outward baptism, the Sign thereof?

6. The Fruit, and benefit of this Ordinance of baptism, is not restrained to
the very Time of the Administration of it; but may come in afterward. Yea,
that baptism received in Infancy, is of use through ones whole course.

7. Yea, in some respects it has its special uses and advantages, even above
that in adult Estate. To name a few particulars here.

1. As the Child baptized is a declared Member of the Visible Church of Christ,
and so especially Interested I mean, above others who are yet without the
Church.
in the Churches Prayers, even before it can pray for it self. Certainly, to
have a share in the Prayers of all Gods People, is no mean Privilege. When
Abraham prayed for Ishmael, though he was not the Son of the Promise; yet, As
for Ishmael, I have heard thee, (says God, Genesis 17.20.) Behold, I have blessed
him, and will make him Fruitful. That he fared some way better for Abraham's
prayer. Though the Church of God out of common Charity, prays for all men; yet
more especially for her Members, for whom she can plead Gods Covenant. And thus
Infants by their baptism being declared Members of the Church, and within the
Covenant, are in a greater probability of reaping benefit by the Prayers of
Gods People, than if they are supposed to be without the Covenant.

So likewise upon our Principles, Christian Parents have stronger Pleas to urge
with God in Prayer, on the behalf of their Children, than they of contrary
Principles can have. They can pray for their Children, only as they may pray
for Heathens, while they suppose them out of the Covenant. Now see the
difference of these two States, Isa. 63.19. We are thine, -- they are not
called by thy Name. So we can pray for our Children upon better grounds, Lord,
bless them, own them, they are thine. When our Opposites deny themselves this
Plea, and instead of it must pray God to pity them, though they are not called
by his Name.

2. Infant Baptism lays a stronger Obligation upon Parents to bring up their
Children in the Knowledge, Nurture, and Admonition of the Lord. And how many
have cause to bless God for the Privilege of good Education? And how strong a
Motive is this, to Excite and Quicken Godly Parents to their Duty, in the
Religious Education of their Children, to consider Gods special Interest in
them, their solemn devoting of them to his Service, and solemn promise to Train
them up for him?

Yea, many from the mere workings of Natural Conscience, hereupon have shown
some Care, that their Children might be Instructed in the Principles of
Religion, whereby the Knowledge of Christ and Christianity, is further spread.

3. Infant Baptism also lays a special Obligation upon Children, to acquaint
themselves with the Terms, and Tenor of that Covenant, their Parents have
engaged them in. And so it is a special means to continue the Covenant Relation
betwixt God, and his Peoples Seed. Parents being hereby obliged to Catechize,
Instruct Children, and Teach them their Duty, and to bring them to the Means,
the Word and Ordinances of Christ; and Children being obliged to receive such
Instructions, and to attend upon the Word, and Ordinances, and apply themselves
to the Service of Christ, whereunto they have been Devoted. And herein Gods
preventing Love and Mercy toward our Children is seen, that he would not have
them left to their own choice, whom they would serve, any more than the Seed of
his People of Old; and that as they could never have chosen better for
themselves, so the sense of their baptismal Covenant might prevail with them,
as soon as they come to any understanding, and will of their own, to serve the
God of their Fathers; to set forward in the good and right Way, wherein they
should go, betimes before they are sinfully Habituated in any other Course.

4. Infant Baptism carries in it the clearest Evidence of our miserable,
sinful, and corrupt Estate by Nature, and of the need there is (in respect of
Original corruption) both of the Blood of Christ, to take off the Guilt, and of
the Spirit of Grace, to free our souls from the power of Corruption. And thus
it has a direct tendency toward a deep Humiliation, and sound Conversion, as
soon as Children are of Capacity to reflect upon it. If baptism was only
Administered to persons of adult age, though it denotes thus much, that they are
sinful, unclean Creatures (considered in themselves) such as have need of
washing; yet it would not point at Original Corruption, as Infant Baptism does;
for they might be accounted sinners by practice, without being acknowledged
sinful by Nature. As we know, many who have been against Infant Baptism, have
denied Original sin.

5. Infant Baptism is a more visible Character, and Expression of Gods
Free Grace, the subject being purely passive. It may seem strange, that God
should this way hold forth his Free Grace under the Old Testament, providing an
Ordinance of which Infants were capable, and make no such provision under the
Gospel.

6. Infant Baptism engages us against sin, as a vowed Enemy for ever.

As Israel was to have War with Amalek for ever: So are we ever to resolve, and
strive against sin, and seek the utter Extirpation of it. That we were false to
Christ, and lived in the Violation of our Baptismal Covenant, all that while we
served sin: The remembrance and consideration thereof, is a means to further
the Humiliation of many gracious hearts for sins past, as a means to quicken
them to greater watchfulness and resolvedness against sin for the time to come.

Here methinks it is worth noticing, what one says, Ep. Ded. to Mr. Fords
practical use of Infant Baptism. p. 5.
Though it may in some cases be granted, that an Ordinance administered with
some considerable circumstantial Irregularities, may sanctify; yet that those
Irregularities themselves should be the Channels of Sanctifying Grace, it is
not easily imaginable. Now this is the case of Infant Baptism. Many holy men of
many Ages, have found their hearts Warmed, and Quickened in the Exercise of
Faith, Repentance, Love, Thankfulness, restrained from sin, excited to duty, by
the consideration (not only of Baptism, and the Personal Covenant therein
Sealed, but also) of Infant Baptism under that Circumstance, and the Covenant
of Ancestors, the Foundation of that Administration.

7. Infant Baptism affords much Comfort and Encouragement to believing Parents,
in reference to their seed. It may well rejoice the heart of a Christian
Parent, to see his Childs baptism a token of Gods good Will toward it,
Sealing his Covenant with it. And take away the grounds of Infant Baptism, and
what ground has a Believer to hope of the salvation of his Child dying in
Infancy, more than to hope of the salvation of the Child of any Heathen or
Infidel? Infants are not saved upon account of Native Innocence, (though they
are innocent in respect of Actual Transgression, yet are they Guilty in respect
of Natural inherent Corruption) but Infants that are saved, are saved upon the
account of Christ: And if saved by Christ, then Interested in him: And if
Interested in him, by what Covenant? I know no other but that, where God
promises to be the God of a Believer, and of his seed, that can give us hopes
of the salvation of our Children, dying in Infancy. No other Covenant, that I
can find in Scripture, to make over Christ and his saving Benefits to Infants.

But now God promising to be a God to the seed of believers, and sealing this
in their Baptism, such of them as die Infants, and so no ways revoke or violate
the Covenant by any Act or Deed of theirs, we have good ground to conclude that
they are saved: as Christ said, Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. These being
in Covenant, and not breaking Covenant with God, it is not to be thought, that
God will break Covenant with them.

Again, hence godly Parents may be encouraged, in reference to their living
Issue. Since God has taken them into Covenant, there is more hope, that God
may have special Covenant-blessings in store for them, than there is of such as
are out of Covenant. And if Parents and Children were Diligent, and Faithful in
doing their part, we might see then, it should not stick at Him, the Lord would
not fail to do His part. See Genesis 18.19.

8. Infant Baptism (engaging the seed of professed Christians to the embracing
and professing of Christianity) has been one great means to enlarge the
Visible Church, and Kingdom of Christ. A means to preserve the Christian
Religion, and propagate it to many, that otherwise were likely never to have
come so far, as to an outward owning and profession of it. It is not so easy
to draw persons to a renouncing of Christ and Christianity, who have been
engaged to a Profession of it from their very Infancy; as it would have been to
have kept many such from owning it at all, had they been left to themselves,
till they were grown up, then to choose for themselves. I hope, there are none
of us, so senceless, as not to acknowledge it a privilege, to live in a Land,
where Christ is generally owned by an open, outward profession; rather than to
Live among Jews, Turks, or Pagans, that are Enemies to the very Name of Christ.

You may see more of this Nature in Mr. Fords, practical Use of Infant Baptism.

Object. 4. They Object, that Infant Baptism is followed with Mischiefs,
attended with very evil Consequences; bringing in false Matter into the Church,
and Deforming her with so many Rotten Members, Ignorant, and Scandalous
Persons, as many of those prove, who were Baptized in Infancy.

Answ. 1. They might with as good Reason bring in the like Charge against
Infant-Circumcision. Now would not that be to charge God foolishly? And shall a
man be more pure than his Maker?

2. Were there no Rotten Members among all those whom John Baptized? Mat. 3. No
Rotten Members among them of Samaria, Baptized by Phillip? Acts 8. No Rotten
Members in the Church of Corinth, Galatia, and other Churches, we read of
planted by the Apostles themselves?

3. Are there no Rotten Members that they take in? No Hypocrites? None of
corrupt Principles?

4. Infant Baptism is neither a cause of Ignorance, nor of Profaneness, but an
Engagement upon all that have been partakers of it, to Learn the Doctrine of
Christ, and live according to his Laws. And however Infants may prove
afterward, yet when they are admitted to Baptism, they are free from all
culpable Ignorance, not guilty of Hypocrisy, nor to be charged with any Actual
sin.

5. The true cause of these Mischiefs is Parents neglect of their Duty, of
Instructing and Training up Children as they ought; or want of the due Exercise
of Church Discipline, and Censures. And so they might be prevented, or removed
by other ways and means, than denying Infant Baptism.

And if any that are Parents think they have done enough, in having brought
their Children to be Baptized; or any Person thinks, he is a good Christian,
because he is baptized, they have not Learnt so of us.

More I would have said to this, because it is taking with some well-meaning
Souls; but I had rather refer you to what Mr. Baxter has written of
Infant Baptism, page 117. etc.

Object. 5. They Object, that Baptism being Administered to one in Infancy, he
has no way to be certain, that he was Baptized, but must take it upon trust
from others. And in this respect there is more to be said for
Infant-Circumcision, because that left a Mark and Character, whereby it might
be known, such were Circumcised.

Answ. 1. Circumcision was used amongst others, besides the Jews; some that
were Idolaters, and Heathens, took up this Rite; though to them it was not the
Ordinance of Circumcision, or a Sign of Gods Covenant. And it was possible for
the Jews to be sometimes taken Captive by these, and their Children to be
Circumcised with their Mock-Circumcision. Now look how the Jews might be
satisfied, that they had the true Circumcision, and ^n the like way our
Children may be certified of their Baptism.

2. How was Paul certified, that he was Circumcised the eighth day, Phil. 3.5.
Surely, he could ^ot remember it? Only it was so testified by others, And the
same way may our Children be certified of their Baptism in Infancy.

3. What assurance can they that are Rebaptized have, that their later baptism
was right? I suppose the words [I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,] are pronounced as they are Plunging into
the Water; at which time it is not possible they should hear, and attend to
them. How do they know in whose Name they were baptized? Must not they also
take it upon trust, that they were Baptized in the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; which the Bystanders sometimes could not hear
distinctly.

4. Why may we not as well be certified of our Baptism in Infancy by a
Register, as of our Birth? They that will question what is so Recorded, may as
well question their Christian Names, and so feat to claim any Earthly
Inheritances, Portions, or Legacies under those Names.

Further, some of them will plead Antiquity: but how vainly and groundlessly,
some of ours have shown.

I cannot but wonder H. D. should make such a Flourish with the Citations he
meets with in The plain and well grounded Treatise concerning Baptism, (falsely
so called) without taking any notice of Mr. Colbet's answer thereunto.

The Pelagians (though bold enough, yet) had not so great a stock of
Confidence, De peccat. Mer. and Remiss. l. 1. c. 26.
(as Augustine observes) who never durst deny the baptism of Infants, because
they saw, they must too openly have Clashed with the whole Church. Certainly,
if those ancient Heretics could have found any fair pretense from Antiquity to
have opposed Infant Baptism, since it would have made so much for their
purpose, they would have thought their Labor here well bestowed.

Object. Last, One Objection more, that must not be passed by, is, That we have
changed the ancient Rite and Ceremony of Dipping. This some make so Essential
and Necessary to true Baptism, that they hold our Baptism no more Baptism, than
it would have been Circumcision; if instead of Cutting off the Foreskin, they
had only pared their Nails.

Now, 1. They argue for the Necessity of Dipping, from the Notation of the
words, (...), and (...), which they will have only to signify Dipping, or
Plunging into Water.

Answ. But if it could be proved that the word [Baptize] primarily signifies
to Dip, Plunge, or Cover all over; yet the Scripture-use of the word is against
them. This is plain from Many Texts which are ordinarily produced, Mark 7.4.
Except they wash (...), They Eat not. I hope they do not Imagine, that the
Pharisees Dipped themselves every time they went to Meat. So the word is used to
signify any way of Washing, and not only that of Dipping. And whereas they use
to oppose [Baptizing] to Rantizing, or Sprinkling; yet the Scripture uses them
promiscuously: In the Language of the Holy Ghost, Sprinkling is sometimes
called Baptism, Heb. 9.10. We read of diverse Washings, in the Greek it is
Baptismes. Where some of those Washings spoken of, were by way of Sprinkling,
ver. 13, 19, 21. Numb. 8.7. and 19.17, 18. And whether is more proper to the
place, diverse kinds of Dipping, or diverse kinds of Washing and Purifying?

So we read of the Israelites being Baptized in the Cloud, and in the Sea, 1
Cor. 10.2. Were they Dipped in the Cloud? No, but Be-dewed, or lightly Washed,
as men are in a shower of Rain. Were they Dipped in the Sea? No certainly, not
the Israelites, but the Egyptians were Dipped, Plunged in the Sea, Exodus 15.10.
(...): Demersi fuerunt ceu plumbum in aqua, So (...), Vid. Bez. in Mat. 3.11.
differt a verbo, (...). it is of a milder signification, that there is no
reason they should put so great an Emphasis in it.

Again, Rev. 19.13. We read of Christ that he was Clothed in a Vesture (...)
Dipped in blood, says our Translation. But it has reference to Isa. 63.1, 2, 3.
where it is [Garments sprinkled with blood.] As that must be the meaning. As
the Expression is taken from great Warriors, returning from the Slaughter of
their Enemies, who do not use to Dip their Garments in the blood of the Slain;
though they have often their Garments besprinkled with blood.

By this time I hope you may see, their Dipping is grounded on such a
Criticism, as will not hold water.

2. They argue from Primitive practice, the manner of baptizing used, when the
Ordinance of baptism was first set up.

Answ. 1. But first the Texts of Scripture they bring to prove it, if well
looked into, are no cogent Proofs of it. The phrase of baptizing (...), Mark
3.11. will not necessarily infer Dipping. The preposition (...), signifying
[with] as well as [in,] Mat. 5.13. (...) With what shall it be salted. So we
have (...), Mat. 3.11. Whether is more consonant to Scripture Phrase, to say,
he shall Dip you in the Spirit; or to say, he shall Pour the Spirit on you? So
that phrase seems to be more against Dipping, than for it. Another Text they
urge, is Mat. 13.16. Jesus when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the
water: but in the Greek it is only (...), he went up [from] not [out of] the
water. Another Text which they think very considerable for their purpose, is
John 3.23. John baptized in Aenon, (...), because many waters were there. The
Text proves not the waters of such depth, as was convenient for Dipping; though
here was a convenience, when great Multitudes came to John's baptism, that he
and his Disciples might be employed together. The word Aenon signifies no more
than Fonticulus, a little Spring, or Rivulet. And they tell us, it was a small
Brook indeed, which one might almost stride over; though of no small account in
that hot Country, where water was so scarce. Another Text they stand much
upon, is Acts 8.38. which if it will prove, that Phillip Dipped the Eunuch, it
will prove also that he Dipped himself: For it is said, (...); they both went
down unto the water. The proposition (...) and (...) there, may as well be
rendered [to] and [from] as by [into] and [out of:] No wonder, Philip is said to
go down to, and come up from the water, ( ver. 39.) The water Running in the
Valleys, and that being a Land of Hills and Valleys, Deuteronomy. 11.11.

2. They have little to say, to those Instances, which some of ours produce of
Persons baptized, and no probability of their being Dipped. As we read of Three
Thousand baptized in a day, Acts 2.41. Yea, in part of a day. (Compare ver. 15.
with 41.) When so few hands were to be employed, it would seem passing
strange, that they should Dip so many as Three Thousand, taking them one by
one, in part of a day, (as one part of the day was spent before the Company
met, and a further part of it was spent in Peter's Sermon, by which they were
Converted.) Now had they been baptized in their way, it would scarce have been
the work of a day or two. Again, if they were Dipped, they were either Dipped
Naked, or in their Clothes. If Naked, then they might all have seemed full of
new Wine indeed. If David's servants were ashamed, when Hanun cut off their
Garments to the Middle, (2 Samuel 10.4.) What matter of shame had it been, if all
these had been stripped Naked? And what reproach would this have brought upon the
way of Christianity? If in their Clothes, such Dipping would have been a
Washing of their Clothes, rather than of themselves. So the Clothes had been
baptized immediately, and primarily, and the Body only consequently, and
secondarily. Thus indeed their Bodies might be wet, but not properly washed. So
likewise some parts of the body might have been untouched, And then how would
such Dipping hold forth a being Sanctified throughout.

Again, when Paul was weak after three days Fasting, Ananias comes to him in
the House of Judas, and baptized him. And afterward receiving Meat he was
strengthened, Acts 9.9, 18, 19. What Evidence or Probability can they show,
that Paul in that weak condition he was in, was taken out to a River, or
Plunged into cold water, which might in an ordinary way have destroyed him? The
old Rule [I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice,] approved by Christ himself,
Mat. 12.7. may satisfy us, that either it was not Paul's duty (pro hic and
nunc) to be baptized, or that Plunging the body into water was not then held
indispensibly necessary, and essential to Baptism.

Again, we read, the Jailor and his Household were baptized in the Night. Had
the Jailor a Pond, or River in his House? Or if he was so well stored with
water laid in, as might suffice to Dip or Plung them into; yet would it be pure
enough for those that came last, when others had been washed in it before? We
know sometimes they Argue from that Expression of [Bodies washed with pure
water,] Heb. 10.22.

(3.) Had it been never so clear and manifest, that in those Hotter Countries,
Baptism was Administered in the way of Dipping; there is more to be pleaded for
it, than for this Practice in such a cold Climate as ours, where it would be to
cross other Scripture-Rules. As Mr. Baxter conceives, that The Practice sprung
up in the Hotter Countries, where Custom had Taught them to go almost half
Naked, in comparison of us, and therefore it was there more Civil, or less
Immodest, and less Dangerous to their Lives. But what he has written of this
Practice in our Circumstances, page 134. to 138. deserves to be well weighed.
So far as I am able to judge, he there clearly proves, that our Dippers break
the Commandment of God, to follow their Tradition.

3. They argue from the Nature of Baptism, and the Analogy and Resemblance
betwixt Dipping, and Christ's Burial, or our burial with Christ, held forth in
baptism, Romans 6.4. And on this, the wisest of them lay the greatest stress: To
overthrow this, is to overthrow their greatest strength.

Answ. 1. Whereas one of them makes Dipping the very Form of Baptism: If it
were so, then (for as much as Forma dat esse rei) whenever persons are Dipped,
(as some are for Punishment) or Dip and Douse themselves, (as some do for
Pleasure) this should be the Ordinance of Baptism, here being the true Form of
baptism.

2. It is not the Measure and Quantity, but the Quality, or Use of water, that
is Representative, and Significative (by Christ's Institution) in Baptism.

For my part, I should not dare to make the Action of Dipping, or Sprinkling,
or (which we generally use) Pouring on of water a Sacramental, without clearer
Evidence of Scripture, than I could ever yet see produced. As in the Lords
Supper, Christ has appointed Bread and Wine, without determining how much of
these each Communicant should take: So in Baptism, he has appointed water to
be used (to signify the Cleansing virtue and Efficacy of his Blood and Spirit)
without determining the quantity of water, or the manner how it should be
applied, whether by Immersion, Aspersion, or Superfusion.

3. If because Dipping best Represents the Burial of Christ, etc. therefore
we must be for Dipping upon any Terms, and account that no Baptism, which is
not this way Administered; I doubt this way of Arguing has a Reach, quite
beyond the Intention of them that use, and urge it.

They that are so Zealous for Dipping, to hold forth their being Buried with
Christ, by a parity of Reason should as well be for Crossing, to hold forth
their being Crucified with Christ. Whereas they Insist so much on Romans 6.4. We
are buried with him by Baptism: In the two next verses, the Apostle speaks of
being Planted together in the likeness of his Death; and of the Old Man being
Crucified with him, ( ver. 5, 6.) Now might they not from hence Argue as well
for Crossing all that were Baptized, as holding forth the likeness of Christ's
Death more clearly, than Dipping only does? Only they should be for Crossing
first. and Dipping after that; as the Crucifixion and Death of Christ preceded
his Burial, and as men use not to be buried before they are dead. So might not
others plead as well for the White Garment, as holding forth that Purity and
Holiness Christians are called, and obliged unto? So might they not in like
manner Argue for the Ministers Breaking and Giving to every Communicant a whole
Loaf, more clearly to hold forth such an ones duty to take whole Christ, and
the Privilege of very worthy Receiver, that he is Interested in whole Christ?
And might they not as well contend for every ones taking their full of Bread
and Wine, in the Lords Supper, to hold forth in a plain and Lively manner, that
plentiful Provision which is made for Souls in Christ; and that one Christ is
enough to fill us all: According to the Invitation, Eat, O Friends, Drink, yea,
Drink abundantly, O Beloved. By this way of Arguing, might not men soon bring
into that part of Gods solemn Worship, as great Disorders as ever were in the
Church of Corinth?

So likewise should they not as well plead for the use of Musical Instruments
in singing of Psalms, as from the proper signification of the word (...): So
from the Nature of the thing, it fitly setting forth the Melody we should make
in our hearts to the Lord, ( Ephesians. 5.19)

But further, may not others as well Argue for Sprinkling, because Baptism is
to signify the Souls being cleansed by the Blood of Christ, which is called
the Blood of Sprinkling, Heb. 12.24. 1 Pet. 1.2. And the Inward Washing, which
the Outward Baptism represents, is set forth under the Term of Sprinkling, or
(as they call it) Rantizing, Heb. 10.22. As the same thing was shadowed out
under the Law by Sprinkling.

Or may one not say (as Mr. Cotton) that Sprinkling, or Pouring on water, where
water is applied to the Body, sets forth in a more lively manner, the Grace of
Christ in washing away our sins, than Dipping, where the Body is applied to the
water? That being done rather by applying Christ's Blood to Us, than by applying
our selves to Christ's Blood.

And may we not as well Argue for Baptizing, by Pouring on water (which we
generally Practice) as best setting forth the Communication of the Spirit,
promised to be Poured on us, Joel 2.28, 29. Certainly they are all one, to be
Baptized with the Holy Ghost, and to have the Spirit poured on us.

Thus it is plain, that their Arguing for Dipping from Allusion and Analogy,
has no strength, or Cogency at all. The same Argument may be urged against
them. As they decry Baptizing by Sprinkling (which I think few or none amongst
us use) or Pouring on water, as not holding forth the Burial of Christ, etc.
Others have the like Plea against Dipping, as not holding forth the Sprinkling
of the Blood of Christ, and Pouring forth of his Spirit, which Baptism is as
well to signify. Let them answer here for themselves, and they will answer for
us too.

Here I shall only add this Note, That whatsoever Rite be used in Baptism,
whether theirs, or that which we hold best and safest in our Circumstances,
being Baptized unto Christ; it must needs follow, that we are Baptized unto his
Death, and obliged to Conformity to him; and to improve Christ, to our dying
more and more unto sin, and rising again to Newness of Life. And thus we are
buried with Christ by Baptism, Baptism serving for this Use and End, to hold
forth our Duty and Privilege (if Faithful in our Baptismal Covenant) of being
made Conformable to his Death.

As for the Objections against Dipping, as they hold it necessary for all
Times, and Places, they are not so weak as H. D. would make them: Who says
thus, Treatise of Baptism. p. 252.
As for the Cavils of Unseemliness, and hazzarding of Health to the weak, they
are the Fruits of Carnal Wisdom, Unbelief, and Shunning of the Cross, etc.

But, Page 133. in Margen.
1. To Baptize Naked, he grants to be Abominable, and consequently is it not
unseemly, to Baptize persons in so light and loose an Habit, as is next to
Nakedness.

They are for Washing all and every part, as the whole man is unclean. Page 250.
Now must it not be a very loose Attire, wherein the whole body, and every part
may be washed with one sudden Plunge, at first Dash? If there be no
Unseemliness in their way, Why do they ordinarily choose the Night for it?
Baptism being solemnly to declare ones Admission into the Visible Church, the
more publicly and openly it is Administered, (Caeteris paribus) it is the more
solemn.

2. It cannot be denied, but some are so tender, that they can scarce look into
the Cold Air without Hazard and Prejudice: And can it be thought, that there
is no Danger in casting such into the Water? Of Infant Baptism. p. 136.
As Mr. Baxter has Noted: God has not appointed Ordinances in his Church
which will destroy them, except they be preserved by a Miracle; for then it
were a Tying himself to a constant working of Miracles, which he has not done,
except the Doctrine of Transubstantiation be true.

3. Add this, as Dipping is Hazzardous in cold Countries, so it is scarce
Practicable in some Hot Countries. How many Miles may one Travel in some
places, ere they come to a River of sufficient Depth for this purpose? Whereas
the positive Institutions of the Gospel are usually Commended. and Prefered to
the Legal Services, for their Easiness; their way would make Circumcision less
Painful, Troublesome, and Dangerous than Baptism.

Some may think, I have Expatiated too far here: But is there not a cause? How
many that Unchurch us in their rash Censures, and will have no Communion with
us in other the undoubted Ordinances of Jesus Christ, because we maintain our
Childrens Interest in the Covenant, and Right to Baptism, the Initiating Sign
and Seal of it? What a sad Snare is the way of Anabaptism to many well-meaning,
but mistaken Souls? If so deep Censuring of their Brethren, and Separating from
all the Churches of Christ, that are not of their way, as the strictest, and
the most of them do, be the way of Christ; Then Christ would seem to be against
Himself, and then how should his Kingdom stand? Whether their way be not
Injurious to the Churches Peace, to the Comfort of Christian Parents, and
Prejudicial to Christ's Interest in the World; let the Soberminded judge.
Whether the Engaging of a Christians Children from their Infancy, to the
Entertainment and Profession of Christianity, and engaging Christian Parents to
Train up their Children in such a way; or leaving both Parent and Child Free,
and Uningaged here, which of these ways has the more direct Tendancy to bring
in Ignorance, and Irreligion; Let any, but such as are strangely prepossessed,
and prejudiced judge.

Now you that are satisfied in the point of Infant Baptism, account it not
enough to own it, or that you may be able to Plead for it; but see that your
Practice be such as may bring Credit and Commendation to it. It is a woeful
Solecism, yet too Common, for men to be Zealous for Infant-baptisin, and to
Glory in it, that they were thus Devoted to Christ and his Service, in their
Infancy; and yet really to Disown it again, and Disgrace it in their Lives. How
should we fear laying such an Ordinance of Christ's under Reproach and Contempt?
Shall we scarce have patience to hear others Deny, or Question Infant Baptism,
and yet by our unworthy and unsuitable walking, make it stink among prejudiced
Minds? Not to give up your selves to the Service of God, to whom ye were
Devoted in Baptism, is a kind of Sacrilege. As Calvin says, Nec specie
Sacriligii carere, In Romans 12.1.
si ad immunditiem relabimur: Quoniam id nihil aliud est quam rem Sanctificatam
profanare.

Again, Have we given up our Children to God, and Christ in Baptism? Let us
Train them up for him. We should be often minding them of what we have done
for them; and that as they come to have a Will of their own, God expects they
Confirm what we have done. We should Instruct, and warn them, Charge and
Command them to keep the Way of the Lord; go before them in an holy Example,
and do all we can to help them forward, that so God may establish his Covenant
with us, and ours.

Romans 3.28, 29. He is not a Jew, which is one (only) outwardly. But he is a Jew
which is one (also) inwardly, etc.
Sect. 18. PROP. XVIII. They who are also Internally in Covenant, are
Privileged far above those, who are only Externally in Covenant.
THey that are Internally in Covenant, have an Actual right to the greatest
Benefits and Blessings of the Covenant, whereas the other have a Right only
Conditionally, viz. If they perform what on their part they are Engaged unto.

Surely there is a great difference, between a Pardon offered, and a Pardon
accepted, and obtained; betwixt Salvation offered upon Condition, and an Actual
right in Salvation, as having the Condition, to which it is promised. To all
that are Outwardly in Covenanr, Remission and Salvation are promised
Conditionally; that is, if they Believe, if they Repent. But where the
Condition is not performed, the Promise cannot be pleaded. but now such as are
Internally in Covenant, having the Condition, have an Immediate actual Right to
the Blessings promised.

What those Covenant-blessings are, you heard something before under the
Thirteenth Proposition.

Jer. 32.40. I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, I will put my fear
in their Hearts, that they shall not depart from me.
Sect. 19. PROP. XIX. One Special Privilege of those who are Internally in
Covenant with God, is, that they shall never totally depart from God, or fall
from Grace, or be cast out of Covenant.
WHere Special Grace has wrought the Candition, it will maintain the work.
Where Special Grace begins, it will finish the work in due time. Thus the
Faithful, as they have an Immediate right, so on Indefeasable right to the
great Benefits contained in the Covenant.

The Remonstrants hold Grace to be Vincible, both in Conversion, and after
Conversion. Si Deus fidem vi irresistibili quae impediri non potest, non
efficit, neque sustentat: As they. And we know their meaning, when they deny
Vim Gratiae irresistibilem; that when God had done all that belongs to Him to
do, yet man's will may Frustrate his Grace, and render all ineffectual and to no
purpose.

If the Saints perseverance be not certain. Then,

(1.) What becomes of Gods Decree? Here they will say, that God Electeth men
upon foresight of Faith, and Perseverance, not unto Faith and Perseverance.
But (methinks) the Scripture teaches otherwise, Ephesians. 1.4. Elected, to be
Holy: Not upon Gods Foresight that such would be holy. Jam. 2.5. God has
chosen the Poor of this world Rich in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom. Chosen,
not because Rich in Faith; but to be Rich in Faith: As they were Chosen, not
because Heirs of the Kingdom; but to be Heirs of the Kingdom. 2 These. 2.13.
Chosen to Salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the
Truth. He could not foresee Sanctification in any, but as the work of his own
Spirit: He could not foresee Faith in any, but as his own Gift. (Phil. 1.29.
Tit. 1.1.) Acts 13.48. As many as were Ordained to Eternal Life, believed. Some
indeed would have it taken thus: As many as were fitted, or disposed unto
Eternal Life, believed. But what Disposition, or Aptitude unto Eternal Life is
there found in any, before Faith, before they do believe? Besides, the word is
(Plusquam perfecti temporis) (...), ordinati fuerant: As many as had been
ordained to Eternal Life. Importing a previous Ordination rather than a present
disposition to Faith.

To the like purpose consult what our Savior says, John 6.37, 39. All that
the Father gives me, shall come to me. And this is the Fathers will, that of
all which he has given me, I should loose nothing; but should raise it up
again at the last day. Raise it up, that is, to everlasting Life, as it is ver.
40. Hence it is plain, that in regard of Gods Will and Purpose, all the Elect
shall certainly come to Christ, and be kept by him to everlasting Life.

And so much is implied in that speech of his, Mat. 24.24. Insomuch that (if it
were possible) they would deceive the very Elect. It is impossible that false
Christ's should deceive the Elect. Though in themselves they are liable to
Deception, as well as others; yet being Elect, God has a special care of them,
and they are the special charge of Christ, and the holy Spirit of Truth; for
which cause it is not possible they should be finally deceived, and drawn away
from Christ, and Fundamental Truth.

And may we not gather as much from Romans 8.28. All things work together for
good, to them who are the called according to his purpose. How will this hold
true, and yet they may fall into the greatest of Evils, both Sinful, and Penal,
Apostasy, and Perdition. And ver. 30. Whom he did predestinate, them he also
called: And whom he called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them
he also glorified. They that can prove their Election by their effectual
Vocation, may thence conclude their present Justification, and their future
Glorification. Though the former of these Texts should make nothing against
those, who grant the certain Perseverance of the Elect as such, but not of all
the Justified, or Sanctified; (supposing there are some such, who are not
Elect) yet this last Scripture clearly Determines that all that are called,
that is, effectually called (and so Sanctified) and Justified, are or shall be
Glorified, and Consequently must needs Persevere.

(2.) What becomes of Divine Promises, that look this way, if the Faithful do
not certainly Persevere? Is not Gods Promise good Security? Jer. 32.40. I will
put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Here we see
Persevering-Grace is a Gift, which God has promised. And they in whose hearts
God puts his Fear, they shall fear him for ever, (ver. 39.) they shall not
depart from him. It is Evident, and Undeniable, that this is here promised. Now
it is promised either Absolutely, or Conditionally. If absolutely, then it
inevitably follows, that they must continue in his Fear, and never depart from
Him; Or else where were his Truth and Faithfulness? If Conditionally, Then what
is the Condition? Can we understand it thus, I will put my fear into their
hearts, that they shall not depart from me: If there will be to continue to
fear me, if their will be not to depart? But hold: The same thing cannot be the
thing promised, and the condition unto which it is promised. Otiosa est haec
conditio, facit enim perseverantiam conditionem perseverantiae: Non enim deesse
gratiae sufficienti est perseveraere, (Suffrag. Britan. de 5. Art. p. 225.) I
hope, they with whom we have to do here, would not make God, as one that
Mocketh. And then how can this be the sense, I will give them to fear me, that
they shall not depart from me: Provided their will be to fear me still, and
their care not to depart from me. I will give them to continue and persevere in
my fear, if their will be to continue in my fear; that is, If they do continue
in my fear; Certainly, they that do persevere, must persevere, whether God
promised it, or no. No need for God to promise that, the contrary whereof would
imply a Contradiction. We neither consult the Honor of his Wisdom, nor of his
Grace, if we would have no more meant than so.

And further, If the Lord promised no more here, than Grace to persevere, if we
will; then there should be no more promised to Believers under the Covenant of
Grace, then Adam might have concluded on under the Covenant of Works. Adamo
fuit datum, ut posset. si vellet in bono perseverare, sed non fuit datum, ut
vellet: Nobis vero, qui vero Christo insiti sumus, talis data est gratia, ut
non solum possimus, si velimus, sed etiam ut velimus in Christo perseverare,
(Aug. de Correp. and great. in c. 11. and 12. Ut Suffr. Britan ib.)

Yea, the condition of Believers would be so much worse than Innocent Adams, by
how much they have less strength, than he had. Innocent Adam had the fear of
God in his heart, (otherwise he had not been Innocent) and that fear preserved
in his heart; must needs have pre^ented his departing from God. So he had that
which might have kept him close to God, without any contrary principles to turn
him aside. Whereas the best of Saints upon Earth are not so perfect in Faith,
or Fear, or any Grace, but that there is something of a contrary corrupt
principle still remaining in them, as a B^ck-byas drawing them another way.

Again, The Lord has promised, Mat. 16.18. The Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against his Church.

Now if the Faithful should not persevere, it is plain in this case, the Gates
of Hell would prevail. Therefore the perseverance of the Faithful is certain;
Or else how should this word of promise hold certainly true? If the
perseverance of the Faithful be not certain, but purely contingent, that this
Believer may fall away, and that Believer, and so another, and another; and if
there be no one in particular, to whom it may not happen, that he may fall
away, then that any should hold out to the end, and be saved, it must be purely
contingent and uncertain. And if it be purely Contingent, whether any one
Believer in the world will persevere, what is not certain, cannot be certainly
known; what is not certainly Future, cannot be certainly Fore-known. Qualis est
res, talis est rei sci entia, etc. Camero. Resp. ad Ep. viri docti. p. 162. in
fol. 757.
When Christ says, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against the Faithful,
(who are built on him, the Rock) it is certain, the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against them, otherwise he might be mistaken, and his word not hold
true.

If any suppose this to be the sense, That the powers of Hell shall not prevail
against Believers, without their will, and consent; if this were all, then
Christ should promise here, as much as comes to nothing. There was no fear of
the Devils forcing away any soul from Christ, quite against its will. Besides,
what is promised to Believers, would hold as true of Unbelievers: So the Gates
of Hell should not prevail against Them neither. For none will say, that
Unbelievers are kept off from Christ by force, but that their wills are to keep
off from him.

Another Promise you have, 1 Cor. 10.13. God is faithful, who will not suffer
you to be Tempted above that ye are able; but will with the Temptation also
make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it.

Another, John 10.28. I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never
perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand.

If we must understand these Promises, as depending on such a Condition as
this, that they yield not of themselves to Temptation, nor cast themselves out
of Christ's hands: But not as securing them at all, that they shall not Totally
and Finally yield up to Temptation, and cast themselves out of his Hand; then
it will follow, that they speak not at all to a Believers fears: but to what he
has no fear of. Believers have no fear at all of being plucked away from Christ
by strong hand, and against their wills; but all the fear is, whether they
shall not at one time or other, be Tempted away from Christ, and their hearts
prove Treacherous to Him.

To these Promises, agrees that of the Apostle Paul, Phil. 1.6. Being
confident of this very thing, that he which has begun a good Work in you, will
perform ((...) Finish) it until the day of Jesus Christ. Where observe, his
confidence was not in them, but in him that had begun the Work.

Likewise that of the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 1.5. Kept by the power of God
through Faith, unto Salvation. Where we see the Lord has them in his keeping.
And, Qui custodit nos per fidem, custodit in nobis fidem: He that keeps us
through Faith unto Salvation, keeps Faith in us to Salvation. How are they
kept by his power, who are suffered to Apostatize, that they are lost
Creatures? ( John 17.12.) Surely, such are deserted and cast off, not kept.

(3.) What becomes of Christ's Prayer, and prevalent Intercession, if Believers
shall not persevere? There is therefore no Condemnation to them, because Christ
is at the Right Hand of God, making Intercession for them, Romans 8.34. What is
it that Christ Sueth and Pleads for, on the behalf of his People? That their
Faith may not fail, as he Prayed for Peter, Luke 22.32. That God would keep
them through his own Name, keep them from the evil. If they are not kept from
the evil of Total and Final Apostasy, How is Christ's Prayer for them heard? See
John 17.11, 15, 20. If there be any power in the Intercession of Christ (whom
the Father hears always) Believers shall be kept by Gods power. The Father
should not have his will, if they be not kept unto Salvation, John 6.39.
Neither should the Son have his will, John 17.24.

And to say, that Christ means no more, but that they might be kept, upon
condition that they be not wanting to themselves; is as if he should only Pray
that they might be kept, while indeed they shall keep themselves. So to deny
the certain perseverance of the Faithful, is to make Christ's Intercession on
that behalf, either Needless, or Fruitless, and Successless.

(4.) What becomes of the Saints prayers for Perseverance? And what ground
have any of us to Pray, that the Lord would Unite our hearts to fear his Name,
that he would give us an heart to fear him for ever; or that we may be kept by
his power, and so guarded with his Grace, that no Temptation may prevail, to
draw us away from him? If the Faithful may fall away, and if God does not
promise their Perseverance, but conditionally, then the meaning of such
Petitions can be no more than this: Lord, keep me, so long as I have a care to
keep my self. Lord, uphold me by thy Grace, so long as I have a care not to
fall. Preserve me in thy fear, while I have an heart to fear thee. Give me to
persevere, if I will.

(5.) If the Faithful do not certainly persevere, what becomes of Gods
everlasting Love to them? That Love which the Apostle does so greatly glory in,
Romans 8.38, 39. Should he suffer them to draw back, his Soul could then take no
more pleasure in them, Heb. 10.38. Then he should not remember them with
everlasting kindness, as Isa. 54.8, 10. Or Love them with an everlasting Love,
as Jer. 31.3.

If any Believer fall away, and perish, certainly it is not for want of Power
in God. He that could quicken them, when dead in Trespasses and Sins, could
settle them when Staggering; could Raise them when Fallen. I say, it is not for
want of Power in God to keep them, if they be not kept: He is of power to
Establish them, Romans 16.25. He is able to keep them from falling, Jude ver. 24.
He is able to build them up, and to give them an Inheritance among all them
that are Sanctified, Acts 20.32. And otherwise the Apostle Peter would not have
prayed, as 1 Pet. 5.10. That the God of all Grace would make them Perfect,
Establish, Strengthen, Settle them. Nor would Christ have Prayed for Peter,
that his Faith might not fail; if it had not been in his Fathers hands, to
prevent the failing of Peter's faith. And if it be not for want of Power, it
cannot be, that they are not kept for want of Love, and good will in God
toward them. The Love of God being such, as brought them to the Participation
of his Grace, and Reconciled them to Himself, who before were Enemies; how
strange were it, if he should not continue to Love them, whom he has
Reconciled. See how the Apostle argues, Romans 5.9, 10, 17.

(6.) What ground for that joy of Faith the Scripture speaks of, if the
perseverance of the Faithful be not certain? Take away the Doctrine of
perseverance, and what becomes of Assurance? What ground for that Assurance,
which many of the Faithful (of whom we read in Scripture) had, and all are
called on, to give Diligence to obtain, 2 Pet. 1.10. Heb. 6.11. When we read
of the the full assurance of Hope, as attainable, as in the Texts last Cited?

And methinks, they which from that Caution, 1 Cor. 10.12. [Let him that
thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall.] Infer, that he that stands may
fall; they should not deny, but from this Council, and Exhortation, 2 Pet.
1.10. Give diligence to make your Calling and Election sure.] This may be
Inferred, that by giving Diligence, we may make our Calling and Election sure.
And consequently our Salvation. As that Golden Chain, Romans 8.30. can never be
broken, but one Link will Certainly, and Infallibly draw on another.

And so when we read of the Peace of God, which passes all understanding,
keeping the heart and mind, Phil. 4.7. When we read of the God of Hope,
filling souls with joy and peace in Believing, Romans 15.13. And giving them
everlasting Consolation, and good Hope through Grace, 2 These. 2.16. When we
read of Believers Rejoicing with joy unspeakable, and full of Glory, 1 Pet.
1.8. Methinks, these things do strongly Imply the Safety and Security of the
Faithful. Otherwise though we do suppose their Estate at present to be never so
happy, yet if their happiness be no way secured; but in the event they may be
more miserable, for having once been so happy, Acriores sunt morsus libertatis
amissae. Cic.
the thought of this must needs be a great allay, and sad check to their Joy
and Peace. If the state of Believers be so Lubrick and Uncertain, as some would
have it; then what ground can they have for such an Hope, and such Peace, and
such Joy, as the Scripture speaks of? Rather it would be but like Jonah's
Gourd, that sprang up in a Night, and perished in a Night: Would this afford
strong Consolation, and everlasting Consolation, to believe that they are Elect
persons to day, but may be Reprobates to Morrow? That they are Saints to day,
but may be wretched Apostates to morrow? Would this yield Joy unspeakable, and
such Peace, as passes understanding, to apprehend their Adoption to day, but
to live in fear of their Abdication to Morrow?

Indeed if the Saints Perseverance and Salvation depend on their mutable,
Inconstant will, not on Gods Purpose and Grace; Then how little hope is there
of their Perseverance, and Eternal Happiness? While Innocent Adam being
Tempted, was overcome; How much rather may the best of us conclude, that we
shall fall by the hand of the Tempter? Who of us all is fit to Encounter, and
go out against this Goliath?

How little hope of the Perseverance of any of the Faithful, if God has no
more promised to secure them from Total and Final Apostasy, than from common
Slips, and Falls? When there is scarce any probability, that we should at all
times do our Duty, but much to the contrary; that partly through the Remainders
of Inbred Corruption, and partly through the Impetuousness of Temptation, we
should at one time or other grow Negligent; if, as we are letting go our Hold
with God, and Jesus Christ, the Lord should let go his Hold of us; What is
like to become of us at last?

But should we suppose the Scales to be even here, and that it is every way as
likely, a Believer will never carry himself so, as might provoke the Lord to
withdraw, and to leave him to himself, as that he will; yet it is plain, that
to deny the certain Perseverance of the Faithful, must needs Lessen a Believers
Comfort. So his joy could not be full, no, not though he knew himself to be a
true Believer. But admitting the certain perseverance of the Faithful, a
Believer that had but a probable persuasion, (and much more being assured of
the Truth and Soundness of his Faith) might have more comfort for that. As Mr.
Baxter has well Noted: If I have no persuasion either of my own sincerity, or
perseverance, or yet of my perseverance as certain, if I were certainly
sincere, then I should have two difficulties in the way of my comfort; which is
more than one alone, and therefore must put me further off from comfort. But if
I were sure that all true Believers shall persevere, if I had withal but a
strong hope, or probability that I am a true Believer, I should freely receive
the comfort of that probability, without the Impediment of farther doubts
concerning perseverance. When otherwise I should be thinking, what if I be
Justified, yet how can I tell but I may lose it by Backsliding?

But against the certain perseverance of the Faithful, many things are Objected.

Object. 1. We read, Ezekiel. 18.24, 26. When the Righteous turns away from his
Righteousness, etc.

Answ. It is true, that when a Righteous man does turn away, or if he turns
away from his Righteousness, he shall Die: But it is Propositio conditionalis,
quae nihil ponit in esse. An Hypothetical proposition does only hold forth the
Connection as true. Not that the Antecedent shall, or may be: but if it should
be, then such a thing would be consequent upon it, John 16.7. If I go not away,
the Comforter will not come. This will not prove, that it might have so fallen
out, that Christ might not have departed. His going away was a thing certain,
and Determined, notwithstanding his putting this Supposition. So Gal. 1.8. If
we, or an Angel from Heaven Preach any other Gospel, let him be accursed. This
will not prove, that an Angel from Heaven ever shall, or may Preach another
Gospel.

Object. 2. Do we not read of some that believe for a while, but in time of
Temptation fall away? Mat. 13.20, 21. Luke 8.13.

Answ. A Temporary Faith is not a true Faith. It is there said of a Temporary
believer, that he has no root: But of the true believer we read, that he is
born of Incorruptible seed, 1 Pet. 1.23. And that his Seed remains in him, 1
John. 3.9. And it is Noted as the property of the good Ground, that it brings
forth Fruit with patience, or perseverance, Luke 8.15. That never was good
Ground that only makes a flourish for a time, but does not bring forth Fruit
to perfection.

Object. 3. Do not Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. and Chap. 10.26, 27, 28, 29. Speak of a
Total and Final Apostasy?

Answ. 1. To that [If we sin wilfully after, etc.] We answer as before to Ezekiel.
18.24.

2. These Texts speak of that sin unto Death, which the Regenerate shall never
fall into, 1 John 3.9. and 5.18.

3. That having Tasted of the Heavenly Gift, is a Diminutive Expression,
denoting a Slighty, and Superficial, not a sound Perception; signifying
something short of that Drinking, John 4.14. Whosoever drinks of the Water
that I shall give him, shall never Thirst: But the Water that I shall give him,
shall be in him a Well of Water springing up into everlasting Life. Something
short of that Eating and Drinking, which is by a true and lively Faith, John
6.35, 54. Whosoever eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, shall never Hunger, nor
Thirst, but has Eternal Life, and I will raise him up at the last day.

4. It would seem that the Apostle does not speak of true Believers, Heb. 6.4,
5, 6. But when he speaks of such, he uses another Dialect, ver. 9, 10. But
beloved, we are persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany
Salvation. For God is not Unrighteous to forget your Worth, and Labor of Love.

5. That Text, Heb. 6. as they urge it, crosses another Principle of the
Objectors. There it is said, It is Impossible if such fall away, to renew them
again unto Repentance. But they hold a Believer may fall away Totally, and yet
be raised again by Repentance. As Thompson would say: See Mr. Hickmans
Animadver. Dr. Heylins Quinq. Hist. p. 396.
I am a Child of the Devil to day; but I have Free Will, and to Morrow I will
make my self a Child of God.

Object. 4. Instances are brought of some that have fallen, and fallen off: As
David, Solomon, Hymeneus, Philetus, etc.

Answ. It is granted, some of these were in a state of Grace, and yet fell
Foulely; but not Totally, and Finally. They were worsted in praelio, lost this
and that Battle, and yet were on the Conquering side in bello. As we read of
Dan, A Troop shall overcome him; but he shall overcome at last. So however they
were Foiled for some time, yet they overcame at last. Sometimes God suffers
his own Children to Fall, to make them more Humble, Cautelous, and Circumspect
ever after: That they stand more surely, and walk more steadily afterward.

Again, Some of those mentioned, did fall quite away; but it cannot be proved,
that ever they were true believers. The contrary is Intimated, when the Apostle
subjoyneth that word of Encouragement to the Faithful, 2 Timothy 2.19.
Nevertheless, the Foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal, the Lord
knows them that are his. Implying, that the other who had Apostatized were
none of his, and never had a good Foundation; otherwise they had stood sure. As
the Apostle John has the like, 1 John 2.19, 20, 27. They went out from us, but
they were not of us: For if they had been of us, they would (no doubt) have
continued with us. But ye have an Unction from the Holy One, (yea, by way of
contradistinction to those that went out, and fell off.) And ver. 27. The
anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you: And even as it has
taught you, ye shall abide in it. So that according to the Apostles Doctrine,
if those Apostates and Impostures, had ever received that Anointing, which true
Believers have, they should then have abode in the Truth, and not have proved
such wretched Apostates.

Object, 5. If the perseverance of the Faithful be so certainly Determined,
then all Exhortations and Promises to Perseverance, and all Threatenings in case
of Apostasy, are needless, if not absurd. Who would make a business of it, to
persuade the Sun to keep its course, that can do no other?

Answ. Some things Naturally hold on their Course, Est duplex genus
perseverantiae, unum Physicum, quo modo coelum perseverat, and Terra, --
Profecto hoc genus persever antiae non admittit admonitiones. Sed est aliud
genus perseverantiae quod est ab animi propositio, id vero admittit, and poscit
ultro admonitiones; Nam propositum animi est a judicio and ratione, etc. Camero
praelect. p. 227. c. 2.
without any understanding of it, or Natural inclination to do otherwise; as
the Sun shines, and the Fire burns, whether they are bid to do so, or no. And
here it is true, it were Irrational to use Exhortations to that which their very
Forms and Natures put them forth unto. Again, others are so confirmed in their
state, and course, that there is no more danger of their being Diverted, or
turned aside. So are blessed Angels, and the Spirits of just men made perfect
in Heaven. And therefore being fully confirmed, and no more in any danger of
falling from that state of Perfection; whereunto they are arrived, Ordinances,
Exhortations, and the like means of Establishment are needless to them. But the
perseverance of the Saints on Earth, determined by God, is promoted, and
affected in a Rational way, with Understanding, and Deliberation (wherein it
differs from the Course of Natural Agents) joined not only with a Natural
power of doing otherwise; but also with great danger of their not persevering
in respect of themselves, and of the manifold Temptations, which here they are
surrounded, and assaulted with. In which last Respect, the state of the Saints
on Earth, is different from the state of the Saints in Heaven. And what is not
needful to those blessed souls, who are absolutely freed from sin, and set so
much above the Power, and reach of Temptation; yet may be needful for the
preservation of the Faithful here, who are annoyed both with remainders of
Corruption within, and with Temptations from without.

As the Faithful are kept, and held on in their Course by a close application
of Spiritual Objects to their Faculties, all means of strengthening their
Apprehension of the goodness of their way and state; are very useful, and
proper for their Preservation.

2. And now methinks the Absurdity rather falls on their way, who would
separate the means from the end. Gods Intending and Determining the end, does
not Exclude, or Overthrow, but rather Takes in, and Establishes the means
conducing to the Saints Establishment and Perseverance. Though they could not
do the work of themselves, yet by Divine appointment they are subordinate to
that power of God, which does preserve the Faithful. The Spirit of God making
use of them, and concurring with them. As Gods determining whom he will
effectually Call, and Convert, does not make the Ministry of the Word needless;
So neither does his Determining that these shall presevere, render the means
needless. Grace is nourished and maintained by the like means, whereby it was
at first wrought.

Again, when God determines that the Faithful shall be kept unto Salvation;
the meaning is not, that they shall be kept without their having any care of
themselves: But that he will keep up in them a care not to cast away, and Ruin
themselves. Which care is promoted by Exhortations, Promises, Threatenings: So
likewise they are kept through Faith. Now Faith submits to Divine Precepts and
Admonitions, closes with Divine Promises, trembles at Divine Threatenings. Thus
Faith takes in the whole Word.

3. Take one plain Instance, Christ assures (...) of his standing in Grace, [I
have prayed (...) that thy Faith fail not.] I hope, it (...) that Peter's Faith
should not fail, whe^^ (...) ^^ed that it might not fail: Yet Christ (...) as
well as on the rest, to Watch.

Object. 6. The Doctrine of the certain perseverance of the Faithful is
Securitatis pulvinar, the Bolster of Security, the Pillow of Sloth.

Answ. 1. Then Christ Preached a Doctrine of Security to Peter, when he told
him [I have prayed that thy Faith fail not.]

2. It is possible, that some may abuse this Doctrine of the Saints
perseverance, to sloth and security; but that is the fault of men, not of the
Doctrine. So many did, and do abuse the Doctrine of Free Grace, and
Justification by Christ's Righteousness, without the works of the Law, Romans 6.1.
which must not therefore be rejected, as false and dangerous Doctrine.

3. But the Doctrine of the Saints perseverance is so far from Teaching, or
encouraging to Security, that we cannot hold it, but we must hold our selves
condemned by it, if we give up our selves to Security. Indeed it tends to beget
in the Saints an holy Confidence, not a sinful Security. If I hold, that a
Regenerate man does never fall Totally from Grace, then I must needs conclude,
I cannot fall totally into Security; or fall into any sin, so as to be wholly
under the power of it, and yet be a Regenerate man. These two are purely
Inconsistent. To fall totally under the power of Security, or of any other
Reigning sin, is to fall totally from God, and from Grace. So again, If I
believe that all sound Converts shall continue in Gods fear, how can I hope,
that I was ever a sound Convert, if I cast off his fear? Or if I have a certain
persuasion, that I shall be saved, then I as little doubt of my continuing in
the way to Heaven even to the end, as of my enjoying Heaven at last: And every
man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is pure, 1 John
3.3.

4. The Apostles Doctrine and Practice, both cuts off this Objection. As for
his Doctrine, he tells us, Romans 11.29. The Gifts and Calling of God,
(understand such as flow from Election, spoken of ver. 28.) are without
Repentance. Yet in the same Chapter, ver. 20. gives this Caution and Counsel:
Thou stand by Faith. Be not high minded, but fear. Indeed the Doctrine of
Perseverance does not befriend Carnal security; nor the duty of an holy fear,
Cross and Thwart the Doctrine of Perseverance: [Be not high minded, but fear.]
Not that the Apostle commends doubting, or distrust in Christians: he only
opposes Security, and Self-confidence. Christians may have an humble sense of
their own Weakness, and Insufficiency, and withal an holy confidence in Gods
Power, and Faithfulness.

Again, where the Apostle encourages the Faithful from the very Faithfulness
of God to expect a good Issue, whatever Temptations they are put to encounter;
yet at the same time he warns them [Let him that thinks he stands, take
heed lest he fall.] 1 Cor. 10.12, 13.

And as to his own practice, though none will deny, but he was fully persuaded
of his own perseverance, yet this had no such effect as to make him Remiss and
Careless. See the contrary, 1 Cor. 9.27.

5. There is an Anxious fear, and there is a Cautious fear. 1. There is an
Anxious fear, including doubtfulness concerning the event. And so far as any
one is certain of his perseverance, so far he is freed from this fear. 2. A
Cautious fear, including such an apprehension of the evil of Apostasy, as puts
the soul upon an holy care to shun it: And this is a means of preserving the
Faithful. Now this is contrary to security. Therefore the Doctrine of the
certain Perseverance of the Faithful is not a Doctrine of Security. We (with
the Scripture, Jer. 32.40.) Teach it is promoted by such means, as are very
opposite to security. And further, Mr. Baxter will grant them: That it is not
(at least by any ordinary means) to be expected in this life, that the
knowledge of our Sincerity, Justification, and Perseverance should be so
perfect as to have no degree of Doubting, Habitual or Actual, at one time or
other. Seeing therefore we are all Imperfect in our certainty of our Sincerity
and Perseverance; it is meet and requisite that we be called on to (and so that
we keep up) a Rational working, preventing fear, according to the measure of
our uncertainty.

6. They that make this Objection, sometimes grant, that the Apostles might
have a Special promise of Perseverance, and Donum indefectibilis
perseverantiae: And further cannot deny, but supposing they were certain of
their perseverance, yet they might be put upon the use of means from a
principle of Faith and Love. Res est soliciti plena timoris Amor.
Now will it not hence follow, even from their own Concessions, that the
Certainty of the Saints Perseverance will not necessarily infer, or produce
Security and Negligence?

Object. 7. What need have the Faithful to pray for Grace or Perseverance, if
their Perseverance be Certain and Determined?

Answ. 1. Prayer is a necessary part of that Worship, and Homage due to God, an
acknowledgment of our Dependence on him; and that he is the Author of all that
good, we either have, or hope for.

2. That the Perseverance of the Faithful is promised, this can be no Bar to
their praying for it. But the Promise is an Encouragement to Prayer, and Prayer
a means to obtain the Promise, Ezekiel. 36.36, 37. I the Lord have spoken it, and
I will do it. Yet for this I will be enquired of by the House of Israel, to do
it for them. The Lord would have his People to sue his Promise, to put his Bond
in suit. As David did, 2 Samuel 17.27. And Daniel prayed with a Courage, when he
understood the Number of the Years, whereof the Word of the Lord came to
Jeremiah the Prophet, that he would accomplish Seventy Years in the Desolations
of Jerusalem. Promissiones Dei non huc tendunt ut Homines torpeant, and inde
captent occasionem ignavia and socordiae, quia certo persuasi sunt Deum
facturum esse quicquid promisit, Vid. in M. Pool. Synops. in Dan. p. 3.
sed ut eos solicitet stimuletque ad preces. As a good Expositor notes.

3. They that hold Perseverance a Benefit offered to all alike upon this
condition, Nempe si gratiae sufficienti non defuerint: That is to say, If they
shall not be wanting to that sufficient Grace, and Help afforded to them; these
rather take away the use of Prayer here. For so one cannot pray with
understanding any other way than thus; Lord, give me to improve that sufficient
Grace which of course thou offerest to me, as to all others, if I have a mind
to improve it. Let me peresevere, if I will.

Object. 8. How should God ever seriously try the Faith of his People, if he
has determined, that their Faith shall never fail?

Answ. 1. Gods trying of his People, is not for his own sake, he knows their
minds, and thoughts afar off, Psalm. 139.2. That which we read, 2 Chr. 32.31.
God left Hezekiah, to try him, that he might know all that was in his heart. Is
spoken per (...), after the manner of men. The same is to be said to Gods
trying of Abraham, Genesis 22.1, 12. Exploratio obedientiae Abrahae non est
ignotae deprehensio, sed notae jam illustrior patefactio and solennis
approbatio. (Alting.) So it is not for his own sake, but it is for their sakes,
and others sakes, that God tries them, That they might be more known to
themselves, and others. 2. Was not Christ's Obedience tried, Heb. 5.8. when yet
there was no doubt to be made of his Obedience?

3. Thus one might Argue as well against the Divine praescience, and deny that
God foresees who shall persevere in the Faith, and consequently deny that any
are Elected so much as ex fide praevisa, (which yet they maintain) because God
could not seriously try and prove their Faith, if it was certainly known to him
before.

Indeed a new Writer has started that strange Notion, Middle Way of Elect. and
Redemp. p. 14.
that some things are Insoibilia, as well as other things are Impossibilia in
themselves. Their nature's such, as God cannot foresee them, because he would
have them Contingent; now though I hope, his Design is good, to represent God
more Lovely, and more Adorable, (as he says.) Yet the Assertion seems to be a
very bold one, and very unworthy of God. He best knows, whether here he
^loweth with Socinus's Heifer, Socin. prelect. c. 8. f. 26.
Quae^am sunt, que Deus scire nulla ratione ^ei potest, nec tamen ipsius
omniscien^iae quicquam derogatur. But when a man kills mother by chance, not
Intentionally, we find Gods hand in it, Exodus 21.12. Castal. in M. Pool. Synops.
Quae pu^ant Homines casu fieri, providentia Dei fiunt. And if Gods hand be in
such things, Known unto God are all his Works from the beginning of the World,
Acts 15.18. And David could not think a thought, but God knew it afar off,
Psalm. 139.2. As a man that knows what roots are in his Garden, though there be
no appearance of them, yet he can say, when Spring comes, such and such a
Flower will come up: So the Lord knows a man's thoughts afar off. It is Doctor
Preston's Comparison: So Ezekiel. 11.5. I know the things that come into your
mind, every one of them.

Again, That God has foretold future Contingents, it is an Evidence, both that
he is the true God, the Disposer and Governor of all things, Isa. 41.22, 23.
and 46.9, 10. And a proof that he foresees future Contingents. Else how could
he foretell them? God revealed to Elisha what Hazael would do to Israel, as
that he would dash their Children in pieces, and rip up their Women with Child,
2 Kings 8.12. Now either this Writer must say, that God determined Hazael's
will to these things, (which he would not think to be any lovely Representation
of God) or else that these things were so Contingent, that God could not
foresee them. As he says, There are some things depend on man's will, which God
determines; and here he fore-knows men's Wills, because he Knows as well as Does
whatsoever he Will: And there are some things depend on man's Will, which we are
to conceive that he determines not, but will have Contingent, etc.

More I would have said to this, but that it would look like a Digression.

First, infer the happiness of the Faithful; Gods Covenant with them being so
well ordered, and so sure. They may say, as Psalm. 48.14. This God is our God
for ever and ever: He will be our Guide even unto death. None so safe as they,
against whom the Gates of Hell shall not prevail. None so Rich as they, who
have an Interest in God, in Christ, in the Promises, and in the purchased
Possession: And none have their Estates so well settled. Their Estates settled
by the Decree of Heaven, and their Names Enrolled in Heaven.

2. Therefore it is our greatest Interest and Concern, that we come up to the
Terms of Gods Covenant, Isa. 55.3. Incline your Ear, and come unto me: Hear,
and your Souls shall Live, and I will make an everlasting Covenant with you,
even the sure Mercies of David. Of David, the Lord said, 2 Samuel 7.15. My Mercy
shall not depart away from him, as I took it from Saul. O rest not in being
only outwardly in Covenant, as Saul was! But see that you come up to
Covenant-Terms, as David did. What gross and groundless presumption is it for
one to hope he shall be preserved in a State of Grace and Salvation, who never
yet was in such a State?

3. Then what Enemies are Believers to their own Peace, and Comfort, who do not
use all Diligence to clear up the Work of Grace, and prove themselves to be in
the Faith; whereupon they might have such strong Consolation? If our Title to
an outward Estate, as House or Land was questioned, we would do what we could
to clear it. And why are we at no more pains to clear our Spiritual estates? 2
Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the Faith. If I have Faith, it
is not impossible, but upon a due Examination, and diligent Enquiry I may come
to know, I have it. And if once I know, I have true Faith, then I may know, I
shall be saved: He that believes shall be saved.

4. Then such as can see their special Interest in God, and in the great
blessings of his Covenant, have cause indeed to walk on cheerfully, but not to
grow secure, or walk carelessly. None can be more certain, that they shall not
fall short of Heaven. and Glory hereafter, than that they shall not fall from
Grace and Holiness here. This Doctrine may greatly Encourage the Faithful to
strive against sin, assuring them of final Victory: But it gives no
encouragement to any to yield to sin, and continue in it. And assurance of ones
Perseverance and Salvation cannot be maintained without an Holy watchfulness.
As one says well: Sin does as naturally bread Troubles and Fears, as a gross
Substance in the Sunshine causes a Shadow.

Sect. 20. PROP. XX. The Covenant of Grace is the best Covenant.
NOt but that the Covenant of Works was perfect in its kind, and most exactly
fitted to that State, wherein Man was Created. God therein required nothing but
what was man's Duty, as he was His Creature. Required nothing, but what man was
able to perform. And promised all that man could desire. As perfect perpetual
Obedience was required of Man in the Covenant of Works; so perfect and
perpetual Happiness was promised thereupon. Thus the Covenant of works did
excellently Comport with the state of Man in Innocence.

But then the Covenant of Grace only can be to Man's advantage, in his fallen
Estate. The Covenant of Grace is the best Covenant for us sinners. It is
impossible, that sinners should have Relief, and Benefit by the Covenant of
Works. Indeed it may be beneficial unto sinners, Occasionally, Indirectly, that
is, showing our Misery by sin, that hereby we are fallen short of Glory and
Happiness, laid under the Curse and Condemnation of the Law; and become
Obnoxious to Gods Wrath, and subject to Death Temporal, and Eternal. Thus it is
true, the Covenant of Works may be an Occasion of Awakening our Consciences,
showing what lost Creatures we are, should we stick to that Covenant, and if no
other way be found out, but we must stand or fall by the sentence of that
Covenant. And thus it may some way prepare sinners to accept of the Covenant of
Grace, propounded and held forth. As the Israelites Bondage under the Egyptian
Taskmasters should have prepared them to hearken to, and welcome Moses and
Aaron, who were sent about their Deliverance, Exodus 4.31. But observe, all the
benefit sinners can have this way from the Covenant of Works, is only upon
supposition of a Covenant of Grace, provided to relieve them from the strict
Sentence of that other Covenant.

That sinners can have no benefit Properly, and Directly from the Covenant of
Works, (which makes against them) but only from the Covenant of Grace, framed
on purpose for sinners Relief.

And that the Covenant of Grace is best for us: Appears thus,

(1.) The Covenant of Works was for the Preservation and Continuation of Man's
Happiness: But it speaks not to his present case, being now sinful and
miserable, whereas the Covenant of Grace was provided for his Recovery: Post
naufragium tabula, a Plank after Shipwreck. The Covenant of Grace holds forth
the way of Man's Restitution and Restoration to Happiness.

(2.) The Condition of the Covenant of Works, is utterly Impossible to sinners.
To be a sinner, and to be perfectly Conformable to the Will and Law of God; to
be a sinner, and not to be a sinner; is a plain Contradiction: It is
impossible, Quod factum est infectum fieri. But the Condition of the Covenant
of Grace is possible, and attainable; yea, easily in it self.

Object. But do not many Divines say, That it is as possible for a man to keep
the Law perfectly, as heartily to accept of Christ upon the Terms of the Gospel?

Answ. Such Expressions must not be taken strictly, and Rigorously, but with a
favorable Construction. For it is simply, and naturally impossible, that a
sinner should be perfectly Conformed to Gods Law: But it is not naturally
impossible that a sinner should Repent, and should come to Obey from the Heart.

True, (as I have proved before) none so without Gods Special Grace; yet that
any, who are called on to Repent, and Believe, do it not, they can only blame
themselves: The hindrance is in their Wills. They might come to Christ if they
would. As Mr. Of the Covenant. p. 343.
Ball says: The Invitation of God is not so hard, that Man cannot fulfill it,
if he would: But such as if Man would, he could not but Execute.

Sinner, How it it? Art thou unseignedly willing to leave thy sins, that would
Ruin thee for ever? Art thou heartily willing to accept of Christ; as to be
Redeemed and Saved, so to be Guided, Ruled, and Governed by him? This is the
Sum and Substance of the Condition of the Covenant of Grace. If thou art
unwilling to this, certainly, thou judge thy self unworthy of Eternal Life,
and shall be Self-condemned. You see, they are no hard Terms, whereon Life and
Happiness is offered and promised in the Covenant of Grace. If you be but
willing, truly willing, it is done. And if you be unwilling to abandon your
Lusts, that would be your Death, and unwilling to give up your selves to Jesus
Christ, the only Redeemer, and an All-sufficient Savior; it is evident, your
Destruction is of your selves, that you are left without excuse.

(3.) The Covenant of Works requiring and exacting Obedience every way perfect,
as the Condition of it, there was no provision of a Mediator, no place for a
Mediator, when God made that Covenant with man. The Covenant of Works owned no
such thing, as Acceptance through, and for the Righteousness of another. But
the Covenant of Grace does admit of, and hold forth a Mediator. According to
the Covenant of Grace, we may be Justified and Saved for the Righteousness of
another, scil. of Jesus Christ, the Lord our Righteousness; when it was
impossible that we should be Justified, and Saved by our own Righteousness, And
the Righteousness of Christ (God-man) which is made over to a believing sinner
for his Justification, is a more excellent Righteousness, than that of any mere
Creature.

(4.) The Covenant of Works holds forth no such thing, as Pardon. Absolute
perfect Obedience being (as I said) the Condition of it, upon the least sin,
that Covenant was Irreparably broken. But the Covenant of Grace accepting of
sincere Obedience, and requiring no more as its Condition, grants out a
Pardon to those, whose sins are not Inconsistent with Sincerity. And so this
Covenant is capable of Renewing. Wast thou not obliged to forsake sin, and to
give up thy self to Christ, and his Service, by thy very Baptism? But alas,
Have thou not broken thy Baptismal Covenant? Yea, Have thou not lived long in
the breach of Covenant? And yet if at last thou would Repent, and come in to
Christ, thou should be pardoned, and accepted.

(5.) Man might keep the Condition of the Covenant of Works for a time, and yet
afterward fall off, and lose all. God Created Man at first in a state of
Integrity, with sufficient ability to Obey perfectly if he would; but did not
then think meet to Engage, and Undertake for him, that his will should be ever
to Obey. But such as come up to the Terms of the Covenant of Grace, stand safe,
are upon surer ground than Adam in Innocence. Their Perseverance is certain;
and as their Perseance is certain, so their Salvation, and Happiness. Thus get
within the Ark of the Covenant, and you are Lodged safe indeed.

Now, Riches of Divine Grace and Mercy. When man had once broken Covenant with
God, one would have thought, the Divine Majesty should have been so Incensed
against him for it, as never more to have dealt with man in this way; or if He
did make another Covenant with man, it should have been upon harder Terms: Yet
behold, and wonder, from man's breach of the Covenant of works, he takes
occasion to manifest more of his Grace, in making another Covenant more to his
Creatures advantage, when man might rather have concluded, that he would cast
off for ever, and would be favorable no more. Is this the manner of man, O
Lord God? If a man find his Enemy, will he let him go well away out of his
hand? God dealt not so with the Angels that fell, as he has done with sinful
men.

2. See here the gross Ignorance, Folly, and Madness of Self-justitiaries. Such
as adhere to the Covenant of Works, and hope to be saved by their works,
slighting and contemning Christ, and Grace offered. They that say to the works
of their hands, ye are our Saviors: And say, we are Lords, we will not come to
thee. Surely, they are miserable, foolish Creatures, they know not what is good
for themselves, that go about to establish their own Righteousness, rejecting
Christ, and his Righteousness. These trust to a broken reed: To turn away from
Christ, to rely on ones own Righteousness, is to build on the Sand, not on the
Rock: Or as if a man leaned his hand on a Wall, and a Serpent bit him. Indeed
better no hope, than false hope; Better no confidence, than Carnal confidence.
It is better to have no peace, than that which is false. A lying refuge will at
last prove no Refuge, will be no Protection, but the Confusion of those that
put their trust in it. I should have far greater hopes of one that is low in
Self-despair, than of one that is highly Confident in himself.

Heb. 8.6. and Chap. 7.22. Mediator of a better Covenant.
Sect. 21. PROP. XXI. The New Covenant of Grace, is the best Dispensation of
the Covenant of Grace.
THe Gospel Dispensation, this last Edition of the Covenant is the best: And it
was meet, that the best Dispensation should come in with Christ, the Mediator
of the Covenant. It was fit, he should have the Honor of bringing in the best
Form, and Administration of it.

Now this is the best Dispensation of the Covenant.

(1.) In regard of Plainess and Perspicuity. As Mr. Of the Covenant. p. 33.
Ball observes: From the first giving forth of the Promise, until the Coming of
Christ in the Flesh, the Revelation was more Clear, Distinct, Ample, as the
Coming of the Messiah did approach nearer and nearer. So it was Clearest, and
Fullest, when Christ Came. And so much it seems was expected: As the
Samaritan woman could say, John 4.25. I know that Messiah comes, when he is
come, he will tell us all things. No wonder that the Church of Christ under the
Gospel has more sight, since the Sun is Risen. Christ was darkly shadowed out
under the Old Testament, but is clearly Revealed in the New. Moses was veiled,
and an hard thing it was for the Jews to look to the end of that which is
Abolished, (2 Cor. 3.13.) Christians have the Advantage clear of those that
Lived before Christ. So that what the Prophets foretold, we may have a clearer
understanding of, than they had themselves. As we read, 1 Pet. 1.12. That not
unto themselves, but unto us, they did Minister the things that are now
reported. We may see those things that many Prophets, and Kings, and Righteous
men heretofore could not see, ( Mat. 13.17. Luke 10.24.) We may know Christ in
his Offices, and special Undertaking, and his saving Benefits, of which they
knew very little. Types are best apprehended by the presence, and coming of the
Antitype. So Christians may understand the scope and meaning of the Legal
sacrifices, and other Types of Christ, better than the Jews themselves did.
Yea, it is a wonder, if any of us now should be Ignorant of Christ, and the Way
of Salvation by him, 2 Cor. 4.3.4. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that
are lost; such whose eyes the God of this World has blinded.

What should we think of such as enjoy the Gospel, and yet are Ignorant of
Christ, and the way of Salvation by him? Must it not needs be affected
Ignorance? Must it not be wilful Blindness, if not judicial too? Indeed, they
that like not to receive the Truth in Love, that they might be saved, may
justly be given up to Satan, to be further blinded, and deceived by him. That
as the Philistines dealt with Sampson, so should he deal with them, even put
out their eyes, blind their minds, lest the Light of the Glorious Gospel of
Christ should shine into them. Do not such forfeit their eyes, who will not see
the things that belong unto their peace? As it is Isa. 6.9, 10. (A Text that is
Cited no less than six times in the New Testament.) Hear ye in hearing, (hear
as much as ye will) but understand not: q.d. In summa rerum abundantia
peribitis same. (As Occolump.)

The New Covenant of Grace holds forth Eternal Life and Happiness more
clearly than the Old. What was more darkly propounded, and promised in the Old
Testament, is brought to Light, and more plainly discovered, and offered in the
New. 2 Timothy 1.10. Life and Immortality, is brought to Light, through the
Gospel. Thus New Testament-promises are better Promises: Though not better for
the Matter of them, yet better for the manner of propounding them. The Church
of God of old, for a long time (even from Adam to Abraham) had but one noted
Promise, that we read of, to Live upon; and that very Dark and Mysterious too,
[The Seed of the Woman, shall break the Serpents head] And the Church of the
Jews had Spiritual, and Heavenly things promised more Darkly, shadowed out
under Earthly things; as Heaven was shadowed out under Canaan, the Land of
Promise. The way unto the Holiest was not so manifest, while as the first
Tabernacle was yet standing, Heb. 9.8. But we have He^ven opened in the Gospel,
and the Vail taken away.

(2.) The Gospel Dispensation of the Covenant is the best Dispensation, in
regard of the Easiness of Services enjoined. Our Gospel-Service is far more
easy, than the Legal-services appointed to the Jews.

Under the Old Testament, God required a multitude of Outward services. Many
Carnal Ordinances the Jews had, which stood in Meats and Drinks, and diverse
Washings, Heb. 9.10. And many of those Services were Costly, as the sacrificing
of Sheep, and Oxen, etc. And some of them painful, as Circumcision, and going
up from the Remotest parts of the Land, to make their appearance at Jerusalem
thrice a Year, Exodus 23.17. The positive Institutions under the Gospel are very
few, and those very plain, and easy. Christ's Yoke is very easy, compared with
Moses yoke.

(3.) The Gospel Dispensation is the best Dispensation of the Covenant of
Grace, in regard of its Extensiveness: Bonum quo Communius, eo melius. The Old
Covenant was made with one Nation, the Nation of the Jews, the Gentile Nations
being strangers to it. Though a scattering of Gentile Proselytes were taken in,
yet they were Incorporated into the Jewish Church, showing that Ordinarily
salvation was not to be had, but among the Jews. It was (...), the Pre-eminence
of the Jew, that unto them were committed the Oracles of God, Romans 3.1, 2.
Before they were the Children of the Covenant. But the Gospel Covenant is not
so Confined to any Nation, excluding orhers, Mark 16. Go, Preach the Gospel to
every Creature. He that Believes shall be saved. Here Is good tidings of great
Joy to all People.

(4.) The Gospel Dispensation of the Covenant is the best Dispensation, in
regard of Power and Efficacy accompanying it, Heb. 8.8, 9, 10, 11. The Spirit
was given more sparingly to those under the Old Testament, but is poured out
more plentifully in the Times of the Gospel. Those appointments which the
Apostle is not afraid to call Carnal Ordinances, had less of the Spirit
accompanying them than Gospel Ordinances have, 2 Cor. 10.4. The Weapons of our
warfare are not Carnal, but Mighty through God.

The Gospel-Ministration is the Ministration of the Spirit, Signanter,
Emphatically, and Especially, 2 Cor. 3.8. And is not that the best
Dispensation, that has more of God, more of his Grace and Spirit in it? Of the
Covenant. p. 35.
It is true, as Mr. Ball has well observed, (which preventeth an Objection
some might make here) If we speak of some particular Persons under the First
Covenant, they were endued with greater Gifts of the Spirit, than many under
the New: But more Light of Knowledge, and greater Plenty and Abundance of
Grace, is bestowed upon the Church in the time of the Gospel, if we respect the
Body of the Church, and Faithful in General.

(5.) The Gospel Dispensation is the best in regard of Duration, and
Continuance. Indeed as the Old and New Covenant are the fame for Subsiance, so
that for substance was an everlasting Covenant, 2 Samuel 23.5. Yet as to the
Outward Form, and Seals of it, it is changed: So as the New Covenant is not to
be changed. The New Covenant shall never wax Old, but remain every way the same
to the End of the World. The Old Covenant was to prepare, and make way for the
New, and so to give way to it: But the New Covenant is not to give way to any
other. There is no Third Dispensation to be expected here upon Earth. They are
Idle Dreamers, that Talk, or Think of such a thing. The Gospel Ministry,
Ordinances, and Seals are to continue, till we all come in the Unity of the
Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the Stature of the Fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. Till the
Lord come, 1 Cor. 11.26. Till the end of the World, Mat. 28.19, 20. Till the
End, when Christ shall deliver up the Kingdom to God, even the Father, that God
may be All in All. As for Saltmarsh, his Conceit, that understands [ Till the
end of the World, Mat. 28.20.] thus: Till the end of that Age, after which a
Third Dispensation of the Spirit should take place, and Ministry, and
Ordinances, cease: It is very gross.

1. How well does this Interpretation agree with the foregoing words, [ Go
Teach (or Disciple) all Nations, teaching them to do observe all things,
whatsoever I have commanded you.] Were all Nations Discipled, and Taught to
observe all things whatsoever Christ commanded in that Age?

2. Though (...) sometimes be put for an Age; yet so it is as well used for
(...), World, as we have it Translated, ( Heb. 1.2. and 11.3.) And (...),
again, and again used for the end of the World, Mat. 13.39. The Harvest is the
end of the World, (...). And v. 40. So shall it be in the end of this World,
(...), not in the end of this Age. So again, ver. 49. So let the Evangelist
Matthew, Interpret this [(...).] And who may better do it? And we see plainly
according to him, it must be [Vntil the end of the World,] in a proper sense.
See Gerhard. Har. Cap. 160. p. 467. c. 1. As for that Text, Heb. 9.26. But now
in the end of the World, (...), it favors not Saltm. at all. Eadem est hoc
loco (...), quae est Apostolo alibi plenitudo temporum. Camero. praelect. p.
237. c. 1. In consummatione seculorum. id est, diebus novissimis. Beza.

3. Saltmarsh, his Conceit is plainly against the Gospel, and therefore (sure)
is not Gospel. He opposes the Gospel-Ministration, to the Ministration of the
Spirit; which is directly contrary to the Apostle, who calls the
Gospel-Ministration (...), the Ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8. We are
sure, the Apostle was in the Right, and therefore Saltmarsh must be in a very
great Error here.

Others have the like Pretense for casting off Gospel Ordinances, as when we
urge, 1 Cor. 11.26. to prove, that the Lords Supper, is to continue in the
Church: (And if that, why not other Ordinances Instituted by the same Author?)
Till he come. To this some say, He is come to them in the Spirit; and being
come in the Spirit, such Ordinances are out of Date. But what Ground or
VVarrant have they to understand it of his coming in the Spirit? Will it not
hence follow, that the Lords Supper was Instituted for none but Unbelievers,
Carnal, unregenerate Persons, such as have not the Spirit? If they that have
the Spirit, have no more to do with this Ordinance, then we must say, it was
never intended, as a Feast for Christ Friends: But for such as are none of his,
(as, if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.)

Again it is manifest, that the Apostles and others, to whom Christ was come in
the Spirit, did yet continue to hold Communion in this, and other Ordinances.
As we read, Acts 2.42. They continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and
Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and Prayers. The Apostles Practice, with
other Primitive Christians, who had the Spirit in an Eminent Degree and
Measure, and yet kept close to this, and other Gospel Ordinances, plainly
Condemns their Way, and Overthrows their Conceit, who under Pretense of having
the Spirit, cast off Ordinances, and think themselves above them.

Therefore we are to understand another coming of Christ, to be meant in 1 Cor.
11.26. Then his coming in the Spirit, even his Second coming, his coming in
Glory, Luke 9.26. His coming at the end of the World, Mat. 24.3.37, 39. Rev.
22.20. The Gospel-VVay being to Continue from His First to His Second coming.

The Times of the Gospel are often called the Last days, As the ends of the
World, (...), 1 Cor. 10.11. Fines, Idcirco hi dies vocantur novissimi, and
aetas Christi adventum consecutae vere dici potest Seculorum perfectio ac
complementum. Beza.
Isa. 2.2. Heb. 1.2. God has in these Last days spoken to us by his Son; the
Gospel being to succeed, and put and end to the Old Testament-Dispensation, and
so being it self to Continue to the end of the Time. So the ancient Hebrews,
called the Kingdom of the Messiah, The World to come; which Expression the
Apostle uses, Heb. 2.5. In these Last days of the Gospel, God has poured out
of his Spirit, as we see Acts 2.16, 17. Then judge whether they speak according
to Scripture, who would make the Gospel Dispensation a middle Dispensation, and
to give way to a Dispensation of the Spirit. If Gospel Times be the Last times,
and if that pouring out of the Spirit which was promised, was to be in and
under the Gospel; then there is no such Dispensation of the Spirit to be
expected here on Earth, as Quakers and Enthusiasts talk of.

Now how does it concern us all to see, receive not this Grace in vain? If we
are strangers to God, and Grace, who Live under the best Dispensation of the
Covenant of Grace, How Inexcusable are we? And how can we think to Escape, if
we Neglect Gospel-salvation? This is the Everlasting Gospel. No other Gospel to
come after it. Lud. Tena. in Heb. 1.2. p. 28. b.
Evangelium dicitur Lex nova, non tantum quia successit veteri, sed quia post
illam non est alia futura. God will never Treat with men upon other Terms, then
are set down here. These are the last offers he will ever make, Mark 16. Go,
Preach the Gospel to every Creature: He that Believes, shall be Saved: But he
that Believes not shall be Damned. If you reject these Terms, God will reject
you. You that have not only Moses, and the Prophets, but the Doctrine of
Christ, and his Apostles, if you do not Believe, and if you are not this way
brought in, your Case is desperate. If any bring any other Gospel than this
unto you, let him be accursed, says the Apostle, Gal. 1.9. And that Doctrine
which would lay the Publishers under a Curse, is no way likely to bring the
Hearers on to true Blessedness.

And then, that the Lord has kept the best to the last for us, that we have
been brought forth under the last and best Dispensation of the Covenant, it
should teach us to acknowledge his Exceeding abundant Grace to Usward. It was
not because we were better than others that went before, that we have been thus
Privileged above others. No, we were by Nature the Children of Wrath, even as
others: Our Father as an Amorite, our Mother as an Hittite, and We as the
Children of the Ethiopian before God. Yet the Mystery which was hid from Ages,
and Generations, is made manifest unto us, to whom God would make known the
Riches of his glorious Grace. And thus the last come to be first, (to allude to
that, Mat. 19.30.) We that Live under the Gospel Dispensation, are Privileged
far above those that went before; not only such as were altogether strangers to
the Commonwealth of Israel, and to the Covenants of Promise, but even such as
were taken into Covenant under the Old Testament-Dispensation, see Mat. 11.11.
with Luke 7.28. John's Ministry is preferred to that of the Prophets, as
clearer; and the Gospel Ministry preserred unto John's, as clearer still. So it
is a greater Privilege and advantage (if men would Improve it) to enjoy a
Gospel Ministry, than to have sat at Moses feet, or to have heard of any of the
Prophets of Old.

But a word more: As we Live under a better Dispensation, should not we
endeavor to be better? As we have greater means, should we not abound more in
Grace and Knowledge? As we enjoy more, should we not do more than others? Now
let our Conversation be as becomes the Gospel.

I shall not Enlarge further upon the Doctrine of the Covenants. Though many
things are Pretermitted, yet I hope I may Conclude, as Cunaeus, Diximus autem
neque omnia, neque Nihil. I have not said all (but far short of all indeed) yet
I hope what has been said, it is not as Nothing.

THE END.
The Table.
A.
ANtiquity of the Gospel. Page 303. 350.
B.
Baptism, Infants right to it proved, p. 398. 403, etc. Objections against it
Answered, p. 412, etc. No need of an express Command for it, p. 407.
Antipaedo-Baptists have no Scripture Rule for deferring their Childrens
baptism. p. 417 The special advantages of Infant Baptism. p. 430. Dipping not
necessary to Baptism. p. 439, etc.
C.
Children taken into Covenant together with their Parents, p. 365, etc. How
styled holy, p. 378. Disciples. p. 421 Christ's Conception, why Miraculous, p.
90, 91. Against being Christed with Christ. p. 273 Church. Of an Universal
Visible Church. p. 346 Condition. The Conditions God propounds, man is bound to
accept. p. 44, 45. There are Conditions in the Covenant of Grace, p. 134. etc.
The Conditions are performed by us, not by God, or Christ for us. p. 145, etc.
But by the help of special Grace, p. 148. God not unjust in requiring the
Condition, where yet he gives not Special Grace, p. 163. The Condition of the
Covenant of Grace, what, p. 225. (1) What, in reference to the Honor of the
Redeemer, and of Free Grace, p. 229, (2) What, for the Honor of Gods Holiness,
and Authority, p. 242, etc. (3) What, to secure the Interest and Benefit of
Souls, p. 252, etc. [Corruption, vid. Nature.] Covenant. The difference between
a Promise and a Covenant. p. 44 Covenant of Works, why so little said of it in
Scripture, p. 2. Made with Adam and his Posterity, p. 5. How far it is now
abrogated, p. 72, etc. Children might be Involved in it, though they know
nothing of it. p. 84, 85 Covenant of Grace. It is made betwixt God and man, p.
229. It is Conditional, p, 134. One and the same for Substance in all Ages, p.
298, etc. It was made with Adam, p. 298. With Abraham, p. 305, etc. With the
Israelites, p. 311, etc. How this was a Subservient Covenant, p. 325. Of a Mixed
Covenant, p. 326. Of a Covenant of Peculiarity, p. 334. Of a Political
Covenant, p. 339, etc, 345. Atwofold manner of being in Covenant, scil.
Externally, and also Internally, p. 352. The Privileges of those, that are
Externally in Covenant, p. 362. The Special Privileges of those, who are also
Internally in Covenant, p. 451. etc. The Covenant of Grace is the best
Covenant, p. 478. Its Dispensation twofold, scil. Old, and New, p. 331. The New
is the best Dispensation, and why, p. 484 The Covenant of Redemption.
D.
Death. What kind of Death threatened in the Covenant of Works. p. 51, 52
Dipping. Whether Necessary, and Essential to true Baptism. p. 439, etc.
Dispensation. The Old and New Dispensation of the Covenant of Grace, p. 331. No
third Dispensation to be expected here on Earth. p. 489
F.
Faith. Of the Faith of those that Lived before Christ. p. 229, 301, 302 Fear,
twofold, Anxious, and Cautious. p. 471
G. vid. Interest.
God. Against being Godded with God. p. 270 Grace. No Subtraction of it from
Man till he sinned. p. 64, 65 Of Special Grace in the work of Conversion, p.
148. What Duties Special Grace teaceth, p. 174. Special Grace promised to some,
p. 179, etc. Saving Grace purchased by Christ for some. p. 199, etc.
I.
Image of God in man threefold, p. 7. Wherein it cbiefly consists p.8. Whether
Gods Image in Adam was Natural, or Supernatural, p. 11. Natural two ways.
Incogitancy, probably the first step in man's Fall. p. 71 Infants, if not
sinners in themselves, they should not be saved by Christ. p. 95. [ v.
Baptism.] Interest in God twofold. p. 262 What happiness Included in the
Special Interest. p. 262, etc.
L.
Law. Whether the Moral Law bind only as delivered by Christ Redeemer, and not
also as the Law of our Creator. p. 17, 23, 49, 50. Whether the Moral Law
obliges, as given by Moses. p. 20 The distinction of the Law of Works, of
Faith, and of Christ, considered. p. 22 Whether God ever dispensed with a
Natural, or purely Moral Law. p. 32 Covenant of Grace a Law. p. 120 How the Law
is opposed to the Gospel. p. 339 Life. What Life was Promised to Adam in
Innocence. p. 38, etc.
M.
Man holy at first but mutable. p. 63, 64, 65 Mediator. No Mediator in the
Covenant of Works, p. 61. Whether Christ be a Mediator for Confirmation to
Angels. p. 62, 63 Merit. Whether Innocent Adam in a strict sense, could Merit
the Reward. p. 42 How the Saints cannot Merit. p. 205, etc. Moral Agents
governed in a different way from Natural. p. 25
N.
Nature. Corruption of man's Nature following the Fall. p. 86 It makes all
liable to Condemnation. p. 93 [ vid. Original.]
O.
Obedience. Whether it be in Heaven. p. 67 Offers of Grace. God mockes not
Creatures in them. p. 166 Original Corruption Propagated. p. 88. [ vid.
Nature.]
P.
People. What Happiness included in Gods special owning any for his People. p.
292, etc. Permission. Why God permitted man's Fall. p. 68 Perseverance of Saints
proved, p. 453. Objections against it answered. p. 464 Precepts. Of positive
Precepts, p. 35. What under the Gospel. p. 36 Promise. The Promise of Life to
Adam, not of strict Justice p. 41. 48 Of the Promises of the first Special,
Inward, Discriminating Grace, p. 189. The use of such Promises, p. 194. Whether
the Israelites had only Temporal Promises. p. 317
R.
Redeemer. The Faithful had some knowledge of a Redeemer before Christ's
coming. p. 229, etc. Respecter of Persons, how God is not. p. 170. Reward. In
our Obedience, we may have an eye to the Reward. p. 26
S.
Salvation cannot come by the Covenant of Works. p. 99 Sin. The greatness of
man's Sin in eating the forbidden Fruit. p. 69, 70 Sinners. We are Sinners, not
only by Imitation. p. 91 Spirit. Whether the Expression of the Spirits personal
Indwelling in Believers, be sound. p. 276
T.
Testament. The Covenant of Grace a Testament, p. 115. Old Testament of use to
Christians. p. 348, 349, 351 Threatenings. A Righteous man awed with them, p.
53. Declare what punishment is due. p. 80, 81
U.
Usurpers. Wicked men not Usurpers of what they have by Providence, though no
right by Covenant. p. 288
W.
Will. Freedom of man's Will not overthrown by Special Grace. p. 158
Texts of Scripture Cleared and Vindicated.
GEnesis 3.15. Page 298, 299. Lev. 18.5. p. 321. Deuteronomy. 10.12. p. 320. Jer.
31.31, etc. p. 179, etc. 334, 335. Chap. 32.40, p. 455. Ezekiel. 16.61, 62. p.
333. Chap. 18.24, 26. p. 464. 36.26. 27. p. 179, etc. Mal. 2.15. p. 392. Mat.
16.18. p. 457. 28. 19. p. 403. 418, etc. Ver. 20. p. 489. Mar. 16.16. p. 423,
424. John 5.22. p. 18. Acts 2.38, 39. p. 370, 408. 13. 48. p. 453. Romans 4.11.
p. 236, 237. 5. 12. p. 94. Ver. 19. p. 89. Romans 6.4. p. 444, etc. 9. 6, 7, 8.
p. 355. 10. 5. p. 323. 11. 15, 16, etc. p. 374. 1 Cor. 7.14. p. 378. Gal. 4.24.
p. 339. 5. 3. p. 313, 314. Tit. 1.2. p 131. Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. p. 465. 8. 6, 7. p.
331. Heb. 8.10. p. 179, etc. Ver. 13. p. 338. 9. 20. p. 118. Jam. 4.12. p. 19,
1 John 4.18. p. 56. Rev. 3.4. (...) p. 216. 13. 8. p. 300.


