Reformed Religion, OR, Right Christianity DESCRIBED, IN Its Excellency, and
Usefulness IN THE Whole LIFE of MAN.

By a Protestant-Christian.

And the Disciples were called Christians first in Antioch. Act. 11. 26.
^eritatem Philosophi quaerunt, Theologi inveniunt, Religiosi possident. Aug.
(...). Greg. Nyssen. LONDON, Printed by J. A. for John Dunton at the Black
Raven in the Poultrey over against the Compter, 1689.

THE PREFACE.
THE present State and Circumstances of our English Nation, cause great
Thoughts of Heart, every wise Man considering, not what will best gratify his
own Humor, Passion, personal Interest, or Opinion, but what may be best for
the peace, wealth, strength, safety, and settlement of the Nation. Every Fool
can make breaches and divisions, but it requires good Wisdom to heal them. A
wise Man's Heart discerns both Time, and Judgment, says Solomon; and Tempori
parendum, was the Motto of Theodosius the second: we may better see what we may
be able to do; than what is best to be done in our present Circumstances. We
have amongst us a company of rash, heady, fierce, ignorant, and felf-confident
People, who if wisely managed by the prudence of Government, may be made useful
in the Nation, to the enriching and strengthening of it, who are no way fit to
have the Reins in their own hand, whether they be Conformists or not. Was the
fear of God, and the Principles of true Religion more set up in the Hearts of
Men, it would greatly be to the advantage both of Church, and State: I have
been thinking how this may be best done. And seeing though we have many sorts
of Opinions amongst us, yet we all profess our selves Christians, and unite in
that Center, I thought it might be a good work to show men briefly, what
Christianity is, and what they are obliged to be, by being Christians; and have
run over as many particulars about it, as I could at present think of; and
finding that many of our Disorders and Mistakes arise, from want of a due
understanding of, and regular respect to Magistracy and Ministry, I have
therefore given a brief description of both, to engage Men to that reverend
Honor, and Respect which are due to both: And that none may satisfy
themselves in being Protestants, if they are not also true Christians. I find,
it is not being of this, or that Party, or Opinion in Religion, which makes a
right Christian. We may observe some bad Men in all, and I hope there may be
some good, I would be loath to condemn all in a Lump. If I see a Man's Actions
bad, I will say he is a bad Man, let his Profession be this or that; and so
would I hope on the contrary. We have infallible Rules in the Word of God, to
judge of Men by: Though for the most part we judge of Men by false Rules,
suited to a Party, Opinion, or some secular Interest. But as I hate Profaneness
and Debauchery, so I abhor Dissimulation, or Hypocrisy, in all Professions, so
as to make Religion a pretense to Ambition, and Covetousness; to fraud and
Cousenage; to Murders, and Massacres, to Treasons and Rebellions. The Form of
Religion without the Power of it, the fairer it appears the fouler it is, is a
good saying of a late Writer. Religion is most wounded in the House of its
false Friends. And some upright, and innocent Souls, may suffer by the
miscarriages of some of their own Party; whereof we have had many Instances of
late amongst us. I am confident all good Christians agree in more things, than
they differ: And there may be forbearance where there is not agreement,
especially when the safety of Religion requires it: And sometimes the
Providence of God does that for a People, which their own endeavors could not
accomplish. Let wise Men observe its present Indications and act accordingly.

I find in the feavourish heats of Men's disputes, the Vitals of Religion are
apt to expire, and we have but too many sad Symptoms of it in the Nation, at
this day: And to recover it to its primitive vigor, and activity, in the right
Sphere, is the main Design of these papers; that there may be found more true
Christianity, amongst those who bear the Name of Christians, and the Name of
Protestants also. For the Conversation of many of them is such, that we have as
good ground of hope, for the Salvation of Turks and Infidels as of theirs. It
is not External Incorporating with any visible Church, whether the Church of
England, the Church of Rome, or any other, that puts a Man into a State of
Salvation, without having a sanctified Heart, and a Reformed Life. Many are
ambitious to make Proselytes to their Opinions, and their Church, and then call
them Converts, when possibly thereby, they may be made seven times more the
children of Hell than before.

I am sure the chief End of all Religion is the Salvation of Men's Souls, and
they are not likely to attain it in any Religion, if they are not sincere in
it: And sincerity lies more in the Heart, than the Head: And therefore seeing
men's heads, have of late been much exercised about Disputes, and the Polemical
parts of Religion, and vindicating the Doctrine of the Church of England
against the Errors of the Papists, (and of which there has been great use,) I
thought it might be seasonable to subjoyn something about practical Religion,
which is so much wanting in the Nation. Our Savior styles his Apostles not
only the Lights of the World, but the Salt of the Earth; And sent them forth
not only to inform Men's Judgments, but to season and sanctify their Hearts and
Lives. The chief business of these Papers is to expose good Salt to public
Sale; and as Solomon calls upon Men to buy the Truth, and the Prophet Isaiah,
To buy wine and milk, So I hope this Salt will be bought up a pace, it being so
necessary for every man's use. For as corruption in the Heart and Life does
oftentimes corrupt the Judgment, and makes Men receptive of any Religion, so
Sanctity of Heart and Life may be a great means to preserve men from Popery,
and erroneous Doctrines, and establish them in the true Religion. Therefore I
hope these Papers will not be thought unseasonable. We know the Protestant,
Reformed Religion, is the Profession of these Nations, and therefore attempts
to promote a true Reformation are surely seasonable in such a juncture, when
the three Estates of the Land are engaged in the establishing of it. My design
is to draw a strait Theological Line, whereby Men may discern both Rectitude
and Obliquity; what they are, or what they ought to be. And if any will account
me a Fool for speaking plainly, I am content to be so accounted, if I can make
others wise.

And let me advertise the Reader, that he will not find any rare things in the
following Discourse, I mean rare in the Notion, but many things, God knows, too
rare in Men's practice.

REFORMED RELIGION, OR, Right CHRISTIANITY DESCRIBED, etc.
ALL Religion in the World has Respect to a Deity; and was there no God, there
need to be no Religion, and they cast off a Deity, and may be termed Atheists,
who cast off all Religion. But there are such bright Characters of a Deity in
the Works of Creation, and in every Man's Conscience, as that there are but few
who embrace not some Religion or other: And tho some Men seem to live as though
there was no God, yet when they are in distress, or in the approaches of Death,
the sense of a Deity returns upon them; as motions against Nature will at some
time or other recurr. And therefore such as promote Impiety under pretexts of
Religion, are likely to do more mischief, and have greater success, then those
who seek to do it by disputing against a Deity. I know some have endeavored to
make themselves and others Atheists; as Lucretius boasts of Epicurus, that he
was the first that sought to deliver the World from the burdensome Yoke of
Religion: but he had not many Followers. Yet I fear the notion of a Deity may
be much stifled in many; for when they see all things come to pass by second
causes; when they* see Vice and Wickedness rampant in the world, and true
Piety, and Virtue under Contempt; and when they observe so many Sects in the
World, and differences about Religion; and how the generality of Men, though
they have no fear of God, yet they fare as well as those that fear him; and
when they see the Apostasy and Hypocrisy of many that have made great
Profession, and the simpleness and weakness of others; they begin to think, all
that is discoursed about a Deity, Providence, Judgment to come, Heaven and
Hell, or any Religion, are but fanatic Fancies, superstitious Conceits, or
politic Inventions, either of Princes to keep the People under Government, or
of Priests to make Markets of Peoples Consciences. But my business at present
is not with these, but such as own and acknowledge a Deity, profess Religion,
yea, the best, and only true Religion, the Reformed Christian Religion; a
Religion founded first in Gods Eternal Councels, for the highest Manifestation
of his own Glory, and formed for the good of Mankind in this World, and for
conducting them to the Eternal Felicity of the World to come. And was it not
defaced by the vicious practices of false Christians, it would either convince
or convert the World to it; and vindicate it self from the Reproaches under
which it lies with many at this day; most Men looking more at the Actions of
Men, than the Rules of the Religion they profess, to judge it by; though some
look upon it as some vindication of the Name of Christ against the Impostor
Mahomet, in the great success of the Christians, so called, against the Turks;
yet we may fear, that the unjust Practices, gross Idolatries, inhumane
Persecutions, and scandalous Lives of many called Christians, may keep them
from embracing Christianity. But because my design is general, I shall not make
it my business now to consider any one Party or Denomination of Christians
distinct from another, but shall briefly treat of Christianity it self, in the
Principles, Rules, Mysteries, and Designs of it; that all may here as in a
Glass see their own face; and as most, I fear, may have cause to blush, so it
may tend to reduce the Christian world to a better Temper, especially our own
English Nation. I find all Parties ready to reflect one upon another, whereas
all may be guilty: And whilst each are contending for some particular Opinions
and Circumstances in Religion, they may evidently transgress the Rules of
common Christianity: And while some are called Papists, others Protestants,
some Lutherans, some Calvenists, some Conformists, others Nonconformists, all
are apt to forget they are called Christians: And while we are contending for
that which is Primitive in Church order, and in the Externals of Religion, we
regard not that which is primitive in the right Temperament of our Hearts and
Lives, which if we could arrive at, or did studiously endeavor, it might
prevent the mischiefs, which have befallen us, for time to come; and allay our
late contentions in Religion, more than all the wrangling disputes which have
been among us; and though in doubtful things it is commendable to search out
Truth, and plead for it, yet not with minds possessed with Passion, or Prejudice,
which blind the Judgment, and break the bonds of Unity, Love and Peace: As the
two Men mentioned by Anselm, who disputing and then falling to blows in the
Morning, about the place where the Sun would rise, beat out one another Eyes,
and so neither of them could see it. It Is no great advantage to a Man to be a
Papist, Lutheran, Calvinist, Episcopal, Presbyterian, etc. if he be not a right
Christian. Our greatest zeal is about those things for the most part, that are
not necessary to Salvation; and which may leave us short of Heaven: So that we
may take up the complaint of the Historian, about the Divisions of the Eastern,
Western and Lybian Churches among themselves, Tanta confusio Niceph. cap. 25.
lib. 16.
mentiumque Caligo orbem universum incessit. Opinions get into Men's lusts, and
are twisted with Interest, which make Men furious and violent, who are
altogether Strangers to Christianity in the life and power of it: And though I
have not told the World my Name, either who I am, or what I am, yet I think I
need not care who knows it; for I suppose no man will be angry with me for
wishing all Men well; and as for praise of Men, as I deserve none, so neither
can I expect it from a work of this Nature: this I shall only say, I have lived
now the full Age of a Man, have been an Observer of the Contests of the late
Times, and have seen little good fruit upon the Spirits of most Men; many have
changed their Opinions, their particular Professions, and Parties, but still
have retained the same Hearts, and Religion in the Power of it has been
manifestly declining; either by being rarefied into airy Ceremonies, or
condensed into stupid Formality, or refined into speculative Notions, or rent
asunder by manifold Opinions, and perverse Disputes, or abused to unwarrantable
Designs; and Men have made it their work to trample others down, and their
Conquests have proved their Snare, and then their Ruin; wherein the saying of
Solomon is fulfilled, There is a time when one man rules over another to his
own hurt, Eccl. 8. v. 9. I fear most Men know not, or forget what it is to be a
right Christian: And what that worthy Name does oblige them to; which was the
Name whereby all Christ's Disciples were called, before all those Names were
known in the World, whereby since they have been distinguished or reproached.

And as it was the first Name given on Earth, so it may probably continue for
ever in Heaven, For of Christ the whole Family of Heaven and Earth is named, as
the Apostle speaks: I shall therefore endeavor to show in several distinct
Aphorisms, what a right Christian is in general, and then apply my Discourse to
Men in particular Capacities, and Relations: And I have not been careful to
observe Method, which my design will not well admit of, but have put things
down in my Paper as they came into my Thoughts, without consulting any Author;
yet they are all contained in the Scriptures, as I could easily show, whence a
Christian derives the Practice and Principles of his Religion.

Of a Right Christian in General.
FIrst, He is one baptized into the Profession of the Christian Faith, whether
in Infancy or afterward, or whether by sprinkling, plunging, or dipping, I
shall not here dispute; which is the outward badge, or distinguishing Sign of a
Christian, as Circumcision was to the Jews, and is sometimes applied to persons
who prove as flagitious and impious as any that are upon Earth.

And therefore in the next place, besides this outward washing of Water, he
has received the washing of Regeneration, and the Renewing of the Holy Ghost,
Tit. 3. 5. whereby, (considered in his first Original) he is said to be one
born of God, as one Apostle speaks, 1 John 13. And born of an incorruptible
Seed, as another Apostle speaks, 1 Pet. 1. 23. Born of Water, and the Holy
Spirit, as our Savior himself speaks, John 3. 5. And is made a Christian, not
born so by Natural Birth, as that Ancient Father speaks, Tertul. Apolog. Cap.
18. Fiunt non nascuntur Christiani. And tho outward Baptism is styled by the
Ancients, Regeneration, Renovation, Illumination, etc. yet it is with respect
to the inward Grace, which sometimes accompanies, and sometimes follows Baptism
in the right Christian; whereby he is more then a Christian in Name.

Again, He acknowledges one only living and true God, the Maker of Heaven and
Earth, and gives divine Honor, and Religious Worship to him alone, and will
not so debase the Incomprehensible God, as to make any Image of him, to Worship
him by. In both which he is distinguished from the Pagans.

Further, He is one who believes the Revelation made of Christ in the
^criptures to be true, that he is the Eternal Son of God, assumed the Nature of
Man, offered himself a Sacrifice for the Sin of the World, rose from the dead,
and now makes Intercession in Heaven, and will come again to judge the World.

Moreover, as a Christian he is dead to the Law, seeks not Righteousness and
Life by it, but believes that only through Faith in Christ, any Man can be
Justified, Redeemed, Sanctified and Saved; and that there is no Salvation in
any other, whereby a Christian is distinguished from Jews, Mahometans, and all
Infidels whatsoever.

Again, He is one who embraces the Christian Religion, not merely by the Power
of Education, or the Example of the place or Country where he dwells; but by
the powerful Evidence and Conviction of the Truth of it upon his Mind, by the
Purity of its Precepts, and the transcendent Reward it exhibits in its Promises
to them that sincerely profess and practice it.

He knows also, That as he is a Christian he is called to Liberty, yet uses it
not for occasion to the Flesh, or to free himself from the obligation of any
Duty he owes to God, or Man; but to keep his Conscience free from bondage to
the Commands of the Ceremonial Law; or the rigorous Commands of the Moral Law
of God, or the sinful Injunctions and Commandments of Men.

Further, He measures not the Mysteries in Christianity, by the Line of his own
finite Reason, he knowing that the Natural Man discerns not the things of the
Spirit, but believes them because God has revealed them, though he cannot
comprehend them; yet is daily seeking further illumination in the knowledge of
Spiritual things, being Spiritually discerned, and does realize to himself by
Faith the things that are not perceptible by Sense.

He is one also, who, as he bears the Name of Christ; so he follows him as his
Master and Teacher, and sets before him the Example of his Life, as his pattern
to imitate. Imitari quem colimus est summa Christianitatis. Lactant. He having
left us an example, that we should follow his steps, says the Apostle.

He is one who feels in himself a daily combat betwixt Flesh and Spirit, as
Jacob and Esau struggling in the same Womb; but is Crucifying the fleshly part,
that he may be like to Christ in his Death, and is striving to rise up into the
power of a Spiritual life, that he may be like him in his Resurrection, and
which are both signified in his Baptism; and by a serious Contemplation of the
Death and Resurrection of Christ by the eye of Faith, and the help of the
Spirit, he is arriving to both these; which is a Mystery only known in the
Christian Religion.

Further, He believing that Christ is Ascended into Heaven, and entered the Vail
in the name of all his People, and there sits at the right hand of God; it does
raise up the Affection of his Heart, and the Contemplation of his Mind to
things that are Above; which is peculiar also to a Christian, and above the
Sphere of mere Morality.

Again, He is no Enthusiast, expecting a Divine Teaching by Immediate
Inspiration; bu^ owning, and receiving the Scriptures as the holy Oracles of
God; he reads them, and studies the knowledge of them, for his direction in
Faith and Practice; Contra Scriptur a^ nemo Christianus. August.

Neither is he a Sceptick in Religion, of a giddy unsettled Mind, tossed too and
fro with every wind of Doctine, but having received the Truth, he stands fast
in it, and wherein he doubts makes sober inquiry, and does willingly receive
instruction that he may be sound in the Faith, and complete in the whole Will
of God; but resigns not up his Judgment or Practice in Religion to the Conduct
or command of any Person, or Church, so as not to satisfy himself in the
Grounds and Reasons of his Faith and Obedience; that his serving God may be a
reasonable Service, and not blind Devotion.

Neither is he a Solisidian, hoping to be saved merely by Believing, or naked
Assent, but is one Zealous of good Works, as being profitable to Men,
acceptable to God, honorable to Religion, and necessary to Salvation. Yet he
knows they must spring from Faith, and are not sufficient of themselves to his
Justification in the sight of God; and therefore he puts not his trust in them,
but in the Mercy of God and perfect Righteousness of Jesus Christ; which
Bellarmin himself at last thought the safest way.

Further, He being sensible of his own insufficiency, depends upon God for that
daily supply of his Grace whereby he may have his Heart in a readiness for
every good work, and may show forth his Faith, by his love to God and Men.

He is one who makes all his approaches to God by the one Mediator, the Man
Christ Jesus, without making use of any Sub-mediators either of Redemption or
Intercession, not mentioned in the Gospel; and herein he considers God, not
only as a Creator, or in the absolute perfections of his Being, but as
reconciled in the Blood of his Son, related as a Father, and engaged by a
special Covenant.

He is one who waits and prays for the help of Gods holy Spirit to lead him
into the presence of God, and to help his Infirmities therein, and approaches
not to him merely by the impulse of natural Conscience, much less by the help
of Pictures, or Images, forbidden by the Law of God; but by the Spirit of
Adoption, inclining his Will, moving his Affections, and crying Abba Father in
his Heart.

Again, He reckons upon Suffering with Christ, as well as Reigning with him, of
bearing his Cross, as well as wearing his Crown, and of Denying himself as
becomes a Disciple of Christ; and therefore Arms himself for it, that he may
not be surprised by it, or faint under it; and as he will not rashly thrust
himself upon sufferings, so neither decline them when necessarily called
thereunto, wherein he will have respect to the goodness of his Call, of his
Cause, and of his Conscience.

Further, He is one, who when he is Reviled reviles not again, patiently bears
affronts and injuries for Righteousness sake; seeks not privately to revenge
himself, but commits his Cause to him that judges righteously.

Again, He embraces Religion for its own sake, and not for any politic end,
and abhors to make use of it as an Art, to serve any Covetous, Ambitious, or
Treacherous designs.

He is one who believes a Judgment to come, and therefore lives in continual
awe of it, and endeavors so to manage the whole course of his actions, that he
may be accepted of the Lord in that day, and not fall under the wrath to come,
and thereupon is less concerned about being Judged of men, or of man's day.

Again, He believing the Immortality of his own Soul, the Resurrection of his
Body, and hoping for the Eternal Life of the World to come, (Life and
Immortality being brought to light by the Christian Religion;) he is seeking to
make it sure to himself, and thereupon is less concerned as to his temporal
Life, and his short stay in this present World, looking upon himself as a
stranger here on Earth.

He is careful to examine himself about his State toward God, and to know the
inward frame and temperament of his own Soul, and the Actions of his Life in
the Principle, Rule and End of them, that he may not be found among Hypocrites,
and that counterfeit Grace may not be mistaken for that which is true.

His Zeal in Religion is not rash and precipitate, hypocritical and
treacherous, violent and cruel, so as to transgress the Rules of Humanity,
Charity, and Sobriety; but is grounded upon Knowledge, and regulated by sound
Judgment, Wisdom, and Discretion; and his greatet Zeal is about the great
things of Religion, and of the greatest certainty.

He is one who has a regular Conscience, extending to one Duty as well as to
another, and therefore will not strain at Gnats and swallow Camels; nor be
scrupulous about Ceremonies, and of conforming to some outward Forms of
Worship, and yet can practice injustice, oppression, lying, fraud,
intemperance, backbiting, malice, and such moral impieties not becoming
Christians.

And if he has a Conscience of Conformity to the Church, he makes Conscience
of the moral Duties of Religion, and will not be found guilty of swearing,
cursing, drunkenness, fornication, scoffing at piety, blasphemy, false
accusation, or persecution for Conscience sake of the truly conscientious, etc.

And though his practice in Religion is according to his best Light and
judgment, yet he confines not the Church of God, or monopolizeth Salvation to
the narrow limits of his own private Opinion, but judges charitably of men who
Conscientiously differ from him, as knowing that as in several Nations, so
under several Opinions, He that fears God and works Righteousness, is
accepted of him; and therefore he can love and honor true Piety, Sincerity and
Goodness, and real Worth, wherever he finds them; as the Philosophers called
(...), studied to extract the good out of every Sect of Philosophers, and
rejected the rest.

Again, He beholds the Creator in the works of his Creation, and adores his
wisdom, power, bounty, and goodness shining forth therein; and as a Christian,
he can look upon the Creator of the World, as the Redeemer of it, and as his
God and Father in Jesus Christ, and in special relation to him; and hereupon to
have his Heart engaged to love him, honor him, fear him, and trust in him,
which is more than the most learned Heathen, by the light of Nature could
attain unto.

Further, He considering the Dominion God has given Man over the brute
Creatures, he uses them with Thanksgiving, but will not abuse them as a
Tyrannical Lord, and is stirred up to the more cheerful service of God, by
those brute Creatures which are daily serving him.

He knows that not only Faith is required of a Christian, but outward
Profession, and therefore he conforms to all the Ordinances and Institutions of
Christ in his Church, and attends there diligently for his Edification, and
that God may be hononred by the Divine Worship of the Public Assemblies of his
People, according to the dictates of the universal Law of Nature; and therefore
as he will not have Communion with any Church in that that is evil, and sinful,
so he is ready to hold Communion with all Churches in that which is lawful and
good, that he may not fall under the just charge of Schism or unwarrantable
Separation; and seeks the maintaining of his whole profession unspotted and
without rebuke, and therefore He keeps his Foot when he goes to the House of
God; demeans himself with all seriousness, and Reverence in Gods public
Worship; will not be found talking, gazing, whispering, laughing, or sleeping
when his mind and thoughts should be directed toward God, that he may carry
himself suitable to that great Presence wherein he is, and the solemnity of
that Service he i^ engaged in.

He carefully avoids all Tempting of God, by presuming upon his Power and
Mercy, for the good either of his Soul or Body, without using suitable and
rational means, or such as may be appointed of God for that end; neither will
he pray or hope to receive what God has never promised to give, and thereby be
also a tempter of God.

Again, He being a Christian, is careful to observe the Christian Sabbath, not
the Seventh day of the Week as the Jews, but the First, according to the
example of the Apostles, and the first Christian Churches; whereby he owns
Christ's Lordship over the Sabbath, to change the day, as well as the Ordinances
of Gods worship therein; and therefore he remembers to keep it Holy by
abstaining from bodily Labors, and by the exercise of his mind and thoughts in
those Duties of Religion, both public and private, which are suitable to the
Day, and required in the moral part of the Fourth Commandment; and we read,
that the keeping of the Lord's Day was made the Character of a Christian, in the
primitive times.

Further, He is an Encourager of good Ministers who labor in the Word and
Doctrine; receives them as the Ambassadors of Christ, submits to their
instructions in the Lord, and has them in high esteem for their Works sake,
and thinks it his Duty to give his Carnal things to them from whom he receives
his Spiritual things, and grudgeth not an honorable Maintenance to such, whose
Work and Office are both honorable.

He shapes not his Religion to the times, and alters it not as his Interest
alters; but denies himself therein, that he may be a true follower of Christ,
and the Truth, and for the maintenance of a good Conscience.

Again, He is one who lives not in any scandalous Sin, nor allows himself in
any known Sin; but because he cannot live without Sin, he daily renews his
Repentance toward God, and Faith toward the Lord Jesus Christ, to preserve
his peace with God and his own Conscience, as the Christian Religion does
direct, whereby he does carefully avoid the two fatal racks of presumption and
despair.

Neither is he the more easily drawn to any Sin because he esteems it Venial,
or by hope of obtaining Pardon by the Absolution of a Priest, or the
Intercession of any Saint, or the Expiation of it in Purgatory.

He fetches down his Mercies from God by constant Prayer, and returns them
back to God by hearty Thanksgiving, as becomes a Christian: The Incense he
offers up is fervent Prayer, and his Peace Offering is a thankful Heart; and
this he does not only in company with others, but in his private Devotion
betwixt God and his own Soul.

He loves, honors, and practices true Godliness never a whit the lesser,
because of the weakness, folly, or sinful miscarriages of some that make
profession thereof; much less will he take advantage thereby to reproach an^
scoff at it.

But the excellency, equity, peace, and comfort which are in the ways of
Religion, make him to cleave to it, though he sees many false pretenders to it,
under several Professions, as knowing there will be some Hypocrites under all
Forms; and he will not justify such a^ make no profession, because many cast a
reproach upon it by an irregular conversation.

Again, What evil he sees or censures in another, he will examine his own Heart
and practice, whether the same is not found in himself, and will therefore
endeavor first to cast the Beam out of his own Eye, and not practice himself
what he has condemned in another, lest he thereby be self-condemned.

He is one, who places not his Religion in Forms, and Ceremonies, or bodily
Worship; though he is for comely Gravity, and all outward Decency in Gods
worship, yet his main ^^re is to serve God with a frame of Heart ^oper to
Christianity, viz. not from servile ^ar as the Jews under the Law, or the
con^aint of humane Laws, as time-serving for^al Christians, much less out of
vain osten^^tion, as the Scribes and Pharisees, but with ^ve, and delight,
filial reverence, humility, ^^vency, and sincerity, as becomes a true Chri^an;
and will not cry up holiness in Places, Al^rs, and Vestures, etc. and yet
despise it in ^ens Persons.

Neither does he place his Religion in high ^raphical Notions, affected
Gestures, canting ^ords, doubtful opinions, or in not conform^g with others out
of mere singularity; but ^ sound Knowledge, Faith, Love, Mercy, Hu^ility, and
all Holiness of Life.

He also is one who can take kindly a just Re^oof, and prefer a faithful
reprover, before ^ vain self-seeking flatterer, being more de^ous to be
humbling himself, than to be self^alted.

If he meets with Affliction, he justifies God, ^bmits himself patiently to his
Sovereign ^ill, and seeks to turn it to some advantage ^ his Soul; or if it be
Persecution for Righ^ousness sake, he patiently commits his cause ^ God, will
rather judge himself than revile ^e Adversary; will use no unwarrantable ^eans
to deliver himself, will acknowledge ^e righteousness of God in all the
unrighte^usness of Men: Yea he does love his Enemies, blesses those that curse
him, prays them who despitefully use him, is not ov^come of evil, but
overcomes evil with go^ as becomes a Christian.

He is not offended at the Prosperity of wi^ed Men, he knowing it has been so
in ^ Ages, and that they receive all their go^ things in this Life, and the
time of Recompe^ is not yet; neither does he stagger at the A^versity of the
Righteous, as knowing it co^ either for a trial of Virtue, or a chastisem^ for
their good, that they may not be conde^ed with the World.

He is one who is not Anxiously careful ab^ the things of this Life, seeks not
great thi^ to himself; yet is diligent in his place, a^ calling, and commits
his Affairs to the cond^ and blessing of God; seeks to eat his o^ Bread, and is
content with the portion G^ allotts him of the things of this World.

Further, He will not extenuate Sin a^ Wickedness in some, and aggravate it in
other merely to serve a design, to gratify a part and promote some particular
Interest; ^^ disallows of evil impartially in all.

Again, He considers not only what is La^ful, but what is Expedient, and of
good R^port before Men, and is careful to give ^ just occasion of offense to
any; and in ^ things, wherein he can without sin, will stu^ously avoid it,
providing for things honest in t^ sight of God and Men.

Further, He judges not of Right or Wrong, ^od or evil, by events or
successes, but by ^e light of true Reason, and the Law of Equi^, and the rule
of Righteousness; and yet he ^ observant of the course of Providence, a^ut all
humane Affairs, and gathers instructi^ to himself thereby; but he well
considers that the wise man said and observed in this ^se, There is one event
to the righteous and the ^icked.

He is one who is not forward to censure ^hers, but still hops the best; will
not un^ertake to judge Men's hearts, which are only ^nown to God, and is more
ready to Judge ^mself than he is his Brother, and will take ^otice of the Good
as well as of the Evil he ^nds in any Man, according to the example of ^od
himself.

He does not Rejoice when his Brother is ^vertaken with a fault, will not Glory
over ^im, but rather with a spirit of Meekness will ^ek to restore him,
considering himself, lest ^e also be Tempted; much less will he lay a
^tumbling-block before him to cause him ^ fall.

Again, He is not of a base selfish Temper, ^eeking only his own things, but is
content to ^uffer in his private interest, if the public ^ood may be Advanced
thereby, and is glad ^ God is Honored, and Chirists Kingdom ^dvanced, though
he be any way Eclipsed by ^^.

He envies not another Prosperity, but ^ joyceth in another Welfare, as his
own, ^ becomes a Christian to a fellow Member; W^ one member rejoiceth all the
rest rejoice with it, sa^ the Apostle.

Again, He carries it Humbly toward a^ and in Honor will prefer another
before hi^ self, and if he be High, yet condescends ^ men of Low degree, as
becomes a Christian^

He is one who affects not Pride, Vanit^ or any singularity in Apparel, but
consid^^ the place, and condition wherein God ha^ set him, and what is comely
and of good ^ port herein, and what sobriety, humilit^ and modesty the
Christian Religion does o^lige all unto, and requires both of Men a^ Women
professing Godliness.

He gives not heed to every Report, wise considers what he Hears, and much more
^fore he reports again, that he may not ^ charged with folly, lying, or
defamation.

Again, He is one who Glories not in himself, neither in what he is, or in what
he hat^ or in what he does, but acknowledging G^ in all, gives all Glory to
God, as becomes Christian, he knowing well that he has n^thing but what he
has received, and that i^ God alone who makes him to differ.

He lays to heart public Calamities, a^ the Sins which bring them upon the
People and stands in awe of God and his Judgments, when they are on the Earth,
and is from thence learning Righteousness; but especially he being a member of
the Church of God, does simpathize with her afflicted condition, and is not
satisfied in his own private welfare, and will not omit the extraordinary Duty
of so^emn Fasting and Humiliation in such extraordinary cases.

If he be cast upon Perilous times, he will ^ot rashly expose himself, but will
use all ^rudent means for his own safety, but always ^ill join the Innocence of
the Dove with the Wisdom of the Serpent, and his dangers do ^ake him fly to
God for refuge, and to hide himself under the shadow of his Wings; The ^^udent
man foreseeth the evil, and hides himself, says the wise man.

He is one who walks in Love, is a fol^ower of Peace with all men, as knowing
^here there is strife and envy, there is confusion, ^d every evil work; and
that Men are known ^ be Christ's Disciples by loving one another.

Further, He is no Busie-body in other Men's ^atters, which concern him not, but
minds ^e Duty of his own place, to discharge it ^rightly toward God, and
faithfully to^ards Men.

If he be a Master of a Family, he will up^ld good Government, and the Worship
of ^od therein; allows not Sin in his Servants, yet Rules not over them with
cruelty a^ rigor, but gives them that which is just a^ necessary. If a
Servant, he is Submissive a^ Gentle, Diligent and Faithful, performs n^
Eye-service from fear of Man, but in singl^ness of Heart as to the Lord. If an
Husban^ he dwells with his Wife according to kno^ledge, Loves and Cherishes
her as his o^ Flesh, giving honor to her as the weak^ Vessel, and is satisfied
in her Breasts, a^ embraces not the Bosom of a Stranger: so t^ true Christian
Wife is modest, meek, prude^ peaceable, a keeper at home, guiding t^ House,
submitting her self to her own H^band, as to the Lord, and is faithful to t^
Marriage Bed: and so true Christian Pare^ will provide for their Children,
dispose ^ their Education to the best advantage, w^ early teach them the good
Knowledge and Fe^ of God, and by reproof, counsel, and c^rection, restrain the
exorbitances of the Youthful Age: And so their Children, if co^ to Age, will
Reverence and Obey their ^rents, endeavor to requite them, hearken ^ their
instructions, and perform the ingag^ments they have laid upon them in their
B^tism; and those that are Young will revere^ Age, and be tractable to receive
instructi^ from their Elders, and the Aged will by ^ gravity of their carriage
put an awe upon ^ Hearts of the Younger.

Again, A right Christian will not allow vain or wicked thoughts in his Mind,
(the actual sins of the life being first committed in Men's thoughts) and
knowing though they are hid from Men, yet they are all open to the Eye of the
omniscient God, and under the Authority and Cognizance of his Law, as well as
Words or Actions; so that he being a lover of Gods Law, is an hater of vain
thoughts, as the Psalmist speaks.

He is one also who watches over his Lips, that his speech may be seasoned
with Salt, and that nothing that is vain, false, foolish or unsavory, may
proceed from them; he remembering what the Apostle speaks in this case, If any
man seem to be Religious, and bridleth not his Tongue, this man's Religion is
vain.

He is one who is Just and Righteous in his dealings with Men, will not defraud
and overreach in Bargains, or fraudulently break in others Debts, will not
lie, equivocate, or break his Promises, betray his trust, much less take a
false Oath, to wrong another or advantage himself, and seeks to walk by the
Apostles rule, Owe nothing to any man, but love one another; and if he has
wronged another, is ready according to his ability to make restitution.

He has a sacred Reverence for the holy Name of God, will not Profane it by
common Swearing, or take it up rudely in common discourse or talk.

Again, He is pitiful, and compassionate to those that are in distress, will
not add Affliction to the Afflicted, but is ready to show mercy, and to forgive
others, as he himself hopes to obtain forgiveness from God.

He will not abuse the good Creatures of God to any excess, his eating and
drinking is to refresh, and not to oppress Nature, and will studiously avoid
all Temptations thereunto; that his Body may be kept in a due serviceableness,
and subjection unto his Soul. But confines not himself to any Jewish, or
superstitious distinction of meat, and drink, he knowing as a Christian, that
to the pure all things are pure, etc.

And, as he will not prodigally consume his earthly Substance, so he has an
Heart to make use of it, for comfort to himself, and the benefit of others; and
will not disquiet his mind, or perplex his thoughts, with carking cares,
groundless fears, or endless desires about the things of this World, whereby he
cannot enjoy the good that is in his hand.

He is one also who is careful to redeem, and improve his Time, and will not
consume it in hearing or reporting News, in unnecessary Visits, idle Discourse,
much less in Gaming, Clubbing, Tippling, Feasting, or any immoderate Recreation.

His love to Men is without dissimulation: He will not say to another, Your
Servant, your humble Servant, Sir, when he hates him in his Heart.

And further, whenever he finds in himself an opposition betwixt Conscience and
Interest, he gives Conscience the praeminence, preferring his inward peace
before outward advantages, and the pleasing God before gratifying himself.

Again, He will not use his utmost liberty ^n lawful things, where it may be a
Temp^ation to himself, or a stumbling block unto others.

He is not led by the Examples of Men, ap^roves not of any evil, because
practiced by ^he multitude, but having found out the Rule ^f his walking, he
follows it, though against the ^ream of a corrupt Age.

Again; He studiously avoids vain Scoffing and reproachful Nicknames,
especially about ^atters of Religion, as being the Evidence of ^ frothy mind,
and tending to beget pro^haneness and Atheism in Men's Hearts.

Further, Though his Conversation is civil and courteous toward all, yet he
especially ^onours them who fear the Lord, and chooses ^ch to be of his more
intimate Acquaintance ^d Society, wherein he does delight.

He bridles his Anger, that it may not trans^rt him to any excess, either in
words, or ^tions, neither will he suffer the Sun to go down upon it, so as to
lodge with him, lest it grow up into malice, or inveterate hatred: Remembering
herein the wise Man's saying, Anger rests in the Bosom of fools. And he also
has that Rule over his Spirit, that he is no^ easily provoked to wrath.

He will not easily take up false Report against any, much less divulge them;
most o^ all, not raise them, but seeks to preserve another Reputation as his
own; knowing tha^ he ought to love his Neighbor as himself and therefore he
will not entertain ground less Jealousies, but puts all things under the most
favorable Interpretation, according t^ the Rule of Christian charity.

He is not wise in his own Conceit, but judging humbly of his own Parts, he
readily hearkens to other Men, and over-weens not his ow^ understanding.

He will not rejoice and triumph in other Men's Calamities, nor trample upon
the^ when they are fallen, not knowing how so^^ their case may be his own; and
the trya^ which are upon them, may come to his ow^ door.

He makes it his care to preserve Pea^ within, in the midst of all the troubles
the attend him from without, and sets befo^ him the Joys of Heaven as a Relief
against t^ Worlds sorrow.

He looks upon the Providence of Go^ as superintending, and guiding the
Affairs the World, and therefore is not dismayed by the signs of the Heavens;
gives not heed to Diviners and Soothsayers, as the Heathen did, and which was
forbidden by many Christian Emperors, and becomes not the Christian
Profession. Neither does he ascribe Events to blind Fortune, the Power of
exorcisms, or to the Connection of second causes, any further than they are
influenced by the first cause; and therefore he does not perplex his Thoughts
about future things, which are not in his Power, but in the discharge of his
present Duty; leaves them all in the hand of the only wise God.

Again, Though he is diligent in the affairs of his Calling, yet he suffers not
the things of this World, so to ingross his Time, Heart, and Thoughts, as to be
diverted from all Communion with God, and attending the great Concernments of
his Soul; and will what he can, avoid the encumbrances of the World, that his
Heart may be more free for the Duties of Religion, and the service of God.

And seeing that he was not made by himself, or for himself, he is careful to
serve the end of his being, which is to glorisie his Creator, and for that end
is diligent to improve the several Talents wherewith God has entrusted him,
whether natural, acquired, civil or spiritual, and considering also himself as
bought with a price, he glorifies God both in Soul and Body, which both are
his: which is peculiar to a Christian.

And lastly, He knowing that his Time is short upon Earth, he is making
Provision for his latter End, that he may dye in Peace: Whereupon he lives not
in continual Bondage to the fear of Death, nor hardens himself against it by a
Roman courage, but looking upon Death by Faith in the Death of Christ, he sees
the Sting of it taken away, and it made a Passage into Eternal Life: And
knowing also that the coming of the Lord draws nigh, he comforts himself in the
Expectation of it, as hoping to find mercy of the Lord at that day. I should
here have added one particular more, which the Christian Religion does oblige
all Men to, which is Obedience to Rulers and Magistrates, but I shall make it a
distinct head to speak of afterward.

Now Reader, By these things, and such things as these, (for I cannot possibly
mention all,) thou see what it is to be a Christian, and what an Excellency
and Purity is in the Christian Religion, and what brave Men it would make us,
both toward God, our selves, and one another: Whatever moral Virtues the
Heathen Philosophers boasted of, or whatever Goodness or Truth there is in
natural Theology, whatever is consentaneous to the purest Reason, or whatever
moral goodness there is in the Law of Moses, whether Moral, Judicial, or
Ceremonial, or in any Religion professed in the World, we have it all comprised
in Christianity. Here we have an account of the true Happiness of Man, and how
to attain it: And where an Expiation may be found for the sin of his Soul: And
how he may be supported under all the Calamities of this present Life, which
three things the Minds of the Philosophers were so exercised about. It is a
Religion, which endows men with higher Principles, and sets before them higher
Motives against the practice of evil, and for performing that which is good,
than any other in the World; and was it Exemplified in the Lives of Men,
instead of Oppression, Injustice, and Violence, instead of Animosities,
Divisions, and Contentions, instead of treacherous plotting and contriving the
destruction of one another; we might enjoy our selves and live together in
great Tranquillity, Love, and Peace: whereas, now the lives of most who are
called Christians, are the public scandal of the World, and as great Atheism,
Profaneness, Irreligion, and all sorts of Immoralities are found among us, as
where the Name of Christ and the Gospel were never heard of: And in many things
worse than Infidels, which makes the old saying true, Aut hoc non est
Evangelium, aut nos non sumus Evangelici: Either this is not the Christian
Religion we profess, or else we are not Christians. And will not Christ be
ashamed of them, who are a shame to him, and his Name, that is upon them? As a
Parent who has a vile and wicked Son, is ashamed that he should bear hi^ Name:
And as some have probably thought^ that those shall come first to Judgment, s^
they are likely to fall under the severest judgment in the day of Christ. The
Heathen o^ old upbraided the Christians with their Name* Cajus Sejus bonus vir,
sed Christianus; but now it may be said, Cajus Sejus Christianus, sed no^ bonus
vir; which is a real Reproach, which the other was not. And may we not complai^
as Salvian in his Time, In nobis patitur Christus opprobrium, in nobis patitur
Lex Christian^ maledictum? Christ and his Religion do bot^ suffer reproach in
us: Whereas the Primitiv^ Christians as they gloried in their Name, an^ were
encouraged by it under their Persecutions* so they were a Glory to it both in
their Lif^ and Death. Let no Man say, that he hope^ to be saved by Gods Mercy,
or by an impute^ Righteousness, while he walks not by the holy Precepts of our
Savior, and the Rule of the Gospel. And Baptism, or a Christian name, o^ the
Name of Protestant, will avail men nothing, where there is not true
Christianity if we count it a disgrace to be called a Jew, ^ Turk, an Heathen,
let us take heed we mak^ not the Name of a Christian odious: and a^ Eusebius,
speaks of the Godly who lived before the coming of Christ, that they were (...)
though not (...), Christians; but many tha^ ^ive now after it, are (...), not
(...); Christians in Name only, not in Practice: And he is not a Jew (a
Christian) who is one outward^y, says the Apostle.

I know, It Is an easy thing to talk of Religion, of a Catholic Church, and to
commend morality, and the Excellency of our Saviors Precepts, when Men will
not touch the practice of them with one of their fingers. If Love be the
fulfilling of the Law, sure then where there is not love, the whole Law is
broken, and there is nothing of true Religion: And when Men walk in strife,
envy, malice, hypocrisy, etc. they are quite Strangers to right Christianity.

And though it has not cost me much time or pains, to gather these many things
together, (for I considered nothing, but the public benefit, and the present
necessity of the Times) yet to reduce them into practice, he shall find it
difficult who will seriously apply himself thereunto, corruption and lust
prevailing in most Men, above true Reason and Conscience: Yet every Christian
who is upright in his Profession, is striving after further perfection in
Christianity, though he finds he yet falls short in many things.

And though I know that the whole Duty of Man may be generally expressed in a
few words, yet as the saying is, Generalia non pungunt; and particulars are
more apt to make impression upon Men's Hearts: Though I have not enlarged upon
any of them, that may bring the Sum of a Christians Dut^ within as narrow
compass as I could.

And I think there are but few Duties of Christian, but what are either
mentioned, or comprehended in them. And I believe the trut^ of them will be
owned by all sober Christians carrying their Evidence along with them t^ their
Judgments and Consciences. The Protestants call themselves of the Reformed
Religion, but how many have unreformed Lives they have good Articles of Faith,
but have not their Creed in their Conversation.

But methinks we may expect to find tru^ Christianity in as high an Elevation,
and Eminency in England, as in any part of the Christian World. What Nation
has afforded more Eminent Divines both for Learnin^ and Piety? where has the
Cause of Religion been more asserted, and vindicated? Where have the holy
Mysteries of the Christian Religion, been more clearly opened? Where have such
Books of practical Godliness, been published and printed, as here? which are
much valued in foreign Countries, and their young Divines learn to preach by
them: I know some will shrugg their Shoulders, and say, It Is true, we ought to
be such Christians a^ are before described, but alas! where are ther^ any such?
And we are but as others are; and we would be better Christians if we could,
and all have their failings: Thus men exeuse their sin and Sloth; but do their
Consciences ^ell them they do what they can, and not rather the contrary? were
but the Principles of ^eason and Natural Conscience more awaken^d in Men, it
would reduce them from many Ex^rbitances they run into, and lead them into a
^ore sober and regular Conversation, how ^uch more the Principles of
Christianity? But ^en love their sin, and hate to be reformed: and cannot bear
a faithful Ministry, of one ^ort or another, and trust to a little outside
^evotion, or feigned Profession, and know nothing of the serious part of
Religion. Let ^en seriously read the former particulars, and ^s they read them,
make a short pause, and ^onsider them; and I have not published them, because
men know them not, but because they ^o know and profess them, and that they ^ay
practice what they know, and their ^nowledge may not condemn them. And ^ould
not Men consider what their Baptism ^oth oblige them to, and those that profess
themselves of the Church of England, what ^hen their Sponsors undertook for
them? That ^hey should forsake the Devil, and all his ^orks, the Pomps and
Vanities of this wic^ed World, and all the sinful lusts of the ^lesh? Words
easily said, but little regard^d.

And is not this Obligation vouched, and re^ewed afresh, every time they come
to the holy Communion? Has their Baptism no other effe^ upon them, but that
then they received their Christian Name? Surely either all Religion is bu^
Nomen inane, a vain Name, as Brutus said of Ve^tue, or else it is the most
momentous thing i^ the whole World: we should therefore practi^ it in good
earnest, and be Christians alt^gether, as before described. For I fear, le^ in
opposition to the Dissenters, who have cried up so much the Power of Godliness
it is grown into Contempt, and we satisfy our selves in the outward Form, and
i^ the name of a Church.

And for the people called Dissenters, giv^ me leave (and I hope you will take
it well to deal plainly with you, out of love to you persons, and the honor of
Religion, wherei^ all good Men are concerned.

The truth is, You not conforming to the Church of England, as Men of stricter
Principles in Religion, have thereby contracte^ much envy from your Neighbors,
and a mo^ critical observation of your Conversation, expecting more exactness
and exemplinarines^ of Life from you than others; and though i^ may be more
has been charged upon you, o^ some of you, than is true, yet too much fear is
true: First,

Have not there been found among you some who have dealt Deceitfully in their
Commerce and Trading, Cheating, Overreaching, breaking your Word, and sometime
Equivocating, and Lying for a private Advantage?

Have there not been some, who have failed and broke in others Debts, and that
either through great Carelessness, or rash Adventures, or it may be plain
Cousenage?

Have not some of you taken too much liberty at Taverns, to Drink and Tipple,
and to Discourse at Coffee-houses, and spending your time there at unseasonable
Hours, when you should have been attending the Duties at home, of your
Families? Which those that may like it well enough in others, and practice it
themselves, yet cast it upon you in Reproach.

Have not others been guilty of excessive Costliness, and Pride, and vanity in
Apparel, and modish and immodest Dresses, not becoming their Profession; and
high living beyond their Quality, their Place, or it may be their outward
Estates?

Again, Have you not some amongst you who are of unquiet Spirits, unruly
Passions, given to brawling, strife, and contention in your Family, Parents
with Children, Masters and Mistresses with Servants, using reproachful Names
and threatening Language, not becoming the Gospel, and injurious to all good
Order and Government?

Have not some also been guilty of great Covetousness, grasping at great
Estates, and griping the Poor, and oppressing the Needy, and withholding Wages
when it was due, an^ shutting up your Purse in works of Charity and Mercy, and
have had the cry of the Poor thereby against you?

Have not some of you had itching Ears, now crying up one Man, then another,
having Men's persons in admiration, because of parts, gifts, opinions, and
affecting tone, o^ some peculiar notions in Religion, affecting Novelties more
than sound Doctrine, and hearing them, rather to please your Fancies, than
profit your Souls?

Again, Have not others of you run into extremes in Religion, running so far
from Justification by Works, as to cast off Charity and good Works, and seeking
purer Ministry and Ordinances, have rejected both, and depending upon the
Spirit, have cast off the Scriptures and negected endeavors; and fleeing from
Superstition are fallen into practical Atheism, and from knowing Christ after
the Flesh, to know him only as a Light within; and from corruption in the
Church to be of no Church, and have run from Prelacy to a popular Anarchy, and
from receiving the Sacrament Kneeling, not to receive it at all?

Have not others been Tale-bearers, Sowers of Discord, and Raisers of false
Reports, it may be of Magistrates themselves, at least have been too credulous
to receive them, and divulge them abroad, and so ensnare themselves in the
words of their own Mouth?

Have not some been guilty of too much Uncharitableness to such who have
differed from you, and your Opinions in Religion, and confining the Church of
God to too nar^ow a compass, and making Christ's Kingdom ^o consist in doubtful
Opinions, high Notions, forms of Government, gifts of Utterance, ^ather than in
Righteousness, Peace, and Joy ^n the Holy Ghost, as the Apostle speaks?

Have ye not also had great Divisions and Animosities among your selves,
Brother going ^o Law with Brother; rash Censuring of one another, and broke off
your Communion with ^ach other, for slight, and trivial, and doubt^ul matters,
being of fickle Minds, and have ^ot any due consistency among your selves;
^eing uneasy without Liberty, and when you ^ave it, want wisdom to preserve
it, or im^rove it?

Have not many of you discovered great ^ant of Wisdom and Prudence in the
manag^g of your Professions, and different Opini^ns, both in your speeches and
behaviors amongst Men, and toward one another, and ^ereby given just occasion
of offense?

Have not some of you placed much of your ^eligion in your particular Opinions,
in your separate Churches, without seeking as ye ought, that inward Grace which
might Sanctify your Hearts, and Regulate your Lives and so separate you from
the moral evils o^ the World as well as corruptions in Worship*

Have not others of you been guilty of much Spiritual Pride, in despising those
whom y^ have thought in a Form below you, and discovered it in contemptuous
Language an^ Carriage? And have mistaken the power o^ Fancy, and the transport
of mere natural Passion, soon vanishing away, for the work ^ the holy Spirit
which abides in the Soul.

Have your Fastings, and days of Praye^ been kept as days of true Humiliation
for Sin, but rather to have your Sufferings removed than Sanctified; or to have
some particular Opinion prevail, rather than sincere Religion, substantial
Holiness, and solid Piet^ in your Hearts and Lives?

Again, Have not the Temptations of the times made some of you to act contrary
t^ your Consciences, Principles and Professions to save your self from
Suffering, and givin^ occasion thereby to your Adversaries to glor^ over you?

Other things I might mention, but the^ things may serve for Conviction to the
Guilt^ and for Caution to others. For I am perswade^ better things of many of
you, though I the speak: I know ye have among you many eminent examples of
Piety, Prudence, Justice, Sobriety, Charity, and strict and sincere Devotion
toward God, and Innoceny toward Men; and that nothing but Conscience toward
God does make them Dissenters in Religion; being otherwise ready to perform all
dutiful respect to Magistrates, and all acts of Love, Friendship, Hospitality,
and good Neighborhood toward all among whom they live; and it cannot be
denied but that many of your Ministers and Teachers have been and are, Men of
great Learning, Prudence, and Piety, great Textuaries, and eminent Preachers,
and sound Expositors, and zealous against Popery.

But if any will make an ill use of what I have said, and are glad through the
sides of some offending Dissenters to wound all Religion, Piety and Profession,
I shall only say as the Prophet Oded did to the Host of Israel, after they had
slain their Brethren, the men of Judah, with a rage reaching up to Heaven, Are
there not sins with you, even with you, against the Lord your God? 2 Chronicles. 28.
10. Or as our Savior to the Pharisees concern-in the Woman taken in Adultery,
Let him that is without sin cast the first Stone at her.

Have not those of the Church of England (who have of late been casting Stones
at the Dissenters) their Sins? May not our Savior say to the Church of
England, as to the Church of Ephesus, I have somewhat against thee? And as it is
said to the Church in Sardis, Rev. 3. 2. Srengthen the things which remain that
are ready to die, for I have not found thy works perfect before God.

Has she not expressed more zeal against Nonconformity in some indifferent Rites
and Ceremonies, so accounted by themselves, than against notorious Vice and
Wickedness?

Has she not established Church Communion upon other Foundations, than the
Apostles did in the Primitive Churches; as Profession of Faith, and Repentance,
and Subjection to the Commandments and Institutions of Jesus Christ?

Has she manifested the meek and tender Spirit of Christ toward those who have
i^ some small Points of Religion differed from her, and such as may justly be
Scrupled; and herein not done to others as she would he^ self be done unto? And
scoffing at their plea^ of Conscience as vain Canting?

Has she not in many of her Doctrine Preached, Printed, and Published,
departe^ from her own Articles, and some forwar^ Men have been shaping them,
and their public Worship and Order, more and more into a conformity to the
Church of Rome, an^ thereby raised the hope of the Papists, and occasioned many
multitudes of Protestants in the Nation to dissent from her; she driving them
from her Communion, and then punishing them for so doing? Has she not been
breaking down the Civil Bounds and ancient Landmarks, and exposing the holy
Sacrament, that she might thereby the better establish her self?

Has she not made it too evident, that Wealth, Grandeur, and Dominion has
been more her design than the Glory of God, pro^oting true Holiness, and the
Salvation of Men's Souls?

Has she not been guilty of Silencing many ^undreds of able Preachers, not for
Slothful^ess or Non-residency, not for Insufficiency, ^ot for Scandal, not for
Heresy, not for ^ebellion to the Civil Authority, but only ^on-conformity to
some unnecessary Rites in ^eligion which they scrupled out of their zeal
against Popery; wherein if they have exceed^, I hope it may now be judged a
pardon^le Crime; but I fear it has had no good ^fect, but has tended to the
hindering the ^ogress of the Gospel, and the Salvation of any Souls, by rigid
imposing of Subscriptions ^d Canonical obedience, and Assent and Con^t, and
stretching Conformity beyond what ^ was in the former Age? Does not the in of
many Families, and the loss of some ^es lie at her door?

Has she not debarred public Assemblies for Worship to multitudes in the
Nation, unles^ in such a way as was Offensive to their Consciences, and not
Edifying to their Souls though such as maintain and profess all the substantial
parts of the Christian and Protestant Religion, are blameless in their Live^
and profitable in the Nation; and thereb^ exposing them to the danger of
returning t^ Popery, or of being reduced to Paganism? D^ the Dissenters differ
from her in any of tho^ things wherein she differs from the Papist^ but rather
in those things wherein she agre^ with them? And what then is that whi^ is
strictly to be called the Church of Englan^ She has indeed made a strong and
honour^ble oppsition to Popery by many Wort^ and Learned Men of her Communion,
b^ has it not been in those things wherein t^ Dissenters agree with her, and
rejoice ^ what they have done, and act with her the^ in? So that the Church of
England consid^ed as distinct from the forementioned Diss^ters, is made up only
of some Additional to ^ Christian Religion. And if it be Object* That such
deference ought to be given to ^ Laws of the Land, as not to have publ^
Meetings otherwise than allowed: I Answ^ Such Laws are only humane and topical,
^ so cannot supersede the universal Law^ Nature, which does dictate to all
Nati^ public Assemblies for the solemn worshi^ God. And let it be considered,
whether the imposing of those things which are judged unnecessary can be
justified, to the hindering of what is necessary both by the Law of Nature, and
the written Law of God; and whether this Liberty has not been taken against
public Laws, both in the times of the Heathen Persecution, and here in England
in times of Popery.

Many other things I might mention; but these I only lay before her, with the
words of our Savior to the Church of Ephesus, Remember therefore from whence
thou art fallen, and Repent, or else I will come against thee quickly, and
remove thy Candlestick, except thou Repent, Rev. 2. 5. And if she thinks her
self in danger, should not this awaken her to Repentance? And is there any
Protestant Church, but does solemnly Fast and Pray in threatening Dangers? But
we see little of this in the Church of England: Not that every individual
Member of that Ecclesiastic body ought to be charged, God forbid. I know many
of them have been grieved at the sufferings of their Brethren, Pleaded their
Cause, and Lamented to see such a spirit of Persecution act in the Church of
England; and could see a little better than others, who they were that pusht on
those ^evere Persecutions against them, and how ^opery crept in upon the Nation
under a Pro^estant Vizard; and were ashamed to hear some of her Clergy boast of
the Purity of the Church of England, when (to their great trouble) Corruptions
both in Doctrine and Worship, and in the Conversations of multitudes in it, was
so visibly seen to prevail, not only tolerated but too much countenanced; and
little Discipline exercised but against Non-conformists, though Men of the
greatest Sobriety and Piety, and usefulness in the Nation.

But I mention these things not to recriminate, but to help on that Repentance
which may prevent Gods controversy with that Church; and to melt down their
Spirits into such a Coalition with their dissenting Brethren, that the Nation
may be strengthened against our Popish Adversaries; and that all hands may be
at work to make the Bank strong against the inundation of the Sea, ^^ mean the Sea of Rome. I fear whilst our public, especially our Cathedral Worship is
shaped so like to that which is in Popery, the transition will be made more
facile to it. It will be never the less Decent by being less Ceremonious: And I
hope the Pulpit-theam of some dignified Clergymen, will be no longer, The
Necessity of a Public Conscience, The Absoluteness of Kings, And Invectives
against Dissenters; and that Able, Orthodox, and Learned Preachers will not be
starved out of their work for want of Maintenance. Nothing is more likely to
secure the Protestant Religion, than a pious, diligent, and able Ministry.
Every body knows the influences a corrupt Clergy has upon the Laiety, and how
easily under the name of the Church of England, such Men may lead the People
blindfold into the Enemies Camp.

But now I hope that both sides will be sensible wherein they have failed, and
the more Sober, Pious and Judicious among them both, centring in their present
Majesty's Accession to the Throne, it will allay all former Animosities; and we
shall love and own one another as Christians and fellow Protestants; which will
disappoint the Hopes of the common Adversaries above any thing that can be
imagined, who are likely to get no great advantage upon us but by our own
Divisions, and make no Music but by our Discords, and we may well hope that
the Concord that is found in the great Assembly of Parliament for the uniting
all Protestants, will have a happy influence upon the whole Nation herein: but
if any will be still grumbling and contentious, sure they are such Men who love
the fiery Element, are the Nations Enemies, and are secretly acted by Priests
and Jesuits, to bring us back again to Popery and Confusion.

But I hope by this time the body of the Nation is enlightened and awakened to
dis^ern their Dangers, the Indications of Providence, and their own Interest,
and that the designs wherewith these Men are traveling will prove Abortive, or
bring forth no other Fruit but Mischief to themselves; but it may seem strange,
that any who have Prayed or Preached for Union, and lamented the want of it,
should run from it, when it is now offered to them, and they invited to it. As
we would preserve the Nations Existence and Entity, let us study its Unity, and
follow the instincts of Nature herein: Omne ens no^ minus appetit unitatem quam
entitatem.

And as Natural Unity upholds the Universe, so Civil Unity the Commonwealth No
external Force can shake the Earth, bu^ Winds and Vapors within its own Bowels
Vis unita fortior, is a true Rule both in things Natural and Civil. We can
never expect t^ have all Men pleased, but we should all be s^ wise as to
subordinate a Private to a Public Interest, and Sacrifice our particula^
inclinations to the advantage of the Whole* As Air and Water will move contrary
to their Nature, to prevent a Chasme and Ruptur^ in the Universe. Let us be
Wise before i^ be too late, and act like Christians, and rational Men.

And seeing our present King and his Roya^ Consort have so often declared, that
o^ great end of their accepting the Invitatio^ of coming to us, and of the
Regal Power now in both their Hands, yea, and the Roy^^ Crown now upon both
their Heads, was to Unite all Protestants, and thereby strengthen the
Protestant Interest both at Home and Abroad. I hope we shall readily fall in
with so good a design, and not disappoint it by our Divisions; which nothing I
observe does more foment, than Jealousies among our selves.

I think, none will envy the Dignity of the Church of England, if they make not
use of it to trample others down; as thinking, that Liberty of Conscience is
inconsistent with it; and that all that are not with them, must needs be
against them.

That good Old Rule well observed would be a Panacaea, a Catholic remedy to
Heal us all; In necessariis unitatem, in non necessariis libertatem, in
utrisque Charitatem: Unity in things necessary, Liberty in things unnecessary,
and Charity in both. It Is true, the Dissenters are not all of one Piece, yet
they are all as One Man against the return of Popery, and for the Civil Rights
and Liberties of the Nation; and have been great Sufferers upon that account,
and have stood their ground against the Temptations laid before them in the
Reigns of the last Kings; and made resistance to their utmost against them that
would betray them.

Their Royal Majesty's, our present King and Queen, seem to have a generous
Principle in their Breasts, not to be Heads of a Party, but of Protestants in
General, that the Birds of every wing, that are not Birds of Prey, may lodge
under their Branches; and I hope we shall all say them, Our God Speed, and not
lay some narrow, selfish Interest, in the way of this so Catholic a Design.

Of the Christian Ministry.
I Call it Christian, to distinguish it from the Pagan Priesthood, and Jewish
Ministry of Priests and Levites under the Law, which was confined to a
particular Family. And under this Name I comprehend all Men that are in that
sacred Function: Whether called by the Name of Bishops, Pastors, Elders,
Doctors, Guides, etc. and in aftertimes the Clergy. The Gospel Ministry is of
Divine Institution, and of no humane Creation. God has had a Ministry in his
Church from the Beginning, though under several Forms, and Denominations; and
our Savior has appointed it for the Gospel Church, and to continue to the end
of the World. Now a right Gospel-Christian-Minister, is as follows.

First, He is one who is in some measure accompanied with Gifts, and Grace,
Knowledge and Learning, Wisdom and understanding, Speech and Utterance for the
discharge of that so solemn Work; for no Man ought to take this honor to
himself, but he that is called of God, and God calls no Man to a Work, or
Office, for which he is no way fit. As no Man is called to be a Physician,
Schoolmaster, Pilot, Architect, etc. that has not a Competent Skill in such
Professions; and how can he be able to teach, as is required, if he is a
Novice, and has not Ability, has not Natural, Acquired, and Moral
Qualifications for it. According to the Decree in the Council of Toledo in this
Case, Solus ad sacra Dei Mysteria tractanda accedat, quem morum innocentia and
literarum splendour reddit illustrem: Let none undertake to handle the holy
Mysteries of God, but men well esteemed for Integrity of Life, and Excellency
of Learning; and I may add, Men fitted of (...), 2 Cor. 3. 5.
God, as the Apostle speaks, Our sufficiency (or fitness) is of God.

Again, He undertakes the Ministry, not for carnal Ends, but because he judges
it to be a good Work, wherein he might be serviceable both to God and Men, in
the highest Capacity in this World: So that Love to Christ and the Souls of Men
invites him to it, and influences him in it, and yet he has a subordinate
respect to the maintenance and profit that is annexed to the Work: God having
appointed that the Preachers of the Gospel should live of the Gospel; but is
not tempted by it, to comply with any unlawful Terms, or the using of sinister
or indirect means for the obtaining of it.

He is one separated to the Work of the Gospel, by solemn Ordination, and joins
not a Trade, or secular Employment with it; but gives himself wholly to it, as
his proper Work, to which God has called and Consecrated him; and does not
thrust himself upon his Charge, without a due Call, according to the Rules of
the Gospel, and as the Providence of God opens a door.

Again more particularly, He is one who Labors in the Word and Doctrine, he
reads the Word, and makes use of it in Wisdom, for Conviction, Reproof,
Instruction, Exhortation, or Comfort, rightly dividing the Word of Truth, as
there is occasion; and is instant in season, and out of season.

He looks upon his Office as a Divine Institution, and originally derived upon
him from Christ himself, tho he receives the Exercise of it from the
Designation of Men, or the call of the People.

He minds the good of his Flock, and the Salvation of Souls, more than any
private advantage of his own, knowing the invaluable worth of Souls, and the
Dangers they lie open to.

He is one sensible of his own Insufficiency for so great a Work, and therefore
does humbly and daily seek Divine Asistance from Heaven, saying with the
Apostle, Who is sufficient for these things?

He ascribes the Glory to God, for what good he does, or for what assistance,
or success he has in his Ministry, as knowing that he that planteth is
nothing, or he that waters is nothing, but God that gives the increase.
Whereby be serves God in his Ministry, (as the Apostle speaks) with all
humility of Mind.

He seeks not the Applause and Praise of Men, and to be called Rabbi, Rabbi; as
knowing the words of our Savior, He that is from beneath, seeks his own
honor: And therefore his Preaching is not in wisdom of words, and ostentation
of Learning, or to gain a popular Auditory, but strives to commend himself to
every man's Conscience in the sight of God.

He seeks to bring Men over to the true Knowledge of God, to the Principles and
Practice of true Piety according to the Gospel, rather than to a Party or
disputable Opinion, to uphold and promote a private Interest.

He affects not the secular Pomp, and Grandeur of this World, considering whose
Servant he is, the great design of the Gospel he preaches, the Example of
Christ his great Lord and Master, and of the Apostles sent forth by him; much
less does he affect to introduce it into the New Testament Church, which was
well cautioned against in the first Ephisine Council; Ne sub specie
administrationis rerum Sacrarum, potentiae secularis, Typhus in Ecclesiam
irrepat, etc. Canone ultimo.

He seeks not so much to please as to profit the People committed to him, and
yet will become all things to all Men to gain them, and do them good; and as it
is Titus 1. 7.
required of him, not to be (...), a self-pleaser, so he is a Pleaser of Men
only to their Edification and Salvation.

He is one not given to Contention, nor soon angry, no Striker or Railer, no
Promoter of Strife, Faction, or Sedition, or inhumane Cruelties, but with
meekness instructs those that oppose themselves, if peradventure God will
give them Repentance to the acknowledging of the Truth.

He is not for the promoting of Religion, by Fire and Sword, as Mahomet; nor as
some rigid Zealots Bellarmin de laici. Lib. 3. Cap. 22. p. 1319.
of the Roman Church, that Heretics are every where to be rooted out, if they
are not too strong for them, then they must be quiet and show them forbearance.

He is Sober, and Temperate in all things, not given to Wine, no haunter of
Taverns, but uses all moderation in Meats and Drinks, that his Mind may be
more sedate, and composed, to intend and discharge the Work he is called unto.

He is not Morose, nor Stoical, but Affable, and courteous to all, and seeks to
preserve an Esteem for his Person, to the greater advantage of his Ministry;
yet he studiously avoids all lightness or vanity in Speech or Behavior, and by
Gravity of Carriage puts an Awe, Respect and Reverence to his Person, upon the
Hearts of the People.

He is one not greedy of filthy Lucre, uses not a Cloak of Covetousness,
whatever Garment he wears; will not make merchandise of the People, for his
private advantage; entangles not himself in the Affairs of this present Life,
but is ready to deny himself in his Earthly Interests, rather than bring a
blemish upon his Office, and obstruct the success of his Labors, whereby his
People may see he seeks not Theirs but Them.

Again, He does not Lord it over the Faith, and Consciences of the People, but
seeks by sound Doctrine, and Evidence of the Truth, to convince men's Judgments,
and persuade men's Minds, to the Faith, Obedience, and love of the Word.

Neither does he affect Preeminence, and Dominion over his Brethren, and to
assume a Jurisdiction which Christ never gave him: As when in the degenerate
State of the Church, the Bishops contended about the Superiority of their Sees,
and which our Savior reproved in the Disciples, when they disputed who should
be greatest. But what Authority he has given to his Ministers, he does
faithfully exercise it to preserve the Churches Purity, to Propagate and Exalt
his Name and Kingdom, but not to exalt himself: For the Jewish Priesthood being
now changed, as being typical, he knows we cannot argue from thence for an
Hierarchy under the Gospel to be parallel to it, without a new Institution from
Jesus Christ. Whereby Primacy over the Gospel Church might be as clearly
declared, as that of the Highpriests over the Jewish Church? And therefore it
is well known, that the Council o^ Carthage would not allow the Name of
Episcopus Episcoporum, the Jurisdiction of one Bishop over another: yet in all
difficult Cases, he takes advice, and submits his own Judgment to the
Judgment of Synods, regularly assembled to determine Controversies in Religion.

He is one who Practices himself what he preaches to others, Exemplifies his
Doctrine in his Conversation, that he may be an Example to his Flock, and of
good Report with those that are without; and does not tempt his People to think
that he preaches those things which he himself believes not to be true by his
not walking accordingly: And thereby not only bring Contempt on the Ministry;
but while he preaches to others, himself may be cast away.

Further, He indulgeth not himself in Sloth and Idleness, follows close his
private Studies as strength and opportunity give him leave, that he may grow in
Learning, and Knowledge and be better furnished for his public Ministry; more
able to convince gainsayers, and open the Mysteries of God's Kingdom, as a
Minister of the New Testament, and lead up the People to further degrees of
Knowledge, and higher seize in Christianity: But as for Politics, and
Mysteries of State, and the Affairs of Civil Government, he leaves them to the
Study of Princes, and the Civil Magistrates, to whose Province they especially
belong.

Again, He considering that he is for Salt to Season others, he seeks to
maintain a favor upon his own Heart of the Doctrine that he preaches to them,
that he may not himself be rejected as unsavory Salt. And for that end he is
much in Prayer, for the daily supply of the Holy Spirit, and his teachings upon
his Heart; the New Testament Ministry being a Ministration of the Spirit.

He is one who fears not the Face of Men in the discharge of his Duty, will
not baulk or decline any Truth, or faithful Reproof of Sin, for the Fear of
Man, but declares the whole Counsel of God, that he may give up his Account
with Joy, and be free from the blood of all Men.

He will not accumulate Livings, and enlarge his Cure beyond his Capacity to
discharge it, least he be injurious to some of his Brethren, who may want both
Work and Maintenance, and aggravate his own Account by the neglect of his Duty.
Neither does he think it reasonable that he should live of the Flock he does
not feed, or of the Altar at which he does not serve, especially when no
necessity compells thereunto: He well knowing that at first there was no
Bishops, but to Single Congregations, which he might be able to inspect with
the assistance of Presbyters, where the Church was numerous; and the enlarging
them to more, crept in gradually, by the Ambition of Men, or humane
Constitution.

He is one who Rules well his own House, having his Children and Servants, in
subjection, with all Gravity; instructing his Family in the Knowledge of God,
their Duty to him, and the Duty of their several Places and Relations: And if
he be unmarried, he preserves his Mind and Body chaste, but confines not
himself to a single life, as necessary to his Office.

He also Preaches sound Doctrine, feeds the Souls of his People with
wholesome Food, gives not Chaff instead of Wheat, nor Stones instead of Bread,
nor Scorpions instead of Fish, warns them against Contentious Schisms, the
Errors, and Heresies of the Times, and endeavors to preserve truth
uncorrupted, and his People sound in the Faith, and to lead them the right way
to Salvation, whereby he neither seeks to pollish the simplicity of the Gospel
with vain Philosophy, or Platonic Speculations, or corrupt its Purity by the
mixture of Pelagian, Socinian, or any Popish Doctrines dissonant from the
Scriptures.

Further, He binds and loses, retains and remits Men's sins: Yet only
Ministerially, he well knowing, that none can forgive sins but God only, and
this he does not only by general Doctrine in his Preaching the Gospel, but by
what particular Evidence he finds of true Faith, and Repentance in Men. As the
Priest cleansed the Leper, when upon Examination he declared him clean, and not
othewise, Lev. 14. 11.

And, though few question but a Form of Prayer, animated with a right
Intention, and holy Affection, may be accepted of God, yet he confines not
himself to it, as knowing there may be many Emergent Cases among his People,
fit to be commended to God in Prayer, which cannot particularly be comprehended
in any stated Form.

And he has a special Reverence for the Lords Prayer, as briefly comprizing
all those Blessings both Spiritual and Temporal which we have need to ask of
God, and as Dictated by the sacred Lips of Christ himself, but he does not
think that the mere saying of it does sanctify his Prayer, or that it is the
Sal and Condimentum Sacrificii: As Durandus speaks, Rationale, Lib. 5. in his
Discourse of the Mass.

He is one who Preaches and Practices Obedience to Civil Magistrates, making
public Prayers for Kings, and all that are in Authority, as knowing that they
are Ordinances of God, appointed for the good of Men, to maintain the public
Peace, and the Estates, Liberties, and Lives of the People; to be a Terror to
evildoers, and a praise to them that do well; and he puts his People in
mind to be subject to them for Conscience Sake, Giving to Caesar the things
which are Caesar's, and to God the things which are Gods.

He teaches not for Doctrine, the Commandments of Men, nor makes void any
Commandments of God by humane Traditions, and makes no more things necessary to
Salvation, than Christ has made either in Doctrine or Worship, whom he knows
to be Lord and Head of the Church: And yet is careful to maintain Order, and
Decency in the public Assemblies, for the more comely discharge of all public
Service, and the greater Edification of the People; as knowing that God is A
God of Order, and not of Confusion, as in all the Churches of the Saints.

If he dissents in any thing from the established Religion, he does not do it
out of Faction, Pride or Obstinacy, but out of a real, and rational
dissatisfaction of Mind; makes no noise with his dissent, and will not judge
and condemn other good Men in their belief, or practice, as he would not be
judged and condemned in his own; and does not separate from the Universal
Church, by any particular dissent in Religion.

Again, He is wise to Sobriety, will not too boldly search into the Secrets of
God, but contents himself to know and preach only the things that are revealed,
and will not be positive, in dark Prophesies, or dubious Problems in Religion,
but modestly submits his own Sentiments to the Trial and Judgment of other Men.

He reckons the Work of his Ministry not only to be Laborious, but Hazardous, a
spiritual Warfare, and therefore does Arm himself with Faith, Wisdom, Courage,
and Patience to encounter the Perils that may attend the faithful discharge of
his Function. Scripture-story tells him of the Sufferings of the Prophets, and
Apostles: Ecclesiastical Story of Ignatius, Policarp, Cyprian, etc. and our own
Martyrologies of Cranmer, and Ridley, and many other famous Bishops and
Ministers in their days, and of the fires they passed through into the Light
and Glory of Heaven. And Eusebius tells us, that the Persecution under
Maximinus the Emperor, was particularly against the Pastors and Ministers, who
are above others set for the defense of the Gospel.

Again, He serves not God of that which costs him nothing, digests well in his
own Mind what he delivers to others, examines it by the unerring Rule of the
Scripture, clothes his Matter with convenient words and method, that he may
approve himself a Workman that needs not be ashamed, and better speak to the
Understanding, Memory, and Affections of the People.

He studiously avoids ridiculous Gestures, mimical Postures, affected Tones,
disfiguring Looks, Superstitions, and all Antic Formalities in his public
Service, but fills up his Place with that Presence and Gravity, as becomes the
solemn Work that he is engaged in, and is careful to utter nothing rashly with
his mouth before God.

Further, He wisely considers the State of his Flock, and therefore suits his
Doctrine to the Capacity and Condition of the People; he has strong meat for
the Strong, and milk for Babes; and he puts a difference betwixt the Righteous
and the Wicked, the Penitent and the Obstinate, the Scrupulous and the hardened
Conscience. He will not cast his Pearls before Swine, nor give that which is
holy unto Dogs; but will give to the Children their Bread, and as a faithful
Steward, will give to all their Portion of Meat in due Season: And also, he
knowing that his Office leads him not only to Teach, but Rule, he therefore
will make use of Christ's Discipline, to preserve the Purity of his Church, both
in Doctrine, Worship and Manners, doing it with Wisdom, Integrity, and
Impartiality; Christ having put the Power of Order and Jurisdiction, as they
distinguish, the Keys of Doctrine and Discipline, in the same hand; and in all
his use of the Church Keys, he is careful to avoid Extremes, which Men are apt
to run into, either by opening the Door where it it should be shut, or shutting
it where it should be open.

And, Though he meets not with that Reward, and Encouragement from Men, which
he expected, and may be his due, yet he is not discouraged, but persists in the
discharge of his Duty, and encourages himself in the Reward reserved for him
in Heaven, to be fully given when the chief Shepherd shall appear.

Again, He is no Respecter of Persons, thinks not the meanest and poorest of
his Flock beneath his Care, and Charge, that he may give good Account of his
Ministry to the chief Shepherd, who takes care of his whole Flock, and regards
not the Rich more than the Poor. And though the Name of Bishop be now confined
to one particular Order of Ministers, yet he looks upon himself as a Bishop in
his own Congregation, to take the oversight of his whole Flock, as his Name and
Office do oblige him.

He has respect to the Interest of Religion, beyond his own Congregation, as
he has Call and Opportunity, he being set a Minister in the Universal Church,
as well as particular, and a Servant of Christ therein; and though he be not a
Roman Catholic, yet is truly Catholic, and has a Catholic Respect to the
Service and Interest of his great Lord and Master, in every place. Yet he will
not be (...), to intrude himself into another Work or Charge without ground
and Warrant.

He is also one given to Hospitality, ready to relieve the Strangers,
Fatherless and Widows, and such as are in distress, according as he has
Ability and Opportunity thereunto, that he may express the Virtues upon Earth,
of his great Lord and Master in Heaven.

He regards not the Speeches and Censures of the People, in the Faithful
discharge of his Duty, accounts it a small thing to be Judged of Man's day, but
is satisfied in the Testimony of his own Conscience, and in the Approbation he
hopes to find with God, who is the Searcher of the Heart, and has learned to
go through good Report and evil Report. And tho he observes some foolish and
ignorant Men to despise the Calling of the Ministry, yet he is not ashamed of
the Gospel of Christ, but magnifies his Office.

Again, If he find any of his Brethren to exceed him in Parts, Learning,
Ministerial Abilities, and have more success in their Labors, and are better
accepted with the People, he envies them not, but rejoices that Christ is
Preached, Piety promoted, and Gods Kingdom propagated, though by other hands
more than his own.

He contenteth not himself to Preach general Doctrine, but seeks by particular
Application of the Truth to awaken Men's Consciences, and to lead Men into the
Knowledge of their Hearts; and to bring into Captivity every Thought in their
Hearts into the Obedience of Christ.

Further, Besides his public Ministry, he is ready to go from House to House,
to comfort the Afflicted, to support the Feeble-minded, to satisfy the
Scrupulous, to visit the Sick, and pray with them, and prepare them for their
latter End.

He convinces Gainsayers, and confuteth Errors by strength of Reason, solid
Arguguments, and Evidence of the Scriptures, and the best Antiquity, without
casting reproach upon Men's Persons, with vilifying and invective Language,
whether he has to do with Dissenting Protestants, or Papists: For though
Controversies in Religion, are a Theological War, and therefore called
Polemical; yet he does not manage it with the Sword and Spear of bitter words,
which neither tend to convince the Judgment, nor win the Adversary. He reading
in his Greek Testament, that the Minister of the Gospel ought to be (...), no
Fighter, either with Hand, Tongue or Pen, 1 Timothy 3. 3.

Lastly, He discharges his whole Ministry, in sincerity, as in the sight of
God; will not set up his Sail, to move with every wind, nor look to the East,
and Row to the West, but deals plainly and faithfully with God, with the
People, and with his own Soul, that this may be his rejoicing, as it was the
Apostle Paul's, in the Work of his Ministry, even The Testimony of his
Conscience.

Now Reader, By these things, or such as these, we have the Portraicture of a
right Christian-Gospel-Minister, which as it reflects Honor upon some, so
Shame upon others; However, the Office of the Ministry is sacred, honorable,
and necessary, and ought not to be in Contempt on the Account of the Personal
miscarriages of any.

And if some think the Papists lift it up too high, let not the Protestants
cast it down too low, as many did in the late Times, and despised all Ministry,
but what was of their own Opinion, or Humor; which our English Nation is too
prone and subject to. And yet let the People consider that their Ministers are
not Angels, but Men of the like Infirmities with themselves, and not account
that a Vice in them, which they will account a Virtue in other Men.

Yet I think if the Christian World was well furnished with Ministers
competently qualified, as before described, they might be accepted of the
People, and useful to their Salvation, and own one another, as true Ministers,
notwithstanding some lesser differences in Religion, and in the Form of their
Ordinations; which the common People do not much regard, and less understand.
For we may observe that the public reflections that Ministers have made upon
one another, have but taught the People to despise all Ministry, and their
coming to Church has been to hear other Men's faults and errors reproved, and
not their own. And it may be it is no way prudent to have the People gratified
in such an humor.

Of the Christian Magistrate.
MAgistracy is a great Ordinance of God, for the good of Mankind. He appointed
it from the beginnning, and it has continued in all Ages, though under several
Forms: And there is scarce any People in the World so barbarous and blind, but
have among them some Government. Magistrates, we know, are called Gods, and
bear some stamp of Gods Authority; and without them the World would run into
Anarchy and Confusion, every Man's Will, Humor, Fancy, or Lust, would be a Law
to him; and as far as his Power reached, would be a Law to others: Yet
Magistracy is not founded in Grace. A bad Man may be a lawful Magistrate, to
whom Obedience is due; as well as a bad Man may be a Father or Master, to whom
Obedience is due both from Children and Servants; yet good Magistrates are to
be desired, though the bad are to be obeyed in all lawful things.

Now Magistrates are either Inferior, Superior, or Supreme, the King himself,
or Governors sent forth by him; all which are called by the name of Powers, by
the Apostle, though their power is not all of the same Nature, Extent, or
Degree; yet all appointed to one common end, which is the well-being of the
People both in Soul and Body. And I hope it will not be accounted Presumption
to speak o^ things, which may seem above me; For ^ speak only in Thesi, as
Divines do who spea^ of Magistracy, in their common Places of Divinity. I shall
proceed in the same manne^ as before.

First, A right Magistrate is one who come^ lawfully unto his Power, according
to the Constitution, Order, or Custom of the place where his Power is
exercised, or at least will not impose himself upon the People without their
Call or Consent: An Intruder cannot properly be called a good Magistrate,
though we could suppose him to be a good Man; he cannot lawfully command,
though in some Cases it may be lawful for the People to obey when he is in
plenary possession of Power.

Again, He is a Man of Wisdom, able to Judge of right or wrong, can search out
a matter, and can discern both Time and Judgment. Can distinguish of Causes,
and Persons, of Guilt and Innocence, and of the several circumstances that are
to be considered in a Righteous Judgment.

He is a Man of Courage, fears not the face of Man in the discharge of his
Duty. Is not daunted by the Dangers that may encounter him in the way of
Righteousness; will make bold adventures for the Peoples Wealth, Liberty and
Safety: Yet his Courage is not fierce and boisterous, as of some Brutes, but is
guided and animated by sober Counsel, and sound Wisdom.

He is a Man of Justice, who will not be corrupted by Bribes, enticed by
Flatteries, or ^iassed by Friendship, Opinion, or a Party. He regards not the
Rich more than the Poor, in pronouncing Sentence; will deliver the Oppressed
from unjust Violence, and plead the Cause of the Fatherless, and in all things
proceed uniformly, according to the Rules of Equity, and right Reason, without
partiality or respect of Persons. He knowing he is the Righteous Gods
Vicegerent, or Minister, dares not act unrighteously, as Bracton speaking of
the supreme Magistrate; while he does Justice he is Vicarius Dei, but when
Unjustly, Minister Diaboli. Lib. 3. l. 9.

He is a Man endued with Mercy, and Clemency, can have Compassion on the
Oppressed, and Afflicted, will mitigate the rigor of the Laws, where they may
seem over-severe, especially in matters of Religion, and makes his Government
an easy Yoke, and not irksome and grievous to the People; seeks rather to Rule
in their Hearts by Love, and Gentleness, than over their Persons by Fear and
Terror; is ambitious of a Cheerful, rather than a forced Obedience; can
sympathize with the People, as a Father with his Children, and the Cries of the
Oppressed enter into his Ears, and their Petitions find easy access, and
speedy relief; so that he obliges them by his Goodness, and provokes them not
to Wrath by rigor and severity. But yet he is careful to keep up the Authority
of his Government, tha^ it fall not under Contempt.

He studies not Revenge, but counts it his glory to pardon Offenders, so far as
may stand with public safety; showing himself herein, like unto God, whose
Name he bears, and whose Minister he is, who as the Psalmist says, is Slow to
Anger, and ready to forgive.

He is also, a Man of a public Spirit, minds the general Good, more than his
own private Concerns, and rejoices more in the Good and Welfare of the People,
than his own, or rather wraps up his Own in Theirs; And that he may act the
more like God himself, who does good to all, he is devising how he may make his
Government most useful to the public Benefit. As the Emperor Adrian had this
for his Motto, Non Mihi, sed Populo: His Power was for the People, not Himself.

He depends not upon Power and Success to justify his Cause, so as to leave
himself no Witness from God, good Men, or his own Conscience, if it does
miscarry; but the righteousness of his Cause does uphold him, so that he does
not go on Trembling, upon the prospect of the mutability of humane Affairs, or
any emergent Difficulties that may rise up in his way, or from any inward
regret of his own Mind or Conscience.

If he meet with Success, and his Affairs Prosper at Home or Abroad, it does
not transport him to transgress the Bounds of Justice, ^he Law of God, or the
Rules of his Go^ernment, or to invade any of those just Rights or Privileges,
which belong to the People, but is a Defender of Property against Foreign
Claims, or domestic Wrong or Violence.

Again, If he be encompassed with visible Strength, and all probable safety,
both at Home and Abroad, yet he is not secure, remembering the Old saying, Summa
cadunt subito; nor puts his trust in any Arm of Flesh, as knowing the
uncertainty of all humane Affairs, and the unexpected Changes that do often
befall the things of this World. And therefore Conradus the Emperor chose for
his Motto, Fortuna, dum blanditur, fallit; Fortune is False when she Flatters;
and Cito reposcit, quae dedit, was another; Soon takes away what she gives.

Further, He is true and faithful to his Word and Promises, will not prostitute
his Honor and his Conscience by Deceit or Dissimulation: He well knowing that
his Office and Place requires of him to be a Man of Truth, and that not only
the Law of God, but the Light of Nature, oblige him thereunto. Many of the
Heathen as appears in story, valuing their Words equal with their Lives; and as
he expects Truth and Fealty from the People, in performing their Oaths,
Promises, and Engagements unto him; so he reciprocally answers it, by
performing his Trust, or Engagements unto them. And as he entertains no
principles to the contrary, so neither is he led aside by any bad Examples; as
in the case of John Huss, who was put to Death by the Emperor Sigismund, at
the Council of Constance, though he engaged his Faith and Honor for his safety,
Cochlaeus, lib. 5. Histor. Hussitarum. And as the Dignity of his Place, Clothes
his Word with Power; so he knows it will reflect the grearer Dishonor upon him
if it be divested of Truth.

Again, He is vigilant to discover Dangers at Home, and to understand the state
of affairs Abroad, that he may either strengthen himself by Foreign Alliances,
or be prepared to resist Invasions, or any Encroachments that may be designed
upon the Nation and his Government.

Again, He well knowing that People are apt to be led by the Example of their
Governors, he is therefore careful about his more Private and Personal
conversation, that it may be managed with that gravity, wisdom, sobriety,
piety, and true manliness, as becomes his Place, and may procure an awful
Respect to his Person, and the more invite the People to give Obedience to the
wholesome Laws of his Government; according to the true Motto, Bonus dux, bonus
comes: A good Leader will have good Followers.

The love of Pleasure does not effeminate his Mind, nor divert his Thoughts
from attending the weighty Affairs of his Government, and the Interest of the
People. And if he be a King, the weight of his Crown does affect his Head with
thoughts, but the Luster of it does not blind his Eyes, or bewitch his Heart.

He is one who will stop his Ears to Sycophants, and Flatterers, who for some
private Advantage to themselves may Counsel him to that which may be really
Mischievous to himself, and injurious to the Public good.

Again, He carries it Humbly, though he is in High Place, his outward State and
Grandeur, lift not up his Heart with Pride; he maintains them rather to keep up
the Awe and Authority of Government, than to exalt himself: The distance of his
Place, does not make Access to him uneasy, through his condescension to the
people. Though he is called God, yet he knows he must Die like a Man, and that
Death will fetch him down from those Steps again, to which his place has
Advanced him.

He will make use of Policy, but what only may consist with Justice, and
Honesty. He will not in all things follow Machiavel, or a Caesar Borgias, lest
he be condemned by Solon, Lycurgus, Solencus, or any of those just Heathen
Lawgivers. He always keeps within the bounds that Reason, Conscience, or the
Law of his Government does set him. His Will is still guided by Judgment, and
his Policy is always directed to the Welfare, not Destruction of the People. He
is always resolved to do Good, yet as wisely as he can; yet he trusts not to
humane Policy, observing how often God makes the Wisdom of the Wise of no
Effect.

He is also a studious maintainer of Peace, both at Home and Abroad, he knowing
well the mischief and misery of Civil or Foreign War. He will never obtain that
by Strife, which he can have by Peace: If he draw the Sword, it is not Avarice,
or Ambition, or private Revenge that do unsheath it; yet because he knows that
he bears not the Sword in vain, he draws it, when the Honor, Wealth, or Safety
of the People calls for it. He is always careful that what Blood is spilt may
not lie at his door, and therefore will not give just Provocations, and be
first in Quarrels, and will never advance his own Greatness upon the spoil of
others.

He is one who gives not himself to Wine, or strong Drink, Lest he forget the
Law of God, or pervert the Judgment of any of the Afflicted, which was the
advice of Bathsheba to King Solomon.

Again, He does nothing Momentous in his Government without deliberate Counsel,
as knowing, that In the multitude of Counselors there is safety; and chooses
Men of the greatest Wisdom, Integrity, and Experience to be his Counselors.

He also does seek to Cherish, Preserve, and Multiply the People, as knowing
the true saying of Solomon, In the multitude of the people there is Honor, but
in the want of people is the Destruction of the Prince, Prove. 14. 28. And Joabs
Prayer for David, The Lord thy God add to the People, how many soever they be,
an hundredfold, 2 Samuel 24. 3.

The Candor of his Government does Invite and Unite people to it, but the
Rigor of it drives them not away from it, whereby the public Revenue is
increased, and the empty Houses filled with Inhabitants, and his Quiver being
filled with People, he need not fear his Enemy in the Gate.

Further, He sets before him the Example, not of Tyrants and Usurpers, but of
the Wisest and Best of Governors to be his Pattern, will not follow that which
is wicked and unjust, though it has had success, yet wisely observes what
Rocks others have split upon, to avoid them, and by what Methods good Designs
have prospered, to imitate them.

Again, If he has Persons of differing Judg^ents in Religion, under his
Government, as it is impossible to have all men of the same ^ind,) He spreads
the Wing of his favoura^^e Protection over them all, so far as may stand with
the public Peace; He knowing that those who may differ in some matters of
Religion, may yet be good Subjects, faithful to the Government, and useful to
the Public: Our differences in some matters of Religion, being to God and our
own Consciences, says a late Writer. He therefore disowns those principles
which lead to Cruelty, upon that account, yet he will wisely distinguish
between men of Turbulent Spirits, and such as peaceably dissent through scruple
of Conscience; he well knowing that every man in Religion, ought to be well
satisfied in his own mind, and that Conscience is not in our own power, and
that a forced Religion cannot be accepted of God. And as he himself would not
be imposed upon, so neither does he think it equal with respect to others. For
as a Magistrate may be a good Governor to the People, though he differs from
them i^ Religion; so he knows they may be good Subjects to him, though therein
differing from him. Neither will he suffer one part of the people to destroy
the other, because not all o^ the same opinion, in case they live innocently to
one another, and are useful to the Government, and profitable to the Nation
when both hands may be working for the public Good, and in his Service; he
will no^ suffer the right Hand to cut off the left, b^ comprehends all useful
persons in his Government; yet he stands not indifferent to a Religions or
Opinions in Religion; if they tend to Atheism, Blasphemy, and plain Idolatry,
or are destructive of Morality, or humane Society, or the known or fundamental
Principles of Christianity, or the Civil Government, or are repugnant to the
Laws of Nature; in such cases he will make a difference, but in other things he
shows forbearance, wherein men truly Pious may differ from one another.

Again, He seeks to satisfy the Minds of all his People, by doing things that
are Rational, Just and Good; but Men of restless Spirits, whom nothing will
content, he restrains their Power, for the preserving the public Peace.

Moreover, He will not judge of a whole Party by the Miscarriages of some, as
to comprehend them all under the same Guilt, but will defend the Innocent,
while he does correct the Guilty, that every one may bear his own Burden, and
not another.

Lastly, Which is the greatest of all, he is a Man fearing God, and though he
is as a Temporal God on Earth, yet he knows there is a Supreme God in Heaven,
and though now he Judges others, yet that he himself must come to Judgment.
And in Religion he is really before God, what he seems to be before Men. He
commands not his Religion, but is commanded by it, and follows not Machiavils
advice to the young Prince, That to seem Religious may be to his advantage, but
to be really so, may be to his prejudice. And as his place is higher, and more
capacious of Service than other Men's, so he knows his account will be greater;
and though he now stands above them, yet then must stand level with them, and
therefore, does not only seek the outward welfare of the People, but the
progress of true Religion, to the saving of their Souls, and seeks the Honor
of that God that has put Honor upon him. For this end he does countenance,
and encourage a good Ministry to teach the People, and reflects the greatest
Honor upon them who are most diligent and faithful. He upholdeth Universities,
and Schools of Learning, that there may not want Men of ability to defend the
Truth; and that the Church may be furnished with an able, Orthodox Ministry, to
instruct the People, and seeks to suppress that Vice and Wickedness which may
provoke God, and bring down his Judgments upon him and the Nation. And he being
a Christian Magistrate, knows that Christ is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
and that by him Kings Reign, and Princes decree Judgments; He therefore Kisseth
the Son, lays his Government at his Feet, submits to his Scepter, propagates
his Kingdom, and upholds whatever is truly Christian, against all which is
truly Antichristian, either in Doctrine or Worship, and derogatory to his
Crown. The Motto we know upon our Kings Coin in England, is, Christo auspice
Regno; and the Emperor Jovinian chose for his Motto, Scopus vitae, Christus;
and Charles the Great, Christus regnat, vincit, triumphat: Wherein they
acknowledged the Superiority of Christ's Dominion, and the subserviency of their
Government to it: And we know the Title of the French King is, Rex
Christianissimus; but how proper to him, let Europe judge.

And though he intermeddle not in the Intrinsicks of the Church of Christ,
which belong to the Ministry, yet he makes use of his Power to preserve Civil
Peace in Church and State, and to command Obedience to the known Laws, and
Ordinances of Christ in his Church, both in Ministers and People, by his Power
and Government in matters Ecclesiastical, and will Protect and Encourage them
therein. And as the Kings of Israel were required to write a Copy of the Law of
God, and Read therein all the days of their Life, so he Reads and Studies the
Word of God, that he may see with his own Eyes, and that his own Devotion
toward God, and that which is Professed and Practiced by the People, may be
guided by that infallible Rule. And being sensible of the weighty Charge of his
Government, he depends upon Almighty God for his daily Assistance, Guidance,
and Blessing. So that this fear of God does steer his whole Course, and Rules
in his Heart, in all his Rule over Men; whereby the Righteous rejoice and
flourish under his Government, but the Wicked and wickedness are scattered with
his Eyes.

Thus we have a Brief Description of a good Magistrate, and what a Blessing
such are to the People, and may engage all to give them Honor and cheerful
Obedience; and may condemn those Men that will submit to no Government; and
others who only Submit, while their own Interest or Opinion is upheld by it:
And if in any thing the Magistrates fall short, they at least may by these
things see their Rule; however it will not excuse the People, in the Duty they
owe unto them, which leads me to the next Head, to Discourse of

A Right Christian-Subject.
FIrst, He is one who acknowledges God himself to be the Supreme Governor of
the World, but yet that he does execute his Government by Second Causes and
Instruments, and particularly by Princes, and Magistrates, in their respective
Provinces, Places, Kinds, and degrees of Power.

He also owneth the Providence of God, as the chief disposer of the Governments
of the World, and of the Persons that under him do execute them; Setting up one
and Removing another, and changing of Times and Seasons as he pleases; and
whether they are sent in Wrath, for Correction and Punishment; or in Mercy, for
the Comfort and Establishment of a People; he acknowledges a Divine hand in
both.

He is one who is contented in his Station, and being a Subject, seeks rather
to Obey well, than to Aspire after Power and Government, which belong not to
him; he considering the cares, fears, distractions, and dangers that attend
high Places, which Men in a lower Sphere are freed from, whereby he rather
Pities than Envies them: The Onus of Government for the most part outweighing
the Honos of it.

He is careful, in the First place, to discharge his Duty toward God, and
therefore dares not yield Obedience to Men in any thing that is inconsistent
with his Fealty, Allegiance, and Duty toward God; he knowing that he must Fear
God as well as Honor the King, and that he that Fears not God, cannot be duly
and truly Subject to Men; and that the Notion of a Deity, is no Enemy to Civil
Government, by setting up a fear of God in Men's Hearts, above all other fear,
as some Atheists have said. His Religion teaches him Loyalty, but he makes not
Loyalty his only Religion.

He is one who gives Obedience to Magistrates, not merely out of fear of
Wrath, o^ any outward Constraint, but of a ready Mind, in compliance with the
Commands of God, and the Dictates of a well regulated Conscience; and as he
makes the Law of God, and the Laws of the Land conjunctim, the Measure o^ his
Obedience, so Conscience is the Principle of it.

He is a follower of Peace and Concord, n^ sower of Strife and Sedition, no
fomenter o^ Divisions, no Incendiary to kindle Flames; he knowing it is great
disservice to the Rule^ to have his People Divided, and injurious to the growth
of the Nation, in Wealth, Strength, and Honor.

He will not entertain, much less promote groundless Jealousies of Magistrates,
whereby to disaffect the Minds of the People, and so diminish their just
Honor, and the Authority of their Government.

He is one industious in his Place and Calling, and serviceable to the
Commonwealth of the Nation, though he be but in a mean Place and Station; the
King himself being served by the Field, and the Labor of the Plough-man;
whereas Men that live like idle Drones, are neither useful to their Governors,
nor the public Welfare, and so are not, as they ought to be, good Subjects. As
that is not a good Be, that brings neither Wax nor Honey to the Hive, so in
point of Arms, he is not a good Subject that will not use them in a just Cause,
for the public Good, upon Lawful Command, as well as he that takes them up
without such grounds.

He pays Tribute, Custom, or whatever Tax is justly due to the Magistrate, for
preserving the Peace, Wealth, and Honor of the Government under which he
lives, and according to his Duty and Ability, will help to defray that public
Charge which is necessary for his own, and the peoples Preservation, in the
Community of the Neighborhood among whom he dwells.

He will not revile the Gods, and speak evil of Rulers, nor rashly censure
their Actions, as knowing they may Act upon Reasons of State, which are not
known to him, nor fit to be made Public; and will not oppose his private
Sentiments to the public Wisdom of the State.

And as a good Subject, he is careful in his Place and Calling, to maintain
those Liberties and Immunities which are legally and justly due to the People;
and will not basely through Cowardice or Bribery, betray them to an Arbitrary
Power. As a good Servant will carry it, as he ought, not only to his Master,
but also to his fellow Servants; but herein he is careful to do nothing
tumultuously, but according to Law, and Ancient Custom, with peace and
quietness; so that if any disturbances arise, they may not lie at his Door;
that Judgment may run forth like a River, and Righteousness like a mighty
Stream, and no rushing noise arise by interrupting the free course thereof.

He does truly Honor, but not Idolize Rulers, gives not that Fear, Trust,
Honor, and Adoration to them, which are due to God alone; and as Men of
Wisdom, in high Place, affect not vain Applause, and to have their Persons in
Admiration above what is meet, (as we Read of some of the Heathen Emperors that
they affected Divine Titles and Worship;) so a wise Subject, who truly Loves
and Honors the Prince, will not spread a Snare for his Feet, by flattering
Encomiums and Deisying Venerations; as when the People shouted to Herod's
Oration, It is the Voice of a God, and not of a Man; it proved in the issue no
honor nor kindness to him.

Again, He will not be found in any wicked Conspiracies against Lawful
Governors, and abhors those Principles, which justify the Lawfulness of
Killing and Assassinating Princes upon the account of Religion, or any account
whatsoever; but thinks himself obliged to detect and discover them, when they
come to his knowledge: neither will he publish false News, or invent, or
scatter Seditious Libels, in design to exasperate the Minds of People, and
disturb the peace of the Nation.

Lastly, A good Christian Subject judges himself Obliged continually, to Pray
to Almighty God, for the Peace and Welfare of the place where he dwells, and
of the Civil Government under which he is protected, that he may live a
peaceable Life, in all Godliness and Honesty; and will take heed of that Sin
and Wickedness, which bring down the Judgments of God upon a Nation: And to
speak truly, to be a right Subject, requires a Man to be a true Christian: As
Constantine, or rather Constantius, is said once to make trial of his Servants,
by such a Test, saying, Qui in Deum, etiam in Imperatorem, perfidi essent.
Sozomen, Lib. 1. Cap. 6. They who are perfidious to God, will not be true to
their Prince.

Thus, I have run briefly through many particulars, and given the World a short
Taste, what Christianity is, and if it run in the Truth and power of it,
through Men, in all Degrees, Ranks, and Relations, it will make us an happy
People in this World, and that which is to come.

The Nation I know, has been sadly divided, and in this woeful State, that one
part of the Nation has thought it their Interest to destroy the other; and the
foolish Names whereby we have distinguished Men, proclaimed our Folly to the
World, and argued the displeasure of Heaven against us.

By many years Experience it is made evident, That there will never be Peace
and Settlement in the Nation, if we do not somewhat Codnescend to one another;
and 'till there be some Settlement, Trading will decay, Industry will be
discouraged; we shall have Breaking upon Breaking, and Men will not dare to
trust one another; and the Revenue of the King will suffer in the End. I find
most Men satisfied in the Model and Frame of our English Government,
Dissenters, and all for the most part, and can swear Allegiance to it, unless a
few odd People, who scruple all Oaths: And I believe after this unhappy, and
threatening Storm of the Papists, is now as we hope blown over, and the
Providence of God so eminently appeared in the sudden scattering of it, men's
Minds are much disposed to quiet and settlement, especially since their
Majesty's acceptance of the Regal Power, and the Concurrence of the Lords and
Commons therein; And is it not a brave sight to see all sorts of People to
follow their several Vocations, without Distraction and Trouble? The
Countrey-Farmer improving his Land and Stock, and paying well his Landlord: The
Plowman following his Plough, the Carter to go Whistling by his Horses side,
the Sheppherd with his Dog attending his Sheep, the Shoemaker sitting at his
Last, the Tailor upon his Board, the Weaver at his Loom, the Smith at his
Anvill, the Tradesman busy in his Shop, and the Merchant exporting, and
importing, to the enriching of the Nation? To see ^o leading into Captivity, no
complain^ng in our Streets; but Men's Swords turned unto Plough-shares, and
Spears into Pruning-^ooks; to which I may add with the Psal^ist, as the
Conclusion of all, Happy is that people, who are in such a Case, yea happy is
that people whose God is the Lord. Psalm. 144. ult. v.

But if War should arise, I hope it will not continue long, and the Ancient
Proverb made good, Bellum in Anglia non senescit: And that ^^ will soon issue
in an happy Peace. And nothing is likely more to shorten it, than a ^rm Union
amongst our selves. England being compared by the Historian to a great A^imal,
that will not dye until it Kill it self.

Of Right Christian Worship.
I Call it Christian, to distinguish it from Jewish, Mohammedan, Pagan, or any
false Worship. That Worship which Christ has appointed for his Church under
the New Testament; ^his I call Christian, which I touched upon before; this
Worship is either External, or In^ernal. External consists in the Ordinances
appointed by him, wherein the outward man is concerned.

As all Nations have some outward Rites, Modes and Forms, which they use in
their Worship, besides the Worship of the inward Man.

God appointed such for the Church of the Old Testament, and Christ has
appointed some for the Church of the New: But has laid aside those many
Figures and Shadows, and significant Ceremonies, which clouded the Old
Testament-Worship; intending a more spiritual Worship for his Church in its
adul^ State, conversing more immediately with the^ heavenly things themselves,
and so nearer resembling the Worship of Heaven. And intending to give more of
the help of his Spirit, has provided fewer sensible helps in his Worship:

And because he went out of the World before the Gospel Church and Worship were
fully established, he sent forth his Spirit to direct his Apostles herein. And
we may observe,

1. How they make no mention of the Bloo^ or Flesh of any Beasts or Fowls to be
offere^ in Sacrifice; or of Flower, Wine, Oil, Incense, etc. as were used under
the Law, to be used in the New Testament-Church.

2. Neither do they mention any Altar o^ Earth, Wood, or Stone, to which the
Ministers of the New Testament, are to approac^ in the Service of God, as the
Priests were appointed under the Law.

3. Neither have they given notice of an^ one general Place that is appointed
for hi^ People to assemble in, as the Jews did at Jerusalem.

4. Neither do they mention any particular Times, or stated Days, Months or
Years, to be observed for solemn Fasts, or Festivals, as God appointed under
the Law: Or any of the Jewish Sabbaths, but only that of the Moral Law, changed
from the Seventh to the First day.

5. Neither did the Apostles give Order about Consecrating of Temples, and
Worship therein; whereby it might be the more acceptable to God, for the Places
sake, as it was under the Law, or prescribed the Forms or Dimensions of any
such Temple, or Temples, as it was then.

6. Neither have the Apostles mentioned any thing about Musicians, and
Choristers by Office, or Singers, or Players upon Instruments of Music, as the
Law required.

7. Neither have they left any thing upon Record about the Confining of the
Instituted Worship of God to any particular Family, Seed, Country, or Nation,
as it was under the Old Testament; when the Ordinances of Gods Worship were the
Inheritance of the House of Jacob, Psalm. 47. 4.

8. Neither have they told us of any High Priest, or Priests on Earth, for the
Gospel Church, to whom the People are to present their Services, or
Gospel-Sacrifices, that through them they may be presented with acceptance to
God, as under the Law. Neither have they appointed Saints or Angels, or the
Virgin Mother in Heaven for such a Work.

9. Neither have the Apostles left any Directions about Garments and Vestures,
that the Ministers of the Gospel are to wear in their public Ministry and
Service of God, as God appointed to the Priests under the Law.

10. Neither have they left any Order about outward Washings, Cleansings, and
Purifyings, to fit Men to approach to him in his solemn Worship, as was
required under the Old Testament. These things, and many more has our Savior
left out in the New Testament-Worship, that were required under the Law; so
that to return to these, is to go back to Judaism, and to the Bondage and Yoke
of the Law, and not to stand fast in the Liberty wherein Christ has set us
free: And can any imagine that Christ laid these aside to make Room for Men to
introduce others in their stead? But for his Gospel Worship and Worshippers,

1. He has appointed public Assemblies for his Disciples, to meet together
for Worship, in all Places and Nations where they do reside, and not to
satisfy themselves in their private Devotions, or Family Worship, Heb. 10. 25.

2. He has appointed them not only to meet together, but to incorporate
themselves into an orderly Body, and Society, for their mutual Edification,
Comfort, and Establishment, as was practiced in the first Gospel-Converts, by
the Appointment and Assistance of the Apostles.

3. He has appointed in these Assemblies his Word to be Read, Expounded and
Preached; Baptism and the Lords Supper to be administered, Prayers and
Thanksgiving for all Men, and Psalms to be sung for the Praising of God, and
Collections to be made for the Poor, as there is occasion; that they might be
Nurseries of Charity, as well as Piety; and Discipline to be Administered for
the preserving the Churches Peace and Purity; as it was in the Church of
Corinth, against the Incestuous Person; which makes it necessary that Churches
should be fixed, organized Bodies, and not loose Assemblies.

4. He has also appointed a Ministry for his Gospel Church, to administer the
Ordinances of his Worship, and to preside in all their Assemblies, to be chosen
and approved of by themselves, and to be set apart to their Office by solemn
Ordination. And has left upon Record their Qualifications necessary to their
Office, and the Provision that is to be ^ade for their outward Maintenance, and
^any Motives and Encouragements to their Work and Labor.

5. He has reserved to himself the sole Head^^ip in all these Gospel Churches,
and not ap^ointed any one visible Head under himself; that so all Ordinances
may be administered, and all Church Power executed immediately in his own Name:
having left his Promise with his Churches to be with them to the end of the
World, and that Wherever two or or three meet together in his Name, he will be
in the midst of them. The High Priest under the Law, Head of the Church of
Israel, being a Type of this Headship of Christ over the Gospel Church; which
the Apostle speaks of, Ephesians. 4. 5. One Lord, etc.

6. He has left with his Gospel Churches his Rule in the New Testament, to be
observed by them for the way of Worship; which therefore they ought to search
out, and cleave unto; and has not left the ordering or altering it to the Will
of Men; so as to make any thing the Worship of God, or any part of Worship,
which is not appointed by him. Neither do we find appointed by him any one
Church, to be as a Mother Church to others, and to which they are subordinated,
and to receive Rules and Directions from, in their Faith, Worship, and
Practice, or to make their Appeals unto.

Neither do we find that he left any stated Liturgy for the Gospel Church, or
appointed his Apostles to frame one; only general Directions for Prayer in the
Lords Prayer, when his Disciples desired him to teach them how to pray.

And as for such things in Gospel Worship* wherein he has left no particular
Rule, there are general Rules laid down by the Apostle to be observed in it.

1. That all things be done Decently and in Order, 1 Cor. 14. ult. For the
Gospel Worship being to be set up in all Nations, no particular Rule can agree
to all herein: For that is Decent in one place that is not so in another, and
orderly in one Church that is not so in another, and at one time that is not at
another; And the Light of Nature, which is part of Christ's Law, and the Custom
of the Place, and the Christian Wisdom of each Church, especially of their
Pastors, and Teachers, are to guide them herein: In which things nothing is to
be imposed as an Act of mere Dominion, but upon grounds of Reason and Judgment:
And nothing that may savor of Pride, Pomp, and Vanity, not becoming the
simplicity of the Gospel.

2. That all things be done to Edification; 1 Cor. 14. 26. So that whatsoever
is introduced into the Worship of God that tends not to this, is forbidden by
this General Rule; whereby all such Ceremonies that are merely Arbitrary, and
such Practices which hinder Edification, are to be excluded.

And each particular Church is best able to judge in this Case, what may be
best for their own Edification: And what is thus judged, is no longer to be
accounted as a thing merely indifferent. And the Apostle himself conformed to
this Rule, saying, All things are lawful for Me, but all things edify not. 1
Cor. 10. 23. And advised all Churches to manage all their Church-Ministrations
to this End.

3. That all things be done without Offense, 1 Cor. 10. 32. Which Rule respects
things Circumstantial, and not Essential in Worship: And just occasions of
Offense, and not groundless Exceptions, and things disputable rather than such
as are clear and plain, and the direct Commandments of God. About these things
the Apostle requires Christians to be tender in giving Offense one to another,
and hereby to walk charitably; for to offend against the Law of Charity, is to
offend against one of the greatest Laws of Christ's Kingdom: And hereby, by
giving offense, a Brother may stumble, fall, and perish, for whom Christ died,
Romans 14. 15.

Though no Offense to Man can supersede our Obedience to the express Command of
God; yet we ought to forbear sinning against a Brother, whenever it may be done
without sinning against God: Though one Man's Liberty is not to be judged by
another Conscience; yet in things not necessary, we are to have respect to
another Conscience as well as our own.

4. Let every Man be fully satisfied in his own Mind. Romans 14. 5. Which General
Rule forbids practice in Religion with a doubting Conscience; whereby, that may
be lawful to one which is not to another, and sinful to one that is not to
another: As to eat Flesh might be sinful to one, and not to another; and so
keeping of days, as the Apostle argues, Romans 14. whereby Christians should be
tender of forcing their own Sentiments, especially in doubtful things, upon
another Conscience.

5. Abstain from all Appearance of Evil, 1 These. 5. 22. Many things may in
themselves be lawful, yet not to be practiced when they carry an Appearance of
Evil. Religion may be scandalized, and real Evil encouraged, by that which is
not a real Evil, but only has an Appearance of it: As to sit at meat in an
Idols Temple, was not evil in it self (for an Idol is nothing, and the
Sacrifice offered is properly nothing, that is, no Sacrifice) but it had an
Appearance of Evil, to him that had not that Knowledge; and therefore the
Apostle does forbid that practice, 1 Cor. 8. 1 Cor. 10. 14. and requires them
to flee from Idolatry in that Show and Appearence of it; and so those
Ceremonies in Worship that are abused to Idolatry, should be laid aside rather
than others, because they have an Appearance of Evil: I know what is answered,
that they may be used where the Superstition or Idolatry of them are declared
against. But I am confident that the Primitive Christians would not have put
Incense into the Fire of the Sacrifice offered to an Idol, tho they might have
had Liberty to declare against the Idolatry of it: Nor the three Children bow
to Nebuchadnezzor's Image, tho they might have declared against the Idol. And
the Apostle forbids eating meat in the Idols Temple, tho it was not thought
that they were Idolaters who sat there, or practiced Idolatry. God forbad the
Israelites when they came into Canaan, to symbolize with the Customs of the
Heathen, tho in themselves not evil, because they had an Appearance of Evil;
and their minds thereby might be the sooner reconciled to the Evil it self.
Superstition is very catching, and therefore the occasions of it are dangerous;
which made Hezekiah break in pieces the brazen Serpent, when abused to
Superstition, 2 King. 18. 4.

6. The last General Rule is: Let all things be done to the Glory of God; which
though it be a General Rule to all the Actions of Men's Life, yet the Apostle
applies it to things in themselves indifferent in Religion, and the Worship of
God; as about eating things offered to an Idol; 1 Cor. 10. 31. so that nothing
should be practiced herein, but what may tend to this General End: And hereupon
forbids the using of that Liberty that may offend another Conscience, and
cause him to fall, as that which would not be to the Glory of God, v. 32. yea,
whatever it is that offends against any of the forementioned Rules, is not for
his Glory. And this General Rule well observed, would direct Christians much in
the managing such Circumstances in Religion, where there is no express Rule or
Institution; and limit all Governors from imposing such things in Worship,
which tend not at all to the Glory of God.

And tho I know it is not well possible to answer all Scruples particularly,
which may be made about Christian-Worship; yet I believe these General Rules
well observed, would make Peace with all judicious, and sober Christians. And I
easily grant, that the Gospel Church is left more at Liberty in Circumstances
of Worship, than the Jewish Church, as about Times and Places, and Postures,
etc. Christ intending a more spiritual Worship in these days, has not tied us
up to the Observation of every minute Circumstance belonging to it, or
appointed any outward Pomp and Splendour therein, as in the Temple-Worship of
the Jews, seeking now a true spiritual Worship.

And as for that General Rule which some assert in this Case, that what Christ
has not forbidden in his Worship, humane Authority may Command, and what he
has left Indifferent, may by Men be made necessary, I would wish all
Protestants to take heed of urging it; for we know the evil use the Papists
have made of it. Where, say they, are the use of Oil, Cream, Spittle,
Exorcisms, etc. forbidden in Baptizing? where is the use of Holy Water, when
they enter their Temples, forbidden? where is Sprinkling the Head with Ashes
forbidden? where is the use of Pictures and Images, as helps to Devotion,
forbidden? And where is the Crossing themselves, as they do upon several
occasions, forbidden? And much more of this kind is used by them. But we know
our Savior excused his Disciples from observing the Traditions which the
Pharisees urged upon the People, though they were commanded by the Authority of
the Jewish Church: Such as washing of Hands, Cups, Platters, which seem to be
very innocent Ceremonies: And were such things as these only recommended, and
not enjoined, if they did no good, they might do no hurt; but when they are
made necessary to Church Communion, and for not observing them, People are shut
out of the Church, and the ordinary means of Salvation, the mischief is
unspeakable. And let it be considered, when God under the Law required in
Sacrifice either two Turtle Doves, or two young Pigeons, whether any Authority
in the Jewish Church or State might determine that which God left indifferent;
but herein let the former Rules be observed.

And I shall conclude this Discourse, with adding a few Passages out of the
late Author of The Discourse of an Infallible Judge: A Learned Divine of the
Church of England.

There is, (says he) an easy and effectual way of Curing Church Divisions,
without having a Judge of Controversies, nay without making all Men of a mind
in every thing, which must never be expected in this World. And that is, not to
make the necessary terms of Communion straighter and narrower than Christ has
made them; nothing but what is plainly revealed in Scripture, and is Essential
to Christian Faith and Worship: For such matters most Christians agree in, and
tho they may have some private Opinions of their own, this ought not to divide
Communions, while they do not impose them upon the Faith of others, nor
introduce any new and strange Worship unto the Christian Church. P. 55.

Again, If Catholic Communion be the Communion of the whole Catholic Church
from the time of Christ and his Apostles, to the end of the World, which is but
one Church, and the Apostolic Churches are the true measure and Standard of
true Catholic Communion, then those Churches which are to this day in
Communion with the Apostles, are in true Catholic Communion: And this Test we
will stand by, etc. p. 78.

Again, In the same Page, The Communion of particular Churches does not consist
in using the same Liturgies, or External Rites of Worship, if their Worship be
a Right Christian-Worship, and agreeable to the General Rules of the Gospel.
For every Church has Authority within her self to direct, and Model her own
Worship.

And therefore those that keep to the Apostolic Terms of Communion, cannot
justly be charged with Schism. And these Rules observed would have prevented
those Persecutions, which have bin in the Christian World, upon the account of
Rites and Ceremonies, or some little difference in Religion. And this is all I
shall speak about Christian-Worship in the External part of it.

And therefore shall next speak of it in the Internal part of it: Of which our
Savior speaks. John 4. 23. The hour comes, and now is, when the true
Worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth: But this is
General; but more Particularly, he that worships as a Christian,

1. He Worships in the Faith of the New Testament, which is a Faith respecting
Christ as already come; and not as yet to come, as the Faith of the Old
Testament did. And he worships in greater assurance of Faith also; which the
Apostle speaks of as proper to the New Testament; Heb. 10. 22. Christ having
now actually Suffered, and the New Covenant sealed with his Blood, and ascended
Heaven to make Intercession, as our great High Priest. The Faith of the New
Testament has more assurance in it, wherein the Saints do worship and draw
nigh to God. Let us draw nigh with full assurance of Faith, etc. Heb. 10. 22.
Let us come boldly to the Throne of Grace. Heb. 4. 16. Having therefore
boldness to enter the Holiest, Heb. 10. 19.

2. He Worships, not in the Oldness of the Letter, but in the Newness of the
Spirit. This oldness of the Letter referrs either to the Ceremonial, or Moral
Law. The true Christian worships not in the oldness of the first Covenant: He
worships not in the Ordinances of the Ceremonial Law, but only in what was
spiritually signified in them: His Incense is fervent Prayer ascending to
Heaven, in the Fire of the Holy Ghost: His Peace Offering is hearty
Thanksgiving: His Heave Offering is an Heart lifted up to Heaven: His
Wine-offering, Joy in God: His Sin-offering is Repentance, Confession of Sin,
and a Broken Heart: His Burnt-offering is his whole Body of Sin offered up to
be destroyed: He keeps the Feast of Tabernacles by living as a Stranger upon
Earth, and Traveling toward the Heavenly Country: He keeps the Feast of
Passover in his worshipping and living without the Leaven of Hypocrisy and
Malice in his Heart all his Days: His Washings and Purifyings, are the
Sanctifyings of his Heart and Conscience: And his looking toward the Temple in
Worship, is his looking to Christ herein. And this is one part of his
worshipping God in Spirit and in Truth, and not in the Letter of the Ceremonial
Law.

So also he Worships not God in the outward Letter of the Moral Law; that is,
merely by the force of an outward Letter without the inward Principle of a
renewed mind: when the outward Letter of the Law striking upon the natural
Conscience, carries a Man sorth to Worship, without any love to the Duty, any
life or delight in it, this is to worship in the oldness of the Letter, Romans 7.
6. The Letter is said to kill, but the Spirit gives life; 2 Cor. 3. 6. So that
all Worship in the outward Letter, without the Spirit, is dead Worship, and not
truly Christian.

3. The true Christian Worship is, not to Worship in a Spirit of Bondage, but
in a Spirit of Adoption: As the Apostle speaks of Christian Believers, Gal. 4.
6, 7. that They were no more Servants but Sons; so they serve not God in the
Spirit of Servants, but of Sons: Not so much for fear of Wrath and Punishment,
as love to please God, honor him, and enjoy him; which is the Principle that
they act from. Perfect love casts out fear, for fear has Torment, 1 John 4.
18. And God has not given us the Spirit of fear, but of power, love and a
sound mind. 2 Timothy 1. 7. And to the same purpose, Romans 8. 15. Christianity
brings not Men to Mount Sinai, where are Thunders and Earthquakes, Blackness,
and Darkness, and Tempests; which made not only the People, but Moses himself
to fear and quake: And in this Principle of servile fear, did the Jews for the
most part serve and worship God, which is not the proper principle of true
Christian Worship. Though this Worship excludes not all fear of God, but
requires it; Let us have Grace to serve God with Reverence, and Godly Fear,
says the Apostle, Heb. 12. 28. A Reverential Fear of God, at^ended with an
holy Modesty (...).
and Caution, as the Greek words import, ought to be found in all Christian
Worship. He worships God as a Father, and with a filial fear suited to that
Relation, but not with servile fear.

4. The true Christian Worships God as a Redeemer in Christ; and so it is
distinguished from the worship of the Heathen, who worshipped him only as the
Creator of the World. They worshipped and adored him, beholding the Characters of
his Power, Wisdom, and Goodness in the Works of his Creation; but the Christian
Worships and Adores him, beholding his Love, Mercy, and Grace, etc. manifested
in the Work of Redemption: He worships God rather as he is in Christ, than in
the Creatures. And the Heathen worshipping God in the Creatures, did lead them
at last to worship the Creatures themselves, and so became Idolaters instead of
true Worshippers; yea, the Apostle says, They worshipped and served the Creature
more than the Creator; Romans 1. 25. They did not worship God in his Creatures,
but divided their worship betwixt God and his Creatures, and the Creatures got
the greater share of it. But none of this is Christian worship: The Apostle
gives account how he Worshipped God, 2 Cor. 1. 3. Blessed be God the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. And Ephesians. 3. 14. I bow my Knees to the Father of our
Lord Jesus: And the Worship performed by the Elders, and Angels, and all
Creatures, that we read of Rev. 5. 13. is directed to him that Sits upon the
Throne, and the Lamb, even that Lamb that has Redeemed his People by his Blood.

So that the Right Christian Worshipper looks at God as in Christ, and as
manifested in the Work of Redemption. And so beholding him, is inwardly acted
and moved thereby to Adore and Worship him: The true Principle of a Christian.

Lastly, The true Christian Worshipper worships in Humility of Mind: The
Christian Religion so clearly showing man, above all Religions, his lost and
wretched State in his Fall, and that he has all his Righteousness, Life,
Strength and Hope in another, out of himself. It teaches him to worship in
Humility: As the twenty four Elders worship, falling upon their Faces, and
casting down their Crowns before the Throne, Rev. 4. 10. A Representation of
right Gospel Worship; which Christ therefore would have dressed up in a decent
plainness, that it might be performed in Humility, and not in Ostentation.

Thus we see what is the Internal part of Right Christian-Worship: Not that it
does not require also the humble Gestures and Adorations of the outward Man,
which was practiced in the Old Testament, and ought to be also in the New, and
was practiced by Christ himself; and the Light of Nature did lead the Heathens
to it in their Worship: And the Christian Religion excludes none of the
Principles of the Light of Nature. But that worship which is more strictly
Christian, is worship in Spirit, from an Evangelical Principle, and according
to the Laws and Institutions of the New Testament.

Neither does this Religion exclude public Oratories, Temples, or as we call
them, Churches, for public Worship, or any convenient places appropriate
thereunto. The Light of Nature, and the forementioned Rules of doing all things
Decently and to Edification, in the worship of God, does direct to them; but to
think that the Place makes the worship acceptable, is no Christian Principle,
as having no holiness in it, like the Jewish Temple, and under no such
Institution. For that Temple was figurative both of Christ and the
Gospel Church: So that God has his Temple still, his Visible Church, as the
Apostle tells the Corinthians, Whose Temple you are: And as that Temple of
Solomon had its outward and inward Court, so it is now: Some who worship in the
outward Form only, which are the outward Court given up to the Gentiles or
Paganizing Christians, and are that Temple where the Man of Sin sits, and which
God regards not, and will not have it measured: And others who worship God in
Spirit, and are the inward Court, and the true Temple and Altar, measured by
the line of Gods Sanctuary, and where Christ does sit and walk. And was this
Spiritual Worship more regarded, I believe we should not contend so much about
the Ceremonial part; which when it is forced upon Men by Fines and Penalties,
it looks more like Antichristian than Christian Worship.

Of the English PARLIAMENT considered as Christian.
I Should not have added any thing upon this Head, but that the present
juncture of Affairs makes it seasonable, we having at this Time a Parliament
Assembled, not only of Christian Men, but of Protestants, which profess
Reformed Christianity: And by a wonderful and unexpected Call brought together,
and in a critical Time, when the Nation was in an Agony of Fear, Distraction
and Danger. How welcome are Physicians to a Distempered, Dying Patient, who
both know the Malady, and have Skill to recover him! Such we hope this
Parliament to be to England, consisting of so many Eminent Worthies, freely
chosen, and freely debating, sent from all parts of the Nation to Consult our
Cure. And seeing that I have bin treating of the Christian Religion, in the
Excellency and Influence of it, we cannot but expect its Eminent Influence upon
that great Assembly: And that true Christianity will be in the Chair, and
preside in all their Votes and De^btes.

I do not presume to be capable of giving any Advice to those Honorable
Persons who are every way so far above me. All I shall presume unto, is only to
lay before them such things which they already know, and present them in a
fresh view to their Minds, and that only in Hypothesi; and only according to
the Laws of Christianity, and not the Rules of State Policy.

Our English Parliament, we know it to be the Supreme Court of the Nation,
England's Sanhedrim, and the Kings great Council, of ancient Constitution;
acknowledged and maintained by successive Princes both of the Saxon and Norman
Race for many Generations. It is the Epitome of the whole Nation, who are all
here either present or represented. It is the Fountain of Justice, the Ne plus
ultra of Controversy. It is the Bulwark of its Defense, the Healer of its
Breaches; the united Reason, Wisdom and Counsel of the whole Kingdom. It is the
true Balance of our English Government, holding the Scale even betwixt a
Turkish Tyranny, and Republican Democracy, or betwixt Arbitrary Government and
Popular Anarchy; yea, I may style it, a brief Model of the whole Universe:
wherein the King may be considered as Regent in both Houses; the Peers as the
Planets compassing him about; who as they receive the Splendor of their Honor
from him, so they reflect it back again upon him, in their Loyalty, and
Allegiance to his Person and Government. The House of Commons is as the middle
Region, which by its Coldness does Temper and Moderate the Influence of the
Superior Luminaries, that the Earth of the Common People may not be Scorched by
it. The wholesome Laws here Enacted, are as Rivers that Run forth to refresh the
whole Land. And it subsists as the Universe, by the Unity of its Parts, and
breaks in pieces by Division. And as Natural things are formed by the Communion
that is betwixt the Superior and Inferior World; so things Political, by that
Communion which is betwixt the two Houses of Parliament.

But who is a right qualified Member of this great Assembly? He that would
describe him, may have the easier Task, by having the Instances before him
hereof, in the many eminent Worthies now met together in this present
Parliament.

First, He is one who sits in the House by a just Right, either by the right of
Birth and Peerage, as the Lords, or by a right of a free Election of the People
in the Majority of their Votes and Suffrages, as the Commons. But yet, as he is
a Christian, he takes notice of the Providence of God in calling him to this
Public Service.

Again, He is a Man not Acted by Ambition, comes not thither merely to assume
Honor to himself, but to do some public Good to the Nation, and Service to
his Country, which he accounts his greatest Honor, which is a temper becoming
Christianity.

He sits in the House with a mind free from Prejudice, both with respect to
Causes, and the Persons of all Men; and gives up himself to the conduct of
Reason, Equity, and Conscience, in all his Votes and Debates, that he may not
justly wrong any Man; as becomes a Christian.

He is not pertinacious in his own sentiments, and overweening his own Parts
and Wisdom above other Men; but is more ready to hear than to speak, and will
submit readily himself, to Men of greater Judgment and Experience than his own,
and in Honor will prefer another before himself; as becomes a Christian.

He looks not on himself as a private Person when he sits in that great
Assembly, and therefore lays aside the consideration of all private Interests
when they stand in Competition with the public Good, that he may Faithfully
discharge both toward God and Man, the public Trust that is in his Hand; As
becomes an English Senator, and a Christian.

He will not suffer himself to be transported with Heat or Passion, whereby his
Judgment may be blinded, and his Speech precipitate and provoking, but has
that Command over his own Spirit by the Dominion of Reason, and the Grace of
God in his Soul, whereby he can either be Silent and not Speak, or else can
Speak with that Sedateness and Sobriety, as becomes a Christian.

He is aware of the great Mischief of Extremes, and therefore seeks to have all
things carried on in that Assembly with that Decorum and Moderation, which may
be most safe and satisfying to the whole Nation; whereby he seeks to prevent
Divisions, and to promote Union; As becomes a Christian.

He Acts not in the House for the interest of a particular Party, but has
regard to the whole Community, and will not be a respecter of Persons for
Interest, Friendship, or a private Design, not becoming a Christian. And will
rather widen than narrow the Protestant Interest, to strengthen it against
Popery; As becomes a Protestant Christian.

He does not so much consider which is the Strongest side, and most likely to
Prevail, but where Justice, Equity, and the Interest of true Religion do
preponderate; aiming not so much at the securing himself, as saving the Nation.
And if he cannot do the Good he would, he will do the Good he can, both for the
Honor of God, and the Welfare of the Nation, as becomes a Christian.

If there be Differences in the Nation, either upon the account of Religion, or
Civil Liberties; as a State-physician, he will rather seek to have them Healed,
than to be made Wider and Incurable; and endeavors if it may be, rather to
have the Flesh cured, than the Limb to be cut off; showing herein the true
Spirit of Christ, and of a good Christian.

He is careful to Maintain the just Privileges of Parliaments, and the Ancient
Bounds and Landmarks of the Nation, as a true English man. And also to give
unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, in maintaining the due Power, and
Prerogative of the King; whereby he approves himself to be a Man who both Fears
God and Honors the King; As becomes a Christian.

He is one who can discern both Time and Judgment, and considers not only what
is Just or Lawful in it self, but what is most Proper, with respect to the
present State of the Nation, and the juncture of Affairs both at Home and
Abroad; and accordingly will Act, either in making New Laws, or Repealing the
Old, when the State of the Nation is Altered, and the Reason of the Law is
Ceased. And will in a good sense (...), as the Apostle speaks, and take the
Advantage of the Season for the doing of Good, as becomes a wise Christian; not
knowing whe-it may ever again return into his Hand.

He is one who has respect to Posterity as well as the present Generation; and
will take care for the future Age, that no oppressing Yoke may be entailed upon
the Necks of those that are to come after, by leaving any such Laws Unrepealed,
or by making any such New Laws, which may have a bad effect upon the following
Age, and which may affect his own Posterity, as well as others. To ^oresee an
Evil, is left by Solomon as the Character of a prudent Prove. 22. 3.
Man, which may now be styled, of a wise Christian.

He is careful to provide supplies for the King, both sufficient and speedy, as
the Ho^our of his Government, and the Affairs of the Nation may require; that
some parts of Men's Estates may be Sacrificed to the preser^ation of the whole:
And yet he is merciful ^o the Peoples Purse, not to impose a burden that is
either Unreasonable or Unnecessary: By which mercy he Acts as a true Patriot of
his Country, and as a Christian.

He gathers Wisdom from the experience of former times, wisely considering the
Rocks that others have Split upon, that went before him; that he may Steer his
present Course by other Measures, and take timely warning; and will not follow
any evil Steps, but avoid them; As becomes a Christian.

He is Careful and Vigilant, as a public Watchman, to discover the Nations
Dangers, either from Abroad or at Home; either such as are before his Face, or
such as lie in Ambush behind; and will be diligent to make speedy Provision
against them, least by delay* they prove invincible. And he will not be
diverted by securing some Men's particular Cabbins, from attending the safety of
the whole Vessel from Wrack and Ruin. He considering the Trust that is in his
Hand, he makes Conscience to discharge it as becomes a Christian, that no ruins
which may possibly come, may lie at his Door.

He takes notice both of Persons and Things that obstruct the course of Justice
in the Nation, and have been injurious to the Liberties, Peace, Wealth,
Strength, and Security of the Kingdom, as its proper Grievances: That such
Things may be removed out of the way, and such Persons who have been violators
of public Justice, may be made exemplary, though hitherto escaped, and such who
have suffered wrong may be recompensed. Which as it has been the practice of
our English Parliaments, so it is agreeable to the Rules of true Christianity.

He stops his Ears to Pernicious Counsel, shuts up his Hand against taking
Rewards to pervert Justice, to wrong the Innocent, or to make his motions
Eccentick from others, to promote a private design. He is also diligent to
attend his public Duty, and will ^t be found Absent when the public Affairs
^quire his Presence: And will Subordinate ^s private Concerns to the common
Good.

And will not be diverted by Ease or Pleasure ^om putting his own Hand to the
Oar, to ^eer the Vessel to the right Port. Consider^g, that the known Rule of
Hoc agere, does ^ well respect Civil Affairs, as the Duties of ^hristianity and
Religion toward God.

If the Affairs of the Nation be Urgent and ^ressing, and its Dangers Eminent,
he uses ^ouble Care and Diligence. He well knowing, ^at the Patient may Die by
the Physicians de^ys; and the Vessel sink, by the Leak suffered ^o long; and
the Fire be past Quenching, ^r want of timely prevention. And the say^g of
Solomon may in this case be verified; He that is Slothful (or Remiss, Heb.) in
his Work, ^ Brother to him that is a great Waster, Prove. 18. 9. and that of the
Poet,

-- Sero Medecina paratur,
Cum mala per longas invaluere moras.
The Medicine is too late at length,
When the Disease has gotten strength.
He is also more particularly concerned a^out Religion, and the Service and
Honor of God; that true Piety may be Protected a^ Encouraged through the
Nation, and the open Vice and Wickedness may be suppressed and that good Laws
may be made, or exec^ted for that end; and especially, that goo^ Ministers may
be encouraged, and good Preac^ing may abound in the Nation, and a maintenance
to support it, whereby the Protestant Religion may be secured, good Knowledge
may increase, and the People not lef^ in Ignorance to be seduced to Popery, o^
drawn aside to any moral Impieties, whereb^ he gives to God, the things that
are Gods And he that is thus Concerned, I am sure he Acts like a good
Christian, and to the Interes^ of Christianity: And the Line I have been
drawing, effectually reaches to him. And as he knows the Eyes of the Nation
are upon the Parliament, whom they Trust; so much more the Eyes of the
Omniscient God, before whom all the Gods of the Earth must shortly appear.

And as the Nation hoth now the Blessing of the Conjuction of a Protestant King
and Queen in the Throne; and as we hope and desire, an Hearty Conjuction of
both Houses of Parlialiament with them; surely then, no Conjunction of the most
Benign Stars in the Heavens (according to the Rules of Astronomy) can be
esteemed so Auspicious as these Conjunctions, to the flourishing Estate these
Nations.

I have nothing further to add, but to ^gg Pardon for this Boldness, and the
Ac^ptance of my good Intentions, both as a ^ristian and an Englishman.

Of the Christian Soldier.
Shall draw my Line a little further; from ^ Men of Peace, to Men of War; from
the ^urt to the Camp; from the Persons who sit ^ Council, to those who March in
the Field; ^ecially considering our present times, where^ we hear of Wars, and
Rumors of Wars: ^a we see them come to our very Doors. It ^ould be a Mercy to
the World if there was ^ need of Soldiers; But when there is, it ^y be Mercy
to have them; especially such, ^o are good Christians, as well as good
^uldiers. It was one of the Judgments threat^d to the Jews, that God would
remove from ^em, The Mighty man, and the man of War; ^e Captain of Fifty, and
the man of Eminent ^untenance, Isa. 3. 2, 3.

And now when Antichristian Armies a^ round about us, and dangers Threaten us ^
every Side; it is time for the true Chr^stian Soldier to gird on his Sword, a^
stand upon his Guard; for the Contest no^ with us, seems to be betwixt Papist
and Pr^testant, true and false Christianity; or pa^ticularly, betwixt the
French and Irish Papis^ and the English and Dutch Protestants, a^ their Allies.
And as the Israelites carried t^ Ark of God along with them into the Field that
they might have good success in Battl^ so true Christianity will not a little
tend ^ the success of the Army that is influenced ^ it; and therefore it is
desirable it may atte^ the Camp also, and that not only in the Pr^fession, but
Practice too.

Now this Christian Soldier,
First, (which is to be supposed) He is o^ whose Conscience is persuaded of the
La^fulness of Christians to take up Arms. So^ have denied it; as the Manichees
of Ol^ and so do some still at this Day; but su^ scruples and ties upon the
Consciences of m^ may be very injurious, in this time of p^^lick distress and
necessity. Our Savior inde^ forbids private Revenge, and requires patie^
^uffering for private Wrongs in the case of ^ersecution, and bad Peter put up
his Sword, ^ut no where declares the Unlawfulness ^f all War. We know how God
trained ^p the Israelites in Martial Discipline, Com^anded, Commended,
Assisted, and Blessed their ^artial Enterprises; though private Revenges ^ere
then Unlawful as well as now; but Na^ional War in a good Cause was Lawful then,
and so it is still. When the Soul^iers came to John the Baptist, he Luke 3. 14.
^ids them use no Violence, etc. but ^equires them not to lay down their Arms.
When Peter Preached to Cornelius the Centu^ion, and Converted him to the
Christian Faith, ^e Baptized him, but required him not to ^ay aside his Sword
and Military Office, Act. 10. ^s not our Savior neither, the other Centu^ion
mentioned Matt. 8.

And we read of Christian Soldiers called ^he Thundering Legion, in Aurelius
his Roman Army. And when Tertullian in his Apology ^or the Christian Religion,
pleads, That they Prayed for the Roman Emperors, and that their Councils
Exercitus fort^s, Senatum fidelem, etc. cap. 29.
and Armies might be prosperous; surely he did not think all National Wars
Unlawful. And though he speaks against the Use of their Idolatrous Crowns and
Garlands, in his Book De Corona militis, yet not the Use of the Sword i^ War.

And the light of Nature does teach all Men* yea all Creatures
Self-preservation; and Christianity does not extinguish the Light an^ Laws of
Nature; and hereby Christian Commonwealths* will be more exposed than any
other. So that this is supposed of the Christian Soldier; for being a
Christian, he will no^ practice what is not allowed by the Laws o^ his Religion.

Again, He looks upon his Employment not only as Lawful but Honorable, the
Honor of most Noble Families being raised first in the Field; and therefore
seeks to put on that true greatness of Mind, whereby on a right principle, he
can look upon Dangers and Difficulties so below him, as that he is able to
Encounter them.

Further, He has a general Satisfaction, at least, of the justness of his
Cause. Though he knows not the secret Councels and Reasons of State, or of every
particular Command, which may not be fit for him to know; yet he believes in
general, that the War he ingageth in, is not upon any wicked design, merely to
satissie the Ambition or Revenge of Men, but for the defense of Liberty,
Property, or true Religion, against such who do invade them. For what is not of
Faith is sin, is a General Rule in the Christian Religion.

He will not make use of his Sword for any unjust Violence, either to Men's
Persons, Goods or Estates, or to usurp that which is not his own, because he
has power in his hand, but is Content with his Wages, and makes no Mutiny: And
the Power of his Sword is under the restraint of his Conscience, and Religion.

He will be faithful to his Cause, and his Prince, that intrusts him with the
Sword; And abhorrs to be treacherous and perfidious, as that which is below a
Man, much more a Christian. For as the Heathen did detest it, so they honored
Fidelity even in an Enemy: And if in any thing he is dissatisfied, he will
rather lay down his Arms, than use them in Hypocrisy, and Treachery to the
Power that does both pay and trust him.

He counts not his Life dear that he may serve his Country, the Welfare of the
Nation, and the Public good: He knowing that he was not born for himself, and
that his Strength, his Spirits, his Skill and Life are well improved when they
are Sacrificed to the good of Mankind, especially in any Christian Service,
either at Home or Abroad. And that he may pay a Tribute to God, the King, and
his Country, when he pays his Tribute to Nature.

And seeing that Courage is necessary to his Warfare, and that it is the gift
of God; he looks up to Heaven for it, that he may not turn back in the day of
Battle, and by base Cowardice betray his Cause, open the way to a destroying
Enemy, and expose or disparage himself: Having in his Thoughts the Speech of
Joab in the Head of his Army, Be of Good Courage, and let us play the Men for
our People, and the Cities of our God, and the Lord do that which seems him
good, 2 Samuel 10. 12. True Christian Courage.

He knows he carries his Life in his hand, when he goes forth to War, and
therefore does entrust it in the hand of that God who gave it him, and has
appointed its Bounds; And he knows that God can as well preserve it abroad as
at home, in the Field as in the Chamber; and being in his way, he may hope for
Gods Keeping and Protection over him in his Warfare, as well as in any other
Employment: And if an easy Death be desirable, those that are Slain in the
Field have commonly the advantage of those that die in their Beds.

He trusts not in his own Strength, Skill or Courage, or in the Numbers of
Horse or Men; but he knows, as a Christian, that Victory is in the hand of God:
And therefore after the best improvement of Martial Skill, and notwithstanding
all advantages that are before him, he makes the Lord his only trust, and
commits all Successes into his hand, as becomes a Christian.

He is content in the Station wherein he is set; whether in higher or lower
Command, or under Command; and is careful to be found in his proper Duty, and
discharge of the Service of the place he stands in; whether of Commanding, or
Commanded; that there may be no breach upon Military Order, or through the
Irregularity of any one Wheel, the motion of the whole may be discomposed, and
prejudiced: And to be content and diligent in our own Place and Station, is, we
know, a Rule enjoined in Christanity; and if he desires after an higher
Station, he seeks to raise himself to it, by his Courage and Faithfulness in
the place where at present he stands.

He is willing to deny himself in his outward Accommodations, and to endure
hardship in the attending his present Warfare; and especially when the Cause of
Liberty and Religion is in Jeopardy: In which Case he says with that brave Man
Vriah, The Ark, and Israel, and Judah abide in Tents, and my Lord Joab, and the
Servants of my Lord are Encamped in the open Field, shall I then go into my
House to eat and to drink, and lie with my Wife, etc? When the public All
seems to lie at Stake, he exposes his Flesh to hardship, as well as his Life
to hazards; and shakes off an Effeminate Temper of Mind.

He also carefully avoids those Sins and Impieties which usually attend the
Camp; as Drunkenness, Rapes, Swearing, Cursing, Quarrelling, horrid
Imprecations, Blaspheming, etc. and all such Debauchery, which is dishonorable
to humane Nature as well as Christianity. And as God required the Israelites,
when they went forth to War, to remove all Ceremonial Uncleanness out of the
Camp, that he might not forsake it; so the Christian Soldier will avoid those
moral pollutions which may be displeasing and provoking to the Eyes of that God
from whom he knows comes all Success and Victory; and for the cause of which,
great Armies have been often defeated, and rebuked from Heaven; as Christians
well know.

And if he meet with Success, and his Arms Prosper, he gives not the Glory of
it to the Valor, Strength, or Skill of Men, but, as a Christian, he gives all
Glory to God himself, well remembering the Wise Man's saying, The Race is not to
the swift, nor the Battle to the strong, etc. Eccles. 9. 11. And if the Light
of Nature led the Heathen to offer Gratulatory Sacrifices to their Gods, for
their Victories, much more does the Light of Christianity teach Men to give
Glory to God: And if the Romans, would ascend the Capitol in their solemn
Triumphs, to pay their thanks to Jupiter, much more is ^t becoming a Christian
to ascend with his Thanksgivings to God.

He will not seek to prolong the War for ^rivate advantage, ingageth in it
rather out of Necessity than Choice, and the usual Mot^o, Pacem Bello
quaerimus, if not painted in his Colors, yet is written in his Heart.

Lastly, The Hazards of Life which he En^ounters, make him to secure his Peace
with God, that he may dye both honorably and ^appily; that tho he has bin a
Man of War, ^et may dye in Peace, and live triumphantly in ^eaven, when his
Warfare is finished here on ^arth. And as his Religion directs him for this and,
both Repentance toward God, and Faith ^owards the Lord Jesus Christ, so he is
found ^n the daily practice of it, as becomes a Chri^tian; whereby that old
Latin Verse is Con^uted:

Nulla fides, pietasque viris qui Castra sequuntur. And when we see Faith and
Piety, Valor an^ Virtue attending the Camp, especially in the Commanding Part
of it; we may then say with King David, that Man of War; God has given a
Banner to them that fear him, to be displayed, because of the Truth. Psalm. 60.
4.

Not that I think it is Essential to a goo^ Soldier to be a good Christian, or
tha^ Church-qualifications are necessary to the Camp, yet this I say, that
whatever natural or moral goodness, or acquired accomplishments are found in
any Man, the superadding of true Christianity to them, will put a farther
Excellency and Usefulness upon them both in the Service of God and Men, and
will put the Blessings of Heaven upon them also: An^ tho I pretend not to Skill
in Martial Affairs* whereby to speak as a Soldier, yet I do to some Knowledge
in the Rules of Christianity, whereby to speak as a Christian.

Thus I am come to the End of my Line; and have endeavored to make good the
Title o^ this short Discourse, by showing the Excellency of Right Christianity,
and its Usefulness in the whole Life of Man: And thereby to attain ^ true
Reformed Religion.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for John Dunton at the Black Raven in the Poultrey, over
against the Compter.
(1) A Continuation of Morning Exercise Questions and Cases of Conscience,
pra^tically Resolved by sundry Ministers, in October. ^682. Printed in a Large
Quarto. Price bound 8. s.

(2) A Collection of the Dying Speeches, Let^ers and Prayers, of those eminent
Protestants who suffered in the West of England and elsewhere: under the Cruel
Sentence of George Lord Jefferys. price 6. d.

(3) The Saints Readiness for their Lords com^ng: A Funeral Sermon preached
upon the death of that faithful and laborious Servant of Christ Mr. John Oaks:
by Samuel Slater Minister of the Gospel. Price bound 1 s.

(4) His Sermon Preached to Young Men the Twenty fifth of December last, at
that which was Mr. Oakes's Meeting Place: price 6 d.

(5) Early Piety, Exemplified in the Life and Death of Mr. Nathanael Mather,
who having become at the Age of Nineteen, an Instance of more than common
Learning and Virtue, changed Earth for Heaven, October. 17. 1688. Whereto are
added, some Discourses on the true Nature, the great Reward, and the best
Season of such a Walk with God, as he left a pattern of. Price bound 1 s.

(6) The Joy of Faith; or a Treatise opening the true Nature of Faith; its
lowest Stature, and Distinction from Assurance, with a Preliminary Tract,
evidencing the Divinity of the Sacred Scriptures. By Samuel Lee, M. A. All sold
by John Dunton at the Black Raven in the Poultrey: price bound 1 s. 6 d.

(7) A complete History of the Life and Military Actions of Richard Earl of
Tyrconnel, wherein (among other things) is related the Skirmishes, Battles,
Seiges, and remarkable Transactions which have happened under his Government both
before (and since) the Late Kings Landing in Ireland. Dedicated to the Officers
in his Majesty's Army: To which is added the Life and memorable Actions of
Father Peter's. price 1 s.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THere will in a little time be published a Treatise Entitled, A New
Martyrology, or the Bloody Assizes, now exactly methodized in one e^^ire
Volume, comprehending a Complete History of the Lives, Actions, Trials,
Sufferings, Dying Speeches, Letters and Prayers of all those Eminent Martyrs,
who fell in the West of England, and elsewhere, from the year 1678. to 1689.
with the Pictures of several of the most Eminent of them in Copper Plates. To
this Treati^e will be added the late Duke of Monmouth's whole Expedition whilst
in the West. Written by an Officer in his Army: As also, the Life and Death of
that bloody Persec^sor, George Lord Jefferies. The third Edition with large
Additions, Printed according to the Original Copies in large Octavo, for John
Duncon at the Black Raven in the Poulare.


