BARNABIES SUMMONS: OR, Pay your Groat in the Morning.


INtended for all Malaga men, called Vintners, Sack-drawers, White Wine,
Claret, Rhenish, Bastard Sherry, or Canary Blades, and Birds, together with all
Ale-Brewers, Beer-Brewers, (alias) Hogshead-fillers, Barrellers, Tapsters, or
Firkinners: As also for all Drawers, Tub-Taysters, Quaffers, Huffers, Puffers,
Snuffers, Rufflers, Scufflers, and Shufflers, with Wine-bibbers, Sack-suckers,
and Toast-makers; not forgetting other depending Officers of a lower Rank, of
our stumbling Fraternity, viz. Bench-whistlers, Lick-wimbles, Suck-spigots,
Hawkers, Spewterers, Maudliners, Fox-catchers, including in the said Warrant as
a Reserve, our true and trusty Friends for the speedier effecting our design
and purpose, All Vulcans, Crispins, Tinkers, Pedlars, and of late our endeared
friends, the Society of Upstart Printers, and Newes-mongers; and excluding by
special command, all Three penny Ordinary Sharks, as Bakers, Weavers, Tailors,
Usurers, Snip-eard Scriveners, Presbyters, either English, Scotch, or Dutch,
(but stay there a little) for though the last of these be good for nothing
else, yet they are stout Drinkers and Drunkards; and therefore if they please
to Veil as formerly they have done, and must do now, they shall have the
benefit of this our warrant, provided they neither drink all, nor too much: our
Warrant for the general content of all Bonos Socios is set out in manner and
form following, that all whom it concerns, (as it does too many) may, if they
can stand, understand it.

The VVarrant.
KNow all men by these presents, that we Sir Resolute Rednose, of the Town of
Taplow, in the County of Cumberland, with our dear and trusty Cosins, Sir
Ferdinando Fiery-face, Lord Sigismund Ruby-nose, together with our assotiates
and fellow Commissioners, Sir William Swill-boule, Sir Gregory Toss-pot, Sir
Thomas Spend-all, Sir Alexander Dry-lips, Sir Lewis Lick-spiggot, Edward
Barley, Thomas Malster, Richard Brewer, and Geffery Tapster, Esquires, etc. By
virtue of a Mandamus, or a fieri facias, issued unto us from the great
Wine-Cellar in Bacchus Prerogative Court, near to Stumbling Alley, from the
Lord Jacomo Fill-pot, and Signeur Jeronymo Tap-lash, do Enact, appoint, and
ordain, that any and every person, male or female, of what Country soever,
being taken so drunk, that they are without wit, sense or, reason, shall forth
with pay to the under Officers herein named, viz. to John Bottle-Ale, William
Suck-all, Gerard Turn-tub, and Jenkin up Morgan of Ale-ton, or to their Deputy,
or Deputies, the full and just sum of 4 d. without any resistance or delay upon
the next Morning; but in case any of the Delinquents in the Premises shall be
so ingenuous as to confess their fault without distraining, that then this
Penalty shall not extend to above 2 d. But in case the Parties are resolved to
ride the old ridden Jade called Cut, or a Dog of the same Hair next morning,
without any remorse, and will presume to hunt the Fox again, that then our
said Bailiffs, and Deputies are forth with either to join with them, or else
to suspend the execution of this our said Warrant, till he or they may be
sober, which is much feared will not quickly be effected; and therefore for the
better and surer progress herein, that Justice may be the sooner executed, we
enjoin all Constables of Buroughs and Parishes as well high and Petty to be
assisting to this our merry Warrant, and do desire them if they or any of their
substitute Officers can find leisure from sleep, or their nodding benches, to
examine the Premises and persons, to show due respects unto them, considering
well that the case and cause not only has been their own, but suddenly and
shortly will be again, as soon as they can either meet with merry Company or
good moneys. Hereof they or any of them are not to fail at their utmost perils.

To all Constables, Headboroughs, and other petty Officers, and stout Drinkers,
whom this specially concerns. Given at our Manor of Flushing, in the Full
Moon Tavern, at Sun rising, Anno 155432. Upon the last day of the first of
March, Ut supra.

