VENUS in the Cloister, OR THE NUN in her Smock.

In Curious DIALOGUES, ADDRESSED To the Lady Abbess of Loves Paradise, By the
Abbot Du Prat.

Done out of French.

LONDON, Printed for H. Rodes, next Door to the Bear Tavern near Bride-Lane in
Fleet Street, 1683.

TO MADAM D. L. R. Most Worthy Abbess of Loves Paradise.
MADAM,
AS it would be a difficult matter for me not to comply with all your desires,
I did not at all pause upon the Requests I received from your Ladyship, for the
reducing as soon as possible into writing, the secret Entertainments wherein
your Society had so great a share. I engaged my self too solemnly in this
Gallant Enterprise, for to decline now the going through with it, or to excuse
my prosecuting this Work, upon the difficulty there is to give to the Voice and
Action that Vivacity they were animated with. I know not if I shall have fully
performed my Duty, and satisfied your expectations, the exercise of two or
three mornings will discover to you the Resemblance or Imperfection of this
Draught; and will let you know, that if I have not a great deal of Eloquence, I
have at least memory enough, faithfully to relate the greatest part of things
past. I have so proposed to my self your satisfaction in this Undertaking, that
I have indifferently passed over all the reasons which seem to dissuade me from
it; the fear only of it is falling into any other hands than yours, has made me
somewhat delay sending it to you, and I my self would have been the bearer, if
my present affairs would have allowed me that satisfaction, rather than trust
to the hazard of a Post or of a Messenger a Packet of this consequence. For in
good earnest, if the secret conferences should happen to be made public, it
would Occasion no small scandal both to me and your Lady-ship; and if Actions
which are not blamed, but because they are not known, should happen to become a
new subject of Criticisme, and furnish arms to all those who are willing to
attack us; what a posture would our poor Nun be in, and with what Countenance
can she appear, if she had the misfortune of being exposed in her Smock to the
sight of all the curious? How much Scandal, Shame, and Disorder would this
Occasion! All these considerations are strong, but you will be Obeyed, and you
have termed sure and solid reasons by the name of light and timorous
Reflections.

Let what will happen, I wash my hands of all consequences; and to lay aside
this serious humor, I may tell your Ladyship, that Sister Agnes has nothing to
fear, though her ill Destiny should concern it self in the management of this
business; for the Draught I have made of her in my Writings, has represented
her in a very exact observation of all her Vows; for indeed, to begin with
Poverty; can one be in a greatter disengagement from the blessing of this
World, than to strip and deprive our selves of them, even to ones very Shift?
Can we in our words or our actions show the Beauty of Nature with more Luster,
than by proposing to ones self for Rule, Nature altogether pure? in short, if
one had a mind to make trial of her Obedience without exception, she would be
found to have as much Docility as any one of your Novices.

Thus you see Madam, you have a long Letter to a small Work, and a great door
to a little House, but no matter: I chose rather to sin against the Rules, than
to curb and constrain my self in my writing to your Ladyship. Impart to your
and my most intimate Friend, what you think fitting they should know of this
matter, and believe me to be without reserve.

MADAM, Your Ladyships most Obedient, and most Affectionate Servant, The Abbot
du Prat.

Venus in the Cloister, OR THE Nun in Her Smock.
First Dialogue.
Sister Agnes, Sister Angelica. AGnes. Ah Lord, Ah Lord! Sister Angelica, pray
come not in my Room, I am not visible at present: must you needs surprise
People thus in this condition? I thought I had made the Door fast.


Angelica. Well, well, hist, hist, why are you thus Alaram'd? a great hurt
indeed, to have found thee changing thy Smock, or doing something better;
Intimate Friends ought not in any wise to conceal themselves from one another.
Sit thee down upon thy Bed in the same posture thou wast in: I Will go shut the
Door.


Agnes. I assure you my dear Sister, that I should have dyed for shame, if any
other than you had surprised me in this pickle; but I am certain you have a
great deal of affection for me; wherefore I have no reason to fear any thing
from you whatsoever you may have seen.


Ang. Thou have reason my poor Chucky, to say what thou do; and though I
should not have for thee all the tenderness that a heart is capable of,
nevertheless thy mind ought to be at rest as to that. I have been now a Nun
these Seven years, and I came into the Cloister at Thirteen: and I may say,
that (...) not yet by my ill conduct, (...) any ones enmity; having always had
detraction in abhorrence, and doing nothing more to my hearts content, than
when I render service to any of the Society. This course of Life has procured
me the affection of the most part; much above all, has assured me of that of
our Abbess, which is of no small use to me upon occasion.


Agn. I know it, and have been often amazed, how you could so manage those who
are of a contrary Party: It is undoubtedly requisite to be as well stocked with
wit and learning, as you are to manage such like Persons. For my part, I have
never been able to Bridle my self in my affections, nor endeavor to engage
those to be my Friends, who are naturally indifferent to me; It is the
imperfection of my Genius which is an Enemy of Constraint, and will in all
things act freely.


Ang. The truth is, that it is very sweet and delightful to suffer owns self to
be led and conducted by that pure and innocent Nature, in only following the
inclinations it gives us. But Honor and Ambition which are come to disturb the
repose of Cloisters, obliged those who are engaged in them, to divide
themselves, and to do often out of prudence, what they cannot do out of
inclination.


Agn. That is to say, an infinite Number who think themselves Mistresses of
your heart, do only possess the painting of it, and that all your protestations
assure 'em often of a blessing which they do not really enjoy, I must own that
I should very much suspect my being of that number, and that I am a Victime of
your Policy.


Ang. Ah my Dear! Thou do me an injury, dissimulation has no share in such
strong friendship as ours! I am wholly thine, and though Nature had produced me
from the same blood, it could not have given me sentiments more tender than
these I feel. Allow me to Embrace thee, that our hearts may speak to one
another in the midst of our Kisses.


Agn. Ah God! how thou graspest me in thy Arms, thou little think I am naked
in my Smock! Ah! thou have set me all on a Fire.


Ang. Ah! how finely does that Vermilion wherewith thou art at present
animated, Augment the Luster of thy Beauty? Ah! How Amiable does that
Brightness render thee which now sparkles in thy eyes? No, no, my pretty Rogue,
I will impart to thee my most secret acquisitions, and give thee a perfect Idea
of the Conduct of a Prudent Nun; I do not speak of that Austerity and
Scrupulous wisdom, which is only nourished by fastings, and only coverd with
Hair Cloth; there is another Prudence less savage, which all understanding
persons make profession of following, and which has no small affinity to thy
Amorous Nature.


Agn. I of an Amorous Nature, my Phisiognomy must certainly be very deceitful,
or else you are not perfectly well acquainted with the Rules of that Science,
there is nothing which touches me less than this Passion, and for these three
years that I have been a Nun, it has not given me the least disturbance.


Ang. That I very much doubt, and am of Opinion, if thou would speak with
more sincerity, thou would own that I have said nothing but what is true. How
a Maiden of Sixteen, of so quick a Wit, and so handsome a Body as thine, should
be cold and insensible: that I cannot persuade my self, all thy most careless
actions have assured me of the contrary, And that I know not what, which I
perceived through the Keyhole of the Door before I came into the Room, makes
me know that thou art a dissembler.


Agn. Ah Lord! Ah Lord! I am undone!


Ang. Go thou silly Creature, what should thou apprehend from me? prithee
tell me, have thou reason to be afraid of a friend? I told thee this with no
other design than to make thee my confident in several such like cases of my
own: truly a fine business it is, but what the most scrupulous put in practice,
and this is called in Cloistral terms, The Amuzement of the Young, and the
Passion of the Old.


Agn. But pray what did you see then?


Ang. Thou weariest me with thy fooling: do thou not know that Love banishes
all fear, and that if we both mean to live in so perfect a correspondence as I
desire we may, thou must hide nothing from me, and I must keep nothing secret
from thee; Buss me my pretty heart; considering thy perverseness, a Discipline
would be of good use to punish thee for the small returns thou make to the
kindness one shows thee. Good God, how soft and plump art thou! Ah! thou art of
a sweet delicate shape? Let me --


Agn. Ah! For Heaven's sake let me alone! I cannot recollect my self from this
surprise: but in good earnest, what did you see?


Ang. Do thou not know thou little fool thou? what I might have seen? I saw
thee in such a Posture and Action as if thou pleas'st I will serve thee in my
self; wherein my hand shall at present do thee the Office which thy own a while
ago did so charitably render to another part of thy Body; A very great crime
indeed that I have discovered, it is but what my Lady Abbess practices, as she
her self says, in the most innocent diversions; It is but what the Prioress
does not reject; but what the mistress of the novices calls The Exstatical
Intromission? Thou could not have believed, that such Holy Souls could have
been capable of employing themselves in such profane Exercices? their mean and
their outward behavior have deceived thee, and that show of Sanctity, with
which they know so well how to deck themselves upon occasion, has made thee
think they live in their Bodies, as if they were composed of nothing but the
Spirit. Ah my dear Child, I will instruct thee with a Number of things which
thou art ignorant of, if thou would but have some confidence in me; and if
thou let me but know the disposition of mind and conscience thou art in at
present: after which thou shall be my Confessor, I will be thy Penitent; and I
protest, that I will as freely unbosom to thee my heart, as if thou thy self
feltest the purest motions of it.


Agn. After so many words, I do not think I ought to doubt of your sincerity,
wherefore I will not only tell you what you desire to know of me, but I shall
even take a sensible pleasure in communicating to you my most secret thoughts
and actions. It will be a general Confession which I knew you have no design to
prevail of, but the imparting whereof to you, shall only serve to unite us to
one another, with a more strict and indissoluble Bond.


Ang. It shall so, without doubt, My Dear, and thou will afterward find, that
there is nothing more delightful in this World, than to have a true Friend, who
can be the depositary of our Secrets, of our Thoughts, and of our very
Afflictions. Ah how Easing and Comfortable are those disclosings of ones mind,
in such like Occasions. Speak then: Prithee, My Dear, speak. I will sit down by
thee upon thy Bed: It Is not necessary that thou dress thy self, the Season
allows thee, to continue as thou art, Methinks! Thou art so much the more
lovely, and the more thou aproachest the Estate wherein Nature brought thee
into the World, the more Charms and Beauty do thou appear with. Hug me, My
Dear Agnes, before thou beginnest, and confirm by thy kisses the mutual
Protestations We have interchanged of loving one another Eternally. Ah! how
Pure and Innocent are these Kisses! Ah how full of Tenderness and Sweetness! Ah
how they tickle me with Delight! Hold a little my Pretty Heart, I am all of a
Flame, these Carresses have brought me into a Panting Condition; Ah God! How
powerful is Love; and what will become of Me, if mere Kisses Animate and
Transport Me to such a Pitch?


Agn. It is indeed a very difficult matter to contain ones Self within the
bounds of ones Duty; when We in the least slacken the Reins to that Passion;
Would you believe it Angelica? These little wantonings, which in the bottom are
nothing, have had a wonderful effect upon me? Ah, Ah, Ah, let Me breath a
little: Methinks my heart is too much pent up at present: Ah! these sighs give
me ease. I begin to have for you a new Affection, and more Strong and Tender
than before: I know not from whence this proceeds; for can mere Kisses cause so
much disorder in a Soul? The truth is, you are very dextrous in your Carresses,
and all your ways are extraordinary engaging; for you have so won upon me,
that I am more yours than I am my own; Besides I am afraid, that in the Excess
of the satisfaction which I have enjoyed; there may have been some such things
as may give me occasion to reflect upon my conscience, which I should be very
sorry for; for when I am to speak to my Confessor upon those sort of Matters,
I dye for shame, and know not where to begin. Ah Lord! How weak are We poor
silly Creatures, and how vain are our efforts, for the surmounting the least
Sallyes, and the least Attacks of a corrupted Nature.


Ang. This is what I watched for, I know thou have ever been something
scrupulous upon several Subjects, and that a certain tenderness of Conscience
has given thee no small trouble. This it is to fall into the Hands of a Cursed
and Ignorant Directour: For my part, I will tell thee that I have been taught
by a Learned Man, with what air I am to comport my self, for the living happy
all my life long; yet without doing any thing that might distaste and scandalize
the sight of a regular Society, or that was directly contrary to the Commands
of God.


Agn. Oblige me Sister Angelica, by giving me a perfect Idea of that happy
Conduct; believe that I am entirely disposed to hear you, and to suffer my self
to be persuaded by your discourses, when I am not able to destroy them by such
as are more stronger, and more prevailing. The promise I have given you of
disclosing my self wholly to you, shall by these means be but the better
observed, because that insensibly in my answers which shall partake in our
entertainment, you will observe what Method has been taken with me, and upon
what foot I am fetled, and you will judge by the sincere Confession I shall
make to you of all things, of the good or ill course I shall Steer.


Ang. Dear Child, thou will be surpised perhaps at the Lessons I am going to
give thee, and thou will be amazed to hear a Maiden between Nineteen and Twenty
years of Age, pretend to Dogmatize and Learning; and to see her Pry into the
most hidden secrets of Religious Policy. Do not my Dear, fancy that a Spirit of
Vain Glory animates my Words; no, I know I was even less knowing than thou at
thy age, and that all I have Learned, has succeeded to an extreme Ignorance.
But I must likewise own to thee, that I ought to be accused of stupidity, if
the Cares and Pains several Great Men have taken to form me, and render me
perfect, had not been followed with any fruit: and if the Understanding they
have given me of several Tongues, had not made me make some Progress by the
Reading of good Books.


Agn. My dear Angelica, begin your Instructions I beseech you: I Languish under
the impatience I am in of hearing your Reasonings: you never had a Scholar
more attentive, than I shall be to all your Discourses.


Ang. As we are not born of a sex to make Laws, we ought to obey those we have
found, and follow as known Truths, many things which of themselves do only pass
with others for Opinions. I pretend, my dear Child, to confirm thee truly in
the Sentiments thou have, that there is one Just and Merciful, who demands our
homages, and who with the same mouth he forbids us what is Evil, Commands us
the practice of what is Good. But as all do not agree what ought to be called
Good or Evil; and that an infinite number of actions for which we are made to
have a horror, are received and approved of by our Neighbors; I will tell
thee in few words, what a Reverend Father Jesuit, who has a peculiar affection
for me, told me at the time he endeavored to open and enlighten my evil mind
and understanding, and to render them capable of the present Speculations.

As all your happyness, my dear Angelica (so spoke he to me) depends on the
perfect knowledge of the Religious Estate you have Embraced, I am willing to
give you a natural account thereof, and at the same time furnish you with the
means of living, in your solitude, without any disquiet or trouble which
proceed from such engagements. Now to go on methodically in the Instructions I
am to give you, you must remark, that Religion (I understand by that word, all
the Monastical Orders) is composed of two Bodies; whereof, the one is partly
Celestial and Supernatural, and the other Terrestrial and Corruptible, which is
but an invention of Man; the one is Political, and the other Mystical by
Relation to Jesus Christ, who is the only head of the true Church. The one is
permanent, because it consists in the Word of God, which is Immutable and
Eternal; and the other is subject to an infinite number of changes, because it
depends on that of Man, which is finite and fallible. This being supposed,
those two Bodies are to be separated, and a just distinction of them is to be
made, that we may know what we are obliged to. But it is no small difficulty to
solve them well, the Political as the weakest part, has so united it self to
the other, which is the strongest, that all is almost at present confounded,
and the voice of man confused with that of God. From this disorder is it that
do arise the illusions, scruples, wracks, torments and groanings of Conscience,
which often bring a poor Soul into despair; and thence it is, that this yoke,
which ought to be light and easy to bear, is become by the imposition of men,
heavy, painful, and insupportable to many.

Amongst such thick Clouds of darkness, and so visible an alteration of all
things, we must wholly and solely apply our selves to the Body of the Tree,
without troubling our selves to embrace it is sprouts or it is branches. We must
content our selves with Obeying the Precepts of the Sovereign Legislator, and
hold for Certain, that all the Works of Supererogation, to which the Voice of
men would engage us, ought not to give us a moments disquiet. We must in
Obeying that God who Commands us, consider if his Will is written with his own
finger, if it proceeds from the mouth of His Son, or if it only departs from
that of the People. So as Sister Angelica, may without scruple, lighten her
chains, embelish her solitary way of Life, and by giving a cheerful Air to all
her Actions, become tame, grow familiar, and be acquainted with the World: she
may, continued he, dispense her self, as far as prudence will allow of, from
the Execution and performance of all that hodge podge of vows and Promises,
which she has indiscreetly made before men: and may again re-enter into the
same Rights she stood possessed of before her engagement, following only these
first Obligations.

This is, pursued he, for what regards the inward Peace; Now as for the
outward, you cannot without sinning against prudence, dispense your self from
seemingly affording a Compliance to the Laws, Customs and Manners, which you
subjected your self to, at your entrance into the Cloister. You must also seem
zealous and fervent in the most painful Excrcises, if any interest of Glory or
of Honor depends on those Occupations. You may deck your Chamber with
sackcloth and hair Shirts, and by that devout furniture merit as much as she,
who indiscreetly shall go lash and mortify her Body.


Agn. Ah! how rejoiced am I to hear thee; the extreme delight I took in thy
discourse has hindered me from giving thee any interruption, and that freedom
of Conscience which thou beginnest to aford me, by thy discourse, unloads me
almost of an infinite number of troubles wherewith I was tormented. But proceed
I beseech thee, and tell me what was the design of Policy, in the establishment
of so many Orders, whose Rules and Constitutions are so rigorous?


Ang. We may consider in the foundation of all Monasteries, two workmen who
has labored therein, namely the Founder and Policy. The Intention of the
former has often been Pure, Holy, and far from all the designs of the other.
And without having any other prospect than the Salvation of Souls, he has
proposed rules and ways of Living, which he thought necessary, or at least
useful, to his Spiritual advancement, and to that of his Neighbor. By this
means have Deserts been populated and Cloisters built; the Zeal of one Person
alone enflamed several with the like, and their Principal Occupation being to
sing continually the Praises of the true God, they draw by those Pious
exercises whole companies, who united themselves to them, and made but one
Body. I speak in this of what passed in the Fervency of the first Ages. Now as
for the rest, we must take another Bias in our Reasonings, and not imagine
that this primitive Innocence, and this fine Character of Devotion did long
preserve it self, and that it has been derived to and inherited by those we see
at present.

Policy, which can bear with nothing faulty in a State, seeing the increase of
these reclused people, their disorder and extravagancy, was obliged to Provide
against further mischief, thereupon banished several, retrenched the
Constitutions of others, which she did not think necessary for the public
Interest. It would willingly have got entirely rid of these Blood-suckers, who
in an horrible Idleness and Laziness nourished themselves with the labor of
the poor people. But this Buckler of Religion wherewith they covered
themselves, and the Spirit of the vulgar People, which they had already decoyed
and infatuated, have made her to go another way to work, that so such sorts of
Companies or Societies might not be entirely useless to the Commonwealth.

Thus Policy has looked upon all those Houses as Common places where it might
discharge it self of these following superfluities: It makes use of them for
the Ease of Families, which the great number of Children would render poor and
indigent, if they had not places to retire to: And that their retreat might be
without hopes of Return, it has invented Vows, by which it pretends to bind us
and wed us indissolvably to the state it has made us embrace: It makes us
renounce likewise the Rights which nature has given us, and separates us so
from the world, that we no longer make a part thereof. Thou conceivest all this
well enough?


Agn. Yes I do: but from whence comes it, that this cursed Policy, which of
free people renders us slaves, approves more of those rules which have nothing
but what is Austere and Rigorous, than of those that are less severe and painful?


Ang. Why this is the Reason. It considers all Religious Orders, as Friars,
Nuns, and the Rest, as members retrenched from its Body, and as parts
separated, whose life does not lean to it particularly for any thing
beneficial, but much rather damageable to the public. And as it would be an
action, that would appear inhumane, to take 'em away openly, it makes use of
Stratagems, and under pretext of Devotion, it engages those poor Victims (as it
were) to cut their own throats, and to load themselves with so many fasts,
penances and mortifications, that at length these Innocents fall under 'em, and
make way by their death for others, who are to be as miserable, if they have
not more understanding. After this manner does a Father often become the
Executioner of his own children, and without thinking of it, Sacrifices them to
Policies, when he meant to make them an Offering to God.


Agn. Ah the piteous effect of a detestable Government! Thou give me life, my
dearest Angelica, in withdrawing me by thy reasons from the High Road that I
was following. Few Persons did practice more than I did the most severe
Mortifications; I have swing'd my self off with Discipline, Blows, and Lashes,
often for to combat the innocent motions of Nature, which my Directour would
needs persuade me were horrible disorders. Ah! have I been so mistaken then? it
is undoubtedly by the means of that cruel Maxim, That the mitigated Orders are
despised. Oh God, Do you thus suffer your name to be abused by unjust
executions? and do you allow men to counterfeit you in this manner?


Ang. Ah my poor child, I perceive by these exclamations, that thou still
want some light, to see clearly and universally into all things; let us
pause there; thy mind is not at present capable of a more nice speculation.
Love God and thy Neighbor, and believe that all the Law is contained in these
two Commandments.


Agn. How, Angelica, would you leave me in an error?


Ang. No, my pretty heart, thou shall be fully instructed, and I will lend thee
a Book which will perfect thy Knowledge, and wherein thou will easily learn,
what I should not be able to explain to thee, without being out of Countenance.


Agn. That's sufficient; I must needs own I found this saying very pleasant.
That the Cloisters are the Common shoars, where Policy discharges it self of
it is superfluities; Methinks one could not speak after a more sordid and more
humbling manner?


Ang. The Truth is, it is something a bold expression; but it is not much more
offensive, than that of another, who said, That the Friars and Nuns were in the
Church, what the Rats and Mice were in the Ark of Noah.


Agn. Right, and I admire the easyness wherewith you utter your thoughts, I
find I would not for all I may have most Dear, but that the opportunity of my
doors being half open had given occasion to our discourse: yet I have
comprehended the sense of all your Words.


Ang. Well! thou will then make a good use of 'em; and that beautiful Body,
which is not culpable of any Crime, shall it still be treated, as if it were
the most infamous Criminal upon the Earth?


Agn. No, I intend to give it satisfaction for what I have already made it
suffer; I ask its pardon, and particularly for a severe Discipline, which I but
yesterday inflicted upon it by order of my Confessor.


Ang. Kiss me, my pretty Child, I am more moved with what thou tellest me, than
if I had made the trial upon my self; that punishment must be the last thou art
to mortify thy self with: But prithee did thou hurt thy self much?


Agn. Alas! my zeal was indiscreet, and I fancied the more strokes that I gave,
the more did I merit; my plump Body, and my youth rendered me sensible to the
least lashes; so as at the end of this fair exercise, my Backside was all of a
Flame; nay, for ought I know I broke the flesh, and made a wound, for that I
was wholly transported, when I outraged it so cruelly.


Ang. My pretty little Dear, priddee let me see and search it, I Will see what an
ill managed fervency is capable of?


Agn. O Lord, Why must I suffer this? what you are then in earnest? I cannot
endure it without confusion, Oh! Oh!


Ang. Hey day, to what purpose then was all my discourse, if thou art still
withheld by a silly Bashfulness? What hurt is there in granting me my request.


Agn. Indeed indeed I am to blame, and your Curiosity is not to be found fault
with; satisfy it according to thy desires.


Ang. So, so, this beautiful face that is always veiled is now uncovered; get
thee on thy knees on thy Bed, and douk down thy head a little that I may see
the violence of thy Blows. Ah good Lord how it is streaked! methinks I see Chyna
Taffetas, or else the sky at Sun-Seting; you must needs be very devout at the
Mystery of Flagellation, since you scourge your Buttocks at this rate?


Agn. Well now you have sufficiently contemplated this innocent Outrage? Ah
Lord what makes you grope there! Ah let it alone that it may recover its former
complexion, and get rid of that stranger of a color. Pooh, what! do you kiss
it?


Ang. Lie still, my pretty Rogue, be not refractory, I have the most
Compassionate soul in the World; and as it is a work of mercy to comfort the
afflicted, It Is my Opinion that I cannot afford them too many Caresses, for the
worthily acquitting my self of that Duty. Ah! this part of thy Body is
delicately well made: and what a Luster does it receive from its whiteness and
plumpness; I perceive also another part, which is no less well endowed by
Nature; It Is Nature it self.


Agn. Prithee take away thy hand from thence, if thou meanest not to cause
there an inflammation which cannot easily be exstinguished? I I must needs own
to thee my weakness, I am the most sensible Maiden that ever was, and what
would not cause in others the least Emotion, often puts me all in disorder.


Ang. What then you are not of so cold a temper, as thou would needs have
persuaded me at the beginning of the conversation? and I fancy thou will play
thy part, as well as any one I know, when I have put thee into the hands of
true honest Friars; for this reason I would wish that the time of the retreat,
I am going to enter into according to custom, might be deferred, that so we
might be together in the Parlour: But no matter, I shall comfort my self with
the account thou wilt give me of all that passes, namely, Whether the Abbot
performs better than the Jesuit, or the Friar than the Monk; and in short, if
all the whole Priesthood is able to give thee full satisfaction.


Agn. Ah I fancy I shall be very much at a loss in those sorts of
entertainments, and that they will find me a mere Novice in point of Amors.


Ang. Trouble not your head, they know what course is to be taken in such
occasions, and a quarter of an hour with them will render thee more knowing,
than all the precepts thou might receive from me could do in a week. Come,
cover your Backside for fear thou should catch cold; stay let me kiss it
once more, and again, and again.


Agn. Your are very wanton; do you think I would have born with these follies?
no, but that I knew there was no hurt in all this.


Ang. If this was offending I should sin every moment, for the Scholars and
Pensionaries, being committed to my care, obliges me to visit their back
apartments very often. But yesterday I whipped one rather for my own
satisfaction, than for any fault she had committed; I took great delight in
contemplating her, she is very pretty, and is already thirteen years of age.


Agn. I long for that employment of Mistress of the School, that I might take
the like divertisement! I have a mighty fancy to it, and I should be overjoyed,
might I see in what thou have so attentively considered in my Person.


Ang. I am not at all surprised at thy request, we are all made of the same
Past. Hold I will put my self into thy posture; well now lift up my Pettecoats
and my Smock as high as you can.


Ang. I have a great desire to take my Discipline, and so order the business,
that these two twin Sisters may have nothing to reproach me with.


Ang. Oh! Oh, Oh, Hold! What do you do; these sorts of sports do not please me,
but when they are not violent? Hold, hold, if thy Devotion should now happen to
revive, I should be undone! Oh God! ^hou have a very flexible arm; I have a
design to associate thee in my Office, but you must use a little more
Moderation.


Agn. You have great reason indeed to complain, this is not the tenth part of
the blows I have received; I Will defer the rest till another time, something must
be allowed to thy little courage. Do thou know that this part becomes so much
the more beautiful; a certain flame which animates it, Communicates to it a
Vermilion more bright and pure, than all that of Spain. Get a little nearer the
window that the light may discover all its beauties -- So, now its well, I
could never be weary with looking on it. I see all I desire, even its very
neighborhood. Why do cover that part with thy hand.


Ang. Alas, thou may look ont as well as the Rest; if there be any hurt in
this occupation, yet it is not prejudicial to any Body, and does not any wise
disturb the public tranquillity.


Agn. How can it disturb it, since we are no longer members of the public?
besides faults concealed are half pardoned.


Ang. Thou have reason on thy side; for if as many faults were practiced in the
World (to speak conformably to our Rules,) as are committed in Cloisters,
Policy would be obliged to correct their abuses, and put a stop to all their
disorders.


Agn. I also believe, that Fathers and Mothers would never suffer their
Children to come into our Houses, if they but knew the Disorders that are
committed there.


Ang. There Is no doubt of that; but as most of the transgressions here are kept
secret, and that Dissimulation domineers more in Convents, than in any other
place, all those who dwell in 'em do not perceive the faults and disorders, but
serve themselves to engage others. Besides the particular interest of Families
does often get the better over many other Considerations.


Agn. The Confessors and Directours of Cloisters have a peculiar talent to
draw into their nets poor innocent Girls, who fall into a snare when they
thought to have found a treasure.


Ang True, and I have found it so in my own person. I had no inclination
toward Religion, I disputed briskly against the reasons of those who persuaded
me to it; and I should never have taken the vows, if a Jesuit, who at that
time governed this Monastery, had not undertook the matter. A Families concern
obliged my Mother, who bare me a tender affection, who had always opposed my
being a Nun, to give her consent to it; I resisted it a long time, because I
did not foresee, that the Count de la Roche my eldest Brother, wh by right of
Nobility, and the Customs of the Country, would have for himself almost all
the Estates and Riches of the Family, and that we being six of us left, without
any other support, than what he promised us, which according to his humor must
have been but a very small matter: At length he resigned a thousand pounds, as
he told me, of those pretentions, to which were added four hundred more, so
that I brought fourteen hundred Pounds in making my profession in this Convent:
But to return to the Cunning of him that drew me in, thou may know the
business was so ordered, that I met with him one afternoon, that I went to make
a visit to one of my Couzens who was a Nun, and who longed to see me in the
habit of a Religious.


Agn. Was it not Sister Victoria?


Ang. Ay the very same. Thus being all three in the same Parlour, Victoria and
I, began with the compliments and civilities usual in the First interviews;
they were followed with a discourse of this Loyalist, touching the vanities of
the age, and the difficulty of working out our own Salvation in the World;
which did very much dispose my mind to suffer it self to be seduced: These were
nevertheless but slight preparations, he had many other subtilties to insinuate
into my Bosom, and to make me espouse the sentiments they lured me with: He
told me sometimes, that he observed in my Physiognomy the true Character of a
Religious Soul; that he had a particular gift in the distinguishing thereof;
and that I could not without doing an injury to God (so he said) consecrate to
the World so perfect a Beauty as mine.


Agn. He took the right course; but what answer did thou make to all this?


Ang. I presently fell a combating these first Reasons, by others which I
opposed against him, which he destroyed with an admirable artifice. Besides,
Victoria was aiding to the deluding me, and showed me religion in such
colors, as made it seem to have some Charms, and cunningly hid from me all
that was capable of giving me any distaste: In short, the Jesuit, who as I had
learnt had made more difficult conquests, used his utmost efforts to make sure
of mine. And was successful in his undertaking by the description he gave me of
the World and of Religions, and constrained me by the force of his Eloquence,
strictly to embrace his Party.


Ang. But prithee what said he that was capable of exercising so absolute a
power over thy mind?


Ang. I cannot tell thee all the Circumstances for he held me three hours at
the great; thou shall only know, that he proved to me by Reasons which I
thought strong, That this was my Vocation wherein alone I could attain to my
Salvation; That there was no safety for me, nor way except that, that the World
was full of, Rocks and Precipices; That the Excess of the Religious was much
better than the Moderation of the Worldly; That the repose and Contemplation of
the former, was at the same time more delightful and more meritorious, than the
action and all the Hurry of the latter; That it was in Cloisters alone, that
one could converse familiarly with God; and by consequence to render ones self
worthy of so Holy and so Excellent a Communication, we were to fly the Company
of men. That it was in these places that the remnant of the Ancient Christians
were preserved, and where might be seen the true Image of the primitive Church.


Ang. It was hardly possible to speak with more Eloquence, and at the same time
with more Cunning; for I observe that he said not to thee a word of the rigors
and Austerityes, that might startle thee and divert thee from following the
bait.


Ang. Thou art mistaken; he forgot nothing. But the Pains and Mortifications he
told me of, were seasoned with so much sweetness, that I found 'em not
distasteful to my palate. I will hide nothing from you, said he to me; these
devout Societies, whose number I hope you will shortly augment, labor day and
night by their Austerities and Penances, to subdue the Pride and Insolence of
Nature: They exercise over their Senses a violence which lasts always; without
dying their Soul is separated from their Body; and equally despising grief and
Voluptuousness, they live as if they were only made of the Spirit alone. This
is not all, pursued he, with a persuasive tone, they make a rigorous Sacrifice
of their Liberty, they strip themselves of all their goods to enrich themselves
only with hopes, and impose by solemn vows the necessity of a perpetual Virtue.


Agn. This Disciple of Loyala, was a Master Orator, I wish I knew Him.


Agn. Thou know him well enough, and I will tell thee some small
circumstances of his Life, which will make thee believe, that he knows how to
play more than one part; But I must First make an end of the rest. You see,
Mademoiselle, the Chains, Rigours, and Mortifications I offer you; but would
you believe it, said he to me, those Holy Souls whereof I spoke to you just
now, are proud of this Yoke, they Glory in this Servitude, and there is no
manner of Severe Torment to suffer, but what they esteem a great reward; they
make all their Amors and Passion consist in the Service of Jesus Christ. It is
he alone who puts 'em all into a Flame in case he does but touch them; It is he
alone who is the only Master of their Hearts, and who knows how to make their
Torments to be succeeded with incredible Joys, Delights and Transports.


Agn. Without doubt thou wast charmed with this florrid Talker.


Ang. Yes, my pretty Child, I was persuaded by this Quack; His words changed me
in a moment, they snatched me from my self, and made me eagerly court what I had
constantly avoided: I became the most scrupulous person in the World; and
because he had told me, that out of the Cloister I could not work my Salvation,
I imagined until I was got into it, that I had all the Devils about me. Since
that time he himself has endeavored to make me recover my Right Senses, he has
given me such instructions, as were capable of freeing me out of the Errors he
had plunged me in, and it is to His Morals that I owe all the Repose and Quiet
of mind that I now possess.


Agn. Prithee tell me quickly who this man is.


Ang. It Is Father Raucourt.


Agn. Ah Lord! He is an Enchanter. I was once at Confession to him, I took him
for the most Devout man in the World; the Truth is, he knows to perfection the
Art of insinuating himself into peoples affections, and persuades what he
desires. But I bear him a grudge, for having left me in the error he found me
in, and from whence he might have disingaged me.


Ang. Ah! He is too prudent to run such hazards! He saw thee under an
extraordinary Bigottry, in horrible scruples, and knew that a Maiden is not so
easily reduced from one extremity to the other. Besides if one Saint alone
should enlighten all the Blind, there would be no more Miracles for others to
do; thou understandest me? that is to say, If thou had had Faith, thou
would have been Cured, and that if that wise Directour had found in thee some
dispositions to follow his Ordinances, he would have been this Phisician.


Agn. I believe it; but I had as lieve have the Obligation thereof to thee as
to him. Tell me I beseech thee, some Circumstances of the Life of that Blessed
Man?


Ang. I will so, My Pretty Heart, but Kiss me, and Embrace me very Amourously
first: Ah! Ah! that is fine. Ah how am I charmed with the Beauty of thy Mouth
and Eyes! one of thy Kisses alone Transport me more than I am able to Exp ess!


Agn. Begin then? Ah thou art a mighty Lover of Kissing!


Ang. I am never weary of Caressing what is Lovely. Since you knew Father
Raucourt, it is not necessary that I tell thee, that he is the man of the
World, the most intriguing, the most Dextrous and the most ingenious that can
be found. I will only tell thee, that in point of Amity, he is nice to the
highest Degree, and as he sets some value upon himself, many qualities are
requisite for to please him. Amongst all his Conquests he reckoned none more
Glorious, than that he had made of a young Nun of a Convent in this City, who
is called Sister Virginia.


Agn. I have heard talk of her, as of a perfect Beauty, but I know no other
Circumstances of the Matter.


Ang. It is the Loveliest Person that can be seen, if the Picture her Gallant
has showed me of her be Faithful; as for Wit she abounds with it as much as she
can desire, she is jocund and Facetious, Plays upon several Instruments, and
Sings with Charms capable of bewitching peoples Hearts. Our Jesuit had already
acquired her entirely to himself for some Months, and they both enjoyed that
sweet Tranquillity which makes all the Happiness of Lovers; when Jealousy began
the disorder I am going to tell you of.

There was in the same Monastery a Nun, for whom the Father had showed some
kindness, and to whom he had made several Visits upon that design: He had also
received from her such Favors, as were capable of engaging a man of the least
Fidelity: But the Luster of Virginia's Beauty, was too prevailing over his
Heart; he inwardly disengaged himself from that first commerce, and only
afforded that poor Maiden, the outside and appearance of a Real Love. She
quickly perceived the change, and and saw clearly she had a Rival, who shared
with her in his offerings. She nevertheless dissembled her spite and vexation;
and seeing she had to do with a Rival who surpassed her in all things, she did
not entertain the design of attacking her, but vowed the Ruin of him who
despised her.

To bring this Enterprise of hers the more easily about, she Studied the Hours
and Moments that Virginia met with this Religious Lover; and as she had learnt
by experience, that he did not content himself with Words, nor light Favors,
she fancyed she might reasonably surprise them in certain Exercises, the
Knowledge whereof rendered her Mistress of the fate of her faithless Lover: She
was a long while before she could discover any thing strong enough: She
perceived indeed two or three times that poor Father warming his hand in
Virginia's Bosom: She saw them Interchange some Kisses with an incredible
fervency; but this passed for trifles in her mind; and as she knew that these
sorts of Actions were in Cloisters only reckoned for Pocadilloes, which Holy
Waters washes clean; she held her peace, waiting for a better Occasion to speak.


Agn. Ah I am in a terrible fright for poor Virginia!


Ang. Our Lovers not in the least suspecting the Ambushes that were laid for
them, took no measures to avoid them: They met two or three times a Week, and
wrote Letters when Prudence Obliged them to part for some time from one
another. The Fathers Letters, whose expressions are tender and passionate made
a perfect conquest over Virginia. He went to see her after eight days absence,
and observed he should obtain from her what she had always refused him before.
In the mean while her Rival was not Idle, for Corresponding with the Matron
that was the Doorkeeper, she had notice of the Jesuits arrival, and not
doubting but that after so long an interval, they would proceed to such
privacies, as she could have wished for her self, she went Transported with a
Jealousy into a Nook hard by the Parlour, where by the means of a little Chink
she had made, she might discover to the very least motions of those who
entertained one another there, and hear their most secret Conversations.


Agn. Now does my fear revive! Ah I have a spite against that Curious Creature
for disturbing so maliciously the Repose of two unhappy Lovers!


Ang. That the Depositions she designed to make of what she saw, might be the
more Authentic, and received without difficulty, she took another Nun with
her, who might give the same Evidence. Being thus, both posted in the place I
mentioned, they perceived our two Lovers entertaining one another more by their
looks and their sighs, than by Words; they grasped one another hands, and with
languishing looks spoke some tender words, which departed more from their
Hearts than from their Mouth. This Amorous Contemplation followed with opening
a little four square Casement, which was toward the midst of the grate, and
which served for pretty big Packquets to pass through of such as made presents
to the Nuns: Then it was that Virginia, received and gave a thousand Kisses,
but with such great Transports, such surprising saillies, that Love it self
could not have augmented the ardour of them; Ah my dear Virginia, began my
Passionate Priest, would you have us stop here? Alas! What small returns do you
make to those who Love you, and how well do you practice the art of tormenting
them? Alas! How, replied our Vestal, can I make you any other present after
having given you my Heart? Ah! How Tyrannical is your Love! I know what you
desire, I know too that I have had the weakness to make you hope for it, but
neither am I ignorant, that it is all my Blessing and all my Riches, and that I
cannot grant it you but by reducing my self to Extremity. Cannot we remain in
the terms we are under, pass together soft delightful moments, and enjoy
Pleasures so much the more perfect, as they are Pue and Innocent? If your
Happiness, as you say, does only depend on what I have most dear, you can be
happy but once, and I always miserable, since it is a thing that cannot be
recovered. Believe me, let us Love as a Brother Loves a Sister, and let us
allow this Love all the freedom that can be imagined, with exception to one
alone.


Agn. And what answer did the Jesuit make to all this?


Ang. During the Discourse he said not a Word, but leaning with his head on one
of his hands, he looked with Eyes full of Languishment on her who spoke to him;
after which, taking her by the hand through the grate, he told her after a
touching manner! Must we then change our Method, and no longer Love as before?
Can you consent to this Virginia, for my part I can retrench nothing of my
Love, and the Rules you have newly prescribed to me, not to be received by a
true Lover. He exaggerated to her afterward, with so much heat, the excess of
his Flames, that he absolutely disconcerted her; and drew from her an Oral
Promise, of granting him within some few days, what alone would render him
perfectly happy. He then made her come nearer to the grate, and having made her
mount upon a pretty high stool, he conjured her to allow him, at least to
satisfy his sight, since he was barred all other Liberty; she obeyed him after
some resistance, and suffered him to see and grope the parts consecrated to
Chastity, and Continency. She for her part would also needs satisfy her eyes
with the like Curiosity, and the Jesuit who was not insensible, easily found
the means for her so doing, she obtained from him what she desired with more
easiness than she granted his request. Then was the fatal moments of 'em both,
and what our Spies desired: They contemplated with an extraordinary
satisfaction, the fine parts of their Companions Body, which the Jesuit laid
to view, and felt and groped with transports of an enchanted Lover: Sometimes
they Admired one part, and sometimes another, according as the Officious Father
turned and changed the situation of his Mistress; so that when he considered
the fore part, he exposed her Breech to the light, because her Petticoats all
round were lifted and tuckt up above her middle.


Agn. Methinks I am present at this spectacle, so naturally do thou tell the
Story!


Ang. At length they terminated their wantonings, and our two Sisters retired
with a design to put a stop to these ill managed Amors, and to hinder the
effect of Virginia's promise. By a particular happiness for that Poor innocent
Creature, the Nun, whom her Rival had associated to her in the Consideration of
what had passed, had a very tender kindness for her, and endeavored to find a
bias for Ruining the Jesuit, without injuring her she loved; she gave her to
understand what she knew of her interigues, assured her of doing nothing to her
prejudice, provided she would promise her to break entirely off with that
Priest, and not have for the future the least Communication with him. Virginia
extremely ashamed at what she heard, engaged her self to all that was desired,
only earnestly begs the Jesuits Reputation may be saved, because it was
impossible to wound the one, without doing some damage to the other; she
protested she would see him no more, and that the Letter she was going to write
to him never to return again, should be the Last he should receive from her.
These conditions were accepted by both, though with trouble; they embrace
Virginia, of whom they were become Enamoured, and said at parting, that they
would supply the Fathers place, and enter into a strict friendship with her.


Agn. She came off then at a pretty cheap Rate, I fancy she owed this
indulgence to her Beauty, and to her other qualities, which rendered her
without doubt Amiable to her very Enemy?


Ang. We are not yet at the end of our History. Virginia imediatly wrote a
Letter to Father Raucourt, and therein acquainted him with all that had
happened, and with the Conditions she had bound her self to, to save both her
and his Honor; she remonstrated to him the danger he would expose himself to,
if he came to see her again; and let him also know, that it was impossible she
could receive any of his Letters, unless he made use of a particular trick, to
avoid their being surprised; she ended with protestations of a constant Love
and proof against all the most secret attacks of Jealousy, and made him hope,
that time would dissipate that storm, which threatened them. I do not say with
what surprise this Father received and read this Letter, which struck him, as
it were, with a Thunderbolt, he saw it was not convenient to make any Answer
to it, and that he must be forced to buckle to an an unhappy Accident, which
opposed his good Fortune, in the very moment he was ready to enjoy it.

Three Weeks was already passed of this Widdow-hood, when Virginia growing
weary of that solitary Life, found by a mavelous piece of cunning, the means
of hearing from her Lover, and letting him hear from her: She pretended to have
forgotten to send Father Raucourt a square Bonnet, which he had given her to
make in the time of their late Familiarities. Her Rival told her, that she
needed but to give it to her, and that she would have it delivered to her by a
Touriere. This was done accordingly, the messenger had notice after what manner
she was to speak to him; she acquitted her self punctually of her Commission,
and the Jesuit after he had received the Bonnet, he desired her to wait a
moment in the Church, that he might have time to think of what he saw. After
some small reflection, he suspected the stratagem, ripped open the Bonnet in a
certain place, and there found Virginia's Letter: Without examining it much, he
made a speedy answer to it, which he put in the same place, and closed it up
the best he could, with two or three stitches of a needle: he came again to the
Touriere, whom he desired to carry back the Bonnet, that it might be mended,
because that it was much too narrow for him; that he had tried it upon several
other of the Convent, that he might exempt the Person from the trouble she
might have in reforming it, but that there was not a Father it fitted; that for
the rest he was obliged to her for the Patience she had had to wait so long.
The good Sister made answer by her Bows to the Fathers Civilityes, and carried
back the four squared Bonnet to the Monastery, delivered it by order of her,
who sent her into the hands of Virginia, who was overjoyed to hear there the
news of him she loved, and for that her Artifice had had such good success.


Agn. It must be confessed that Love is full of Invention.


Ang. This Commerce lasted for above a Month, there was still something to be
altered and mended in this Venerable Bonnet; once in three days it was to be
carried to the College and back again to the Monastery. Yet no body imagined
that there was any Mystery in such a thing as that; no notice was taken of it;
and they might still have made use of this Postilion, had it not been for this
accident which spoiled all.


Agn. Oh Lord, I fancy the whole Plot was discovered by the Touriere.


Ang. No, thou art mistaken. It happened that on a fast day, that the Porter of
the Jesuits was out of humor, perhaps for that he had not stuffed his Gutts,
at his usual Rate: The Touriere who had an infinite number of Commissions, and
amongst others that of the Bonnet, rang twice or thrice at the College Gate,
for to discharge her self as soon as possible of her Message. This good Friar
went out of the Garden he was in, and being come almost out of Breath; thinking
it was the Bishop or Archbishop, or some other Grandee, who had rung after so
Commanding a manner, was much surprised at the sight of the poor Sister; she
had nothing else to say to him, than to deliver the four square Bonnet into the
hands of Father De Raucourt. This pettish man being vexed at so many
troublesome visits, upon so small a matter, fell into a Passion, and said; That
Bonnet walked very often, and that he would put it into the hands of a man who
should make it withdraw for a while. The Touriere excusing her self as well as
she could, away she went, and the Rector waiting for a Companion in the Porters
Lodge to go out together, having heard the Dialogue, called the Brother, and
would needs know the subject of the dispute, and why he treated so rudely the
Persons who had business with those of the College. This man, seeing himself
schooled by his Superior, told him all he thought of this Bonnet; told him that
it had already jogged and jaunted above 20. times between the College and the
Monastery: that there must without doubt be some hidden design in this matter;
and that if His Reverence was so pleased, he would search the Cap which he said
was counter-band; which he did at that same instant, and with one touch with
his Cissars he brought to light the Fifteenth Infant of the square Bonnet,
which came in a direct Line from Sister Virginia.


Agn. Oh Lord! how difficult a matter it is to save ones self, when pursued by
an ill Destiny, and that it has sworn ones ruin. What happened of all this
business?


Ang. It happened that the Father was confined into another province, and that
poor Virginia has been mortifyed with some Penances; from hence came that
Proverb, That there is a great deal of malice under a Jesuits four square
Bonnet.


Agn. Good Lord! It was for her alone that I was in fear, but tell me how this
came to the knowledge of the Prioress?


Ang. I should be too tedious in entertaining thee with one and the same thing;
In the first Conversation after my retreat, I will tell thee more upon this
Subject; I will show thee two Infants of the four squared Bonnet, and will
acquaint thee with the Fate of their Father and Mother. Think only at present,
my Dearest, that I am going to spend eight or ten days after a very doleful
manner, since I shall be barred having the least conference with thee; I am
going to write to my three honest Friends that they may Visit thee during that
time: There is an Abbot, a Friar, and a Capuchine.


Agn. What a mixture! and what would thou have me do with all those people
whom I know not?


Ang. Thou need only be Obedient, they will teach thee sufficiently what
shall be thy Duty, for the satisfying and contenting them. Here, take this Book
I lend thee, make a good use of it, it will instruct thee with many things, and
will give thy mind all the quiet thou can wish for. Kiss me my poor Child,
Kiss me for all the time I am to be absent. I should pass my retreat after a
very pleasant rate, If my Derectour was as Amiable and as Docible as thou art.
Adieu. My heart, Dress thee, and be sure that thou keep all our amorours
matters secret, and prepare thy self to give me an account of all thy
Divertisements when my Exercises are expired.


End of the First Dialogue.
Venus in the Cloister, OR THE Nun in Her Smock.
Second Dialogue.
Sister Angelica, Sister Agnes. ANgelica. Ah! God be Praised, I begin to breath
again; never was I more pestered with Devotions, Mysteries and Indulgences,
than since I left thee; I nauseate strangely all those Superstitions. How do
do? What not a Word? Why do you Laugh?


Agnes. I am quite ashamed to appear before your eyes again; I fancy you know
all, to the very least particulars, of what has been said, and done, since your
absence.


Ang. And who should tell it me? What you railly me? Come, come thy ways into
my Room, and think where you are to begin to give me a faithful Narrative. For
my part I came out of the hands of a savage Creature, who would have made a
person of any other humor than mine mad, I mean my Directour; It is the worst
natured, and most ignorant man of his Character. I fancy he has made me gain
all the Indulgences and Pardons that were ever granted by the Popes, since
Gregory the Great to Innocent the XI. If I had followed his Order, I had set my
Body in Blood by the Discipline he prescribed me; not that I let him see much
malice in the confessions I made him, but because he imagines, that to be in
the way of Paradise, one must be as dry, as lean, and as fleshless as himself;
and that it is sufficient to be something cheerful and plump to merit all
manner of Penances. Judge now, how I have spont my time, and if I had not
reason to think it tedious?


Agn. For my part I must tell thee, that thou have given me Directours, who
have tired me little less than thine have done; I know not if I have gained
Indulgences with 'em; but I am certain that to gain them, many Persons do not
do so much as we have done.


Ang. That I do not doubt of. But tell me a little News of our Abbot, and let me
know if he is capable of any great matter.


Agn. Him it was, I first saw, and in whom I found the most heat; there is
nothing more lively, and more animated, and there is pleasure in hearing him
discourse. I was at the afternoons Recreation, when word was brought me, that
he asked to speak with me. As I knew the Lady Abbess was indisposed, I sent him
word by the Porter, that he should go into the Great Parlour, and that he would
not grow impatient. I made him wait for a large quarter of an hour, because I
changed my Vail, and some other things, that I might appear the Neater before
him, and endeavor to answer the hopes he had of seeing a Person, of whom he
had heard so advantageous a Description. At the first I seemed something mute
and silent, answering very seriously to the civilities he paid me, but this did
not discourage him; on the contrary he took an occasion to tell me very boldly,
that he knew the Fair Ladies had the freedom to speak after a certain
indifferent manner, which would be unbecoming in others; but that he had reason
to hope, that presenting himself under the Favor and Recommendation of my best
Friend, his Visit could not but be grateful to me.


Agn. He passes for a Wit; and we may say that his great Travels accompanied
with much experience, have added to his natural advantages all the perfection
he had wanting.


Agn. I know not what thou had told him of me, but I found he made great
Progress for a first Visit! He turned the Conversation upon the Austerity of
Religious Houses, and endeavored to persuade me by an infinite number of
Reasons, not to follow the indiscreet Zeal of several, terming all those
ridiculous, who indifferently put in practice all sorts of Mortifications. He
made me laugh at the Natural account he gave me, of what happened to him in Italy
with a Nun of St. Bennet, of whose cunning he made use of to see her as often
as he pleased, and how at length he received such favors from her, as were to
be the effect of his Assiduities. He assured me that before that acquaintance,
he had always believed, it was only amongst the Nuns that the true Vestal
Chastity was preserved, and that he had always persuaded himself, that those
recluse Souls, lived in so perfect a Continency, as that of the Angels; but
that he had found the contrary, and that nothing perfect is meanly spoiled; and
that a thing keeps in its Corruption, the same degree it had in its Goodness;
he had observed there was nothing more dissolute than all the Reclused and
Bigots, when they find occasion to divert themselves. He showed me a certain
Instrument of Glass, which he had received from her, whom I have spoke to thee
of, and assured me, that he had learnt from her, there were above fifty of the
same in the Monastery, and that all from the Abbess to the last Professor
managed it oftener than their Beads.


Ang. That Is fine! but thou tellest me nothing of what concerns thy self.


Agn. What would thou have me tell thee? He is the most wanton man upon the
face of the earth. At the second visit he made me, I could not dispense my self
from granting him some favor; he opposed all my reasons with Morals so strong,
and so full of artifice, that he rendered all my Efforts useless and to no
purpose: He showed me three Letters from our Abbess, which assured me that let
me do what I would, I should only walk in her steps. She has spent whole nights
with him, and only terms him in her Letters the Abbot of Loves Paradise. I
represented to him, that the Grate was an insurmountable obstacle, and that he
must of necessity content himself with some slight wantonings, since it was
impossible to proceed any farther. But he gave me sufficiently to understand,
that he was much more knowing than I, and showed me two Boards, that were to be
lifted up, the one on his side and the other on mine, and which gave sufficient
passage for a Person: He told me that it was by his advice, that the Lady
Abbess had so ordered the business, that she had called it the Straight of
Gilbraltar, and that she one day told him, that he must not venture passing it
without being well provided with all things necessary, particularly if he had
any design to stop at the Pillars of Hercules. Thus after several contests on
both Sides, The Abbot passed the Straight, and arrived at the Port where he was
received, but it was not without difficulty, and only after having assured me
that his entrance should have no ill consequence; I allowed him to ancher as
long as was necessary to render him happy; it was the seventh of the Month of
August, which was a day that my Lady Abbess was used to be Employed in great
Ceremonies, but that her indisposition had obliged to defer till the next Month
following what she commonly observed in this. He told me that she had created
the second year she was Abbess an Order of Knighthood, which was composed only
of Priests, Monks, and Abbots, and Religious and Eclesiastical Persons. That
those who were admitted into it, took an Oath to keep the secret of the Order,
and called themselves the Knights of the Grate, or of St. Laurence; that the
Color which was given them at the day of their Reception, was composed of the
Ciphers of my Lady Abbess, interwoven with Flames of Love, and that below hung
a Medal of Gold, Representing the Patron of the Order, lying all naked upon a
Grate, in the midst of Flames, with these Words, Ardorem Craticula Fovet, That
is to say, The Grate Augments my Heat. He showed me the Collar he had received,
and after he had made me some presents of curious Books, we parted from one
another until a new Interview.


Ang. Thou have told me nothing now touching this Order established by my Lady
Abbess; my Lord Bishop of, is the First Knight of it, the Abbot de Beaumont the
Second, the Abbot du Prat the Third, the Prior de Pompiere the Fourth; these
are the Principals and the First in date; they are followed by Jesuits, by
Jacobins, Augustins, Carmelites, Fathers of the Oratory, and the Provincial of
the Cordeliers. So as at the last Promotion, which was made in the year last
past, the Number was Twenty-two. But it is observable, that there is a great
deal of difference between them, and that they cannot all enjoy equal
Privileges; there are of them who call themselves the Blew Ribonds, and these
are those who are the Almightyes, who have the secret of the Order, and who
dispose of my Lady Abbesses affairs as my Lady Abbess manages theirs. As for
the others their Power is limited, it has bounds which they cannot pass. And
they have little more advantage than the Aspirers, until that by their Zeal,
their Prudence and their Discretion, they have rendered themselves worthy of
being of the Great Profession. Of all the Monks, the Capuchins alone are
excluded, because the Beardwhich disguises them so much, has rendered them
Odious to our Abbess, who says, that she cannot imagine that any Person of our
Sex can bear any Good Will to those Satyrs. But to the purpose tell me some
tidings of Father Vital of Charenton.


Agn. I should never have believed no more than my Lady Abbess, that a
Capuchin, could have been capable of a Gallantry, if this man had not persuaded
me of it by his Conduct. He came to see me three days after our Abbot, we went
into the Parlour of St. Augustine, and there it was that he tickled my fancy
with so many wanton discources, that I could not have expected more from a
professed Courtier. Besides, he spoke so boldly that I was ashamed to hear come
out of the mouth of a man, words at first something Libertine, but at length the
most dissolute the greatest Debauchee could have made use of. I could not
forbear making him sensible of my astonishment, and letting him know, that
there was excess in his transports; which made him use some moderation in the
matter. He made me three visits during thy retreat, and at the last he obtained
no great Favors from me, because the Parlour where we were had not the
conveniences of the others. I will only tell thee, that he prepared me
sufficient matter to laugh at, in that having by his efforts loosned one of the
Bars of the Iron in the Grate, and thinking he had made a passage sufficiently
large, to pass through it, he ventured, notwithstanding my disswasions: But
through he could not get, for as much as having passed his head, and one of his
shoulders with a great deal of difficulty, his Cowle got hold of one of the
spikes without, so notwithstanding all his struggling he could not get rid of
that snare. I could not contemplate him in that posture, without bursting out a
laughing, I made him get back again as soon as he could, and caused him to put
the Grate so as it was before. He gave me three or four Books which he had
mentioned to me in his first Visit, and withdrew very ill satisfied with his
Adventure.


Ang. I am sorry for this disorder, for without doubt this will have
discouraged him.


Agn. Discouraged him! Good Lord! He Is no man, take my word, to be discouraged;
he is the most impudent and most dissolute of all men; I hope he will be here yet
before the Weeks at an end, he has promised me the Collection of the secret
Amors of Robertd, Abrissel; he began to tell me the story, but I cannot believe
its true, it must needs be a piece of Invention.


Ang. You Are mistaken, there is nothing more true; and several grave Authors
write, that he was used to Lie with his Nuns that he might try 'em, and observe
at the same time in his own Person, how far the strength of virtue can prevail,
which combat the temptations of the flesh; he thought this very meritorious in
him, and this it was that gave occasion to Godfrey of Vendome, to term this
Devotion pleasant and ridiculous, in a Letter he wrote to St. Bernard, and
calls this fervency a new kind of Martyrdom; This has hitherto been the
occasion of that man's not being placed in the Calender of the Saints by the
Court of Rome, he is nevertheless termed Blessed.


Agn. We must own, that there are many abuses practiced in our Religion, and I
am not now at all surprised, that so many Nations have separated themselves
from our Church, to apply themselves literally to the Scriptures. The Father
Mendicant whom I saw during thy retreat, made me Visibly remark all the faults
of the present Government, as to what concerns Religion: he is a man who for
his Age, (for he is not yet Six and Twenty Years Old) possesses all the
Sciences that can render a person accomplished of what Character soever he may
be; he speaks Universally upon all subjects, but with so easy an air that
Savours nothing of the Pedant.


Ang. I perceive thou art pleased with him, he is well made, and a lusty
handsome Sawny, for my part I always call him my swinging Towzer; in what
Parlour saw thou him?


Agn. I saw him twice, he first was in the Parlour of St. Joseph, and the last
was in that of my Lady Abbess.


Ang. Well, well, that is to say, he passed the Streigths, he well deserved it,
and there is delight in seeing him play his part.


Agn. He gave me two small vialls of Essence, which have a wonderful Odor, he
was perfumed from top to toe, and with so Animated a Vermilion, that I at first
suspected he had been at the little pot; but I found the contrary afterward,
and saw that the Red only proceeded from the fervency of his Passion. I was
infinitely pleased with his discourse, and his way of toying and wantoning, and
I made no difficulty of granting him the passage I had so much disputed with
our Abbot. I represented to him, that there was reason to fear, that the
follies we two committed would be followed with a third: I understand you,
replied he, and at the same time took a little Book out of his pocket which he
gave me, the title of it was, Soft and easy Remedies against dangerous
swelling. He told me it would teach me what I had to do in such an occasion, he
put a little Conserve into my mouth, which I found had no ill taste; I know not
if it contained any secret Virtue, but immediately he put himself into a
posture of attacking the Pillars of Hercules.


Ang. That is to say, swinging Towzer won thy Heart.


Agn. Certain it is that he shared it with the Abbot; I cannot tell thee to
whom I could give the preferrence: One thing alone displeased me in the
Mendicant, which is, that having seen about his neck a Reliquary of Guilt
Vermilion, which he wore upon his heart; I had the curiosity to open it, but I
was very much surprised to find nothing else, than a kind of a down, and hairs
of different colors, divided into Figures and Flowers in several Branches, and
very well done. He owned to me that these were the Favors of all his
Mistresses, and desired me to countenance likewise his Devotion with the like,
and that what I should bless him with a grant of should be put in the finest
place of all! Well in short I complied with his humor! I forgot to tell thee
that there was in Characters of Gold, this inscription in the midst of a
Crystal which covered all this fine Merhandizes, Relics of the Holy Beard.
Upon the outside of the Reliquary there was Engraven a Cupid, in a Throne, with
this Noddy of a Friar prostrate at his feet, with these Words which I have
remembered, though they be Latin, Ave Lex, Jus, Amor. I blamed him for this
irreverence, which I termed Impiety, but he did but laugh at it, and said he
could not refuse these Worships to those who merited all manner of adorations;
and that if I knew but how to decypher seven other letters, which were on the
other side, I should make many more Exclamations. And indeed having looked upon
it again, I saw the seven following Letters, A. C. D. E. D. L. G. But he would
not unriddle the matter to me, though I was very earnest with him, and seemed
to take pett, but he perceived that I was not heartily angry with him,
therefore he hugged me once more, and we took leave of one another.


Ang. I am overjoyed, my Pretty Creature, that all things have succeeded so
according to my wishes; this is but a Sample of what I will do for thee. And I
will procure thee the acquaintance of a Jesuit, to whom thou will undoubtedly
give the Prize, and wilt own that he has got the advantage over all the others.
But he is jealous of his acquaintance, even to Excess, it is the only fault that
thou can find in him, otherwise a handsome man, gallant, a florid talker and
ignorant of nothing that can come to the Knowledge of a Person.


Agn. That imperfection is great enough of all conscience, to hinder me from
having any Communication with him.


Ang. And why so? Thou will find it a difficult matter to meet with a man who
really Loves and is not jealous. I remember I was once acquainted with a
Benedictin, who fancied that all the Nuns of St. Bennet could not Converse with
Friars of another Order without injustice, and that they stole from him and his
Fraternity all the Favors they bestowed upon the Capuchins, and his reasons
were as follows. It is not to be doubted, but that men, who have devoted
themselves to Religion, are subject to the same Passions and Motions, with
those who are in the World. Wherefore said he, the Pounders of Orders who were
very prudent Persons, did not only raise Cloisters for those of their own Sex,
but at the same time built the like for Maidens, that without having recourse
to strangers, they might ease and comfort one another from time to time, in the
rigor of their Vows. In the beginning this was practiced, according to the
intent of the Institutors; by which means there arose not the least scandal;
but at present these Places savor too much of the General Corruption; we see
without any trouble, the Bernardin Friar, in Conjunction with the Jacobin Nun;
the Cordelier with the Benedictin Vestal; and from this horrible Confusion,
nothing can arise and proceed but Monsters.


Agn. That thought was pleasant enough.


Ang. Alas! Cried he, what would those Holy Founders say at the sight of so
many Adulterers, if they returned upon the Earth? How many Thunderbolts and
Anathemas would they hurl against their own Children! Would not St. Francis
send again the Capuchins, to the Capuchinesses, the Cordeliers to the Nuns of
the same Order: Saint Dominick, and St. Bernard and all the rest, would not
they bring again those Stragglers into the first way of their Rules and
Constitutions, that is to say, the Jacobins to the Jacobinesses, the Mendicant
to the Nuns of that Order? But what would become of the Jesuits, and the
Chartereux said I to him, for neither St. Ignatius, nor St. Bruno drew up Rules
for the Female Sex. Oh! that Spaniard, replied he, took care enough for that,
he did this on purpose that they might have occasion to forage over all with
impunity; besides following his fancy which was something Pederaste, he has put
'em into employments, wherein they find amongst the youth moments of
satisfaction, which they prefer before all the Divertisements of others.

As for the Chartreux, continued he, as Retreat is strictly ordered them, they
seek in themselves the pleasures they cannot take with others, and by a brisk
animated War, they make a shift to subdue the Highest Temptation and
Insurrection of the flesh. They renew the combat as often as the Enemy makes
any against them, they employ their resistance in all their vigor, and call
these sorts of Expeditions; The War of Five against One. Well did not the
Disciple of St Bernard speak very Learnedly?


Agn. He did indeed, I should have taken delight in hearing him.


Ang. There Is nothing more certain than if this was practiced, and that if in
the disorder it self, some rules were followed, all would go much better. It is
now a year since that a young Nun would not have been so unhappy as she has
since been, if she had done with the Provincial of her Order, what she did with
that of another. Thou have perhaps heard talk of Sister Cecil, and of Father
Raymond.


Agn. No I have not; tell me what thou know of 'em.


Ang. Sister Cecil is a Nun of the Order of St. Augustine, and Father Raymond,
was the Provincial of the Jacobins. I shall not tell thee after what manner he
insinuated himself into the Breast of that innocent Creature, who had been
inaccessible to all others before; But thou shall only know, that he acquired
her to himself, that never friendship was more strict and engageing, and they
could not rest a moment without seeing or receiving News from one another. This
Commerce was taken notice of in the Society; and the Provincial Augustine, who
Governed that Convent, having received an inckling of this matter, was ready to
die for vexation; because he had never been able to obtain those Privacies with
her, though he had used all manner of means to corrupt her. She was the
greatest Beauty in that Monastery. Being thus netled to the quick, he wrote to
the Abbess, and gave her order to have an eye upon Cecil's Behavior. It was an
easy matter for this Guardian, quickly to discover some extravagancies, for
that the Parties were not upon their Guard; but what they saw was only little
wantonings; but however these were sufficient to give ground and occasion to a
jealous man, who had the Power in his hand to misuse a Poor Nun. Nevertheless
he did not entertain such a design, but purposed to himself, though making use
of that occasion, to have from her what he had not been able to obtain before.
He wrote to her himself, that the business might not make a noise, and forid
her the Grate until his Arribval, being twenty Leagues distant.


Agn. But could any Proof be produced against her, that she had done any
notable matter?


Ang. Oh! That Is an easy business to find, though there were none, when one has
a design to destroy a Person. But all the mischief only came from that she was
ill advised. The Provincial being thus arrived, told her, that nothing brought
him thither, but the informations of her ill Conduct; that it was a shameful
thing for such a young Nun as she, to abandon her self to Actions, that could
not be named for their Infamousness; and that he was very sorry to find himself
obliged, to inflict upon her an exemplary punishment. Cecil (who was only
culpable before man of some little wantonings, as of eying and feeling) told
him that it was true, she had often seen the Father Raymond they talked of, but
that she also knew, that she had done nothing with him, that merited any
notable reprehension; that she had forbidden him to see her, as soon as she had
received Orders for so doing; and that she had thereby shown, that there was
nothing very binding in their Engagement. The Provincial to bring about his
design, changing discourse, spoke to her in more softer terms than before, and
represented to her, that if any Mortification happened to her upon this
account, she her self would be the cause of it; that she might remedy the
disorder she had occasioned; and that it was a very easy matter for her, to
parry those rigorous corrections, which she could not fail of falling under, if
she did not make use of the advantages she possessed He took her at the same
time by the hand, which he grasped after an Amourous manner, eying her with a
smile, which ought to have made her understood the disposition of her Judges
Heart.


Agn. Did she not make use of what she had most engaging to free her self out
of the danger she was in?


Ang. No, she did not; but took a quite contrary course to that she ought to
have followed; she imagined that it was to try her, that her Provincial spoke
in this manner, and that his whole scope and design was, to Judge by her
weakness, of what she had been capable to do with the other. Upon this ill
foundation, she only answered him, who burnt with Love for her, by Coldness and
words more than indifferent; which changed the heart of that Amourous Priest,
who of a tender Lover became by these means an implacable Judge. Whereupon he
proceeded according to the Forms, in the information of Cecils process; he
received the depositions which jealousy and flattery put into the mouth of
several of her Companions, and condemned this poor Child to be whipped till Blood
come, to fast ten Frydays on Bread and Water, and to be excluded from the
Parlour six Months: So as one may say, she was punished for having been too
Wise, and for not suffering her self to be corrupted by the Brutality of her
Superior.


Agn. Good God! this story moves me strangely to Compassion; and I look upon
that poor Nun, as an Innocent Victime, offered up to the rage of a Furious man,
and I make no difference between her, and the Eleven thousand Virgins.


Ang. Thou art in the right; for these are said to have been slain, because
they would not satisfye the Passion of a man, and poor Cecil was only outrag'd
out of the same Motive and Reason. As there is no Animal in the World is more
Luxurious than a Monk, so there is none more Malign and more Vindictive, when
his Flames are despised. I have read upon this Subject a Story of a cursed
Capuchin, in a Book Entitled the Goat at Rutt. But now we talk of Books,
prithee tell me what those are which thou have received during my Retreat? I
expect to have the Reading of 'em.


Agn. With all my heart; some of them are pleasant enough, this is the
Catalogue of 'em. Pregnant Chastity, a Curious Novel. The Jesuits Pastime, a
Piece of Galantry. The Prison Enlightened, or the Opening of the Little-Wicket,
all in Figures. The Journal of the Feuillantine Nuns. The Prowesses of the
Knights of St. Lawrence. Rules and Statutes of Conny-Borough-Nunnery. A
Collection of Remedies against dangerous Swelling. Composed for the Convenience
of the Religious Ladies of St. George. The Extrean Unction of the dying
Virginity. The Apostolical Orvietan Composed by Four Mendicant Friars,
Expraecepto Sanctissimi. The Monks Devotion. The Abbots Pastime. The Chartreux
War. The Fruits of the Unitive Life, etc.
I believe I am not mistaken, that I have not forgot one in this List; I have
already Read Five or Six of 'em, which have pleased me infinitely.


Ang. Certainly they have made thee a present of a whole Library. If the
Contents be answerable to the Frontispieces, I do not doubt but that they must
needs be very diverting: thou have wherewith to perfectionate thy Wit, and to
render thee so as thou ought to be, that is to say, Universal in all
Sciences; for there are those, who in the midst of a great deal of light and
understanding, do still lie under doubts, which renders 'em sometimes uneasy,
and whose consequences are often dangerous. I will tell thee a Story upon this
Subject that happened in the Abbey at Chelles.


Agn. You must needs have wonderful intrigues, to know all that passed most
secret in all the Monasteries.


Ang. Thou must know, that the Abbess of that House, being of a very hot
Constitution, was used to Bath every Summer for some weeks together. Her Bath
was set up according to the prescription of Her Physician, who for the making
it thought the better, prescribed a particular Rule and Method to observe,
without which it would be of no use. It was entirely to be prepared on the
Evening, before she was to go into it, and let the water rest all the Night
till the Morrow, and then she might at certain hours go into the Bath. Sweet
Scents and Essences were not spared, they were thrown in with profusion, and
all that could flatter the Lady's sensuality had place in his Composition.


Agn. Ah these Quacks and Physicians by a pretended Complaisance do thus
nourish and inflame Peoples weaknesses!


Ang. Be it as it will; a young Nun of the House called Sister Scholastica, of
above Eighteen years of age, seeing all these Great preparations for my Lady
Abbess, and perceiving that the Bath was ready the Evening before, entertained
the design, (as well for easing her self of the inconveniency of the Season, as
of her interior Heat which was not very small) to take hold of the Occasion,
to make trial every Night of that salutary Lavabo. And indeed she constantly
went into it for eight days together, and found that this gave a Luster to her
plump Body, and that she slept and rested the better for it. She went out of
her Chamber about Nine a Clock, and almost Naked in her Smock, went to the
place where all was ready; she quickly got off her Petticoats and her Smock,
and thus Stark Naked went she into the Tub, where she cleaned and rubbed her
self all over, and then afterward came out, as Clean, as Pure, and as
Beautiful as was Eve in the Terrestial Paradise, during the State of her
Innocence.


Agn. Was not she discovered?


Ang. Thou Wilt presently hear the whole matter. One Night that Scholastica was
Refreshing her self at the usual Rate, one of the Old Nuns, who was not yet
asleep, having heard walking in the Dormitory, at an hour that according to
Custom all Nuns were to be Retired, went out of her Chamber, and after having
sought to no purpose the Person she had heard, she entered into the place where
the Bath stood, where she perceived immediately by the Light of the Moon, a Nun
stark Naked, who was rubbing her self with a Napkin, being ready to put on her
Smock again. The silly Old Dowdy thinking it was the Abbess, retired in all
have and begged Pardon for her intrusion. Scholastica made her no answer, but
could perceive that this Old Matron was mistaken, and had taken her for
another. Away went she too, after having given the other time enough to
withdraw, without intending to come thither again for fear she should be caught.


Agn. Well, but did the thing stop here?


Ang. No, Poor Scholastica's Buttocks would have been glad it had.


Agn. How! did that Pretty Creature come to suffer for it?


Ang. The Venerable Matron I mentioned, having reflected in the Morning upon
what she had seen the Night before, thought it convenient to go to my Lady
Abbess, to make her her particular Excuses for that Encounter, which she might
attribute to an ill Curiosity; which she accordingly did, unluckily. This
Extremely Surpised the Abbess, and made her believe, that she had had only the
leavings of the filth of some infirm Nun of her Society: she spoke of it in the
Chapel next Morning, and commanded (by Virtue of Holy Obedience) her who had
put her self into the Bath, to declare it. But not one of the Company spoke a
Word; Scholastica was none of the most scrupulous, and had Wit and Sense,
wherefore she held her peace. This General silence put the Abbess into despair,
she cried, thundered, threatn^d 'em all; but all to no purpose. At length by the
Advice of a Monk, she practiced a pleasant Stratagem: She caused all her Nuns
to assemble, and represented to them, that there was one among them
Excomunicated, and in the State of Damnation, for not having revealed what she
had been Commanded to declare by Virtue of Holy Obedience; that a Holy and
Learned man had given her an infallible means to discover her, but that she
still allowed her to speak the Truth, and avoid by that means the severe
Penance, which she would draw upon her self, by her formal obstinate
Disobedience.


Agn. Good Lord! I am terribly afraid for Scholastica in this perplexity, for
all the Counsel of Monks are always pernicious.


Ang My Lady Abbess seeing that this last Constraint had been without effect,
she followed the Advice that had been given her. She caused a Table in a Room
to be covered with a Coffin-Pall, and set in the midst the Cup of the
Sacristie. This being so disposed, she commanded all her Vestals to enter after
one another into that Room, and to touch with their right hand the Foot of that
Sacred Cup, (these were the Terms she used) that was set upon the Table, that
by this means she should know, who it was that so obstinately concealed this
wicked Fact so long, because that she would no sooner have put her fingers upon
that Sacred Cup, than that the Table would fall upon the floor, and discover by
a secret Virtue from above, she who should be Culpable. This was done about
Nine a Clock at Night, and in the dark: whereupon they all entered into the
Room, and touched the Foot of the Cup with their hands. Scholastica was the only
Person who durst not do it, for fear of being discovered, and only touched the
Carpet. After which she retired with the rest into another Room, which was also
without Light, from whence the Abbess made them come to her one after the
other, when all the Ceremonies were over. Now it is observable, that she had
blacked the foot of the Cup with Oil and Soot, so as it was impossible to touch
it, without bearing away the marks of it. Thus having lighted a Candle in the
Room she was in, she viewed the hands of all those Nuns, and found they had all
touched the Cup, except Scholastica who had no black upon her fingers, like the
rest of Her Society. This made her judge, that it must be she who had committed
the fault. This poor innocent Creature, seeing her self thus trappan'd by this
Trick and Artifice, had recourse to tears and excuses, and came off for a
couple of Disciplines, which she received before all the Company. Well! this
was only that outside of Religion, which was impiously made use of, which made
her afraid; and if she had made the least reflection upon the impossibility
there was, of discovering her by so ridiculous an Artifice, she would not have
been found out.


Agn. That Is right; but the Abbess ought to have pardoned her, upon the account
of her Beauty and her Youth.


Ang. She might so, but she did not; nay, and I have heard say, that the first
Discipline, which she ordered her, lasted for above a quarter of an hour; judge
then of the condition the poor Buttocks of that pretty Creature must needs be
in.


Agn. They were undoubtedly much like mine when I showed 'em thee: If it lay in
my Power I would condemn that Cursed Counselor of the Abbess to be a
perpetual Gally Slave; and if the same business had happened to me, I would
have laid so many snares for that Monk, by the means of some friends abroad,
that I would have made him repent his Stratagem.


Ang. Do thou think, that if he had in the least suspected this punishment
would have fallen upon Scholastica, he would have had a hand in it? No; he
imagined as well as the Abbess, that it was some Old or some Infirm Creature
that had been surprised, and it is that that turned the Lady Abbesses Stomach,
for having, as she fancied, washed her self in the filthy leavings of such
Persons.


Agn. For my part I believe she was more at ease, when she knew it was
Scholastica, who had been dabbling in the Bath; for people are not disgusted
with a young neat and handsome Girl, as thou have represented her to me. The
Penance she received puts me in mind of that of Virginia, and of the Children
of the Jesuits four-square-Cap.


Ang. Stay; I Will show you two of 'em I have in my Box, one from Father Raucourt,
the other from Virginia; here read this first.


Agn. This is almost like a woman's hand, it is so scrawl'd and so carelessly
written.

Ah God! My Dear Child, now do I begin to be tired with this commerce of
Letters! It does but the more Augment my Flames, and not ease 'em in the least.
It tells me that Virginia has a kindness for me, but lets me know at the same
time, that it is impossible for me to enjoy her. Alas! what strange motions
does this mixture of sweetness and bitterness cause in such a heart as mine! I
had heard say, that Love sometimes inspires those with Wit who were unprovided
of it, but I find in my self a quite contrary effect; and I may truly say, that
it takes from me what it does present to others; several take notice of this
change, but they are ignorant of the cause of it. I yesterday Preached at the
Convent of the Nuns, of the Visitation, never was I more animated, and
inspired; I ought Conformably to my Subject have entertained the Company with
Mortification and Penance; But my whole Sermon and Discourse was made up of
affections, and tendernesses, and sailleys and transports. It is you, Virginia,
who causes all this disorder; wherefore take compassion of the confusion I am
in, and endeavor betimes to find the means of bringing me back to my right
Senses.


Ang. Well Agnes, what do thou say of this Child got in have?


Agn. I find it worthy of its Father, and capable all naked as it is of Dress
and Ornament, not only of keeping to it self a heart that it possesses, but
even of exciting there new motions.


Ang. Thou art in the right; for in some the most careless style is always the
most persuasive; and oftentimes all the Eloquence of an Orator cannot produce
those soft Transports in a Breast, as are only the effects of a less lofty
term, but more expressive. This is a Truth I can give Testimony of, since I
have tried it several times in my self. But let us see a little, if Virginia
expresses her self so well as her Lover.


Agn. Give me the Letter that I may read it.


Ang. There take it, it is rather a Note than a Letter, for its but five or six
Lines in all.


Agn. Her hand is little different from mine.

Ah! how cunning are you in your words, and you know to perfection the art of
disturbing the little Repose a poor innocent Creature who lov's you has left?
can you with reason ask me, if I think on you? Alas, my Dear, consult but with
your own self, and believe that we cannot both be animated with one and the
same Passion, without undergoing the like and equal torments.

Adieu! be mindful of the breaking of our Chains; Love renders me Capapable of
any enterprise. Ah! how much weakness does it cause in me!


Ang. In good earnest, Do thou not think-this Note more tender than the
Letter?


Agn. Yes indeed. We may say it is all Heart, and that two or three Periods
express as much the disposition of the Soul of a Lover, as would do two Pages
of a Romance. But I do not see that it is an answer to that we have read from
Father Raucourt.


Ang. No, it is not, it is to an other which was not sent me.


Agn. I pity the misfortunes of those two Lovers; especially I bear an extreme
Compassion to the troubles of Virginia, for undoubtedly she spends her time at
present in a great deal of anxiety and affliction, and leads a very wretched
tedious life.


Ang. If she had not kept the Letters and Notes that had been sent to her, she
would not have been so unhappy; for then they would not have discovered the
Design she had, of making her escape out of the Monastery.


Agn. Then it is undoubtedly that she means, when she says in Her Letter,
Think of the rupture of our Chains. I should not have hit of the right sense of
these words; Alas! poor Creature, how unhappy had she been, had she committed
that egregious mistake: Alackaday, Alackaday! What is not Love capable of
doing, when it meets with opposition.


Ang. As soon as the Rector of the Jesuits had learnt what passed, by the
Letter he found in the Bonnet, he gave notice thereof to the Abbess, who went
immediately with Her Assistance to search Virginia's Chamber, where she found
in her Box an infinite Number of Letters and other trifles, which discovered to
her the truth of what she could not have believed, if she had not seen it. As
she highly loved Virginia, she only showed in these proceedings, what she
could not well conceal, and moderated the punishment which the Constitutions do
prescribe.


Agn. The Jesuit was more happy since he came off only for Changing his
Province.


Ang. Phoogh! You're mistaken, this storm did not blow over so easily as thou
imaginest. He is at present out of Society. Thou must know that as in that
Society all is hing'd and established upon Esteem and Reputation, it is
impossible for a man of honor to remain in it, after he has lost by some
accident, those two things which so agreably flatter the Ambition of mankind.
Father Raucourt seeing himself thus fallen, by the misfortune I told thee, from
that degree of Glory, which he had acquired by his Merits, and wherein he had
always maintained himself by his Prudence, set little value upon the
Indulgence which his Superiors offered him, and thought only of abandoning
them; which he did a while ago, and retired into England.


Agn. What can a man do in a foreign Country, who has no other fortune than
knowledge, nor other Estate than Philosophy.


Ang. What can he do? Why he can render himself more useful to the
Commonwealth, than all the Artificers who compose it: He may by his writings
give vigor to Laws the most opposite to the Inclination of the people; he may
carry the Glory of a Nation into places the most remote: In short, there are
very few Employments, but which he can worthily acquit himself of, and from
which the State may draw considerable Advantages. As what I say is not void of
Reason, so neither is it without example; and I have learnt from a Dominican,
that a Malcontent of their Order was at the Court of that Kingdom, whither
Raucourt made his Retreat, and that he made a very fine Figure there, in the
quality of a Resident or Envoy of a German Prince.


Agn. Without doubt he would have conducted Virginia into that Country, if
they had brought about their designs. Alas! there would be but few reclused of
either Sex, if those who go into Cloisters had but time given them to reflect
upon the Advantages of Civil Liberty, and upon the ill Consequences of a Fatal
Engagement.


Ang Why do thou talk at this rate? Cannot we enjoy as perfect Pleasures
within the compass of our walls, as those do who are abroad? The Obstacles that
oppose them, do but serve to give 'em the better taste and relish, when that
after having cunningly and dexterously surmounted 'em, we possess what we have
desired. It would be both malign and ungrateful, to censure the Divertizements
both of Monks and Nuns; for I should ask those people, is it not true, that
Continency is a gift of God, which he gratifies whom he pleases with, and which
he only bestows upon those whom he thinks fitting to Honor! This being
supposed, he will only require an account of that Present from those to whom he
gave it.


Agn. I do well enough understand the strength of that reason, but one might
say that the Vows by which we solemnly engage our selves, do render us
responsible before him.


Ang. And do thou not perceive, that those Vows which thou make in the
hands of men, are only Songs? Can thou with reason oblige thy self to give
what thou have not? And what thou can not have, unless it pleases him to whom
thou offerest it, to grant it thee? Judge from hence of the Nature of our
engagements; and if to the rigor we are held according to God, to the effect
of our promises; since that they contain in 'em a moral impossibility, thou
have nothing to say to destroy this argument.


Agn. It Is true, I have not, and this is what ought to set our minds at rest?


Ang. For my part I may say, that nothing troubles me, I spend my time in an
Equallity of mind, which renders me insensible to the Torments which weary and
fatigue others. I see all, hear all, but few things are capable of moveing me;
and if my Repose were not troubled by some Corporal Indisposition, there is not
a Person could Live with more Tranquillity than I do.


Agn. But in a Conduct so opposite to that of other Cloisters, What do you
think of the disposition of their Souls, and those Actions which are followed
as they Preach, with so many merits, do not they tempt by the hopes they
propose? They might tell us, that Libertinism is often capable to furnish us
with Reasons for our own ruin. For what is more Holy than the Meditation of
Celestial things, wherein they employ themselves? What is more Laudible and
Praiseworthy than that great Piety which they put in practice, and the
fastings and austerities wherewith they mortify themselves, can they pass
under the Notion of Fruitless Works?


Ang. Ah! my poor Child, how weak are all these obligations. Thou must know,
that there is a great deal of difference between Licenciousness and Liberty; I
often in my actions hold my self upon the rim of the latter, but now fall into
the disorder of the former. If I do not give bounds to my joy and to my
pleasures, it is because they are innocent, and that they never wound by their
excess the things for which I ought to have a Veneration. But give me leave to
tell thee what I think of those Melancholy Fools, with whose manners thou art
charmed; do thou know that what thou call Contemplation of things Divine,
is only at the bottom a sordid Laziness incapable of all Action? That the
Motions of that Heroic Piety which thou so much extollest, do only proceed
from the disorder of a cracked Brain; and that to find out the cause that makes
them tear themselves like distracted people, you must seek it in the vapors of
a Black humor, or in the weakness of their Pericranium?


Agn. I take so much delight in hearing thy Reasons, that I proposed to thee
all on purpose as a difficulty which did not make me suffer the least doubt;
but I hear the Bell that calls us!


Ang. It is to go to the Refectory, after Dinner we will continue our
Conferences.


The End of the Second Dialogue.
Venus in the Cloister, OR THE Nun in Her Smock.
Third Dialogue.
Sister Agnes, Sister Angelica. AGnes, Ah how Grateful and Pleasant is the
Beauty of this Day! It Revives all my Spirits. Let us both retire into that
Alley, that so we may get rid of the Company of others.


Angelica, We cannot find a more convenient place in all the Garden for our
Walk, for the Trees which environ us, give us as much shade as is necessary, to
hinder our being exposed to the heat of the Sun.


Agn. True; but it is to be feared that my Lady Abbess will come to recreate
her self here, for this is the place she most commonly chooses to take the Air
in after meals.


Ang. Be not you afraid of her coming to disturb us here, she is indisposed at
present, and if thou knew but the cause of her indisposition, thou would
laugh heartily.


Agn. Why she was well enough yesterday?


Ang She was so, the Disaster only befell her this night, and thou must needs
have slept very soundly, if thou did not perceive that, by her shrikes and
bawlings out, she frighted and alarmed all the Dormitory. I intended to have
made it part of our Diversion when I came unto thee this morning; but
insensibly our Conversation deviated upon other subjects.


Agn. The truth is, I hear nothing but what is public.


Ang. You know that one of my Ladies Principal Pleasures consists in nourishing
all sorts of Animals, and that she does not content her self with enjoying an
infinite number of Birds, she has likewise rendered tame and Domestic, even
Tortoises and Fish. As she makes no secret of this folly, and that she calls
this Amusement, The charms of a Solitary Life; they all endeavor to Contribute
to her Divertizement, by making her presents sometimes of one Creature,
sometimes of another. The Abbot of St. Vallery having heard that she had
rendered, (as he had been given to understand) even Carps and Pikes, tame and
familiar; he sent her four days ago two live Mackerells, two Sea Crabs,
likewise living. After having caused the wings of those Demy-Ducks to be cut,
she put them into the Pond, resolved to make it her whole business to look
after the Craw-Fish; for which reason she caused a little Trough to be brought
into her Chamber, which she had filled with water, and where she put those
Lobsters, (so are those Animals called). It is hardly to be expressed what
pains she took for their preservation, even to the casting them Sweetmeats and
Sugarplums; in short, she would only feed 'em with the most delicate meats and
food.


Agn. Those sort of pastimes are innocent and excusable in youth.


Ang. Yesterday Evening, by ill luck, Sister Olinda, who had order to change
the water every day in the Trough for the refreshment of the Fish, forgot to do
it, which was the cause of all this disorder. You must know that the last night
having been very hot, one of these Lobsters, finding himself incommoded by the
heat it felt, went out of the Trough, and trail'd along the Chamber, until
that seeing it self without ease, it sought after the water it had left, as its
most Natural Element. But as it was much more easy for it to descend than to
mount, it was constrained to have recourse to the water of my Ladies
Chamber Pot, where without examining whether it was fresh or salt it posted it
self. Some time after our Abbess had occasion to piss, and half asleep, and
without going out of the Bed, she took her Urinal; but alas! she had like to
have been frighted to death, this Crah-Fish finding it self watered with
something too warm a shower, lanched forth toward the place from whence it
seemed to come, and seized it so hard with one of its paws, that take my word
it has left marks there for above this week.


Agn. Ha, ha, ha, This, this indeed is a pleasant Adventure!


Ang. At the very same moment she gave a skrich that awakened all her
neighbors, flung the Looking-glass upon the floor, and geting up in a terrible
fright, called people to her help. In the mean while this Animal, that had
never met with so delicate and so relishing a bit, let not go its hold. The
Mother Assistant, and Sister Cornelia, were the soonest up; Cornelia had much
ado to forbear laughing at the sight of such a scene, but checked her self
however the best she was able. But the Mother Assistant being dim-sighted, put
on her Spectacles to see what was the matter, and peering too nigh, the Crab
caught hold of her nose with the other Claw; this added to Cornelias's
Diversion, who was forced to cut off the Claws of that Sacrilegious Creature,
which till then did not abandon its prey. The Mother Assist^nt withdrew to her
own Room, very much concerned at the outrage done to her Reverend Nose; and
Sister Cornelia, who is my Lady Abbess's Confident, spent the rest of the Night
with her to comfort her in this distress. This is the cause of our Abbesses
indisposition, which will apparently hinder her from interrupting our
conferences.


Agn. Ah Lord! I should not dare to appear if such an accident had happened to
me, and that it was come to other peoples knowledge.


Ang. Truly a mighty business to be ashamed of, she let nothing be seen but
what she had often shown to others, and the Knights of the Order have placed
their hands several times where the Crab placed his paw.


Agn. But which of all her Knights is her greatest Darling.


Ang. I know not well which is, but this I know that a Jesuit visits her
often, and that he has had privacies with her, that give us to understand he is
one of the Blew-Ribbons. I perceived her one day with him in a very servent
Communication; and at another time that she went out with the same Person, I
found in the Parlour she went out of, a Napkin wet in certain places with a
certain viscous Liquor; she had let it fall near the window; I do not speak of
this Rencounter, I only observed that the loss made her somewhat uneasy.


Agn. What needed she to fear, the Bishop on whom she depends, is wholly at
her Discretion, in the visit he has made of this Monastery, he had ordered
nothing but what she had before prescribed to him.


Ang. Right, She is Mistress of all, and the Directours and Confessors are
only received and changed by her Order.


Agn. Ah! I could wish with all my heart, that our Common Confessor whom we
have at present, did but displease her, as much as he does me; what say thou
to it?


Ang. The truth, is he is very austere, and is capable of putting those to a
great deal of trouble who knew not how to behave themselves; but to such as you
and I, it ought to be indifferent to us whether it be he, or a less rigorous
Person who hears us.


Agn. For my part, I cannot confess the least tyny sin, but that he falls into
a Passion. For a thought I accused my self of, he ordered me terrible
Mortifications and Penances, and will make me fast two days for the least
motion of the Flesh that I shall confess to him. Besides, I know not what most
commonly to Entertain him with, for fear of telling him something that should
displease him. And I cannot conceive what course thou take, thou who keep
him so long?


Ang. And do thou believe me so silly as to declare to him the secret of my
heart; for from that, as I conceive him altogether rigid, I only tell him such
things as there is no hold to be laid on; he cannot conclude from all that he
hears from me, but that I am a Maiden of Prayer and Contemplation, who is not
acquainted with all the Motions of a Corrupted Nature, which makes him he dares
not question me upon that matter; the severest Penance I have received, is Five
Pater Nosters, and the Litanies.


Agn. But what do thou say to him then, for only having broke silence, or
droll'd upon a Person of the Community, (which is nothing) he will Schooll me
for a quarter of an hour


Ang. All these faults being designed in particular, with their Circumstances,
of small, become sometimes more Considerable; and this is what renders thee
subject to his Reprehension. But see the course I take by giving Ear to my last
Confession. After having most humbly begged his Blessing, with my eyes down, my
hands lifted up, and my Body bending: I began in this manner.

My Father, I am the greatest Sinner on the Earth, and the weakest of all
Creatures, I almost ever fall into the same faults.

I accuse my self of having troubled the Tranquillity of my soul, with Universal
Divagations, which have put my Breast in disorder.

Of not having had sufficient Recollection of mind, and of having spent too
much time in external Occupations.

Of having dwelt too long upon the Opperations of the understanding, spending
therein the most of my Prayers to the prejudice of my will, which remained by
that means dry and barren.

Of having at another time suffered my self to be engaged in Affection, and
exposed thereby to troublesome Distractions, and to a Lazyness of Spirit,
contrary to the methodicall perfection of the Contemplative.

Of having kept too much in me, too much of what is belonging to me, without
disengaging my heart from all Created things, by a generous Act of suppression
of self Love, Interests, Desires and Wills, and of my self.

Of having made an offering of my heart without having first of all
Tranquillized and Pacified it, and freed it from the trouble of the too unruly
Passions and disorderly affections.

Of having suffered my self to be led away by the inclinations of the Old man,
and by the proneness of an unrepaired Nature, instead of making a Divorce from
all, for the gaining all.

Of not having been careful to renew my self by a review of my self, in my
self, and of making the Reparation in me of what was decayed, etc.

Well Agnes, Thou may judge of the whole piece by this Sample. This is not
the third part of my Confession, but the rest renders me no more Criminal than
this beginning.


Agn. The truth is, that I should be very much puzzled, were I to order
Penances to Sins so ingeniously laid open; and yet this is the only way to
deceive the Curiosity of young Directours, and avoid the Reprimands of the Old.


Ang. The Latter are commonly the least tractable; for I have seen but few
Fasts, since I have been in the Society, but what have been pretty indulgent.


Agn. The truth is, that they have not all the same rigours, Witness him who
Imprinted Devotion so deep in the Soul of two of our Sisters, that they found
themselves very much incommoded Nine Months afterward.


Ang. Good Lord! It Is well they had so much Wit and Cunning, to conceal it as
they did, and to hinder this job from being blab'd abroad. It came not so much
as to the knowledge of the Bishop himself, but when there could no longer any
proof be made thereof. It puts me in mind of an Italian-Jesuite, who one day
Confessing a young French Gentleman, who had learnt the Language of the
Country, gave an Exclamation without thinking of it, which made known his
weakness. The Penitent accused himself of having spent the night with a young
Lady of of one of the Principal Families of Rome, and of having enjoyed her
according to his desire; The Good Father looking very wishfully and attentively
on the Person who spoke to him, being a handsome youth and well made, forgot
himself so far as to the Office he performed, and imagining himself to be in a
free Conversation, so transported was he, he asked the young Spark, if she was
Beautiful, what Age she was of, and how many times he had done the job with
her? The French man making his answer, that he had found her a perfect,
exquisite Beauty, that she was but Eighteen years Old, and that he had done it
three times. Ah qual gusto Signior, Cried he then pretty loud; that is to say,
Ah the delight and pleasure of the enjoyment of such a Creature!


Agn. This Sailly was not unpleasant, and very capable of Exciting the heat of
a Penitent to the repentance of such a fault.


Ang. What would thou have, they are men as well as others: and I have heard
one of my friends say, who was in those sort of Employments, that often a
Confessor would not expose himself so much by going to a Bawdy House, were it
not for what the devout whisper in his Ear.


Agn. For my part, I should find methinks that Occupation pretty Diverting,
provided I was allowed to make choice of my Penitent: I should take pleasure in
hearing 'em, and my imagination would be notably tickled by the account they
should give me of their follies. Which would not be without a great deal of
pleasure on my Part.


Ang. Alas my Child! Know thou what thou ask? if a Devout Woman affords a
little pleasure to a Confessor by the ingenious account she gives of her
weaknesses, there are a thousand who weary them by their repetitions, who tire
them out with their scruples; and when they would with more ease free
themselves out of an Abbyss than from their doubts. Sister Dosithea has for
above three years almost, solely taken up the Common Directour of the House by
her Questions. It was to no purpose for him to represent to her, that those
curious Niceties wherewith she tortured her Conscience, never thinking she had
taken care enough to examine her self, were not only useless but likewise
vicious and contrary to perfection; he could do no good with her, and was
Constrained to abandon her to her self, and leave her in her error.


Agn. Methinks however, that she is at present more reasonable; and I remember
that once we were oblidged to lie both together, while that our Dormitory was
setting up; she kept me in discourse, but in such discourse as was not only far
from any scruple, but likewise which I found at that time somewhat too free and
libertine. Besides a thousand wantonings to which she excited me, by the
Relation of an hundred Stories, the most Smutty and Lascivious imaginable.


Ang. I perceive thou know not how she was freed out of the error
Superstition had plunged her so deep in: her Confessor had no share in her
delivery; we may say that it is Devotion it self that has produced this change
and that of a Maiden extremely Scrupulous, it has made a Religious altogether
reasonable. I am content to tell all I know of this matter, from her own mouth.


Agn. I do not well conceive this, for to say that Devotion can rid a person of
her Scruples, is to say, that a blind man is capable of freeing another from a
Precipice.


Ang. Hear me but, and thou will find I have urged nothing but what is true.
Sister Dosithea as you may perceive by her eyes, is naturally of the most
tenderest amorous Complexion imaginable; this poor Creature at her entrance
into Religion, fell into the hands of an old Director superlatively ignorant,
and so much the more an Enemy of Nature, as that his Age rendered him incapable
of all the pleasures it proposes. Thus finding that the inclination of his
Penitent was carnally given, and that the failing, and weaknesses she accused
herself of every day, were a certain sign of it; He thought it was his duty to
reform that Nature which he called Corrupted, and that it was allowed him to
erect himself into a second Rapairer. To bring this design about, he cast into
her mind all the Seeds of Scruples, of doubts, of torments, and pains of
Conscience he could bethink himself of. He did it with so much the more
success, as that he found a disposition in her to 'em, and that the ingenuous
Confessions he had often heard from this innocent Creature, made him know the
extreme tenderness she had in what concerned her Salvation.

Whereupon he gave her a description of the way to Heaven in such course
colors, that they would have been capable of discouraging and disgusting from
the persuit of it, a Person less zealous, and less fervent than Sister
Dosithea. He only spoke to her of the Destruction of that Body, which opposed
it self to the enjoyment of the Spirit, and the horrible penances wherewith he
loaded her (...) said, means absolutely necessa^^ (...) which it was impossible
for (...) arrive at that Celestial Jerusa^^^ (...)

(...) not being capable to defend (...) against these arguments, suffered
(...) to be led away blindly by the (...) ^^eet Devotion, with which she was
(...) ^^ated: The plain practice of God's ^^^andments, was no longer thought
(...) to be of any great consideration (...) him, they were to be accompa^^
(...) with works of supererrogation, and (...) ^ith all this Clutter, she was
still (...) ^ontinual fear of the pains of a^^ (...) World, with which she was
so (...) ^reatned. As it is impossible here (...) destroy in us what we call
Con^^ (...), she was never in peace with (...) it was a perpetual War which
(...) prudently made upon her poor (...) and the sierce Conflicts she in^^
(...) upon it, were rarely followed with (...) ^^rt Cessation.

(...) Alas! poor Creature, I pity (...) how strangely should. I have (...)
^^ved with Compassion, had I seen (...) that error.

(...) As her amourous disposition cau^^ ^^^er, her greatest failings, She
neglected nothing of all that could extinguish her most innocent flames,
fastings, hair shifts, and all other rigorous usage were put in practice, and
the change of a more reasonable Directour than her former, brought not the
least Diminution to her folly. She was four whole years in this condition, and
would have remained so in it still, had not a fit of Devotion forced her out of
it. Amongst the Counsels she had received from her ancient Directour, she
practiced one with an unequalled regularity; which was, to have recourse to a
Picture of St. Alexis, the Mirror of Chastity, which was in her Oratory, and
to prostrate her self there,, when she saw her self pressed by temptations, or
that she felt in her those movements which she accused her self so often of.
Thus one day that she found her self more moved than usual, and that her nature
attacked her brisker than was customary, she had recourse to her Saint;
represented to him with tears in her eyes, her face upon the floor, and her
heart lifted up toward Heaven, the extreme danger she found her self in;
related to him with a wonderful candor and simplicity, to how little purpose
she had defended her self, and used all her efforts to repress the violent
transports she was seized with.

She accompanied her prayers with Penance and Discipline, which she inflicted
in the presence of this welbeloved Pilgrim. But as they tell of him that he was
not in the least touched with the Beauty of his Wife on the first Night of his
Wedding, but abandoned her on the Contrary, the beautiful Body of this innocent
Creature exposed naked before him, made no impression upon his Spirit, and the
lashes she so briskly swinged her self with did not move him in any wise to
compassion. After having clawed her self off in this manner, she recommended
her self anew to this good Roman, and withdrew as one victorious, to go pass
her time in Peace in less fatiguing exercises.


Agn. Good God! What a bussle and hurry does Superstition make in the soul when
it has once got possession of it!


Ang. Dosithea was hardly got out of her Room, than that she found her body all
of a sire, and her mind inclined to the pursuit of a pleasure which she was not
yet acquainted with. An extraordinary tickling animated all her senses, and her
imagination filling it self with a a thousand lascivious Ideas left this Poor
Religious half vanquished. In this pittious condition she returned to her
Intercessour, redoubled her prayers, and conjured him by all that Devotion can
have most sensible to grant her the gift of Continency; her servency did not
stop there, she took Instruments of penance in hand, and made use of 'em for a
quarter of an hour together, with the maddest and most indiscreet zeal
imaginable.


Agn. Well but this gave her some ease, did it not?


Ang. Alas! Far from that, she retired from her Oratory more and more
transported with Love than before. The Bell rung to Vespers much ado had she to
assist at 'em all the while. Sparks of fire flew out at her eyes, and without
knowing what she fuffered, I admired her instability, and at her being in so
continual a motion.


Agn. But from whence proceeded this?


Ang. This was occasioned by the extreme heat she felt over all her Body, and
especially in those parts where she had disciplined her self; for you must know
these sorts of exercises were so far from extinguishing the flames wherewith
she was consumed, that on the contrary they had more and more augmented them,
and had reduced that poor creature into such a condition, as that she was
hardly any longer able to bear with it. This is easy to conceive, forasmuch as
the lashes she had clawed her backside with, had excited heat in all the
Neighborhood, had brought thither the purest and most subtle spirits of the
blood, which to find an Issue conformable to their nature all of fire, did
prick so notably the parts where they were assembled, as if it were to make a
passage.


Agn. Did the conflict last long?


Ang. It began and ended in a day; for as soon as Vespers were over, Dosithea,
as if she could not directly have addressed her self to God, went to prostrate
her self again before her Oratory, Prayed, Wept, Groaned, but all to no
purpose. She found her self more pressed than ever, and to insult anew this
obstinate Nature, she took her whip in hand, and lifting up her Peticoats and
smock to her Navel, and tying them up with a girdle, she outraged her buttocks
with extraordinary violence, and that part which put her to so much pain being
all uncovered. This raging having lasted for some time, her strength failed her
for that cruel exercise, nay (...) not enough left to untie her clothes, (...)
exposed her half naked, she lean (...) her head upon the Bed, and (...)
reflection upon the Condition of (...) kind which she called Unhappy, (...)
they were born with motions (...) condemned, though it was almost in (...) ble to
bridle them. She fell into (...) of a trance, but it was an amou^^ (...) trance
caused by the fury of the pass^^^ and which made that poor young (...) enjoy
such a delight as ravished he (...) the very Heavens. In that moment (...) ture
uniting all its forces, and Virgi^^^ which tell then had been a Captive,
d^^^vered it self without any help with an^^ petuosity, in leaving there the
Keeper (...) tended upon the floor for an evid^^^ token of her Defeat.


Agn. O Lord! Oh Lord! I wish I (...) been by!


Ang. Alas! What pleasure could (...) have been to thee? Thou would (...)
seen that innocent Creature sighing (...) panting, which she knew not the cause
(...) Thou would have seen her in an ^^^tacy, her eyes half dying without
Viv^^ city or Vigor, yiedling to the Laws (...) mere Nature, and lose maugre
all her (...) that Treasure, the keeping whereof had put her to so much pain.


Agn. Well this is what I should have taken delight in, to view her thus all
naked, and to observe curiously all the transports, that Love would have caused
in her at the moment she was overcome.


Ang. As soon as Dosithea was recovered from this Rapture, her mind which was
before clouded and buried in thick darkness, found it self unvailed at the very
instant of all its obscurity: Her eyes were opened, and reflecting upon what
she had done, and upon the little virtue of her Saint, whom she had so much
invoked, she knew she had been in an error, and thus raised her self by her
own strength through a surprising Metamorphosis, above all things which she
durst not before look upon, and had nothing but a contempt for what before she
had the greatest Veneration.


Agn. That is to say, that of Scrupulous, she became Indevout, and Irreligious,
and that she made no more Offerings to all the little Saints she adored before.


Ang. Thou take things in a wrong sense; we may rid our selves of
Superstition without falling into Impiety; which was what Dosithea did; she had
learnt by experience, that it was to the Sovereign Physician, that recourse is
to be had to in one's weaknesses and failings, that temptations were not in the
power of the faithful, and that in the most submissive Soul, there often arose
involuntary thoughts and motions, which however could not occasion any fault or
imperfection. Thou see how that I told thee nothing but what is true, when I
urged that it was Devotion that freed her from her scruples.

Almost the same thing happened to an Italian Nun, Who after having prostrated
her self very often before the figure of a Child newly born, which she called
her little Jesus, and had conjured it several times to grant her the same thing
by tender words which she uttered with an extraordinary affection. Dolce
Signore Mio Gjesu, fat mi la gratia, seeing that all her prayers were without
effect, she fancied that the Infancy of him she invoked, was the cause thereof,
and that she should find better redress in addressing her self to the Image of
the eternal Father, which represented him in a more advanced age: She went
thereupon again to her little Lord, whom she upbraided with his little virtue,
protesting that she would never amuse her self with him, nor any little Child
of his sort; and left him in that manner applying to him these words of the
Proverb. Chi S'impaccia con Fanciulli, con Fanciulli si ritrova. Do but reflect
a little how far superstition does sometimes go, and to what an extremity of
folly ignorance does sometimes lead us.


Agn. The truth is that these examples are a sensible proof of what you now
say, and that the simplicity of this Nun is unparellel'd: The Italian Women
however do not pass for fools, they are said to have an infinite deal of Wit,
and that few things are capable of puzling them, and escaping their
understanding.


Ang. That is true, generally speaking, but there are ever some who are not so
sharp, and so quick witted as the others. Besides, it is not always a sign of
stupidity to have doubts and scruples, for you must know, my Dear Agnes, that
(unless it be things of Religion) there is nothing certain or sure in this
World, there is no side but may be maintained, we have commonly only false and
confused Notions of those things, which we think we know most perfectly. Truth
is yet more unknown, and all the pain^ and artifices of men, who apply
themselves to the search of it, have not yet been able to render it sensible to
us, tho they have often fancied they had found it out.


Agn. But how must we then manage our mind in so universal an Ignorance?


Ang. You must my Child, to prevent the being mistaken and abused, Consider
things from their Rise, view them in their pure naturals, and afterward judge
of them conformably to what we see thereof. You must above all avoid suffering
your Reason to be prepossessed and prejudiced, neither must ye suffer it to be
besieged by the sentiments of others, which commonly are only Opinions. And you
must be cautious, how you suffer your self to be taken by the eyes, and by the
ears, that is to say, by a thousand exterior things, which are often made use
of for the seducing our senses, but still preserve our mind free and
disengaged, from the silly movings, and childish Maxims, with which the Vulgar
is infatuated, who like Brute animals run after all that is (...) 'em, provided
it be gilded with some fine appearance.


Agn. I understand all this well enough, and I fancy too that thy Argument
might be pushed on much farther, and comprehend therein many things which thou
exemptest from it. I must own there is a great deal of pleasure in hearing thy
discourse, and though thou were it not so young, and so lovely as thou really
art, thy Wit alone would render thee amiable. Priddee buss me once.


Ang. With all my heart, My Dear Creature, I am overjoyed with pleasing thee in
any thing, and with having found in thee so much disposition to receive the
instructions which thou want. When our minds are cleared of those clouds of
Darkness, and freed from all manner of disquiet, there is not a moment in our
whole lives, but that affords us some pleasures, and which may procure to us
recreation from the very torments and scruples of others. But let us lay aside
all this morality, wherein I have insensibly engaged my self. Kiss me my little
Mignion, I love thee more than my own life.


Agn. Well, are you satisfied? thou little think that People my see us here.


Ang. And what reason have we to fear? Let us go into that Arbor and there no
body can see us. But I am not yet satisfied, thy kisses have nothing that is
common, give me one after the Florentine way?


Agn. I believe thou art mad? Does the World kiss after the same manner? What
do thou mean by kissing after the Florentime way?


Ang. Come and I Will teach it thee.


Agn. Oh! Lord thou sets me all of a Fire! Ah what a Lascivious way have thou
with thee! Prithee stand off; Ah how thou huggest me, thou devourest me!


Ang. I must pay and reward my self for the Lessons that I give thee. Now this
is the way that persons use in kissing, who really Love one another, by
Amourously Lanching the tongue between the Lips of the Object one Adores; for
my part I find nothing more sweet, and more delicious, when we acquit our
selves of it in due manner, and I never practice it without being Ravished into
an Ecstasy, and without feeling through all my Body an extraordinary Titilation,
and a certain I know not what, that I cannot express to thee, than by telling
thee, that it is a secret Pleasure which spreads it self Universally into all
the most secret parts of my self, which penetrates into the very bottom of my
Heart, and which I have right to term, An Abridgment of Sovereign
Voluptuousness. But what not a word; what sense does it raise in thee?


Agn. Did I not tell it thee sufficiently, when I let thee know that thou
put me all in a flame; but whence comes it that thou call these sort of
kisses a kiss after the Florentine mode?


Ang. The reason is, that amongst all the Italians, the Ladies of Florence pass
for the most Amourous, and do generally Practice this kiss after the manner
thou have received it from me. They take a singular delight therein, and say
they do it in imitation of the Dove, which is an innocent Bird; and that they
find therein I know not what that is Lascivious and Poignant, which they do not
find and taste in others. I am amazed that the Abbot and the Mendicant did not
teach thee this during my retreat? for they have traveled Italy, and in all
probability they have rendered themselves knowing in all the most secret
practices of Love, which are peculiar to those of the Country.


Agn. Truly my mind was employed in something else, than these simple trifles
when they came to see me, for me to remember 'em at present. I know very well,
that there is no sort of Caresses and Follies, but what their Amorous fury
bethought it self of; but indeed the Pleasure I took therein was so Great, and
the Ravishment those Transports caused in me so Excessive, that I had not
sufficient freedom of Judgment left to reflect thereon.


Ang. The Truth is, that the sweet moments, wherein we enjoy that
voluptuousness, do so possess us, that we are not capable of withdrawing our
selves by any application of our memory, nor to make an Agenda at that instant
of all that passes within our selves. Yet I do not doubt but the Abbot and the
Mendicant have extended their Galantry so far; for besides thy having a Divine
mouth, they are perfectly informed of all the softest and most Engageing arts
and ways of those who know Passionately how to Love.


Agn. Alas! They know but too much of those matters, for persons consecrated to
the Altars and devoted to Continency.


Ang. This is pleasant in you indeed, and those who know thee not would think
that thou speak seriously. But shall I tell thee my thought? I fancy that
they cannot know too much, but that they might practice less? For certain it
is; that having the direction of Souls, they ought to have a perfect knowledge
of Good as well as Evil, for the making a just distinction, and for exhorting
with the more Vehemence, to the Love and pursuit of the one, and Preaching to
us with the like zeal the avoiding and the aversion of the other. But they do
nothing less than this, and the ill Books they draw their lights from, Corrupt
their Wills as well as Enlighten their Understandings?


Agn. I fancy thou mistakest and abusest the terms, and that thou do not call
to mind, that amongst the Learned there is no Books that of its nature bears
the Title of forbidden, and that the use alone we make thereof, gives it the
quality of good, bad, or indiffe, rent.


Agn. Good God! Thy talking at this rate, makes me think thou ravest, and thou
must agree with me, there are certain Books all whose parts are bad, and whose
instructions are essentially opposite to good Morality and the practice of
Virtue. What can thou say of the School of Venus, and of that Infamous
Philosophy, that has nothing but what is flat and insipid, and all whose poor
and silly Reasonings can only persuade low and vulgar Spirits, or only touch
those who are least corrupted, or who of themselves suffer themselves to be led
away to all manner of weaknesses.


Agn. I own that that Book may be placed in the ranks of things useless, nay of
those that are forbidden; I wish I could recover again the time that I employed
in reading it, and there was nothing in it that pleased me, nor but what I
condemned. The Abbot who showed it me, gave me another which is almost upon the
same matter, but which treats it and manages it with much more Wit and
Ingenuity.


Ang. I know what Book thou meanest; it is as bad (as to manners) as the former,
and though the purity of its Style, and its easy Eloquence have something
agreeable, this does not hinder it from being infinitely dangerous, since the
Flame and the briskness which sparkle there in many places, do only serve to
make people swallow with the better gust the venom wherewith it is filled, and
insinuate it insensibly into the hearts of those that are the least
susceptible; its Title is, The Academy of Ladies: Or the Seven Satirical
Dialogues of Aloisia. I have had it for above this Week in my hands, and he
from whom I received it, explained to me the most difficult passages, and gave
me a perfect understanding of all it has mysterious. Especially he interpreted
to me these words, which are in the Seventh Dialogue, Amori, vera Lux, and
discovered to me the anagramatical sense which they concealed, under the simple
appearance of the inscription of a Medal. I fancy it was of this Book, that
thou had a design to speak?


Agn. Right, it was so. Lord, Lord, how ingenious it is in inventing new
Pleasures for a satiated and disgusted mind! With what Points and with what
Spurs does it revive that Lust that is the most lulled asleep, the most
languishing, nay and that which is no longer able! What extravagant A^^^ tites!
What strange Objects! VV^^ unknown Meats does it Offer! B^^ perceive I am not
yet so knowing (...) it as thou art.


Ang. Alas! my poor Child, the kn^^ledg thou aspirest to, cannot but (...)
prejudicial to thee? The Pleasures (...) propose to our selves, ought to be
bo^^ded by the Laws, by Nature, and by P^^dence, and all the Maxims which t^^t
Book is capable of instructing thee w^^^ almost equally deviate from those
th^^e things. Take my word, all Extremities (...) dangerous; and there is a
certain M^^^ way, which we cannot vary from without falling into the Precipice.
I^^ us Love, that is not prohibited; Seek ^^ter Pleasure, as long as it is
Lawful; b^^ let us shun and avoid, what can only i^spire Debauchery, and let us
not suff^^ our selves to be persuaded by an El^^quence which only flatters us
to our Ru^ine, and which only expresses it self well to hurry us the more
easily to mischief.


Agn. Goodly, Goodly, With your fine Morals forsooth! I find you know how to
Gild the Pill when you please! Not but that I yield to your Reasons, and blame
all those things which thou condemnest, but I cannot forbear laughing to see
thee Preach Reformation with so much heat, and that I hear thee speaking to the
dumb, and to the blind: such as are our Sisters, who will receive no rules, but
such as they propose to themselves.


Ang. You are in the right; and I own it is time ill bestowed, to labor the
suppressing of Vice, and the excelling of Virtue, in the Corruption of the Age
we live in; the Disease is too great, end the Contagion too Universal to be
remedyed by plain Words, and to be cured by a Potion and Preparation that can
only act upon the mind. This is not my design, in the least, but I was only
very willing to let thee know, that I do not approve of the Libertinisme of
those Persons, who never enjoy perfect Pleasures, unless they go seek them in
the lessons of a Corrupted imagination, beyond the most inviolable bounds of
Nature, and even into the most dissolute Licentiousness of passed Fables.

I am no enemy to Sports, and Delights, nor am I wedded to that troublesome
Virtue which our Age is not capable of. I know the most Noble soul cannot be
Mistress of its passions, nor purged from other humane infirmities as long as
it is wedded to our Body.


Agn. Ah I am pleased with this return! and this reasonable indulgence may be
perhaps allowed of. For what hurt can there be found in pleasure when it is
well regulated? Something of necessity must be allowed to the temperament of
the Body, and comply with the weakness of our minds, since we receive them so
as Nature gave us them, and that it lies not in our Power to pick call and
choose 'em. We are not responsible for the freaks, fancies, propensities and
inclyations which it give us; if they are faults, it is it that is culpable and
ought to be blamed. And men cannot be upbraided with the vices that are born
with them, or which only proceed from their Birth.


Ang. Thou speak reason, thou Darling of my Heart, and I cannot express to
thee the joy I feel, when that thy Words make me see the Progress that thou
have made by my instructions. But let us no longer puzzle and weary our Brains,
after the search and ripping up of other Peoples Crimes, let us bear with what
we cannot reform, let us not touch nor glance upon Evils, that would
undoubtedly discover the insufficiency of our remedies. Let us live for our
selves, (...) without making our selves sick with (...) infirmities, let us
Establish in our (...) that Spiritual Peace and Tran^^^^^y, which is the
Principle of the joy (...) Beginning of the happyness which (...) reasonably
desire.


Agn. For my part I am already in (...) peaceable enjoyment of the repose,
(...) the quiet of Spirit, to which I (...) say I could only attain to by thy
(...). These are Obligations which (...) never sufficiently acknowledge; (...)
new my Gratitude to that degree (...) lay in my power, since for all (...) thou
have taken to free me out (...) Error I was in, thou must content (...) with
the Affection I have sworn (...), and it must serve thee instead of (...)
reward.


Ang. Alas! My dear Child, what (...) thou offer me more to my Satisfaction? I
prefer thy Caresses before all th^^ Treasures in the World; one sole K^^^^
thine Charms me, and puts me in^^ ^^^pture. But see, yonder is someB^^^^
coming, let us part to hinder al^^ ^^icion they might have of our (...) and
discourse. Buss me, my (...) Dove.


Agn. I will so, and it shall be a sucking Kiss, I mean after the mode of
Florence.


Ang. Ah thou Ravishest me with Delight! I am in a Transport! Ah it is too much
for me to bear! Thou causest in me a Thousand Pleasures.


Agn. Well, this is sufficient for the present. Farewell Angelica, it is Sister
Cornelia, she is a coming.


Ang. I see her, it is without doubt to bring me some message from my Lady
Abbess. Adieu Agnes, Adieu my Heart, my Souls-Delight, my Love.


THE END.

