A LETTER, From a Gentleman in Colchester, to his friend in London.
SIR
I Am happy in this occasion, to tell you how greatly I affect you, and what
high content and satisfaction it would bring to me to hear of your welfare,
and other my loving friends. Be assured our condition here is very good: Our
Storehouses and Magazines are full, Our Soldiers at as good command as the
Centurians in the Gospel. One said; should he paint War like a Beast, he
would begin with his Belly: Money may be the Nerves and Sinnues of War; But
Meat and Drink is the Soul of it. This place is the Grannary of the County,
and Fish-market of these Eastern-parts, We have infinite quantities of Corn,
Salt, etc. and had they not got the Blockhouse at the mouth of the River, We
had lived in too much luxury, yet have we no Dearth of Oysters and other
Fish. The Lord Fairfax has made a Battery on the Conny-Warren, half a mile
from us, but our Cannoneers shoot so exactly well they have little rest in
their new works; We hear they dwindle away daily by reason of fresh
Insurrections in other places, and that some Bumpkins are come to them from
Suffolk, but all that are Arethmeticians know that a great many such Ciphers
stand for nothing. Mounsieur Thomas is Lieutenant to his Cozens Troops and
salutes you all. Commend me kindly to all friends. I pray you do it
particularly. I would feign see a perfect relation of the fight wherein Lambert
was slain. I pray for you all daily. We hear you had a Common Hall in London
on Saturday, We expect glorious events thereby: I wish you could at last
become a Loyal Subject, and leave that Idol the present Parliament which you
so much adore, I pray for your conversions; and rest.

Your faithful servant I. B.
Colchester 26. June 1648.

