The Petition of Mr. Praise-God Barebone, and several others, to the PARLIAMENT.
Presented on Thursday the 9th of February, 1659.
THE House being informed that diverse Petitioners were at the Door, they were
called in, and Mr. Praise-God Barebone in the name of the rest, being come to
the Bar, addressing himself to Mr. Speaker, said, we are come to wait upon this
Honorable House with a Petition from such as are lovers of the Good Old Cause;
the Petitioners are such as have adhered to this Parliament, and such as are
lovers of Justice, Righteousness, Freedom, and lovers of a Commonwealth,
accounting it the best Government: There are many Subscriptions, I may say
thousands, and in their names I do humbly present it to you: And thereupon
presented the Petition, who being withdrawn, the Petition was read, and is as
follows;

To the PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth of England.
The Representation and Address of the Well-affected Persons, Inhabitants of
the Cities of London and Westminster, and places adjacent, being faithful and
constant Adherers to this Parliament, who are resolved (by the assistance of
Almighty God) to stand by, assert, and maintain their Authority, against all
opposers, notwithstanding the present confidence and bold attempts of the
Promoters of Regal Interest, by the declared Enemies of their Cause and
Authority.

WHereas the good Old Cause was for Civil and Christian Liberty, against
Oppression and Persecution; The Oppressors and Persecutors, were chiefly the
King, his Lords and Clergy, and their Adherents, who to effect their designs,
raised War against the Parliament.

Whereupon the Parliament in defense of Civil and Christian Liberty, call the
oppressed and persecuted to their aid, by whose assistance the Oppressors and
Persecutors have been subdued, Kingship and Peerage abolished, and persecution
checked; by which the number of conscientious Friends to the Parliament, have
been so exceedingly increased, that they are now (by Gods assistance) in a far
more able capacity of keeping down their enemies, than they were in those times
when they subdued them.

Nevertheless, so watchful has the restless enemy been to make advantage, that
what (time after time) he has lost in the Field, he has endeavored to
regain, even in the Parliaments Council; where because he had not the Face
openly to bring in the King, with the former oppressions and persecutions, they
shrouded and veiled themselves, one while under a Personal Treaty, another
while, under a Cloak of Zeal, against Blasphemy and Heresy, their endeavors
being to bring in the King upon any terms; to cherish the persecuting party,
and to brow-beat their most conscientious Opposers.

Upon which pretenses, nevertheless they have, through tract of time, and the
unsettledness of Government, prevailed so far, as under the notion of a
moderate Party, to get the subtillest of their Friends into many places of
Trust and Command, both Civil and Military, through whose countenance and
encouragement, albeit the Parliament upon good Grounds, Voted the Government by
King and Lords useless, burdensome and dangerous; and declare very largely for
Liberty of Conscience, yet of late a general boldness has been taken, to plead
a necessary of returning to the Government of King and Lords, a taking in of
the Kings Son, or which is all one, for a return of the justly secluded
Members, or a Free Parliament, without due Qualifications, whereby the Good Old
Cause of Liberty, and Freedom (so long contended for against Regal Interest*
with the expense of much Blood and Treasure) and the assertors thereof, will be
prostituted to satisfy the lusts of the Enemies of the Commonwealth, where in
they have prevailed so far, that unless all conscientious persons in
Parliament, Army, Navy and Commonwealth, do speedily unite, and watchfully
look about them, as the Sword will certainly (though secretly and silently) be
stolen out of their hands; so also will they find all Civil Authority fall
suddenly into the hands of their enraged enemies, and a return of all those
violences, oppressions and persecutions which have cost so much Blood and
Treasure to extirpate.

The Serious apprehensions whereof, has stirred up your cordial friends to
desire you to use all possible endeavors to prevent the Commonwealths
adversaries in this their most dangerous Stratagem; And as the most effectual
means thereunto; We pray,

I. That you will admit no person or persons to Sit, These Petitioners declare
themselves disaffected to conscientious men in Civil and Military employment,
and also to godly Ministers, as his Excellency the L. Genesis Monck does take
notice in the 9 and 10 pages of his Letter, dated from Whitehall Febr. 11. 1659.
or Vote in this, or any future Parliament, or Council of State, or to be in
any Office or Judicatory, or any Public Trust in the Commonwealth, or Command
in the Army, Navy, or Garrisons, or to be a public Preacher to the people at
Sea or Land, or any Instructor of youth, except such only as shall ABJURE, or
by Solemn Engagement renounce the pretended Title, or Titles of Charles
Stewart, and the whole Line of the late King James; and of every other person,
as a single person, pretending, or which shall pretend to the Crown or
Government of these Nations of England, Scotland and Ireland, or any of them,
and the Dominions and Territories belonging to them, or any of them, or any
other single person, Kingship, Peerage, or any power coordinate with the
peoples Representatives in Parliament; And all coercive power in matter of
Religion, according to a Vote of a Grand Committee of this Parliament, of the
11 of Sept. 1659.

II. We further pray, That it may be Enacted, That whosoever shall move, offer,
or propound in Parliament, Council, or any other Court, or public meeting, any
matter or thing, in order to the introducing of Charles Stewart, or any of that
Family as aforesaid, or any other single Person, House of Lords, Coercive power
in matters of Religion, or any power coordinate with the peoples
Representatives in Parliament, may be deemed and adjudged guilty of High
Treason, and may suffer the pains and penalties thereof. And that whosever
shall in Parliament, Council, or any other public Court, or meeting, move for,
or propose the revocation of this Law (when by you Enacted) may be deemed and
judged guilty of High Treason, and suffer the pains and penalties thereof.

In the prosecution whereof, we shall stand by You, with our Estates and Lives,
to assert and maintain your Authority, against all oppositions whatsoever:
Notwithstanding the present Confidence, and bold Attempts of Yours and our
Enemies.

Signed by, etc.
Resolved, That the Petitioners have the thanks of the House for the expression
of their good affections to the Parliament.

The Petitioners being again called in, Mr. Speaker gave them this answer.

Gentlemen, The House have read your Petition, and they do find that you have
been such as have constantly born them good affections, and that your
affections are the same still, and for the expressions of your good affections,
the House has commanded me to give you Thanks, and in their Names I do give
you Thanks accordingly.




