THE CASE OF The Lord JEFFREYS, and the Lady CHARLOTTE, his Wife, sole Daughter
and Heir of Philip, Earl of Pembroke deceased, In Relation to a BILL Entitled,
An ACT to set aside several Amendments and Alterations made in the Records and
Writs of a Fine and Two Recoveries in the Grand Sessions, held for the County
of Glamorgan.
PHILIP late Earl of Pembroke, being seized in Tail Male, 17 Dec. 1647.
with remainder over to the present Earl, of several Manors and Lands in the
County of Glamorgan, in consideration of a Marriage to be had between him and
Henriette Querovalle, and of 10000 l. Portion, did by Articles of that Date,
Covenant with Robert Earl of Sunderland, and Sidney Lord Godolphin, to settle
on her 1300 l. per Annum, during her Life, out of those Manors, in lieu of a
Jointure; and entered into a Statute of 20000 l. Penalty to make good those
Articles.

The Marriage took effect, and the Portion was paid; and the late Earl, to
enable himself to make such Settlement, employs Mr. Rider and Mr. Negus, his
own Servants, to get a Fine and Recovery, levied and suffered at the Grand
Sessions held in Glamorgan-shire in April 1675. And accordingly Commissions of
Dedimus Potestatem were taken out, and directed to Mr, Herbert Salladine, Mr.
Francis Negus, and others, as Commissioners to take the Earls acknowledgment of
the Fine, and Warrant of Attorney for the Recovery; which were by Salladine and
Negus duly executed and returned.

That Mr. Rider coming to the Grand Sessions was informed, that there were
several Freehold Leases on several parts of the Estate, and that the Recovery
would not bar the Entail of those Lands, unless such Freehold Leases were first
surrendered; and therefore Mr. Rider agrees with the Compounder for the King's
Silver, to pass the Fine and Recovery at that time for 140 l. Composition
Money; which was also to be a Satisfaction for a Second Fine and Recovery, if
any were esteemed necessary, for the Tenements contained in such Freehold
Leases: And in April 1675. a Fine and Recovery of the Estate passed, and a
Chirograph of the Fine, and an Exemplification of the Recovery were brought to
Sir John King, in order to have the Settlement drawn by him; and by his
Direction and Advice the Freehold Leases were surrendered, and a Fine and a 2
d.Recovery duly suffered of those Lands, at the Grand Sessions held in August
after. And thereupon a Chirograph of that Fine, and an Exemplification of that
Recovery were brought also and delivered to the said Sir John King.

That thereupon the Earl by Indenture, dat. 10. Sep. 1675, Reciting both Fines
and Recoveries to be duly levied and suffered, declared the Uses thereof to
himself and his Heirs. And in pursuance of the said Articles, and subsequent
Agreement secured to his Countess a Jointure of 1500 l. per annum, out of the
said Manors and Lands, of which the said Fines and Recoveries had passed.

And upon the Execution of the said Fines and Recoveries, and the said
Conveyances, the Trustees of the Countess delivered up the Stat. of 20000 l. to
the Earl to be cancelled.

That in Aug. 1685. Earl Philip dyed without Issue Male, leaving only one
Daughter, viz. the Lady Charlotte now Wife of the Lord Jeffreys; to whom all
the said Manors and Premises, of which the said Fine and Recovery were
suffered, descended; and by whom after the Earl's death, the Premises were
enjoyed, subject to the said Jointure of the Countess of Pembroke.

That the Records and Writs relating to the Fines and Recoveries are so
carelessly kept in the County of Glamorgan; that many of them are Torn, Defaced,
Rotten, Lost, or otherwise embezzelled, by the neglect and default of the
Officers in the Courts there.

In Hill. Ter. 1687. Tho. Earl of Pembroke, now Lord Privy Seal; hoping to take
advantage of the Misprision of the Clerks in Entering the said Fines and
Recoveries, or of their negligence in keeping them, brought three several Writs
of Error to reverse the first Fine and both Recoveries, which were returned
accordingly.

That upon this occasion the Countess being advised; that the mistakes in the
said Fines and Recoveries were amendable, and that upon a Writ of Error brought
the Court usually Ordered Amendments to be made, did, by the advice of her
Council, move the Justices of the Grand Sessions of Wales; That the mistakes in
the said Fines and Recoveries might be amended, and the several Writs and parts
of Records, that were rotten, eaten by Vermin or desac'd, might, as usually in
like Cases, be supplied upon the Testimony of Living Witnesses, who were
concerned in the said Fine and Recoveries.

That upon this motion, the usual Rule was made for amending and supplying the
said Writs, unless the Earls Council should at a time appointed show cause to
the contrary.

That upon hearing of Council on both sides, and upon fight of many Precedents
of the like Amendments in Westminster Hall, and upon the Opinion of many
Eminent Council, and the Oaths of several Living Witnesses, That Commissions
had issued, and were returned for the Earls acknowledging the Fine and
Recoveries, and that the usual Writs and Proceedings had been made in
prosecuting and perfecting them, and that the Records were kept in a confused
manner, and in such places, that they were Rotten, Defaced, or Lost: And that
whatever Writ, or part of Records was wanting, was rotten or eaten by Vermin;
such of the Defects, as were usually amendable, were by Rule of Court amended,
or supplied.

Since which Proceedings the amended Records are removed into the King's Bench
by Certiorari, and by the Rules of Law the Errors cannot be further proceeded
in until the Lady Charlotte comes of Age.

The Present Earl has now brought a Bill in Parliament, to set aside all these
Amendments by the Legislative Power, and to disenherit the Heir at Law.

Now forasmuch as these Mistakes occasioned by the Misprision or Negligence of
the Clerk in making or keeping Records have usually been amended and supplied.

And forasmuch as many good Laws have been made for the Encouragement of
Amendments in the Reigns of several of their Majesty's Predecessors, which do
yet stand in force.

And forasmuch as a Common Recovery is favored in Law, more than any Judgment
or Proceedings in any other Real Action: As being a Common Assurance made by
the mutual Consent of Parties, and upon which most of the Settlements in
England, and the Titles of Purchasers do depend, and therefore has been, and
is usually amended and supported.

And forasmuch as this Precedent will be of fatal Consequence to most of the
Estates in England, and more especially in Wales, if the Neglect, or
Misprision, or indirect Acts of the Clerks shall set aside all Titles and
Settlements, contrary to the plain Words of the Deeds, and the Testimony of
many Witnesses yet alive, and the known Consent and Meaning of the Parties,
without any Relief, or Amendment of those Mistakes: And the rather since it
cannot be denied, that the Records in that County are kept in such Place and
Manner, that there are no whole and entire Proceedings in any Fine or Recovery,
suffered and levied in the County of Twenty Years standing.

It is therefore humbly Prayed, That this Bill may not pass into an Act.


