The Portraiture of the Renowned Cleoreton and the virtuous Cloriana.


The Famous and Delectable HISTORY OF Cleocreton and Cloryana;

Wherein is set forth The Noble and Heroic Actions of CLEOCRETON Prince of
Hungary, His Wonderful and Warlike Achievements in sundry Kingdoms.

Herein is also declared, His constant love to the most beautiful Princess
CLORYANA, the only Daughter of the Emperor of PERSIA.

London, Printed by J. B. for Charles Tyus, at the three Bibles on London Bridge.

TO HER Discerning and most Knowing Brother, Mr. E. C.
I Do not question but you will accept of my Cloriana, though she be not set
out in her full Luster and Language fiting her Virtues and your Entertainment;
yet the only thing I build on is, that these my poor endeavors are chiefly
laid out for to pleasure you, and such as you shall think fit to present it as
worthy by your commendation: Who though they may very well account your
commendations partial, yet it is all my ambition at this time, to dedicate
this, the Employment of my idle hours, to your kind acceptance: which being
granted, it will very much oblige,

Your Sister and Servant, S. C.

The Famous and Delectable HISTORY OF Cleocreton and Cloriana.
BEutiful Aurora had scarce shown herself to the eye of the World, before there
appeared a wandering Vessel, destitute of her Pilot, and the waves to sing her
too and sro: Prince Abyazer being come out of his melancholy ^ump, lift up his
eyes and behel^ this Noble Ship, whose stern and ^^eamers did speak her to be
some triumphant Vessel, which the unmerciful waves had severed from her company
and so had cast her on the shore of Persia: And while he bent his steps that
way, he heard the lamenting, as if it were of a woman; and his pitiful ears no
sooner heard it, but he skipped into the ship, where he espied a Lady full of
tears, though Majesty sho^e through sorrow, and on her lap lay their a^ of a
wounder Knight; to whom she sadly said, Oh, has all my care, love and
diligence brought forth this strange effect, would to the Gods I had never been
so happy as to have brought thee forth, then should I never have been so
miserable, as to have seen the untimely death of so worthy a son. Ab^azer stood
all this while unperceived by her: At the last, he stepped in, and when he had
view^ed the comely proportion of her wounded (...) with the rich and costly
habit they both were in, and the noble ^^^niture of their ship, he interrupted
the sorrowful Lady, faring,

Madam, Cursed be the De^^^^ies that has robbed you of so rare a Jewel; but
sometimes a skilful Physician is more necessary then tears, to the wounds that
are so grievous, as these appear to be.

She hearing his words, and turning her eyes on him, she said,

Alas, Sir, I have no hope that Fortune should so readily turn her wheel about,
since she has so lately thrown me from the highest felicity, to the lowest and
grievous torment.

Then would she have continued her usual lamentations, but that Abyazer applied
himself to the recovery of the Knigst: and lifting up his head, perceived same
life, which gave the Lady further occasion to leave off her mourning, and with
him, to use her utmost endeavor for the life of her Son; and calling of his
trusty Dwarf Galtazet, who almost dead for grief to see his Master in that
plight, and hea^ing there was breath in him, came running to him with a
so^eraign water, wherewithal rubbing his temples, he began to groan: At which
his afflicted Mother said,

Dear child, the danger of thy powerful Enemy is past, lift up thy drooping
spirits, and give some comfort to thy doleful Mother.

In the mean time Galtazet and Albyazer bound up his wounds, and laid him on
his bed. He lifting up his languishing eyes, and seeing his Mother, coming a
little to himself, said,

O how unhappy a monster am I, that could not without being giulty of a
Paracide, have not only sacrificed my own life, but the blood of the Tyrant,
to the Shrine of your merits and innocence.

She receiving much comfort to hear her Son speak said* Son, thy love has been
enough manifested to thy wronged Mother, but do not, my Son, call the King thy
Father Tyrant, but rather pray to the Gods to unmask his eyes, and let him and
all Hungary see, how he is deluded by that vilde wretch.

By these words Albyazer perceived, he had not given that respect which was due
to the Queen: Therefore he very reverently said,

Madam, I am sorry my ignorance should cause me to give your Majesty no more
respect, due to you: In recompense of which, make use of me as your humble
servant, to avenge you of your Enemies, or lose my life.

To which the Queen said, Sir, it is much to find a stranger so great a friend
in adversity, but I beseech you tell us what Country we are in. And while he
did satisfy the Queen, the Lady Philopeet, whose abode was in the Emperor of
Persia his Court, though it was not long but the by her beauty had so
captivated the Noble heart of Albyazer, who by choice did owe her the whole
service of his life; and she by her rigor almost bereaved him of his wits, and
having newly given him some harsh replies, caused him desperately to run out of
her presence, and thus in his pensive thoughts he walked to the Sea side, where
he met with this adventure, by which he was a little diverted.

In the mean time, the young Princess Cloryana, as her tender heart did move
her to compassion, to hear Philopeet thus rigoro^s^e use her servant, she said,

Madam, methinks you are too harsh with Prince Albyazer, certainly you cannot,
but as well as others, see his rare endowments, which might make you in love
with him as well as he is with you; Then why should you deal thus hardly with
him*

Well, well, said Philopeet, ^^^ding he young Princess so pretily so plead for
a lover, we shall see Madam, one day, ^ow merc^^ul you will be to your
multitude of Lovers, that will lie at your feet, begging for a smile from your
beautiful face.

And indeed the Lady did not call her so without good cause, for so far as her
tender years had shone of her, she was incomparably beauteous, her great wit
and pleasing disposition, did distract the eyes and hearts of all to honor her*
(...) such was her pretty contest at that time with Philopeet, as when she
could not get the better of her, she called her maid that attended on her, and
said, Go (...) and see out my poor Cozen (...), and bid him come and see what
success have gained for him.

Philopeet would not consent to it: For, said she* Madam* I might accuse you of
partiality, for you Cosins do wink at one anot^ers faul^, but not to deny what
you have said of him. Well, sa^d, Cloryana, I will engage for him, that he
shall not move you again.

So sweet Cloryana her command bore sway at that time: and her maid went and
enqu^^ed for Alb^azer, and she was* i^formed, that he went to the Sea side.
Iulia going that way, came to the place where he was and he ring his discourse
with the Queen of Hungaria, did not stay to de^iver her message* but came and
told Cloryana, that he was in a ship, and that ^^e Queen of Hungary was with
him.

Cloryana went ha^^ily, and told Philopeet, that she need not trouble her self
at his importuning: For, s^id she, m^ Cousin is entertained with no less then a
Queen in her ship. This she said in mirth: but Philopeet said, Good Madam,
torment me not, but tell me, what Queen it is you mean.

Oh, come, come, said Cloryana, I will now show you what a fine dissembler you
are. So they both went and told the Emperor, and he with his Emperess and the
Ladies, went to the Seaside, for the more honoring of the Queen of Hungary, who
by this time had received b^ Galtazet skill, the Prince Cleocreton out of his
sound, which the inconvenience of his much speaking had caused. When the
Emperor entered with the Ladies, who seeing the Queen, which before they had
never done; but her majestic demeanor did merit respect of all that saw her,
the Emperor and Empress s^^^ted the Queen, and told her, that the condition her
Son was in, required, a more commodious lodging, and ^^ ^^ted her to the
Palace, where she got her sick Son ^^dged: and giving the Emperor many thank,
whose noble inclinat^ons to ^^sp^tality, was much admired of all that had
occasion to know or stand in need of him: He very courteously desired her to
^^ay in Persia, till her fortunes would smile more upon ^er* the descript^on of
which we will omit, and only at this time discourse of her better days.

She being Daughter to the King of Tunis, and always inclined to ver^ue* which
added to her excellent beauty* caused the King of Hungary to be enamored with
her, only* by fam^: and his Father required her in marriage of the King of
Tunis, for his Son, who was of a Noble, brave spirit: But this Lady was laid
claim ^oo by the Midian Prince, but Hungary proved too invinsible, through the
great love his rich Subjects, and store of valiant Souldie^s, that h^ overcame
the Midian Arm^, and gained himself a virtuous wife; for her Father the King of
Tu^is, gave her to him of the Ri^al Princes that won^er by valor. The ^^ved
little more then a year ver^ happily, and then h^ had by his Queen a fair,
goodly child which was this young Cleocreton, who in his ^ery childehood was
so nob^y i^cl^^ed, ^o either with his Princely education, and s^ virtuously was
he eddued, that he b^came the wonder of his ag^, and the glory of men, his
wisdom and Pri^c^ly b^haviour, with hi^ beautiful or^am^^ts of his body, and
^ibleness in an^ ex^^^^se, especially in Warlike ^^pl^its that he performed
such Wonders as is past belief, which you shall afterward understand

But now re^urn we to the Lady Cloryana, who by her prett^ devises, did cause
Philopeet to recant her rigid proceedings to her S^rvant Alby^zer: who coming
into the roo^ where they were, and he espying Iulia, said,

Was not you at the shore, a little before the Emperor came? She lookee on her
Lad^, as though she asked her what to sa^. Iul^^, said Clor^ana* ^ell my Cos^n
what I ba^e you. She making her address to the Prince, as s^e very well knew
how to do; for she had a very goo^ wit, and was a Noble man's daugh^er of
Persia; she telling him, he ^ighed and said,

I, dear Cousin, you have much power with my rigid Lady, I pray is it to my
advantage?

P^^lop^e^ seeing his sad^ess, said, My Lord, you ^ere (...) to make all merry
about you, and now you are come as pensive as any. I Madam, said he, you see
how you by your rigor, can metamorphise me, and it is in your power to make me
as I was wont.

And so indeed she di^ ever after and he did enti^ely esteem his Cousin
Clor^ana, for pro^^ring it for him. So taking Philop^et by the hand, he said to
Cloryana, M^ dear Princess; take ^er to ^ou, for thri^e better by you then any,
till ^ go and visit the Prince Cle^^^^^on*

No sooner ^as he gone, but the Queen of Hungaria came to wait on Cloryana, and
with this complement, The Gods keep you, Madam, in that cheerful frame to which
I see you inclined: In my youth, I was as pleasant as any, and before I am old,
the Heavens are pleased to cause my mirth to turn to sadness, and makes me
scarce sociable to my nearest relations.

Truth Madam, replied Cloryana, your sorrows, be they of what nature they will,
they are so sweetly mixed with patience, as your presence does add as much
life, as if your Majesty had all the reason in the World of mirth; and I am
extremely obliged to you, for your honorable company.

It Is a great oversight of Fortune, said Philopeet, Madam, that she should
over-shadow so splendent a Beauty as yours, with the least discontent. O,
Madam, replied the Queen, your Chamber is so absolute an encloisture of Divine
beauty, as it may well become the sole discourse of all your Visitants.

Indeed Madam, said Cloryana, when any place is adorned with yours, then may it
be called the best furnished room in the world, and so by consequence this is?
In this and the like discourse way the Ladies in, when the Empress Treveana
entered, which turned it into more serious discourse.

All this while the Prince Cleocreton having Albyazers company, whose noble
demeanor did beget great esteem of the ^oung Prince; who entertained him with
as pleasant discourse as his sickness and affliction would afford, while the
Emperess was with her noble Guest, desiring to be acquainted with her
misfortune: But she unwilling to be the reporter of it her self, said to the
Empress, Madam, pardon me because I do not give your Majesty an account of
what you desire; for in my discourse. I must detract from my Lord and Husband,
whose follies I am unwilling to devulge my self; but, if it please you, my Sons
Dwarf I shall call, who has been a witness of all our hard hap. But then, said
the Empress, we will have the Emperor to be present.

So in the mean time, they went to receive the noble Entertainment of a dinner,
the Empress being placed in a Couch covered with purple velvet, embroidered
with gold, with cushions and footstools of the same the Queen of Hungary with
her in the same Couch, and all the other Princely Train being placed, they
di^^ed in Prince Cleocretons chamber, by the Emperors command: the Emperor
being in a robe of gold and hair colored flowers mingled, the Queen of Hungary
was in black, for she thought that most befitted her condition: the young
Prince Cloryana, rather adding a luster to her Apparel, then any thing addi^g
to her surpassing Beauty, her gown was of a blush colored Satia, covered with
silver twist, made in the fashion of Grasshoppers flying, her head was subtly
attired, with her lovely brown hair curling naturally, which color did more
seem an ornament to her beauty, then any thing in the world: behind of her
head was a Chaplet, and bordered with Diamonds and Rubies, richly enclosing her
hair, which was wrapped together with pearl, wherein stuck a plume of Pink and
White Feathers: her full black eyes so much resembling the Graces, that every
wink darkened the World, and every look peirced not only the eyes, but the
hearts of the beholders, and little Cupid once getting acquainted, presently
turned Thief, and punished himself with throws infinite: her lips was certainly
the pattern, that Dame Nature when she had made them, she saw them so
exquisite, that she would have counterfeited them, by making the Rubies and
Coral, but failed in her expectation, for they excelled both in color and
sweetness, which all the rich perfumes in the World could not compare: all the
fabric of her beautiful body was composed without fault, save it was too
little, an that was increasing: The Lady Philopeet was very fair, whose hair
was of a perfect yellow, and fair gray eyes, she was in a gown of White Satin,
and her breast-lace spread full of such rare flowers as the Spring could
afford: but it was only her beauty that did make Abyazer forget that she was
mortal, at least the Shrine that he did adore: and it was no little pleasure to
her to know, what great power she had over him, for he would even behold her,
as if he were an image, without motion: But the two younger Princes could not
yet tell what love was, though they must needs have a good liking of one
another, sometimes, though sick, yet Prince Cleocreton would steal a look on
lovely Cloryana, and she would do the like for him, but this was by course,
that these two did admire one another, for all the World did the like.

But when the Princely train had ended the^r ^ell ordered dinner, the Empress
streightway desired to have her curiosity satisfied: To that purpose, the Queen
commanded Galtazet to^^^ what she had promised: and so absenting her self, the
rest were Auditors, hile he began, and addressing himself to the Empress, said,

MAdam, I suppose your Majesty has heard the life of my Master and Mistress,
the King and Queen, till their misfortune fell ^ut: Her Majesty having born
the King of Hungary two Sons, the one two years before the other, Prince
Cleocreton being the first, and Prince Fortus the next: Thus the King and
Queen, with these two pretty Sons, lived in peace and love, without any
disturbance, and the Realm was in quiet a great while: At the last, Fortune
weary with her own Constancy, there chanced to be in Hungary an Earl of great
wealth, who had one only Daughter, whose name was Meaga; the King loved the
company of this good Earl of Drooma, for he was a man of excellent parts, and
without him the King would take no enterprise in hand, nor no sport, but the
Earl was present with him: So that not only he was frequent at the Court, but
also his Lady and Daughter many times came to visit the Queen. But in time, the
love that the King bore to the Father, was not comparable to that he had to the
Daughter: But first it fell out, that the Ambitious Lady Meaga did consture the
Kings familiarity, with her Father, to be, because the King was taken with her
beauty; and then thought she, if it be not, I wish it were so: And from these
thoughts, she fell to practice; for when the King came to Droomars house, which
was near the Court, she would trim her self in glorious apparel, and add Art
to that Beauty she had, and declares her unlawful love to an old Aunt of hers;
whose bewitching skill could not only cause love, but also procure hate, and
so wrought her Devilish Art on our good King; for by powders for the purpose,
she did infuse it in his drink, by the hand of her maid, whom she caused to
carry the Kings cup, till she had procured the good will of the King; and many
times would she come to the Kings Person, contrary to the custom of Ladies: Now
so their Art prevail^d on the King, and against our gracious Queen, that
sometimes at the first he would say to the Queen, Madam, if you mark it, the
Earl of Drooma has a pretty Daughter; and the poor innocent Queen never
suspected any thing, but because her Lord commended her, would often send for
her, and sometimes praise her to the King: But Oh! how soon is Innocence
betrayed? at the last the King would not only insensibly praise her, but would
curb the Queen extremely; and tell Meaga, that he must needs enjoy her love:
And saying that often to her, at the last he desired her to answer him; Then
she said, My Lord, you need not, except one of them were better: But he not
well apprehending her, said, I am sure, whatsoever my wife is, I know Lady
Meaga is without comparison beautiful. She seeing that her plot took so well
applauding of her Aunts wisdom, as she termed it: But Meaga had a young
Servant, whom she had promised marriage, whose name was Sir Melker: but she
slighted him, and would scarce afford him any of her company, she was so taken
up with her great Captive: As she called him to her Aunt, who by this time grew
almost mad for love, or rather lust; and courting her to yield to his desire,
she did say, Truly, my Liege, I can grant nothing of that nature to the Emperor
of the while World, who cannot be my husband. Therefore, continued she, your
Queen is the only and sole obstable of your desires, who by her loving
speeches, has deluded your Majesty this many years; she has a Paramor that
you know not of; Does not young Cleocreton resemble the Lord President? But,
said she, while should I discover this concerning my lawful Queen? but my great
love to you, my Lord, does make me go beyond my duty; for I cannot endure that
you should be called that, which your poorest Subjects hate.

Now the Kings passion broke into a flame, and being always resolute in any
enterprise, therefore he would be satisfied, though it were both against the
Laws of the Gods and men: Thus he sucked up the bitter poison, that the old
Witch, and the young Devil had prepared for him, and after wayed down with the
sweet cup of Meaga's sugared words: And so cunning was she, as when she said
any thing against the Queen, we would even seem sorrowful to declare what she
knew. But the King being three days from the Court, every one began to wonder
at the Kings intimacy with the Earl of Drooma: Now the Lord President, whose
name was Cabulus, came to the Palace, with other Lords and Ladies of the City,
to enquire how the Queen was in health; for it was told them, that she was
sick; and indeed it was merely through the unkindeness she conceived at the
Kings stay from her.

But the King in his wrath against his good Queen, and bewitched with love to
this wicked Meaga, came home, and found matter enough for his jealousy; for
asking the servants who was with the Queen? they answered, the Lord President:
But he dissembling the matter, came to the Queen; who seeing her Lord, rose up
(though not in health) and bowed to him. He seeing her indisposition of body,
never attributidg the cause from himself, but all his thought ruminating on
what Meaga had told him, was rather subject to believe, that she was breeding a
child, and straight concluded it was begot by the President: Thus was his
mind bent to evil against his innocent Queen; for falsely smiling, he said,
Madam, you are but a breeding me another Son: Thus a while the King lived in
languishment, so long as he was from Meaga.

In the mean time, Sir Melcar, Meaga's rejected Servant, out of anger and
despite to her, went and married a Cousin, worthier indeed then she, whose name
was Thrispne: And Meaga's maid being troubled in conscience that she should be
guilty of Meaga's wickedness, went from her, and lived with this Lady Thrispne
whom Melcar marr^ed; and telling her Lady and Master of all the designs and
plots of Meaga, did not likewise spair to devulge them abroad; and thus came we
to know. At which report the Queen fell sick: But the wicked Meaga (the King
continuing long from her) fearing that her base love would come to naught, was
by her old Aunt, the hatcher of mischief, promised a powerful effect: And it
proved, thus, The Queen being better in health, the King commanded a ship to be
finely trimed, wherein he did intend to take pleasure on the Sea, with the Lord
President and Cleocreton, only a woman or two of the Queens: But before they
went, Meaga had procured instruments of mischief like her self; for the King
examining his Servants and Domestics concerning the jealousy he had of his
Queen, though such things were far from any of their heads, for they and all
others, knew her modest life: Therefore said the King (when all he said was to
no purpose) in a fury, You are all of a conspiracy, and one day will cut me
short, by that wicked woman my wives instigati^n: But I solemnly swear, said
he, that if you will not confess that the Queen and the President are too
kind, I will have you all hanged by the morning light.

Then there started up a wicked fellow, and said, My Liege, your suspicion is
not without good cause; but I and my fellows will swear to be faithful in what
occasion your Majesty shall command. Then some of them consented to what he
said through fear, and others in hopes to be enriched, and the rest slunk away
unseen, that were more honest.

Well, the King hearing this, and knowing of Meaga's Villains that she had
prepared for the business, therefore he went even then into the ship with
Cabulus, and the Queen with Cleocreton; but they had forgot young Fortus, of
whom you shall afterward hear: But the King did not forget to cause the
Rascally rude Rogues to follow them in another ship. So when the Royal ship had
now lanced into the deep, with the other close by it, the King began to say,
What Cabulus thinks thou, shall I have another Son, my wife seems to threaten
me: At which the Queen smiled innocently, and said, It may be so my Lord,
sooner then I know of, but the Queen meant another way. Then said the
President, I wish your Majesty had many such Sons as these two you have. I,
said the King, so would I, but not of your getting, as this is; and with that,
he thrust Cleocreton from him. The Queen and Lord Cabulus stood amazed, to hear
these words from the King. Nay, said he, Do not Cabulus and thee, wicked woman,
study for excuses, for I will bring witness enough of it: So calling to the
other ship, the ministers of Cruelty came, and monsterously swore, That the
^ueen with Cabulus, had defiled the Kings bed: whereat the King drew forth his
sword, and smote the President on the shoulder, not suffering him or the Queen
to speak; but the President warding off the blows, would not strike at the
King.

And one of the Rogues going to the deplorable Queen (who teared her very hair,
and was miserably weeping) abused her with his Devilish Tongue; whereat
Cleocreton drawing his sword, and his Princely heart not suffering him to
endure his Mothers injuries, stroke the fellow on the face, that he fell
backwards over board into the Sea, there to feed fishes; and the Prince seeing
more enter, valiently cut some of their legs off, and others he cleft their
heads, till he had killed nine or ten of them; one of them escaped, and told
the King; who seeing the fellows lie dead, and having slain the President, went
to Cleocreton, and gave him two or three grievous blows, saying, Take thou that
thou valiant Bastard. And for you (pointing at the Queen) said he, for thy
child within thee, I will not lay my hands on thee.

Well (said she) my Lord, I hope the Gods will look on my innocence and
affliction. But the King went forth in a rage, and commanded the dead men to be
thrown out, and left none but my self and the Queens woman with the wounded
Prince, whom we laid on his Mothers lap, thinking he had been slain: Our sails
being up, and the winds high, and out Pilot dead, our ship sailed fast away,
and so was cast on the Persian shore. This (most Illustrious Empress) is the
whole and true story of my Queens Tragedy.

When the Princely company had heard the sum of Galtazets, Discourse, they
could scarce any of them refrain from weeping. The Emperor going to the Queen,
said, Madam, if the heart blood of me and my Subjects will redeem your virtuous
self, und your Son, it shall be done; and in the mean time, abide with us, and
call this your home, till your own be made more comfortable. The sweet Lady
having returned humble thanks to the Emperor, he taking her and Cleocre^on by
the hand, said to the Empress, Madam, take this virtuous Queen to thy custody,
and you Cousin Albyazer, take the Prince into your Charge, and render to them
respect according to persons of t^ei^ m^r^^ and quality. Which done, the
Empress and Albyazer ans^ered, Your Majesty's command shall be obey^d, to the
u^most of our power. Then the Emperor ^e^ the Queen, to her chamber, and
Albyazer conducted ^loryana and Phi^opeet to th^irs: and so retur^ed to
Cleocreton, and said, Now Noble Prince, you are in my charge. I am very happy,
replied Cleocreton, to have such a Guardian.

Come said Albyazer m^rrily) my Lord, we (...) never in love? No replied the
Prince, there has no such fancy ever entered m^ brain: but if you be so, I will
not condemn the passion; although I must needs confess, I think its a folly in
men, to engage their senses in such an unnecessary trouble: And though it be an
usual thing amongst men, that thing they call love, yet the Ceremonies of any
thing should never make me the more affected with it. Well, Prince Cleocreton,
I shall one day, said he, see you taken in the height of this Unnecessary
Trouble, as you call it.

Then said Albyazer, For my share, I am intrapped by the gins and snares of a
powerful Beauty, as I could wish I had always remained as free, as you profels
your self. But, said Cleocreton, I pray Sir, what may that Beauty be, that has
dominion over such a brave spirit as yours? I hope you may discover your
disease, it is not infections. Sir, replied Albyazer, Your own eyes shall be
Judges, no other then the Lady Philopeet, whose beauty you know, and whose
perfections are scarce to be paralleled: This Lady is Niece to the King of
Corinth, her Father dying two years ago, and he being a great Companion with
the Emperor my Uncle; so these two dearly loving one another, and the Lady her
Mother losing her life, by giving of breath to Philopeet, her Father left the
Wardship of her to the Emperor of Persia; though it did a little stomach the
King of Corinth her Uncle, who had no child: But no sooner did I see the Lady,
but straight I had an invincible love for her: But though so fair, yet so
rigorous is she, as the truth is, I am very unhappy. She so much resembles the
Diamond, that though the most beautiful, yet the hardest of any stone: At the
first she entertained me very sweetly for a friend, but in the quality of a
servant, even as I have told you. Cleocreton could not but smile, to see with
what a concerned look and action he did declare his love, and thought himself
blessed to be free from such a distraction, as disturbed the hearts of the
bravest men

But while they were talking of love, there came to the Emperors Palace a
Knight, with a Paper in his hand, and delired to deliver it to the Emperor:
therefore it was presented to Albyazer, as was the custom, and if the business
was of great weight, then he carried it to the Emperor: if of little value,
then he dispatched if himself. But finding it to be thus,

Creeon King of Corinth,

To the Emperor of Persia wishing health, and also requiring our Niece
Philopeet, as it is right and due that we should have her in Ward, she being
our Heir next in blood: But if this be denied, we have sent ten of our Knights
to defend by right what we demand; and by their swords to maintain the quarrel
against ten others, equal in Armor and Weapons; and then who wins, thee or I
shall have the Lady in Ward: Be honorable, abuse not my Knights by inequality
of number, or treachery, for fear of a further Vengeance lighting on the
Kingdom of Persia.

Farewell.

Albyazer being deeply concerned in the business, and carrying it to the
Emperor, he presently calling of Counsel determined rather to fight it out,
then to give up the pledge of his deceased friend. Thou Albyazer went out to
his defiance to the Enemy: where he espied their brave Captain, whose name was
the Lord Muxorb, Nephew to the Queen of Corinth, he was armed in White, with
spots of Orange, shaped in hearts flaming: he was on a white Steed, and his
Horse was traped in the some color with his Armor: for a Device in his
Shield, he bare a Heart pierced through, with the beams of a Conquering eye, the
words were, Too hot to hold: his brave Plume spreading it self on his well
shaped shoulders. When Albyazer had viewed the Champions, with their brave
Captain, and seeing them all very well accoutered, he said to Muxorb, Sir, the
Emperor of Persia does not fear the proud threats of the Corinthian King,
neither will he give up the Lady, who is the pledge of his deceased Friend her
Father, but he will without delay send as many in number, and soon show his
right by his Knights valor. Well, replied Muxorb, I wish their valor may be
great, that we may have the more honor in conquering them.

And in the mean time the Emperor was providing equals for them, Albyazer went
and armed himself in a fine new Armor, blew as the Heavens, and sp^ng^ed with
Stars, his Devise was Sun, in the motto was,

It hurts the sight,
T^ough to see it is delight.
And while the Knights was arming themselves, came Albyazers Father with his
fair Daughter, and seeing his Son going to fight, would needs go with him, but
by the tears of the Lady Calecy, and the Emperor his Brother, he was diswaded
from his enterprise, for the Prince Matignirene of Gnickrib, was a valiant
Soldier, but now he rather submitted to age, and entreaties of his friends:
But Cleocreton could not by any means obtain leave to go, and be one of the
Knights, for the Emperor nor his Mother would by no means venture him, by
reason of his youth: But he being resolute, and being spurred on with desire
of honor, took occasion to slip out of the way, and causing Galtazet to make
ready his Horse and Armor, he made himself ready for to go: for he had got
Albyazer to let his Squire to go in the room of his ovva, therefore Cleocreton
commanded him as soon as he came into the lists, to go away. But before
Albyazar would go out, he would ask leave of his Lady Philopeet, and being in
haste, he caused his Squire to give Philopeet this short farevvel.

MAdam, as your Beautiful Self gives life to me, so I being armed with your
Command, shall be valiant, and give death to my Enemies, who does proudly
pretend to take you from your humble Servant,

Albyazer.


This being delivered, Philopeet now understood the bottom of her own heart
more then ever, and saw that she could not be happy without Albyazer; whereupon
she writ this short return,

Prince Albyazer, you have my leave to gain Honor, but not hurt; therefore to
the Gods I commend you: And that you may return Victor, is the chief desire of
yours,

Philopeet.


He joyfully received it, and then took a general farewell of them all, and of
his dear Sister the Lady Calsey, who prized him as her life: He went
accompanied with all their prayers, for his safe and honorable return. Then the
Emperor, the Prince Ma^^gnirene, and all the Ladies, being placed at the
windows on ^ich cushions (the place of battle being very nigh the same) as they
were just going to their blows, the Vmpers being set, and the Trumpets
sounding, Cleocreton came in, and his Squire went out: so none could be
offended, though they all took notice of his sprightly behavior, and some
could have wished they had kept the other. Then fell the Champions to break
their spears with great fury* and then drawing their swords, fell to the
fiercest Battle that ever eye beheld: but there was none in more rage, then was
Albyazer, for he alwa^s fetch^d new courage from the sweet face of his
Philopeet: And coming to the Corthy Muxorb, whose delicate shape, and Knightly
demeanor, winned attendance and admiration of all the Ladies: but Albyazer
lent him such a stroke on the head, as he cut the clask of his Helmet, and left
to the view of the spectators, all the treasure of his golden hair: but he was
not accustomed to borrow such coin, and not to pay largely, he gave Albyazer
such a counterpose on the shoulder, as he made his head touch the crooper of
his Horse: But the great reason that made Muxorb lay on such puisant strokes
was, when his Helmet was off, he took occasion to look to the windows where the
Ladies were, for one might very well see the Beauty of them all; but it was
Calseys beauty that conquered Muxorb: and he taking her to be Philopeet, for he
never saw her, but knew that Abbyazer was her servant, and as a Rival did he
treat him: But Cleocreton coming from amidst his slain foes, and seeing his
friend in Extremit^, he stepping in, set Albyazer free, who else had been
Prisoner to the King of Corinths Champions, who by that means thought to get
some noble Prisoner, and so have gotten Philopeet for a Ransom: but Cleocreton
strongly engaged Muxorb, to the bravest onset that ever eye beheld. At last
Cleocreton (being referred to complete the Wonders he had begun) got Muxorb to
such an advantage, as he must either dye or be his Prisoner: Now, said ^
leocreton, What will thou do? He being hugely grieved at his disgrace, even
before the Lady to whom he had seceetly vowed his heart: but he thought, since
he was vanquished both within and without, it was better to yield the day to
them both, and so he might however gain something by the bargain, said, My
Lord, since I am brought to this pass, I must yield: whatsoever you be, I
cannot be overcome by a braver Conqueror then your self.

So the fight being done, there was three slain on the Emperors side, and two
sore wounded: but of the King of Corinths side there was but four left alive,
and they all vanquished: But they would take none Prisoner but the gallant
Muxorb, and let the other go to report their own hard hap. Then Albyazer
desirous of nothing more, then to know the hardy Knight that relieved him, came
to Cleocreton: and Muxorb said, Thou Son of Wonders, whose stature is but
youth, yet whose valor does arise to rule the World; that has not only given
the pastport to the most of the Enemies, but has conquered that Valiant
Knight, meaning Muxorb. But (continued Albyazer) let us be so happy, as to know
whom ye are. Cleocreton taking off his Helmet, bowed to them both. Muxorb
ignorant who he was, did with vvonder gaze on him: but Albyazer astonished to
see him ran and embraced him, saying, I had the least thoughts on Prince
Cleocreton. Muxorb then remembered that he had heard many reports of him.

Then they all would make an Eternal league of friendship Cleocreton,
Albyazer, and their Princely Captive Muxorb: So going into the Palace, they
presented their gallant Prisoner. Then said the Emperor to him, My Lord, assure
your self, as your fame is spread abroad for your Noble deeds, so shall you
lose nothing of your honor and respect here, only give your oath not to depart
hence without leave from my self. Muxorb did so: But they were all amazed when
they saw Cleocreton in Armor, which was of a pleasant green, resembling the
time of the year, which was Spring, with many pretty flowers; and in the midst
of his Shield was broken Spears, with slain men, and others led like Captives
in chains, with this inscription,

Born to Conquer. But as he was born indeed to conquer, so was he conquered,
and became a captive to the beauty of Cloriana: for she being amongst the other
Ladies, and her beauty surpassing them all, therefore he very earnestly
beholding herface, saw so much of Majesty and Sweetness in her, that he did
admire that any should adore anything else. But it was a strange alteration
that was in him; for even a little before, seeing Albyazer with as much
devotion greet his beloved Philopeet, thought, they are well that are free: No
sooner did he think so, but he looking on Clor ana, and they encountering one
another with their eyes, she suddenly turning her eyes from him, with a dart
like lightning, did those glances of her beauty strike Cleocreton to the very
heart: for his too too much gazing at her, did cause all her face to look like
Vermillion, as well as her cheeks, to see him give such an assault to her
incomparable face: but he recovered himself without being taken notice of; for
they were all employed, Albyazer with beholding Philopeet, and Muxorb was no
less taken with Cal^eys beauty, whom now he knew was not Philopeet, but
Albyazers sister: for she did discover it her self, with going to her brother
so prettily, saying to his Squire, take off your Masters Armor, and let me know
if my brother has any hurt: the which Muxorb well noting, said to himself, Let
het be what she will, yet she only shall rule me, my life and all I have ^^all
be at her Service: Then Galtazet disarming his Master, and found no wound about
his body, but an old wound that was open: but sooner cured then that of his
mind, which though it was not visible, yet it formented him more a thousand
times, then any ever did of his body.

Then they all returned whom to their lodgings, but poor Cleocreton was in the
sadest case of them all; for he was sick, and knew not his disease: but getting
all alone, said to himself,

What Cleocreton is the matter? does this victory displease thee? or wast thou
not enough honored by conquering Muxorb? Ah, but my heart is about some other
game; it is no Victory that troubles me, my very reason is lost: I know there
is not one thing that I did very earnestly bestow my sight upon, but only on
the Princess Cloryana; but that is a thing that all do, as well as I. and when
he had named Cloryana, his very heart did beat and pant strangely. Then would
he say, This, t^is was a very strange sight, that could cause all this
disquiet. But I that was so high against Lovers, must not now become one my
self; It is but surely some distemper that over-chargeth my body, and so puts
my heart out of frame; for it is not love, I do but affect Cloryana, as all
must needs do that behold her. But why should the Idea of this Amiable
Princess, present it self thus before me? I have seen her before, but never did
her sight thus set my heart on fire: O Cleocreton! must thou needs err by
example! Is it not enough to consider, how many dangers there still accompany
this Passion, but thou will run headlong unto them thy self. But now now he
began to cr^, It is. Love, it is Love! for no sickness can go further then the
body, but this insensibly touches my very soul: But take courage my heart; for
though I am fallen into a snare, yet she that has catched me, is not in the
degree of comparison; for surely my Princess is the Paragon of the whole World.
But O, how ignorant am I! will such a Goddess as she, suffer a poor exiled
Prince, as I am, to love her. Yet (said he) she must do it, how can she help
it; for all the powers in the world is not able to root it out of me, nor am I
my self indeed. But will she love thee Cleocreton, who art born of an unnatural
Father, and of a disconsolate Mother? But why not, for she is born, and must
love; and she cannot affect any, that ever would more adore her; or hazard life
or any thing, so willingly as Cleocreton for Cloryana.

Thus you see the Conqueror was bravely vanquished: but yet his case was not so
desperate as he thought, for it he was unquiet on the one side, she was not
serene on the other: For at that very instant the Gods ordered it so, that this
was a day of Cupids sports* for in the same manner was she switten: and though
she was young, yet knew she that he heart was conquered, as well as was
Cleocretons, but she did resolve not to bear it all her self, for she very
secretly imparted it to her beloved Iulia that she was not only in love, but
sick of love and she needed not to counterfeither self sick, for her Cousin
Calsey perceiving her indisposition, aying, what is the matter with you? She
said, I desire to be in bad. So they left her to her bad, and told the Emperess
her tender Mother: who went presently to her Daughter, and taking her by the
hand, and fee^ing it very hot, she said, Child, what shall I do for thee?
Nothing, Madam (said she) but let me have a little sleep. So the Empress drew
the curtain, and caused her maids to attend very quietly by her, and commanded
that one of them should tell her when she awaked. But her sleeping was an
excuse to be alone: So causing them all to go forth but Julia, she said, Dear
Julia, I would gladly discover my self to thee, but I am afraid thou will
oppose me, and think to bring me to my reason, but that medicine is past
taking; for I have tried all arguments with my self, and therefore nothing of
application will do that thou know.

But Iulia finding whereabouts her Lady was, said, Madam, your will shall be my
Law, and if my service in any thing will profit you, you may assure your self
it shall be employed according to my duty. Then caused she Iulia to come near
her for she was afraid that the very stone wa^ls should perceive her fally:
then said she,

O Julia, this Princely stranger has by one sight so bewitched me, as I cannot
enjoy my self in any serenity in the World: But what hopes is there that I
shall be better, when he is an exiled Prince, and only comes to my Father for
protection? And nothing, dear Julia, I find, in the Universe, can bring me
content, hut Cleocreton, who I fear has no affection at all for me. Now tell
me, did thou ever behold a more accomplished person then this young Prince?
Julia well perceiving what ground this growing passion had gained of her Lady,
thought that nothing would do but compliance: and therefore said, Madam, how is
it possible but he should have a great affection to you; for I think I did see
you both, when your hearts were smitten with love, and I Will swear he did gaze
upon your beauty so much, as I am very much mistaken if he have not a most
passionate love for you. But, Madam, if you would have the credit of the cause,
cheer up your Spirits, and to morrow let me attire you to all the advantage
that may be, and you, shall presently perceive whether it be soor no.

Well Julia (said she) thou would make me believe strange things, but I am
not so credulous; for I have often heard, that Lovers have much difficulty, and
much danger, and shall I think to be happy at the first? For if Cleocreton did
love Cloriana, that were not all; for then my Father how incensed would he be:
But if that were all my distress, I should bear it well enough, but it is the
want of love, that will, I fear, be the cause of my complaints. Well Madam
(said she) then I hope you need not complain; for there must needs be a
simpathy in nature between two that are so incomparable you are.

But this Discourse was broken off by the coming in of the Emperor and all the
Ladies, to visit Cloryana: for one of her maids being asked of the Empress
concerning her: answered, that Cloryana was awake; and no sooner knew the
Emperor, but needs must he see his chief and only darling. So coming in, Iulia
went to the door, and seeing the Emperor, went and told Cloryana, who was in
far better temper then she was. So he placing himself on the bed side, and all
the Ladies on seats, he said to her, what is thy Melady, my Cloryana. She
smiling said, A little sleep has cured me, my Lord. Then said the Empress,
Child, if thou be well, I would have thee rise. And so they departing the
room, cloryana got up, and very pleasantly said, come Iulta, lets see thy
charms now, that thou will arm me withal, to take a heart Prisoner. So cloryana
was very gloriously apparalled, in a Gown of green and silver, which best
suited with the season, and she affected to be attired the most like a
shepherdess, with her head adorned in flowers of diverse colors, and intermixed
with Diamonds, and having her garment clasped down before with Diamonds und
Rubies, the sleeves being open, hung loose, and were as long as the rest of her
gown, and over her lovely hair, hung a vail of white, spreading over her
shoulders, her fair alablaster neck showing it self through it, with her rich
and costly bracelets, and chains of pearls. In the mean time was cleocreton
discovering himself to Galtazet, and he was very sorroy for his dear Masters
disquiet, and promised him all the aid and assistance that he could make him.

My Galtazet, said Cleocreton, what shall I do to discover my love to her, that
is the cause of it. Well, my Lord, said Galtazet, if you will for this once be
counseled by your servant, do but write your Princely challenge to the Lady,
and I will dye, or bring you an answer. cleocreton was glad to hear him say so,
for he knew that his notable wit, would bring forth any enterprise that he took
in hand: So he went and writ a Letter to Cloryana.

So we will leave him to his writing, and take notice what news the Queen has
received from Hungary. A messenger having brought her a packet of Letters, and
a pretty sum of gold, from the good Lady the Presidents wife, whose name was
Queama: Who when she had received the sad tidings of her husbands death, and of
the strange banishment of the Queen, having at that time in her custody young
Prince Fortus, conveyed him secretly to her Country house, whose weak soul was
so transported, without measure, that the Lady could scarce keep him from being
discovered: but he had a great love to Queama, for she was his nurse, and had a
son of his age, and very like him: so the Lady sent away her son to a brothers
of hers, and by that means was Fortus preserved in the room, and under the name
of the Presidents son, whose name was Steafea. So this virtuous Widow, though
her Husband lost his life for the Queen, yet she still retained her old love
toward her: And hearing that her Majesty was in Persia, went and acquainted
the Queens friends thereof, and so amongst them, they sent her a sum of moneys,
and also to let her know, that she was their lawful Queen, and they her lawful
Subjects, and that they would venture their lives for her: and also, that the
King they thought, would be soon weary of his proud, insulting Concubine, who
did not only strive to distress the Queens friends, but also to govern the
King, and all the Kingdom. The Queen hearing this news, presently acquanted her
good friends the Emperor and Emperess wi^h it, for it was no small Joy to
her, to hear she had such good Subjects. But the Prince Fortus writ to his
brother Prince Cleocreton, That if he would gain honor, then must he come where
it was to be had; desiring him to come to Hungary, and see if either by whiles
or force, they could rout the wicked Meaga out.

Which news was not very pleasant to the Queen: for she dreaded to part with
her other Son also, but at the last she consented that he should go within two
months: but so did not sweet Cloryana for she lost all her hopes, if her
servant went away, before there was some discovery of their love. But for all
this news, Cleocreton continued to adore her Shrine, above all the Kingdoms of
the World: and when he had writ his Letter he gave it to Galtazet, which
contained these:

Most Incomparable Princess,
LEt the Bleeding Wounds of that Heart, which you have peirced by the beams of
your matchless Beauty, plead together with those irresistible Charms, and do
not quash the small hopes of your humble Servant; who though but new begun in
the School of Cupid, yet is so Eternally yours, as it is in the power of your
answer, either to give life or death to your sworn Admirer,

Cleocreton.


Galtazet quickly met with Iulia, and began to court her, and extremely praised
her beauty: She was very tractable, because she had a desire to found him
cunningly concerning his Master, as well as he her to get the Letter carried to
her Lady: And thus he began,

Sweet Julia, I wish that your Lady were the young Queen of Hungary. How should
that be? said she. If your Princess, said he, would marry my Prince, then it
might be. Truly, said she, your Prince is a very gallant person. And truly,
said he, your Lady is a very gallant Princess. They would do well together,
said she, but it may be your Master has no such mind. If you Lady, said he,
had but as good an inclination to him, as he has to her, then were all right.
Iulia smited, and said, How know you that? Well enough, said Galtazet, for he
is in a very great p^ssion for her, even at this time, and here is a testimony
of the truth of it: then he gave her the Letter, and earnestly desired her to
carry it to the Princess. She was something nice, but when she heard Galtazets
oaths and prodestations, of his Masters being the Princess Cloryana's servant,
she took it: And they en^oyning each other to secrecy, she carried it to her
Lady, and said, Madam, I bring you such news as my self did never expect so
soon. The Lady said, with a blush, What Julia, have thou betrayed me? Good
Madam (said she) be not so suspicious; for I protest, I would not do any thing
contrary to your directions for a World. Cloryana hearing her say so, and
knowing her truth, said, Come good Julia, let me understand what thou know.
Madam (said she) I being in a walk of the Garden, Galtazet came to me, and said
that he should be very much engaged to me, if I would deliver this Letter to
your own hands. Cloryana opened it, and reading it, said, Oh! surely Julia this
is a delusion; but if this be true as he pretendes, I will ever love
Cleocreton, whatsoever follow. It is good to be resolute Madam, said Iulia.
Then Cloryana took pen and ink, and writ him this answer.

My Lord,
THere is so much danger and deceit in the Passion you speak of, that it is not
good for us to believe all pretended affection: But if it be so, that I have
conquered the brave Conqueror, then I may well boast of my Conquest, and say,
It is more then the deserts of

Cloryana.


Cleocreton received this answer with unspeakable joy: and whilst he was
wishing to see his Honored Lady, the Lord Muxorb had very much privilege to
see and court his Lady Calsey; for there was not any that withstood their
affections amongst all her friends, and many of them, even in his presence,
would plead for him. The Lady did admire his handsome proportion, and courtly
demeanor, but yet he had something to do before he could get the coy Lady to
accept of his affection: But at the last, with his frequent and passionate
discourse and protestations of affection, she was never so pleasant, as when he
was with her, and threw off all her Admirers, only for his sake, and a
constanter Lady then she the World could not afford.

But now the King of Tunis had intalligence concerning his Sister the Queen of
Hungary: And being very much troubled, sent a Messenger to her with a Letter,
wherein were these words:

Dear Sister,
I am sorrowful for your base inclined Husband, and I desire you to come to me;
and I swear by the Gods immortal, that I will not leave any alive in his
Kingdom, before he shall abuse our Family with his gross enormities: Commend me
to the Emperor of Persia,

Farewell.

The Queen called Cleocreton, and they determined to send this answer:

Renowned Brother,
I Give you many thanks for your kindeness, and your proffer; but if you have
any love for your Sister, do not raise a War against my Lord and Husband: If
you think good to threaten do, for it may be that may work upon him; proceed no
further, if you prize the welfare of your sister: By your leave, I would stay
here, till I hear further what your counsel or threatening will do, and I will
in the mean time send my two Sons Cleocreton and Fortus to you.

Farewell.

Now there was to be a general Feast and Banquet at the Emperors Palace, for
the Lords and Ladies of the Court; for it was the Emperors Birthday, and every
one appeared in their sundry costly Apparel.

And when the were all placed, every Lover feasted more on their Ladies beauty,
then any entertainment that could be imagined. Cleocreton gladly, but wifely,
beholding Cloryana, for it was death to him he thougth, to be discovered: but
Cloryana could by no means hide her blushing for though she dissembled her
self, and looked at any thing else, yet still she must sometimes steal a sight
of her Cleocreton, who did the same for her: but she sitting next Calsey, and
they two having a little discourse, Cloryana had a great deal of love toward
her: for she was of so true a disposition, that in any thing, that possibly she
could, she would favor her friend: and all people did honor her, but especial
Muxorb, whose eyes did closely follow her looks. Calsey seeing Cloryana very
often to blush, and knowing well what Love meant, did imagine her to be
affected with some that was present: and finding Cleocreton stealing his looks
on her, and viewing him, and seeing his great worth and noble presence,
thought, why may it not be that with him my Cousin Cloryana is in love. And
taking her by the hand, said, Cousin, methinks Prince Cleocreton is a very
Noble, fine Person. Cloryana, blushing more then before, said to Calsey, I
Cousin, it is pity he should be crossed in his Fortunes so much, for he has a
very virtuous Mother. Calsey could not but saul to see Cloryana's hand shake,
and tremble, as she spoke, but let her alone for that time, and thought to get
it out some other way.

But when they had ended their entertainment, the Emperor desired they should
dance, and having as: excellent music as the World could afford, he went
himself to the Queen of Hungary to take her out: She would fain have refused
it, but that she knew it would affront the Emperors kindeness, but she very
gallantly performed her part: the Emperor took also the fair Empress, and she
very spritely, and most becomingly danced, Cleocreton took Cloryana through
course, and she did so nimbly and delicately dance one while in the French
mode, and another while in the Persian fashion; and Prince Cleocreton was not
to seek: for indeed they were so rarely matched, as these two did shade away
all the attendance of the company: there was none that could in the least come
near her, but only a Noble Lady of the Court, whose name was Trandia, whom the
Lord Muxorb, after he had taken Calsey, he led her out, and they did both
admirably well, though Cloryana carried the day of her.

But now it was time for every one to go to their rest. But Cleocreton had
warned Galtazet to court Iulia by any means to get entrance into her Ladies
Chamber, for that was the privatest place they could meet in. So Iulia said, as
soon as she could speak with her Lady, Good Madam, grant me one request, and
that is, that you would let Prince Cleocreton come and speak with you to night.
Nay Julia, I must not give him that liberty. For we two to be alone with him, I
shall not endure it, and company thou know is dangerous, and besides, my
Cousin Calsey must be with me to night. Why Madam (said she) are you so far from
satisfying one, whom you have confessed often to me; that you loved above all
the World. And for the Lady Calsey, let her be with you, only discover your
self to her beforehand, and for her fidelity, you need not fear: If you deny
this Madam, I may justly say that you dissembled, under the Rose be it spoken.
Well Julia, thou art a strange Wench, and thy confidence thou can well
justify, because thou know I love Cl^ocreton: therefore go thy ways, for
thou have over persuaded me, and let him come, while I go and tell my dear
Calsey.

So they parting, Cloryana went to Calsey, and taking her by the hand, said,
Dear Cousin, thou shall lie with me: So they took the^r leave of all the
company, and went to their chamber, which Jul^a had trimmed finery up, and put
the Princess new Furniture into it, which was of green Damask, and imbroidered
with gold and with many other pretty things had she adorned it, and likewise
with a perfume that the Princess Cloryana had learned of her Mother the
Empress, that all the Lady, of Persia had not the like. So the two Ladies
sitting them down, Calsey said, Dear Princess, I pray you tell me one thing.
Any thing, sweet Cousin, said Cloryana. Only, said Calsey, what it was that
moved you so much to blush, when you and I sat toget er? O, said Cloryana,
have you ta^e^me: Pray tellme, what it is that males your color come so fast,
when the Lord Muxorb courteth you? Is it so indeed with you Cousin? said Calsey.
It Is so, said Cloryana: and blushing said, My Lord Cleocreton truly did make me
do what you speak: and dear Cousin, I am resolved to tell thee all, for he will
be here presently. But, said she, dear Calsey, for thy life do not so much as
tell thy Muxorb. Well, dear Cousin, do thou suspect me? I should never be at
peace with my self, if I should give Princess Cloryana occasion to call me
Trusebreaker. Cloryana embraced her, and said, I fear thee not, dear Cousin.

The Ladies waited but a while, before Cleocreton came, but he was surprised
when he saw Calsey, and thought to have turned back: but Calsey said, Come
Prince Cleocreton, for I w^ll do you no harm. He then knowing that he must go
in, went, and with a very low congee, kissed the hand of Cloryana, and saluted
Calsey with this complement. I suppose you need not think it strange, to see
men under take any thing for one sight of the Lady they adore: for I must needs
confess, that the beauty of the Divine Cloryana, has got so conquering a power
over my very soul, as I that always condemed love, am now happy if I can but
confess my error to the Princess of my life: and with that he looked on
Cloryana, and being overcome with love, and afraid to displease her, said no
more. Then said Calsey, Truly, my Lord, if I have any power with my Cousin, I
will employ it to this purpose, that she may requite your sincere love with as
true affection. But Cloryana turning the Discourse, said, Sir, If it please
you, I will desire my Cousin to tell us the life and fortunes of the Lady that
danced so admirable well. he replied, Madam, your commands are as Restoratives,
to qui^ken the drowsiest parts to become obedient to you, and so questionless
me your Servant. Then Calsey willing to oblige Cloryana; began thus, directing
her d^scource to the Princess.

Madam,
I Need not describe the beauty of the Lady Trandia, for you know it: But as
concerning her birth, it was hard by my Fathers Castle of Gnigrib, her Fathers
name was Salliman, a Gentleman of very good account; he was an Italian born,
and being a very great Traveller, at the last seeing a Lady in Persia, a
Noblemans Daughter, whom he long courted; and at the last, when her Father was
dead, she being the only heir, and left great possessions, she married Sir
Salliman, and he by her had the Lady Trandia; who being very young, was sent
from them into Italy, to a Nobleman that was her Fathers Kinsman, and there was
she bred up; and she being courted by many of the Italian Gentry, she liked
none of them, till a young Knight that was a stranger in those parts, at the
first sight of Trandia, fell desperately in love with her; but the Lord Panim,
in whose House Trandia was, did not at all like the match: Yet Sir Trulious had
got the Ladies heart, but yet she seemed to banish him as well as Lord Panim,
but for all that, secretly married him: And soon after, her Father sent for her
home; and as the Lady was going, Sir Trulious met her, and riding close by her
Coach, they being in serious discourse, heard the trampling of a horse,
Trulious looking behind him, he espied a Guyoxy Knight, whom Lord Panim would
have had Trandia to have married, his name was Castore; for he hearing that she
was on her journey, and that Trulious was going with her, and having a mortal
despite against him, as the chief obstacle to his felicity, therefore when he
saw him ride close by Trandia, he drew his sword, and said, Come thou wanderer,
and let us try our titles to the Lady. We need not, said Trulious, let her
speak, and condem whom she pleases. He then attending her answer, she said,
There has none any right to Trandia but Truilous. Well, said Castore, since I
must dye by your condemnation, Madam, my fall shall be with the blood of
Trulious; and with that he gave him a very mortal wound on his side. Trulious
at the receiving of this wound, was almost dead but yet recovering himself, he
gave him another on the thigh, and after that, laid on strokes incredible for
one so fore wounded; while poor Trandia crying, and threatening, and promising
great things to Castore, to leave the fight; but all her tears and entreaties
was to no purpose, for fight they did, till they both fell down to the ground.
She running to Trulious, and finding that he did breath, caused him to be
conveyed into her coach, and away they hasted to the next Town: But O Heavens,
how grievously she lamented the sad fortune of her dear Trulious! who by his
groans and sighs did give his summons to death, while she spent herself with
dolorous and heavy complaints. At the last, while he was in her arms, he
faintly said, Now my dear Trandia farewell, the Gods make thee more happy in thy
second love, then thou have been in thy first: And so lifting up his head to
kiss her, and so breathed his last breath in her mouth: She seeing him dead,
could not contain her sorrows, but bursted forth a weeping, and lamenting, and
kising the dead body, she fell on her face, and said, I come my dear Trulious,
and so fell into a swound; her two women using all their art and industry for
her recovery, and filling the air with their cries, and not suffering their
Mistress to depart, she came to her self just as they were entering into the
next Town; and coming to a house, the very people in the streets did lament
with her: But one of her maids laying reason before her, told her, That
Trulious must dye, and that was the time, and the death, that the Gods had
appointed for him; and also, said she, What would you do? his body must be
buried, and you must go home to your Fathers. She always was her Counselor
before, and therefore she hearkened to her; and so causing the body to be buried
(after many entreaties) and clothing herself and her Servants in mourning, she
took her way toward Persia: And having uttered many sad Complaints, she
considered that it was the best way for her, not to discover herself to her
friends, because it was not known to any in the place where she was going.

So coming home to her Father, he and her Mother rejoiced to see her, but
wondering at her sadness, and her mourning apparel; she told them, That there
was a friend of Lord Panims dead, and one whom she loved greatly: But she
continued in her sad and pensive thoughts, which none knew but her servants,
that would not betray her. But good Salliman was extreme sorrowful to see his
daughters reserved temper: for all the invension he had, or that he and her
mother could devise, would scarce cause a laugh from her: Then they resolving
to try all ways with her, went abroad, and came to the Court, where they stayed
a while: And one night (as she was in her usual lamentations) there appeared
the spirit of her Trulious, and said unto her, O Trandia, leave thy weeping,
for thereby thou tormentest my soul, and so vanished. She durst not mourn then,
but striving as much as she could to comfort herself, at the last, with much
ado, she became as pleasant as any Lady at the Court, and then her beauty
appeared as bright as ever: And there was then with the Emperor, one of his
chief Lords of his Counsel, that fell in love with her, and married her.


Now, sweet Madam, you have the relation of the life of the Lady Trandia.
Cloryana gave Calsey many thanks; and smiling said, It seems there will nothing
last on earth, for joy is soon qualified with sorrow, and that has an end, as
is seen by this Lady. Truly, said the Lady Calsey, if Lovers be but constant
whilst they live, I think it is enough; for it is but a folly for one to spend
their time in mourning, and unnecessary lamenting, when all will nor call a
dead friend again.

Cleocreton now awaking his thoughts to what they were saying; for all the
while before, he was more contempla^ing on the beauty of Cloryana, then giving
any great heed to Calseys story, he said then to Cloryana, Madam, I am ^learly
of Lady Calseys opinion; and I think, that if you would but yield to love me, I
should think your constancy to me on earth, were satisfaction enough, and not
to have any mourning for me when I were dead. And do you think, Sir, replied
Cloryana, to have full satisfaction here? Truly I think we shall never have
that, but in our graves; and if we cannot have that on earth, then may you be
in some sort satisfied with my friendship, without my love. I greatly esteem
your friendship, Madam, replied Cleocreton; but I can take no satisfaction in
the World without your love; which is no hard thing for you to bestow, though
it were the most precious thing in the World to me, and more valuable. then all
the treasure in the World. Then said Cloryana, You speak, as though my love,
being enjoyed, were treasure and honor. Yes, Madam, surely it is Treasure, and
Kingdoms, and Honor in the highest. Then, said she, It ought to be linked to
Treasure, and Honor, and Kingdoms.

Poor Cleocreton was daunted at this speech, because he had not Kingdoms to
endue her withal. Come, come, Cousin, said Calsey, you are very p^evish to
night; will you not consent to no argument at all? you entertain your Guest
well indeed. Then Calsey took Cloryana by the hand; and in a pleasant humor
said, Come Madam, be not so coy to the Prince, because I came with you. And
then giving Cleocreton her hand, she took a Lute that lay by her, and played
them a Lesson very well, which very much delighted the Lovers; for Cleocreton
having Cloryana by the hand, said, Sweet Prince, be more gracious to me, or
else I am but a miserable Lover; and with tears in his eyes, he begged more
kindeness of her, saying, Sweet Madam, what is your displeasure against me? Is
your heart engaged to any other?

She fearing to give just occasion to him; said, You are too too hasty, my
Lord, in desiring to be assured of my affection at the very first; besides,
there is great Beauties at the King of Tunis his Court, and perhaps you will be
as ready to forsa^e Cloryana, as you seem amorous on her now. Well, said
Cleocreton, did I think really that you, Madam, did imagine me to be so basely
inclined, then let me dye presen^ly, before I be more mis^rable. Then the
Princess took his hand, and held it, saying, Live and hope, Cleocreton

He kissing her hand, she went from him to Calsey, who was playing still, and
said, Sweet Cousin, I pray thee let me have a song. She said, Good Madam, do not
make me out run my self at this time, not only to play ill, but to trouble
your patience so much as to sing so too. Well, said Cloryana, We will see what
Prince Cleocreton can gain of you. Your self, Madam, shall gain of me, as much
as any Princess in the World. But Cleocreton being glad to obey his Lady in any
thing, went to Calsey, and said, Come Madam, make me once in my life to hear
your sweet voice; but most of all to content the Princess. I, said she, since I
must needs do it, th^n let one word more come from the Princess, because she
may well say else, I would not do it for her. Nay, said Cloryana, you would
have me to entreat you, but now I will not. You shall have no Song then Madam.
Then said Cloriana I pray the good Calsey, sing. Then she sung to the Lute as
follows:

A Lady in Persia there lived of late.
Whose beauty excelled each one or other:
To gain her love great Princes did wait,
She that was alone born of her Mother:
Great pride she did take, sometimes to torment
Those that her vowed Servants would be,
And often leaves them to Passions rent,
But turn again shortly I hope you shall see.
Nay in good faith Calsey, said Cloryana, leave thy Song. Scarce could Calsey
hold for laughing, to hear her pretty humor. But Cleocreton was extremely
satisfied, and laughed out right.

Calsey then laid by her Lute, and laughed with them, and said, I will make no
more songs, if you laugh at me thus. In good truth, said the Princess, I
thought it was of thy own making, it was so well penned. Nay, it was never
penned, said she, for this is the first time I made Princess Cloryana the
subject of my song; neither could I take in hand to do that, unless I could do
it better, but I hope it will be no offense; fot it was only done to make your
Ladyship merry. No Cousin Calsey, those that would be offended at thy harmless
conceits, they should not be liked of by me.

Now it was time for the Ladies to go to bed, for fear that some or other
should discover them. So Galtazet lighted his Master to bed, and the Ladies
leapt into their glad bed, which was willing to receive them: And little
discourse passed b^tween them, before time measured them the short all of
sleep, which lasted till pretty far in the morning. Philopeet came and sat
down by them, and told them, That they were good Housewives indeed, that lay so
long a bed. Truly my Cousin Calsey, said Cloryana, kept me so long awake with
her conceits, as I am glad to get a little sleep in the morning. Well, said
Calsey, half awake, You do well to lay the blame on me that was fast asleep.

But Cleocreton was not so apt to bury all his cares in sleep, for one while he
remembered the Princess coldness, another while he tormented himself with the
thoughts of the impossibility for him to enjoy Cloryana, because of his Fathers
perverseness, and so he thought that he would clearly disinherit him of the
Kingdom. These and the like fancies made Cleocreton to look pale for want of
sleep.

The next day, said Albyazer to him, and smiled, Methinks you have the wan look
of a Lover, my Lord. Whereat he blushed, and fearing to be discovered, as it is
the custom of Lovers to fear that sometimes which is most impossible. Come my
Conqueror (said the incomparable Muxorb) be not ashamed to be like your
friends. Well (said Cleocreton) when I am in love, I will tell you all. Truly,
my Lord, (said Albyazer to Muxorb) if you had but heard how Prince Cleocreton
reviled love, you would have had no patience. Well (said Muxorb) Sir, lets hear
what you can say against the Noble Passion of Love. Whatsoever I can say
(replied Cleocreton) I will not take in hand to hold up the agument against
persons so much experienced as you be.

Now the company was forced to break up, for Albyazer was to accompany his
Father home to his Castle of Gnikrib; but the Empress did desire him to be
content with his other Daug^ter at home, and let C^lsey stay with Cloryana,
which she did: And Albyazer was to return again to the Court, but no sooner was
he had to Gnikrib, but he fell into a fever, which continued a good space, to
the great grief of Calsey, who loved him dearly, but most of all Philopeet,
whose whole content of her life rested on his welfare: And all the Ladies must
be content to forfeit their company for a time, and their servan^s; f^r
Cleocretons time of departure came, and Muxorb had got leave of the Emperor to
take his liberty, which he did intend to do, when Cleeoreton went; and the
night before their departure, the two Lovers did steal to their Ladies
chambers, to take their private-farewel.

Cleocreton came to Cloryana's Chamber, and there they conferred on his
departure which she would not by any suffer him to do. The next day therefore
Cleocreton told her, that to obey her, he would make come excuse for a day
longer: But, said he, Madam, shall I part from you without any assurance of
your love? Truly (said Cloryana) I do not love to engage my self at all. Well
Madam (said he) then you have no love for Cleocreton; How should he live and
hope?

She resolving to try his love to the utmost, the which she thought she could
not be too sure of, presently answered ^ Those whom one loves, they will trust
without bond or engagement. Yet (said he) they will give their word: But Madam,
you are very witty to torment me; but if you resolve to be thus, then
Cleocreton must either strive to cure his love, or dye; but the last is sooner
done then the first, which time can never remedy.

And cast in his eyes on the ground, a perfect despair Possessed him: But she
seeing it, could no longer hide her tender affections, but went near him, and
smiling said, Prince Cleocreton, I will dissemble with you no longer,
Cleocreton only has the heart of Cloryana, and had it before she knew his
love.

Then he revived with these sweet words of Cloryana, and taking her by the hand
and kissing it, said, Then, Madam, if you do, I hope you will always do the
same. I will, (said she) be constant, as long as you are so. Then Madam (said
he) that shall be for ever: But there is one thing that I shall beg of you,
which is, that you will not believe every appearance of my falsehood. It seems
you fear your self (said Cloryana.) No Madam (said he) but there may be many
false stories go abroad; but when Cleocreton proves false, then the whole frame
of Heaven and Earth shall be removed.

Then he took a box and presented it to her, which had in it his own
Portrai^ture exactly drawn; the case was a very rich co^l^ thing, all set and
enameled with Diamonds: She resolved to requite before they parted.

Muxorb and his Lady was likewise in a most serious Discourse; and he often
kissing her, said, Dear Madam, I will again and see thee, sweet Calsey. But
when (said she) even when I can get loose from my Nation: And dear, give me one
kiss, and that shall be all that I will give or receive from any, till I see
you again. O (said she) they that are so circumspect in their promises, fail
soonest. I prove false! no my dear, (said he) do but try me first, and then
trust. The truth is, he was not really suspected by her, but a tender, dear
love she had for him, and he as basely afterward requited her.

Now while they were all thus employed, there came news to the Emperor in the
afternoon, that the young Knights and Lords of the City, did desire to show
their valor, and so would have the Emp^rors and the Ladies to be spectators of
their ser^ue exercise: But the Emperor was busy in come serious Devetion, and
could not attend them; but he remembered that Cleocreton was for his journey on
the morrow, therefore he sent him word by Galtazet, that he desired his company
one or two days more: And Galtazet knowing where his Master was, came and told
him. Cloryana was very glad that she might enjoy her Princely servant a while
longer: Whereat Cleocreton with a great deal of reverence, kill the hand of his
Lady, and so had her good night. Now they both thought it very convenient, that
he should discover his affections to the Queen his Mother, for the better
carrying on of their design: So in the morning, before the time of sport,
Cleocreton went to the Queens Chamber, and told her the message that the
Emperor sent him; and he was naturally unwilling to discover the snare he was
fallen into, and stood mute: yet thinking that he must not neglect that which
would be any advantage to his love, and also that it was the pleasure of the
Lady of his life; the Queen taking notice of his earnest study, smiled, saying,
Well, Cleocreton, Lovers use to muse; but thou art not one, how come thou to
be so strangly stupefied? He hearing her speak so, thought it good to take
occasion by her speech, to discover himself, saying. In love Madam; if I were
so, would you oppose it? I would (said she) if were it not a person of merit
and quality. Nay, then I am right (said he) for I know there is none so worthy
as she. Then she is too high for us Son (said the Queen. What Madam (said he)
if I be loved again. Then so much the better. But it seems (said the Queen)
thou art in good earnest Cleocreton; but if it be so, tell me. Madam (said he)
it is none but the Princes Cloryana; and certainly it must be confessed, that she
only is the Paragon of the World, and sole Empress of Beauty.

The Queen sighed and said, Alas, what hope is there, though she do love thee,
yet will not the Emperor match his only Daughter to a Prince banished, not
only out of his Kingdom, but robbed of his right for ever. Well, fear not
Madam (said he) but that in a short time I shall bring or send you good news
from Hungary: But good Mother, I entreat you to let the Princes enjoy your
company, for she does greatly desire your favor. I, but (said the Queen) how
can I be privy to all this, and not seem a deceiver to the Emperor, whose
kindeness I shall abuse, by advancing my own designs, without his knowedge.

Cleocreton hearing his Mothers words, fell down on his knees, and said,
Deplorable is my condition; for I must either have my sweet Cloryana, or dye:
Nor shall all the Emperors in the World keep the sweet Cioryana from me; for
she vouchsafes to love me, by which I am obliged to gain her with my dearest
blood.

The Queen hearing her Sons passion, and knowing the power of love, she sought
to reclaim him with persuasions; but seeing all her Rhetoric was to no
purpose, but rather made him more violent, and she having a tender heart
toward her son (for there was no virtue that she was not possessed of) she
said, Since I must, Cleocreton, consent to thee, thou have my free consent; and
I shall be glad to have the esteem of so noble a Lady as Cloryana. Cleocreton
humbly thanked his mother.

And by this time the Lists began to be entered by the young Knights of the
Court; the Emperor, with the Empress, and sweet Cloryana, by her was set
Calsey, and on the other side was the Queen of Hungary and Philopeet, and
behind them was placed all the young Ladies of the Court, all placed on rich
cushions, and they attended the sports of Tilting, and the Tournaments.

Cleoereton appeared in green Armor, varnished and enameled with green and
silver, and in it one might see the cunningness of the Workman, in representing
a clear River, and in it little Fishes, leaping and sporting, as though it were
real; and on the banks was a Shepherdess of admirable beauty, flying up to a
Garden of diverse pretty slowers, that grew beside her on the green bank: His
Motto was,

Harm lies near Delight. His Horse was of a light Bay, and all his Trappings
and Furniture was of green and Silver, like the rest. But no sooner did
Cloryana see him, but ^^e looked on Calsey; and said, See Cousin, my Prince, how
fine he is to day, and clad all in green. Yes Madam (said Calsey) you know it
signifies hope. But (said Cloryana) where is Lord Muxorb? Yonder, said Calsey:
And she looked and see him in Armor of Ash color and flowered with red, as it
looked more like silks then steel. The Motto was this,

Beauty claims the Victory. Philopeet to her pleasure, beheld her recovered
Albyazer in Armor, being of the same that he had before, for he came but even
hen the Iusts began, and so was not so well provided: But suddenly the sports
began, and breaking their Spears very nimbly, and some being tumbled off their
Horses, drew their Swords, through anger to be disgraced, even before the eyes
of their La^ies, hoping thereby to revenge their injuries, and recover their
lost glory, with their following valor; but the Emperor perceiving it, called
and commanded, that they should put up their Swords, and said, Gentlemen, you
shall shed no blood here, but stay, and I will send you the Pictures of all the
Ladies of my Court that has beauty, and break your Spears in the honor of your
Ladies.

And the Portraictures of the Ladies was first presented to Albyazer, who did
very courteously give Cleocreton the choice, he taking Cloryana, and himself
Philopeet, Muxorb took Calsey, and then according to their several qualities,
the rest took their choice. Lord Cranor took Lady Vincy Lord Rophet took Lady
Pleama, young Crispus took Oney, and all the rest took choice according to
their interests and affection. But thus was it ordered, that he that conquered,
the vanquished should resign his Portraicture to him that conquered him.

The Lady Pleama's beauty, as it was excellent, so her Servant defended it
valiantly, and carried the prize of three Pictures, doing homage to Pleama's
beauty; but Cleocreton disdained that any should bear the prize of beauty,
though it was the more inferior prize; for he allowed none at all to any but
the Pearless Princess Cloryana; therefore couching his Spear he ran with such
violence, as he caused both horse and man on their knees, not only to do
homage to the beauty of Cloryana, but also to the horse feet of Cleocreton, and
so he lost all. Now Cleocreton had got a great many Portraictures, and Albyazer
and Muxorb had conquered all the rest; but only Lord Craner, who did stoutly
resist, for he had met with his equal, and they did so long continue, till at
the last his Enemy gave up his Portraictuee, he being constrained thereto; and
so Lord Craner had got other three besides his own, but Cleocreton quickly
dispatched him, and sent him grieving amongst the rest, not only for their
loss, but also their disgrace.

Now all seemed vanquished but the three Conquerers, Prince Cleocreton, Prince
Albyazer, and Lord Muxorb; but there came a Servant of the Lady Calseys into
the List, and hearing that Muxorb did claim privilege to her by her Picture,
came and produced her Picture but Muxorb soon espying his Ladies Portraicture,
the which the Emperor did not bestow, he straight may spurred on with
indignation, and thirst of glory, ran at the valiant Haimerei, who did
excellently well defend his Ladies beauty against her beauty; but he that had
the most love from the Beauty, gained the Beauty, and so away rid Muxorb with
his Ladies Portraiture, and when he came they were all vanquished. But Muxorb
thought, that though the honor of the day was great, yet that honor divided
among three, was but little; so he proud of his last Conquest, thought to try
his fortune with one of the Princes.

So going to Albyazer, he said, Come, win my six prizes from me. He would not
refuse it, but rather was as forward as Muxorb: Then did they go together, and
many offenses and defenses, blind Fortune gave Muxorb the Victory, to the
grief of Philopeet, that had no great esteem on Calsey: But for all that, she
thought herself a little rescued, if one may call it so, to see her Enemy fall
by himself; for Fortune was Cleocretons friend alwa^s in the field of Mars,
though in Venus Court she troad on the winged Ball, turning sometimes this way,
and sometimes that way with him; but she would suffer no Vmpire in pis Throne
at this time: For he coming to Muxorb. said, My Lord, since the other being
overcome, then let me friendly try with you for the sole Prize of the day; but
not for your Friendship, for that is a prize that I highly esteem. The Noble
courage of this Victor, did always beget admiration without envy, and esteem of
his very Enemies, nay, which was most of all, the esteem of his friend the
worthy Muxorb; who answered, Though my Lord, you were my Conqueror once, yet I
will not yield without trial, because ye would get no Honor by that; and yet
love has such effects, as to cause them that are possessed with it, to imagine
their snares to be laid by the hands of the most accomplished Beauties,
therefore it shall not be said, that I will not venture all my strength, and
the other prizes, for the Lady I account so: But if you do remain Victor, let
me keep these two, that I may not lose her esteem. Content, said Cleocreton.

With that they bravely advanced their Spears, and ran one upon another. Muxorb
gave Cleocreton a round salute over his Helmet, and he nimbly paid him in his
own coin; then Muxorb resolved to try his utmost, and bending all his force,
struck Cleocreton almost out of his saddle; but Cleocreton grew angry to be so
long debating a thing, that all the World must needs yield it to be his right;
and also knowing, that it was not the custom of Conquerors, to be long in
conquering, he presently gave Muxorb the foil; and then the^ embraced each
other, and he delivered to Cleocreton all the Pictures, only that of Calsey.
And being almost loaded with the number of them, the Emperor seeing it, said,
In earnest, Prince Cleocreton, you will carry all the Honor away from my
Persian Knights. If it be dishonor to your Majesty's Knights (said Cleocreton)
yet does the Honor rest to you still in the Princess Cloryana, whose Beauty
has made me invincible.

Then the Emperor espying Cloryana's Pourtraicture among them, and the highest
of them all, said, Truly Daughter I did not intend yours for one; but since it
is so, take your Coronet from your head, and therewith Crown the Conqueror. She
with a modest bsush, obeyed her Father, and Crowned the Temples of her beloved
Cleocreton: which did certainly presage, that she alone must set the Crown of
Persia on his head. He most humbly kissed the Princess hand, and reverently bowed
to them all, and so went from her; the Queen his Mother well noting with what
willingness she gave, and he received; But infinite praise and acclamation did
all the Persian people throw continually on Cleocretons noble valor in any
enterprise.

But the worthy Cleocreton thought no honor, like the last that the Emperor
conferred on him, to cause Cloryana to Crown him; whose beautions self he
preferred before all the Kingdoms and Crowns in the World.

Philopeet was highly dispreased, that her beauty would be foiled by Cloryana,
and Ca^sey likewise, for it was insufferato her, she always having the greatest
conceit of her own, above others.

But for Cloryana, she was satisfied, that she only should have the prize of
Beauty from all the World. The Ladies did clearly see Calseys discontent.
Whereupon said Cloryana, Cousin Calsey, thou art also troubled that Cleocreton
should conquer thy Muxorb. But poor Lady, she seemed as if she was not at all
troubled, and said, Truly Cousin, if he had ventured any thing else but my
beauty, pardon me, if I wished his honor above all the Princes on earth; but
since he went about so unprofitable a thing, as my beauty, I cannot grieve at
all; for in my conceit, that was the only thing that made him be vanquished.
But, dear Madam, if I were proud of my beauty, then have I matter enough, in
being seated next you, that have the choice name of beauty in the World. Well
Calsey (said Cloryana) thou can flatter fairly; but I know it is thy love
that makes the err, and have more esteem of poor Cloryana then she deserves.

But now the great care of our two Lovers, is, to take their secret farewell of
one another: They had some discourse that they did not expect, for the Emperor
would needs take the pleasure of a walk in the evenin. So they all went but the
solitary Queen of Hungary: The Emperor led his fair Empress, and after her went
her most incomparable Daughter, led by Prince Cleocreton, and after them
Albyazer with Philopeet, and then went the other Lovers, Muxorb and Calsey. The
Emperor and Empress was applauding Cleocretons worth and Princely demeanor, and
all the rest in their several discourses: Cleocreton and his sweet Princess was
altogether taken up with the sad discourse of his departure from Persia, O
(said he) how should I do, my Divine Princess, if some great match should be
offered the Emperor your Father for you, and I far distant, and not at Persia
to dispute with him. Well, my Cleocreton (said she) all the Parents in the
World shall never cause Cloryana to violate her love to Cleocreton.

Then she took out her picture, which she begged of the Empress her Mother for
the same purpose; that as she was to remember him by his Pourtrai^ure, so he
might do the same for her by her Picture: And she did it very cunningly,
because of the Lovers that stood next them; and conveying it i^ to the hand by
which he sed her, she s^id, Take this* and forget no^ Cloryana. It was of an
inesti^^ble value, only pu^ in a cover of Crystal, but the Picture it self
was held between four Angels that were framed; and though little, yet ^o
curiously they held the four corners of it in their hands, and having rich
Diamonds and Enamels to set their feet on, and their ^eads were enclosed with
enamel^d and transparent Diamonds, as it was thought to be one of the best
pieces in the World, being newly drawn by an exact workman, that the Emperor
employed a great while, in taking his one, and his Emperess, and Cloriana's
Pictures.

Cleocreton would have veiwed it well, it cast such a rare show, but he kne^
Philopeet was behind, who would know any thing, and of a penetrating wit and
would sometimes suspect things that never were thought on, therefore Cleocreton
only kissed it, and so putting it up, said, If I should be false to my
incomparable Princess, certainly my abject soul should not be worthy to breathe
in the air. Be you but constant, my Princess (said she) and then Cloryana with
her Loyalty shall deserve thy dearest affection. Albyazer was busy in begging
pardon for his defending Philopeets beauty no better, saying, for the future he
would prove himself more valiant. Muxorb and Calsey was pleasantly jesting and
talking of several passages, they were both of a more deearful disposition,
then were those that went before them.

Thus were they all severally entertained, t^ll the Emperor led them to a fair
little Revolet, whereon there stood the finest Waterworks that ever was
invented: on both sides the water, stood two Lions, which with their great
shoulders held up the works, and in the midst of the water stood two other, one
on one side, and another on another, who ^ith their hollow breasts and limbs
received the water, and so conveyed it to the works above, and those works
furnished all the Palace ^ith wa^er: Then they went up a pair of stairs, that
was fastened between the two Lions: On the one side one might perceive how
prettily the water came murmuring, and making pretty music at the t^rning of
the pipes; and then in another place, over the open shoulders of the Lions,
there stood a stone Cistern, wherein was Diana and her Nymphs washing their
alabaster limbs; and always at the turn of the water, one might see the Nymphs
wash and bathe the delicate body of their Lady; and also a little way off them,
was Actaeon turned to a Stag, and his own Dogs barking at him, and abusing
their Master with their unkind teeth, tearing him apieces. No^ having seen
all, the Emperor went toward the Palace, and his privy train followed him; but
to their great amazement* they saw two great fierce Lions, who having slain
their Keepers, and broke their ^hains, came toward the Emperor with open
mouth: Which Cleocreton perceiving, drew his sword and engaged one of the Lions
in so sore a fight, as made the Beast send out such cries, as made the ground
shake: The other run away, and straight finding Cloryana sitting anst^^eeping,
the Beast went and laid down his head on her knees: She exceedingly trembling
for fear, the Empress crying and lamenting, the Lady Calsey would needs go an^
partake of her danger; but Muxorb holding her in his arms, would not suffer.
Cleocreton having slew the other Lion, turned toward them; but seeing the Lion
lie so quietly on Cloryana's kn^e, and conceiving the great danger his Princess
was in, he made incredible haste to her, and said, Madam, hold him as fast as
you can. She did so; and then Cleocreton catched ^he Lion by the Beard, and
would have slain him; but the Emperor would not suffer him, but commanded the
people that were gathered together with pikes and swords, to carry the Beast to
his hold again. But the City of Sisuion was all on an uprore; for they seeing
the furious Beasts run from their dens, and hearing that the Emperor was walked
that ^ay, it made them like people mad, to save their Gracious and Sovereign
Prince from their rage.

Then as soon as the Lion was catched, the Emperor highed to his Palace; and
all the way as they ^ent, they could not but exceedingly praise the great
valor of the young Prince Cleocreton; and he leading his sweet Cloryana, she
lifted up her eyes to Heaven, and praised the Gods for the deliverance of her
Noble Cleocreton. Now they all bring come out of their great dangers, they all
heartily praised the Gods: And the Emporor told the Queen, that her Son h^d
slain one of the fiercest Lions that ever he saw in his life For surely (said
he) At the time that he was born, the Gods did all conspire, how to make one as
invinc^ble as themselves, and so it lighted on Prince Cleocreton to resume the
shape of Mars himself.

This was their discourse an the time of supper; which being ended, they all
betook themselves to their rest, being weary with their exercise that day. And
in the morning Cieocreton went to his Mothers bed side, and a while they
discoursed of the matters belonging to the business of Hungary; and at the last
parted, the Queen weeping heavily to part with her other Son also. Then he went
to the Emperor, and humbly biding farewell to his Ma^estie and the Empress, who
was very sorry to lose the company of so brave a Prince, the Emperor gave him a
very fair Jewel, and he reverendly gave him thanks, and departed, having both
their good wishes and prayers for his safety. Then last of all, going to his
Lady Cloryana's Chamber, and softly knocking, Julia came to the door; and
seeing the Prince look like one going to take a journey, she softly said unto
the Princess, Madam, here is Prince ^leocreton come to have a sight of you,
before he go. She hearing the name of her Prince, straight awaked, and said,
Where is he? Just here, Madam, said he. Come, Cleocreton, said she, for all
your haste, I will tell you my dream, I thought I was with you, and my Father
told me I must go with an Ambassador to a Foreign Country: And me-thought I
refused, but my Father plucked me from you, and would needs deliver me into the
hands of an Ambassador, but there straight came to him a Lady of great beauty,
and took my Father by the arm, and said it must not be so; whereat I waked, and
heard you.

Cleocreton thought her dream Ominous; and sighing said, I hope, Madam, your
dr^am will not prove true, surely the Gods will have more pity on Cleocreton.
Then he kissed her, which before he did never presume to do; and ^ith tears
said, My dear Princess, I shall not a great while behold the face of my adored
^aint.

She now insensibly touched with grief to part with him, and also to see his
grief, her eyes gushing out tears, which distilled down her vermillion Cheeks,
like an April shower on a fair Sky-light, carelessly exposed to the weather, she
said, The Gods make but Cleocreton as fortunate for ever, as he has been at
Persia.

Calsey by this time was gotten up, for they both lay together, and she and
Muxorb was a little high in their terms; for there was something that she took
unkindely, and reproving him sharply, at the law they were good friends: And
then he kissing her a thousand times, said, Well, it shall not be long ere I
see thee again, dear Calsey. Then he left her hardly sensible of her loss, but
afterward, poor Lady, comes her sorrow.

Now Cleocreton often going back to his Cloryana, but at law they must part:
Then shedding a shower of tears, which even moved the heart of Julia to weep
also, in came Calsey: then Cleocreton taking her by the hand, said, Good Madam,
be careful of my Princess, and saluting her, went to have another kiss of
Cloryana, but went immediately forth, for fear that he should have been forced
to have returned again. So they departed, and Albyazer rode a little way with
them, and then parted from them.

Now Cleocreton and Muxorb went together some miles, till they took shipping,
then parted they. Cleocreton sailed very sadly toward Hungary, and Muxorb as
full of mi^th, went toward Corinth. In few days Cleocreton got to the coast of
Hungary; and horsing himself, having no company but only Galtazet and a
Squire, for he desired to go very privately, and to that end changed his name,
which was Garnes, for so was the little Brother of Cloryana called, and she
greatly loving him, told Cleocreton, that if ever he had occasion to hide his
name, that he should call himself Garnes.

Now Cleocreton came to the house of the good Lady Queamas, who reio^ced to see
the Prince, and to hear of the welfare of the Queen his Mother. Young Fortus,
whose name was Strata, was a hunting: Then Cleocreton commanded Galtazet to go
tell his Brother, that he was there. Then Galtazet went and found Strata, and
rid by, to see whether the young Prince would know him or no; but no sooner
was Galtazet hastened by, but Strata turned his horse, and galoped after him,
saying, What, Galtazet, is it thee. Then he bovved, and told him, that his
Brother Cleocreton was at his house, and that his Mother the Queen was well,
and that she had sent him a pretty Ievvel, which he gave him: Then Strata
hasted away, and left the sport to the rest of his Companions; and alighting
and seeing his Brother, they embraced each other, and with glad hearts asked
one another of all the passages that they knew; which Cleocreton did also, but
omitting that of his love to Cloryana.

Then Strata told Cleocreton, that Meaga had banished the love of almost all
the Kings Subjects by her oppression, and that she had born the King three
Sons, and was grown so secure in her wickedness, that she thought never to be
removed; and that there was gathered together a head of Rebels, and their chief
was one Crenopher, and the next to him was Meaga's Father, the Earl of Drooma;
who foretelling her, that great misery would befal^ her, if she did not resign
her place to the lawful Queen of Hungary; she she insolently replied, Keep your
doting Prophecy, for them that will give you thanks for it; I will make you
know, that I am you Sovereign. So she being touched to the quick, would not
spare her own Father, but caused the King to take his Estate from him, but took
her Wicked Mother and Slut to her. And thus was the Court of Hungary furnished
with rare guests, while in the mean time the poor Earl being troubled in his
Conscience for his Daughters sin, and having no maintenance, turned utter foe
to the King, and his own Household, and was amongst the Rebels.

Cleocreton bearing his Fathers distress, through his Subjects hate, that
before was of an accounted the most Loyal: therefore he would go (as nature
bound him) and cool the heat of the Rebels: But Strata said, Brother, why
should we fight against our friends, and for the wicked Mega. I (said Garnes)
but where is our natural affections, if we do not relieve our Father in his
distress; and for her, let her puniwment be by some other: And brother, fear
not, But the Gods will look on the afflictions of our virtuous Mother.

With this resolution the virtuous Prince went in amongst his Fathers Enemies,
and first observing which was the Queens friends, they fell on the other like
Lightning, and, made such a great breach upon them with their two sword so that
all them that were left, with great admiration, callee them gods, that were
come in the persons men, to revengd their Treason. But their natural Prince
Cleocreton, did not delight to shed the blood of his Fathers Subjects, and
therefore said, with a high voice, Friends, what are your reasons to abuse your
selves thus, in rebelling against your Supreme Lord. One of the head of them,
which was Crenopon, said, Our oppressions are great, by reason of the wicked
Harlot; our hate extends not to our King, but against her. Well, said
Cleocreton, persist not in your practices, but come and I will beg your pardom.

They then thought it was the best course so do, and shouted in token of
agreeing to what he said. Then he going near the King, kneeling down, said,
Your Majesty's Subjects craves pardon for their past faults. The King would not
let say any more, but took him up, and presently gave them pardon, for he
himself was a witness what wonders they performed, and by inspiration had
respect for them, though be knew them not. Therefore he said, Let me know the
men that have saved my life. Whereupon Cleocreton and Fortis took off their
Helmets, and kneeled down to their Father: The King then knew full well, that
they were his two Sons, and was grieved in his thoughts that he had treated
them so fair, and shown them so much kindeness, for he deemed them no better
then Bastards; yet he said, Come, Bastard Sons must have portions, though not
Kingdoms. Well, my Lord said Cleocreton) I would to the Gods you had lived as
virtuous a life as the Queen our Mother, then had not your Majesty harbored
so base a Concubine, and thrown forth your lawful and virtuous Wife: But know,
that though she is not in Hungary, yet does she in health live in Persia, and
wishes you health, my Lord, notwithstanding all your harshness to her: And I
add this, that your Majesty shall well see, that the King of Tunis will prove
his Sister worthy and virtuous, and then you will be glad to take the Vengeance
of your Harlot with patience.

The King in anger rose, and called to the Guard to clap them up. But they
said, Not so, my Lord they that saved your life, will not Juffer their own to
be taken away; and so making their way with their swords, they broke through the
midst of them: And when they were got from the throng of their Enemies, they
looked behind them, hearing and seeing Meaga commanding the Soldiers to
pursue them, but none would obey her; for they feared the valor of the two
young Princes.

Then they went and lodged at Lady Queama's house, and in the morning took
their farewell of the good Lady, who was almost become a natural Mother to
Fortus, and shed a world of tears to part from him. Then they took their
journey to wards Tunis, and when they were almost at the City and Palace of
the King, they savv a great multitude of men, and tents, and they were ready
to give battle to one another. Cleoc^eton enquired who they were, and they
told him, it was the Midian King, who upon an old grudge, had sought new
occasion, and so had brought on a ^^ar upon the King of Tunis. Cleocreton
stood, and seeing the Battle to be hot, and that on a ^udd^n Tunis was put to
the vvorst, then they rushed in upon the Midians, and put new courage into the
hearts of the other party; for their General being dead, Cleocreton bravery
performed that Office for t^em, and so valiant were they both, as the very
sight of them, did daunt the Midims, but their stout General kept them from
turning their backs. Cleocreton seeing that, quickly engaged himself in fight
with him, whose name was Basus; he thought to h^ve dispatched Cleocreton,
because of his slender body and youth but the contrary fell out; for Cleocreton
with his horse, crosing in upon Basus, and e^pying his hare neck, he gave such
a stroke upon it; as Basus fell down dead; the Soldiers seeing their General
dead, put their greatest strength to their heels, for losing their General,
they lost all hear^s, and the other scorned to pursue; but the Soldiers did
with shouts appiand their new General: And the King seei^g them ride in the
front of the Army, that had vvon him that almost lost Victory, came to them,
and said, Gentlemen, I shall think my self greatly honored, if you w^ll come
and appoint your own reward, that has so recovered my lost honor.

Cleocreton and Fortus took of their Helmets, and Cleocreton kneeling said
Gracious Lord and Uncle, we claim more right to your esteem by relation, then
valor. The King seeing something of his Sisters face in both of them, ran and
embraced them, ^aying, What! my Nephews Cleocr^ton and Fortus. Then the King
took them by the hands, and led them to his Queen, and said, I am richer then I
thought for these are the two Sons of my Sister of Hungary. Which, said the
Queen? and s^luted them: There was set in her chamber with her, her dear
Daughter Marsea, and her Near the Lady Freesa, who vv^s Daughter to the King
of Calchese, of excellent beauty, vvherevvith young Fortus was took, at the
v^ry first sight of this young Lady, whose stature, though lovv, yet she was
very taking, and of an admirable vv^t, but her Cousin Princess M^rsea, was of a
pass^onate temper, and though she was fair enough, yet vv^nted she that
discreet behavior that young Freesa h^d; for she was apt to be taken with
every object, and sometimes she would, beyond the bounds of m^desty, betray it
with a certain wanton grosing of her great gray e^es, that no sooner did her
Admirers approach her with any show of Affection, but they straight took
surfit of her common compliance, for there is nothing so svveet, as to conquer
the Enemy that seems invincible: but of that temper was not the Lady Freesa,
for she had so sweet a commanding presence, that all must needs love her,
though they durst not approach her.

Now when the King had entertained his Nephews a while amongst the Ladies, he
retired with them, to discourse of matters of State, and excused himself that
he did not so speedily perform his promise to the Queen of Hungary, their
mother, but his own Wars at home was matter enough of excuse for him; yet he
then presently sent an Ambassador to the King of Hungary. But now Cleocreton
did also dispatch Le^ters to Persia, to his beloved Cloryana, and the Queen his
Mother, and after a good space they received them; the Quee^ opening hers,
before she red it, she called Cloryana and delivered her one: Who with joy
opened it, and found it thus,

My most adored Princess,
I Am sorry that I had not an opportunity sooner, to let know that Cleocreton,
though at Tunis, yet is he as Faithful, as if he were in Persia; and that there
is nothing in the World would more comfort him, then to know from your self,
that Cloryana is so too; without which there is no life for your only devoted
Servant,

Cleocreton.


Cloryana was exceeding joyful to hear from her beloved Cleocreton and reading
it of ten over, she showed it to her Cousin Calsey, who also ha^ long expected
to have the like from her Muxorb: but all in vain she waited, which did greatly
daunt her, ^ut she would not show her grief to any but her Maid Treena, and to
her she opened the secrets of her heart; for she knew her fidenty, and Treena
had cometimes been a Witness of his pretended love.

Cloryana by the same Messenger, returned this Answer:

Prince Cleocreton,
YOur Faithfulness does very much delight me, and know, that Cloryana shall
never by inconstancy, merit your discontent; And as you would be esteemed by
me, so continue still to love your alone,

Cloryana.


This being enclosed within the Queens Letter to Cleocreton, did the Messenger
return with all speed to wards ^unis, whiles the Ambassador arrived at
Hungary, with his Letters to the King, who was turned strangely effeminate, by
being ruled, and over ruled by the Wicked Meaga: yet he had some remorse of his
virtuous Wife, when he considered the words of his Son Cleocreton, and was very
much troubled with his own guilt and faults, which appeared fresh before him;
and thereupon he became very much disturbed in his mind: But Meaga seeing the
King so pensive, and that he shunned her company, she then fearing that his
Conscience should move him to remove her, she then fetching up all her Devilish
Rhetoric: What! (said she) how comes my Lord so heavy and sad? Does the words
of one man affright you, that commands so many? Has any one more wisdom or
judgment to order your own affairs, then your self? Then cheer up your self,
my dear Lord, and let us enjoy one another in peace and tranquillity of mind;
for assure your self, if yout enemies know you indisposed toward your own
occasions, they will take advantage by it to overcome you: Do but take the
counsel of your servant Meaga, and you shall well perceive that no streights
shall be troubles or perplexities to us. This was enough to quiet the troubles
of the blinded King at that time, having yet the vail of deceit and enchantment
cast upon his better judgment and discretion. But now the Ambassador came
and required audience, and delivered his Letters to the King; who sitting
with his Council commanded to have them read aloud as follovveth:

The King of Tunis, to the King of Hungary.
VVIshing health, if one so much declining from Honor or Nobleness, can digest
the counsel that is determined for thy good; which is, to fetch our Sister your
lawful Wife home to Hungary, and by a kind acknowledgement of thy penitency
for thy passed injuries: But if this be denied, then look for no mercy at our
hands, but all the cruelty that can be committed, by and without delay: I will
overrun Hungary with such a War, as shall by too late repentance, show to the
world thy shame and folly, in throwing out a virtuous and honorable wife,
without any cause of mislike, but only thy brutish lust to a base Harlot at
home. If thou will not consent to this, then shall Cleocreton thy lawful Heir
to thy Crown, be quickly invested in thy throne and Kingdom, which is now
filled with oppression and ignominous Criminal Offenses, committed by thy own
self, which should be all the example of good to thy Subjects. Now if our mild
conditions be granted, then shall thy faults be buried in Oblivion, and Hungary
shall have Tunis for a Friend and a Defender.

Farewell.

Then the Ambassador expecting an Answer from the King, who very well knew,
that he was greatly favored to have such reasonable conditions of Peace, he
stayed the Ambassador some days with honorable entertainment; whiles in the
mean time the King, whose time or Enchantment was finished, conferred with his
Lords and Council is formerly: But Me^ga now fears the worst, and her old Aunt
knowing all things, saw her practices at an end, burst for very grief; but
Meaga had not lost all hopes yet, but built them all on the Kings love* which
she thought would be eternal: Therefore she went to the place of Council, as
full of confidence as ever but the King now did not behold her with such eyes
as before, for he could se^rce brook her impudence, nor was there and else that
had the least love for her; therefore when they before her face, had t^ld the
King of all her treacherous actions then he fully convinced of them all,
commanded to have her out: But before they could lay hands on her, she said
a-aloud, What, will the Kings Majesty trust Traitors also? truly, my Lord, I
would have them all hanged, that seeks to oppose your wise determinations: If
them prattling fellows had been your truly begotten Sons, would they stirred up
such commotions as these against their Father? but they are all in a conspiracy
to have the life of the King. The Council even amazed to hear her impudency,
said, Will your Majesty su^er this?

Then the King commanded to have her carried to Prison, where she remained
cursing Gods and men, Heaven and earth, till furt^er order was taken for her:
But the poor Queen of Hungary little thought how effectually her stars were
working* for her, only she wondered that she should hear of any thing of peace
in Hungary, but nothing from Cleocreton; and also the Princess, expects ne^s
with the Queens from her dear Cleocreton, who was also impatient for to hear
from them, because he had writ.

But you are to understand, that Mersea his Cousin, as it was her custom to fall
in love with every one* so did she not spare Cleocreton, who indeed was lovely
in ever ones eye, but did entertain boundless affection for him at the first
sight, not considering there nearness in blood: Now she following the vent of
her foo^ish affections, and by all her cunning could not allure ^i^, whereat
she wondering the cause, she would often discourse of love, and sometimes would
she pretend to he his Confident and would say, Cousin, I think you are in love
with some beauty or other: if you will tell me, I will be as faithful as any
body in the World. But he having a notable penetrating, profound wit, through
all her masks of deceit, could perce^ve the intent of her speeches; and
therefore would not disclose any thing at all. But she did imagine that the
^reat Beauty of Cloryana had taken him from all others, therefore to be assured
of this, she made use of a fellow who had formerly lived in Persia, and caused
him by a maid of hers, whose Sweetheart he was, to get himself acquainted with
Galtazet, and to get by any whiles his Letters to carry to P^rsia; and indeed
so cunning was he, that he g^t Galta^ets good opinion: Whereupon he told his
Master, saying, Sir, since you have lost your other Messenger you may make use
of this fellow, to convey your Letters. Cleocreton neither fearing nor
suspe^ing any thing, did give this man the Letter to the Queen, and ^^ it was
one for Cloryana. But no sooner had he got the Letter, but he carried it to his
Mistress, and she to Marsea: But O how did she appla^d her one invention, for
so strangely ^e^uiling Cleocreton; and then she found in it a familiar and
lovely sweet Letter from him to Cloryana; she presently took paper, and
counterfeited this Letter, as follows;

Madam.
I Am sorry that I cannot have that love for you as formerly, but if it be so,
it will better please the Emperor your Father, and so please,

Cleocreton.


Now she did not alter the Queens Letter; for there was news of Hungary in it,
but enclosed her Letter in ^^e room of the other, and sent him away: but also
bad him tell it up and down Persia, that Cleocreton was to be married to
herself. Now she did verily think, that this would for ever break friendship*
but though it could not, yet it wrought harm and discontent enough, for when
the Messenger came and gave the Letter to the Queen* and she giving the other
unto Cloryana: O Heaven, how in vain was all consolation when she read it to
her self: She presently went and showed it to the Queen, who wondered that her
Son should so strangely violate ^his vows and prodestations. Then they heard
the report of the marriage between Marsea and Cleoton; the Queen was extremely
dissati^f^ed within her self, but she put the fairest show outward, for the
more comforting of Cloryana, who did so hainously take the falsehood of
Cleocreton, that often would she steal from Calsey and the Queen, and get her
self in her Clo^et, and weep and lament her hard and wretch^^ Fortune, to love
Cleocreton, or ever to see him.

And one day amongst the rest, she did so, and her Cousin Cals^y d^d follow and
listen, and heard her say, O false and Perjured Cleocreton! Whom do thou
torment? is it not Cloryana? that always rendered thee chiefest in her thoughts;
and her, who did not seek the first, although she did love thee, before she
knew thy love. But O, forsworn Wretch! How can thou look on the Pourtraicture
of thy Cloryana, whom thou have thus abused with thy falsehood* But then would
she say, O Clo^yana, Why do thou so? Whom do thou condemn and rail against?
Is it not thy Cleocreoon, whom thou have vowed thy only stay and comfort of
thy life? And surely it must needs be thy own fault, that makes wise Cleocreton
refuse thee: Can he err? No, he cannot; blame thy self, O foolish Cloryana:
For was it possible that he should continue to love thee, that deserves rather
to live in love with the Gods, and not the childish Cloryana? And it may be
Cleocreton is not inconstant, O fool then, would he declare it himself.

Then did she betake herself to revenge it on her fair eyes, and with an
incessant grief, she did not spare to torment her self. But Calsey hearing her
extreme sorrow, and weighing her own case by hers* could have wished to have
born her company* but having a stronger heart, and knowing her Cosins weak
temper, she knocked. Cloryana rose ver^ hastily, and rubbing her eyes, came to
the door, thinking it had been Julia, but found it to be her dear Calsey, whose
eyes was also red with tears; yet she would not confess what was the truth, but
told Cloryana, that she did greatly bemoan her condition. And seeing the true
Pourtraicture of Cleocreton, she took i^ up, and looking on it, said to
Cloryana, Certainly Madam, he is not inconstant, but rather some deceit is in
it, or some trial it is, to ^e^ how you will take his inconstancy. O Calsey
(said Cloryana) thou would fain put a fair gloss upon it; but do but view his
own Letter? It may it is not his own hand (said Calsey.) O yes, there is no
hope but Cleocreton is false.

Calsey opening the Box of Diamonds where the Picture was, and in the bottom
was a Christa^ Glass, which she ^ifted up, and found these verses, and gave
them to Cloryana, for she did never see them before, and she read them as
follows:

Cleo wounded was a late,
And Clory did not show her hate,
For so much firmness shall be found,
In his love that had the wound,
That if she threaten him with jealousy,
His wound will open fresh, and causeless die;
Then Queen of Beauty take no pride,
To wound and kill a heart beside.
Truly, Cousin (said Calsey) methinks these very verses does testify his
faithfulness, and does also request you not by jealousy to wound and kill him;
have more confidence then in his virtues. Well, Calsey (said Cloryana) thou
pleadest well for him: But what can I say less then I do.

But while she pleaded for Cleocreton, her heart was filled with her own
passions; and though she did bear it out with incredible p^tie^ce, yet the time
was come, that yield she must, and yield ^e did to sorrow, for the inconstancy
of her Muxorb; and her sorrow caused such inward grief to approach her, that
she would not open her mind to any, but only to her maid Treean: and to her
would she say, O^ Treean, what harm have I done to the incomparable Muxorb,
that he after all his high expressions of love, should in absence forget his
poor Calsey, that would refuse all the Kingdoms of the World for him?

The Maid being of a good nature, and pitying her Lady, always pleaded, Why
Madam, he w^ll return again I am persuaded: But her sickness increased, and
grew very sore, and she still kept it secret, with extraordinary torment. At
the last came her Brother Albyazer, and required the cause of her sadness:
Which out of her great love to Albyazer, for there was an entire affection
between them, she satisfied him.

Th^n did she tell him the inconstancy of Muxorb, and with a thousand
expressions of love to him, that was false and treacherous to her. But said
Albya^er, I will find him out my dear Sister, and do thou but write to the
perfidious Muxorb, and I will make him know, what are the qualities that a
Gentleman ought to have. O, do not (said she) dear Brother, abuse him, for he
is noble in all things except this Well, said Albyazer, droop not, but comfort
thy self, and thou shall see what I will d^

So with persuasions, she did recover her former cheerful frame of spirit,
which did greatly please her Cousin Cloryana, who was a great deal more constant
to aff^ict herself, with her wronging p^or Cleocreton, who every hour expected
an answer of his Lettes, and of one indeed he had, but Cloryana would not stoop
to write to him, yet the Queen did twitch him up, though in dark expressions,
but yet such as would smart to the quick.

And whi^es the base Messenger returned, there came to the Persian Court an
Ambassador from Calydon, from the Emperor, to require Cloryana in marriage with
his young Son Frederick: For the Emperor of Calydon was well in years, for he
had ^ived with a wife a great while, and had no issue by her; then she dyed,
and he married another young Lady, by whom he had his Son Frederick, and he
before he died, would have his Son settled and married; and thought no match
more fit then the Emperor of Persia's daughter, his good friend: His mind^ he
did declare to his Son, but he being already engaged to a young Lady, though
beautiful, yet far his inferior, therefore Frederick would have persuaded his
Father from the business; but the old Emperor not knowing his Sons Reasons, but
thought it was through childishness, therefore he followed his own will with
eagerness, and with many entreaties, he greeted the Emperor of Persia for his
Daughter.

The Emperor of Persia was very glad of the profer; but said the Emperess, I
cannot part with Cloryana yet, she is too young. Then said the Emperor, We
cannot deny the Emperor of Calydon, our good Friend; and again, there is no
match fitter for the advancing of our Daughter, and some strange fancy would
possess the Emperor, if his kindeness be retorted with a refusal* Then the
Emperess consented to all those powerful arguments, but so did not the Queen of
Hungary, for with silence she heartily wished the contrary.

Then the Emperor sent for Cloryana, to see what she would say to the business,
who was with Philopeet and Calsey, and Albyazer, who were very much talking of
inconstancy, yet they did not all know how much Cloryana was concerned in the
discou^s^, though poor Calseys condition was known, and much b^meaned, whom
Albyazer prot^sted in some case to revenge; and therefore he begged leave of
Philopeet to go to Corinth secretly, and there meet with Muxorb. Thus were they
all employed, Cloryana and Calsey, Albyazer and Philopeet, when ^he Emperor
suddenly surprised Cloryana with a Messenger; and she leaving the Lov^rs to
themselves, Calseys greatest care was to get alone. But when Cloryana came, the
Queen of Hungary absenting herself, the Emperor smiling said, What Cloryana,
have thou a mind to be married? the Emperor of Calydon, has sent to require
you for his Son: and your Mother and I am well contented with it, and we look
that you do obey our will, and not in the least cross our intentions, under
pain of our displeasure.

The sweet Princess was never brought to such a straight as ^ow; for ^he was
fully re^olved to be constant to her Cleocreton, though he was not so to her,
whereupon she one while did show the color of the Rose, that climbing up to
her face, was grown proud to have so high an honor, but then again received a
check for his pr^de, b^ being overshadowed with pale fe^r, for the beautiful
Princess was afraid to displease her F^t^er with an over^rong de^ial: Therefore
very reverently said, My Lord, sure my you^h will plead against me, and my want
of discretion, to become so grave a ^ondition, that I am altogether ignorant of.

Come (said the E^p^ror, (...)) Cloryana, I am not young Frederick that am
courting thee, but thy Father commanding thou needst not fear but I will
provide for thee bette^ ^he^ t^ou ^hi^ke^^. She see^ng her Father both
confident and ^e^olute* an^ ^houg^t that ho^ever, a prolonging of time wo^ld
bring for something ^ore concerning Cleocreton, theref^re s^id She humbly* I
hope your Majesty will not dispose of me any way, till you have enquirrd of
the Gods. I am glad Daughter (said the Emperor) that you are so Religious, it
shall be done as you say: for it was the custom of the Country. Therefore the
Emperor detained the Calydon Ambassador till he cent to Delphos, to enquire at
the Oracle of Apollo. Then Cloryana, however glad that she had gotten a little
respet for her undesired marriage, went to the Queen of Hungaries Chamber,
where she sighed out her discontent to the good Queen, and said, O Madam, how
shall we do to put by this great suit? for first I will know Cleocretons cause,
and the certainty of his inconstancy; then all the Emperors in the World shall
not dishonor the name of Cloryana with the stain of Ingratitude and
Inconstancy; and if be he false, then am not I in a condition to marry, but dye.

The Queen could not choose but weep, to hear the sweet Lover, how she pratled
out her own Virtues, and to think that any thing should proceed from her so
derogating from her own disposition; as that Cleocreton should so strangely
neglect the Pearless Princess Cloryana.

But while the Queen and the Princess was thus blaming innocent Cleocreton,
Albyazer was craving leave of Philopeet, that he might leave her some space:
For, sato he, Madam, the grief of my poor Sister, does concern me, next to the
harm of your self. So Philopeet knowing the fidelity of Albyazer, she consented
to it; whereupon he pretended some affair that he had in hand, and so got the
Emperor also tolet him go. But no sooner was he gone, but his Cousin, whom he
merrily gave her in charge, whose name was Prcuhoun, and he entertaining
asecret affection for Philopeet, took occasion one day, by Albyazers absence,
to courther, and fair, Now Madam, if I were so highly honored as to have the
love of so rare a person as your self, I should not leave you as my Cousin does,
I should sooner dye then do it. She were a strict Mistress indeed (said
Philopeet) that would not give her friend leave to go about his earnest
occasions, O Madam (replied he) I should make all business wait on so
Accomplished a Lady as you are. These and many other things he said, to make
known his love to her. The which she very well perceived, and to avoid the
same, she did shun his company: Sometimes she would tell him, that he was a
trusty friend to his Cousin in his absence, rather to condemn, then to speek for
him: But her shun^ing of him went wo^se for Cloryans, for she would often
frequent her company, which did affect the poor Princess the more; for Lovers
^ist^essed seeks rather to be alone, then to have such company as they will not
impart their secrets to: For Cloryana did not look upon Philopeet for a
Confident, for she was jealous that she ^ould tell her Mother what she know;
for the Empress was very familiar with Philopeet But Cloryana was hugely civil
to her, for her (...) temper not such, as she would rather give her self the
trouble of ariding Philopeets company, then distake her in the least.

Now Cleocreton had received his Mothers sharp Letter, which stung him to the
h^a^t and he became so pensive as passed, but was often crossed with the
extravagant love of Marsea. And one time it chanced, that the King of Tunis her
Father did go a hunting of a Stag in his own for^e^^s, with the Princes of the
Court, and the Queen and the Ladies went also to the sport; but all Mer^ea's
care was, rather to follow Cl^ocreton then the Stag: And so it was, that the
Stag went into the most remote place in the Forest, and all o^ them losing the
fi^ht of the Bea^l but Cleocreton, who very nimbly followed him and Marsea
followed Cleocreton as fast as he did the Stag shall pursuing the beast closel
with his good Dogs, he ended the life of the sport at that time: And he feeing
the Beast dead, and being ^eary, thought to rest himself under one of the large
green trees; but looking behind him, he see his Cousin Mersea, who said, What
now, Cousin, have you stolen our sport from us; but it is a small thing to
steal a Stag, for you can take hearts. Why, Madam, said he, sometimes a Stag is
called a Heart, but you are welcome to have any thing that I have stolen; take
it, for dead Hearts will do me no good, but a living heart.

She ^ould have said more, but that the King her Father came toward him; and
he merrily said, What Nephew, will you not be content with our sport, but you
must have my Daughter too? Then said Cleocreton also, smiling, I fear, my Lord,
I shall get but little honor by this hunting; for your Majesty charges me with
your Daughter, and she says, I have stolen the Beast And so they rid toward
the rest of the company; whiles young Fortus was at the other end of the Wood,
riding with Freesa, and he took hold of an opportunities to tell her of his
Love: Madam (said i, e) there is a great difference between the chase of
Beauty, and this in the Forest; for If any do but take the Beast, we are all
contented, and though he were too flight for us all, we should but make little
matter of it: But I know by sad experience, that both my eyes and heart have
followed the chase of your Beauty, ever since I had the happiness to see you
first, and am never weary; and I know, that if any one should get that which I
so long have thirsted after, they should have my blood with it; and I do not at
all weigh the venturing of my life for you, if you would but give me some
encouragement.

Then said Lady Freesa, That was well put in, my Lord, it seems you must have
encouragement, or else you can follow that chase no longer, but I fear I have
given you some occasion to think me light, which makes you so confident in your
discourse. Truly, Madam (said Fortus) I think your Admirers shall never boast
of overmuch favor, I am sure I have little enough; yet you cannot choose but
look on me sometimes; for I have often made it my business to make my self yo
sole object, as much as I could, but your heart is harder then the very
Adamant, that may not be softened or fashioned: Though there is none more
sweetly civil then your self. But dear Princess of my life, either be more
gracious, or else it is the ready way to kill your most faithful servant.

But by this time their secrecy was arrested, by the coming of the King and the
rest of the Noble Hunters. Now there was a report spread abroad, that there was
a man seemed invincible in Hungary, that stood for the defense of Meaga, and
many noble Knights was foiled and slain by him, and in short every one became
afraid and distressed because of him. Then Cleocreton told his Nucle that he
must needs go and try his ^a^our with him. The King consented though
un^illingly, yet would he not part with Forrus, who was wholly devoted to the
beauty of young Freesa. Then Cleocreton took his journey; but the night before
he went, the Mersea was much moved at his sudden departing, but she thought she
would have answer of her love; and therefore having provided a Letter for that
purpose, and being in a high Territ, she saw Cleocreton walking all alone under
where she was, with other Ladies, taking their pleasure: Then she hastily put
her hand in her pocket, and thinking to throw it down to him, in the room of
her Love-letter, she threw down the intercepted Letter of Cleocreton to
Cloryana, and in it was wrapped a copy of her counterfeit Letter she sent. But
D, what disturbance it breed in poor Cleocreton, when he saw his own Letter
that he sent to Cloryana, and another base Letter, that seemed as a Copy of
some other; but pondring more seriously upon it, he plainly perceived the drift
of Mersea, and also saw it fall from her; whereupon he ^id clearly conclude,
that she by craft had intercepted his Letter, and sent that strange im^i^de ^ne
in its room. Then was he almost mad to think that Cloryana should so strangely
account of him, as to think him treacherous. O! (said he well might my Mother
so sharply reprove my basen^ss to the Princess! O pardon me, my dear Cloryana,
and condemn thy too much credulity, and do not settle revenge on thy innocent
Cleocreton. But then he was also much troubled, to think that he could not go
speedily to Persia, but must first go to Hungary to fight with the enchanted
Friend of Meaga's fancy: But as he went along, he said to himself, If I should
dye by the sword of this Giant, then must Cleocreton never be accounted of
otherwise then a Traitor wi^h the Divine Cloryana: But ah false Treachery. And
then again said he, Must Cleocreton be abased at the valor of one man when he
has slain so many? And what may Cloryana say? she may justly banish me from
her as a Cow^r^, unworthy of her love. Come (said he, to his good Squire, and
Galtazet) lets now see what this Monster will do with Cleocreton.

So they went to the place of battle, and Cleocreton armed himself with Armor
more for strength then magnificence, and went to the proud Knight that defended
the right of a Harlot to the Crown of Hungary; but Cleocreton left this charge
with Galta^et, that the Letters which he by chance got from Mer^ea, should, if
he dyed, be carried to Cloryana, to avouch his great constancy to ber, and the
great desire he had to have her remembrance, though dead.

And so we will leave him to the mercy of Fortune, and the power of his good
Angel to bring him again to his sweet Cloryana, who was always in the
condemnation of her blameless Lover, and never did she blame him, but (...) ^^e
accused her self for her own forwardness and want of love; and poor Calsey was
ready always to simpathize with her Cozen, and many times would they walk into
the shady Groves, and on the trees would they engrave the names of Cleocreton
and Muxorb; and the greatest comfort of Cloryana was, the Picture of
Cleocreton, which she would view; and as love is never better pleased then when
his Servants do follow the usual tracks that their griefs and wrongs do provoke
them too, so Fortune when she is wear with frowning on them, she is pleased to
smile; but Cloryana had felt the worst of her ^^ings and torment that any
rejected or jealous Lover could feel.

But now the Messenger came from Delphos with the Oracle of Apollo, and the
Emperor caused one of his Holy Priests to read it to him: There was none by,
but the Empress and the Queen of Hungary, and it contained there words, written
in golden Letters, on a parchmen Roll,

Boast not on Calydons prouder love,
For in his suit he shall be strangely forced,
Even to retreat, and so thy patience move,
And thou shall against him raise a mighty Host:
But he that shall once more crown thy careful head
With recovering thy lost victories,
To him thy Pearless Daughter shall be wed:
From Metamorphosed Maid, shall all your glories rise,
But let the blossom ripe Afflictions now is done
Of the virtuous Mother, though still they hold the Son.
The Emperor being of a fiery temper, and seeing that the Gods did foret^l the
breaking of the match, he was much incensed, and said, I will see whether these
Prophesies shall be true or no; and in his wrath he dispatched away the
Ambassador, and bad him to tell his Master the Emperor of Calydon, that he
should think himself happy to match with him, and said he, Only let him send
your Lord Frederick to Persia, and here to marry my Daughter Cloryana, and I
wish them a happy l^fe, and eschew to sit on both our Thron^s in Peace.
Cloryana did not know the Oracle, but poor Lady, her grief was extreme, to hear
that the Calydon Ambassador was returned with a grant from the Emperor her
Father: And mourning sadly at the news, she went from place to place to find
comfort, but all was in vain, till the Queen of Hungary, perceiving her in
ordinate passions, told her all the words of the Oracle, which did comfort her
a litile, though not wholly compose her disquiet soul.

And one day she and Calsey walking forth into the Plain, toward the
Waterworks, they espied two Maids, which though they well knew the way, yet
they asked the Ladies which was the way to the Queen of Hungaries Lodging?
Cloryana overburthened with sorrow, was not so apprehensive as at other times,
but Calsey she did verily think she knew the face of the for most Maid, who was
very beautiful, though not in to high a garv, yet she did resemble Majesty in
her countenance; and Gloryana ^eing more attentive on her sorrows, she quickly
told them the way; but the young Maid said, Madam, if you please, we will wait
upon you to the Palace, and so we shall go right. Cloryana could not choose but
smile for all her grief, to hear the Maid speak as she thought, boldlier then
ordinarily Country Wenches do to great Ladies; but Calsey took Cloryana by the
arm, and whispered to her and said, Madam, do not you know these Maids? No
truly Calsey (said she) do thou know them? I Madam, said Calsey, my memory
never failed me, so much as yours does at this time. Come, said Cloryana, tell
me who they are. Nay; said Calsey, that I will not, but if you will grant me
one favor, I will some way satisfy you. Any way, said Cloryana, if thou will
tell me; for she was very curious to know it, which caused her to be more
pleasant then she had been since she received Cleocretons Letter.

Then (said Calsey) Let me see Prince Cleocretons Picture. Cloryana said, Now,
dear Calsey, do not play upon my misfortunes. Calsey said aloud, What Cousin,
will you not let me see Prince Celocretons Picture? one of the young Maids
behind them laughed, to hear their contention about such a small request:
Cloryana hearing them laugh, turned her about, and looked on the pretty maid,
as she called her, and suddenly a vermillion die for a while presumed to salute
the Ladies face all over, as well as her cheeks, but she knew not well for
wha^; Then taking the box out of her pocket, she gave it to Calsey, who took
out the Picture, and said, Madam, this is the young Maids name that is writ
here, and this is her face. Cloryana at that looked again upon the maid, and
knew certainly that it was Cleocreton, but would not at all take notice of it;
but as soon as they entered, the Princess commanded them that were at the gates,
to convey the maids to the Queen of Hungaries Lodging, and when they had obeyed
her, she and the other Lady wen^ to their own Chamber, and there they consulted
with what contrivance to carry on the business: Cloryana's opinion was, to be
very nice; but said Calsey, Madam, I would have you know the reason of the
Letter, before you set any countenance at all of it. But before they could
determine any thing, came the Queen of Hungary into the room, and said to
Cloryana, smiling, Madam, Did you not see two Maids come in? for they said that
you came in with them. I, (said Cloryana, assuming a very grave look) we did so
Madam.

The Queen took her by the hand, and led her to her own chamber, where
Cleocreton and Galtazet was set as mannerly ^s could be, and when the Queen
went in, they both did reverence her with a low courtesy: Then the Queen said
to Cleocreton, Sweetheart, Pray tell me out the story of the Giant in Hungary.
The Princess set her down on a chair by the Queen, and Cleocreton began and
said, I told you Madam, that he head slain many brave Knights, and at the last
Cleocreton came to him into Hungary. Then he would have said further, but
Cloryana's stomach was come down, and she said, Nay, pray, my Lord, say I. The
Queen was almost split with laughing, to hear the Princess: Then said
Cleocreton, Truly Madam, my story was only designed to see whether you would
take occasion to know your poor Servant. In earnest, my Lord, (said she) I have
the least reason in the World to be civil to you. Then the Queen and Galtazet
left them; and the Prince kneeling down said, Divine Princess, do but vouchsafe
to hear me, and then condemn me as you find occasion; and then he took out the
Letters out of his Pocket, and said, The very truth is, Madam, your displeasure
I know, though I am not guilty of the cause; for it was clearly my Cousin Mersea
that outwitted me, and caused a Messenger to profer his service to me; and she
entercepted my Lecter to you, and sent one of her one devising, the copy of
which I have, which is the true cause of my thus disguishing my self, to clear
me of those impeachments you might justly lay upon me for my falsehood, if I had
writ the Letter: But Madam, if you will not believe me, then I must bring more
proof; and though I heard that you were required in marriage by the Emperor of
Calydon, yet it did not so much trouble me, as if I had been false, though I
must confess it was death to me to hear it on another account; for I did think
that the Emperor of Persia would accept of it, because he was an Alley to the
Persian Emperor; and likewise I thought that you might yield also, being so
incensed against poor Cleocreton, that was as constant to Cloryana, as her own
heart to her: Come my dear Princess, and tell me, Do you yet distrust me? if
you do, then let me dye, for no longer would I live, then I am beloved of my
dear Princess, and no longer can I be loved, then believed.

At the last Cloryana spoke, for she was very busy in observing how earnestly,
and how sincerely he confessed the truth, and sweet Lady, s^e was for from
distrusting her dear Cleocreton; for he expecting her answer: She said, My
Lord, if I had not been moved at this strange Letter of yours, as I did verily
think it was, then might all that know our love say, either that Cloryana was
mad or senseless not to take notice of such an affront, offered to a person that
did not only confess her love to you, but also promised to be faithful, so
long as you were so O Madam (said he) but your being convinced, is the thing
that I only aim at; and without which, I shall never enjoy my self again; but
sooner give over to live, then live distrusted of my only life, Princess
Cloryana. You have now said enough (said she) Cloryana cannot in the least
distrust Cleocretons own words. But I must needs say, that your Cousin had some
design upon you, or else she would never have gone about to have wronged both
you and me so basely. Well Madam (said he) I shall tell you that another time,
but now my chiefest care is, what we must do with your proud wooer. Why truly
(said she) my Father has promised me to the Emperor, but see the Oracle of the
Gods.

And the^ she gave him a Copy of it, for s^e had learne^ it of the Qu^en. Madam
(said Cleocreton) I shall be betrayed only by this Oracle, for it does make
mention of a metamorposed Maid, which is only me: But how shall I bring glory
to the Persians? therefore I fear it is some other Maid. Nay, my Cleocreton, it
is you; for it also says, that afflictions now is done of the virtuous Mother,
yet ho^deth still the Son: And who is more virtuous then your Mother? or who
has had more afflictions? and they still hold. I dear Princess (said he) and I
look for more; this is one great one, that I must now leave you, the dear Lady
of my content: But I shall shortly come, as we do accompany my Father, who does
intend to fetch my Mother, and then, dear Princess, we shall further see how
the Gods will order our affairs for our good: But, O Heavens! how strange is
our fate, Madam, that even the Gods themselves do expose me to the hazard of
being betrayed; for the Oracle does almost discover me: And though they do
promise great things for us, yet I must not reside here.

Now all Cloryana's persuasions could not prevail with him, but n^eds must he
be gone* only begging the Princess not to be so credluous any more; Which she
promised, and then he took his farwell of the Princess and his Mother, and away
the Maids went, as secretly as they came in; and when they had got clear of all
the Doors and Porters, then Cleocreton found his Squire, and they went out of
the Town, and so got their horses, and rode toward Hungary, which was a great
way, and then they took shipping; and when they had continued a long time on
the Seas, with boisterous minds and contrary, at the last they arrived in
Hungary.

Now the Emperor of Calydon was in a great fury when his Ambassador came, and
brought him word from the Emperor of Persia* that he would be glad to match
with him, for his Son had told him in the Ambassadors absence, that he was
already married to a fair Lady; therefore the wrath of the Father was great
against young Frederick, but all could not recall what was past: But now the
Emperors great care was, how to pacify his good Friend his Majesty of Persia;
but he delaying ^t a great while, which made the Emperor of Persia wonder the
reason, and contented his Daughter the more. But at the last, the Emperor of
Persia was impatient at these demurs, therefore he sent an Ambassador, to know
the cause of this affront; and if a sufficent reason was not given, and a
speedy re^urn with Frederick, the^ ^et them look to themselves, for he was not
afraid to fight the great Emperor of Calydon; and to overcome him, that had
a^^sed ^im in such sort, and his Daughter Cloryana; who did only wish and pray
for the safely of her Cleocreton, who was now ready to come toward Persia: For
the King of Hungary having commanded a Fast throughout his Dominions, to show
his great penite^ce for his past Follies, was ready, with the King of Tunis,
and his two Sons* to fetch his virtuous Queen home to Hungary.

Now when they after a tedious travel both by Land and Sea, drew nigh to
Persia, the King o^ Hungary sta^ed a space be^inde while the King of Tunis,
with his two Nephews, went to acquaint the Queen with the good news. But O! how
overjoyed was the good Queen* to s^e her Brother, and her Son Fortus* that she
had not seen so long time, but most of all, her great content was, to hear that
her Lord and Husband was so nigh. T^^n the Emperor of Persia, with ^ll the
Ladies, accompanied the Queen to her second Marriage, and with a sump^uous
Train was ^he conducted to the King her Husband: But to speak the truth,
Cloryana look^d most like the Brid^, for her Beaut^ far surpassed any ^ the
rest, and also her extraordinary gorgeous. (...) which the Emperor her Father
greatly delighted to see: And here was ^one could be judged the Bridegroom but
Cleocreton, ^h^ was so ex^ctly an ac^omp^^^hed Prince, thoug^ alas, it was not
as it seemed, for the two Lovers must undergo great storms and tempes^s of
Fortune, before they must en^oy one another.

But now the King of Hungary espying his constant Wife, coming to m^et him, who
was ^^d and given by the Emperor of Persia, and the King of Tunis, he was not
a^^e to perform the greetings and ceremonies due to the Emperor and Ladies, but
run and grasped his fair Queen in his arms, to express their great content^nent
in each other, and their two Noble Sons: It was great pleasure to all that
stood by, to s^e with what loving imbracements, the ^ing greeted his good Wife,
and his two Sons.

Which done, he came to the Emperor of Persia, and rendering him humble thanks
f^r bis great kindeness to his Queen; who did never fail in his Noble
disposition, but very kindly carried them all back, and royally entertained
them s^^an^^ days, with the rarest I^ventions that Persia would ^ffo^d, ^u^
none was more glad then s^^ect Cloryana, that she might enjoy the company of
Cleocreton, without fear to have him discovered to he the me amorphosed Maid;
and he many times got priv^te entrance into Cloryana's Chamber. And they being
both set, with her Companion Calsey, the Princess Cleocreton, to give her a
true account of the passages that ^e gave her a (...) of, concerning the Giant
of Hungary, and how he got into his Maids apparel. He then said;

Most Gracious Princess,
I Having left my charge with my Page, to show you, if I dyed, my constant and
real affections, I went to the Enchanted Knight, for I protest, if ever any
fought with a Devil, I did: For all my strokes though grievous sore to a mortal
man, yet he did not at all regard them, but shaked them off, as if it had been
the blows of a Child. But at the last, the Gods hating to favor altogether an
unjust cause, gave me advantage of a better sword; for his brake upon my strong
Armor, and he catched mine from me, but as he did that, I gave him a thrust
from me with my arm, and so he fell from his horse; and I got my own sword
again, and so severed his great head from his wicked body. Then when I had
slain him, in an instant there was such a darkness on the earth, as I could
neither find my Servants nor my way; so I sat me down for about the space of
an hour, and then did the darkness go away, and the horrible thunder ceased.
Then I got upon my horse, and never staid to search whether I had any wounds;
and when I had traveled all the day, till night, I took up my lodging, and
then Galtazet looked, and found one on my shoulder, but not very dangerous, for
it did not hinder my travel next day.

Then we took shipping, and in the space of eight days that we were on the Sea,
I suffered little food to enter my weak body; for truly it was insufferable to
Cleocreton, to be thought Profidious to Divine Cloryana: Then I spent my time
in much sorrow, always condemning my innocent self, as if I had been really
false. Now when we got within three miles of Sheucity in Sisuan, there at the
house of an ancient Gentleman's, where I was forced to stay two days, till they
could provide me a Maids apparel; for Galtazet went not, for fear of being
known, and my man Melcer was not so well acquainted in any place, as to go to
buy me such things as I stood in need of, but came to me again: So I bethought
me of a thing, which was this, there was a young Maid in the house, which was
the Gentleman's Daughter, and she something resembled my self in the face; and
all this while Melcer was going about his own ignorance, yet was so wise
however, as to fear his own want of skill should have betrayed him, and finding
them so carping, he like a good Simpleton, came back; now the truth is, my
other Squire was slain amongst the Rascally rout: But the young Maid, I think,
grew something enamored with me, for I could be in no place, but she would
either have occasion that way, or else would she plainly tell me, she would
come to me; for I put my self in mean attire, and therefore I was more suitable
to her she thought; so she seeing that I was not a courting friend, she told
me, If ^^ could love her, then I should have all her Fatherr wealth I was
^nwilling to deny the poor simple Wench; therefore to bring off my business
handsomely, I said, Sweetheart, I would fain tell thee a secret: Now she was
very willing to do any thing for me, especially to keep my secrets. Then said
I, My self is also a young Maid, and I am now seeking a Sweetheart of mine, and
I have traveled a great way, and have not found what I sought for, and I am
sore weary of this habit yet I know not how to get any woman's apparel for me
and my maid; but if you will help me to such necessaries as we want, then I
will give you the full worth in money, but let them be cl^athes that were never
worn Well (said she) I durst have sworn you had been a young man; but for the
love I bear thee still Sister, I will give thee a new gown that I never wore,
it is not very fine, but it is good stuff; and I will also get your maid
apparel, and none of our house shall know it: Then she gave me what she said,
and all things that you saw me and Galtazet in; but I gave her some gold, that
she might not lose by the bargain.

Then in the morning betimes we dressed our selves, and she conveyed us so,
that we were not at all perceived; and the night before, I caused Melcer to
carry our horses, and our clothes when we were in bed, to a place in the City,
where I commanded him to stay till I sent for him. So we both came to the place
where you were walking; and Madam, this I did, because I would not be known to
the Emperor to come only to see the Queen my Mother, because by that means I
might get sooner to Persia again; and I was not able to stay all this time from
you sweet Cloryana: But, O Heavens! I shall never forget what an Ecstasy of joy
I was in, when I saw you

But I had almost forgot to tell you, what fell out on Seas, as I came to
Persia; when we were gone a few leagues from the shore, there we met with a
famous Pirat, and he thought to have a prize of us, and so he came near and
grapled with our ship; now ours was no man of War, but only a Merchants Vessel
that I had hired on purpose; therefore we were not very well provided for
fight, but yet we did disdain to be their slaves: then I went to the Master of
the ship, and bad him defend himself and his company as well as he could, for I
my self was resolved to fight the Pirat: the Rovers seeing us make so small
resistance, they came into our ship, and no sooner did I see him, but pretty
well I engaged him, and fight we did a great while, before we had either of us
any great advantage; but at the last Fortune gave me the Victory, and I wounded
him sore, but he was not slain: And then I bestirred my self amongst the rest,
which were but all mean fellows, in regard of this their Captain. And when we
had caused them all to yield, the Merchant and I went to the Pirates Vessel, and
in the mean time I left my Dwarf to the wounds of the Captain of the Pirates,
who had the look of a brave man, and indeed was a very Valiant person. But when
I came into the other ship, there we saw a very beautiful Lady, only with two
Maids, and they were weeping.

I went to the Lady, and humbly craved the cause of her discontent. She very
courteously said, Sir, I am daughter to the Emperor of Germany, who having a
young Prince in his Court, his sole favorite, whose name is Almacus, that same
Captain which set on your ship: but this Almacus it seems, having a great love
for me, and so bold was he, as that he did declare it to me: And the Emperor my
Father hearing it, banished him; whereupon he out of his discontent, became a
Pirat, and roving on the Sea, till on a time I going in a Vessel to take my
pleasure; and he watching that opportunity, came nigh my ship, and keeping,
with his cunning, near us, till at the last he came with his other crew of
sturdy fel-fellows, and took me by force, and these my two maids, into his
ship, and they hoisted up their sails, and got from the sight of my followers,
but yonder is the ship in sight again. Then she showed me the ship, and I
straight conveyed her to her company, leaving the Captain to their mercy. And
so I have told you all the passages, till I luckily espied your sweet face; and
then truly I forgot all my dangers, and past afflictions, and sorrows.


Calsey thought all the while, that he told the story, bow happy was the ca^e
of Cloryana. in compar^son of hers; but yet was not she, for all the reason she
had for it, past all her pleasant humors: For she laughing, said to Cleocreton,
I wish with all my heart we had the maid here, that did you the courtesy, and
which did also resemble you, my Lord. Well, to content thee Cousin (said
Cloryana) I will have her to Court. Not while I em here (said Cleocreton) for
as sure as can be she will know me, and discover my knavery by her coming.

But after their wirth, they began to talk of what fortune would do with
their conditions: And then said Cleocreton, Well Madam, after I have carried my
Mother to Hungary, what excuse can I ever have to see you? I conceive
therefore, it were better if you would, dear Princess, consent to marry me, and
then you may be kept, once got into Hungary, in spite of all the World. O no,
(said she) my Cleocreton, it must not be so, lets rather wait the leisure of
the Gods.

So the poor Lover durst not press his Argument an further, for fear of
displeasing his adored Pri^cess, though he did s^e reason enough of his side*
Then they breaking off discourse. Cleocreton took his leave of the Ladies,
with a heart as full of grief, as so small a place could possibly contain; and
he even utterly despaired his thoughts, ever to enjoy his dear Cloryana; for he
thought it was in vain for him ever to move it to his Father, for him to
require ^he Princess in marriage, because the Emperor was already ^ent on the
Son of the Calydon Emperor: And in t^^se thoughts did he torment his restless
s^^r^t: Oh (would he s^y) into what adversities and streights am I plunged!
Was it not enough for me, in my infancy, to be tossed with troubles of sundry
and grievous sorts? but now in my love to incomparable Cloryana, must my soul
be always oppressed with strange fears, of losing the Jewel that I hold my life
by. Thus he bedevved his pillow with tears, and beating himself on the breast
said,

O you just Gods, why should you take ^uch pleasure in prolonging the life of
men, to make them more miserable? better were it that I had no life, then to
want that which is my greatest comfort in the World: Is there no means to use,
but that Cleocreton must be content without Cloryana? O! never can I endure
that; but I will resolve to dye, and then there will be an end of my torments,
unhappy Cleocreton!

It being dark, and he seeking for his sword, in his despair would have killed
himself: But there appeared to him in a flame of Fire, the Goddest Venus, and
with a Charming clear voice, said;

Cease thou young Lover,
Leave thy mourning vain.
Time will thy sugared Fate discover,
For Sunshine follows rain.
Cleocreton was not at all dismayed at the Viston, for he was almost desperate:
And having none to comfort him but his own Love tormenting heart, when the
Vision was gone, he said, Well, the Gods do not cease to promise fair things,
no more then they cease to torment me. But if there be any hope, why should not
I employ all my endeavors to procure me the Paragon of the world? Must I think
to endure nothing? O foolish Cleocreton, be content to suffer what will come,
rather then despair; for Cloryana loves thee: And is not that enough?

So with these resolutions of patience, he then suffered the needful Messenger
of sleep, which ^as slumbers, to hold him, till he himself had wholly arrested
the senses of Cleocreton, and held him almost till bright Phoebus had run a
part of his journey; for Cleocreton lay, till his Brother Fortus came softly
unto his Chamber; and going to his bed side he see him asleep, and looking on
him a while, he perceived his eyes to be red, and his cheeks wet with tears,
and in his hand he had Cloryana's Picture: Then Fortus took i^ up, and viewing
it very well, saw that it was the Pourtraicture of Cloryana; so he then
imagined his grief, for he was well read in the Book of Love himself, and
greatly pitied his Brother, but not to of cover what he knew, because
Cleocreton did never self it him.

So he went softly to the door, and then rusting in, Cleocreton awaked, and
seeing the Picture, he hid it, and said, Who is there? Fortus said, It is I
Brother; surely you have entertained some pleasant dream, you love your bed so
well this morning. Now he said this, to try what he would say, Brother, you
look as though you were possessed with melancholy Love. He answered, Nay,
rather over slept my self Brother, said he. Well thought Fortus, I know more
then you think I do.

Then Cleocreton called for his Clothes, and as though he would tura his inside
outward, he would wear black that day; now it was fine cloth, cut in many
slashes and opens, showing his pure linen, and upon many of the opens was set
claspes of Diamonds, nobly showing their luster on his arms and body, and
giving the more occasion for his fair hair to show its golden treasure. So he
being ready, went out to the other Princely Company; for Persia was never so
plentifully furnished with so Noble Guests as now.

It being a pleasant morning, the Emperor would needs show the King of Hungary
his fine Garden, and curious marks. The Emperor, as it was his use, led his own
dear Empress, the King of Hungary his Queen, and Prince Cleocreton led his
adored Cloryana, as it always fell out for his good Fortune so to do, and
Fortus led Philopeet, and P^euhoun led Calsey, who was her Cousin by the Mothers
side: And thus being all accompanied, Cloryana did well perceive the distemper
of her beloved Cleocreton, saying, My Lord, what does move you so much to heat
and cold, as often times appears in your face? O, Madam (said he) I am
extremely troubled to think that now I must leave you again, and know not how
in all the world to do; for I must not stay in Persia after my Father, and
being once gone, what shall I do? O Heavens direct me! Why, (said she) I have
more hopes, that the Gods will perform what they have promised, and give us
more comfort. But certainly Madam (said he) I admire that you should be so
patient, for it is so insufferable to me, that I can scarce believe either Gods
or men; for though I had a promise from the Goddess Venus, yet I know not how
my afflictions should end; for without the enjoyment of my dear Lady, they are
still greater. Well (said the Princess) if it be determined by my Father, that
I must marry the Calydon Prince, then comfort thy self, my Cleocreton, and
expect me in some strange habit; for false I will not be to Cleocreton, upon
any account whatsover. Oh (said Cleocreton, even ravished with joy to hear her
Words) Madam, I am well recompensed, though I spend my hearts blood to win so
rare a Princess. But Philopeet was not so pleased with her Gallant, whose head
was so troubled to think of the cruelty of his Lady Freesa, that he scarce had
the least thought of the Lady whom he led, entertaining her with little or no
discourse; therefore she had no great estimation of his Courtly carriage.

Thus they walked through all the spacious Gardens and Walks: Now in the midst
of the highest Garden, was a clear Crystal Fountain, walled in with Alabaster,
by which they passed, and so went into a large green Arbor, richly covered, by
reason it was Summer tune; and there they rested on rich Cushions, laid for the
purpose in chairs; and on one side of the Arbor was a door, which was of double
gla^s, so set, that one might perceive something within, though no eyes could
discern what it was: And while they were busying their eyes on the glass, they
were suddenly surprised with the most harmonious music that ever ear was
entertained wi^hal, which did greatly delight the company: And in the mean time
while they did turn all tongnes and eyes into ears, for the better attention;
there op^ned another door on the other side of the Arbor of it self, where the
Emperor envited them all in, and there they had as care a Treatment, as did not
only she the magnificence and richness of the Emperor, but also his kindeness
to his friends, and his rare devices and pleasant fancies on purpose invented;
for the better entertaining of his Noble guests: The Room was hung with
extraordinary precious hangings, for indeed, Pers^a has the praise of all
Lands for fine works, and rich Furniture; and in the hangings was several
s^ori^s, one of Venus and Adon^^, another of Hercules and his Club, both upon
the Altar with his po^soned shi^t, that his Wife D^^^mra s^ut him, in token of
love, yet wrought hi^ death; and likewise t^ers was to life shone, all the
Histories of the ancient Emperors and Kings of Persia; and on the roof was
artificially drawn the Ski^s, wi^h the Clouds, and in the midst was ^he Sun in
his full Glory; and so rare was the devise, that by the weights and whe^is
above, the Clouds were carried ab^ut, and the Sun in its slow motion, as it
should almost deiude the beholders eyes with the thoughts of reality it self.

When they had sufficiently viewed all there pretty devises of the Emperor, they
I sat down to a stately Banquet of r^re Fru^ts, and excel^ent Wines. Now their
eyes, ears and take being delighted, the King of Hungary said to the Emperor,
Your Majesty has the advantage of all the Nations of the ^^^th, for plenty
and store of the best and choice things, both for ^nvensitions and materials;
but most of all, your free and noble entertainments, which must needs make all
people admire you, as worthy of so great and noble an Empire. Well (said the
Emperor) was my Estate greater, the greater should be your Entertainment: I
pray, let not your praise be so lavish, as to hinder you from tasting my
fruits, which I dare commend.

The King of ^unis having fed freely, had more leisure to talk: Your noble
Entertainment, Great Empe^or (said he) make all men, and especially we who have
good experience, to be for ever obliged to become your Servants. You are all
welcome good Friends (said the Emperor) more for your Company, then your
Complements.

The young Lovers were all much deli^^ted, except Cleocreton and Calsey, for
one was tormented with the thoughts of his following mishap, and the other
between hope and fear; and for Cloryana, she had the company of her constant
Cleocreton, and so much joy in that, as ^e forgot an past discontent, and
future evils: And Philopeet, she was so well persuaded of her Serv^nt^
co^stancy, that although she much desired to see him, ^e^ was ^^e not so much
troubled, as it could appear to any: But while they were all thus Nobly busy
in their pastime, came in Prince Albyazer, unthought of, or unexpected, whose
coming did add more pleasure to al^ the company.

The Emperor was extremely glad, and an the rest, but more especially Philopeet
and Calsey, who were scarce able to contain their joy. But when Albyazer
saluted his dear Sister, he could not choose but sigh deeply, to think of her
hard Fortune, to which she gave good attention, and did suspect the worst and
truth of the business; for Albyazer could not meet with Muxorb, for his
occasions f^ll out to be more near Persia then Corinth Then answered she very
patiently, Well Brother, let me suffer, but it is my desire, that it may be
concealed, for it may be the Gods will order the return of my unconstant
Muxorb. Her Brother pitied her condition, and admired her constant affection.

Now the King of Hungary, and the King of Tunis, thought it time to depart the
Persian Court, hiding farewell to the good Emperor and Empress: Now next to the
sorrow between the Princess Cloryana and Prince Cleocreton, was the grievous
parting betwixt the Queen of Hungary and Cloryana; for she did tenderly respect
the Princess, and also considering the great love that her Son ^ad for her, and
the cross Fortune that was like to fall ou^ betwixt them, and they promising to
have eternal friendship for each other, though she should never have the
happiness as to have so matchless a Daughter as the Princess Cloryana: And then
the dolefullest parting of all was, between the two Lovers, poor C^eocreton was
so overcome with sorrow, which wisdom and virtue made just, for the loss of so
excellent and incomparable a Lady; but yet all his hopes was not dead, because
he had a promise from the mouth of his dear Princess, that she would escape to
him, if her Father did determine to marry her to the Calydon Prince: Then did
the Lovers part, with sad hearts; but Cleocreton promised Cloryana to make his
most abode in a Town well fortified and hard by the Sea side, that lay toward
Persia; For whiles the King of Hungary was at the Persian Court, news came to
him, that the inhabitants of this Town, the name of which was Cebria, that they
offered some strange affro^t to the ships that passed into Hungary: Cleocreton
persuaded his Father to b^siege this Town, which was a continual trouble to the
traffic of Hungary, it b^ing a Haven. So the King of Hungary made Cleocreton
his Son General of his Army, and so he went toward this Town Cebria, and the
King of Hungary and the King of Tunis hasted awa^ with the fair Queen, and
Prince Fortus who prom^sed to come to the aid of Cleocreton, with the greatest
part of the Hung^rians, so soon as he had conducted the Queen his Mother into
Hungary, whose Vo^age though long, ^et at the last was accomplished to the no^
uall joy of all the Kingdom of Hungary* For when the ^^^ings came to their
ears, that there gra^ious Queen was again come to her right, the^ made such
rejoycings through all the Kingdom of Hungary, as was seldo (...) ever seen: The
first entert^inment they gave their Queen, was the Har^t Meaga and her two Sons
led to their e^ecution: The good Queen wo^l^ wi^lingly have had her spared,
such was her sweet and pi^iful nature to her very Enemies* but the people ^oul^
se^rce^et her go to the execution, for they would have torn her apieces, but
for the guard of Soldiers that kept them off*

Now the King of Tunis seeing his dear Sister* to his sol^ desire, seated again
with her hu^band in his Throne, and making some s^an abede with them, whiles
there came news from Prince Cle^creton to his Father, that it was the belt way
for Fortus not to come so speedily to him for his aid, till he sent word, for
his coming could not be any advantage; and that it was not the wisest course
openly to make War against them, but rather by some stratigem to win the Town,
which he would let them know.

Fortus was not a little glad of it, for by that means he got time to go with
the King of Tunis his Uncle, and so to see his his fair Lady Fr^esa. So taking
farewell of the King and Queen, they hasted toward Tunis, where they were
expected with great earnestness of affection by the Queen, who longed to see
the safe return of her Lord; and the Lady Freesa was not a little glad to see
her constant ad^irer Prince Fortus, who was ^xcee^ingly s^tisfied with the very
sight of the litt^e pretty Lady, and all his care and diligence was, to get more
of her favor. In the mean while was Princess Cloryana sad e^ough, for the
absence of her lover Cleocreton, who was not slack to send Letters constantly
to her else she would have resented* is absence more heavily; but for the
pleasant humor of her Cosia ^alsey, who had cause enough of disconte^t, bu^
she began now to forget her Se^van^s unconstancy, and though she was resolved
to marry none but Muxo^b, yet s^ did she carry it, as not any in the Court was
so pleasant as she.

But now Albyazer could stay no longer from the enjoying his Phylopeet,
therefore he very ear^es^ly beseeched the Emperor to let the marriage be
consummated with speed; to which the Emperor well contented, caused great
preparation for the marriage, the old Earl of Gnickr^b was sent for, with his
Coun^ess, and his other daughters.

Then an things being ready, an^ the day come, the fair Bride was most
sumptuous^y ad^rned, and so was her more beautiful Bridal Nymph Clo^yana; and
then followed all the Train of Fair Ladies ^o the Temple, and the^e Albyazer
and Philopeet performed their Humane Rites, and so conducted was the delicate
Bride again to the Palace, where was acted Shows, and Feast* Triumphs, and
Dances, acted in all the bravery that could be invented. Then did Albyazer
enjoy that long wished, for day, and great joy and pleasure was it to the Earl
of Gnickrick, his Lady and Children, to have their Brother so well provided
for, especially Calsey, who had extraordinary love him* for he had great riches
with Philopeet: And the Duke his Father began to build him a statele Castle,
for the more commodions dwelling of his fair Daughter, the Castle was seated on
a Rock, by a fair River, and it was but a little distance from the City of
Sisuan, it was twelve months a building, and all the cu^nin^est Artifices were
employed about this Castle, which Albyazer called, The Fort of Beauty: And when
it was finished, he carried his La^y to ^^, and there lived.

But now Cleocreton had got the advantage of the Cebraeans, and sent post to
Hungar^ presently Fortus had the news sent him, ^hil^ he was cou^ting his Lady:
And one day being with the King in his private Chamber, for he always greatly
delighted in his Nephew, and Fortus did greatly hope that the King would assis^
him in ^is de^e^ match with the Lady Freesa, and so to that purp^se he bent his
discourse, and said, looking on the P^anres in t^ Room, S^r, this Love is a
very strange Passion* Nephew (said the King) you speak very affectedly; I do
verily think that my Cousin Freesa's Beauty has smitten you. Truly, my Lord
(said he) you have taken me now; but I beseech you aid me, for the truth is,
dear ^ncle, I have always ever since I see the Lady, an inviolable affection
for her; and though she may deserve to be the Empress of the whole World, yet I
must needs venture my blood with any that will challenge a right to her. I am a
little sorry (said the King) that you should have so much difficulty in your
love, and yet I again commend your noble inclination to Virtue, for my Niece is
a very Virtuous Lady; but if it ^e in my power, I shall do any thing I can for
you, though I know the King of Calcos will look high, but she being his younger
Daughter, there may be some hopes for you Nephew.

Fortus was so joyful to hear the King speech, as he thought that the greatest
thing was the consent of their Friends, for the Lady was now pretty well
satisfied with the love of Prince Fortus, and gave a return of hers to him. But
Mersea, she had not yet forgot her love to Cleocreton, though it was not usual
for her to be so constant, yet seeing all her hopes was vain: and therefore as
it is the nature of love, when it is rejected, either to work the death of the
person that is afflicted, or else to turn to hate, that contrary evil, so it
happened with Mersea; for she invented all imaginary evils to work the harm of
Cleocreton: And to that purpose, she bent her course, and knowing the love
between him and Cloryana, and also hearing that the Emperor her Father had a
design to marry her to the Calydon Emperors Son, she employed many about her
strange practices, and in time ^^e caused a great many papers and pamphlets to
be strewed in Calydon, especially in the principal City, that the Court of
Calydon might certainly know, what she desired: Her Papers was to this purpose,
that the Calydon Emperor was abu^ed by the Emperor of Persia, for his Daughter
was already engaged to the Hungarian Prince Cleocreton: And this was done, even
about the time when the Persian Ambassador was at the Callydon Court, and all
the City was in strange thoughts about it, and it came to the ears of young
Frederick, who straight made it a piece of his excus^ to his Father, who never
staid to know the Author or certainty of it, but when the Ambassador was to go
toward Persia, the Emperor of Calydon told him, That as for his Masters
threats, he did not weigh them, for he thought, that he could himself, without
any help, wage War with Persia, and that his Son should marry one who was free,
and not contracted, as they said his Daughter was, to the Prince of Hungary.

The Ambassador was much amazed to hear the same; then taking his leave, with
speed went tow^r^s Persia: And when he arrived there, he told his Lord the
words of the Calydon Emperor, which did so confound the senses of the Emperor,
as he was well ^i^h fran^ick; but ^ithal, the Ambassador told the Emperor, ^s
he had le^rned in the Calydon C^urt, that Frederick was married before the
Embassage came to require Cloryana in marriage, and that he did believe that it
was a pretense to excuse his (...) rashness, to proffer such a thing, before he
knew the thoughts of his Son: But the Emperors fury was so great that de
dispatched all his business of War in short time, and did intend to correct the
Calydon Emperor for, his forwardness.

But no^ came the sorrow of poor Cloryana, for the incensed Emperor would not
hear his s^eet Daughters excuse, which indeed was but a poor one; for she was
in the most dep^orable condition as ever poor Lady was in the Werld, for she
k^e^^ not in the World how it came out nor could she endure the deadly frowns
of her Father, but fell down in a sound: Her tender Mother thought she had been
dead, wh^reupon she likewise f^ll upon her only daughter, even struck almost
dead for grief: The Emperor now seeing both his wife and only c^ilde i^ that
danger, it cool^d his fury, and augmented his discontent; then taking his Queen
into his arms, with much abo revived her, while Calsey with her tears and
prayers, bemo^ned Cloryana, who also recover dout of her sound; and as soon as
the Empress perceived Cloryana to be ali^e she fell down at the Emperors feet,
and begged of him not to be so harsh to his only child: He said he would
forgi^e her, if she would give over her love to Cleocreton, whom he said he
would kill, and cause to p^rish, if he came in his power: which wor^s still
aggrevated the sorrow of the Fearless Cloryana, who valued her dear Cleocreton
above all ^he Empires or Kingdoms o^ the World; for nothing Would sati^fie her
but the vvel^are and enjoyment of her Cleocreton* who was at that time
bravely conquering his Enemies, vv^th his Brother Fortus, whose Army prevailed
against the proud Cebae^ians: But he little thought o^ ^nevv the ^rief of his
beautiful Cloryana, who did so extremely torment herself with the thoughts of
Cleocretons safety, and her Fathers harshness, which was much moderated by the
p^udence and discretion of the Empress.

Then the Emperors great care was, to get a Valiant General to lead his Army in
the War, for he could not desire Albyazer to supply that place, because he was
but ^e^^ly married; yet for all that, Albyazer proffered his service to the
Emperor, to the great discontent of Philopeet, yet Albyazer loved honor more
then his own content. So he (being General) and a Cousin of the Empresses, whose
name was Morisco, and Preuhoun, with many other young Lords and Knights of
Persia, prepared for the War, and there was a mighty Army levied. Now it was so
ordered, in the fight that was to be between Calydon and Persia, that the Army
of the Emperor hasted, and on a sudden surprised the Calidons; but they being a
well ordered people, were quickly in arms, and they wanted neither puissance
nor valor

But at the last Cleocreton heard of the War of the Emperor against Calydon;
for Cloryana was exceeding sick, and could not write herself, therefore she
caused Calsey to express all the true affection that a Virtuous Lady could have
to one whom she had vowed her love and life; and to let him also know how all
things passed, and likewise that her health was much impaired, and left nothing
unspoken that was necessary. But never was man in such a perplexity, as was
poor Cleocreton, when he received this unexpected news; and also, that the
Kingdom of Persia had infringad its self in a sore War with Calydon. Now for
his share, he having by policy and valor, put the Cebaerians to the worst, he
and all his company was going toward Hungary, but he was resolved not to go
with them: Therefore when Fortus and they were all on the point of their
journey, Cleocreton, whose sorrow was not to be parauel'd, secretly got away,
with none but his Squire and Galtazet.

Great searching was made up and down for him by his Brother Fortus, but all
was in vain, for no intelligence was to be had of him, but they were all glad
to go on their journey: And when they came into Hungary, every one in general
did greatly applaud the valor of invincible Cleocreton, which made all to be
more sensible of their loss, especially the good King and Queen; but the Queen
though she concealed it, yet she did suspect that he was gone to Cloryana,
which did the more quiet her.

But now the King of Tunis was trying what he could do for Fortus; and he did
greatly sol^^cite the King of Calchos for his Daughter; and he was not by
himself, for there was another young Prince. Son to the King of Hecate, would
gradly have matched with Fresa, and had courted her long, but she had no liking
of him; yet he was not so content, but did greatly entreat her Father for to
favor his love, the King of Calcos had already referred it to his Daughter and
so he could not call back his word. Then the King of Tunis sent for Fortus, who
had the greatest share in the Ladies affection, and she was resolved to have
Fortus, before the Prince of Hecate; who hearing of Fortus his cour^^^^g of
Freesa, and being incensed against him, did send him a challenge from his
Chamber, for he was then in the Court of Tunis. Fortus was not at all dismayed
at it, but fearing that a secret Combat might prove dangerous to the
Conqueror, as he hoped to be, therefore he privately told the King of Tunis,
and showed him his challenge, which was this:

Assyrtus of Hecate, to Fortus of Hungary.
VVIshing the valiant (though my Enemy) that I may have the more glory in
Conquering thee: My just despite against thee is, That thou pretends a right to
the Lady Freesa; which if thou do, and dare stand to affirm, then meet me
at such a place as shall be showed thee, with thy Sword, there to receive thy
smart reward for thy presumption, to claim a title to that which none shall
enjoy but my self.

Farewell till I meet thee, and then worse.

The day and hour appointed being come, and the Combaters in the field, just
then came the King himself, and with a seeming earnestness, as though he had
not known of the Duel: Gentlemen (said he) how comes this I pray, let me
entreat you not to spill so valiant blood for a Lady, who does not desire the
hurt of them whom she least esteems. The Prince of Hecate gri^ved to the very
heart, that the King should in the least hinder his intended revenge against
Fortus: Therefore he not regarding what the King said, rid to For us and g^ve
him a blow or two, but the King commanded to lay h^ld of ^ssyrtus, and so
staye^ him. Then the King went ^igher him, and said, Sir, I beseech you be not
so bent to sp^ll your blood in my Kingdom, for I greatly honor your Father;
and what account shall we make for you? I do not speak this* because I fear the
courage of my Nephew, for I know his valor: But this I say, which must needs
appear to be reason, that the Lady hersel^ shall choose one of you, or deny you
both, which you ought, if your affections be correspondent to the honor of
your births and minds, both of you to be* contented with.

Assyrtus could not deny what the King said yet he could scarce a sooer or
anger; and (...) seei^g him so e^rnest, was grieved that he did not fight it
out, for his soul was as high and valiant as any, and none would venture more
for love the he for his Lady F^eesa. As soon as she heard of it, she was
extrem^ly troubled for fear of For^us. lest he should have been slain; for now
she plainly saw, that her heart was too de^ply engaged to him; to suffer his
harm for her sak^. But the Prince of (...) boiring in anger against Fortus the
King very grave^y set him down in a fair room, and having with him Assyrtus,
and calling Fortus, placed them on each side of him, saying, Come, my Lord
Assyrtus, I pray let me be an Arbitrator between you, and let me engage you
both to stand to the words of Freesa, for though you should fight one against
another, yet he that is the Conqueror, is never the better, unless the Lady
give her consent, you can neither of you enjoy her; and you may do that,
without endangering your lives: Now let her give the judgment between you.

Then said Assyrtus, Your Majesty cannot h^de your par^iality to your Cousin;
for I suppose you know her aversion to me, and it may be her love to him, and
so you must needs know what will be my doom: But the nature of Love is, that if
one cannot enjoy the thing loved, however he would hinder another from having
that which he cannot purchase himself. But (said the King) since men have
reasonable souls, let them upon cooler blood, rather be penitent for breaking
the Law of the Gods, by their rash and unruly passions, then to be rudely
resolute. Well (said he) I may be confined by your Laws to your pleasure, in
your Kingdom: But I hope to meet with you my Lord Fortus (said he, scornfully
smiling) if you dare but venture on me out of the Land of Tunis. Well, my Lord
(said Fortus) fear not, but when we do meet, I shall stand to the hazard of it,
and it may be Fortune may give him the Victory, that will not brag of his own
valor, who has (I speak it not out of vain glory) fo^^ed braver men then thy
self, and no doubt. upon such an accoun^ as this, I shall not hide my head.

Then they falling to high terms, the King parted the^, and took his Nephew by
the arm, and said, Surely I can in some measure command you, and so put him out
of the room. But many days did not pass, before the King of Heca^e, being sick
to death, sent for his Son home, who with a sad heart parted from the Lady
Frees^, who was glad to endure his undesired company, because the King her
Uncle commanded that he should have that privilege, for he greatly (...) ^he
hard Fortune and condition of Assyrtus, for he was indeed a gallant person, and
much beloved of his Subjects: Fa^n would Mersea have in^iced him, but he was
other w^ys incli^ed.

But now the affairs went but badly with the Persians; for they having met the
army of Calydon, and brave^y braging of the Victory that they should win, but
when they came to try their strength, they found, that much ^eace had (...)
idleness, and idleness had bred cowardness; for they were almost all ready to
turn their strength into their heels, for all the bra^e example of Albyazer,
and the many other stout Commanders, who was dishearnsed through the faint
heartedness of their Soldiers. But there came into the aid of the Persians a
strange Knight, whom none of them did know who was followed by none but one
man, which seemed to be his Squire: But never man did so he^ in himself, as he
did, in the thickest of the Battle, his Friends blessed the time of his coming,
and his Enemies dreadad the very looks of him, and yet could not choose but
applaud his nimble and hardy strokes, and his L^on-like fury: But it did hardl^
turn the running resolu^i^n of the Co^ar^ly Soldiers: which he perceiv^ng,
turned him quickly about and said, This is not the way, my Friends, to gain
Honor, but shame; therefore raise up your courage, Noble Persians, and let it
not be told in Calydon, that you turned your backs upon your Enemies, for that
will be the infamy of your names forever; but to stand in the defense of your
King and Country, will not only gain you great rewards, but also make your
names dreadful to your Enemies, and held in estimation of your friends.

These words did so animate the towardly hearts of the Soldiers, as they al^
^ith one consent fell pell-mel on the Calydons; now this valient H^ro h^d made
such a slaughter amongst them, as they might very well fall to their work with
more hopes of profiting, when another had begun it. Then he left that wing of
the Army, which he had so much weakened, as it could scarce lend any strength at
all to the body of that great Host. Then he came to a place where there was a
very great an^ terrible combat betwe^n six Knights, three against three, which
was Albyazer, Lord Pr^uhoun, and Moris^o of the Persian party: But Albyazer had
not been idle, for he had slain a great number of the Calydons, and he and his
two Companions had also foiled their E^emies, and the other two went to find
more fuel to add to the fire of revenge, while Albayzer was sore^y engaged
with a stout Calydon, who did distr^ss Albyazer, being almost w^ary; for he had
stood many sore brunts of the fight, and had received wounds, that made him
ready to yield to death to his fresh Adversary.

Then came the unkno^n Victor and re^ieved Albyazer, and quickly gave the proud
Ca^ydon his passport; but Albyazer was not unmindeful of the courtesy that the
strange Knight did him; and as unable as he was to stand on terms of
Comple^ents, yet he took off his Heimet and said, Sir Knight, though I be a
stranger to you, yet I shall not be happy, till I have acquaintance and
friendship with, and from him that I owe my life.

But he un^illing to be known, though he knew Albyazer and said, My Lord
Albyazer, I should think my self highly honored, if I could do any thing worthy
your esteem, or the worthy Emp^ror, whose cause you al figh^. And when he had
said this, he galloped away, yet before he went, he ordered some to took to
^lbyazer, who was stricken with wonder at the deeds of the strange Knight, and
also that he should know his name so well, yet Albyazer thought that he should
know his voice: Then he was resolved to seek out this Noble unknown, and to
that purpose he spo^^e to a kinsman of his, and wished him to follow the earth
of that stout Knight that relie^ed him; For, laid be, in all my life, I never
saw man fight with so great courage, and so merciful to them that cried for
mercy at h^s hand. His friend promising to find him out if it were possible,
and going to the field, he sa^ the finest sight that the World could show; for
the Emperor of Persia was come to the relief himself in person, of his faint
and breathless Army: And the Emperor of Calydon was also amongst his good
Soldiers, to encourage them; now so it was, that the Calydon Emperor* and the
Emperor of Persia, was both of them in a strong fight, and i^deed two braver
Champions could not be on earth, and b^tter matched, but this was the sadness
of the business, that they which were so great Friends, it now should be the
pleasure of Fortune, to make them the greatest Enemies: But there came in a
base slave* and seeing his Lord of Calydon so straightly match, he came behind
the Emperor of Persia, and gave him a sore blow on the shoulder, and present^
rode away, as did amaze the Emperor that he now must yield, being wronged. But
the strange Knight seeing it, made great baste to the aid of the Persian
Emperor; and in the way as he ^ent, he met the co^ardly slav^ that did the
same: Now he took him to be his o^n C^ptain, for their Armor was alike, and the
follow in this belief, said, Sir, I have done your commands for I have served
the turn of the great Emperor of Persia, who else would have slain our Emperor.
Then Cl^o^reton (for i^ was he) in a great fury s^nt this abj^ct soul of the
Calydon to the gates of P^u^o, t^ere to plead for the better usage of his
t^eacherous Captain when he should come there, an^ t^en went to the Emperors
relief, who was so much astonished at the blow, that he ^ell from his horse in
a sound. C^eocreton thought he h^d been dead, and his noble heart was much
overcharged with gri^f, for the loss of so great and wise a Moe^rch, and
resolved to re^enge his death, or lose his own life, and so he fe^l upon the
Soldiers th^^ would have ^arried the body of the Emperor (though dead) to be
one of their Captives, for the more honor of their Victory: But he sent them
after the rest of their fl^vish souls. Now one of the servants of Cleocreton,
who always followed his Master, seeing the Emperor of Persia ^ie on the ground,
went to him and took off his Helmet, whereby his body was refreshed, and
precently the Emperor revived, saying to the Servant that did him that favor,
I pray thee good friend, what was he that fell on ^he men that came to take me
Captive? It was my Master, said ^e, who I hope will also win the Battle for
you: For the truth is, Noble Emperor, he has fought with much vigor, and has
been without all belief, so stirring, as he has made a ma^acre amongst your
Majesty's Enemies; Mars himself could not have done more. The Emperor was so
revived with hopes, at the sp^eches of Cleocretons Squire, as he mounted upon
his horse to find out his great Benefactor, who had no sooner stain the
Soldiers that came to carry the Emperor away, but presently he went where the
Emperor of Calydon was, in great and proud bea^s, how the Emperor of Persia was
slain: But he still thought Cleocreton dreadsin, besides they would gradly have
ordered the death of Albyazer, who as I have said, was nigh death; but also
Morisco and Preuhoun did Valtantly behave themselves, and they were very much
troubled for fear that Albyazer had been slain, for they could not find him
but Cleocreton did make all, both Friends and Enemies stand astonished at his
wonder. Then came unto him a couldier, and said, Though thou proud fool
think thy self unresistable, yet the weight of my arm, when thou have felt
it, then see how thou will crave mercy at my hands; but Monster thou shall not
have any request granted thee. Cleocreron could not choose but smile, to he^r
the arrogant ^ool: whereupon he said, How come thou fellow, to have the
conceit that thou shall conquer me. I dream^ yesternight, said he, that I was
fighting with a Lion, and ^ew it, and certainly thou art he whom I must s^ay.
Then Cleocreton gave him a ^ore wound of his arm that he bragged so on, and
se^^ing the cruel stroke go to his heart, he fell down and begged mercy of
Cleocreton. He granted it, and said, Thou do little deserve it. And there he
lest the Fellow to repent of his other past fouies, because this had been so
^ear to him: Then Cleocreton came again where he has relieved Albyazer, and
espied him not, but riding a little further he ^aw him weeping, and said to
him, My Lord, what is your discontent? O! (said Abyazer, when ^e saw hi^) thou
worthy unknown Knight, my heart bleedeth ^or the death of my Uncle the Emperor,
whom they say is not only slain, but also his body is in the hands of the
Calydon. ^ay (said Cleocreton) I have delived his body from the hands of his
Enemies, and I have given command that the Physicians should attend him, and I
hope he is alive, however; his Enemies shall taste of my ^ury.

And then he galloped to a place where the Emperor was making an Oration to his
Soldiers and with^l he said, I fear not winning the day, if you would but take
a conceit to dispatch yonder black Knight, who holds up their cowardly heads.
Cleocreton (...) hearing the charge of the Emperor, and being even desperate
with the consideration of the loss at (...) Emperor and also the likelihood of
the overthrow of all the Valient Persinns, and not every so, but by this means
(...) the only Star of his life, even Cloryana, become a ^ate: All thee things
considered, he resolved so dye (...), and (...) even thrust himself among his
Enemies, (...) with a high voice, Sirs, you have slain my Emperor, now (...)
greedy stomachs with my blood also.

They seeing the man whom they had the most marice for, they most busiely ^eset
him round, and all of them having, one and the same resolution, fell on him: He
thinking now that his last Tragedy was a playing, said to himself, Now
Cloryana, thy aid at this time, or else thy sweet self must lament the death of
thy constant Cleocreton. Then he with a Lain like fury fell upon them, and one
after another, he ^ewed them like endble, till there was not a man of (...)
left of twelve, but three who cried for mercy, and had it granted them. Then he
made hasle to see what was become of the Battle, and he soon perceived their
great disorder, then g^ing in a^dleading them, they fell to work as fresh as
though they were but new begun and Cleocreton made them way with his sword and
slew so infinite a number, as it is almost (...); and at the last he e^^^ed
their Emperor, and with the thought of a full revenge, he i^ spi^s of all the
Guard of his ^erson, came to him* and said, Come thou most ignoble person, take
thy farewell of thy ^owardly crew, who have most ignominously and treach^rously
slain my Emperor.

With that he gave him a sore wound upon his thigh, whereupon he commanded to
take up his body, while he corrected the rest of them, and then he did well
perform his promice, for he corrected their souls from their bodies. Now the
Emperor of Calydon was even at the back of Cleocreton, and was an ey^ witness
of his Noble and unparalled actions, and was greatly actonished at them.

But now there was not a Persian that would ^ight any more* they had so much
hum^lity from the poor conquered Caldyons, who had lest all va^our and heart
with their Emperor, who was Capti^e. Now the Empress of Calydon came into the
field to seek her Lord, and against all honor, she took to her feet, and ran
from her attendance, and when she came amongst all the dead bodies, to search
for the Emperor, she found him not, but heard that his body was in the Pers^ans
hands. She then came to Cleocreton, and fell down at his feet, and shed a World
of tears, be^eeching him to give her the body of her husband Cleocreton pitying
greatly, that such a gallant Lady as she should be in so great extre^ity, he
went to the Emperor of Persia, and led the Calydon Empress by the arm, and
kneeled down to him, saying, My Lord, I beseech you to let this great and
sorrowful Lady have the body of her husband the Emperor of Calydon. Then the
Emperor of Persia said, Nob^e Conqueror, to thee must all be subject, and why
do thou therefore as^ any thing of me? do as thou think good with all the
Captives, they are all thy own; and for you, Noble Lady, I do not only desire
that that Valiant Hero may have his own will in all, but if he thine good, let
your Kingdom be restored in peace, except so much as he shall desire himself;
and for my share, you shall become Tributaries to me, and Calydon shall be to
my seed for ever: And for the body of your Husband, my Physicians hopes to
bring him to health.

The Empress with joy and wonder said, Most mighty Emperor, it is a small thing
for us to be your servants for ever, for whilst I live, I shall always admire
your clemency, and it shall be left upon record in Calydon for eternity.

Cleocreton c^uld not but wonder at the exceeding civility of the Emperor, who
had been so abused by t^em; and for his part, he required nothing at all, ^ut
consented to the words of the Emperor,. So the Emperor* of Calydon was returned
to his Kingdom, and his Empire to his Son Frederick, who was sick of a Feavor
with his young Wife. Then the Emperor of Persia, and all his Souidiers,
returned with all their glory wone by the Noble Cleocreton, but the Emperor
must needs know who this Conqueror was, and coming to him said, Sweet Sir, let
it be no offense to you, to show me the face and name of the Preserver of us
all. He intending not to be known for all this, and being at a nonplus, said,
Great Emperor, all my deserts are nothing worth, but if I must have a reward,
let it be this, that I may go away unknown, and when I am gone, this Noble Lord
(pointing to one, whom to his great astonish meet ^e he had found in the
Batte^, on the Persians side, who^e name was Muxorb) shall declare my name. The
Emperor was more discontented at the reward that Cleocreton begged then it ^e
had asked his Crown from his head. Then Cleocreton spoke in the ear of Muxorb,
and said, I am Cleocreton your humble servant, a constant lover of Divine
Cloryana, though you, contrary to your Noble disposition, are become as
inconstant to your Lady. I beseech you, my Lord (said Muxorb) do not term me
so* for never did man more passionately admire any thing, then I do the
Virtuous Lady Calsey* Make haste then (said Cleocreton) and let her know it;
and tell my Princess, though my accursed fate, does hinder me from visiting
her, yet my very heart loatheth any thing that does not resound the name of
Cloryana.

When he had spoken that word, he very reverently bowed his head to the
Emperor, and to all the Nobles, and quickly spurred his horss, and galloped
away, leaving even tears in the e^es of the Emperor, and all his Noble Company,
for the loss of so valiant a Soldier; but their tears did not stop their
mouths, for they breathed his fame with so universal a praise, as if the God
Mars had in Person helped their Army to the Victory. Then was the Emperor
impatient to know of Muxorb, what his name was that they were so much obliged
to Eter^ies his name and praises. Then said Muxorb, It is none but the
invincible Cleocreton. O Heavens! (said the Emperor) a man reserved by the
Gods, to do wonders in the World. But O, poor Cleocreton (said he) thou had
good reason to fly away from the face of thy Tyrant friend: But certainly
Sirs, the Virtues of this Prince are as great as his Valor, that the could
venture his life against all the Army of Calydon in my cause, when I did
protest my despite against him, which should by its effects cause his
destruction: But now I will witness, that the very name of Prince Cleocreton*
shall be held in such estimation with us, as indeed there is none so fit to
world the Scepter of Persia as himself, nor none so fit a husband for my
Cloryana.

There was no^ a man that did not heartily applaud the words of the Emperor.
But O, sweet Cloryana, how ignorant art thou what good things thy Star is doing
for thee. The Emperor then did send his Servants into all coasts und quarters,
to seek Noble Cleocreton. Their message to him was, entreaties sco^ the
Emperor, to come and except of his Daughter in Marriage; and they did obey his
(...) ^ith all cheer fullness and speed.

Now the Emperor was welc^nted home, with all the imaginable shows of joy that
could be, ^y all the Lords and Soldiers, according to their several interests,
but all ^^d continually applaud the great valor of Cleocreton, which was great
pleasure to Clo^yana; but much more pleasure and content was it to her, when
the Emperor went leading Muxorb by the hand, and sa^^, Daughter Cloryana shall
always bless the time when the Gods by accident, sent the Noble Cleotreton to
Persia* for he has not only saved the life of thy Father, but also the whole
Realm of Persia; therefore it is my will, that thou retain all the affection
for him, as thou would do to the man thou must espouse. Now, my Lord, deliver
your Message, said the Emperor to Muxorb, ^ho as soon as he came into the roo^,
and espied the face of his adored Calsey he went, even wrapped up with joy, and
took her in his arms, and a thousand times kissing her, said, If there be any
mercy left in thee, pardon thy Muxorb, dear Calsey, and let not his former
offenses, cause any distruist for the future.

She was with all her ^ou^ joyful to see and hear her dear Muxorb, when she did
utterly give over all thoughts of his return; but she would not show her
exceeding content that she took in his presence, for tear he should be but the
second time come to deiude her. O far was it from his thoughts ever to prove
tre^cherous to her again* and he made it appear, that it was the wear business
of his coming to Persia, even to marry his Calsey, for he went and humbly
entreated the Emperor to give his consent to the match, and that His Majesty
would be pleased to entreat for him to the Duke her Father. The Emperor did
like it very well, and promised his aid in any thing that might content Muxorb;
Only (said ^e) my Lord, I pray stay till we find Cleocreton, and then let her
and my Daughter, as they have been Companions in their Virginity, so let them
be both married together.

He was not well content with he last Proposition of the Emperor, yet seemed
satisfied. Cloryana was exceedingly satisfied at Muxorbs news, she only wanted
the presence of her beloved Cleocreton, whom she hoped erelong to see; and in
the mean time, she rejoiced with Calsey, for the return of Lord Muxorb, who was
very impatient till he enjoyed his Calfey; but she would by no means consent to
be married privately, as he would have had her, and for all Cloryana's
persuasions, whom Muxorb requested to court for him, but all was to no purpose.

But now the Queen of Hungary was much troubled, that she could hear nothing of
her Son Cleocreton. Therefore she sent a Messenger see retly to Persia, to
Cloryana, to know if she knew, any thing of him, who returned answer, that she
nor none of them knew where he was then, but catel ^he won the Emperor of
Persia the day against the Calydons, and that the Emperor had sent into all
parts to seek him, that he might bestow ^loryana upon him. This news did please
the Queen if she had b^t known where he was. Poor Lady, she was without both
^er (...), Cleotreton and Fortus who was strongly engaged in War with him (...)
was now King of H^^^te for (...) word to the King of (...), that ^e mu^^ defind
his Nephew, or have his Need taken from him by f^^ee. The King of Tunis was
very ^orry for the rashness of the month yet he did not spa^e to (...) the
Messenger, that he would (...) the^ cause (...) his Nephew* And to be made
ready a great Army, and went against the King of (...), and the King of Calchos
promised supply to the King of Tu^ if need required, but the King of Tunis did
pretty handsomely hold Hecate to it. And when they were in the heat of the
fight, came in a Knight in black Armor, be was falsely told, that the Hecateans
were the Tunians, and the first man he fought with was Prince Fortus, who was
very much encouraged to fight, for it stood upon the point of winning or losing
his Lady, and he thought he had better lose his life; But he was never in all
his life so matched as now, for the black Knight, as they called him, did give
such sore wounds to Fortus, and Fortus to him, as it was doubtful whether they
did not both lose their lives, and all people was confirmed ^n that opinion,
when they saw them both fall to the earth, but the black Knight being the
nimbier, got up, and being pitiful to the other, that had so well defended
himself, and likewise thought to recover himself, that he might get the more
honorable advantage, and so taking off his Helment, he gave him the advantage
of the open air: But, O Gods, how strangely the black Knight was surprised,
when he saw the face of young Fortus, whom he thought he had fought for, and
found that he was the only man that he did then fight against: He then did not
only pull off his Helmet, but called the Physicians to him, and lay bemoaning
him saying to himself*

O Cow^rdly Cleocreton! Was there none for thee to work thy Discontent upon,
but thy only* Brother? What will thy Father and Friends call thee? unworthy
Creature that thou art* But O Heavens, what hard for^une have thou had,
monsterous Cleocreton, that thou should escape all. Why did thou not dye,
before thou flew thy Brother? Whose Funeral must now be solemnized instead of
his Marriage.

Now Fortus his Squire was at the back of Cleocreton, when he thus condemned
himself; and hearing him call his Master Brother, he therefore went and told
Fortus, who was then pretty well recovered: But when his Master heard it, he was
insensible troubled, that he should fight with him; but he was also pleased,
that there was a possibility that he should find his Brother, therefore he
mounted on his horse, and rid to the place where his man directed him; and when
he came, he found Cleocreton on the ground, For^us alighted, and said, Good
Brother, I am sorry to see you in this plight* and my self the cause of it; but
pardon the ignorance of your Servant Fortus.

He then (...) up his head, and seeing his Brother in health, ran and embraced
him, saying, Truly Brother I did intend never to lift sword more, if I had
slain you. But (said Fortus) I would gladly know, what is the reason of your
strange hiding your self from your Friend. I shall tell you that Brother (said
he) another time; let us now see what order the Battle is in.

Then they went and found proud Hecates Forces prevailing greatly against the
Tunians; but supply came, for the King of Calc^os* with a great multitude, came
in to the aid of the King of Tunis, which made the s^out Hecateans to tremble;
for when they saw the Army of Calchos to come in, they thought it was time for
them to y^eld to the greater number: But when the King of Hecate saw the
wavering heads of his new detracted Souldies, he with an angry look came
amongst them, and said, What now, will you yield your selves to death, your
wives into captivity, your children to be slaves, your Country to strangers?
and lastly* have you no regard to your King* but after all your expressions of
love and l^y a^^y to him, yield his neck under the feet of his Enemies? Quit
your selves like men, my friends, and look for your good service to receive
great rewards.

Now his Army hearing their Prince blaming their Cowarrdize, they with shame
that they should want heart, when they were always called the (...) people. And
truly they did follow the example of their King, and did begin another rare
onset (...) the Tunians. Then came Assyr^us to For^us, and with a^^ intent
either to in his Lady, or else dye* and not live to see the destruction of his
Land; Fortus received him with a great deal of courage and strength, and s^
they fell to their work Assyrtus more desperate then wise, but Fortus had well
his wits about him, and ^^th great, ^^cretion he ordered his ^^ows, while
Assyrtus laid on strokes any where like a Lion.

In the mean time Cleocreton and the King of Tu^nis fell upon the rest like
hai^ stones and thunder; but in the fight there was a great cry, and the King
of Tunis r^de to see wh^t the matter was, but it wa^ a sad ^ight to see, for
there was a Lady all in tears, tearing her very hair from her head, and
wringing her fair hands, and making a pitiful lamentation: The King of Tunis
was much grieved at the sight, but much more when he perceived it to be the
^air Daughter of the King of Calchos, Lady Freesa's sister, whose name was
Philereta, who ^as la^enting the death of her Father, the King of Calchos, who^
Assyrtus had slain before he went to fi^ht with Fortus, who had now dispatched
him; and then he came where the mourning Lady, and both hi^ and the King of
Tunis was extremely t^oubled at this sad accident that was fallen out, and
greatly pitying the sad condition of Lady Philereta, whose ominous dream was
come to pass; for she dreamt, that she sa^ her Father lie bleeding upon the
ground and he said to her wi^h a doleful voice, Come Philereta, go with me;
whereupon she could no ^ay be contented, till she came to see her dear Father,
whom she found dead, as she feared. The King her Uncle did very ^isely and
tenderly persuade her to be content; but she would take no persuasion, but kept
on her fruitless mournings: Then they carried her into a fair lodging, and was
resolved to see her better ere they took their ^ourney for T^nis; for no^ there
was none that made any resistance, for Cleocreton had slain an infinite number
of them: And while they were consul^^ng about the a^^airs of the Heca^etians,
the ^ing not knowing Cleo^reton, Fortus asked whether he would be disown^d or
no, then Cleocreton, without answering, went to the ^ing his Uncle* and when
the king did perceive it was him, he embraced him, and said, Sweet Nephew, was
it you who was so assault^ng our Enemies, my joy would have been greater, if my
poor Brother and Niece were not in so deplorable a condition.

Now while the King was thus talking, one of the Maids of Philereta came crying
out most la^entably* she ^i^g ask, what was the matter: she said,

Alas, my Lord, our Lady sent us out from her, and when we returned to her, she
^ad slain her self with a little dagger which she had in her hand, and when we
went to her she was dead. But alas, alas (continued she) it is the death of
young Lord Cloxin, that lay slai^ besides the King, that is the cause of this
bloody Tragedy. They were all extremely amazed at this heavy news.

Then the King of Tun^s ca^sed a (...) to be pr^pared* ^ll in ^l^^k and the^
p^^ the ^ing, and Phile^e^a, and Lord (...) in ^t, for it was a large (...) was
the b^^ies of these dead friends co^^^^ed into Calchos* and there they were
buried, and stately Monuments raised upon their Tombs.

Then went the King of Tun^s, with his t^o Nephews to tak^ possession ther^of,
For^us was the man that must have the Kingdom, and he entered peacea^ly i^to
Hecate* she inhabitants received him very well, and would needs Crown him King
of Hecate: Now Fortus had the possession of two Kingdoms, for he took
possession of Calchos, in the name of her that was now Queen Freesa.

Now they le^t Fortus to rule ^is new conquered Kingdom, while the rest went
with many of the inhabitants of Calchos, to fetch h^me there new Queen; who
poor Lady, could scarce accord ^o any ^oy at all: For when she heard that her
Father and Sister was dead, all her ^oy for their winning the Victory, was
conve^ted into mourning* ^he which she and the Queen of Tun^s ^^d second with
a^ ^^^^igned ^adness for a time, for the loss of her Brother and N^^ce: But as
all ^^ings ^^th, and must ^ave a^ ^^d, ^o had the ^orrow of Lady Freesa, who
when she considered, that she saw not her beloved Fortus, she then was in great
fear, that she had lost her chiefest Jewel, that she pri^ed abo^e all Friends
here upon earth* but when she was ^onvi^ced by the mouth of her Uncle who
advertised* her, that her Servant was not only ali^e, but also the King of
Hecate, and had caused ^he principal Lords of Calchos to come and salute her
Queen.

She then, after a little space was ^ver, took her ^ourney to^ards her Kingdom:
when she d^e^^ near the ^ame, came King Fortus to meet Queen Freesa* and with
him ^as all the princ^pal Lords, Earls, Barons, and Gentlemen of Calchos and
Hecate: But the bravest sight of all was* that after them came all the fairest
Ladies of them two Kingdoms to v^elcome their Queen: Then met the t^o Lovers,
and though they were both e^alted since they see o^e another, yet were their
hear^s one and the ca^e that they were in Tunis.

They solemnized the great marriage at Calchos, which was as joyful a day as
ever that people saw; and they manifested their great satisfaction, by their
Foasting, Revelling, Banqueting* Tournaments, and all things that could delight
their prudent King, and Marriage, and their beautiful and ^vit^ Queen.

When the Crown was set on her head, ^e took it off again, and with her own
^ands Crowned the head of King Fortus^; whom we will leave to the enjoyment of
his beloved Queen, in the possession o^ whom he was both enriched and blessed.

Now Cleocreton, of whom my pen has been too too treacherous, for giving
account of his thoughts and actions; who had great pleasure to see his Brother
established in his Throne: But his great and soul tormenting accusation of his
own unvvorthiners, that had provoked the Gods, by their unstable and variable
torments, to afflict their own Works. Then Cleocreton in a great (...), took
his leave of the King, and posted in all haste (he well knevv not ^vhi^er) but
his thoughts and heart prompe^ him to dravv highier to the pla^e where the
only She abo^ed, by whom all his sorrovvs and griefs must have an end.

Now they were quite changed from joy to sorrovv in Persia, for the bad nevvs
the Messenger brought them, which was, That the Ship wherein Cleocreton
was, it was svvallovved up by the Waves of angry Neptune: but Cloryana could
not believe this report, for it was Hel^ to her to hear it: Then she did send
Messengers the second time, and wished them, Not to look to the highest of men
for her Cleocreton, but to men in mean habit as well, for she did believe that
he was not joyful no more then she: And indeed sometimes the worthiest of men do
rest in mean habits, especially when it may be a means, to bring their hopes to
their desired Haven, by following the fruits of love.

But before the Gods ordered the great happine^s of Cleocreton, they thought to
pull down his greatest Enemies, one of which was Lady Merca; who seeing all her
practices could not entire never a match suitable to her, nor so much as any
below her; and she seeing the good and gentle smiles of Fortune fail upon every
one but her self, she grew so desperate, that she did intend to follow her own
Fates with as envious punishment; but first she confessed all her practices
against innocent Cleocreton: And then she one day caused her Maid, that she had
ma-many times employed for an instrument of malice^ to go out with her, and
they both went near the Sea side, and to the top of a Rock she climbed, and
from thence she received her deaths kiss, at the botom of the Sea: Her Maid was
not willing to see her underneath* but she became the carrier of this monstrous
news to the good King of Tunis, which straight broke his heart, and so he
resigned his Kingdom to the Issue of his Sister the Queen: of Hungary; which
fell to the share of Cleocreton, who was in great distress, for his hopes was
all gone concerning his dear Cloryana; for he heard nothing from her, but only
of her mirth and health.

Then he was willing to expire, and getting the habit of a Pilgrim, went to the
Court of Persia, and there he two days behe^d the great beauty of Cloryana;
which did so revive his spirits, as he did wish that it were possible for him
in that habit to speak to her, as well as he could see her.

Now one day it fell out, that the Emperor, and all the Ladies of the Court,
was at the sport of fishing at the Lible River; and Cleocreton going on the
other side, ^e saw his Divine and Beautiful Lady, who instead of sporting with
others, she wept to her Cousin Calsey, and bemoaned the loss of Cleocreton. At
the last, the Pilgrim being on the other side, threw in a fishing book, and did
wave it a little up and down the water; but there was a sturdy fellow, one of
the Lords attendance, who seeing that the Pilgrim troubled the waters,
presently went to him, and said*

Thou bold Caitiff, how dare thou put thy leauing-staff in the Brook, when
the Emperor is taking his pleasure.

But the Pilgrim gave no heed to what he said, but kept on his posture: The
fellow began to be angry, and laid his hand on his sword, sayin^,

Surely thou shall be taught some manners, if thou did bring none hither.

And having said so, he presently struck the Pilgrim on the breast, with the
pummel of his sword. The Pilgrim bring grieved at the Impudence of the Fellow,
be drew out his sword from under his gown, and gave him a sore remembrance: The
fellow almost mad to see the courage of the Pilgrim, and therefore with all his
might be aimed at the head of the Pilgrim, who had one of his feet in the
water, and the other on the grass, which was just over against the Emperor.

Then the Pilgrim could not well wave the stroke, and therefore the weapon of
the other, cleft his Helmet in two pieces, which fell down, and showed his
golden hair to the beholders; who were all struck with astonishment, when they
well perceived it was none but Noble Cleocreton.

The Emperor was even rapt up in any and commanded his Lords to take away the
fellow, whom he had given many sore wounds too. Then the people swarmed about
Cleocreton, and sweet Cloryana had all the content that a person so long from
her love could have. When he came over the River, the Emperor embraced him, and
said, Welcome a thousand times, valiant Cleocreton. But when he came to
Cloryana, O Gods, none knows the joys of them hoth, but such that have been
debarred from the thing they most esteem: when they enjoy it again, then surely
there is nothing but the extremily of that Passion must fall out.

Now the next day following, must be the day when there two Lovers must of
ne^essity roap the fruits of their long deserved love and constancy: Then was
the beautiful Cloryana conducted by the Emperor and Empress, and all the Nobles
in Persia, both Lords and Ladies, whose beauties did but st^ll add more luster
and perfection, to the incomparable Beauty of Heavenly Cloryana; whose eyes
rather invited the Gods to be her guests, then her Fathes mortal Subjects.

Then followed the other Bride, which was Lady Calsey; but Cloryana first paid
her Rites to the God Hyman. The Emperor took her by the hand, and gave her to
the Invincible Cleocreton, saying,

Now behold your King, my Friends and Subjects, who is the Emperor of all the
Land of Persia, Hungary, and Tunis; respect him as your lawful Prince, and
worthy of all Renown; and as one that is able to defend your Rites, and Lives,
and Liberties, from all foreign assaults.

Which said, the people almost caused the Earth to shake, by the reason of
their joy, shouts, and praices, and acclamations, in, and to the glory of
Cleocreton and Cloryana. And then came the turn of Muxorb and Calsey, whose joy
was no less then the others.

And thus they both enjoyed their Ladies; and in short time, the Emperor
yielded all his Regal Power and Riches to his Son Cleocreton; and the King of
Hungary did the same, enforced by the common Adversary death, and left
Cleocreton in the height of pleasure and content, to enjoy his beautiful
Empress Cloryana.

FINIS.
The Renowned Cleocreton, Prince of Hungary.



