THE Long Parliament IS NOT REVIVED by THO. PHILIPS

OR, An ANSWER to Tho. Philips his Long Parliament Revived.

By R. C.

Novem 28 LONDON, Printed for N.W. at the King's Head in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1660.

Anno 17. Caroli Regis.
An Act to prevent Inconveniences which may happen by the untimely adjourning,
proroguing, or dissolving of this present Parliament.
Whereas great Sums of Money must of necessity be speedily advanced and
provided for Relief of his MAJESTY'S Army and People in the Northern parts of
this Realm, and for preventing the immanent danger this Kingdom is in, and for
supply of other his Majesty's present and urgent occasions, which cannot be so
timely effected, as is requisite without Credit for raising the said moneys:
Which Credit cannot be obtained until such obstacles be first removed, as are
occasioned by fears, jealousies, and apprehensions of diverse His Majesty's
Loyal Subjects, that this present Parliament may be adjourned, prorogued or
dissolved before Justice shall be duly executed upon Deliquents; public
grievances redressed; a firm Peace between the two Nations of England and
Scotland concluded, and before sufficient provision be made for the repayment
of the said moneys so to be raised. All which the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled having duly considered, do therefore humbly beseech your
most excellent Majesty that it may be declared, and Enacted.

And be it Declared and Enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord, with the assent
of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
Authority of the same that this present Parliament now assembled shall not be
dissolved unless it be by Act of Parliament to be passed for that purpose. Nor
shall be at any time or times, during the continuance thereof, prorogued, or
adjourned, unless it be by Act of Parliament to be likewise passed for that
purpose. And that the House of Peers shall not at any time, or times, during
this present Parliament, be adjourned, unless it be by themselves, or by their
own Order: And in like manner, that the House of Commons shall not at any time,
or times, during this present Parliament, be adjourned, unless it be by
themselves, or by their own Order. And that all, and every thing, and things,
whatsoever done, or to be done, for the adjournment, proroguing or dissolving
of this present Parliament, contrary to this Act, shall be utterly void, and of
none effect.

decorative strip with a French fleur-de-lis flanked by a Tudor rose and a
Scottish thistle
THE Long Parliament IS NOT REVIVED.
THE Authors Introduction is in the first Paragraph, an Apology for the Peace
of the Nation upon a Lasting Foundation, which in the next Paragraph he does
not doubt but lies in Parliaments rightly constituted, and in their just and
lawful Privileges: And this in the third Paragraph he says must hold true in
relation to the Long Parliament, called by the late King CHARLES of blessed
memory, which being constituted legally and indissolvible but by Act of
Parliament, and not dissolved by Act of Parliament, is yet in force: to
evidence which he brings in three Arguments.

1. The Title, or end of the Act, viz. that it was an Act to prevent
inconveniences that may happen by the untimely Adjourning, Proroguing, or
dissolving this present Parliament, viz. want of credit to raise money to
maintain his Majesty's Army and people in the North, etc.

The second is, That this present Parliament shall not be dissolved but by Act
of Parliament.

The third is, That all, and every thing and things whatsoever, done, or to be
done, for Adjourning, Proroguing, or dissolving this present Parliament,
contrary to this Act, shall be utterly void, and of none effect; and therefore
this Parliament wanting these Formalities, is yet in being, and no Parliament
can be hereafter convened, before this be thus formally dissolved, or it must
needs follow, two Parliaments may be existent at the same time, which he
believes to be so absurd as none will aver. There is an Answer to Mr. Prin, and
against the Authority of this Convention, which his Majesty his owned a
Parliament. What the Authors disposition is to the Peace of this Nation, upon a
right foundation, I know not, what Peace he hopes to find by Reviving the Long
Parliament, few can tell, but none have found. That it does not follow, that
the Long Parliament is not Dissolved, or Revived from any of his three
Arguments, we will show.

For first, his first Argument is drawn from the end, or title of the Act, to
prevent the inconveniences which may arise by the untimely Proroguing,
Adjourning, or Dissolving the Parliament, for want of money to maintain his
Majesty's Army and people in the North: If the force of the continuance of the
Long Parliament be drawn from hence, then must the Parliament be dissolved (or
at least dissolvable without Act of Parliament) upon the payment of his
Majesty's Army and people in the North; for cessante ratione legis, cessat lex:
But it must needs be irrational, and most absurd, to aver, that any Law can
create a contrary, or different obligation from the first reason and end of it,
viz. Because they might be a Parliament until they had relieved his Majesty's
Army and people in the North, therefore they might destroy his Majesty's Army
and people in the North.

The second is, That this present Parliament shall not be dissolved but by Act
of Parliament. If the Act had said, the Parliament shall not be legally
dissolved but by Act of Parliament, then this Author might have disputed
against the Legality of that Act, which should otherwise have dissolved it; but
if this Author shall affirm this Parliament to be in being, because not legally
dissolved, is all one as to say, no man is killed or oppressed, because
Subjects ought to be preserved in their lives and estates by Laws and Acts of
Parliament; and this Parliament might as well have made an Act that none of
their Members should dye but by Act of Parliament, as that they should not be
dissolved but by Act of Parliament.

The third is, that all, and every thing or things whatsoever done, or to be
done for the Adjourning, Proroguing, or dissolving of this present Parliament
contrary to this Act, shall be utterly void, and of none effect. Such was the
omnipotency of these men in their beginning, that they believed all things, how
impossible soever, to be very sensible to establish their Greatness and Reign:
For things simply impossible are impossible even to God himself; as that
contradictions should be true, or that any thing should be, and not be at the
same instant. Yet such was the Omnipotency of these Members, that contradictory
and impossible things must not be repugnant, but subsist in order to their
perpetuity and greatness. For if things be done, they must necessarily be done,
and so cannot be void and of non-effect, whatsoever they may be in Law.

I pray Reader take notice, that the Author of this Pamphlet, not only insists
upon impossible things to prove the continuance of the Parliament, but his very
title is contradictory and absurd, which revives the Long Parliament, and yet
affirms it not dissolved; whereas if it had not been dissolved, it could never
be revived; and a man may as well dispute thus as our Author does: No man ought
to do violence upon, or kill himself but by his own consent; and that if a man
does violate or kill himself, or be violated, or killed by another, contrary
hereunto, such force shall be utterly void, and of none effect; therefore every
man shall live, though he kill himself, or be killed by another; which I think
no man in his wits will affirm.

The LONG PARLIAMENT dissolved, and dead, and never to be revived.
IT is not worth, upon so mean an occasion to declare the Principles of Power,
from whence Humane Laws are derived, and what creates them obligation: Or
whether effects or accidents of Power can create any alteration or obligation
upon that Power: As if Laws made be derogatory to the Power that made them. For
example, if by an Act of Parliament the Crown of England were aliened against
the Right of Succession; or that it should hold of the Pope or any one else; or
that there be not sufficient Means left to the King to protect his Subjects;
for Salus Populi suprema Lex: Neither will I dispute at what time Laws and Acts
of Parliament take place: But that Civil Laws take not place always, is
evident; for inter Arma silent Leges: Or who shall plead the benefit of them,
as whether any man can plead the benefit of Law for Treason, Inst. 3, 9.
Felony or Breach of Peace: And whether (since no Subject can levy Arms without
Treason, but by Authority of the King) The Long Parliaments raising Arms
against the King, did not justly invalidate all benefit they could claim by
virtue of this Act, or any other Law? I shall endeavor to show three things:
1. Whether the Long Parliament be totally dissolved. 2. Whether in the ordinary
nature of things it can be revived. And lastly, Whether the Members have any
just cause to complain. But that we do not lose our selves in obscurity, as our
Author does, we will first define our terms, and so set down our Notions, as to
be so understood, as any man may reject or deny any thing herein.

First then, A Parliament is a Politic Body, compounded (not of three States,
as our Author would, of King, Lords and Commons, but) of heterogenial or
dissimular parts, viz. the King, the Principium, Caput and Finis of it, and of
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, one distinct House, and of the House of
Commons, another distinct house; both which houses are convened and created by
the Kings Writ. Inst, 4. p. 1, 4.
Sir Edw. Coke calls them, Conventus Sapientum, Inst. 4. p. 2. Now all
Conventions and Assemblies whatsoever, are either regular or irregular: All
regular Conventions and Assemblies do proceed from, and may be reduced into one
just and certain Principle, which causes and creates those Assemblies; but all
other Conventions and Assemblies, which do not proceed from one certain, just
Principle, are rather Commotions or Routs, than Assemblies. These regular
Conventions and Assemblies are so either potentially or actually; potentially,
two ways, either when a rightful power constitutes any company of men to meet
at time and place, these men thus empowered, have by right a power of
convention and assembling at such time and place; or else after they be
convened, either by the power which first convened, or by themselves they
adjourn or prorogue to some certain time or place, and for want of such
proroguing, adjourning or covening, all such Conventions are totally dissolved,
because their Conventions did not proceed from a certain and just Principle,
which might create them: Or actually, when such regular Assemblies are actually
convened by virtue of a just authority, impowering them: the two Houses
therefore being the Convention and Assembly, which united to the King, the Head
of them, rightly convened by virtue of the Kings Writ, and after prorogued or
adjourned either by the King or themselves, to meet at a certain time and
place, do continue such Conventions; otherwise they may meet in Riots and
Routs, in regular Assemblies they cannot.

1. Now would I fain know, when the two worthy Speakers deserted their
Speakerships, and run from the House to the Army, and joined with them against
the remaining part of the Members, they did prorogue to a certain time and
place, wherein they did convene by virtue of such Adjournment: Or whether there
were then two Parliaments in being, which our Author so abominates, one at
Westminster, another in the Army: and whether when the Lower House retained
nothing but the Rump, and having turned the remaining part of the Lords (who
had before excluded by like means, 3 times the number of themselves, who had as
good Title as themselves to sit there) and four times their own number out of
themselves) were a rightful Assembly, duly convened in time and place; if they
were, then may a part be equal to the whole; and the Speaker joined with Henry
Martin, and Titchbourn, and his Majesty's Sergeants, Glin and Maynard, since
Knighted, may yet be a rightful Parliament: But if it be true, that Formae
rerum sicut numeri consistunt indivisibili, and that the aggregate body of a
Parliament consists of both Houses duly convened in time and place, then if
either be not rightly Assembled actually or potentially, the whole is utterly
dissolved; much more, when neither are so, as the case now stands with us.

2. The Houses thus dissolved, I would now know what power can revive them, it
must be either they themselves, or the King: If it be themselves, what hinders
them from convening (yet I believe our Author will hardly persuade the Speaker
and Lord St John to make two) if they and the world be satisfied such
Convention be just and regular? If it be by the King, it must be either Legally
or Arbitrarily: If Legally, the King must revive it by virtue of some Act of
Parliament, or by Common Law: If by Act of Parliament it must be revived, let
our Author, or any one else show it: If by Common Law, then let him or any one
else show any President for a Kings reviving a Parliament, and I will presently
yield the cause: So I am quit with him for his Answer to Mr. Prin's first
Objection. But if the King do it, and yet neither by Act of Parliament nor
Common Law, then must it be done by an Arbitrary Power, which is every whit as
dangerous as his Conclusion. King Charles upon the death of King James, asked
Sir Edw. Coke, whether he might not continue (or rather revive) the Parliament
dissolved by his Fathers death? he answered negatively, because Parliaments
could not be convened, but by the ancient and usual Form, which this was not.

3. But because it is objected, that though the Houses be dissolved, yet are
they not legally dissolved, and so violently done: And great Crime this! I pray
who did, or who may complain? Did not the Members (all but the first
persecuted) from their first beginning, abuse all the Kings Grants and Favors
to his own and Loyal Subjects prejudice? Did not they themselves turn out one
another, from the Contents unto the end of the Chapter, until there was scarce
any of either House (none of the Lords) to turn out? And if no Fool or Mad man,
shall in Law complain against his own Act? for volenti non fit injuria, then
the Members have no reason to complain of their usage to one another, and of
dissolving of themselves; and the Nation is so far from complaining, that I
believe, with a bitter sense, they wish they had never been.

But suppose the King might revive them, yet if he might do it, then he might
not, and might choose whether he would or not: And can any man in his wits
believe, the bitter sense of his Fathers death, and his own, his Mothers, and
Brothers and Sisters suffering by them, would not divert him from such an
intention, unless he did desire to have the Tragedy revived again, upon himself
and Family, and all his Loyal Subjects; who after so many storms of their
unjust suffering for their Conscience, may reasonably hope, through Gods
Blessing, for the future, to be protected by his Majesty's peaceable
Government, from them, which upon the reviving of the Long Parliament, they
could not reasonably hope.

FINIS.

