The CASE of the Waggoners and Carriers of Goods and Merchandises, through the
several Roads of England.
Humbly submitted to the Honorable House of Commons assembled in Parliament.
THAT in the Sessions of Parliament 1695, the said Carriers were heard (as to
many Grievances and Oppressions imposed on them by several pretended Informers)
before a Committee of this Honorable House, who were pleased 14th of March
1695, to make their Report.

That it was their Opinion, the Petitioners had fully proved the Allegations of
their said Petitions, and deserved Relief of the House. And also that the House
be moved for leave to bring in a Bill for explaining the several Acts relating
to the Highways, and for preventing the Abuses arising thereby.

To which the House agreed, committed John Littlehale, for oppressing the
Petitioners, to Custody of the Sergeant at Arms, and a Bill was then drawn up,
and past into a Law, Entitled, An Act for better amending and repairing the
High ways, and Explanation of the Laws relating thereunto.

By which, it was (amongst other things) Enacted, that all Carriers and
Waggoners should be obliged to draw with double Shafts, and a Pole between
their Wheel-Horses, etc.

But it having been tried, it was found by experience to be impossible to pass
the several narrow Roads of this Kingdom, and Gate-ways of Inns, and Passages
of Streets, Where the Petitioners must Come to abide and lodge their said
Wagons and Wares, with such double Shafts and Polls, for that they are not
broad enough to contain the same.

The said John Littlehale, and other Informers, have taken upon them to
prosecute the Petitioners for Forfeitures committed, by not driving pursuant to
the said Act, which is impossible to be done.

And some Justices of Peace have been so civil and encouraging to these
Informers, to grant them Warrants for Distress of the said Carriers Horses, to
levy the Penalties and Forfeitures incurred by their not complying with the
said Impossibility.

By which means, the said Carriers have suffered very much, and are not able to
go on with their Callings, unless these Grievances are redrest. Some whereof
are as follow. Particularly,

That the 6th of March School, Seven Horses were seized from Mr. Basse, Leicester
Leicester Carrier at Brown's Well in Finchly Parish, upon Warrants granted by
Justice Monday of the Temple, and carried away by William Hull, Brother-in-Law
to John Littlehale, viz. five Horses out of the wagon, which were all that it
was drawn with; one Horse from Mr. Basse's Man, which he rode on, and a Gelding
which he led in his hand. And the said Hull, assisted by two Soldiers, demanded
10 l. of him, for non payment of which, they swore they would knock him off his
Horse, and in a violent abusive manner forced all the said Horses from him,
whereby he was necessitated to leave the said Wagon, laden with Wares and
Merchandises, in the open Road, till he came to London, to get Money to clear
them, or a Replevin. And afterward when a Replevin was obtained from the
Sheriff of Middlesex, the said persons refused to obey it, and forcibly
resisted the Officers, who came to execute it, and restore the said Horses.

At the same time and place, the said Hull and his Agents, by Mr. Munday's
Warrant, Nottingham.
seized six Horses from Mr. Wilkinson's Wagon of Nottingham; demanded ten
Pounds of his man, and gave him the like Language and Usage.

The beginning of February School, the said Hull and his Agents seized two
Horses, two Collars, and two pair of Traces from the said Wilkinson, Nottingham
Carrier for four Pound, at Highgate, and the four Pound was paid to redeem them.

And at the same time and place, the said Hull and his Agents seized two
Horses, Derby.
two Collars, and two pair of Traces, from Samuel Locker's Wagon, Carrier to
Derby, for four Pound, and the four Pound was paid to redeem them.

About the 21th of February, the said Hull and his Agents seized two Horses in
the Parish of Finchly for four Pound more from the said Locker, Derby Carrier.


