The CONFESSION of GEORGE CASVVELL Gent. Executed at TYBURN, on Monday the 21st
of December 1691 For the Murder of ANDREW HICKSON. With a True Copy of a Paper
delivered by him at the Place of Execution.
AFter many Visits made to him in the Prison, on the Lord's Day before his
Execution, he made this Confession to the Ordinary. That he had good Education,
and was put forth an Apprentice to a Grocer, but not delighting in that
employment, he left it, and after that, entered himself Voluntary into Military
Service, for Six Years past, during which time, he contracted Acquaintance with
the unfortunate Person, who fell by his hand, the manner of which, he said,
was, as follows.

That himself and the person killed by him, were drinking together, during
which time, this Acquaintance gave him very reproachful Language, whereupon Mr.
Caswell made a Resolute Protestation that he would have satisfaction for his
affronting him; The other in a careless manner, replied, Pre-thee what
satisfaction would thou have, we will go and Friendly drink together, so they
did; and afterward parted for that night. But when Mr. Caswel came home, and
was alone, he passionately renewed the reproaches in his Mind: In the Morning,
he went to the Lodging of the Deceased, and finding him in bed, did in anger,
bid him Rise, for he would have Justice of him, which he wondered at, saying we
are Friends, we will go and drink again, which they did, in several places to
an Excess. And the Deceased paid the Reckoning: But Mr. Caswel being too much
heatted with drink, said, this is not sufficient, I am resolved to fight you,
which the other declined, but Mr. Caswell contiued urging him to fight,
whereupon the Deceased, (as he says) fetched a Sword, and they went apart where
Mr. Caswel drew upon him, and he fell, at which he was startled and hoped that
his wound was not Mortal, tho it proved contrary, upon which, he was
immediately apprehended, being in Prison, and coming to his Right Mind, he fell
into great Terror of Conscience, as thinking his Sin to be unpardonable,
whereupon the Ordinary was sent for, to pray with him, and Endeavored to
Support him from Despare. The great aggravation of the Crime, and which
multiplied his Terror, was that he had thrust a Man out of the World so
unprepared for Death; which troubles him as much as the loss of his own Life.
In my Observation of him, he seemed full of Remorse for so vile a Fact. I hope
others will take warning from him to avoid immoderate Passion, lest they fall
into the same misery, into which he has brought himself.

Being Conveyed to Tyburn in a Coach, when he came into the Cart he kneeled
down alone and prayed very fervently for himself, afterward being Tied to the
Tree, the Ordinary and another Minister, who came with him as his Friend, both
prayed for him, according to the public prayers of the Liturgy, which suited
his distressed dying Estate, himself repeating the same words. After this a
Penitential Psalm was sung, he joining in it; then he desired the Ordinary and
the other Minister to make their several Prayers for him, which they did. Then
he did hold the following Paper in Writing to the Spectators in his hand, but
spoke it word for word by Memory: and delivered it to the Ordinary to be
Printed with the Subscription of his hand to it, to prevent any false reports
of him.

Friends and Countrymen,
I Am very sensible from sad Experience, how prone frail humane Nature is to
Youthful Lusts, and all sorts of Extravagant-Courses, which ^urry men to the
pit of Destruction, from whence there is no return, if Infinite Mercy does not
interpose, by turning them from Darkness to Light, and from the power of Satan
to the Living God: I confess that of Sinners I am the Chiefest, and that I
justly deserve to Dye, a Painful, yea Eternal Death, but with the Lord there is
Mercy and plenteous Redemption, therefore there is hopes for the greatest
Sinners. Here I rest hoping for a full Pardon of all my sins, through the alone
Merits of my Blessed Savior Jesus Christ. And I earnestly beg of all that
behold my Tragical Departure hence, to take warning by me to shun immoderate
Passion, and neglect of serving God Early lest ye fall into the snare of the
Devil, and dye in your sins: And now I beg all your Prayers, that Christ Jesus
will receive my departing Soul, Amen, sweet Jesus Amen, Finis

George Caswell.


His Beheavour was very Reverent and Composed, desiring the prayers of all the
Spectators, which moved them Generally to Lament his sad untimely End with
Tears. After this, he Ordered the Executioner not to turn him off till he gave
some sign; so after a Prayer made to himself, the Cart drew away, he first
committing his Soul to Gods Infinite Mercy, as a Faithful Creator and Redeemer.
To this whole Account as the Truth of his Confession, Last Speech and
Deportment, at the place of Suffering, I do Subscrib my hand as he desired me.

Dated Monday this 21st. of December 1691. Samuel Smith Ordinary.

London, Printed for L^ngley Curtiss at Sir Edmondb^ry Godfre^'s H^^d near
Fle^^-^ridge. 16^^.


