THE CASE OF SOME OF THE ADVENTVRERS AND PARTICIPANTS With the Right Honorable
William Earl of Bedford in the draining of the great Level of the Fens stated,
in reference to a Bill depending in Parliament for settlement of the said
Draining.
BY a Law of Sewers made at Lynne, Anno Dom. 1630. and in the 6th year of his
late Majesty's Reign, The Right Honorable Francis late Earl of Bedford became
undertaker for Draining the said Great Level within 6 years, and was to have
95000 Acres for his Recompense.

In the same Law the Commissioners therein named besought his Majesty to accept
of 12000 Acres, (part of the 95000 Acres) to be conveyed from the said Francis
Earl of Bedford, and his Heirs.

The said Earl took in several other persons or Participants and Adventurers
with him in his undertaking, Peterborough Law, 13. Jan. 12. Car.
and together with them prosecuted the work; and in or about the year 1636. the
Commissioners of Sewers then sitting at Peterborough adjudged the 95000 Acres
unto the said Earl and Participants.

That the said Francis Earl of Bedford made tender to his Majesty of a Deed
purporting a conveyance thereof from the said Earl to his Majesty and
Successors; But his Majesty was not pleased to accept thereof, so that there
was never any Conveyance of it.

In the year 1638. a Commission of Sewers sat at Huntingdon, and upon inquiry
into the Earl of Bedfords draining, Law at Huntingdon. 14. Car.
the Commissioners did declare That the said great Level was not perfectly
drained, and that the Country ought to repossess their Lands, and set on foot
a new draining, wherein the King was declared sole undertaker, and the
Commoners of each County, and owners of severals, enter upon their Lands and
possess themselves as well of the 12000 Acres, as of the residue of the 95000
Acres.

The King begins the work as sole undertaker; and Anno 1639. gives it over
again. In the year 1641. the said Earl and Participants apply to the then
Parliament, and had their Case committed. In 1644. the Country then in
possession of their Land petitioned for the Earl of Bedfords draining; and
thereupon, and upon the prosecution of the said Earl and Participants, a
pretended Act is obtained in the year 1649. whereby the 95000 Acres were
decreed to William Earl of Bedford, Son and Heir of the said Francis, and
Participants, as their recompense for draining the said great Level, which they
were to effect and bring to perfection within 6. years, and enjoined them to
make it winter ground and fit for Tillage; whereas by the first undertaking
they were only obliged to make it Summer ground and fit for pasture.

For raising money to begin the work, They propounded to dispose of several
parcels of the 95000 Acres, and amongst the rest 10000 Acres of the said 12000
Acres, and did afterward contract with the present owners thereof for the same
at 40 s. an Acre. The money amounting in the whole to 20000 l. was paid into
the Treasurer of the Company of Adventurers within four Months after the
Contract, and all laid out and expended that Summer, as was agreed upon the
first Contract, in making Banks, Rivers, Sluices, and other works for draining
of the said great Level. The other Adventurers raising upon the residue of the
95000. Acres no more then 2 s. 6 d. an Acre for that time.

That this sum of money thus advanced gave the first life to this work, and was
(as the said Adventurers then acknowledged) the foundation of their credit,
whereby they raised further sums of money for the future carrying on the said
undertaking.

That over and above the said 40 s. an Acre, the present Owners have since that
paid in Taxes and Sesses laid upon the said 10000 Acres, for draining and
preserving the said Level, near 10000 l. more, and further disbursed many great
sums of money, in hassaking, ditching, planting, building upon, and other ways
improving the said Lands.

That by the Contract aforesaid the present Owners of the said 10000 Acres
became Adventurers and Participants with the said Earl, to all intents and
purposes, equally with any others, who were before interessed in the said
undertaking, and were as one Company and Common Body to manage the whole, and
to participate each with other in gain and loss, according to their several
respective Interests and proportions.

That a very considerable quantity of the 10000. Acres is forfeited to his
Majesty by the attainder of some of the persons interessed therein.

That the said Adventurers have prepared a Bill to be tendered to the Parliament
for settling the said work of draining, by the purport whereof the 10000 Acres
is to be disposed from the present Owners thereof, as that which is thought
necessary to be done for the good of the whole work.

That in the said Bill no provision being made for satisfying those Adventurers
and Participants who are interessed in the said 10000 Acres, for the great sums
of money they have expended as aforesaid, in and upon the works of draining;
they represented the Justice and Equity of their Case upon the grounds
aforesaid to their Fellow Participants and Owners of the Residue of the 95000
Acres at the general Meetings of the Company; and not being willing to
interrupt the passing of the Bill, in reference to the whole work, or to the
disposing of the 10000 Acres in such manner as was propounded therein; they
demanded only the re-imbursement of the 40 s. an Acre, with such other sums of
money as have been since assessed upon the 10000 Acres, and paid by the said
Owners for draining and conserving the said great Level; and hoped that their
said Fellow-Adventurers and Participants would have complied herewith as a most
moderate proposition, and below that which might have been insisted upon,
considering the miscarriage of all former undertakings, and in that and other
respects the vast hazard they ran in the disbursing so great a sum of money in
the infancy of the work, with the great benefit and advantage the whole Company
reaped thereby.

But the said other Adventurers though they do and must confess the receipt of
the aforesaid sums of money, and the expending thereof upon those works,
whereby the whole Level is drained and defended, and in respect whereof they
expect and demand their recompense, and the equitableness of this Case in the
other points before mentioned, do notwithstanding endeavor to put this burden,
that ought to lie upon the whole Company, upon some particular Members thereof.

The said owners therefore are necessitated to apply themselves to the
Honorable House of Commons, and to appeal to their Justice, humbly Praying,
That before the passing of the said Bill, to take this their Case into
Consideration; wherein they humbly conceive these things are most manifest.

1. That the Earl and other Participants have no better nor other Title, or
pretense of Title in Law, to the Residue of the 95000. Acres, then they had to
the 10000. Acres.

2. And as to the Equitable Title upon the account of the money extended by
them in and about the works of draining; the said other Participants Owners of
the said 10000 Acres, have therein the same Equity with them, or rather
greater, at least in respect of their hazard, having advanced 40 s. an Acre at
the first Entrance upon the works, when the other Adventurers disbursed but 2
s. 6 d. an Acre for their proportions.

3. That all the said Adventurers, as well the Owners of the 10000 Acres, as
the said Earl and other Participants, standing thus upon the same Bottom, both
in Law and Equity, The Parliament who is now applied to for the settlement of
the whole, in Case they shall judge it fit to settle 10000 Acres in the manner
propounded in the Bill, may settle any other 10000 Acres in the possession of
any other of the Adventurers as well as this now in question, There being
nothing in Law or Equity, nor indeed in Interest, why the one should not be
done as well as the other; And in case the Parliament should be of opinion to
do so, or to take part of this land, and part of the other 85000 Acres, to make
up the 10000 Acres, those Gentlemen from whom any proportions of Land should be
taken, would think themselves hardly dealt with (as they might) in case this
loss should be wholly left upon their particulars, and not put upon the whole
Company; There is the same reason, and therefore Justice, in case the
Parliament shall think fit, that this individual 10000 be taken, that the
burden thereof be laid upon the whole Company.

4. That the King having the Interest of the persons attainted, who were owners
of a considerable quantity of the 10000 Acres, if this money be not reimbursed,
His Majesty will lose a very considerable sum of money, which was disbursed
upon the works of draining, by those persons, in reference to their proportions
in the 10000 Acres, the benefit whereof ought to accrue to His Majesty, and not
to the Adventurers.

That therefore which is humbly prayed upon this Case is, That if the said
10000 Acres, or any part of it be settled from the present owners, That
effectual provision may be made in the same Act, for their being reimbursed the
money paid and expended by them, as is before expressed.

These are the names of the Persons who conveyed the 10000. Acres to the
present Owners, and were the chief persons who procured the pretended Act in
1649, and managed the Works of Draining.
William Earl of Bedford. Edward Russel, Esquire; Richard Lord Gorges. Sir Miles
Sandys. Sir Edward Partridge. Thomas Thynn Esquire; Robert Henley Esquire; Isaac Jones
Esquire; John Latch Esquire; John Fountain, Serj. at Law. William Crane Esquire; Sir John
Marsham. Anthony Hamond Esquire; Robert Castle Esquire; John Carryl Esquire; Robert
Wigstead. William Dodson, Thomas Brown.
FINIS.

