engraved frontispiece, image of Saint Joseph spouse to the Virgin Mary
Faithful and prudent servant, constituted by our Lord for the Comforter of his
Mother; for the Forster-Father of his Humanity; and for his only and most
faithful assistant in his great design upon earth.

S. Bern. Hom. 2. Super Missus est

PIOUS REMARKES UPON THE LIFE OF S. JOSEPH SPOUSE Of the B. Virgin Mary Mother
of our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

Written Originally in French by Rd. Father Paul Barrie.

The Second Edition of the English Translation.

Printed by T. F. in the Year, M.DCC.

THE TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
Pious Remarks upon the Life of Saint Joseph Spouse to the Bles-Virgin Mary,
exciting Devotion to this Glorious Saint.
CHAPTER I. OF the admirable Love that God bore Saint Joseph. Page 1. CHAP. II.
Of those wonderful Qualities, whereby God rendered Saint Joseph aimiable, above
all other Saints except JESUS and MARY. Page 20. CHAP. III. Of the great Love
and special Devotion we ow Saint Joseph, and that it ought to be next to that
we have for JESUS and MARY. Page 28. CHAP. IV. What was the Reason why it was
so long, before Saint Joseph, the best beloved of God, and most aimiable of all
the Saints after JESUS and MARY, had such a Love and Devotion paid him, as was
due to the greatness of his Merits. Page 34. CHAP. V. Of the ten particular
Clients of Saint Joseph, who by their Pious Examples have invited and moved us
to a particular Devotion to him next to Jesus and Mary. Page 50. CHAP. VI. Of
the Ordinary Devotions that may be daily Exercised toward Saint Joseph. Page
78. The Alphabetical Litany of Saint Joseph. Page 85. CHAP. VII. What Devotions
are to be used to Saint Joseph upon his Feast. Page 96. CHAP. VIII. Of
Devotions to S. Joseph during the Octave of his Feast or at other times
according to the opportunity or affection of his Clients. Page 108. CHAP. IX.
Containing nine different occasions of particular Devotions proper to Saint
Joseph, and practiced by his particular Devots. P, 113. CHAP. X. Of the help
and Assistance that Saint Joseph gives to his Devout Clients toward their
attaining Interior Perfection, and in what this Perfection does consist. Page
130. CHAP. XI. Of the assistance Saint Joseph gives to Spiritual Maladies;
especially to those who are in a bad State of Soul. Page 146. CHAP. XII. The
Miraculous Assistance which Saint Joseph giv's in Curing Corporal Diseases,
especially the Plague. Page 155. CHAP. XIII. The assistance which God giv's
upon all occasions by Saint Joseph Intercession. Page 171. CHAP. XIV. To exhort
all to have recours to Saint Joseph, and Confide in his Powerful Protection. P.
177.
PIOUS REMARKS UPON The Life of Saint Joseph, Spouse to the Blessed Virgin
Mary; exciting Devotion to this Glorious Saint.
CHAP. I. Of the admirable Love that God bore Saint Joseph.
IT was doubtless a Divine Inspiration with which that Painter was moved, who
first put a Lilly into Saint Joseph's Hand. Flowers we know have something very
lovely and charming in them; and it is looked upon as an honor and good Fortune,
no less to bear their Name, than to bear them in our Scutcheon or Coat of
Arms: Wherefore the City of Florence esteems it as a very great one, to bear
the Name of that rich Flower, that adorns her delicious Gardens.

The glorious Name of Rose, is also justly entailed upon the Island of Rhod's,
as being so beautiful and pleasant a place, that it even resembles a Rose in
the Spring.

All the World know's, that Susa, the chief City, in great Assuerus's Kingdom,
pretended to better Fortune than all the other Cities of Asia; because the Name
Susa signifies a Lilly, whereby she gave her self a right above all other
Cities, of stiling her self the City of Lillies.

And there are none, even of the Interpreters of Holy Scripture, who do not
take notice, that the City of Nazareth fortunately bore the Name of Flowers,
Because it was the residence of Jesus Nazarenus, that is, Jesus of the City of
Flowers, and the Native Town of Mary and Joseph, the three fairest Flowers, in
the Garden of the Holy Catholic Church.

We Read also in Ancient Annals, that the very name and sight of Flowers; have
been looked upon as a most happy and prosperous Omen; for as Plutarch recounts
in the Life of Sylla, the Roman Army being drawn up in Battle array, ready to
charge the Enemy, an agreeable gale arising, brought a great quantity of
Lillies, Roses, Violets, Flower-de-Luces, Daffadils and several other sorts of
flowers, from the Neighboring Fields and Gardens; which falling upon the
Shields and Head-pieces of the Roman Soldiers, they believed it a certain
presage of their good Fortune; and even a kind of crowning them Conquerors
beforehand.

At the Battle of Lepanto, Roses were there sold in the public Piazza, in the
Month of October, as red and fresh as they are in June: From whence all assured
themselves of a signal Victory, that the Christians should obtain against the
Turk's. This Lilly therefore Saint Joseph bears, betokens those extraordinary
qualities and privileges, wherewith he is enriched; and therefore the Painter
who first put it into his Hand, was, as I said; without doubt inspired from
Heaven to do so, since this Branch of Lillies, silently hint's at whatsoever
can be said of him; and even manifests all those wonders, that lie hid in this
Great Saint: As I shall hereafter endeavor to explicate.

Wherefore do but learn the price and excellency of the Lilly, and thereby
you will know the eminent and admirable Perfections of Saint Joseph, and perceive
also that wonderful and almost incredible Love, which God had for him. For as a
Lilly is the grace and ornament of a Garden of pleasure; as it is the beautiful
Masterpiece, that draws the Eyes, and charms the Hearts of the beholders, at
their first entrance into it; so according to Saint Austin, there are no less
charming Lillies in the Garden of Heaven: Floribus caeli neque rosa neque
liliae desunt. Aug. sermon. 11 de Sanctis.
Amongst Heavenly Flowers neither Roses nor Lillies, says he, are wanting: That
are no less charming to their beholders.

Now let us see how beautiful and sweet a Lilly Saint Joseph is; for since the
heavenly Spouse is highly pleased with a feast of Lillies; therefore Saint
Joseph had the honor to be invited to it, next after the Bridegroom himself.
Dilectus meus mihi and ego illi qui pascitur inter lilia. Cant. 2.26.
My beloved is mine, says the Spouse, and I am his, who feeds amongst Lillies.
Behold then Jesus, Mary and Joseph, three glorious Lillies indeed, that assist
at this Banquet of Lillies. The honor and beauty both of Heaven and Earth, and
the most amiable of all Created Objects. But before we Contemplate Saint
Joseph, let us take a view of the Lillies Perfections, which is an Emblem of
him.

The Lilly surpasses all other odoriferous Flowers in growth, as well as
beauty, she raises her beautiful head upon a straight stalk, many feet higher
than any other Flowers do; as Saint Joseph also in the height of Justice and
Perfection, surmounts all other Saints: Wherefore when we behold Saint Joseph
leading his reputed Son Jesus, in one Hand, and the Blessed Virgin Mary in the
other, we cannot but admire, to what a height of Dignity God has raised him,
and must own, that none ever was raised to the like; and that such a Dignity as
this, is not given in the House of God, but according to the Sanctity and
Graces, the Person raised to it, is partaker of; and which the Ministry he is
employed in, does require.

The first and highest degree of all Honors and Dignities upon Earth, was due
to Jesus, the Son of God Incarnate; the second, to the Blessed Virgin Mary,
Mother of God; and the third, to Saint Joseph, Spouse to the Blessed Virgin
Mary, and Foster-Father to the Son of God. Wherefore according to the most
devout and learned Doctor of the Church, Saint Thomas, our Lilly Saint Joseph
is raised also, after Jesus and Mary, to the highest Dignity upon Earth, Eo
fuit excellentior, quo ad altiorem ordinem pertinuit. S. Th. 3. par. ^
By so much, says he, he excelled others, by how much he was raised to a higher
Dignity than others were.

The Lilly also is an Emblem of pure Love, and springs from a Heart, the source
of Love, which it is Root resembles; and in this it resembles also our Saint
Joseph: Who, next to Jesus and Mary exceeds all Creatures both in active and
passive Love; his Heart was most inflamed, by being replenished with the Love
of God toward him, which moved his Divine Majesty to raise him to the highest
Dignity on Earth, next to Jesus and Mary. And Saint Joseph reverberates and
casts back these Flames toward God, by a faithful correspondence, and fidelity
in those high functions, to which he had chosen him; which rendered him most
amiable both to Heaven and Earth, as I shall hereafter prove more at large. So
that we see how the Lilly is a lively Emblem of our Saint, and that this Lilly
he holds in his Hand intimates something that is great, and what is beyond our
power to express. The very number also of the Lillies leaves, betokens those
six wonderful privileges, which the extraordinary Love of God, moved him to
bestow upon our Lilly Saint Joseph.

Margaret Queen of Navar took for her Device, a crowned Lilly, at which two
rich Pendants of Jewels were hung; with this Motto: Mirandum naturae opus.
The wonderful work of Nature: Which Device, may also be very well applied to
Saint Joseph. The Lilly is his Ensign, and is not only the wonder of Nature,
but of Grace also; upon which, hung those two rich Jewels, Jesus and Mary, whom
he led in each Hand, bearing the Title of Father to the one, and of Husband to
the other; he therefore justly deserves to be Crowned, since in the Love of God
he bears away the Prise from all; both in the Church Militant and Triumphant:
So that none must dare to dispute the right of Coronation with him, he having
those high Prerogatives bestowed upon him, from which all others, except Jesus
and Mary, his beloved, Son and Spouse are excluded. The part and portion also
he has of Divine Love in this Triumph, is very remarkable, and gives him a
place in that title, which his great Progenitor David gave to the 44. Psalm;
Triumphus per lilia. Psalm. 44.
The Triumph by Lillies. Making him partner in this Triumph with the two other
Lillies Jesus and Mary, these being all, and always of a Company. Wherefore
since this Triumph partly belongs to him, I may conclude him a Conqueror with
the other two, and that this his Triumph, is as much above that of all other
Saints, as he exceeds them in those wonderful Graces and Prerogatives, which
the Love of God bestowed upon him: This will easily be perceived by displaying
the six Leaves of our Lilly, and discovering thereby the six extraordinary
Prerogatives, the Love of God has bestowed upon him, above all other Saints,
excepting upon Jesus and Mary.

The Head or Blossom of this Flower contains, as I said, six white resplendent
Leaves, which represent the six particular and extraordinary Prerogatives, that
shine in Saint Joseph, beyond all other Saints; Wherefore 'twill be sufficient
only to open and display these six Leaves, to let you see the wonderful
novelties they contain, and thereby both raise your Imagination of Saint
Joseph's Perfections, and charm your Affection to such a height, with Love and
Devotion to him, as he truly deserves. Novelties, as we find by experience,
contain a certain luster within themselves, that causes admiration, and
therefore they need not borrow words or discourses to set themselves out. A
Beauty enriched by Nature, as you know, needs neither Paint nor Patch; a
Diamond of great price wants no foil to set it off. A Cabinet also filled with
rich and sparkling jewels, declares it is own value, and therefore needs no
other commendation, than to set it open; containing within it self it is own
light, luster and beauty. The Leaves I am about to display of this glorious
Lilly, are of the same stamp or nature, so that by giving you only a sight of
them, as of so many unheard of Prerogatives, they cannot but raise your
admiration of his Perfections, and even charm and move you to a Devotion to him.

The first Leaf or Prerogative I lay open, cannot but cause a strange
admiration; for is it not wonderful that a Son should choose his own Father?
It Is a wonder never before heard of in the World, since it is first beginning.
Read the Roman Annals, turn over all the Histories of the Universe, you will find
nothing like to this, and were this a practice that could be brought into the
World, what a change would it make in it? Poor, Deformed, Imperfect and Vicious
Men, would never be chosen for Fathers: None but such as were Rich, Prudent,
Virtuous and every way Accomplished, would be made choice of; from whence we
may conclude, that a Person who is chosen by one that is very Prudent; must
needs be very Good, Beautiful, and most Accomplished in all kind of Perfections.

Now to apply this to our Lilly, to our Glorious Saint- Joseph. You know that
the Son of God, by right of his Divine Existence, had a Being before his Human
Birth; and therefore had the advantage of Time, in which he might choose his
Father; and supposing his design, to choose one amongst Men, it is certain his
infinite Wisdom, would make choice of one most Perfect and Eminent in Sanctity;
and of one that were most fit and most capable, for so high a Dignity: For if a
Worm, like my self, would make choice of the bravest of Men for it is Father,
had it an occasion offered to do so; can we imagine that the Son of God, the
Eternal Wisdom, who judges of things as they are, knows the value and depth of
Hearts, and sees the worth of all Creatures, would not choose the most Perfect
of all Men for his Father? To think otherwise, would be to rank his Wisdom
beneath our own. Wherefore since he has chosen Saint Joseph before all others,
since his Knowledge and Love moved him to this Election, must not this choice
he made of him, be an evident proof, that he was eminent in all Perfections?
Especially since the Divine Wisdom it self chose him for his Father?

Let us now pass on, and take a view of the second Leaf, or second Prerogative
of our glorious Lilly. He was not only chosen by the Divine Wisdom to be his
Father; but even to be Father to him, who was the Son of God. So that by this
Election which the Eternal Wisdom made, Joseph had God for his Son. Who could
have thought it possible, that a Man could be Father to the Son of God? Or
could ever have imagined, that Man might with truth say to the Son of God, you
are my Son? Or that Man should arrive to so high a pitch of Dignity, as to bear
the relation of Paternity, to the Word Incarnate? Which in some measure
resembl'd, the Paternity of the Eternal Father, to his Eternal and Uncreated
Son. O wonderful Dignity! Joseph Father of Jesus! Father of the Son of God
Incarnate! Having the honor to be Father to him upon Earth, to whom God is
Father in Heaven: But to evidence, and make this Truth more clear.

We must know, that Jesus was not his Son by Nature, but by the Lawful Right
that accru'd to Saint Joseph. by Jesus his being Son to his Spouse, the Blessed
Virgin Mary: For by his being her Son he was Produced in, and Born of that
Flesh, which by right of Marriage was Saint Joseph's, and was under his power
and jurisdiction. So that according to the common axiom of the Civil Law, that
says: Quid in alieno solo nascitur vel aedificatur, sub illius dominium cadit
cujus est solum. Institut, de rer. divis.
Whatsoever grow's in, or is built upon another Soil, belongs to the owner
thereof: This title was strong enough, to give him the right and title of a
Father, and caused our Blessed Lady, to style him his Father even to her Son
himself, when she said, Pater tuus and Ego dolentes quaerebamus te. Luc. 2.48.
Behold with how much Grief your Father and I have sought after you; he also by
his Answer, seemed to own him for his Father upon Earth; when he said,
Nesciebatis quia in his quae patris mei sunt oportet me esse. Ibid v. 49.
Knew ye not, that 'twas chiefly my duty to take care of my Fathers business?
Meaning his Heavenly Father, as if he would have said, you have reason for what
you say, but you know that my first and chief obligation, is to comply with the
Will of my Heavenly Father.

But this is not all; Saint Joseph was not only the Father of Jesus; because he
was called so; or because he had that relation to the Blessed Virgin I before
spoke of; but because he wanted nothing, that is found in a true Paternity, or
Fatherly Right. He had all that care, affection, and authority, that any Father
ever had, or ever will have, in relation to a Son. For as Saint John Damascen
says, Omne jus quo constituitur Paternitas, sortitus est Joseph, solo jur^
generation is excepto. S. ^o. Damas. Orat. de na B. V.
Saint Joseph had all that could entitle him to the right of Paternity, except
that of Generation: Et hoc supple vit Deus Pater, infundendo viro Mariae,
paternum pro filio Jesu amorem. Rupertus in 1. Matthew.
Which, according to Rupertus the Abbot. God the Father supplied, by infusing
into the Husband of Mary, a Paternal Love of her Son Jesus. By which infusion,
Saint Joseph participated of all Graces that can either be named or imagined;
for if God had a design to Love a Man after the best manner imaginable, or to
give him the highest place of Glory in Heaven; what more could he do for him,
than to constitute him to bear the Office of a Father, over his own and only
Son? than which nothing can be more excellent, nothing more rare or more
admirable; for by giving him this Office, he gives him all the qualities
necessary for it; and gives him power to call even the Son of God, his Son,
causing the effect to correspond to the Name.

The third Miraculous Leaf or Prerogative of this Lilly, is, that being Man, he
should become Husband to the Mother of God. O wonder of wonders! When we would
comprehend in few words, all the wonderful Perfections and Prerogatives of the
Blessed Virgin Mary, we make use of Saint Mathews words; Maria de qua natus est
Jesus. Matthew. 1.16.
Mary of whom Jesus was born. For as by styling her Mother of Jesus, we
comprehend all that can be said of her; so Saint Joseph by being styled Husband
to the Mother of God, comprehends, under this title, all other Dignities and
Perfections whatsoever: So that a greater than this cannot be given him, as
Saint John Damascen well observes, when he says. Dicis illum virum Mariae, hoc
est prorsus ineffabile, and nihil praeterea dici potest. Cant. 3. in Not. B. V.
You call him the Husband of Mary, this is such a title as cannot be
explicated, and more than this, cannot be said of him.

Mary Spouse to Joseph, does in plenitude of Grace surpass both Men and Angels;
and has not her Husband think you the like endowments? Since God judged him a
fit match for her; and for this end gave him so great an abundance of Grace,
Virtue and Sanctity, that neither Men nor Angels ever had the like, hereby to
fit him to be Spouse, and Guide to the Virgin Mother: God judging it fit, that
in her right, he should partake of all her Honors, Favors and Dignities. If
therefore she be a Princess he is a Prince; and he also is King, wherever she
is Queen. For God who designed to raise Mary to the quality and honor of the
Mother of God: At the same time designed her a Husband, like to her self; whom
he loved above all Men upon Earth, and therefore endowed him with all Graces
suitable to such a Dignity. O thrice happy Joseph! Thus chosen by God, and thus
fitted and advanced to be the Husband of the Mother of God, as his best
beloved, next to Jesus and Mary.

The fourth Miraculous Leaf or Prerogative of this Lilly, is, that he is at
once both a Father and a Virgin. Which is so singular a Prerogative, that it is
allowed to none but him. There have been many Virgin-husbands, but of Virgin
fathers there has never been any one but S. Joseph, who is Spouse also of a
Virgin Mother. Which singular Prerogative, was reserved by God; only for his
best beloved JOSEPH and MARY. God lodging his special Favors, wherever he
places his particular Affection.

The fifth Miraculous Leaf or Prerogative of this Lilly, is, that S. Joseph
being a Creature, should take care of his Creator. For he was Pater familias.
Father of the Family, Foster-father, Tutor and Guardian of the Word Incarnate.
So that the Angels who beheld the Son of God, in the Bosom of his Eternal
Father in Heaven, seeing him also in the Arms of Saint Joseph upon Earth, might
very well cry out with admiration and astonishment^ behold the Governor of the
Universe, governed by a Man! Behold him who carefully nourishes all Creatures,
nourished by his Creature! Behold him whom the Heaven of Heavens cannot
contain, sheltered under the Roof and Protection of a poor Inhabitant of
Nazareth! And these Angels might also very well have addressed to Saint Joseph,
the same admirations, that Methodius did to the Mother of God, in these
following words: O Nutriti cuncta nutrientis. Ave Joseph cujus gratia, Deus
factus est indigens; Euge qui debitorem illum habes, qui omnia omnibus mutuat;
omnis enim ereatura omnia Deo debet, Deu^ aut^m tibi debtor existi^.
O Nursing-Father to him who feeds all Creatures. O Rich Joseph, to whom God
himself becomes a Beggar! Thrice happy art thou, who have him for thy Debtor,
who lends to every one whatsoever he possesses; for all Creatures are indebted
to God for their Being, and for every thing they Enjoy: But to oblige thee, God
will become obliged to thee; and make himself thy Debtor Wherefore let us join
our Admirations and Congratulations with those of the Angels, saying; O thrice
happy Joseph, favorit of the Court of Heaven! O best Beloved of God! since he
has placed so great a confidence in thee, as to commit his only Son to thy Care
and Conduct.

The sixth and last Miraculous Leaf, or Prerogative of this Lilly, is, that he
is one of the Persons of the Created Trinity, which is next in dignity to the
uncreated; and wonderfully also resembles all the three Persons of the
uncreated Trinity; as the Lilly also does, which he bears in his Hand; For in a
white resplendent Cup or Throne, it includes three Golden Septers, all three
equal in Odor, Beauty and Shape, issuing from the middle or heart of the
Flower; which resemblance, gives no little honor to the Lilly; since it mak's
it a similitude, whereby to declare the Majesty of this Divine Mystery. Nor is
it any less honor to our Lilly. Saint Joseph, to resemble the three Divine
Persons, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, which he does after such a manner as might
raise a jealosie even in the Angels; to see that God has bestowed upon Man,
such a resemblance of that Mystery, which in it self is the most wonderful of
all Mysteries; did they not Adore, with all possible Submission and
Resignation, his Divine Will and Pleasure in all things. For as the Eternal
Father, is the Father of the Uncreated word, so Saint Joseph is the reputed
Father of the word Created: And as God the Son is the Redeemer of Mankind; so
Saint Joseph is his Coadjutor in this great work; since he imploy's all his
cares, all the labors of his Hands, and all the sweat of his Brows, to gain
wherewithal to nourish and maintain our most Merciful Redeemer. Lastly as the
Holy Ghost is the Spouse of Mary the Mother of God, so Saint Joseph is also her
Spouse. What therefore can be a greater Subject of jealosie to the Angels than
this? But they know him to be a favorit of God, and therefore rejoice as much
in the honor God bestow's upon him, as in their own; and honor him as a Prince
of their Grand-masters Court, and as one he will have thus honored.

After having thus displayed these Miraculous Leaves; and declared the
wonderful Prerogatives of our Lilly, I cannot refrain from blessing and
praising the Divine Providence, for inspiring the Painter to put a Lilly into
Saint Joseph's Hand, by the help of which, the same Providence has been pleased
to inspire me to explicate his Merits and wonderful Prerogatives. And if
heretofore an ingenious Artist, did so cut and dispose the Leaves of several
Flowers that they made a very Beautiful Picture of Flora; why may not I,
quickened by Saint Bernard's Fancy, when he says; Quot virtutes tot Lilia. Ser.
70. in Cant.
So many Lillies, so many Virtues endeavor to make a lively Picture of Saint
Joseph's Virtues, out of the different sorts of Lillies, and different
signification of their Colors? By the white Lilly, is represented his
Chastity, by the yellow, his Charity, by the carnation, his Mortification, and
by the green one, his Hope. So many Lillies, so many Virtues. Let therefore
this declaration of his Virtues, joined with the rest of those wonderful
Prerogatives I have before declared, convince us of his extraordinary
Perfection, and give us an assurance that there is neither in Heaven nor Earth
any Creature above Saint Joseph, or that is more favored by God, except Jesus
and Mary.

CHAP. II. Of those wonderful Qualities, whereby God rendered Saint Joseph
amiable, above all other Saints, except Jesus and Mary.
ARIVS Montanus a famous Antiquary, and no less admired for his knowledge in
the Hebrew Tongue; kept in his Cabinet amongst his other Rarities, a Medal that
he extremely valued, both for it is Antiquity and Prophetical signification.
Which was a piece of Money called by the Jews a Shekle, on the one side of
which, was represented such a Vessel, as the Crisme or Consecrated Oil was kept
in, in the Temple, with this inscription under it, Genealogia.
The Genealogy, and on the reverse of the Medal was a double rank of Pearls,
one and forty in number, in the center of which, were these words, Tempus
Unctionis.
The time of Anointing. By the number of the Pearls, were signified the
P^ogenitors of Christ, who were fitly represented by such precious jewels, who
were in all, one and forty, himself, the Christus.
Anointed, being included.

I willingly make use of this erudition, to begin my description of the amiable
qualities of Saint Joseph; who was one of these Pearls, to which he is fitly
compared, since you know how much this Jewel is esteemd for it is resplendent
Beauty and Heavenly color, and therefore one of his Devot's, could not find
out a title that more fitly expressed his Beauty, than to call him Margarita
amabilis. S. Teresa.
Lovely Pearl, as the Church styles his Spouse, Matter amabilis. Let. Laur.
Lovely Mother; both being Parents of the Amiable and Lovely Jesus, whom his
Royal Progenitor styles in his Psalm of Triumph: Speciosus forma prae Filijs
Hominum. Psalm. 44.31.
The most Beautiful of the Sons of Men. We know amongst other Perfections,
Beauty of Body is very highly esteemed, which when it meets with good Natural
Parts, and a Virtuous disposition of Mind, nothing can be more desired. I shall
therefore endeavor to show, how Saint Joseph excelled in all these.

To begin then with h^s Beauty of Body, in this he resembl'd his Spouse, and as
she surpassed all other Beauties, so in Beauty Saint Joseph was her Consort: In
which truth, I agree with those learned Men, who hold for certain, that he was
no less excellent in all Perfections of Body, than in those of his Mind. For we
cannot imagine that Jesus would permit so strict an alliance of his Beautiful
Mother, with a Man who had any Personal Defect. For what Father is there that
chooses not the most accomplished Person to Marry his Daughter unto? Gerson
affirm's that in his Face or Countenance; he resembl'd and was very like to
Jesus, the most Beautiful amongst the Sons of Men; the Facies Jesus erat similis
faciel Joseph. Gerson.
Face of Jesus, says he, resembl'd the Face of Joseph. And Saint Bernard
testifies also; that he was like to that unparalled Beauty, the Blessed
Virgin Mary; Erat Joseph factus ad similitudinem Virginis Sponsae suae. S. Ber.
Joseph, says he, was made to the likeness of the Blessed Virgin his Spouse. So
that they are all alike in Beauty, in which they exceeded all others. Thus much
therefore may suffice for the description of his Beauty in general, now let us
descend to particulars.

His Face cast forth such rays of Beauty and Sweetness, as charmed all that
beheld him. One sight of him was sufficient to win the affection of the
beholders, and move them to a Devotion to him. This, Sister Jane of the Angels,
Prioress of the vrsulins at Lodun testified; when the Painters asked her (after
Saint Ioseph's Apparition and Miraculous cure of her Health) how they should
draw him; for having described to them his Forehead, Eyes, Nose, Chin, Beard,
Hair and all the rest of his Features, after the best manner she was able; she
added, make use infine of all the advantages your Art admits of, or is able to
perform; yet after all you can do, you will never be able to express the Beauty
of his Countenance. And when they asked her whether he was as handsome as such
and such a Person; make him as much handsomer than these you speak of as you
are able, yet after all, you will come short of his Beauty; it being impossible
truly to express it, as it is. I must therefore forbear to endeavor to express
by Pen, what they were not able to express by their Pensils; and conclude with
this short description, that in Beauty he was next to Jesus and Mary; whose
Beauties were above what can be expressed by Words, and are even beyond any
idea or imagination can be framed of 'em.

Yet to give you some glimps or shadow of his Beauty, I am assured that when
they showed this Devout vrsuline his Picture at Paris as she passed by, which
Hurlet the Famous Engraver had made, to represent the Miracle of her Recovery;
she acknowledged the Face had many Features like his, and that it had some
resemblance of that Majesty, she beheld in Saint Joseph, when he Appeared to
her, and at the same time perfectly cured her. Which moved me to get a Plate
Ingrav'd after that, though far smaller (which you may see in the Frontispiece of
this Book) which the Graver has performed with so good success, that it
contains such a Majesty and Sweetness, as strike both a Reverence and Affection
into the beholders; and gives 'em a glimps or shadow of his heavenly Beauty.

Moreover an agreeable exterior, a sweet and pleasant conversation, are no less
charming than Beauty: Which Saint Joseph had in very great Perfection, as well
from his Natural temper, as from the many Years conversation, he had enjoyed
with tho Word Incarnate, and with the Queen of Angels: For in him the least
defect in this kind; would have been very notorious; he being designed by God
to treat and converse with those Kings, whom he inspired, and led by a Star to
Adore his Son; and not only to treat with Kings but even with Angels
themselves, sent to him upon several Embassys, to inform him of the Mystery of
the Incarnation; of the Name he should give his Son; of Herod's design against
his Life; to warn him to fly with him and ^is Mother into Egypt; to give him
notice of Herod's Death, and that he might return home again, though by a
different way from that he took when he fled into Egypt. Whom moreover he
designed to be the constant Companion of the Queen of Angels; and even of the
Son, and Mother of God: And therefore he endowed him with a great, noble and
generous Mind; and replenished his Heart with such a Heavenly joy, as even
broke forth and discovered it self in his Countenance; and gave a grace and
ornament to every action he performed; whereby ^e gained every on's Affection
and Esteem, besides his own; he being hereby not the least puffed up with any
self-love or self-esteem; nor did he, as it ordinarily happens, become less
affable upon account of these honors done him, but received 'em with so
bashful a modesty, and such an angelical sweetness, as declared that he looked
upon himself as undeserving, of the esteem and love they showed him; more
admiring and regarding their goodness, than his own merits. So that this his
sweet disposition, this his excellent humor, together with his beautiful and
pleasant Countenance, which breathed such an Humility, joined with winning and
Angelical Modesty, as rendered his conversation both pleasing to Men, and
Angels, nay even to God himself. So that the Interpretation of the Patriarch
Joseph's Dream, was verified in our Saint Joseph; for the Sun of Justice and
she who was as beautiful as the Moon, even the Son and Mother of God, both
admired and even reverenced him.

But all these are only exterior ornaments, and nothing, in comparison of the
interior he possessed; I mean those Virtues that adorned his Soul; for nothing
is so lovely as Virtue; and nothing renders any object so worthy of Love as
Virtue does. And this it was that made Saint Joseph gain so great a conquest
over the Hearts of all that knew him: For he was Charitable, Patient, Meek,
Humble, Devout, Obedient, and infine was all that either the reputed Father of
Jesus, or the Spouse of Mary ought to have been. And tho he had not of himself
been so Eminent in these Virtues; yet the constant conversation with such
eminent Paterns of them, as Jesus and Mary were, could not but render him also
most eminent in the same. For as one who lives in a perfumer's shop, does not
only take pleasure in the smell of the perfumes round about him, but is thereby
perfumed himself, so the Virtues of Saint Joseph, were increased by theirs,
with whom he constantly Lived and Conversed.

What I have said, cannot, I am sure, but raise in your Hearts such a Love and
Devotion to this great Saint as their's was; whose Examples I shall hereafter
recount, and at the same time, show how great this Love and Devotion ought to
be: That is to say, it ought to be next to our Love and Devotion to Jesus and
Mary.

CHAP. III. Of the great Love and special Devotion we ow Saint Joseph; and that
it ought to be next to that we have for Jesus and Mary.
CERTAINLY none can refuse to pay this debt of Love to our Amiable Saint
Joseph; to this object of the Love of Jesus and Mary; and to one so highly
beloved by God himself: For can the Eternal Wisdom Error be Deceived? Can Mary
engage her Affections without Reason? Or can we charge God with partiality,
because he Loves Saint Joseph next to Jesus and Mary? Certainly such thoughts
as these can never enter into a Pious Heart. Wherefore we must conclude, that
since he was so amiable, they could not elsewhere lodge their Affections
better, or give a present of their Love to any one more deserving than Saint
Joseph.

Let us therefore see how they Loved him, and endeavor to Love him as they
did. Believing that God has renderd him lovely above others, to move us to Love
him above others; and move us to follow the track's of his own Divine Affection
toward Saint Joseph.

It Is hereby we shall know that we are proficients in this Divine School of
Love, when we come to Love Saint Joseph above all other Saints next to Jesus
and Mary; in which consists that special Devotion we ought to have to him. I
say not this, to lessen your Love and Devotion to any other Saint, but to
augment your Love and Devotion to this Saint; who in regard of his Merits,
hold's the first rank in Heaven and Earth, not only upon account of that Love
that Jesus and Mary bore him; but of the Love that God has manifested toward
him, by those high perogatives he has bestowed upon him. Not but that God has
also very highly favored, many other Saints of his Heavenly Court; such as
Saint John Baptist, whom the Divine Word declared the Inter natos Mulierum non
surrexit major Joanne Baptista. Matthew. 11.11.
Greatest amongst the Sons of women; and such as the Apostles also were, who
are Pillars of his Church, and like Stars of the first magnitude in the
glorious Firmament of Heaven; as well as several other Saints like unto these;
but we must remember, what the Learned and Devout Gerson says, that if the
first Rank and Hierarchy in Heaven, is, that of the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost; so the second is, this of Jesus, Mary and Joseph; and that all other
Saints are of a lower Rank and of a different Hierarchy. These other great
Saints hold indeed the first place in their Rank and Hierarchy, according to
the ordinary Law of Love; but not in that of the Order of the Hypostatical
Union, and in the Mystery of the Incarnation, wherein those are only comprised,
who most nearly relate to Jesus and Mary, namely Saint Joseph; who compleats
this Created Trinity as I before signified; and therefore makes a Hierarchy
apart, of far greater Excellency and Dignity than the rest.

But still to set forth more at large Saint Joseph's Dignity, I will here
declare the Source and Order of this Hierarchy, which comprehends none but
Jesus, Mary and Joseph? We must therefore take notice, that God who is
admirable in his Works, was not content only to make Man after his own Image
and Likeness, but would also make a Created Image and Likeness of the Increated
Trinity; in these three wonderful personages, Jesus, Mary and Joseph; whom he
chose for the Mystery of the Incarnation. So that as the three Persons of the
Increated Trinity, have all Cooperated to the Sacred Mystery of the
Incarnation; so they would also make an Illustrious and Created Emblem of
themselves, to Cooperate likewise toward the same Mystery. For Example, first
in the subsistence of the two Natures of JESUS CHRIST, his Soul, Body and
Divinity, are United in the Person of the Son of God. So by the Union of the
admirable Love and singular Report that these three Persons Jesus, Mary and
Joseph have to one another, they Contributed to it upon Earth; Mary bears the
Image of God the Father, Jesus is the Son according to his Humanity, in a just
likeness to what he is in Heaven, as he is the Word or Son of God. And Saint
Joseph Represents the Holy Ghost in the quality of Spouse to the Blessed
Virgin, or in the Love he had for Jesus and Mary; which he manifested, by the
care he took both of the one and of the other.

What Affections therefore are due to this Admirable and Venerable Created
Trinity, as the Learned Gerson styles it, either in general or in particular?
And if the greatest Honor be conferred upon them by this Title, why ought not
the greatest Love to accompany it? If Love attends Merit, what can be next the
Uncreated Trinity, but the Created? And next to the Father Son and Holy Ghost,
but Jesus, Mary and Joseph, who ought to take the next place in our Affections.
And as it would be amiss for any one, first to Love God the Father, secondly to
Love God the Son, and then, breaking the Order of the Trinity, to Love one of
the Angels; placeing the Holy Ghost in the same Rank with these Holy Spirits,
so infinitely inferior to him in all things; if therefore this would be very
Preposterous; since by denying his first Affection to the Holy Ghost, he would
refuse him the first of all possible Devotions, which he deservedly challenges
as his Right; it being an undoubted Truth, that we cannot render a greater
Honor than by Love, and by offering our Heart in Homage. Wherefore as none can
divide their Love and Devotion to the three Persons in the Uncreated Trinity,
to give it elsewhere, no more can they do so in order to the Created Trinity:
But must Love Jesus, Mary and Joseph, after the Uncreated Trinity, before any
other object though never so Perfect; and therefore to Love Jesus and Mary, and
in the next place to Love any Saint or Angel, would be to break the order of
Love, and become injurious to this Created Trinity, robbing it of that Honor
God has given it; and 'twou'd be to displace Saint Joseph, who ought to have
the third Rank in the sanctuary of our Affections; which would clearly appear
no less a Defect of Judgment, than of Devotion. Wherefore our greatest Devotion
after that to Jesus and Mary, ought to be to Saint Joseph; without any fear or
apprehension; that any Saint or Angel will thereby be disobliged; they all
giving him the precedence, knowing very well, what Honor and Devotion is due
to the Spouse of Mary, the Mother of God, and to the reputed Father of Jesus,
the Son of God, and to the third Person of the admirable Created Trinity, of
Jesus, Mary and Joseph.

CHAP. IV. What was the reason why it was so long, before Saint Joseph, the
best beloved of God and most amiable of all the Saints, after Jesus and Mary,
had such a Love and Devotion paid him, as was du to the greatness of his Merits?
THOUGH I dare not presume to penetrate into God's hidden Councels, nor pretend
to a knowledge of his Divine Secrets, by permitting my curiosity to make
inquiry why God has not permitted the wonderful Splendour of Saint Joseph's
Glory, to break out, and shine forth, till these latter Years, permitting so
many Years since the Incarnation to pass, without any extraordinary knowledge
or acknowledgement of the wonderful Merits of the Holy Spouse of the Mother of
God; yet I hope it will not appear a rashness in me, to assign some motives
that appear very reasonable; since all that I pretend to herein, is only to
declare my own Thoughts, grounded upon such observations, as are taken from the
ordinary Conduct, which the Divine Providence has used in such like accidental
occasions: And hereby also to promote a Devotion to Saint Joseph, which was the
chiefest design I had in Writing this Treatise; that by enlightening the
Understandings of his Clients, I may prepare a way for Saint Joseph to gain a
higher place in their Affections.

We know that his Feast has not long been kept, with that solemnity as now it
is: And that in the Primitive Ages, no mention is made of any particular
Devotion to this Saint; nor no such notice taken of his Canonization, as is now
adays in practice concerning other Saints. I cannot therefore but own, that
this Devotion toward Saint Joseph is only of late standing, since the most
Ancient marks of Honor showed him in several places, are but of a very fresh
date; as we may guess by the Confraternities, Chapels and Altars erected in
his Honor, both in Italy, Germany and several other places; of which I find
the City of Avignion to be the first that was so happy, as to express any
Devotion to him in this kind; for in the chief Church in that City: there is a
fair Chapel Dedicated to Saint Joseph, in which there is a Confraternity of
Batchelors, and a Sodality of Virgins; who assemble themselves upon his Feast
to hear Mass and Vespers, which are sung in this Chapel with great solemnity;
to gain thereby the Indulgences granted by the Pope, where each of these
Virgins has not only a Loaf of Holy Bread presented 'em as in other
Confraternities, but a Posy of Flowers also, which they carry along with 'em in
the Procession.

This Devotion seems to have had it is rise or beginning from Gregory the XI. in
the fourteenth Age, for in a certain Chapel in the Church; Dedicated to Saint
Agricula, there is an Altar-piece of Saint Joseph, accompanying and conducting
the Blessed Virgin and her Infant Jesus in their flight into Egypt; which
Church both shows the Liberality of this Pope, as well as his Devotion to Saint
Joseph; whose Coat of Arms is placed round about the Chapel Dedicated to this
Saint, in great Scutchions of Stone; so that it is more than probable 'twas he
that began the Honors given to this Saint, in this Ancient Church of Avignion,
where he held his Chair or Holy Sea at that time. Who moreover at the same
time increased the revenues of the Canons of the Church of Agricola. This is
the first place, in which I find any public Honors and Devotions done to Saint
Joseph. So that it is not much above three hundred Years, since we find any
Foostteps of any extraordinary Devotion to this Saint; and if before this time,
there were any, they were but very small, and far remote from the Primitive
Ages; God by his Divine Providence thus ordering the Conduct of Devotion to
great Saint Joseph.

But why did God so long conceal the wonderful Merits of this Saint, without
encouraging Christians by a knowledge of them, to exhibit that Love and
Devotion to him which is now every where practiced? The chief reason that
occurs to me, is because this Devotion would have given too great an advantage
and encouragement to the Ebionites, who began betimes to rob CHRIST of his
Divinity, and maintained that Joseph was his Natural Father. This Heresy not
only Sacrilegiously denying the Divinity of JESUS CHRIST, but the Virginity
also of his Blessed Mother.

Now Men as we know, being easily carried to Extremes, and to an excess in
honoring those they esteem and love, reflecting upon the incomparable
excellency of the Spouse of the Virgin Mary, they might easily have believed,
and taken him for the Father of Jesus, Son to the Blessed Virgin; especially
meeting with some, who were of that opinion; but now we are out of the danger
of any such erroneous credulity, and all that Sect of Heretics, who were
Enemies of CHIST's Divinity, and the Virginity of our Blessed Lady, are
silenced and shut up in an everlasting Prison; there is no danger of extolling
his Merits, which caused him to possess such eminent Glory in Heaven; and to
deserve such a Love and Devotion upon earth, as was next to that of Jesus and
Mary.

Moreover though there had not been this danger of giving countenance to so great
an Heresy; yet this extraordinary Devotion suits better with these latter
Ages, in which the world draws toward an End, which still decaying in Piety
and Fervor, stands in need of some Spiritual Cordial (as I may say) to warm
it is Chilliness and Tepedity, and to inkindle Fervor in the Hearts of the
Faithful; for which end nothing could be more efficacious, than a Love and
Devotion to this great Patriarch, and Favorit of God. There are now one
thousand six hundred ninty and eight Years past, since the Law of Grace took
it is beginning, by the happy conduct of Saint Joseph; who had the charge of the
Word Incarnate committed to him. And can it end more happily and with greater
Glory, than under his conduct also? procured by the affectionat
acknowledgements, applause and devotions of all Nations, to this their thrice
obliging Benefactour and Parent of Christianity. And by their cordial and
grateful acknowledgement to the Father of our King, and to the Spouse of the
Queen of Heaven and Earth: Hereby also God would manifest to the World, that in
the Beginning and in the End of the Law of Love, which are the two Gates of
God's Church, and of the Law of Grace; he would have Joseph the most Chaste and
Holy-Spouse of Mary, appear glorious and noble in this his enterprise, and
faithful in his conduct; that thereby he might deserve the Triumph of a
Possession of our Hearts, by our Love and Devotion to him; wherefore to him may
be well applied these words of the Proverbs. Nobilis in portis Vir Ejus. Prove.
31.23.
Her Husband is Noble in the Gates. Or as the Caldaick Translation has it, Her
Husband is known in the Gates; at the Entrance and going out of the Law of
Grace. that is, he is honored with the public mark of a Senator, which was to
be placed at the Gates where such Men only were wont to sit.

For though it would have been an incredible satisfaction to the Faithful, to
have had him as much Loved and honored during the whole time of the Law of
Grace, as now; yet God would reserve this Joy and Contentment for these latter
Years. And therefore the Devout and Learned Bellarmin, was wont to call this
Age in which we now Live, the Age of Saints. He judging the number of Persons
that arrive to an eminent degree of Sanctity, by making Petfection the chief
and whole study of their Lives, to be far greater in these our Days, than ever
ir was in former Ages. No time therefore could be better for the acknowledging
and serving Saint Joseph, the greatest of Saints, than the Age of Saints;
wherein the Splendour of his Perfections might appear so much the more Glorious,
by how much it had been for so many Ago^ Eclipsed and lain under a Cloud. O how
wonderful is God in all his Designs: And how good is he to us who Live in this
Age? Since he deprived former Ages of the Beauty of this Sun, and ordained it
should break through that Cloud it lay hid in, in this our Age, to give us this
most bright Day, and to move us to a servent Love and Devotion to Saint Joseph.

Moreover the Divine Providence has in this (which is one of the chief works of
Grace) acted after the same manner as he does in the rarest Masterpieces of
Nature. It Is his special Favor that permits us to enjoy the sight of these
Beautiful Objects, which are the product of his Divine Creation. Such as are
Diamonds, Rubies, Emerods, Pearls and all other sorts of Precious Stones; that
gives us also a sight of Gold, Silver and other resplendent Metals; yet there
are far greater Treasures of this kind, buried in the Bottom of the Sea, and in
the Bowels of the Earth, than ever we have yet seen or heard of His Bounty
let us us also behold, the many Beautiful Flowers, Plants, Trees, Birds and
Beasts, together with that wonderful and agreeable variety of so many beautiful
Faces of Men, Women and Children, the wonders of the Universe; yet God has laid
up and kept a reserve of all these Objects, far more Beautiful than any we have
ever yet seen. He permits us also to behold the most glorious objects, of the
Sun, Moon and Stars; though their distance hinders us, in some measure, from
perceiving that wonderful Beauty they contain in themselves. But there are far
greater, richer and more beautiful Objects than all these in the Empyrial
Heaven, which God has still concealed from us, which are as far above the Sun
in Beauty; as the Empyrial Heaven is above it in Height. Though God's Liberality
and Bounty toward us, in affording us the Contemplation of all these Beautiful
Objects, is a great mark of his Goodness: Yet he has been far more gracious
toward us, in showing us the wonderful works of his Grace, than in discovering
to us the foresaid works of Nature: By giving us some knowledge of those
wonderful ornaments of the Empyrial Heaven; especially of those two great
Luminaries Jesus and Mary, which adorn and imbelish his Heavenly Palace,
together with a great number of other Saints also, who like so many Blaeing
Stars Beautify his Caelestial Jerusalem, or Vision of Peace: And though we must
own our sight too short, and even too weak to behold these great Lights, whose
number is beyond our casting up, and whose Beauty and Glory exceed our
Imagination; because we can have no full and complete knowledge of 'em, till we
be so happy as to enjoy their company by being placed with them in the
Celestial Court. Yet we must nevertheless acknowledge this imperfect and
abstractive knowledge he gives us as a special favor, and also that he has
after so extraordinary a manner, been pleased to discover to us in this our
Age, one of the Richest Treasures of Heaven, for Greatness, Sanctity and Glory,
which for so many foregoing Ages he had concealed from the World, that we may
enrich our selves by paying due honor and affection to him, whom he had raised
to the honor of being the Foster Father of Jesus; and Spouse of the Virgin
Mary; and hereby gain those Heavenly Blessings, that accompany such a Devotion.
And it is no less for Saint Joseph's greater honor than our greater merit; that
God has reserved the discovery of his Merits, till our Days.

We also know, that except the work of Creation, of all things out of nothing,
that nothing is done here upon Earth, without fit Dispositions and due
Preparations. The Painter prepares his Pallet with Colors, and primes his
Cloth, before he begins to Paint. The Architect squares and makes ready his
Timber, Stone and other Materials, before he begins to Build. The Goldsmiths
refines his Silver and hammers out his Plates, before he begins to imboss his
Work. Ladies make up their Commodes, all their other Ornaments and Rich Attire,
before they Dress or Adorn themselves. A good Rhetoritian prepares and disposes
his Matter and Figures, to adorn his Oration, before he Composes it. Nay we see
that even all sorts of Artisans, prepare both Tools and Matter to work upon,
and great preparations are made, before any excellent Piece of Work can be
accomplished and when it is done, it is also necessary that the Beholders should
be duly informed, and well disposed for the better conceiving, understanding
and admiring it is Perfections. God therefore would dispose the World to
conceive and understand the great Perfections of Saint Joseph, before he would
discover to them such a Masterpiece.

And not only Art, but Nature also does produce her Works by degrees, nor does
she furnish them without many Previous Dispositions and Trials of her Skill.
For according to Pliny, who searched more narrowly into her Works than any
other Naturalist has ever done, ^^ys that Campanula rudimentum est Naturae
Lilia facere addiscentis.
The Bell-flower is an Essay (...) Trial of Nature, how to make a ^^illy or
Tulip: For after she has thus ^ade or produced it of one Color, ^he takes
still longer time (as the ^^ost experienced Florists inform us) ^o Adorn, Trace
and Paint it, after ^o Artificial a manner, with so many ^indes of rich
resplendent Colors, ^s render it so very Beautiful, that ^he Divine Wisdom
gives it this high Commendation, saying. Nec Solomon in omni Gloria su^
coopertus est sicut unum ex illis. Matthew. 6.29.
That Solomon in all his Glory, was not so Richly Attired, as one of these. Yet
Nature does not Communicate this Beauty to them but by degrees, and after
several trials of her Skill, for she first raised it from Seed, only of one
Color, which Color also is very indifferent and ordinary, in respect of those
Colors wherewith she afterward Stripes, Traces and Adorn's it.

Now if from the Works of Art and Nature, we have recourse to those of Grace,
immediately wrought by God himself, we shall find he takes the self same
Measures, wherewith he inspires both Art and Nature to Operate. Especially in
framing his chief Masterpiece his Holy Church. For to what End did he ordain
so many Ceremonies in the Old Jewish Law? Why was he so careful of all the
Ornaments of Salomons Temple, as even to Ordain that the very Snuffers and
other Instruments, of less Moment, should be of Gold? It was because the
beholding all these Ordinations and Ceremonies, served to his Elect People as
an Aprentiship; to understand and learn both the Excellency and Sublime
Practices of the New Law, that JESUS CHRIST was to Establish; these served as
Foundations whereupon that was to be built; and to dispose us to that
Perfection as was required, and obtained by those Sacraments instituted in the
Law of Love, which the Divine Wisdom was to Establish in his Church. 'Twas
therefore for this End that he brought up his Elect People in the Exercise of
such a Multitude of Ceremonies in the Old Law, that he might hereby dispose and
bring them by little and little, to that solid Devotion and Attention required
in the New.

We also see that the Written Law God gave to Moses, Perfected the Law of
Nature, and the Law of Grace Perfects both the Law of Nature and the Written
Law; and God made use of all these to bring us to that Perfection, which the
Virtue and Prerogatives of his Grace prepared us to obtain; the better to
entertain him, with such Fervor and Devotion as he required, when he should
favor us with his Divine Presence.

Thus we see that God both by himself and his Creatures, prepares, disposes,
brings about, and perfects all his designs by degrees. And we see the reason
why God for the space of near seventeen hundred Years has disposed and ordered
that particular Honors and Devotions, should be performed by his Servants to
particular Saints, for particular benefits received by their Intercession; for
he bestow's upon each Saint some particular Grace or Privilege; to move the
Faithful to a particular Devotion to that particular Saint; giveing to one
Saint the power of cureing one Disease, to another the power of curing a
different Distemper; to one Saint power to help us in one Necessity, to another
Saint power to help us in a different Exigency; to one Saint he gives the
privilege to obtain one Virtue for us, to another to obtain some other
different Virtue; and why did God do all this, but to move his Servants to a
particular Devotion to the Saints in general? And to move and dispose us also
to a Devotion to each Saint in particular, when we wanted their help in such a
necessity as God had given that Saint a particular power to help us in. And
why, has God reserved to this last Age the declaration of the Merits and Power
of Saint Joseph, but that the Devotion wherewith he had Inspired us to give to
each Saint in in Particular, might serve us like so many dispositions and steps
to raise us to such a Devotion to Saint Joseph, as he merits above all other
Saints, next to Jesus and Mary; he having all that Power united in himself,
which God had distributed amongst all other Saints, whereby he was able to cure
all Corporal and Spiritual Diseases, both of Soul and Body, and to help his
Clients in all their Necessities whatsoever; his Dignity and Merits challenging
this extraordinary privilege above all other Saints, except Jesus and Mary; to
the end therefore that all the particular Devotions exhibited for so many Ages,
to many different Saints, might be united and offered to him, and that all
might have Recourse to him in all their Necessities, God has discovered to us
that all the power he had before Communicated and Distributed to several
Saints, is united and given to Saint Joseph, he having all Power given him next
to Jesus and Mary.

I should not thus freely have declared my Thoughts upon so sublime a Subject,
had I not beforehand made my Apology; since after all, none but God and his
Saints do certainly know the true reason why Saint Joseph received not more
Early Honors in the Catholic Church; Now therefore I shall go on to perform
that which I also Promised; and will be a far easier task, which is to make
known to you who were those particular Clients, of Saint Joseph, that in these
latter Years, God has Inspired to endeavor after a most particular manner, the
promoting his Honor.

CHAP. V. Of the ten particular Clients of Saint Joseph, who by their Pious
Examples have invited and moved us to a particular Devotion to him, next to
Jesus and Mary.
THE Clients of Saint Joseph daily increase, and are already become so
numerous, that there are few or none, that desire not to be inrol'd amongst
'em. All the Clients of Jesus and Mary have also Consecrated their Affections
to him, in acknowledgement of his Amability, and of the Love which his reputed
Son Jesus and his Virgin Spouse Mary have for him; their Mouths and Pens
express the desires and wishes of their Hearts; saying, Long Live Jesus Mary
and Joseph, these are now become their Aspirations, adding Joseph to the common
Aspiration of Devout Souls, Long Live Jesus and Mary; and their frequent
prohouncing, of these words, is a signal mark of the Victory he has gained over
their Chaste Affections. It has been heretofore a singular Devotion of some
Persons, who were particularly Devoted to the Virtue of Purity, to add Alexius
to those two Venerable Names of Jesus and, Mary, but since this Lovely Sun
Saint Joseph has pierced the Cloud, under which he so many Years lay hid, all
change their notes and cry out Jesus Mary and Joseph, instead of Jesus, Mary,
Alexius, giving Saint Joseph his own, yet without lessoning their Devotion to
Alexius, whom after Saint Joseph they honor also with frequent Aspirations,
Live Alexius, O let Alexius Live. But they knowing the Merits of Saint Joseph
to be of a different and higher rank, upon account of the alliance he had with
the Virtues of his Holy Spouse, and with the Mystery of the Incarnation; which
rendered him, as I have said, one of the Created Trinity, where he takes his
place; gives him a preference, above all other Saints; tho after him every one
may take Alexius, or what other Saint they are particularly Devoted unto, for
the Object of their particular Affection.

The first and chief of those, who were tenderly affected to Saint Joseph, was
Jesus the Son of God. For though our Blessed Lady was first by the date of time,
that Loved her Spouse; since her Love began before JESUS CHRIST her Son was
Born; yet it is not to be doubted, but that the Savior of the World
incomparably more Loved and Cherished him, than our Lady did. And therefore
though her Love was precedent, as I said, in regard of time. Yet the Love which
Jesus, as Son of God, had for him before time, was above our imagination, and
beyond the power of Angels to express; he loved him as his Father, and never
Son loved a Father as Jesus did Joseph; nay join all the tender Affections that
all the Children that have ever yet been, have ever had for their Fathers; yet
the Affection of Jesus to Joseph transcended 'em all; he had in proportion the
same tenderness of Affection for Saint Joseph, which he had for his Virgin
Mother; and preferred none upon Earth before Saint Joseph excepting her self,
perfectly fulfilling the Commandment, of honoring his Father and Mother, with
greater exactness and tenderness of Affection, than ever any Child in the World
did; and loved him also as it became such a Child to love such a Father, so
Amiable, so Tender, so Careful of him, so Singularly Obliging to him, as he was
upon so many accounts.

Jesus loved him also as a Savior for saving him from the Cruel Hands of
Herod, by flying with him into Egypt. Whereby he became even the Savior of
his Savior. Moreover he loved him as his Nursing Father, as Fostered by his
Sweat and Labors; he loved him moreover under the title of his Angel Guardian.
Other Persons have invisible Angel Guardians given 'em by God; Jesus alone had
no Angel Guardian given him, his Divinity being so strictly united to his
Humanity was to him a sufficient guard; wherefore God gave him Saint Joseph as
a visible Guardian, which honor he conferred upon Saint Joseph, for the space
of thirty Years, he bearing all that while the title and office of Conductour,
Tutor and Governor of the word Incarnate. Moreover the very Name and Right of
a Godfather, appointed by God himself, was another motive of Jesus's
extraordinary affection toward Saint Joseph. Infine such was his Love, that as
the Eastern Church recounts, out of some Revelations, he loved him as the Apple
of his Eye. The Savior of the World (as Isidorus recounts out of very Grave
Authors) entertaining his Disciples upon the Life of Saint Joseph, spoke thus
of him, Morals in Mat. Isid. Dominic.
I Conferred and Conversed with Saint Joseph, as if I had been his Son, he be
called me Son, and I called him Father, he Commanded me and I Obeyed him and
loved him as my Father, and even as the Apple of my Eye.

If you still desire to see the effects of this his extraordinary Love, know
that generally he favored him with all the particular Marks of his Love,
whereby he has ever favored any Saint. 'Twas esteemed a signal favor to Saint
Ex P. Johan de S.M. in His. O.S. Do^.
Mary Magdalen, of the Vrsins to have a sight of the Infant Jesus, as he lay
upon Straw in the Manger at Bethlem. Blessed Teresa de Cerda as a reward of her
Zeal in watching the Corporals upon which his Body was wont to lie upon the
Altar, whilst they were drying, least any Flies might light upon or stain 'em,
saw our Savior himself lying upon them and wrapping them about his Sacred
Body. The honor Saint Mary Magdalen received in Kissing our Saviors Feet in
the Huose of Simon, was also very great; but all these were nothing in
comparison of what Saint Joseph received.

He not only once but all the time of Jesus his Infancy, saw him in the Crib;
how often did he behold him in his Swadling-clouts; and how many thousand times
did he kiss hi^ Sacred Feet?

'Twas a signal Favor Saint John received, by laying his Head upon his Masters
Sacred Breast; and what knowledge of Secrets and Mysteries did he draw from
thence? But how many times has Jesus rested his Sacred Head upon Saint Joseph's
Breast? Whilst he carried him in his Sacred Arms, tenderly Embracing and
Cherishing him, both at home and abroad in his journeys to Egypt and
elsewhere; and how many Secrets did he then Communicate to him?

'Twas esteemed a particular Favor to Blessed Vrsula of Valence, when our
Savior appeared to her clothed in Episcopal Robes, and giving her his
Blessing. And at another time, when be Entered by Night into her Chamber,
whilst she was at her prayers, more Bright and Glorious than the Sun,
transporting and filling her Heart with Divine Comforts. Great was the
happiness our Savior afforded his Apostles by three Years continual
Conversation with them, seeing his admirable Example, and hearing his Divine
Wisdom. But Saint Joseph surpassed all these, Conversing with him not only
three but thirty Years together, seeing and hearing this Divine Word. Beholding
him not in an Episcopal but Mitaculous Habit, that grew as his Body did, and
this not as he was passing from one place to another, but constantly in his own
House; not receiving one but innumerable Benedictions from his Divine Hand.

We Read also of an extraordinary favor that our Savior did Blessed Jane of
France, when he sat down at table with her, at no other Banquet than that of
three Hearts, served up upon a Plate of Gold. Which were his own, his Mothers
and Hers. The Apostles also enjoyed the honor of Eating with him at Lazarus's,
Simion's, Zachaeus's, Saint Mathew's and several other Tables; But was it not a
far greater favor that Saint Joseph enjoyed, of being his and his Mothers
constant Guest, sitting at Table with them, having his Soul fed and set on fire
with the Inflamed Words, that proceeded from the Heart and Mouth of the Son of
God, and from that large Heart of his Blessed Mother, where she had laid and
hoarded up all those Mysteries she had both heard and seen.

We admire the Visions he bestowed upon his Apostles and other Saints, at his
Transfiguration upon Mount Thabor, and by several Apparitions after his
Resurrection, or Assension into Heaven; as to Saint Paul, Saint Catharine of
Sienna, Saint Teresa, Saint Francis and Saint Dominick, Blessed Stanis-laus
Kosta, Saint Ignatius and to many other Saints, replenished with such a
resplendent Beauty, accompanied with such a Melodious attendance of Angels, as
all the Annals of Saints do recount. And was not Saint Joseph also surrounded
by all the Quires of Angels, singing Gloria in Eccelsis Deo? Saint Briget in
her Revelations relates, that Saint Joseph saw our Savior environed by a
Divine Light, which according to his Mothers Testimony, far exceeded the Luster
and Brightness of the Sun, saying to Saint Briget, Lib. 9. Revel. 58.
Saint Joseph often beheld an admirable Glory, in the midest of which my Son
appeared in great Splendor, and at the same time Heavenly Music delighted our
Hearts, the Angels declaring and singing the Glories of my Son. Lastly, we with
reason look upon it as the highest Point of the Love of JESUS CHRIST, when he
visibly appears to his Favorits at the hour of their Death, Visiting,
Comforting and Assisting them in that last passage out of the Miseries of this
World into everlasting Happiness in the next. For in this Saint Joseph had a
most particular mark of his favor above all others, whose Heart was filled
with most delicious Dying Thoughts; for as the Eastern Church, I before cited,
assures us, our Savior assisted him in his last Agony, leaning on his Pillow,
taking him by the Hand, and receiving his last Breath from his Lips; and at his
last Groan, closed his Eyes, shut his Mouth and formed his Visage with his own
most Divine Hand, to give him a graceful Aspect, at his last farewell. Are not
all these extraordinary marks of Jesus his particular Love to Saint Joseph?

The second we find inroul'd amongst the fervorous Lovers of Saint Joseph, is
Mary the Mother of Jesus; she Loved him in quality of her Spouse, never any
Virgin Lady was so Faithfully Loving, so Chastely Observant, so Religiously
engaging in her Conversation with her espoused Husband as Mary was, to her
Joseph. He was Most passionately loved and esteemed by her, as the Protector of
her Consecrated Virginity, and also the conserver of her Honor. Whose
Conversation was a security to her unblemished Reputation, against any reproach
that could be made concerning her Virgin Childbirth. For had he forsaken her
during the nine Months after her Conception, her Purity would unavoidably have
been suspected. Moreover she bore an affectionate service to him as to her
Husband and Head, and as to one of the greatest Merit amongst all Man kind;
next to her Son Jesus.

This Love of the Virgin Mary to her Spouse, caused her to descend to the
meanest and lowest Services, whereby she could any ways express her Love and
Esteem of him; it caused her to attend and wait upon him, to prepare his Meat,
and to perform all other humble Offices he stood in need of; she knew very well
the place she possessed upon Earth, and that also which was designed for her in
Heaven: As being the Queen Mother of God; as being Queen both of Men and
Angels, and that in this regard Saint Joseph was her Inferior; yet the Love she
had for him, made her lay aside these considerations, and render him all sorts
of honor and respect imaginable; for as Saint Briget says in her Revelations,
Lib. 7. Revela. S. Brigit. cap. 25. lib. 6. cap. 59.
she called him her Lord, never spoke to him but with a wonderful and most
submissive respect, and there was no tenderness of affection that a loveing
Soul can express, to one she highly esteems and passionately loves, which she
did not thousands and thousands of times testify to Saint Joseph, wherefore to
convince you how she loved him, hearken to the affectionate Character, she her
self gives of him, to Saint Briget as it is set down in her Revelations, after
the following manner.

My Spouse was reserved in Speech, never uttering the least unprofitable,
murmuring or complaining Word; never was he moved to Anger, or showed the least
Impatience; he was contented in Poverty, diligent and vigilant in Labor, most
obedient and condescending to all my Inclinations. Very Meek and Affable, even
to those that most rudely treated him; he courageously defended the absent that
suffered Detraction, and was a faithful Witness and Divulger, of God's
wonderful Works, he was resigned to live upon Earth tho his longing and earnest
desire was after Heaven, expecting and confiding in God's Promises; and
frequently repeating, God grant I may see them Accomplished; he avoided Public
Assemblies, took no content at all in Creatures; but all his thoughts and
desires, were, that he might perfectly accomplish God's Divine Will.

Saint Teresa of Jesus, deserves the third place, amongst those who after a
particular manner, have expressed their Love and Esteem to Saint Joseph: Who
merits the title of Saint Joseph's chiefest Devote, and may well therefore be
placed amongst his lovers. She made choice of him for her particular Advocate,
frequently recommending her self to him, as to one she honored above all other
Saints, she styled him her Father and Master, and had such a confidence in him
as was admirable; and thereby deserved such a reward for it, as she her self
attests, in the sixth chapter of her Life, which was, that she never asked any
thing of him either for Body, or for Soul, that he denied her; which caused her
to say, that God by his other Saints, helped and succored us in some
particular cases of necessity; but helped us in all necessities by Saint
Joseph, as by his Plenipotentiary. To let us understand, that as he was subject
to him in all things upon Earth, as to a father who Commanded him: So he was
the same in Heaven; granting him whatsoever he asked. This was Saint Teresa's
opinion concerning her great Patron, to whom she was so particularly Devoted,
that she endevour'd to invite all to take him for their particular Patron and
Protector. But especially those who desire to give themselves to Prayer, and
to become knowing in that most holy and profitable Exercise; and therefore was
wont to say, let him who cannot find a Master to teach him the Art of Praying,
take this great Saint for his Master; and he shall not fail to prove a great
Proficient, and a most skilful Scholar. Infine she did what she could to
instill into all sorts of Persons a particular Devotion to Saint Joseph, who as
he was Master of her Heart, so she had a desire he should be so, of the Hearts
of all others; and therefore endeavored to engage their Hearts with her own,
in an ardent Love of him and Devotion to him; which desire of hers, together
with the experiments she had had, of the good, obtained by the Merits and
Prayers of this Saint, caused her engageingly to promise the same success, to
all that should recommend themselves to him: Attesting that she never knew any
Person, that had a true Devotion for him, or rendered him any particular
Service, that obtained not a great progress and advancement in Virtue.

You see here the cause, of my ranking her in the first place, of those of this
last Age, that set up the Standard of Devotion to Saint Joseph; by divulging
his Merits and by a due acknowledgement of his Favors, whereby in these our
times, in which we have more need than ever of Heavenly assistance, she brought
in that profitable Devotion to this great Saint.

The fourth Person, noted for his particular Devotion to Saint Joseph, is that
holy Minim blessed Gaspar Bond, who after Jesus and Mary, had none so near his
Heart as Saint Joseph. All his Life long he had a most singular Devotion to
him, and at his Death his chief recours, was to none so much as to this Holy
and Amiable Patriarch; and expressed his Devotion by a particular honor showed
to his Name, after the Name Jesus and Maria; which made such an impression in
him, that he could think or speak of nothing else; he took a particular gust in
the pronouncing of them, and thought the doing so gave a good success, and
prosper'd all his undertakings, and this was the short, but pithy Incomium,
that he gave them.

Haec tria nomina,
Bona sunt omnia.
Et mundi lumina,
Et coeli limina.

This Trinity of Names,
This lower World Inflames.
Contains the goods of Love,
O pens Heaven's Gates Above.
Wherefore to show the Love and Esteem he had of them, he used them as a
watchword, as a salutation both at meeting or parting, as a sign of
admiration, as a parenthesis, as a transition, and even upon all occasions he
made use of them.

when he came home, his Salutation to the Porter, was Jesus Mary Joseph, pray
Brother open the Gate; and the same Salutation he used when he went forth; and
when any Strangers came in, his Salutation was Jesus Maria Joseph, Father you
are welcome; thus on all occasions these Names were in his Mouth; and as he
lived in this Devotion so he desired to dye in the same; wherefore in time of
his last Sickness, he earnestly recommended to those that assisted him, that
when they saw him in his last Agony, they would frequently repeat these Names
in his Ears, which were an extract and abridgement of his Affections; and a
singular cordial to help and conduct his Soul in it is passage to God: And that
fell out which he desired; for he died with these Words in his Mouth; Bone Jesu
miserere mei.
Good Jesus have Mercy upon me, and then Invocating these three Names, Jesus
Maria Joseph, he yielded up his happy Soul. God grant us all so happy an end as
this.

The fifth Person Devoted after a a particular manner to Saint Joseph, was that
Prince and Prelate of Geneva, Saint Francis of Sales, who as we have reason to
believe, honored him above all the Saints in Heaven, according to the
Testimony of Father Peter Bernaud of the SOCIETY of JESUS; who had the honor
to assist him in his last Sickness, who was acquainted with two or three very
remarkable passages, that testified the very great Devotion this Holy Prelate
had to Saint Joseph. The Night before he died, being at Lions upon the point of
his Departure, an Apoplexy seized him, though not perceptable to the Rector of
Saint Joseph's College, of the SOCIETY of JESUS, when he came to salute and
bid him adue; who offering him, his and all the Fathers Services that were in
his House; to which all the reply or complement the Bishop returned, was to
tell him with an Angelical Sweetness, O Father know ye not that I am all Saint
Joseph's? The same Father also related, that watching the Night following in
the Chamber of this holy Prelate, to assist him at his happy Death, whilst the
Apoplexy grew worse, not having his own Breviary to say his Hours, one lent
him the Breviary of the sick Prelate; in which he found but one Picture, which
was of Saint Joseph. Another mark of his tender Devotion to Saint Joseph, is
related also by the same Father, happened some time before, when he made the
first Sermon in our Church, upon the Feast of Saint Joseph. It seems the Lord
Cardinal of Markmont, Archbishop of Lions, had engaged the Bishop to Preach
upon Saint Joseph's Day, in the Church of the Carmelits, which Father Bernaud
being ignorant of, invited him also to Preach in the Jesuits Church, Dedicated
to Saint Joseph: who notwithstanding refused not to do him this favor, giving
him this Answer, Though when I bring forth Twins by one Days Labor, I shall not
come off well, yet for the Love of Saint Joseph I will de it. However he
performed it in the afternoon with very good success, and for an hour and a
half so employed his Eloquence in expressing his feeling Devotion to Saint
Joseph, explicating the Eminent Merits, and setting forth the Praises af his
Beloved Patron after such a manner, that convinced the Cardinal and the rest of
his Auditory, of the great Passion and ardent Affection he had for this Saint.

This Devout Sermon of his, puts me in mind of a rich Treatise (...) writ
concerning this Divine Spouse of our Blessed Lady, which is in his Book of
Spiritual Entertainments, wherein he evidences how great a^ esteem he had of
Saint Joseph; and that you may by a part, judge of the whole Piece; and of the
great Affection and Esteem he had for this Saint; give me leave out of it to
recite one of his Exclamations. O what a great Saint, says he, in the entrance
of the Discourse, i^ the Glorious Saint Joseph! He Is not only a Patriarch, but
the chief of all the Patriarch's. He Is not only a Confessor, but more than a
Confessor, for in his Prerogative of Confessor, is included the Dignity of
Bishops, the Generosity of Martyrs, the Purity of Virgins, and the Perfections
of all other Saints. it is therefore with just reason that he is compared to the
Palm, which is the King of Trees. This is sufficient to declare his Zeal of the
Honor. of this Saint, and of the Love he had for him, this being his whole
drift in that Discourse. Moreover if we address our selves to the Religious of
the Visitation of our Blessed Lady, his Spiritual Children, they being of the
Order he Instituted, and who inherit the Love their Founder had for Saint
Joseph; They Will tell you their Patriarch has Dedicated his Book, Of the Love of
God, to Saint Joseph: That he has put the first Monastery and Church of their
Order under his Protection: That he every where bears the title of their
Tutelar Saint or Protector; that he has ordered, that in all their Houses, they
keep his Feast with Solemnity, and in his Institute has Commanded, that all
these Religious his Children should hear a particular Devotion to him, that the
Mistress of Novices, should cause the Novices, and even the Postulants, to get a
habit of calling upon him, when they began their Mental Prayer; and that they
take him for their Guide and Advocate in that Exercise. These are his
Daughters, who Imitate their Father in their Love and Devotion to Saint Joseph,
which he has, as his Divine Legacy, entailed upon them.

The sixth, who was Eminent for her Devotion to Saint Joseph, was Blessed
Margaret de Chateau, of the Holy Order of Saint Dominick. As commonly we think
upon what we Love, so this Virgin had ordinarily no other subject of Meditation
than the Sacred Birth of our Savior lying in the Manger, assisted by the
Blessed Virgin and Saint Joseph, and this her Meditating upon those small
services that Saint Joseph rendered to this little Infant and his Holy Mother,
caused both an incredible Consolation in her Mind, and a singular Affection to
this Holy Patriarch; nor was this without many wonderful effects that
accompanied it, which were manifestly wrought by the Finger of God, who most
wonderfully drew in her Heart, these three Personages attending upon Jesus
lying in the Crib. A favor never before heard of: who being often heard to
tell her Confidents, saying, O that ye did but know what I carry and keep in
my Heart! After she was Dead, she was opened, and in her Heart they found three
Precious Stones, in which were Engraven the three Objects of her Love: In the
first was an Image of our Blessed Lady, with a Rich Crown upon her Head; in the
second lay little Jesus surrounded by a Flock of Lamb's; in the third stood
Saint Joseph with a Venerable Countenance, a Mantle of Gold hanging upon his
shoulder, a Dove over his Head, and a Religious Woman kneeling at his Feet,
resembling the deceased Nun. The sight of this, as we may truly believe, was a
comfort to all the beholders; and the fame of it, was spread abroad far and
near, which much increased the Devotion to Jesus, Mary and Joseph, especially
to the last, who had thus rewarded his suppliant. Which three Miraculous pieces
are preserved to this very Day, and to be seen in the Town of Chateau, in the
Monastery of the Order of Saint Dominick, where they are kept with great
Devotion.

The seventh Person, Famous for her particular Devotion to Saint Joseph, is
Blessed Agatha, of the Holy Cross, of the same Order. And it was upon the Feast
of the Purification, that this Pious Soul conceived so great a Devotion to this
Saint: The occasion whereof was this: she had a design to act the part of a
severe Governess, in correcting certain Women, whom the had a little before
taken in a Fault; thereby to frighten 'em from falling again into the like.
Which afterward she had a scruple of, fearing she might have exceeded in her
Words and manner of her Correction; wherefore she resolved to go to Confession
and whilst she was in the Church preparing her self for it: Our Blessed Lady
Appeared to her with her Infant Jesus in her Arms, accompanied by Saint
Joseph; the surprise of so great a favor, made her not loose so good an
occasion of begging Pardon for her Fault, both of the Infant and his Mother,
which they granted her, and at the same time filled her Heart with so great an
abundance of joy and comfort, that she spent the whole Day in Thanksgiving to
them; considering at the same time the seraphical affections Saint Joseph had,
when he assisted in the Temple of Jerusalem, at the Purification of our Blessed
Lady.

Nor did she permit this Devotion they had inkindl'd in her Heart, both toward
themselves and Saint Joseph to cool, but still increased the fervor thereof
toward the Spouse of the Blessed Virgin, which was encouraged and increased by
a Vision she had, upon the Feast of this Holy Patriarch, concerning his Life
and Death.

Wherein she understood, by Divine Inspiration, that when this Saint was at his
last Gasp, he felt an extreme regret to quit the Company and Conversation of
Jesus, and his Beloved Spouse; knowing that after the departure of his Soul
from his Body, he was not presently to enjoy God, but was to expect this
Happiness, till the Resurrection of the Son of God, which grief continuing, our
Blessed Savior bid him not afflict himself at this separation; for he should
quickly see both him and his Eternal Father also, with an accomplishment of the
chief and greatest Promises God had made by the Prophets. These words Comforted
him, but the Prayers that Jesus made for him in his last Agony, comforted him
far more, and so he past from this Life to the next, ^n the Arms of his Son
and Sa^lour, and in the Presence of the most Sacred Virgin his Spouse. The
consideration of these particular Pri^iedges, with reason renderd the Holy
^^^gin Agatha more Devoted than ^^^r to Saint Joseph.

The Devout Yolant de Silva deserves with reason to have the eighth place or
rank amongst the Devotes of Saint Joseph. Her chief Devotion was to consider
the Infancy of our Blessed Savior, who was dressed in swaddling Bands for the
Love of Men; and often Meditating upon this Point, inkindled her Devotion
toward Saint Joseph; she imagining, his Ears, Blessed with the Cries of this
Blessed Babe; his Eyes, with beholding him in all Conditions; his Arms, by
being as a Cradle to Rock, Carry and Embrace him; his Mouth, by declaring the
faith and Affection of his Heart; both by his Words, and those Amorous
Impressions of his Lips, upon the Infants Sacred Feet. This Mystery occasioned
her Devotion also to the Holy Innocents, who as the Church says, Non loquendo
sed moriendo confessi sunt: Orat. Innocent.
Not by Speaking but by Dying Professed their Faith: In Memory an^ Honor of
them, she Yearly say^ a hundred and forty thousand times our Lords Prayer; they
being s^^ many in number, as some reasonabl^ suppose, grounding their Opinion
upon what Saint John relates in his Apo^^lyps, Cum co centum and quadraginta
qua^ tor millia habentes Nomen ej^^ scriptum in Frontibus. Apoc. c. 14.1.
They having his Name Writter in their For-Heads, for whom they Sacrifis'd
their Lives. These Devotions proved very advantageous to her; for Saint Joseph
and the Holy Innocents in requital, visited her at the hour of her Death, never
quitting her till they accompanied and conducted her Devout Soul unto Heaven.

The Ninth Client of Saint Joseph, was the Devout John Gerson, Chancelour of
the University of Paris. No passionate lover ever having the like affection for
his beloved object, as he had for Saint Joseph. He having composed a Book, he
in titles it, his Josephin, in honor of Saint Joseph. In each one of his
Sermons he never omitted to say something in his Praise. And in having, as I
may say, amassed and gathered together, all that can be said to increase Saint
Joseph's praise and esteem in this his work, it may very well be called a
Magazin of Saint Joseph's Praises. But the better to judge of his Love to Saint
Joseph, it is necessary to Read what he says of him, and what praises he gives
him. As that he was Sanctified in his Mother's Womb as Saint John Baptist was.
That he had obtained a perfect Victory ^^er Sensuality, which was always
^^bject to his Reason; that he was confirmed in Grace; that he ^ose ^ith our
Savior from the Dead; That he then Appeared to his beloved Spouse the Blessed
Virgin: That no Saint in Heaven is greater than he except the Blessed Virgin:
So that to hear what he says, you would believe God had chosen him for Saint
Joseph's chief Panegyrist, to write and set forth his Praises; and that all
others who have writ of this Subject, are but his Scholars. 'Twas he that
found out the true elevation of this Star, and that it is ascendent was next to
the Virgin Mother. All which proves him a true Lover and Client of Saint Joseph.

The Devout Henry Chycot, Canon of Chartres, deserves the tenth place amongst
the Clients of Saint Joseph; all his thoughts being taken up how to augment his
honor, either by himself or others. He undertook to write a Book, upon his
Marriage with the Mother of God, in which he endeavored to set forth his
Praises; but not being able to finish it, that Saint Joseph might loose nothing
by his Death, he addressed himself by Letter to his Friend John Gerson,
obligeing him by all the ties of Friendship between them, either to perfect
this Work he had begun, or to make one of his own upon the same Subject: Which
he performed, both to satisfy his Friends Piety, and his own Devotion to Saint
Joseph, the Canon also that he might the better evidence his signal Devotion to
Saint Joseph, in his last Will and Testament, left a considerable Sum of Money
as a Foundation for a Yearly distribution to the Canons, to oblige them Daily
to sing his Hymn and Prayer in his honor; hereby to habituate them to the
Devotion of honoring and recommending themselves to this Saint.

Behold here the ten Lovers of Saint Joseph, given us for an Example how to
honor his Merits, and how to put our selves under the shelter of his powerful
Protection, with assurance of the confiderable advantages we shall gain
thereby. But he has had very many other Clients besides these of both Sexes,
the number of which would make too long a list for so short a Treatise; yet I
cannot omit the nameing a few more of them, as first Blessed Joseph Herman of
the Order of Saint Norbert, who for his Devotion to Saint Joseph deserved to
have the Name of Joseph given him by the Blessed Virgin; who as Surius relates
in his Life, deserved her doing him also so great an honor as to take him for
her Spouse; because he honored her dearest Spouse Saint Joseph. And as a token
of indearment, put her little Infant JESUS into his Arms, that he might carry
him therein as Saint Joseph had done. Father Peter Cotton also, of the SOCIETY
of JESUS, so well known all over France for his rare Virtues, was also
particularly Devoted to Saint Joseph, which moved him to procure that the first
Church in France, that was honored with his glorious Name, should be Dedicated
to him at Lions, near the place called the Bellcourt. He had so tender an
affection to him as thereby he moved Saint Joseph to Reveal to him the Day of
his Death, and to procure it upon his own Feast. Saint Bridget and Saint
Gertrude were commanded to be his Devotes, and doubtless executed so
advantageous a Command. And those happy Carmelites, Ann of Saint Bartholomew,
and Ann of Jesus, who in this imitated their Foundress Saint Teresa, were his
constant and ferverous Clients. I ought here also to recount, those Writers who
with so much Zeal have set forth his Perfections; as Saint Bernard, Saint
Bernardin of Sienna, Saint Chrysostom, Saint Gregory Nazianzen, Saint Peter
Chrysologus, Saint Thomas of Aquin the late James of Arana, Charles Stangel,
Peter Moreles, Stephen Bennet, Charles of Saint Paul, and many others, who have
set forth his Praises. Nor ought we to forget those many Devout Souls of our
own acquaintance, who have had a great tenderness for his Service, whereof some
are still liveing, both in the World, and out of it in Religion; and others gone
to Heaven to reap the Fruit of this their Devotion.

But if these Examples have not force enough or power, to effect what I
pretend, I shall endeavor to propose in the following Chapters such congruous
and easy Devotions to this Saint, as will of themselves incite us to Practice
them.

CHAP. VI. Of the ordinary Devotions that may be Daily Exercised toward Saint
Joseph.
ACTIONS are proper language and best expressions of Love, they testifying by
effects the truth of our good wishes and protestations to the Person we Love.
What does the frequent repetition of I Love you, I honor you great Saint
Joseph, and esteem you above all Saints after Jesus and Mary; if this Love and
Honor halts or stops here, and makes no farther progress than our Lips?

Wherefore all that I intend to say, is to make our Love to this Saint no less
effective, than affective; not that I require that every Point I set down
should be put in Practice, but I propose several, that the Pious Reader may
make choice of that, which most of all pleases him; and all of 'em are so easy
and profitable, that none but a Soul that is hardened against, or disgusted
with what conduces to her Eternal Happiness, can dislike or be displeased with
any of 'em.

The first Devotion is to have an Image or Picture, either in our Chamber,
Book, or Oratory: And this was that which his Devout Client Saint Teresa
practiced; who as her Life informs us, set up over the Gates of all the
Monasteries she Founded, the Statues of Jesus Mary and Joseph; and wherever she
went, carried with her a Picture of Saint Joseph, which Picture is still kept
at Avila; nameing and styling him the Founder of her Order. And that which
occasioned this her. Devotion, was a Conference our Savior once had with her,
after she had Communicated; for she being crossed in the Foundation of the
Monastery of Saint Joseph at Avila, CHRIST bid her use all her endeavors, to
build this Monastery, promising it should be his own Work; and that it wou^d be
very agreeable to his Divine Majesty, would redound much to his honor, and
that he should Faithfully be served therein; and Commanded her to call it the
Monastery of Saint Joseph, to set up Saint Joseph's and the Blessed Virgins
Statue at the Gate: Promising that he himself would with them be Guardian
thereof. Saint Teresa understanding his Will, put all his Commands in
execution, ordering the Images to be placed as he had ordained. Perhaps you will
tell me you have neither House to build, nor any Foundations to make. Pardon
^^e if I tell you, you lie under a great mistake, since you have the Building
of Perfection to raise, the Foundation of a Virtuous Life to lay, you are also
to employ your Thoughts about an Habitation that you must live in for all
Eternity. One of the best means therefore to compass this great Work of our
Salvation, is a tender Devotion to Saint Joseph; this is the best means to
finish the Edifice of Perfection, and to procure to our selves a happy and
Eternal Habitation. What Devotion therefore can be easier than this, only to
keep the Spiritual Image of Saint Joseph in our Thoughts, and to procure it by
carrying it in our Books; by keeping it in our Closset; and by leting it put us
in mind to call upon him, whom the Image represents, and to beg his assistance
in all our necessities. By the help of such an Image, a Gentelman of Venice was
drawn from a most miserable, to a most happy State of his Soul, which had
otherwise been lost. The Story I shall hereafter relate, in the XI. Chapter
with several others therein scited, which prove the care he takes of the
Spiritual Malady, of those who are Devoted to him.

The second Devotion I propose. is a particular and singular affection to some
Mystery of his Holy Life. Such as was that of his Marriage to the Blessed
Virgin; his Flight into Egypt with our Savior and the Blessed Virgin his
Spouse; or any other like unto these. Blessed Agatha of the Holy Cross, was
wont to six her thoughts upon his happy Death, in the Arms of our most
Merciful Redeemer: And did I know to which of these my Pious Readers
Inclinations would most of all lead him, I would promote his Devotion
thereunto. But instead of this, to show how pleasing such Devotions as these,
are to Almighty God, I will here relate what happened to a Devout Client of
Saint Joseph, a Religious Man of the Monastery of Monferat in Spain, who was
particularly Devoted to his voyage into Egypt, with JESUS and his Holy Virgin
Mother.

It fell out that this Religious Man, returning once very late to his
Monastery, lost his way and wandered so long up and down a Mountain some
distance from it, that at length he gave himself for lost; by reason of the
contagious effects that were occasioned by the unwholesome Fogg's of that place;
or because he feared to become ^ Prey to the Merciless savage Beasts of which
the place was very full; his fears and apprehentions increased with the
darkness of the Night, and caused him to recommend himself to Saint Joseph,
when upon a sudden he meets a grave Man leading an Ass, which had a Woman upon
it, bearing an Infant in her Arms; this happy encounter, gave him ^ wonderful
Comfort, which was increased when asking the way to the Monastery, the Man who
lead the Ass, bad him follow him, and he would lead him the right way thither:
As they went their whole Discourse was of God, and this with so much Fruit,
that never in his Lif^ the Religious Man, even in Prayer, had felt the like
Sweetness; which was accompanied with no less Joy, when he saw himself enter
into the Village in which the Monastery was; which joy was followed with no
less astonishment, when on a sudden his guide Disappeared, as soon as he had
thus brought him out of all danger. Which gave him presently the assurance that
'twas Saint Joseph that had brought him out of this trouble, and danger he was
in, whereby his Devotions to this great Saint was increased, and also to that
particular part of his Life, to which he was before so particularly Devoted.

The third Devotion, is to say every Day, or at least once a weak, his little
Office; which is in the Key of Paradise, which is Printed at the end of this
Book; for the greater convenience of those who desire to make use thereof. This
Office contains a continual Praise of Saint Joseph, in which some of his
Devotes, who say it Daily, others who say it every Saturday, find great
Comfort, and no less Profit also: And the great advantage that the Clients of
Saint Joseph experience, is his readiness always to acknowledge them as such,
and to assist 'em accordingly, as appears by what some Years since happened at
Loudun in France.

The Prioress of the Vrsulins of Loudun, named in Religion, Sister ^ean of the
Angels, of the House of Cose, was Possessed by an Evil Spirit called Leviathan,
who exercised extraordinary violences and cruelties toward her; she not
knowing, how better to defend her self against this his Tyrany, made a Vow to
say every Day the Office of Saint Joseph for a whole Year together, and Weekly
also to do some Penance in his honor, to obtain by his powerful Intercession,
a freedom from the Persecution she suffered from this her Infernal Enemy. Two
or three Days after she had made this Vow, the Wicked Spirit left her at the
first Exorcisme leaveing a Cross on the Forehead of the said Religious, as the
Exorcist had enjoined him, and at the same time another Devil cried out, Saint
Joseph is come, and has caused Leviathan to depart.

The fourth Devotion, is Daily to recite the Litany of Saint Joseph, which
contain all the chief Passages of his Life, together with all the extraordinary
Privileges God bestowed upon him. And having lately seen a Manuscript of a
certain Religious of the Order of Saint Bennet, in which were set down amongst
some particular Devotions to Saint Joseph: A little Litany Composed in his
honor in an Alphabetical order, which pleased me very much it facilitating the
Memory in relating it, and therefore take occasion of giveing you the same in
English, after the same Order, which if you like not; you may make use of the
great Litany, which you will find in the Office of Saint Joseph. Page 15. with
the Prayer. Page 5.

THE ALPHABETICAL LITANY OF S. Joseph.
LORD have Mercy on us. Christ have Mercy on us. Lord have Mercy on us. Jesus
Receive our Prayers. Lord Jesus Grant our Petitions. O God the Father, Creator
of the World. Have Mercy upon us. O God the Son, Redeemer of Mankind. Have
Mercy upon us. O God the Holy Ghost, Perfecter of the Elect. Have Mercy upon
us. Holy Trinity, one God. Have Mercy upon us. Holy Mary, Spouse of Saint
Joseph. Pray for us. Holy Joseph, Advocate of the Humble, Pray for us. Holy
Joseph, Blessed amongst Men. Pray for us. Holy Joseph, Confirmed in Grace, Pray
for us. Holy Joseph, Defender of the Meek. Pray for us. Holy Joseph, Exiled
with Christ into Egypt. Pray for us. Holy Joseph, Favorit of the King of
Heaven. Pray for us. Holy Joseph, Guardian of the Word Incarnate. Pray for us.
Holy Joseph, Honored amongst Men. Pray for us. Holy Joseph, Idea of Humility
and Obedience. Pray for us. Holy Joseph, Kind Intercessour for the Afflicted.
Pray for us. Holy Joseph, Lilly of Chastity and Temperance. Pray for us. Holy
Joseph, Mirror of Silence and Resignation. Pray for us. Holy Joseph, Nurfing
Father to the Sou of God. Pray for us. Holy Joseph, Obsequious Servant to the
Son of the Blessed Virgin Mary. Pray for us. Holy Joseph, Patron of the
Industrious and Innocent. Pray for us. Holy Joseph, Quintessence of all Virtue.
Pray for us. Holy Joseph, Ruler of the Family of Jesus. Pray for us. Holy
Joseph, Spouse of the ever Blessed Virgin. Pray for us. Holy Joseph, Theater of
all Glorious Privileges. Pray for us. Holy Joseph, Union of all Christian
Perfections. Pray for us. O Lamb of God, who take away the Sins of the World,
Spare us O Lord. O Lamb of God, who take away the Sins of World, Hear us O
Lord. O Lamb of God, who take away the Sins of the World, Have Mercy upon us.
Pray for us, O Holy Joseph. That we may be made worthy of the Promises of
Christ.
The Prayer. ASSIST us O Lord we beseech thee, by the Merits of the Spouse of
thy most holy Mother, that what our unworthiness cannot obtain, may be given us
by his Intercession; Who live and reignest, with the Father, in the unity of
the Holy Ghost, World without end. Amen.

But the better to excite you to a Practice of this Devotion, of re^^^eing the
Litany of this great Saint. I shall here set down some particular Favors
obtained by the recital of them, either every Day, or only for a certain time
prefixed.

The Religious of the Order of Saint Vrsula, had a defign to settle themselves
in Lambesa in Province, some Years, since upon hopes given 'em of effecting it
by some Inhabitants of that place, who herein testified their good will.
Wherefore they transported themselves thither, but found so little satisfaction
at their first arrival, meeting with so great and so many difficulties, that
they could not so much as find a House to hire to live in, that hereupon they
resolved to return back to Aix from whence they came; but first, had their
Recourse to Saint Joseph, whom they had taken for Protector in this their
Design, and resolved for nine Days together to say his Litany after Mass: But
what appeared as a wonderful effect of their Devotion, before the end of the
nine Davs, a Priest of great worth and authority, who had built a House, and a
Church adjoining to it, in honor of Saint Teresa near the said Town, came to
find out the Superior, to make her an offer both of the Church and House, and
to put her in Possession of all things else belonging thereunto. Which ofler
they accepted and presently the Religious took Possession of it, and were
settled there by the especial favor of Saint Joseph. Who not only took them
into his particular charge and care, but placed 'em under the protection of his
great Devote and dear Child Saint Teresa, in a House and Church where she was
greatly honored, and where she desired her great Patron Saint Joseph should be
honored also.

Fifthly, say at least the Prayer at the end of the Litany, every Day, or very
often, this being a short but a substancial and pleasing Devotion to him, which
qualities cannot but invite us to make use of it, and thereby to imitate the
Canons of Charters, who Daily recite it, as well to satisfy their own
Devotion, as to comply with the Pious desires of the Devout Henry Chicot their
Benefactor, and Founder of this Devotion.

I cannot here omit, what will authorize this Devotion, by relating how great
an advantage it procured to a Religious House of Nuns, which I heard from the
Mouth of it is Superior, a few Months ago. This Monastery had not received any
Novices for a long time, which much afflicted the Religious, wherefore the
Superior thought it necessary to have recourse to Saint Joseph, to beg his
Assistance, and therefore they resolved for six Month^ together, Daily to
recite this hi^ Prayer after Mass, for this Intention, which all the Religious
Cheerfully performed. Which Devotion wa^ no sooner begun, but a young Lady of
Quality with a good Fortune offered her self to Live and Dye with 'em in God's
Service; which favor will never be forgot by that Community; and has obliged
'em to a constant Confidence in Saint Joseph as in a Father, and particularly
this his Child, for having procured such a favor to them and her, by his
powerful Intercession.

Sixthly, you may assign one Day in the Week, for the Exercise o^ some
particular Devotion in honor of Saint Joseph. Saturday seems to me the most
proper Day, upon which he may be jointly honored and served with his most
Amiable Spouse. It Is now a Days a Devotion practiced by some Pious Souls, to
assign or dedicate each Day in the Week, to so me particular Devotion. As
Sunday to the honor of the Blessed Trinity, and the Angel Guardian. Monday, to
the honor of God the Father, and for the Souls in Purgatory. Tuseday to God
the Son, and Saint Ann. Wednesday to God the Holy Ghost, and the Patron whose
Name we bear. Thursday to the honor of the Blessed Sacrament and Saint
Barbara, who rewards her Clients, with Receiving their Viaticum or Communion
before their Death. Friday, to the honor of the Passion of our Savior. And
Saturday, to the honor of the Mother of God, and Saint Joseph her Spouse. It Is
not convenient, I should here suggest what each one is to do that Day, but
leave it to the Affection or Devotion wherewith each one shall find himself
inspired with all. For Example, some good Work; as the giving of Alms, the
doing some Penance, or performing any of the Devotions before mentioned in
this Chapter, or whatever else the Holy Ghost shall inspire you, let it be
performed upon this Day in honor of the Person to whom you design your Devotion

The seventh Devotion may be to call to mind the memory of the seven Dolours,
or Griefs that Afflicted Saint Joseph, or of the seven Joys that were a
constant Comfort to him throughout his whole Life: Which you will find Composed
after his Office and Beads. Page 30. This was a Devotion that Saint Joseph
himself taught to two Religious Men of the Holy Order of Saint Francis, after
he had delivered 'em from the danger of Death. Who being cast away at Sea, they
happily laid hold of a Plank, upon which they were tossed to and fro upon the
Waves, for three Days and Nights together in this their Danger and Affliction,
their whole Recourse was to Saint Joseph, begging his help and assistance, in
the sad Condition they were in. Who appeared to them in the Habit of a Young
Man, of a Beautiful and Comely Feature, who encouraged them to confide in his
Assistance, and as their Pilot Conducted them into a safe Harbor. They
desirous to know who their Benefactour was, begged his Name, that they might
gratefully acknowledge so great a Blessing and Favor. He told them he was
Saint Joseph, he advised them Daily to recite seven Pater Nosters, and seven
Ave Marys, in Memory of his seven Dolours or Griefs, and of his seven Joys, and
having said this he Disappeared.

The seven Dolours of Saint Joseph.
I. The thought he had of forsaking his Spouse, seeing her big with Child. II.
He seeing the Infant JESUS in the Crib, shivering with cold and so ill
accommodated. III. Beholding the Wound of JESUS in his Circumcision, and seeing
him so early shedding his Blood for Love of Sinners. IV. The Words of Simeon on
the Day of the Purification of our Blessed Lady, testifying that a Sword should
pierce our Ladies Heart. V. His flight into Egypt occasioned by Herod's
Persecution, VI. The news he heard, as he returned out of Egypt that Archilaus
was more Cruel than his Father Herod. VII. His loosing JESUS at twelve Years of
Age, when they went up to the Temple of Jerusalem.
The seven Joys of Saint Joseph.
I. That which he received by the Message of the Angel, who bid him to Fear
nothing, but to take Mary for his Spouse. II. The Adoration of the Angels,
Saluting our Savior in the Crib, and singing at his Birth the Hymn, Gloria in
Excelsis Deo. III. The hearing the Salutiferous Name of JESUS, from the Angel,
which as Godfather he was ordered to give the Son of God at his Circumcision.
IV. From the Words of Simeon, when he foretold that CHRIST should be the
Salvation of many and the Glory of Israel. V. From the falling down of the
Idols of Egypt, at the Presence of our Savior JESUS CHRIST, VI. From the
Command given him by the Angel to Return home with the Infant JESUS and his
Mother. VII. From his finding JESUS in the Temple, Disputing with the Doctors.
These good Religious Men daily Meditated upon these piercing Dolours, and
comfortable Joys of their Charitable Deliverer and performing his Commands
continued his Devour Clients all their Lives, hereby honoring so powerful a
Protector, whom he told moreover, as may be seen in Peter Morales, that he
would afford the like particular help and assistance to all that shall practice
this Devotion in all their Necessities, but most particularly at the Hour of
their Death. Wherefore it will be our own Faults if we enjoy not the same
happiness of obtaining his Favor, by rendering him the like Services, he
esteeming nothing more, than the good Will of his Clients, expressed after this
manner.

Eighthly, To lead a Life full of that constant Resignation both Interior and
Exterior, in Thought Word and Deed to the Will of God, as Saint Joseph did. in
which he took so great a content and pleasure, that his ordinary aspiration was
Utinam vivam and videam voluntatem Dei adimpletam. In Rev. S. Brig.
O that I nay but Live to see the Will of God entirely fulfilled. This was his
ordinary aspiration, and only desire as the Mother of God revealed to Saint
Bridget. Adding that this was the cause, Ideo magna gloria ejus.
Why he was so great and glorious in Heaven. There Is nothing therefore so easy
as to imitate him in this point by often saying every Day. Fiat voluntas Dei.
God's Will be done; I desire to live, only to fulfill the Will of God. We
should at least accustom our selves as soon as we wake, constantly to begin the
Day with this Act of Conformity, in risigning our selves punctually to the Will
of God, it being the most Sublime of all Acts of Virtue, and the Crown of all
Perfection.

CHAP. VII. What Devotions are to be used to Saint Joseph upon his Feast.
THERE is no place throughout the whole World where the Feast of Saint Joseph
is kept with greater Solemnity than in Canada, a Country in the Nourthwest part
of America. He being the Father, the Patron, and Protector of new France. It Is
for this reason that his Feast is so Solemnly kept there: And that we may see
how it is kept, I will here set down (what I took out of a Relation Printed in
the Year 1637. The manner how they Celebrate it, is as follows; Upon the Vigil
of his Feast is set up the Standard of Kebec upon one of the chief Bastions,
and at the discharge of a Cannon or Warning-Piece, the Governor of the causes
very Artificial Fire works to be Lighted.

On the one side there is raised a Pillar, upon which there Appears the Name of
Saint Joseph in Fire, in very large Characters, over which from a Crown of
Stars, made in Fireworks, are cast out a great company of Serpents that fly
into the Air, and behind it are placed a great many Rockets, which also fly a
great height, and there break into many Stars, that fall from them.

Near this Pillar is raised a fair Castle richly Painted, and set out with
great Variety of Colors, flanked with four Towers, beset with so many lights
and fireworks as inlightens the whole Battery, whith is also surrounded with a
great many saming Spears, and a great number of Flags bespangl'd with Fire,
appear from the tops of the Towers, from whence there continually ascend a
great many Serpents made in fireworks. Six and six at a time into equal
distance one from another, and also many dozens of great Rockets, twelve at a
time, resting some while between each dozen. At the close of the Evening the
Governor of Kebec (accompanied with all his Officers, in sight of a great
number of Savages that live round about the Country, and come thither to see
the Solemnity) put's Fire to these Machins, the Wonderful sight whereof gi^'s
great occasion to the Savages to honor and esteem Saint Joseph for whom they
perceive the Christians to have so great a Veneration. Upon the Day of his
Feast, they also, express very great Devotion in all their Churches, where all
things are performed with as great Solemnity as upon Easter Day it self, all
giving thanks to God for having done them the honor to bestow Saint Joseph
upon them for their Protector, whom he had made Guardian to his Son JESUS
CHRIST the Word Incarnate.

From the consideration of this Solemnity and Devotion to Saint Joseph in
Canada; let us consider what we may also Practice upon the same Feast; that as
they do what they can, to observe it with due Solemnity, so we may do the like;
not so much by exterior Marks of Joy, which are very laudable; but by
Exercising Interior Devotion and Fervor in all our Actions; to increase
thereby the Glory of this Saint, and move him to advance us in Perfection, for
the secure obtaining ou^ Salvation. For if there be a Feast in the whole Year,
next to those of our Savior and Blessed Lady, in which we may hope for a grant
of our Petitions, it is this of Saint Joseph. Since Saint Teresa assures us in
the sixth Chapter of her Life, that whatsoever we ask him upon his Feast,
shall either have a successful grant, or be changed into a grant of something
else, more Beneficial for the Soul of the Petitioner.

But if you desire to know more particularly how to spend the Day of his Feast
with Piety and Profit. I will here set down half a dozen Devotions, of which
you may take your choice: I suppose you observe the Feast of his Espousals,
which the Church keeps on the two and twentieth Day of January, as well as the
Feast of his Return out of Egypt, upon the seventeenth of the same Month; and
the Memory also of his Flight into Egypt, upon the two and twentieth of
December, these are unanimously agreed upon by all; but some differ about his
chief Feast: Which the Greeks Celebrate on the six and twentieth of December,
the Day after Christmas, as Cardinal Baronius recounts in his Martyrologe.
Others observe it on the twenty sixth of ^une; the Eastern Church assuring us
that he Dyed on that Day. But setting aside these Days, we follow, as ^^e ought
to do, the Catholic Church's Ordination, of keeping it upon the nineteenth of
March: Wherefore (...) shall here suggest how to spend this ^ay profitably:
Proposing six different Devotions, each of which you may make use of according
as you find your self inclined.

The first Devotion is to follow the Practice of the Reverend Fathers
Carthusians, by observing his Feast as a Feast of Precept; though the place we
Live in should not observe it at such; which now in most places they do.
Performing this in acknowledgment of the many Benefits received from his
Fatherly goodness. It Is also Solemnis'd after this manner by the Children of
Saint Teresa, imitating in this their Glorious Foundress. Moreover the Fathers
of the Oratory kept it, who have nothing nearer their Hearts than Jesus Mary
Joseph. The Children also of Saint Francis Sales, who are the Religious of the
Visitation; in this make know^ both their own, and their Founde^^ inclinations.
And the Nuns of the Word Incarnate, or the Annunciates from their first
beginning put themselves under his happy Protection.

The manner of celebrating hi^ Feast is the same, with that we Celebrate the
Feast of other Saints some Fast upon the Eve in his honor; others perform some
other Penance and Mortification for the same end; others Communicate upon his
Feast, others abstain from aservil Works as upon Sundays; others give more time
to Prayer tha^ upon other Days; others Read h^ Life; others spend the Day in
more Religious Exercises; performing all this in testimony of their Love to
Saint Joseph.

The second Devotion is, to take him for your special Patron and Directour for
the following Year; or should you already have chosen him for such, then to
make choice of him for the effecting some particular affair you have in hand of
great Importance: Resolve to perform some Devotions to him for this Intention,
for the space of some Months, as the necessity or length of your affairs, shall
require.

Ex Libro de gloria S. Joseph.
Mother Jane of the Angels, of whom I have already spoken, begged of Saint Joseph
upon New Years Day, that he would take her for that Year. 1636. into his
Protection, and by his powerful Intercession, obtain of our Savior the
Blessing, of being delivered from all Interior or Exterior Impediments in
God's Service; and to dispossess her of those Devils that Tormented her; and
free her from whatsoever else that kept or retarded her Soul, from the Union of
his Divine Love. The Night following, as she fell asleep, she seemed to feel a
more particular Devotion than ordinary, accompanied with a most incredible
sweet smell, quite different from all other scents; that are found in the
Perfumes of this World. And at the same time she heard a Voice that said to
her, Behold him, to whom thou have Recommended thy self. Hereupon the Holy
Patriarch Saint Joseph came into her mind, and her Heart was filled with an
extraordinary veneration for, and love of him: She seemed in her Sleep to see
such a dazeling Light, as far exceeded the Brightness and Splendour of the Sun:
Within which she beheld a Countenance full of wonderful Majesty, so Beautiful
that she neither found Words to express it, nor any Comparisons whereby to
discover her Thoughts.

After all, the Person spoke to her as follows: Conserve Patience and Constancy
in these Sensible difficulties you suffer; support 'em with Resignation and
endeavor to forget your self; for God has Favors in store to bestow upon you.
Tell your Exorcist, that if Men labor not for your Recovery, God will make it
his own Work. By all means let him continue his Endeavors, and God by his
Ministry, will Expel the Devil that most of all hinders your Devotions. This
being said all Vanished, except the Perfume, which lasted so strong for some
time after, that when she awaked, she verily thought her Chamber had been
Perfumed.

Her Thoughts were taken up all the Day following with a Confidence in our
Savior, and with the Assurance, of Saint Joseph's Assistance, in this extreme
necessity she was then in. Nor was she deceived; for five Days after, upon the
Feast of the Epiphany, she found the effect of her Protectour's Intercession,
by being dispossessed of that Devil that did so maliciously interrupt her
Devotions. The Father Exorcist Commanding him in the Presence of all that were
Spectatours, that for a Mark of his going out, he should write the Name of Mary
upon her Hand, as he did, though not without great difficulty and repugnance;
fixing this Name in very legible Characters immediately above Saint Joseph's,
which had been writ there before, upon the going out of another Devil. which
Names, during her whole Life, appeared as clear and distinct as they did the
first Day; which I my self was an Eyewitness of, as the said Religious past by
Lions, to go to Anessy to visit the Tomb of Saint Francis of Sales, in the Year
1638. I say nothing of the Names of JESUS and Saint Frantis of Sales, that were
to be seen on the back of the same Hand, Writ at the Command of the Exorcist,
as a Mark of these Devils quitting their Possession; which by God's Permission
they had taken of her Body, that being not so much to my purpose; which is only
to declare, how much it conduced to her Happiness, to have recourse to Saint
Joseph for his Protection, either upon his own, or upon any other Feast.

The third Devotion that may be performed to Saint Joseph, is to take him for
our chief Patron and Advocate, during our whole Life; and Yearly to renew this
Resolution upon his Feast. I know a Religious Person of our Society, who
constantly practices this Devotion every Year, Offering himself unto him by the
Recital of such a Prayer, as in our Sodalities of our Blessed Lady, erected in
our Colleges, is publicly recited at their Reception into it. I pretend not
to persuade you to perform this Exercise every Day, lest to some it might seem
too great a burden, but only once a Year, at least upon his chief Feast; which
his true Clients can not think too much to perform. And the first time one
makes use of this Prayer, it is fit to choose him for our particular Patron and
Protector. The Prayer is short and therefore I shall insert it here, as I shall
insert a longer at the end of this Book, Page, 25. amongst other particular
Devotions to be recited at Leisure.

O Holy Joseph, Spouse of the most Blessed Virgin Mary. I N. N. choose you this
Day for my special Advocate and Patron, and do firmly purpose never to forsake
you, nor to say, do, nor suffer any under my charge, to say or do any thing
against your Honor. I earnestly therefore beseech, you that you will please to
take me for your perpetual and constant Servant, and to aid and assist me in
all my Actions, especially in the hour of my Death. Amen.

Make a firm Resolution to keep this Purpose, and renew it often, either at
Holy Communion, or when you visit the Blessed Sacrament; whereby you will
render this Devotion more Pleasing to God, more Honorable to the Saint, and
more profitable to your self.

The fourth Devotion may either be to offer Mass your self, or get a Priest to
offer one in Honor of Saint Joseph; and that piece of the Eastern Church
History, that was found and offered to Pope Adrian the V I. as very authentic,
assures us, that CHRIST assisting Saint Joseph at his Death, gave him his
Blessing, and Promiss'd to give the same to all those, that should offer
Sacrifice to God in Honor of Saint Joseph upon the Day of his Glorious Death,
the ninteenth of March: But we have no Sacrifice except the Sacrifice of Holy
Mass. And what greater Blessing can we have than the Sacrifice of the Son of
God, who was Promised to us? Moreover were not this true, yet all that we can
perform that is considerable, all that is of any worth, or that conduces to the
Glory of any Saint, is included in the Oblation of the Divine Sacrifice of
Mass; wherein JESUS CHRIST is offered in thanks giving to his Eternal Father,
for all those Favors and Benefits he has heaped upon any Saint, raising him to
so Eminent a Glory and Dignity.

The fifth Devotion is to give Alms, or bestow a Dinner upon some poor Man or
Widow in Honor of Saint Joseph, and if you please for the same end relieve a
poor Woman and her little Infant to Honor the Created Trinity; the Infant
JESUS, Mary, as also Saint Joseph, and to encourage you to so Pious a Work,
Saint Vincent Ferrerius recounts a wonderful Story of a Gentelman of Valence,
who was very Devout to all these three, and amongst the rest of his Devotions,
used every Christmas Day, to invite a Woman with a Sucking Child, and an Old
Man to Dine with him; and all this for the Love he bore to Jesus, Mary, and
Joseph. This Charity and Devotion was so pleasing to God, that upon his Death
Bed, he had the Comfort to see them, who just as he Departed, gave him this
comfortable Invitation to Paradise, as follows. Friend you have every Year
invited us to a Feast in your House, come now and we will receive you to our
Feast, and into the dwelling place of the Blessed, there to ^ign with us and
them in all sorts of contentment as long as a happy Eternity shall last. Who
can conceive how God Recompenses, even the least Services we do to him or his
Saints? I wish we could always think on this. And practice what these thoughts
would move us to perform.

The sixth and last Devotion to Saint Joseph, is to meditate upon the Virtues,
Mysteries or chief Passages of his Life. The Morning either before or after
Communion, is the most proper time for Meditation: Because the Afternoon is
reserved for Even-Song, Sermon, or some other Works of Charity, as visiting the
Sick in Hospitals, comforting and relieving Prisoners. How and when these
Meditations are to be used, I shall declare in the following chapter.

CHAP. VIII. Of Devotions to Saint Joseph during the Octave of his Feast, or at
other times according to the Opportunity or Affection of his Clients.
I Cannot think there is any better means to pass the Octave of Saint Joseph with
Devotion and profit, than by the consideration of his Life and Death; and the
contemplating upon his Glory in Heaven. Because such Reflections as these, will
increase our Love and Affection toward him, and move us to earnest and
efficacious attempts to imitate his transcendent Virtues. However because some
may not have time or opportunity of making these Meditations, and that those
that have not, or know not how to Meditate, may make use of 'em instead of
Spiritual Reading; I have made the Meditations somewhat longer than ordinary.
Which you will find Printed in a large Character at the end of this Book,
amongst other Devotions: Page, 41. There are eight of 'em in all, for each Day
of the Octave of his Feast, in which are briefly contained the chief Passages
of the Life, Death and Glory of Saint Joseph; and though the Reading of 'em for
your Spiritual Lecture, will be very profitable, yet they will produce far
greater profit and comfort in your Soul, if you Meditate upon 'em; whereby you
will increase a far greater Devotion to Saint Joseph, than only by the bare
Reading of them.

We have declared already that all the Devotions, Honors and Respects that are
rendered to other Saints, ought to be given to Saint Joseph. For whosoever
Loves him, as he deserves, must needs think he can never sufficiently Honor
him, his Merits exceeding all Honor and Devotion that can be showed him.
Wherefore should I advise you to cause a Mass to be said in his Honor, to
perform some good Work of Charity or Penance, you may say I invite you only to
such a general testimony of Affection, as we give to all other Saints whom we
honor; I will here therefore propose to you such a particular Devotion, as
Mother Jane of the Angels, Superior of the Vrsulins practiced with admirable
success. Who having purposed for her Deliverance to Communicate nine Days
together in honor of Saint Joseph; upon the Ninth Day, one of the Devils
within her, of his own accord presented himself to the Exorcist, during his
Exorcisms; and acknowledged he was Commanded in the Name of Saint Joseph, as he
left his Station to write the Name of Saint Joseph upon her Hand, which he
swore he would perform, as he did soon after.

You may also say or get nine Masses said in honor of Saint Joseph, which was
a Devotion that very much assisted Father John Joseph Sevrin, Exorcist to this
Religious Woman; for before he had ended his nine Masses, the Devil left her,
writing according to his Promise his Name, in the presence of many upon her
bare Hand, and amongst others in the Presence of an English Nobleman, The Right
Honorable Walter Montague, Son to the Earl of Manchesters
then a Protestant, who held her Arm, which was the occasion of his Conversion
to the Roman Catholic Faith; and of another, then an Athist, whose Life is
Writ, he afterward becoming as renowned for Sanctity, as before he was
Infamous for Athisme. You may also perform the Devotion proper to all Saints,
by endeavoring to Imitate his rare and particular Virtues. As the exercise of
a retired and hidden Sanctity; the practice of Angelical Purity, even in
Marriage; his Humility, Patience, and Meekness in Conversation; his great
Recollection and wonderful Silence: Who, as a Holy Person declared to Father
Sevrin, Was a very great keeper of Silence, and that in the House of our
Savior at Nazareth, he spoke very little, our Blessed Lady and Jesus still
much less, and that his Eyes performed to him the Office of a Tongue, without
need of speaking.

Lastly, you may Imitate the works of Piety that Saint Joseph Practiced; But
because these are also found in most Saints, and therefore seem a general
Devotion, I will propose some that were particular and proper to Saint Joseph:
Which other Persons of Piety and Particular Devotes of his, Quiriole.
have performed in his Honor; they are six in number, some of which I hope you
will find suitable to your Devotion and Inclination.

CHAP. IX. Containing nine different occasions of particular Devotions proper
to Saint Joseph, and practiced by his Particular Devotes.
THE first is, when you have lost any thing, you had a high Value for, to have
recourse to Saint Joseph, either to beg his help, or at least to suffer
profitably this loss, if by his Assistance we happen not to recover it. John
Gerson his great Client suggests this Devotion; assuring us, that such as in
these occasions recommend themselves to this great Patriarch, presently either
recover what is lost, or by his efficacious Assistance, even gain by their
loss, bearing the same with perfect Patience and Resignation. For a proof of
what he asserts, he brings for an Example the Comfort which one of his
acquaintance received, who lost something of great Value; and recovered it by
this means. It Is perhaps upon this account that Scrupulous and Anxious Persons
have recourse to him, since they have lost so great a Jewel, as is the Repose
of Conscience, and Peace of Mind; this being the dearest, most precious; and
considerable Treasure we have in this World; for we may assure our selves, and
certainly believe, that he who felt the loss of JESUS and the grief it cost
him, will not fail to comfort those who implore his assistance in, the like
exigency.

The Second is, to take occasion for Saint Joseph's sake, to make it your
endeavor to Love all his Clients and Devotes, whether they be already gone
before us to Heaven, or are still with us upon Earth; and especially those who
have born the happy Name of Joseph; but above all to show a particular Love and
Devotion to Saint Teresa his particular, and as I may say his chief Devote; and
not only to those, that are in Heaven, but also to those as you know
particularly to be Devoted to him upon Earth. For your Love to them upon this
account, will become no less pleasing to Saint Joseph, than if they bore his
Name; and the bearing a tenderness and love to those that do so, is very
pleasing also to Saint Joseph. Wherefore to help you to practice this Devotion,
I will here give you a 'List of some Eminent Persons that have born his Name,
and upon this account received from God some of those particular Favors he
bestowed upon him. And shall begin with the Patriarch Joseph, who though he lived
so many Ages before our great Saint Joseph, yet was a Type of him, and probably
upon that account might receive his Name and those other extraordinary Favors
God bestowed upon him.

The first therefore in this List of those that bore the Name of Joseph: Is the
Patriarch Joseph of the Old Law, to whom the Holy Ghost gives a evry great
Elogium or Commendation in the 49. Chapter of Ecclesiasticus. Calling him,
Ruler and Prince of his Brethren, the Stay and Support of his Nation and
People. Who deserves also the first place, he being not only the first to whom
this Name was given, but who was also a Type of our Saint Joseph, upon account
of his Chastity. The Character also that the Holy Ghost gives the Patriarch,
agrees with our Joseph in a far more eminent degree than it did to the
Patriarch; he being a Prince and Ruler not only over his Brethren, but
Governor to the Mother and Son of God, being their support in all their
Necessities, and Saving him who was to Save not only one, but all Nations
throu'out the whole World.

The second is Joseph of Arimathea, that Noble Centurion praised by the Holy
Ghost for his Love to CHRIST in a time of extreme danger. For when those who
were Friends of CHRIST fled from him, as being looked upon as Enemies to the
State; he courageously asked his Body, and took care of Embalming it, and
laying it in a new Monument he had prepared for himself; by the Love and care
he took of it after his Death, hereby Imitating our Saint Joseph's Love to the
Living Body of JESUS. He also resembles him in recovering things lost. As may
appear by the following Example. Ex P. Joan. a S. Maria in Hist. S S. Ordinis.
Saint Mary Vasquez of Mela, of the Order of Saint Dominick and of the
Monastery of Zamata in Spain, had a singular Devotion to this Saint Joseph of
Arimathea, upon account of) the tender Devotion he showed to the Precious Body
of JESUS begging it, taking it from the Cross, Embalming it; and laying it in
his own Monument, and when her Monastery had lost a Paper of great importance,
she had recourse to him for it: Soon after there came a Person well mounted to
the Monastery Gate, where lighting from his Horse he asked for Sister Mary
Vasquez, and as soon as she came Delivered her the Paper, and returned without
any Conversation at all with her.

The third, is Saint Joseph Son to the Samaritan Woman, who gave Water to our
Savior at the Well, whilst he rested himself in the Journey he made with his
Disciples. Who, accompanied with his Brother Victor, obtained the Glorious
Crown of Martyrdom; their Mother also shared in the Victory, as a Reward for
her Charity to JESUS. Whose Feast is kept upon the twentieth of March, according
to Baronius's Martyrologe, who now drink of that Water their Mother begged, that
takes away all Thirst for an Eternity.

The fourth, is Joseph the Just, one of the seventy two Disciples of our
Savior, to whom the Holy Ghost gave the same title of Just, as to our great
Saint Joseph; so esteemed by the Apostles for his Sanctity, that they Named him
with Saint Mathias, to be substituted in Judas Escariot's place.

The fifth, is Joseph the Poet, by Excellency called the Sacred Poet, Whose
delight was to Compose Verses in Honor of the Saints, whom they recompensed,
by Appearing to him and assisting him at his Death, and accompanying him, to
Everlasting Life; his Feast is kept upon the third of April, according to the
Eusebius. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 32.
Greek Martyrologe; but according to Baronius, the fifteenth of February.

The sixth is, Joseph of Ste^ald called Herman in the World, of the Order of
Saint Norbert, so singularly devoted to the Mother of God, that she took him
for her Spouse, and gave him the Name of Joseph, to the end that in all things
he should resemble her first Spouse. The manner how it fell out is as follows.
Surius. Apr. 11.
The Religious amongst whom he Lived, began first to call him Joseph, upon
account of Virginal Bashfulness, which caused him to Blush upon the least
occasion, even when the Religious called him Joseph, which made him complain to
the Abbot, though without redress, for their calling him so, and the Night after,
in time of his Prayer in the Quire, he saw a most Beautiful Lady coming toward
him, full of Majesty and Glory with two Angels attending her; the one asked the
other; to whom this Beautiful Lady should be espoused? To whom reply's the
other; but to him you see here before you. Poor Herman was surprised at this
discourse, and so confounded, that he wished himself hid in some by Corner,
where none might see him. But one of the Angels takes him by the Hand, and
leads him to the Altar, and there takes his Virginal Hand, and joins it with
the Hand of the Sacred Virgin: saying, By the order of God my Master, I give
you the Virgin of Virgins for your Spouse, and with the Title of Spouse I give
you the Name of Joseph. This favor he thus received; which the Virgin
afterward seconded by her frequent Visits, often putting her Dear Infant into
his Arms, as she was wont to do into Saint Joseph's; often calling him by the
indearing Name of Joseph, sometimes in his Cell, other times as he walked about
the House, which increased in his Heart, the most tender Love he before had for
the Blessed Virgin.

The seventh is, Joseph the Earl. who was so wonderfully Obstinate in the
Jewish Religion, as even to resist God himself; who wrought several Miracles by
means of the Holy Cross in his Presence: And our Savior also by several
Visions invited him to the true Faith, yet without any effect. But these
working nothing upon him, God visited him with very sharp Maladies, which also
for a long time did him no good; but their continuance by degrees softened his
Heart, and caused him to become a Christian, and so good a one too, that
Constantin to encourage and settle him in the True Faith, Created him an Earl:
But these Earthly Honors hindered him not from exercising true Humility, and
becoming a true Servant of God; whereby he attained to so high a Pitch of
Sanctity, as to be Canonized, and to receive the best and most lasting Title of
Honor of being a Saint in Heaven; whose Feast is kept the two and twentieth of
July.

The eighth is Joseph Hildegond, who Dyed the twentieth of April, the first
Woman that ever bore the Name of Joseph, which happened upon the following
account. Her Father after her Mothers Death, and the settling her Sister
Religious in a Monastery, resolved to visit the Holy places of Jerusalem, and
fearing lest in his absence any misfortune might happen to his Daughter, should
he leave her behind him, he having no other Child left to take care of but her,
causes her to take the Name of Joseph, and to take the Habit of a Man, the
better and more easily to accompany him in his Pilgramage. She submitted to her
Father's Pleasure, and they both of 'em parted from Cullen, their Native Town,
to begin their Pilgramage to Jerusalem; but her Father Dying by the way, leaves
poor Joseph behind him in very great perplexity what she should do; who still
continues her Journey, though she met with very troublesome adventures, but her
Constancy in God's Service, enabled her happily to overcome 'em all; but the
last adventure proved most happy to her; for passing for a Man, she entered
into a Convent of Monks, wherein she Lived Devoutly, and with great
Edification, none ever discovering her Pious deceit till after her Death, when
they went to wash and lay out her Corp's for Buryal.

The ninth was Ex P. Zach. Boverio. Annal Caput.
Joseph Matthew, the sixth Person of the Holy Order of Capucines, famous for
Sanctity and Miracles: For twice as he Traveled, the Day being far spent, he
having got no Alms to support himself and his Companion, or wherewith to
Relieve or Strengthen 'em to hold out their Joutney, a most ^eautiful Young Man
came to him and the first time gave him a white Loaf, and the second time two,
with these comfortable Words, Take Joseph these Alms which our Savior sends
you, and give him thanks for this Benefit.

The tenth is Father Joseph Anchieth of the SOCIETY of JESUS styled the Apostle
of Brasil, as Saint Xaverius is styled Apostle of the Indies. Who upon account
of the many Miracles he wrought, may also be styled: Moses of the said
SOCIETY, working 'em in all kinds, and upon all occasions. For as he traveled
in rain none fell upon him; passing throu' the Schorching Sun, he commanded the
Birds to fly in great numbers over his Head, to serve him for an Vmbrella or
Canopy, to defend him from the heat thereof. Nay he commanded Birds, Beasts and
even all the Elements, after such a manner, as if he had had a full Empire and
Dominion over all Creatures; as you may Read in his Life, which you will find
full of wonders.

Behold here ten Joseph's worthy to be honored, no less for their Virtue, than
out of Love to Saint Joseph, whose Name they bear; and who deserves that in
consideration of his worth, we should set a high esteem upon any one that has
any Relation to him, either by bearing his Name, or by Imitating his Virtues;
and therefore I shall end this Piece of Devotion I recommended to you, by
recounting what I received few Months ago from the Mouth of a very Faithful
Servant of God, a Religious Woman of Lions, and a great Devote of Saint
Joseph's. Who told me she was wont to Pray often, and to Recmmend her self to
the Glorious Joseph in Heaven; and she assured me, that she found very great
Help and Comfort from this Deyotion, for they by their Intercession obtained
for her, what she desired 'em to help her in.

The third particular Devotion we may show to Saint Joseph, is to take all
occasions to honor his Name. First, by giving the Name of Joseph in Baptism,
Confirmation, or Entrance into Religion, to any one who shall have any
Dependence upon us, or by taking it our selves in the two last occasions. We
have an Example of this Devotion, in out Blessed Ladies giving it to Blessed
Berman, which I just now related; and God be praised it is in this Age a very
frequent Devotion; for both seculars as well as Religious, covet to bear this
Name; and that with a great deal of reason; since Magicians are forced to own,
that their Sorceries have not that power upon any Infants that are Named
Joseph; as upon others. For the proof of which a Person of Honor, who had lost
all his Children by Witchcraft, a few Days after their Birth, being Councel'd
(by one who had once studied that wicked Art more than he ought to have done)
to give his next Child the Name of Joseph, assuring him to his own knowledge,
it was sufficient to prevent all Witchcraft; he followed his Priends Advice,
and found his Remedy very Powerful; for his next Child Lived to inherit both
his Honor and Estate.

Secondly, to Consecrate Churche^ and Chapels to the Honor of Saint Joseph,
and give his Name to Provinces and Religious Houses. In the Order of Saint
Teresa this Devotion is commonly practiced, and our Savior himself, gave the
Name of Joseph to the Monastery of Avila. Father Francis Canilec one of our
SOCIETY, no less renoun'd for his Virtue, than his Noble Birth, Founded the
House in Bell-Court at Lions, and gave it the Name of Joseph, to testify his
Affection to the Spouse of the Virgin Mother of God. And his Example gave
occasion several Years after to Father Cotton, to give the same Name to the
Church he there built; so that whatsoever we possessed in that place, might be
under the Protection of Saint Joseph.

Thirdly, By frequent pronouncing or repeating the Name of Joseph, as Gaspar
Bond, that good Minim was wont to do, of whom I have made mention, Page, 63.
This Devotion is very easy, if we do but take the the pleasure he took, in
pronouncing these three Holy Names of Jesus, Maria, Joseph.

Fourthly, To wear Rings in which the Name of Joseph is engraven, either by it
self, or with the other two Names, Jesus and Mary, and to encourage you to this
Devotion, when the great Plague caused a very great Destruction at Lions, I
knew many that wore such ingrav'd Rings for this Intention, that Saint Joseph
would protect them from the Infection, and with so great a success, that not so
much as one of the Family of those that wore them, or of the House where they
lodged, Were Infected; God giving so great a Blessing to this small Devotion.

Fifthly, To begin our chief Actions under the auspicious favor of his Name,
as the Governor of Kebeck did, at the Dedication of the Church of Kebeck in
new France 1637. before which he planted a Standard with a triple Crown and
Wreaths, with Scutcheons, in which were written in Capitals these three Names,
JESUS, MARIA, JOSEPH, which Standard was no sooner erected, but it was saluted
by the Soldiers with a Volly of Musket shot.

The fourth particular Devotion to Saint Joseph, is to imitate Saint Teresa's
Love, to her Good Father as she stilled him, by taking occasion to invite
others to become his Clients, and omitting nothing that may contribute to his
Honor and Glory; which is so grateful a Devotion to the Blessed Virgin also,
that she gave thanks to Saint Teresa for having contributed and incited Persons
to this Devotion toward her Spouse all over the Church, especially throu-out
all Europe. who^ John Gerson Chancelour of the University of Paris also
imitated; for what did he not do in this Point? He Composed an Office and Mass
for his Feast. He writ to several Bishops to induce them to order his Feast to
be Celebrated in their Bishoprics with Devotion and Solemnity, as a Feast of
Obligation, and by their own Examples to move the People to observe it. His
ordinary Conversations and Entertainments of those that Visited, him, were upon
this Subject. Moreover those who list themselves in the Confraternity of Saint
Joseph, and by their Piety and Examples move others to the like Devotion, do
hereby also Imitate Saint Teresa, and the Pious Ghancelour's Devotion toward
him.

The fifth, is frequently to take occasion to thank Saint Joseph for the Labor
and Pains he took for Jesus and Mary, and the Services he did for them; for how
is it possible. says Saint Teresa, to think upon what the Queen of Heaven and
her little Infant suffered upon Earth, without giving thanks to Saint Joseph
for his Charitable Assistance in their Sufferings. The thinking therefore of
those Passages of Charity he Exercised; as even the bearing JESUS in his Arms,
his helping his Spouse to dress him, his laying him in his Cradle, and such
like ordinary Actions as these, tho they seem but small and inconsiderable; yet
it is not to be imagined what tender Affections the consideration of them breeds
in our Hearts; and how they move us to Exercise greater Services to JESUS, and
also a Love to Saint Joseph, who hereby expressed his Affection to him.

The sixth Particular Devotion we may Exercise toward Saint Joseph, is to take
occasion when any Affairs of Importance happen, to address our seles to Saint
Joseph, and wholly commit them to his Care and Conduct. It Is also a good
Devotion, frequently to ask him Blessing, and to repose a Confidence in him as
in a Father; beseeching him to ^^^tain of his Son and Spouse, such an
Assistance, as we shall in all occasions stand in need of. Thus the Devour
Vrsulin Jean of the Angels, whom I have frequently mentioned, was wont to, do
before and after her Exorcismes, in which the suffered great agitation of Body
from the Devil: Wherefore to prepare her self the better to suffer, she
presented her before his Image, and begged his Blessing and Assistance, whereby
she found her self extremely fortified.

To these I may ad some other Devotions. I know some Persons are wont to
Exercise. Some in their necessities say a little Pair of Beads in his honor,
see the manner of saying them Page. 28. amongst the Devotions to this Saint.
Others never deny any thing asked them, in the Name and for the sake of Saint
Joseph; but I should be too tedious; should I set down all the Dovotions, that
the Affections of his Clients suggest to them; what I have already said, is
sufficient; for whatever may be done to other Saints, either by Prayers, Vows,
or any other Respects, that and much more may be done to him. But the more to
incite you to this, in the following Chapters, I will set down what Help and
Assistance he renders upon all occasions to his Clients both for Soul and Body,
who endeavor to express their Love and Devotion toward him, by such Practices
as I have here set down.

CHAP. X. Of the Help and Assistance that Saint Joseph gives to his Devout
Clients, toward their attaining Interior Perfection; and in what this
Perfection does Consist.
TO give you a satisfactory account of the care Saint Joseph takes to render
his Clients Interior and Spiritual Persons; I must first declare to you what
is meant by Interior Perfection, and in what this Spiritual and Interior Life
does consist; There being very few Persons who Solidly attend thereunto; and
therefore there is great need of so solid and Powerful an Assistance for the
obtaining it, as Saint Joseph gives his Devout Clients.

An Interior and Spiritual Life therefore, is that which minds nothing else
but Perfection; and which rests in the Virtuous Actions of the Soul, practicing
the inward Acts of all Virtues; namely of Faith, Hope, Charity, Religion,
Adoration, Thanksgiving, Humiliation, with a good, perfect and sincere
Intention, without any mixture of Carnal ends. And in the performance of all
Exterior and Corporal Actions, with an Interior Spirit and Presence of Mind;
Beholding God Present, and being carried with a tender Affection toward him,
whilst we perform the outward Action we are about.

This is what is called a Spiritual and Interior Life; and is so called
because it consists not in the Exterior or Corporal Action, but because it
Acts Interiourly in the bottom of the Soul, and within the Spirit or Mind only;
and it is this we must begin withal, and what is thus begun in Spirit, must
afterward pass to our Exterior Actions, which are but of very small Value, if
not accompanied with this Interior Life and Virtue; there being no comparison
between the inward and outward Actions; and if we work not by this Interior
Spirit and Purity of Intention, all the pains we take are lost; we labor much
and gain little or nothing, how great things soever in appearance we may
perform: But working after this manner we gain and heap up Everlasting
Treasures, with so much profit and advantage, that even the least Action
wonderfully advances and increases our Perfection, and gains a great degree of
Glory in Heaven. This caused Saint Mary Magdalen of Pazzi, after that the Glory
of Blessed Aloysius Gonzaga was revealed to her, to say he had gained that
Sublime Glory, by his Interior Actions; in which lys all the Perfection of the
Soul. So that this Interior, and this Spiritual Life, is one and the self same
thing.

But it is not so easy, as one may conceive, to enter into this Interior and
Inward Life, or to lead such a Spiritual Life as I speak of: Since to be much
recollected, and to enter into our selves, is the way to become a Perfect
Interior Man: And to do this you must cast off and wean your self from all
attention to Creatures, you must lay aside Interest, and Human Respects, such
as are, Gain, Honor, Flesh and Blood; you must give your self to Recollection
and Prayer, and hereby unite your self to God. To do this you must constantly
walk in the Presence of God, seek nothing but his Divine Will, Subdue your own
Passions, and then practice all sorts of Virtues, belonging to the Interior
Powers of your Soul. But all this is very hard to perform; and from hence it
follows, that very few Persons attain to it; and for this reason a great Master
of Spirit said very well; Perfectio est Paucorum.
Few are Perfect. But on the contrary the Imperfect and Extroverted Persons are
very many, who permit themselves to sink into the Passionate Affection of self
Love, give their Will the Reins, and yield to all that sense requires,
languishing in Sensuality, rather than practicing true Virtue, of whom Saint
Paul complains; All seek their own, or themselves, not JESUS or the things that
belong to him. But care must be taken, by those who list themselves Clients to
Saint Joseph, that they do not too soon and too easily believe themselves to
have obtained, this Interior and Spiritual Life; because they find some
sensible feelings of Devotion: Omnes quae sua sunt quaerunt non quae JESUS
CHRISTI ad Philip. 2.21.
But when they find their Passions, ill Habits and all their Imperfections
perfectly subdued, and that they are become Fervent and Constant in the
practice of all Virtues, then they may hope they have made some progress in
this Spiritual Life.

This Spiritual deceit was very well understood by Blessed Mary Magdalen of the
Vrsulins, as the handsome reply she made to a Sister, Inferior in Government,
when she came to make her Complaints to her.

This Sister coming to her and expressing how great a desire she had of the
Spiritual Advancement of the Monastery, and in order thereunto told her that
she had observed some Imperfections in certain of the Religious; which gave
Disedification. Telling her that such and such Persons were guilty of them. The
Superior took in good part this Advertisment she gave her, and with her wonted
Sweetness, promised in time to redress 'em, and provide a seasonable cure. But
this Religious being of the Number of those, who would Reform all at once, and
who thought her self far from wanting any such Reform, unsatisfi'd with this
Sweet Answer of her Superior, told her that a speedy Order ought to be taken,
and so efficacious a one, as might keep the Evil from spreading; and she knew
none better, than to devide the Monastery, and that all who were Stubborn and
of an Ill Choleric Humor, Sluggish in Riesing, Tepid, Contentious and
Imperfect, should go by themselves into another House; and the other part of
the Community, that is the Good, Fervent, Perfect and Affable, that had made
progress in Virtue, practiced Mortification, and were exact observers of
Religious Discipline, should remain in this.

The good Mother still Patiently gave ear to all she said, and sweetly asked
her, when she had ended her Discourse, which of these she designed to be in?
Amongst those that are Perfect, replied the Religious, that I may have no
trouble nor vexation of Mind, to hinder me in Virtue. And I, replied the
Superior, will accompany the less Perpect; first, because I am one of their
number, and also out of Compassion to them, that by having occasion of showing
Sweetness and Patience toward 'em, I may gain 'em, and have a greater subject
of Merit. When the Sister heard this admirable Reply from her Superior, she
was silenced, and saw how much she was deceived by thinking her self one of the
more Perfect; and moreover saw that there being not many such, the Monastery
being slenderly furnished with Subjects, there would scarce have been half a
dosen left in the whole House. For in effect in a Community of threescore
Religious, you will scarce find six true Interior Persons, and amongst a
hundred Religious Men, or five hundred Seculars, it would be hard to find ten
such as we speak of, who are eminent in this Interior Life, and make the
seeking after Perfection their chief Endeavor.

Prom whence we may gather, how great an advantage the Clients of of Saint
Joseph have, who by his Intercession obtain so great a Blessing, than which
nothing is so considerable, nothing harder to obtain, nor any thing that ought
more earnestly to be sought after. What a Comfort is it then, to have so
powerful an Assistant who sweetens all Difficulties, lending us his efficacious
Hand; whereby he manifests that God has left to his sole care, the bringing up
of all those, who efficaciously desire to become eminent in this hidden
Interior Life, as a Recompense of that Interior hidden Life he led himself at
Nazareth, with his Sacred Family; and that he is the Ruler and Governor of
those Souls, who desire to have their Virtue and Actions concealed to the
World, and only known to God. As a Young Man greatly inlighten'd by God,
testified to Father Se^rin of the SOCIETY of JESUS.

P. Severin In Relatione impressa.
This Farther accidentally meeting him, and finding him wonderfully replenished
with so many extraordinary Gifts and Graces of God, that in his Life he never
met with the like, and this after a very high manner; for though he had never
been Instructed, and only served a Priest till he was eighteen Years of Age;
yet he spoke most Spiritually, and not only like a Divine, but also like a
Saint of high Perfection. The Father proposed many Questions to him, and
amongst the test he asked him if he were Devout to Saint Joseph; to which he
made Answer, that for the six Years last past he had been his Protector, and
Directour; and affirmed that our Savior himself had given him Saint Joseph for
this end. Adding that he was the greatest of Saints after the Blessed Virgin;
that he had the Plenitude of the Holy Ghost with the Apostles; and that he was
the Master and Spiritual Directour of those Souls who addicted themselves to a
hidden Interior Life and Conversation with God.

To prove this Truth; it is only necessary to observe the assistance Saint
Joseph gives in this behalf, and the particular desire he has to assist and
help Retired and Interior Souls, and to become Master Directour and Protector
of those Souls that aim at this Hidden and Spiritual Life, as the following
passage will declare, which I had from the Mouth of a Religious Person, who
serv's God in a Monastery of the Seraphical Saint Francis's Order. Who as she
disposed her self to make the Spiritual Exercise, according to the advice I
gave her out of Philagie, she resolved to take a Saint for her Protector, to
assist her in so important an affair, and was inclined to choose Saint Francis,
as being Father and Patron of her Order; whilst her Thoughts were thus employed
an Interior trouble of Mind seized her, and raised a doubt whither or no this
choice were according to the Will of God. Whereupon she resolves to draw Lots
and to write the Name of Saint Joseph^ who came first to her Mind, with that of
Saint Francis, in little billets apart; and twice together the first she drew,
was Saint Joseph; which was sufficient to let her se^ 'twas God's Will to take
him for her Directour in this her Solitude.

Some time after God gave her a strong inpulse to make choice of some Saint,
that might for her Life time, take care of her Interior; hereupon she thought
of choosing some of those Saints, for whom, from her tender Years, she had had
a Devotion. Nevertheless it came into her Mind to put Saint Joseph amongst the
rest: After she had well mingled the Papers or Suffrages, Saint Joseph, as
before, twice fell to her Lot; however though 't was very pleasing to her, that
she had thus drawn him; yet she beg's of God, that she might most certainly
know his Divine Will, to permit her if it were his Divine Pleasure, to light
upon the same Lot the third time; wherefore mingling 'em again, the first that
came to her Hand was Saint Joseph, which success made her entirely acknowledge,
and receive him for her Spiritual Father, Protector, and faithful Directour,
of her Interior Religious Life.

But to give us still a greater incitement to choose him for our Master and
Directour in this Intenour Life. Not only Saint Teresa Councel'd all who
desired to profit in Prayer, and in this Spiritual kind of Interior Life, to
have recourse to Saint Joseph, and take him for their Master. But also his
Virgin Spouse the Mother of God, who knows his Power and Goodness, gave the
same Counsel to a Religious Person, who upon account of her Name and that of
her Order, had a Filial Affection for her, and a Confidence and Tender Devotion
to her. This Religious being very much Disquieted for some Temptations, she
suffered, especially in time of Prayer, they giving her a great deal of trouble
and disincouragement, upon account, that they made her think she should never
be able to treat with God with that Fervor, nor have so open and liberal a
Heart toward his Divine Majesty as she earnestly desired, and found necessary
perfectly to serve him. Hereupon she addresses her self to the Blessed Virgin
as to her tender Mother, and Affectionately tells her with a Filial Confidence,
that she must needs obtain for her this Liberty of Spirit, and Inspire and
Direct her what Saint she should choose to help her herein; and in whose
Assistance she might securely Confide; that she might express her Gratitude
during her whole Life, for obtaining by her Assistance so great a Benefit: She
had no sooner ended her Petition, but she obtained a grant thereof; for she
found that Saint Joseph was very lively presented to her Mind, and with a great
Interior Sweetness; and the Excellency and great Perfection of this Saint was
so clearly set before her, that she retained the idea thereof during her whole
Life; and ever after Confided in him, in all and for all, as in a Loving
Father; who immediately freed her from the pain she was in, not only for the
present, but for the future; and when at any time any of her former Temptations
returned, she found no disquiet at all, nor did she do any thing else, but
confidently cast her self into the tender Arms of her Dear Father, and
immediately she found her wonted calm and Peace of Mind, accompanied with a
most comfortable Union and Entertainment with God.

Having thus st own you, how willingly Saint Joseph takes upon him to help
Souls to lead this Spiritual and Interior Life, I shall declare to you the
manner how he does it, and the helps he gives toward the gaining this
Interior Perfection; by procuring those things that are required for it, and
conduce to it, such as are Prayer, Presence of God, Peace of the Mind, and the
Interior Practice of all sorts of Virtue.

As for Prayer, Saint Teresa assures us in her Life, that he who cannot find a
Master to teach him how to Pray, must choose Saint Joseph for his Guide and
Directour; and he will certainly find out the way to perform this Exercise well.

To Confirm this; I know two Persons who found great difficulty in Prayer, the
one by frequently recommending himself to Saint Joseph, the other by
undertaking the Recital of a few Prayers in his Honor, found themselves
assisted by him, even as soon as they had performed these Devotions; and they
have since by his Intercession obtained so great a facility in Mental Prayer,
that there is no greater Comfort or Consolation to them, than the Exercise
thereof.

A Religious Person of my acquaintance being newly Professed in a Holy Order,
desiring very earnestly, as she told me, the gift of quiet Prayer, and to be
freed from Distractions, found her self inwardly moved to have recourse to
this admirable Master; to whom she most readily adress'd her self, and did it
with such a Confidence in his help, that he obtained this gift for her. And she
moreover owns, that when she Meditates upon any Point of Saint Joseph's Virtues
and Perfections, there is nothing else to be thought on, but what ordinary
happens in the Meditations of the Blessed Trinity, the Blessed Sacrament, and
such like high Mysteries, Acts of Admiration, Submission, entering into her own
nothingness, and Contemplation of so high and sublime a greatness.

But the other favors she received of this Saint, by means of recommending her
self to him, are equal to these already related. When she go's to Bed she beg's
something she wants and receives it, she desires to be freed from Impure Dreams,
he obtains for her this Petition also. So happy a thing it is to have so
powerful a Master and so good a Father.

Now as to the Presence of God another thing conducing to this Interior Life,
it is this that he certainly obtains for his Children and Devout Clients.

I knew some who continually walked in the Presence of God, whereby they were
guided in all, even their least Actions, with very great Atention, yet without
the least let or hinde^ance to the exact performance of their Employments; so
that they seemed to me rather Angels than Men; and asking them how they
obtained this happiness, they assured me it was the effect of Saint Joseph's
Intercession; they having begged it of him, who was himself thirty Years
together in the continual Presence of the Word Incarnate; and found by
experience the good that proceeded from it; who is therefore ready to help
Recollected Souls, to a Participation of this incomparable Comfort, of being
Constantly in God's, sight, which influences and facilitates all their Actions.

But Saint Joseph's help is no les^ efficacious also, in obtaining Peace of
Mind, another necessary Disposition, for obtaining this Interiou^ Life; and
amongst many other Examples I could bring of my own knowledge, I will here
produce one. A certain Person of the number of those, who think extraordinary
Devotion and sublime Spirituality, consists in discoursing of such high Points;
as are both above their own, as well as Auditors reach, either to understand
or explicate; yet will venture at new Propositions, to make themselves admit'd
as Persons more than ordinarily enlightened by God. This Person came to a
Monastery, and at the Grate, broaches one of his own Fantastical Opinions for a
truth; that the Humanity of our Savior, was in all places, as well as his
Divinity; and that one might have the Presence of the one as well as of the
other. This new proposition wrought some trouble in those that were present,
especially in one of 'em, who recounted the passage to me, telling me she was
not able any longer to make her Prayer, but that this new and extravagant
Doctrine came into her Head, and so darkn'd her Soul, that she was able to do
nothing. Wherefore by my Direction, as soon as this Thought occurred and
troubled her, she recommended her self to Saint Joseph and begged him to
disperse this Clowd; who had scarce finished this her Petition, but her trouble
vanished, and he^ wonted Peace and Tranquillity of Mind returned after such a
manner, that she never more thought of that Discourse, and resolved never more
^o give ear to such Discourses of Novelties, which nothing but a vain curiosity
can lead us unto.

And as ^o the gaining all forts of Interior Virtues, required also for this
Spiritual and Interior Life; I need only tell you Saint Teresa's Thoughts. S.
Teresa in the 6. Chap. of her Life.
There Is no sort of Virtue, says she, which is not lodged as in it is Proper
Seat, in the Soul of those who serve Saint Joseph with a Faithful Heart, and
recommend themselves to his Prayers, for one may perceive in them in a little
time, incredible advancements. It Is but making trial therefore and having
recourse to him for these Ends expecting and assuring our selves of a Happy
Success by his Favorable Assistance. Thus Saint Te^^sa assures us of his
efficacious help.

CHAP. XI. Of the assistance Saint Joseph gives to Spiritual Maladies;
especially to those who are in a bad State of Soul.
THE Vision Saint Teresa had upon the Assumption of our Blessed Lady, whilst
she considered the Sins of her Past Life; is a proof of Saint Joseph's help, in
all our Spiritual Infirmities; At which time a Divine Transport seizing her
Soul, she saw it clothed with a very white and resplendent Robe. At first she
perceived not who put it on, but at last she saw the Mother of God on the one
side of her, and Saint. Joseph on the other, and understood that this was done
by them, to signify that at the same time her Soul was freed from all Sin and
Imperfection. Which proves how careful and desirous the Holy Spouse of Mary is,
to disperse and drive away all Spiritual Distempers, and restore Purity to our
Soul; so that in all attack's of any Violent Passion; in any dangerous
Temptation; and in our failings or falls into any Imperfection; there is no
better means to free our selves, and obtain a particular help and assistance,
than by calling upon Saint Joseph.

We see daily Examples of this by the great and wonderful change we find in the
Conversations of those, who are noted for their Devotion to this Saint; what
Victories do we perceive they have gained over their Passions? What
Mortifications do they not use to subdue their Senses? And with what Peace and
Tranquillity do they perform all this? I knew some who could not forbear Jesting
and Rallying, which serves for nothing but to wound and destroy Charity; others
who had strange aversions against those who suited not with their Temper and
Humor, they not being able to suffer so much as their sight, much less their
Conversation; others that were so Passionately carried away with Private and
Particular Affections, that they could neither Pray, Labor nor perform any of
their Duties; which is a Passion, if not cured, that is very Dangerous and
Pernicious to Purity. But to my great Joy and Comfort I ever found, all these
Passions vanish, after they had performed some Devotions to Saint Joseph for
this Intention: For this ill Habit of Sharp and Mortifying Words, of
Uncharitable and Malicious Thoughts, that caused these aversions, soon
Vanished; after application made to Saint Joseph for his Assistance: I knew a
Young Woman violently attacked with a Passion of Love, which she freed her
self from, by resolving in honor of Saint Joseph, to obstain for nine Days
from the Conversation of the Person she Loved; which the performing and
recommending her self every Day during that time to Saint Joseph, to beg his
help to overcome it, she was perfectly freed from this tormenting and
dangerous Spirit of Love; and that she might never more be troubled with the
like, she resolved during her whole Life, to say Daily Saint Joseph^^ Litany,
whereby she obtained the happy end she aimed at. but to p^^ her in mind that
this constant Devotion to Saint Joseph, was the means whereby she obtained th^^
Favor; when ever she neglected the ordinary time of performing it^ she found
some small return's of this Passion, which immediately vanished at it is
performance.

I knew also another Person, who by a violent attack of the same Passion, had
quite lost her Sleep; and was in great danger of loosing her wit's also; for
she was seized upon by Dispairing Thoughts and Doubts of her Perseverance in
Religion; who being Councel'd for nine Days together, to say the Beads of Saint
Joseph I before spoke of Page. 28. some of her Friends joining their Devotions
with here is to Saint Joseph for this end, at the end of the nine Days she found
her self perfectly cured.

There are many such like Favors which this great Saint obtains for his
Faithful Servants, that have recourse to him, by his obtaining for them a
Victory over those Passions, they find themselves seized withal, which often
times they have not Confidence to Discover, and which pass only between God and
themselves, these I have set down for encourageing all in the the like
circumstances, to have recourse to this Spiritual and Powerful Physician, the
great Saint Joseph.

Isador, in his fourth Book and ^enth Chapter, Recounts a very Remarkable
Example of a Gentleman of Venice, so Devoted to Saint Joseph, who Daily upon
his Knees he was wont to recite before his Image, several Devotions in his
Honor. This Person lying dangerously Sick, without thinking, as he should have
done, of a Penitent Confession; his cares being rather taken up about the
Health of his Body, than that of his Soul. Being in this condition, Saint
Joseph mindful of his past Devotions to him, shows himself a true Friend and
Father to his Soul; by Appearing to him, and warning him to make a good and
speedy Confession, and to prepare himself for Death, which was nearer him than
he imagined; he followed his Council, put himself in a good State, Received the
last Sacraments, and assisted by Saint Joseph in his last Agony, made a most
happy End, and Received hereby a Reward for his constant Devotions to this
Saint.

Another Example of later Date, I received from the Testimony of Persons most
worthy of Credit. A Father of the SOCIETY, being desired earnestly by some
Friends to say a Mass; and another of the same SOCIETY not Priest, to Offer
nine Communions in Honor of Saint Joseph; that by his powerful Intercession a
near Kins-Man of theirs might be drawn from a Wicked Licentious Life, in which
he had been so Miserably plunged for the space of five Years, that by no means
or Prayers they could use, they ^ou'd prevail with him to Live even like a Man
of Honor before Men, as became his Quality; much less like a Christian before
God, as his Sacred Character and Habit also he ^ore required. At the self same
time these Prayers were Offered for this Person, he fell grieviously Sick, as
his Relation had desired he might, in case no other means would reform him; and
so it fell out according to his wish; the Distemper increased to such an
Extremity, that ^he Received the last Sacraments, and then Miraculously
Recovered; with a Resolution hereafter to employ his time and all his
endeavors in a Work of great Importance to God's Glory. Which he Faithfully
performed, to the great Edification and Comfort of all that knew him; who were
witness of this great change wrought by Saint Joseph. This Conversion happened
at Paris.

Another no less strange Conversion than this happened at Lions, where a Young
Man of very good Condition, who had passed his Youth in the Fear of God, and
infine was resolved to quit the World, and entirely give himself to God's
Service, for the greater security of his Salvation. But this design not
pleasing his Parents, they endeavored to devert him from it, but very
unhappily; for he now seeing himself Frustrated of his design of executing his
good Desires, his former servour cooling by little and little, he fell from a
Remisness in his Devotions, to an entire neglect of them; at last he quite
loosed the Rains of his Passions, and gave himself up to all shameful
Liberties. Then he betakes himself to the War, where he exercises all the
Licentiousness of a Soldiers Life. So that there was no Mischief or Excess, in
which he was not the Ringleader. In the mean time his Father and Mother
Conscious of their great Fault, having a Sense of Piety and of God's Honor
and Glory, fell into unconsolable Regrets and Afflictions of Mind,
acknowledging their Error, and never giving over by Letters and Good Counsels,
both by them selves and Friends, to persuade him to quit his Irregularities;
but all in vain, his Heart being hardened and become obstinate. At length, as
their last Refuge, they have recourse to Saint Joseph, daily beseeching him to
reclaim and bring back this Prodigal Child, by taking him under his Protection.
The third day they had earnestly Offered these daily Devotions, the Young Man
returned home, cast himself at his Parents Feet, begged their Pardon for his
follies, began a new Life, and corresponded to his former Vocation, by entering
into Religion; in which God Rewarded him with Perseverance; all which Favors
he obtained by Saint Joseph's Intercession.

We have in our Church in Lions a Votive Picture of a Woman extremely afflicted
for the Debaucheries of her Husband, no endeavors for Reclaiming him
prevailing, she had Recourse to Saint Joseph, making a Vow to him, for the
obtaining her Husbands Conversion, which she had no sooner performed, but, her
Husbands Thoughts were quite changed, and he was never after Disloyal to his
Consort.

A Person of Worth and Confident Friend of mine, writ to me a little while ago,
knowing I had a Piece of Work in Hand in honor of Saint Joseph, assuring me,
that Saint Joseph had Delivered her from a most miserable slavery and thraldom
of Mind, which happened to her after the following manner. She having failed in
a matter of great Importance, even against a Vow made to God, could not bring
her self to a plain and clear Confession of her Fault; finding this great
difficulty and repugnance, she fully resolved to overcome so dangerous a
Bashfulness, and for this end that she might obtain Grace of God, to put her
Soul in a good State, for nine Days together she said the Hymn and Prayer of
Saint Joseph, Printed at the end of this Book; Page. 20. and upon the ninth
Day, she felt a strange Remorse for her Offense, found a sufficient Courage to
declare all, and to make a good Confession, which she performed with a very
great Sorrow, and a firm purpose of Amendment; and ever after resolved to carry
about her an Image of Saint Joseph, even in the Night, to preserve her from bad
Dreams, whereby she acknowledges to have Received very singular help and
Assistance.

CHAP. XII. The Miraculous Assistance which Saint Joseph giv's in Curing
Corporal Diseases, especially the Plague.
THE Examples I here set down, I have chosen out of many more; they being what
I was either an Eye Witness of, or was very well acquainted with the Persons
upon whom they were wrought, in this our City of Lions, where I now live; or
else are such as have irrefragable Authority to ^rove their Truth.

None can doubt of what Saint Te^sa her self recounts of the Miratulous Cures
he wrought upon her ^n her Youth; and in those very ^ong and lasting
Distempers. She ^ad after she was Religious. Who for eight Months together lost
the use of all her Limbs, suffered frequent Faintings, Soundings, Palpitations
of the Breast, all which were her ordinary Distempers, that held her for three
Years together; from all which she was Delivered by the Intercession of Saint
Joseph, to whom she was extremely Devoted, and whose Feast she kept every Year,
with very great Solemnity; she being upon it, suddenly freed from those long
Distempers, that had kept her for so long a time in her Bed, and able to rise
and walk about the House, as if she had never been Sick.

Sister Jane of the Angels being brought to Deaths Door, by a Mortal Plurisie;
there being, according to the Physicians Opinion, no hopes of her Recovery,
received it by Saint Joseph's Assistance; who Appeared to her, and laid his
Hand upon that side where the Pain was; and so Cured her: But this being a very
Miraculous Cure, and the circumstances very extraordinary. I cannot omit to
give you in short, a particular account of the chief Passages, leaving the rest
to a Printed Relation of it, approved by the Bishop of Poicters; and showing
how she Recovered by a most Miraculous Ointment, that the Saint applied: And
because the most satisfactory relation I think that can be made of it, is what
she Relates her self in a Letter to a Friend; I shall therefore put it down in
her own Words.

I fell into very violent Convulsion Fits, like one ready to give up the Ghost;
I found my self deprived of all Sense, yet my Judgment was still at liberty,
and as I lay in this sad Condition, there appeared to me a great and beautiful
Clow'd, in which on my right side, stood my Good Angel, of incomparable Beauty,
like a Youth of eighteen Years of Age, with fair deshevel'd Hair: This Youth
had in his right Hand a fair Wax flaming Taper; on the other side in the Clowd
was my Holy Father Saint Joseph, with a Countenance outshining the Sun in
Brightness, and a Majesty more than Human, resembling in Age, a Man of forty or
forty five Years Old, with a goodly Head of Hair, of a Chestnut color very long
and I per^eiv'd he looked upon one of the Assistants that stood by me, after a
very sweet manner, full of Amity and Affection. Then beholding me he laid his
Hand upon that side, where from the beginning was the principle Source if my
Distemper, he anointed me With Oil, or some such kind of Liquor, and the place
he anointed remained something moist: And at that same in^ient I found my self
perfectly re^ever'd, and told the standers by as much.

This is what she her self Recounts, now see what followed. she finding her
self very well, ris out of her Bed, which she had kept upon account of her
Fever, for fourteen Days together, occasioned by a formed Plurisie that gave
her extraordinary pain; she had been let Blood nine times in twelve Days space,
which caused such a Weakness and Feebleness, as she was scarce able to turn her
self in her Bed, none expecting any thing but Death. But Mr. Faveon her
Physician and a Protestant was most of all astonished, when entering into her
Chamber, not knowing any thing of the Miracle, he saw all the Company on their
Knees, the Sick Woman's bed empty and covered, and saw her, who but a little
before he had left as a Dying Person, riseing from her Knees, walking in her
Religious Habit about the Chamber without any help, and coming toward him with
a Smiling Countenance: To whom she recounted her Miraculous recovery, giveing
him also thanks for the Pains he had taken. This surprise was so sudden, that
he remaind for along time in a silent astonishment, not knowing what to say or
think, but in the end coming to himself, he acknowledged it to be a wonderful
change, but God says he is Omnipotent.

But another, yet greater Miracle soon followed this; of which this was partly
the occasion; for the rest of the Ointment, remaining upon a Linen Cloth,
wherewith the recovered Person wiped the Place Saint Joseph had Anointed, not
only retained a Sweet and Aromatic Smell, as I my self experienced, as this
Religious Person, so Miraculously Cured, past by Lions, but has also the power
of Working Miracles, which it likewise Communicates to Beads, Medals, Images
and Papers that have only touched this Miraculous Ointment, or the Cloth that
Wiped it off the Religious Persons Side.

The second Miracle wrought by the Ointment is as follows. Madame. de
Laubougemont, about eight Days after Sister Jean of the Angels had so
Miraculously Recovered, being big with Child, happened after the self same
manner to fall Sick of a Plurisy at Trevoux, which four of the ablest
Physicians of that place judged Incurable, and therefore thought it in vain to
apply any Remedies. But God Inspired both the Patient and her Husband to make
use of the Remedy, Saint Joseph had afforded the foresaid Religious; and
therefore they sent an Express to Loudun to desire they might make use of the
Cloth that had Wiped off the Heavenly Balsome, from the Place Saint Joseph had
Anointed. This being brought to the Sick Lady the very Smell of it is Divine
Perfume, filled her Soul with Joy, and the Application of it to her Right Side
perfectly recovered her, and a few hours after she was Delivered of a Child,
which the Doctors and Surgeons judged to have been a whole Month Dead in her
Body.

A Young Man called Claud Murner at Laubougemont, afflicted with an
extraordinary swelling in one of his Ribs, that reached quite to his Reins, and
caused a very violent Fever: So that all concluded he would either be a
Cripple as long as he lived, or else the breaking of the Ulser would occosion
his Death, such an abundance of humors being gathered together, and had caused
so great an inflammation and swelling, as gave him a very great deal of pain; so
that he could not lie in any other Posture in his Bed, but upon his Belly.
Which moved a great compassion in those that visited him, amongst which was one
of his Relations, a Father of the SOCIETY, from whom I received this account.
Who hearing the Doctors and Surgeons of Mascon conclude there was no hopes of
a Cure, caused the Youth with all Confidence to make a Vow to Saint Joseph: The
Father said Mass in honor of the same Saint, to procure his powerful
Intercession, and advised the Youth to Confess and Communicate. This done he
caused the Name of JESUS to be written and brought to the Sick Person who
swallowed down the Paper, it having touched the Heavenly Balm of Saint Joseph,
I before spoke of; they rubbed also the inflammation with a piece of the same
Paper. The same Day the Fever left him, his appetite returned, the swelling
wasted by degrees, and his strength recovered after such a manner, that within
three or four Days he found himself able to perform a journey of seven Leagues
on Hors-back, and this happened not only to these Persons I have Named, but to
several others both at Lions, Trevoux and Loudun were cured of very Desperate
Fevers by the same means.

Sister Margaret Rigaud a Professed Religious of the Monastery of Saint
Elizabeth at Lions, fell from a flore one story high, the fall caused such a
bruise in her Head, as made the Blood gush out of her Ears, and deprived her of
her Senses; they used all remedies, but nothing could ease her Head, which was
so bruised, that for several Months together she was not able so much as to
lean, or rest it even upon the softest Pillow. Her Mind was in no less pain,
being very much disquieted; caused by the weakness of her offended Brain; and
the Evil very much increasing, a Consult of Doctors and Surgeons were called,
who all concluded that her Head was to be opened by being Trapan'd, and unless
this Remedy were used, she would soon be deprived either of Life or at least of
her Senses. At the Patients request, who extremely apprehended this Violent
Operation, it is execution was deferred, and in the mean time the Superior of
the Monastery by God's Inspiration, took a resosution to apply another Remedy
which had it is effect: She ordered that a Communion for nine Days together,
should be Offered for the Recovery of this Religious, in honor of Saint
Joseph, thereby to obtain his Intercession; the Distemper notwithstanding
continued very Violent, and caused great and sharp pain to the Patient, during
eight Days, and the ninth Day being begun without an appearance of Health, some
of the Religious proposed that the Sick Person should make a Vow to Saint
Antoline, who was wont by her Intercession to Cure such kind of Distempers.
Another Religious hearing this, and being unwilling that any but Saint Joseph
should have the honor of this Cure, addresses her self to him, with a great
deal of Fervor begging of him that he would take to himself the honor of this
Cure, whose honor was now at stake, she being first recommended to him, and
that he would not permit another to deprive him of it; especially since he had
full power to effect it; and last of all she conjures him by those Eminent
Prerogatives of his being the reputed Father of JESUS, and Spouse of Mary, to
assist the Sick Person, Promising him if he did so, that in thanksgiving, she
would perform nine Mortifications, and say nine times his Prayer in his honor,
but whilst she Offered these Devotions in behalf of her Sick Sister, at the
expiring of the ninth Day, she was suddenly Cured, and so perfectly well, that
she could not contain her self from running about the House, and crying out a
Miracle a Miracle, I am quite recovered, I am perfectly well again, and so she
was indeed; for she not only received health of Body but of Soul also; enjoying
ever after a continual Peace and Repose of mind; a Love of Devotion and regular
Observances; whereas before, it was a Mortification to her to be at the Quire,
and Plainsong was insupportable to her; whereas now she is, the most Punctual
and Zealous observer of this Duty, and takes a most particular Satisfaction
therein, and in exactly following the Community in all other Regular
Observances: Having received so great Light from Saint Joseph as to see and
value Perfection, and whatever tends to it, even before her Corporal Health or
any other Satisfaction whatsoever; and therefore Honors him as her chief
Patron, since together with the Health of her Body, he bestowed upon her such
Interior Blessings, and Benefits to her Soul.

In the same Monastery about eight Years ago, a Religious newly Professed, was
taken with so violent an Headache, that she could take no rest at all, and
Prayer even became impossible to her to perform; hereupon her Superior, orders
her to Communicate nine Tuesdays following, in honor of Saint Joseph, to
obtain his Intercession, for her Delivery from this Violent Distemper; upon the
fourth Tuesday, which that Year happened to be the Feast of Saint Joseph, in
time of the Sermon, which was made in their Church in honor of Saint Joseph,
in which his Praises were set fourth, her Torments were so redubl'd, that she
was scarce able to hold up her Head, and scarce knew even where she was, or
what she did. But this pain as great as it was, was not able to make her
neglect her Duty and Devotion of hearing out the Sermon; nor hindered her
afterward from ^aying in the Church to Pray with ^he rest of the Religious,
though she ^on'd say, or think of nothing else ^et these two Words O Saint
Joseph! which from time to time she re^eated with incredible joy of Heart,
^ejoycing that he was such a Saint; which joy was attended with that ^f her
being delivered from her Headache, and that so entirely, that ^ever since she
has felt the least ^ain in her Head.

The Superior of the Congregation of the Word Incarnate, being ^fflicted for
ten Years together with ^ore Eyes, so that she could not Read; and a continual
Defluxion fell upon 'em, that so darkened her Sight, that the Occulists thought
she would never perfectly recover it; who no sooner had made a Vow to Saint
Joseph to say his Office for a Year together, ^ut she was immediately delivered
from this dimness of Sight.

How successful Saint Joseph is also in Curing his Clients defending 'em even
from the greatest of all Distempers the Plague, we may gather from his
defending the City of Avinion from being utterly Destroyed by the Plague, about
ten Years since, upon account of a So^emne Vow made to him of for ever
Celebrating his Feast, and this Example caused several at Lions to have
Recourse to him by their Prayers, and receive Succor from him also in time of
the Plague, of whom I shall relate two or three of the most remarkable Examples.

Mr. Augery an Advocate in the Parliament of Dauphine, being at Lions, and
understanding July the 15. 1638. that Theodor Augery his Son, seven Year, of
Age, was seized on by the Plague, a hard swelling appearing under his right
Arm, accompanied with a violent Fever, which were evident sign's of the
Plague, which the Day following very much increast, together with the Bubo or
Swelling; he made a Vow to God that if Saint Joseph by his Intercession would
procure his Sons Recovery, and preserve his Family from the Plague, he would
for nine Days together hear Mass at his Church, in his Honor, and offer Tapers
and wax Candels at his Altar, with a Votive Picture, as a lasting memory of
this Favor. In the mean time the Sick Youth being visited by the Plague
Surgeons, who gave him over for Dead, was taken out of the House, and carried
to Saint Laurence the Pesthouse, for fear of Infecting others; where he found
himself perfectly well, nor were any more of his Family Infected, which were
nine in number, whereupon he performed his Vow, and hung up a Picture at Saint
Joseph's Altar, in which he and his Wife and Children were all Painted on their
Knees, giving thanks to God for this Favor, obtained by the Intercession of
Saint Joseph, with the Story written at the bottom of the Picture, and signed
by himself.

Father Melchior of Faug a Religious of the SOCIETY of JESUS, being a Month ago
exposed to serve those who were in the Quarantin, or Pesthouse, having caught
the Plague, and lying in extremity of Death, all despatring of his Recovery,
after having been three Days in his Agony, a Friend of his of the same Order,
made a Vow, and invited the Sick Man to do the like, in case he recovered;
which was to Offer Nine Masses in the Church of Saint Joseph, in thanksgiving
for his Recovery. At the self same hour that the Vow was made, he Recovered
his Speech and found himself out of all danger.

Tevenet a good Old Man of Saint Laurence Danger, a Village near Lions,
Infected with the Plague, asked the Viccaire of the Place, whether there were
no means for his Recovery; who answered him that there was none, but by having
Recourse to Saint Joseph; and by making a Vow every Year to keep his Feast,
and to Confess and Communicate upon it; and for nine Days to say seven Paters
and Aves, and conclude them with JESUS, MARIA, JOSEPH. The Pious Old Man
immediately made the Vow, and at the same time found himself freed from the
Plague, wondering what was become of his Bubo's and Swellings, which all
Vanished upon a sudden.

Martin de Ba^^ a little Child of four Years of age, was struck with the Plague
as he was at play; all gave him for lost, and his Mother being in very great
Desolation and Affliction, was Councel'd to Recommend him to Saint Joseph,
which she immediately did in these Words, Saint Joseph to you I Recommend my
Child, about two hours after the Child's Father perceiving some signs of Death,
calls his Wife, who now giving him for Dead, made a kind of Pious Complaint,
saying Ah Saint Joseph! She comes to the Child and finds the Evil diminished,
who a little after call's to his Mother for some Meat, recovers his wonted
Countenance, rises from his Bed, and cry's out I am well, Saint Joseph has
Cured me. And the Morning following there was not the least sign of any
Disease, and he felt no more Weakness than if he had never been Sick; whom his
Parents carried to the Church of Saint Joseph to give thanks, where they hung
up a Votive Picture to testify not only the Child's, but the Fathers Delivery
from the Plague; who afterward was visited and Delivered also by Saint
Joseph's Intercession, from the same Evil; by the Application of some Cotton or
the Bubo or Swelling, that had touched the Ointment of Loudun, whereby Saint
Joseph Miraculously cured one of the Religious of that place, as I before
mentioned, whereby he was immediately cured.

Bennet Gontelle a Gardner liveing in a Garden, that joins to Saint Joseph's
Church, every Day lost one of his Family, consisting of seventeen Persons, out
of which one Daily fell sick and was led to the Pesthouse, where his Wife and
all his Children were already Dead of it; and he and one Servant only left
alive in the House, who Daily expeeted to follow the rest. I visiting him,
being his nex Neighbor in this sad Affliction, Councel'd him to make a Vow to
Saint Joseph, which he did, and I joined with him in it; promising him to Offer
several Masses and Communions in his Honor, if by his Intercession he would
obtain his and his Servants Preservation from the Plague, God hears his Prayers
and preserved 'em both from the Infection.

To Conclude this Catalogue o^ those, whom Saint Joseph assisted after a very
extraordinary manner, who were either cured when Infected or preserved from the
Infection; ^ must also add the following Relation: Those who were appointe^
Masters of Health in this City o^ Lions, appointed to take care of the
Infected, and to prevent the increase of the Infection, having after a
particular manner recommended themselves to Saint Joseph were all preserved
from it; notwithstanding for the discharge of their employment they were Daily
exposed to the danger of gaining the Infection. Wherefore they all came in a
Body to Saint Joseph's Church, in the Year 1638. to Confess and Communicate,
and to Offer Wax Candles at Saint Joseph's Altar, to express their Gratitude to
him, for so signal a favor, which by his Intercession he had obtained both for
them and for the whole Town.

CHAP. XIII. The Assistance which God gives upon all occasions by Saint
Joseph's Intercession.
WHOSOEVER desires to experience the effects of Saint Joseph's Intercession,
will find him a true Father; for he forsakes none in their necessities, but
assists those who have recourse to him in all their exigencies, especially, if
what they desire does any way conduce to God's Honor and Glory. Thus he
assisted Saint Teresa in the Foundation of the greatest part of her
Monasteries; as is set down at large in the History of her Order. And I know a
person who was in great pain about the success of an affair of importance,
whereupon he caused Mass to be said in honor of Saint Joseph, begged his
Intercession and it succeeded as well as be could wish it should have done.

Saint Joseph also has concern not only for Spiritual but even temporal
Affairs, and by his Intercession assists those that beg his help herein; as we
may see by the Example Saint Teresa relates of her self, who was in great pain
about some Debts she had contracted, in building the Monastery of Avila; not
knowing what course to take, for the payment of the Workmen: In this
perplexity Saint Joseph Appears to her, bids her confidently to agree with the
Workmen, and engage for all necessaries for the building, promising she should
not want Money to Defray the Expenses; and in effect she found he performed his
Promise, she receiving Moneys from such Persons, from whom she least of all
expected so great Charities, both to her own and other Persons Astonishment.

The Carthusians also experienced in the last Age, how powerful his
Intercession is with Almighty God; for fearing so great a Desolation, as the
failing of their Order would have been for want of Subjects, none presenting
themselves to undertake that sort of Life; a general Chapter held at their
great Charter House by Grenoble, to the end they might obtain Saint Joseph's
powerful intercession, in what was of the greatest concern for the support of
their Order, they made a Decree in General Chapter, in which they chose him for
the Patron and Advocate of their Order; and they ordained, that his Feast
should for the future not only be kept as a Feast of Obligation, throu'out
their whole Order, but with very great Solemnity; which singular Devotion of
theirs, was so favored and accepted by Saint Joseph; and his Intercession was
so Efficacious in the Court of Heaven, that in all Parts of the World where
they are established, they have never since wanted proper Subjects to increase
their Holy Order; and if any particular House at any time wants Subjects, it is
but addressing them selves to him, and they find his powerful Assistance; as
their House at Lions did some five Years ago, where by making a Vow that the
Priests should every Day make a Commemoration of him in their Mass, they have
never since wanted fit Subjects to Increase their Number.

But Saint Joseph not only brings Subjects to Religion, but even whole Nations
to the Catholic Church; and this was the reason that our Fathers gave the Name
of Joseph to the first Tarquois whom they Baptized: New France also owns him
for it is Patron, and for the Propa^atour of the Catholic Faith, in the Southern
Parts of America; and one of the chief Missions in those Parts is called The
Mission of Saint Joseph, and in the Year 1626. two hundred Families were
Baptized, and their Example moved six Neighboring Townships to unite
themselves to the True Faith, that they might also become partakers of those
Spiritual and Temporal Blessings, which Saint Joseph Visibly obtained for these
happy Converts.

Saint Joseph also favors Marryage, and unites the Hearts of Married Persons,
procuring them a True and Constant Conjugal Assection, ^s appears in the
Example of a very Rich Merchant of Lions, who had great Inclinations to Marry
with a Young Woman of quality; but she rejected all Propositions in that kind,
whereupon he addresses himself to Saint Joseph, Vow's the giveing an Alms of a
hundred Crowns in his Honor, if he would move her to hearken to his proposal
of Marriage. The Vow was no sooner made, but he gains her Consent, and the
Marriage is made up, and they lived a most happy Couple in a Constant Peace and
Union of Affections, which is one of the greatest Blessings in this Sacrament.

He assists Chaste Persons also and preserves them from all attempts, that the
Enemy makes to Destroy in them the admirable Virtue of Chastity; as appears in
an Example of a Pious Virgin, who being attacked in this Point, her Confessor
advises her to have recourse to Saint Joseph, and causes her to wear about her,
a Paper that had touched the Miraculous Ointment at Loudun, whereby she
presently found Help and Comfort. As another also did, who recommended her self
to the same Saint, promising to wear his Image for nine Days together. I had
this Relation from the Person her self, who received this benifit by Saint
Joseph's Intercession,

Saint Joseph also hears and helps Persons with Child, as appears by a Votive
Picture in the Church of Saint Joseph at Lions, on the side of his Altar; her
Child being Dead for some Days within her, she could not be delivered thereof.
Yet she no sooner begged his Assistance, but she was Delivered of it half
putrifi'd, with safety also of her Life, which all dispair'd of. The like
favor happened to a Woman at Trevoux who by a very hard Labor for three Days
together, was brought to the last extremity and danger of Death, in these
streights she thought of Recommending her self to Saint Joseph, and Purposed to
Confess and Communicate in his Honor, and to swallow a Paper that had touched
the Miraculous Ointment of Loudun, which she had no sooner done but she was
happily Delivered.

He favors also Married Prisons, giving them Children, one of the chief
Blessings of Marriage. as a Votive Picture in Saint Joseph's Church testifies,
of one who wanted this Blessing, who had no sooner begged his Intercession, but
within a Year she obtained it.

But to save the setting down many other Examples of Saint Joseph's powerful
Assistance; the Testimony of Saint Teresa, and of many others of his, Clyents,
whom I have heard avouch the same Truth, is that he refuses nothing that is
asked him, but provides a remedy in all necessities, which is a sufficient
motive to make us all have Recourse to him, with all confident assurance of our
obtaining our Petitions.

CHAP. XIV. To exhort all to have Recours to Saint Joseph and Confide in his
Powerful Protection.
WE ought Piously to believe, that the Mother of God has a knowledge from her
Son, of what is good for our Salvation; wherefore if we do but Consult her, and
desire her to advise us what is best for us to do to secure our Saltation, we
cannot doubt but she will tell us, Be Devout to Saint Joseph, love my Dear
Spouse Saint Joseph.

To prove this Assertion I will relate what Father Balthazar Alvares, a great
Clyent of hers, and Confessor to the great Devote Saint Teresa, affirm's. Who
being one Day Sick at Valedolid of a Violent burning Fevaer, one of the
Religious that helped him, showed him an Image of our Blessed Lady and Saint
Joseph; and put him in mind of Recommending himself to the Spouse of the
Blessed Virgin. You have Reason, says he, for the Mother of God has expressly
Commanded me to do so. And as afterward he owned, 'twas in the Holy Chapel of
Laurette where she gave him this Command. She gave the same advice also to
Saint Teresa, who was Father Balthazar's Penitent, which caused her to have so
great a Devotion to Saint Joseph and such a Confidence in him, that she styled
him her Father, and those that follow our Blessed Ladies advice in this
particular, may expect such a particular mark of her kindness and encouragement
upon this account as she showed S. Teresa.

It happend that at Avila upon the Feast of the Assumption, whilst Saint Teresa
was carrying on the Foundation of that Monastery, under the Name of Saint
Joseph, that one Day whilst she was at her Prayer, she saw our Blessed Lady
upon one side, and Saint Joseph on the other, showing her extraordinary
expressions of kindness; and amongst others, that which gave her an incredible
Consolation, was a familiar treatment our Blessed Lady used toward her,
taking her by the Hand, and giving her thank's for her Affection to her doar
Spouse; and for her particular Devotion toward him. After these thanks she
ptomis'd her all sorts of Assistance in her Pious design, and in confirmation
of her Affection, she made her a Present of a Collar or Chain of Gold, with a
Cross hung at it, set with Precious Stons so resplendent, as she never beheld
the like. This made Saint Teresa use her utmost endeavors to induce and
persuade all to a Devotion to her Glotious Patron. And without doubt were we so
happy as to Converse with the Saints now in Heaven, they would join with her in
persuading us to so Pious and Profitable a Work, by their own Example: For we
Read in Saint Gertrud's, Life that upon the Vigil of the Annunciation of our
Blessed Lady, she perceived all the Saints in Heaven bow their Heads in honor
of Saint Joseph, whilst his Name was Recited in the Quire, they looking upon
one another with signs of Joy and Congratulation, to see Saint Joseph Honored
upon Earth as they Honor him in Heaven.

Since therefore the Queen of Saints and Angels, and all the Saints and Angels
themselves, take such a Satisfaction in seeing Saint Joseph Honored, can we
think it proceeds from any other reason, than because they see this Honor done
Saint Joseph, highly pleasing to God, and most profitable to Man. Wherefore let
us upon this account renew our Pious Resolutions, of rendering him all Honor,
and of Honoring him abore all next to Jesus and Mary. Let us resolve to honor
him all the Days of our Lives, especially upon his Feast Days, since there is
none more Beloved, nor none more Worthy of our Love, than he, next to Jesus and
Mary; Who obliges his Lovers by all sorts of Favors, Wins their Devotions by
Miracles, especially in matters of Life and Death, both in Body and Soul, as
well for this Life as the next, and who most easily and favorably grants what
ever is asked, and procures us a free access to Jesus and Mary.

Wherefore it was a profitable and imitable invention of the Devour^ Henry,
Canon of Charters, to have Recourse to Saint Joseph; since as th^^ Learned
Gerson remarks, having him on his side, he was sure also of his Son and Spouses
Protection, Saint Joseph having their Power at his Disposal; and it is
sufficient to take him for our Protector, to have his and their help in all our
Necessities at the very first Petition, or ever without asking it, as appears
by the following Examples.

Saint Teresa making a Voyage with some of her Religious to Found Vies was gone
out of the right way, and so engaged with her Company among the Rocks, which
hung over a Brow of a Precipice, so that the Wagoner could not go either
forwards or backwards. Presently she go's to her wonted Refuge Saint Joseph,
ordering her Companions to join with her in begging the Protection of her Dear
Father, they had no sooner ^one so, but they saw an Old Man, who crv'd to them
with a loud Voice, Stand, for you will be lost if you go on. Wherefore they
asked him, what way shall we go then? That way, replied he, which seemed
impossible for a Wagon to go to; but on a sudden they found themselves
Miraculously put into it, at which time they endeavored to find out the the
Old Man to thank him, but in vain as S. Teresa foretold, who assured them 'twas
her good Father Saint Joseph, who had freed them from the great langer they
were in.

'Twas for this Reason that the Exorcist of Sister Jean of the Angels, Prioress
of the Vrsulins at Loudun, who knew his goodness and power, those him for his
Protector in this work: For the Devils complained of Saint Joseph, by whose
means they could not molest the Religious at her Devotions.

And to prove that Saint Joseph even helps without being asked, or expecting
our Prayers, the following passage that hapen'd at Lions in the Month of
September last past, 1638. does evidently prove; which I had from the Persons
own Mouth, and is as fallows.

Mr. Peter Evialvin a Rich Merchant, coming upon the eighth of September, our
Blessed Ladies Nativity, with a Friend of his to the Church of Saint Joseph,
after some Discourse with his Friend, who was a Client of Saint Joseph's, about
several Graces and Favors that Saint Joseph bestowed upon his Clients; and of
the Merits of this great Saint; conceived a great desire to take him for his
Advocate, and resolved to frequent his Church and to heat Mass in it the
Thursday and Friday following. The next Sunday, within the Octave, upon which
he put himself under Saint Joseph's Protection, as he walked in the Fields for
his divertisment, he met two Men unknown to him, one of which shot at him with
a Blunderbuss, charged with thirty hail-shot, all ente^'d his Body without
giving him any Mortal Wound, two or three stayed in his Belly, and one of them
was beat flat upon his forehead: His Wife and some Passengers coming to his
Assistance, found him upon the Ground, and thought him Dead; but being taken
up, the Wounded Man seeing himself all Bloody recommends himself to Saint
Joseph, to whom his Wife also makes a Vow; which succeeded so well, that her
Husband recovered his Hurts, within five Days and came to give thanks at Saint
Joseph's Church for this Preservation, being perfectly well, and there Offered
a Picture of this Miraculous escape, as a memory of his Gratitude.

Give me leave therefore to end this Treatise by joining my Petition with Saint
Teresa's and beseeching you if you will not Believe me yet, for the Love of God
that you would make trial how advantageous the Devotion to this great Saint is,
and how prosperous you will find it by Expetience: For I have not said all I
might have said, there being greater Advantages in Loving and being Devout to
Saint Joseph, than the most persuasive Panagerist, is able to Express. But
believe me who will, and let them that will Imitate me also, I for my Part am
resolved to Love Saint Joseph for Time and Eternity, not with a languishing but
flaming Love, thereby to redeem time lost, nor will I prefer any object under
God before him; for next after Jesus and Mary, Joseph shall have place in my
Affections, in which I will persever to my last Breath, which shall be employed
in pronouncing these Sacred Names Jesus, Maria, Joseph: Live Jesus, Mary and
Joseph. Amen.

FINIS.
DEVOTIONS TO S. JOSEPH SPOUSE to the B. V. Mary Mother of Jesus.



Printed by T. F. in the Year, 1700.

THE OFFICE OF S. Joseph.
At Mattins.
Jesus, Mary, Joseph.
verse. O Lord, open my Lips,

resp;. And my Mouth, shall declare thy Praise.

verse. O God incline unto my aid.

resp;. O Lord make have to help me.

verse. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

resp;. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without
end. Amen. Alleluia.

The Hymn.
JOSEPH, the Son of David, was esteemed,

Father of Jesus, who the World Redeemed.

The Virgin he espoused, In Heart conjoined,

And Guardian was of both By Heaven assigned.

Antiphon. All Hail, honor of the Patriarchs, Steward of the holy Church of
God, who did conserve the Bread of Life, and the Wheat of the Elect.

verse. O holy Joseph, Pray for us

resp;. That we may be made worthy of the Promises of CHRIST.

The Prayer.
ASsist us O Lord, we beseech thee, by the Merits of the Spouse of thy most
holy Mother, that what our possibility can not obtain, may be given us by his
Intercession: Who live and reignest with God the Father, in the unity of the
Holy Ghost, World without end. Amen.

At Prime.
Jesus, Mary, Joseph.
verse. O God incline unto my aid.

resp;. O Lord make have to help me.

verse. Glory be to the Father. etc. Alleluia.

The Hymn.
WHen thou the Virgin did^st with Child perceive, Perplexed in thought, thou her
design'dst to leave.

But in thy Sleep, an Angel with his Voice,

Advised thee not to fear, but to Rejoice.

Antiphon. All Hail, honor of, etc. as before, Page 4.

The Prayer.
ASsist us O Lord, we beseech thee, etc. as before, Page 5.

At the Third Hour.
Jesus, Mary, Joseph.
verse. O God incline unto my aid.

resp;. O Lord make have to help me.

verse. Glory be to the Father, etc. Alleluia.

The Hymn.
TO Bethlem, with the pregnant Virgin, he

Traveled to pay th'imposed Subsidy:

Where Christ was to be born, and in which place,

He shortly should his Infant Lord embrace.

Antiphon. All Hail, honor of, etc. as before, Page 4.

verse. O holy Joseph, Pray for us.

resp;. That we may be made worthy of the Promises of CHRIST.

The Prayer.
ASsist us O Lord, we beseech thee, etc. as before, Page 5.

At the Sixth Hour
Jesus, Mary, Joseph.
verse. O God incline unto my aid.

resp;. O Lord make have to help me.

verse. Glory be to the Father, etc. Alleluia.

The Hymn.
WHen cruel Herod th'Innocents oppressed,

By th'Angel warned, thou cal'dst thy Spouse from rest,

That, taking her celestial Babe, she might

With thee to Egypt make a speedy flight.

Antiphon. All Hail, honor of the, Patriarchs Steward of the Holy Church of
God, who did conserve the Bread of Life, and the Wheat of the Elect.

verse. O holy Joseph, Pray for us.

resp;. That we may be made worthy of the Promises of CHRIST.

The Prayer.
ASsist us O Lord we beseech thee, by the Merits of the Spouse of thy most Holy
Mother, that what our possibility cannot obtain, may be given us by his
Intercession: Who live and reignest with God the Father, in the unity of the
Holy Ghost, World without end. Amen.

At the Ninth Hour.
Jesus. Mary, Joseph.
verse. O God incline unto my, aid.

resp;. O Lord make have to help me.

verse. Glory be to the Father, etc. Alleluia.

The Hymn.
THY foes being Dead, thou made no longer stay;

But into Galilee did bring away,

Mother and Child, Heaven this advice did give,

And thou at Nazareth did humbly Live.

Antiphon. All Hail, honor of, etc. as before, Page 9.

verse. Pray for us, O holy Joseph.

resp;. That we may be made worthy of the Promises of CHRIST.

The Prayer.
ASsist us O Lord, we beseech thee, as before, Page 9.

At Even-Song.
Jesus, Mary, Joseph.
verse. O God incline unto my aid.

resp;. O Lord make have to help me.

verse. Glory be to the Father, etc. Alleluia.

The Hymn.
Blessed Jesus (of thine Eye the glorious Light)

At twelve Years old was lost, unto thy sight;

But finding him among the Doctors, thou

His Guardian was; to who^^ the Angels bow.

Antiphon. All Hail, honor of the, etc. as before, Page 9.

verse. Pray for us, O holy Joseph.

resp;. That we may be made worthy of the Promises of CHRIST.

The Prayer.
ASsist us O Lord we befeech thee, etc. as before. Page 9.

At Compline.
Jesus, Mary, Joseph.
verse. COnvert us, O God, our Savior.

resp;. And turn away thine anger from us.

verse. O God incline unto my ^id.

resp;. O Lord make have to help me.

verse. Glory be to the Father, etc. Alleluia.

The Hymn.
O Happy Man, to be embraced by,

CHRIST and the Virgin in Death's Agony:

That so thou might thy course directly bend,

To Limbo, having made a godly End.

Antiphon. All Hail, honor of the, etc. as before. Page 9.

verse. O holy Joseph, Pray for us.

resp;. That we may be made worthy of the Promises of CHRIST.

The Prayer.
ASsist us O Lord we beseech thee, etc. as before. Page 9.

The Commendation.
THese hours Canonical I have addressed,

To thee, Saint Joseph, from a Zealous Breast:

That, by thy Prayers, thou will obtain that I,

May live with thee, in Heaven Eternally. Amen.

THE LITANY OF S. JOSEPH.
LOrd have Mercy on us. Christ have Mercy on us. Lord have Mercy on us. Christ
Hear us. Christ graciously Hear us. O God the Father, Creator of the World,
have Mercy on us. O God the Son, Redeemer of Mankind, have Mercy on us. O God
the Holy Ghost, Perfecter of the Elect, have Mercy on us. O Sacred Trinity,
three Persons, and one God, have Mercy on us. Holy Mary, Queen of the whole
World. Pray for us. Saint Joseph, Spouse of the Blessed Virgin. Pray for us.
Saint Joseph, Sanctifi^d before Birth. Pray for us. Saint Joseph, Priviledg'd
and Preserved from all Mortal Sin. Pray for us. Saint Joseph, Confirmed in
Grace. Pray for us. Saint Joseph, Honor of the Patriarch's. Pray for us. Saint
Joseph, Replenished with unspeakable Benedictions. Pray for us. Saint Joseph,
Reputed Father of Jesus. Pray for us. Saint Joseph, Abounding with all the
Gifts of the Holy Ghost. Pray for us. Saint Joseph, Who Adored Jesus in the
Crib. Pray for us. Saint Joseph, An Angelical Man. Pray for us. Saint Joseph,
Who, by the admonition of thy good Angel, preserv'dst CHRIST from the fury of
Herod. Pray for us. Saint Joseph, Who (as a Principality of the first Hierarchy
of Angels) did govern Christ. Pray for us. Saint Joseph, who, as a Virtue,
were a Minister to CHRIST. Pray for us. Saint Joseph, Greater than the
Dominations, whom the King and Queen of Heaven Obeyed. Pray for us. Saint
Joseph, In whose Arms and Bosom, CHRIST, was seated, as in a Throne. Pray for
us. Saint Joseph, Who as a Cherubin, had care of the Virgin of the true
Paradise. Pray for us. Saint Joseph, a Seraphical Man. Pray for us. Saint
Joseph, A most high Contemplative Soul. Pray for us. Saint Joseph, Who dyedst
in CHRIST'S Arms. Pray for us. Saint Joseph, Who did hear Angelical Music.
Pray for us. Saint Joseph, Praecursor of CHRIST to the Holy Fathers in Limbo.
Pray for us. Saint Joseph, Who arose with CHRIST from the Dead. Pray for us.
Saint Joseph, Who in Body and Mind, did enjoy peculiar gifts of Glory. Pray for
us. Saint Joseph, Our dear Patron, and Defender. Pray for us. Lamb of God that
take away the Sins of the World, spare us, O Lord. Lamb of God, that take
away the Sins of the World, hear us, O Lord. Lamb of God, that take away the
Sins of the World, have mercy upon us. O Lord hear my Prayer: And let my
Supplication come to thee.
The Prayer.
ASsist us O, Lord we beseech thee etc. as before, Page 9.

THE HYMN In Honor of S. JOSEPH.
HAil holy Joseph, whose pure Mind,
Rendered thee fit to be designed,
The Husband of a most pure Bride,
To Royal David both allied.
Hail Guardian of God's Son on Earth,
Fore-to'ld of his stupendous Birth,
And other Heavenly Secrets, known
But to thy self and Spouse alone.
How often did thy happy Arms
Secure that Sacred Babe from Harms;
When with him, and thy Virgin-Wife,
Constrained to fly, to save thy Life!
With what unspeakable delight
Did thou enjoy the precious sight,
Of thy Redeemer, whose bright Eyes,
Did far outshine the Sun's up-rise!
How many times did thou embrace
The tender giver of all Grace,
And did as often fix a Kiss,
To fill the measure of thy Bliss?
To whom did God such joy's Impart,
As to thine own, and Spouse Heart?
Which did strange Comforts entertain,
When Jesus lost, was found again.
Most happy was thy House, to be
That Paradise, in which the Tree
Of Life did prosper, when the ground,
Where that first grew, could not be found.
How sweetened was thy daily pains,
While Jesus lived on thy gains!
Whereby the Food that ye did Eat,
Became all Sanctified Meat.
With thee he frequently did walk,
Calling thee Father in his talk;
And by his charming sweet Discourse,
Did Sorrows from thy Heart Divorce.
No Instruments, however Strung,
'Ere sounded like our Savior's Tongue;
Which thou heard'st hourly! Happy then
Were thou above the rest of Men.
And when, in age, resistless Death,
Gave summons to thy latest Breath,
Could thou more happiness devise,
Than to have Jesus close thine Eyes?
Great is thy glory sure above,
Whom CHRIST did so entirely love,
As on thy Person to bestow,
Such Privileges here below.
Then let us all, with one Beseech Saint Joseph to present,
Our wants to God; and for us Pray,
That serve our Lord we ever may. Amen.
The Prayer.
OMnipotent and Merciful Lord Jesus who did provide Saint Joseph, the just,
Son of David, for Spouse of Blessed Mary, thy Virgin Mother, and chose him for
thy Nursing-Father: Grant, we beseech thee, that by his Prayers and Merits, thy
Church may enjoy a perfect Peace, and so arrive at the consolation of thy
everlasting Vision. Throu' the same Lord Jesus, our Savior, who with the
Father and the Holy Ghost, lives and reigns one God, for ever and ever. Amen.

A VOTIVE OBLATION TO S. JOSEPH.To choose him for our Patron.
O Holy JOSEPH! Virgin-Spouse of the Virgin Mother of GOD; most glorious
Advocate of all such as are in danger, or in their last Agony; and most
faithful Protector of all the Servants of MARY your dearest Spouse: I. N.N. In
the Presence of JESUS and MARY, do from this moment choose you for my Lord and
Master, for my powerful Patron and Advocate, for the obtaining a most happy
Death: And I firmly Resolve and Purpose, never to forsake you; and never to say
or do, nor even to suffer any under my charge to say or do, any thing against
your Honor; receive me therefore for your constant Servant, and recommend me
to the constant Protection of MARY your dearest Spouse, and to the everlasting
Mercies of JESUS my Savior: Assist me in all the Actions of my whole Life, all
which I now offer to the greater and everlasting glory of JESUS and MARY, as
well as to your own. Never therefore forsake me, and whatsoever Grace you see
most necessary and profitable to me, obtain it for me now, and at the hour of
my Death, to which I now invite you, against the uncertain hour in which it
shall happen; that whatsoever now and then shall not be possible for me to
obtain, may by your Intercession be bestowed upon me by JESUS, the GOD the of
my Soul, Amen.

Ex Man: Tyrnaviensi.
THE BEADS OF S. JOSEPH.
UPON the great Beads, you recite the following Prayer which the Holy Church
makes use of in his Divine Office, and is as fallows.

The Prayer.

ASsist us O Lord, we beseech thee, by the Merits of the Spouse of thy most
Holy Mother, that what our possibility cannot obtain, may be given us by his
intercession: Who live and reignest with God the Father, in the unity of the
Holy Ghost, World without end. Amen.

Upon the lesser Beads, you say.
HOLY Joseph most Blessed of all Blessed Souls after JESUS and MARY, Pray for
us now and at the hour of our Death. Amen.

SEVEN PRAYERS OR DEVOTIONS Containing the seven Dolours and Joy's of Saint
Joseph.
The first Prayer. Containing the first Dolor and Joy of Saint Joseph.
O Most Chaste Spouse of the most Holy Mother of Jesus, by the grief you felt
when you perceived her your beloved Spouse with Child, being as yet Ignorant of
that Ineffable means God had made use of for this end, which caused you to
think of leaving her: And by the great Joy you had as soon as the Angel freed
you from the Suspicion, by declaring to you the Mystery of the Incarnation of
the Eternal Word; Pray for us, that we may endeavor to advance your honor and
worship throughout the whole World, to the end that by the assistance of God's
Grace, surmounting all troubles and asslictions of Mind in this Mortal Life, we
may in the next become the peaceful Mansion of the Holy Ghost for all Eternity,
Amen.

Our Father. Hail Mary.
The second Prayer. Containing the second Dolo^^ and Joy of Saint Joseph.
O Thrice happy Joseph Foster-Father of Jesus, by the great grief you (...) in
your Heart, when you contemplated this beloved Infa^^ lying in the Manger,
Weeping and Shivering with Cold. And by the great Joy you received in beholding
the Holy Angels adoring, and honoring h^^ with their Heavenly Musicl^^ and in
seeing the three King Prostrate before him and Offering him three rich Presents
Pray for us O great Saint, (...) the end that our Souls may b^^ come fit
Mangers to recei^^ our Savior into, and that (...) may lodge and keep him
always therein even to the last Moment of our Lives, that then we may find and
enjoy him in Heaven in the midst of his Everlasting Glory, Amen.

Our Father. Hail Mary.
The third Prayer. Containing the third Dolor and Joy of Saint Joseph.
O Great Joseph a Man according to God's own Heart, by the grief you felt at
the Circumcision of the tender Infant Jesus, shedding his most Precious Blood,
and by the Joy you had in giving him the Sweet Name of Jesus, according to the
Revelation which the Angel had made you; Pray for us to your Blessed Son, to
the end we may be washed and purified with his most Precious Blood, and always
bear his Name imprinted in our Hearts, Amen.

Our Father. Hail Mary.
The fourth Prayer. Containing the fourth Grief and Joy of Saint Joseph.
O Most Glorious Joseph and Prudent Servant of God, by the great Grief that
Wounded and Pierced your Afflicted Heart, when you heard by the Mouth of
Simeon, that the Soul of your dear Spouse was to be pierced with a Sword. And
by the joy you felt therein when you heard from the same Simeon that Jesus was
designed for the Resurrection and Salvation of Mankind; Pray for us to the end
that we may become such partakers of the Dolours of the Mother, that we may
afterward partake of the Joy and Happiness of her Beloved Son Jesus, Amen.

Our Father. Hail Mary.
The fifth Prayer. Containing the fifth Dolor and Joy of Saint Joseph.
O Pious Comforter of the Mother of God, by the Dolours and Anxieties you
underwent in your Flight into Egypt, and by the Joy you received when at your
entrance you saw the Idol's fall down upon the Earth as not being able to
suffer the Presence (...) your Divine Jesus, Pray for us I beseech you, that
flying the dangers of all Terrene and Inordinate Inclinations, we may one Day
rejoice by seeing all the black Idol's of our Sins Entirely cast down and
destroyed in our Souls, Amen.

Our Father. Hail Mary.
The sixth Prayer. Containing the sixth Dolor and Joy of Saint Joseph.
O Most Chaste and Vigilant Guardian of Mary the Virgin of Virgins, by the great
perplexity you were in, when called out of Egypt, you heard that Archilaus the
Son of Herod was made King, who was no less Cruel and Bloody than his Father;
and by the great Joy that possessed your Heart, when the Angel Commanded you not
to fear; because all were Dead that sought his Life. Pray for us that we may so
live in the midst of the Egypt of this Sinful World, that one Day we may
deserve to be called to the Celestial Juda, Amen.

Our Father. Hail Mary.
The seventh Prayer. Contaning the seventh Dolor and Joy of Saint Joseph.
O Merciful Joseph, who is able to conceive the sensible Sorrow and extreme
grief you felt, when you had lost the Child Jesus? Methinks I hear you say, O
unfortunate Man that I am what is become of my Beloved? Where is the Soul of my
Heart? And where shall I seek him? I will never Sleep or give my self any
Repose, till I find him; but presently without any loss of time run over all
parts of the Earth to find him, whom Heaven has pleased to commit to my Charge
and Custody; and without whom I cannot live but in extreme Grief and
Affliction: And on the other fide who is able to express the Joy and extreme
Satisfaction wherewith your Heart was replenished, when you found him in the
midst of Doctors. We humbly beseech you by this unconceivable Sadness and Joy,
that we may never loose our most amiable Jesus, or if ever we be so unhappy as
to loose him, make us feel such a true and lively sorrow as you did, that we
may so carefully seek him, as that we may soon find him, with so great and
sensible a Comfort; that our sole care afterward may be always to conserve
him, without ever loosing him any more; Amen.

Our Father. Hail Mary.
EIGHT MEDITATIONS FOR The Octave of Saint JOSEPH.
I. Meditation. Of the Sanctification, Birth and Name of Saint Joseph.
Preparatory Prayer.
TO beg Light of God to understand his particular Providence toward Saint
Joseph, and those special Prerogatives he bestowed upon him before and at his
Birth, as also at his Circumcision.

I. Prelude.
Imagine your self at Nazareth, where Saint Joseph was born, and there behold
the difference wherewith Men and Angels regarded this Royal Infant. Harken to
the sweet Name of Joseph given him at his Circumcision; consider the esteem the
Angels had both of this Holy Infant, and of the sweet Name of Joseph that was
given him at his Circumcision.

II. Prelude.
BEG Grace to be Inflamed with Love and Devotion to this sweet Infant, and the
Holy Name of Joseph.

I. Point. Consider that Saint Joseph, as Gerson solidly proves was Sanctified
before his Birth: for if the Prophet Jeremy, Saint John Baptist and other
Saints received this favor, upon account of those Functions, they were
afterward to Exercise; The Office designed for Saint Joseph, of being Spouse
to the Mother, and Foster-Father and Governor to the Son of God, far exceeded
theirs, and therefore no less required, the same privileges they had. Admire
the Purity of this holy Infant, give thanks to God for this favor of his early
Sanctification, congratulate with him for it, and for those high Dignities, for
which God designed him, that moved him to give it. And beg by the Intercession
of Saint Joseph, such a true Sanctification as may render you pleasing to his
Divine Majesty, and his Celestial Court; whose love is as much to be valued, as
the esteem of the World is to be contemned.

II. Point. Consider this holy Infant thus dear to God, linally Descended from
David, heir to so many Kings and Royal Prophets, is Born in a Poor house, of
Poor but Noble Parents, without any of those marks of honor and grea^ness,
which are common to the Birth of Princes. See the difference between God's and
the World's esteem of Riches and Honor; consider how be treats his true
Favorits; behold how the Angels admire what the World takes no notice of Praise
their Wisdom and con^emn it is Folly. The Glory of this Royal Infant is from
within, hid from the Eyes of the World, but seen by God and his Angels. O the
Beauty and Riches of Poverty? Which Worldlings perceive not. O Royal and Holy
Infant, obtain for me such an inflamed Love of Poverty, such a generous
Humility as you had, that I may esteem no honor greater than to be contemned
by the World for God's Sake; or than the being loved and esteemed by him and
his Celestial Court.

III. Point. Consider the signification of the Name that was given him at his
Circumcision; either by Divine Inspiration, or which is more probable by the
Revelation of a^ Angel as Saint John Baptist's was Joseph signifies Increase,
an^ what an Increase in all kinds, did he receive with it? All son^ of such
Heavenly Graces, a^sorts of Privileges and Prerogatives, as the Dignity of hi^
Person and Employments justly required. The Name of the great Patriarch Joseph,
who was a Figure of this, was given him upon account of his Angelical Chastity,
and the care he was to take in Feeding, Protecting, and Preserving the Elect
Children of God in Egypt. But our Joseph of whom the other was a Type, was to
be the Virgin-Spouse of the Virgin Mother of God, Protector and Preserver both
of her and her Son, nay even of the Son of God himself in Egypt. O Name above
all Names ^ext to JESUS and MARY, ^^t it be a constant Comfort to any Heart,
and from the abundance of Heart, let my Mouth frequently repeat the sweet ^ame
of Joseph, joining it to ^^ose Delicious Names of JESUS and MARY.

The Colloquie.
O most Holy and Royal Infant, O most Blessed Joseph, be to me a Joseph, that
is, ^otain for me such Increase of sanctity, such a Love of Poverty and
Angelical Purity, with such (...) true Humility, as rendered you ^^uly great,
and such a Devotion to your dear self, that the ^ery pronouncing your Blessed
Name may creat such a Joy and Comfort in my Heart, as may move you to interceed
for, and consequently to obtain an^ Increase of all Virtues in it.

II. MEDITATION. Of the humble Vocation and Sanctity of Saint Joseph.
Preparatory Prayer.
TO beg of God to let us set why Saint Joseph followed so humble a Profession,
as that of a Carpenter, and after what manner he practiced it, Increasing at
the same time in all sorts of Perfection.

I. Prelude.
Imagine your self at Nazareth beholding Saint Joseph, a most comely Youth of
eighteen Years of age, learning and exercising the laborious and humble trade
of a Carpenter.

II. Prelude.
BEG of God to teach you by S. Joseph's Example, how Profitably to join an
Humble, Active and Passive Life, that thereby the less you are esteemed upon
Earth by Creatures, the more you may be Esteemed and Loved by your Creator in
Heaven.

I. Point. Consider first that Providence ordained, that Saint Joseph, though of
a Royal extract, should learn and exercise so mean a Trade, as that of a
Carpenter: first to avoid Idleness so vety dangerous, to the Virginal Purity he
had Vowed to him. Secondly, that the Humble exercises of this Trade, might
balance the Dignities he designed to bestow upon him, of being Spouse to the
Mother, and Foster Father to the Son of God: That no Ostentation or Vanity
might take any place in his Humble Heart. Thirdly, that by the Labor of his
Hands and Sweat of his Brows, he might gain wherewithal to Exercise the
greatest of Charities; by nourishing and maintaining the Mother and Son of God?
O wonderful Providence! O mark of an extraordinary Love! I bless and return a
Million of thanks to thy Divine Majesty, for this thy Love to Saint Joseph: And
I Congratulate with thee my beloved Saint Joseph; for being so great a Favorit
of Heaven: Vouchsafe to obtain for me by thy Intercession, such a Detestation
of Idleness, such a Love of Labor and Chastity it is Companion, such a Love of
JESUS and MARY, as may move me to show it to every one, even the least that
wants my assistance as you did, and I would wish to have done to themselves,
since they take the same as kindly as if done to them: He having assured us:
Quiquid uni ex minimis meis fesistis mihi feustis.
What we do to the least of his, he takes it as done to himself. O admirable
Exercise of Charity! O wonderful occasion of expressing such a Love to JESUS
and MARY, as Saint Joseph practiced!

II. Point. Consider what moved Saint Joseph to Exercise this calling, nothing
else but his Humility and desire of expressing his Love by these Occasions of
labors and Sufferings, that accompany so painful a Trade. O most Humble and
Mortified Joseph, obtain for me such a Love of Humility and Mortification, as
may procure that Virtue of Chastity you so excelled in, that I may truly Love
and faithfully practice this Virtue of Chastity as you did.

III. Point. Consider his laborious and painful Life, was accompanied with so
great Piety and Purity of Intention, doing all purely to please God, as
rendered him so great a Saint, that he deserved to be Canonized by the Holy
Ghost himself, who styles him Just, that is, Replenished with all Virtues, and
free from all Imperfections; verifiing hereby his Name of Joseph, or Increase,
by such a daily Increase in all kind of Perfection, as moved God to bestow upon
him even the highest of Dignities, of being Spouse to the Mother, and
Foster-Father to the Son of God. O wonderful intention that raises such
ordinary Actions to so high a Perfection! O admirable Perfection that rendered
Saint Joseph worthy in God's opinion of such great Imploments! Blessed be thy
Divine Majesty for bestowing 'em and thus Rewarding so great a Sanctity,
whereby thou did render hi^ in Dignity next to JESUS and MARY. I
Congratulate with you O great Saint Joseph, for you^ faithful compliance with
the Divine assistance, obtain for m^ a Love of all Humble Actions, and teach me
your Art of Joining their exterior practice, with such an interior and purt
Intention, as may render me pleasing to God, and a worthy Client of your dear
self.

The Colloquie.
O Infinite goodness, always preventing us with your special Graces and
Favors, grant me such a perfect Conformity to whatsoever your Providence shall
ordain, and such a constant compliance with your Grace, with such a Purity of
In^ention, in all my Actions by the powerful Intercession of Saint Joseph, as
may obtain for me your Sanctifying Grace and Love in this Life, and the Eternal
Enjoyment, of your Divine self in the most Happy Company of JESUS MARY and
JOSEPH in the next.

III. MEDITATION. Of the Marriage of Saint Joseph.
Preparatory Prayer.
TO beg Grace of God to understand those many admirable Lessons of Perfection,
that are taught us in this Mystery.

I. Prelude.
Imagine a great assembly of the chief Batchelours of the Tribe of Juda, whom
the High Priest had summoned together, to choose out of 'em a Husband for the
Blessed Virgin Mary; and behold amongst 'em Saint Joseph, a most Beautiful and
Comely Man of forty years of Age, with a Wan in his Hand from which green Bud's
sprouted forth, and a Dove over his Head, which were the marks that God had
given the High Priest, when he Consulted the Propitiatory, to know which of 'em
was to be the Spouse of the Blessed Virgin. Behold the Ptiest also giving this
most Beautiful and Modest Virgin to Saint Joseph, and he Espousing her by
putting a Ring on her Finger and Veiling her Head with his Cloak, in token of
making her pertaker of all his Goods, and of his taking her into his Care and
Protection.

II. Prelude.
BEG Grace to understand an^ draw Fruit from those extraordinary Mysteries that
appear in this wonderful Marriage.

I. Point. Consider the Budding of the Wan in his Hand and the Dove over his
Head, i^ a token of Fruitful Purity, and a mark of that Love o^ Chastity, that
they both ha^ Vowed to God. Consider also how wonderfully God rewatded this
Vow, by choosing the one to be Mother, the other to be her Spouse and
Foster-Father of his only Begotten Son. See the difference between God's and
the World's choice, he chooses a Poor Humble Tradesman to be Husband to his
Mother, and for his Foster-Father and Governor; not any Rich or Great Person,
as Worldlings ^on'd have done: Oh how different are God's and the Worlds
^entiments, as God himself de^ares. Non enim cogitationes meae co^itationes
Vestrae, Nec Viae Ves^rae viae meae dicit Dominus: Quia ^cut exaltantur Caeli a
Terra sic exaltatae sunt viae meae a vijs ves^ris and cogitationes meae a
cogitationibus vestris. Isaiae. 55.8.9.
My Thoughts are not ^ke yours; nor my Ways, the same ^ith your Ways, For as
far as ^e Heavens are exalted above ^e Earth so far are my Thoughts and Ways
Exalted above yours. The World beheld Saint Joseph as a poor Contemptible
Tradesman, Heaven besides his Royal Extraction, beheld him Rich in Virtue, saw
his admirable Chastity and Humility, which rendered him worthy to be choosen a
happy and fit Consort for the Queen of Angels, and Mother of God. O Thrice
happy Marriage! O Chaste Espousals! O most Happy pair! I Congratulate with you
both, and Bless the Divine Goodness for this Angelical Union, and that joent
happiness you both obtained thereby: Obtain for: me such a Love and Practice of
Purity, with such an Humility as may win God's Heart, and move him as your
Purity and Humility did, to a Love and Tenderness for me.

II. Point. Consider what moved the Divine Providence to effect this
extraordimary Marriage: First he ordained it for the Comfort and Assistance of
the Blessed Virgin, that Saint Joseph might take care of her, and protect both
her and her Son. Secondly, for the defense of both hers and her Sons Honor;
that she might not be accused for an Adultress, nor he for being Illegittimate
or Unlawfully Born. Thirdly, that he might be a Faithful and Credible Witness
of the Divine Incarnatton of the Son of God, which none could Testify like
himself. Fourthly, that this Marriage might augment the esteem of Chastity,
which before was Contemned by the World; and that their Example might make
others Vow it as a thing more perfect than Marriage, and give Example to
Married Persons to Practice it, and hereby produce as many Children as there
should be Lovers and Professors of Chastity in Marriage. Wherefore Alexins,
Eleazar, Julian, Henry the Emperor and Edward King of England, with their
Spouses may be styled Children of Joseph and Mary. O Divine Motives! Oh what
care has God of his Servants! Oh Angelical Chastity! How little art thou
esteemed by Men, and how art thou loved and admired by God and Angels? Oh Chaste
and Fruitful Marriage, that has brought forth so many Virgins! O Virgin Mother
of JESUS, O Virginal Spouse of the Virgin Mary, inspire us with these Chaste
desires, enable us to make and practice, such Nuptial and Virginal Contracts as
these, that may render us capable of accompanying and following the Chaste lamb
your Son JESUS for all Eternity.

III. Point. Consider also God's infinite Wisdom by uniting in Marriage two
Persons so alike in all things, excepting their Age (he being forty she only
fourteen Years old) which disparity was very fit upon account of those Reasons
mentioned in the foregoing Point. For first, they were both of the Royal Line
of David: Secondly, they were both Sanctified before their Birth. Thirdly, they
were both signal Lovers of Chastity, they being the first that knew it is Merit
and Vowed it. Fourthly, they both so excelled in Sanctity and Humility, that
she who styled her self a humble Handmaid, or Slave, was declared by an Angel
full of Grace; and he who endeavored to cover his Sanctity by his humble Trade
and Profession, is Canonized by the Holy Ghost, who pronounced him Just.

The Colloquie.
O Matchless and most happy pair, to whose Care and Protection can I better
commit my self than to yours, to whom God committed the Care and Protection of
his only Son and of his Virgin Mother? O Virgin Mother of God accept me
therefore for your Child, since your Son has recommended me to you as such: O
Virgin Father, to whom God committed the Care of his only Son and of his Virgin
Mother, accept, own and protect me as your and her Child; and teach me to show
my Love to you both, by a Love of Chastity of which you have given me so
admirable an Example, in these your Angelical Espousals; and a Love of Humility
and all other Virtues, by your Constant Practice of 'em upon all occasions.

IV. MEDITATION. Of Saint Joseph's Journey with the Blessed Virgin to Visit St.
Elisabeth.
Prepratory Prayer.
TO beg Grace to understand the Virtues Exercised by the Blessed Virgin and
Saint Joseph in this Journey, and to profit by their admirable Examples.

I. Prelude.
Imagine your self, bearing our Blessed Lady and Saint Joseph, company in their
troublesome Winter Journey of forty miles, over steep Mountains, to Visit Saint
Elizabeth. Hearken to their Pious Discourses in their Journey, and behold also
what past at their meeting Saint Elizabeth; and in their three Months abode in
her House. Behold also Saint Joseph's perplexity when he perceived our Blessed
Lady with Child.

II. Prelude.
BEG Grace to understand their Charity, their Patient Sufferings, their
Humility. And Saint Joseph's Resignation, together with his most Prudent and
Meek Carriage in the greatest of Trials.

I. Point. Consider that about four Months after Saint Joseph's Espousal with
the Blessed Virgin, and a few Days after the Angel Gabriel had declared to her,
unknown to Saint Joseph, the Mystery of the Incarnation, and that her Cosen
Elizabeth was six Months gone with Child: The Blessed Virgin desired leave of
Saint Joseph that she might visit her; but he out of the tender affection he
had for his Spouse, would not permit her to go alone, but would accompany her
himself, O Charitable Visit? O Tender Affection, that renders the hardest
things Delightful? O Amiable Virgin thus dear to your Spouse, what a Journey
did your Charity to your Cosen move you to undertake: O great Saint Joseph what
pains did the care and tenderness you had for your Spouse, move you Joyfully to
suffer: O Holy Joseph obtain for me by your powerful Intercession this ardent
Charity, that even renders the hardest and most troublesome things easy and
even delightful.

II, Point. Consider what Joy and what Congratulations past at the meeting of
these Relations? what sincere expressions of Kindness past between Saint Joseph
and Saint Zachary. And what extraordinary expressions thereof past also between
our Blessed Lady and Saint Elizabeth. Who Prophetically confirmed to her what
the Angel had revealed, by calling her Matter Domini.
Mother of our Lord. Consider also with what Affection and Humility our Blessed
Lady and Saint Joseph, assisted Saint Elizabeth and Saint Zachary, in all kinds
of services both before and at the Birth of Saint John Baptist, consider also
what Pious conversations past between these Pious Persons, during the three
Months they staid there. O Angelical and Heavenly conversation! O Wonderful
practicers, of Charity and Humility, obtain for me by your Intercession those
two Virtues you so excelled in.

III. Point. Consider the great trial Almighty God gave Saint Joseph, when in
his return home he found our Blessed Lady with Child. O what a Combat of
different Passions did this knowledge endeavor to raise in his Peaceful Heart?
The experience he had of her Virtue would not permit him to Judge hardly of
her, nor the tender Affection he had for her, suffer him to act with Severity
against her; but ^n the other side the Zeal he had ^or God's Law, the chief
object ^f his Love, required he should ^^ut her away as an Adultress, ^et on
the other side her con^ant Obedience to the Law and ^ractice thereof, would not
per^it him rashly to accuse her ^ereof, and to quit the greatest Comfort of his
Life by forsak^ng her; yet to satisfy God's Command, without divulging ^er
crime in appearance, at his return home, he purposed a pri^ate Divorse, being
unwilling to ^ublish what perhaps was no ^rime in her, for as Saint Jerome
^ously surmizes, the thought ^f the Promised Messiah who was to be Born of a
Virgin occurred to him, and her Virtue made him think she might (...) designed
for his Mother, (...) this thought made him also th^^ himself unworthy of her
Conversation, and therefore to thi^^ of retiring himself from (...) Sanctuary;
judging himself (...) deserving of that Relation he (...) contracted with her.
O ra^ing Perplexity! O interior Ma^tyrdom! O cruel Combat between the Love of
God and (...) of his Spouse! O how does Go^ try his best Servants? And wi^^
what Silence and Humility do the Blessed Virgin as well as (...) bear this
Cross? But how M^raculously does God Comfort those that thus bear Afflictions
He sends Divine when Huma^ helps cannot afford any? For behold God sends the
Angel G^^briel to bid him take his Wi^^ who had Conceived of the Holy Ghost,
and should bring forth a Son, to whom he should give the Name of JESUS, who
should save his People: O Joyful tyding! Whereby Joseph is not only freed from
all Perplexity and Discomfort, but a new dignity is given him, by being
Declared Godfather to the Son of God. O stupendous Dignity! O just Reward of
such Pious Sufferings! Consider also what mutual Joy did the reciting their
past feelings one to another occasion, after these most Joyful Tidings.

The Colloquie.
O Infinite Goodness, that thus triest and rewardest even thy best Servants,
let all Saints and Angels praise thee, for this thy Bounty to thy dearest
Mother, and her dearest Spouse; and cry out with Saint Paul, Non sunt Condignae
Passiones hujus temporis ad futuram gloriam quae revelabitur in nobis. Romans
8.18.
That all the Afflictions and Iribulations of this World, are nothing in
comparison of the Glory they will Cloth us withal in the next. Grant us O
God, that with Patience, Courage and Conformity we may suffer those thou shall
vouchafe to send us, as they did, rather to please thee, than for any other
Reward that can be hoped for. O Pious Joseph, O Amiable Virgin, Interceed to
obtain this Favor for us, by your powerful Intercessions in all perplexing
Difficulties.

V. MEDITATION. Of the Virtues Saint Joseph exercised at the Birth,
Circumcision and Presentation of the Son of God.
Prepratory Prayer.
BEG Grace of God profitably to consider the Examples Saint Joseph gives us in
these three Mysteries.

I. Prelude.
IMAGINE Saint Joseph after his tiresome Winter Journey of thirty Miles with our
Blessed Lady, who had now almost accomplished her ninth Month, ariv'd at
Bethleem, whither he came to comply with the Emperors Edict, to enrole himself
and his Consort. Behold him with Solicitude seeking a place for her to retire
into, but finding none, he is forced to lead her into a poor ruinous Stable,
where the Son of God is Born: There behold him Adoring him newly Born: Then
Circumcising and giving him the Name of JESUS: And lastly accompany them with
their Divine Infant to the Temple, where they are met by Simeon and Anne who
had long expected this happy hour; and attend to what passed in this meeting.

II. Prelude.
BEG Grace to understand and profit by those Pious Thoughts wherewith Saint
Joseph's Heart was replenished, whilst he Contemplated these wonderful
Mysteries.

I. Point. Consider how promptly Saint Joseph Obeyed the Emperors Edict,
cheerfully quitting, in the circumstance his Spouse was in, those conveniences
they had at Nazareth, to expose himself and her to the inconveniences of a
long Winter Journey, to go to a strange place, where by reason of his Poverty,
he could expect none; wanting wherewithal to purchase 'em. O wonderful Love of
Poverty and Mortification! O blind Obedience! O admirable Confidence in the
Divine Providence! He knew the Emperors Edict, was God's Command, who could
and would take care of 'em, and support 'em to comply with it. O! What Heavenly
Discourse past in the way upon this Subject? O! What Acts of Resignation to the
Inconveniences and usage they met withal? Being denied place in an Inn, and
forced to lodge and and bring forth her Son in a Stable. O! What Joy was it to
him to become a Victime of Obedience, and feel these sensible effects of
Poverty? O! What Love, what Compassion, what sorrow filled his tender Heart, to
see what the Divine Infant and his Mother suffered at his entrance into the
World? What Acts of Love, what Congratulations and Thanksgiving did he the give
him? And with what Joy and Comfort did JESUS fill his Heart, pierced with
Sorrow for what he and his Mother Suffered, by his Heavenly Smiles and
Carresses? And how did the Angels by their Heavenly Canticles endeavor to
Comfort and Rejoice his sad Heart, as they had done the Shep-heards; who^ they
brought to Adore him? And what occasion did the sight also of the Offerings and
Adorations of the three Kings give him to Bless Admire and Love the Divine
Providence? Procuring these Honnours to the Divine Infant and his Mother. O the
Charming Beauty of Poverty! O the Dignity of Humility! O unspeakable Pleasure
of Suffering Mortification for God, in God, and with God! O Divine Lessons
taught us and practiced, not only by S. Joseph but by no less than God himself;
yet how are these admirable Virtues thus esteemed by God, contemned by Men? O
Blessed Joseph obtain for me such a Love, Estee^ and Practice of 'em, as may
constantly replenish all my Thoughts and Actions, influenced by those that were
Communicated to your Heart, from the Heart of the Divine Infant JESUS.

II. Point. Consider Saint Joseph performing that hard task of Obedience, in
Circumcising this Divine Infant; Imagine how the Pain he caused him, pierced
his own Heart; consider how the Divine Infant by his Smiles and Interior
Inspirations encouraged, assisted and even provoked and helped him to
performthis great Pledge of his Divine Love, by this early shedding of his
Sacred Blood. Consider what a strife of Joy and Sorrow were raised in Saint
Joseph's Heart, first by beholding him shedding his Precious Blood, and
Contemplating this Fountain and Stream of Mercy, as a certain Pledge of Man's
Redemption; and secondly by feeling himself the Pain he occasioned, by the
Wound he gave him. Consider also the Joy with which Saint Joseph gave, and the
Divine Infant received the Holy Name of JESUS: Beg Saint Joseph's Intercession
to pronounce it with such a tender Affection and Devotion, as may render it
essential toward the Salvation of your Soul, O JESUS be to me a JESUS: OH.
Joseph beg of him to be to me a JESUS, for Love he bears to his most Blessed
Mother and your dearest self.

III. Point. Consider that forty Days after his Birth, Saint Joseph led the
Blessed Virgin Mother with her Divine Infant to the Temple, carrying a pair of
Turtles in his Hand for his Redemption; where Saint Simeon and the Holy
Prophetess Anne, after many Years Expectation of this Happy Day, were Inspired
to receive them at the Gate: Join your self to this pious Procession, behold
with what a transport of Joy Saint Simeon takes the Divine Infant out of his
Mothers Arms, into his own; and how willingly the Blessed Virgin parted with
what was dearer to her than her Life, to make an Oblation of him to his Eternal
Father. Hearken to Saint Simeons Prophecy in this transport, and consider with
what Affection he Offers his Life to the God of Life. Behold Saint Joseph's
Heart, pierced whilst Saint Simeon foretold, the piercing of that of his
Spouse. Behold also the Joy Saint Joseph felt in hearing, that JESUS was to be
the Light and Salvation of the Gentil's, as well as of the People Israel.
Behold Saint Joseph Offering the Turtles to Saint Simeon to Redeem his Beloved
JESUS. O wonderful Riches of Poverty! Acceptable to God, for the Purchase and
Redemption of an inestimable Treasure. O what a mutual Joy passed between JESUS
and Joseph at this Reception into his Arms? And between him and his Mother in
in being restored to here is. O Powerful Joseph, obtain for me such a
disposition, as his Mother your self and Saint Simeon had, as often as I
Receive him; and obtain for me such a Disposition of Heart for his Reception,
as may cause a Joy in him to be Received by me.

The Colloquie.
O Divine Infant, inspire me with those Thoughts of these Mysteries, wherewith
thou did Inspire the tender and Loving Heart of Saint Joseph: O most Holy
Joseph, obtain by your Spouses and your own Intercession, such a true
Disposition of Heart to Receive, and lay them up in my Heart, that I may profit
by them; that hereby my Heart may become a grateful Present to you, to Offer to
JESUS: Behold such as it is, I here Offer with all the Affection I am able: O
Increase this Affection, that the present may be more acceptable, and than
Offer it to the Divine JESUS the God of my Heart.

VI. MEDITATION. Of the Virtues Saint Joseph Exercised in the Flight of JESUS
into Egypt, in his Return from thence and at his loss of him in Jerusalem.
Preparatory Prayer.
BEG Grace to see and Imitate those Virtues Saint Joseph practiced in these
Mysteries.

I. Prelude.
BEHOLD Saint Joseph, as soon as he heard the Angel Pronounce those Words, Take
the Child and his Mother and fly into Egypt; getting up at Midnight, and
without any delay beginning a long Winter Journey of above a hundred and sixty
Miles, with his Spouse the Blessed Virgin and her tender Infant JESUS, not yet
a Year old. Behold him also exercising his Trade for seven Years together, at
Mattutes six miles from Babylon, amidst a company of Idolaters, who were
incited by the Devil to treat these Holy Persons after a most rude and inhuman
manner: All which Saint Joseph patiently suffered, till he was warned by an
Angel to return home. Then imagine them returning back, the same tedious Winter
Journey to Nazareth, were remaining four Years, they ascended with JESUS, now
twelve Years of of Age, to Jerusalem, where they lost him and returning back to
seek him found him in the Temple.

II. Prelude.
BEG Grace rightly to Consider, the profit Saint Joseph made by all these
Mysteries, and beg his Intercession to do the like.

I. Point. Consider Saint Joseph's Blind and Prompt Obedience, by entirely
adandoning himself to God's Provindence. Quitting at midnight his Country, his
House, Friends and all other Conveniences; to begin a long Winter Journey, to
go to live amongst Idolaters. The Love of JESUS and his Precious Life, made him
set at naught all other things to save this. God's Will was his Guide and Law,
which he Blindly Obeyed without consulting his Reason; which might have
suggested difficulties; and objected, for Example, why at this time of Night?
Why in this hard season of Winter? Why must we go amongst Idolaters, and not
rather to the three Kings? What, must he Fly? He who is to Save others, Cannot
he Save himself? How long must we remain in this Banishment? But nothing passed
of all this, he knew Reason was not to be Consulted, but Contradicted when God
Commands. He knew God never adandon's those, that abandon themselves to his
Providence. O sublime Obedience! O perfect Resignation! O admirable Confidence!
O Holy Joseph, obtain for me these Virtues, Practiced by thee after so sublime
a manner, as raised thee to this Dignity, of becoming Savior to him, who was
to Save the whole World.

II. Point. Consider what a Mortified Life Saint Joseph must needs lead amongst
such Barbarous Idolaters. Consider what he must Interiourly suffer for seven
Years together, by seeing God continually Offended: And what Exterior
Sufferings he underwent, by a want of all things? Living only upon the poor
Earnings of his Trade, and the effects of Poverty he saw JESUS and his Spouse
suffer, were more sensible than his own and then behold and admire his
Patience, Resignation and Joy, in Suffering with and for JESUS. Consider how by
his continual Adorations and Honors done to God, he endeavored to satisfy
for those Idolatries which he with a sad Heart continually beheld. O Pious, O
Patient and Resigned Joseph, teach me how to Love and to Express my Love by
Labors and Sufferings as you did; and that Love may make Labors and
Sufferings both Easy and Delightful; assist me to undergo them as in the
Presence, and purely for the sake of JESUS. Then Consider what Joy the Angels
tidings of Herod's Death occasioned in his Heart, not for his own sake, but for
the sake of JESUS, whose Life Herod, sought and which was dearer to him than
his own. O teach me this generous and disinteress'd Love, that may make me have
no regaurd at all to my own Interest, but that my chief delight may be only in
what relates to God's Honor and Happiness.

III. Point. Consider at Saint Joseph's return from Jerusalem how sensible he
was when he missed JESUS, finding he had lost the only object of his Love; and
fearing this loss might proceed from his own Fault and Negligence. Consider his
Resignation to this so sensible Affliction, and with what Peace and equality of
Mind he bore it, and with what Diligence he sought him; and then consider what
Joy his Heart felt when he found him, and heard his Divine Disputations with
the Doctors in the Temple: Consider also what Joy the Words of our Blessed
Lady caused in his Soul, when she gave him the Title of Father; which Joy was
accompanied with no less Humility and Confusion, reflecting upon his own
unworthiness thereof, O great Saint Joseph, Interceed that I may never loose
JESUS through my own Fault, and when he withdraws himself, that I may suffer it
with resignation and so efficaciously seek him, that I may find him as soon as
you did.

The Colloquie.
O Infinite Goodness grant me by the Intercession of Saint Joseph, that I may
in all things entirely abandon my self to your Divine Will, Patiently suffer
what you think best, where, when, and as long as you please; grant that I may
never Wilfully loose you; but when you please to withdraw your self, may suffer
it with that Patience and Resignation, and seek you with such Fervor and
Constancy, as that I may find you.

VII. MEDITATION. Of Saint Joseph's eighteen Years Conversation with Jesus and
Mary at Nazareth.
Preparatory Prayer.
TO beg of God to understand the great profit Saint Joseph made by, the
advantage of two such admirable Examples, increasing in all sorts of Virtue.

I. Prelude.
IMAGINE your self to hear his Royal Progenitor David under a Similitude
Prophetically declare in the following words, the profit he made by his abode
at Nazareth. Justus ut Palina florebit, sicut Cedrus Libani multiplicabitur,
plantati in Domo Domini, in atrijs Domus Dei nostri florebunt. Psalm, 91.13.
The Just, says he, planted in the House or Court of God; shall flourish like a
Palm Tree; and Increase or be Exalted in Perfection, like a Cedar of Libanus.
See how Saint Joseph verifies this Prediction, both by his Title of Just, and
Name of Joseph, which signifies An Increase; and reflect how like a Cedar he
grew and increased even to the highest pitch of Perfection in Nazareth; which
may truly be called the House and Court of God, since 'twas the Habitation of
the Son of God, his Virgin Mother and his Foster Father Saint Joseph, for no
less than eighteen Years: Imagine your self there to hear and see Saint
Joseph's Pious Conversation and manner of Living.

II. Prelude.
BEG Grace to Conceive those admirable Virtues practiced by Saint Joseph, in
his Conversation with JESUS and MARY, and beg also his Powerful Intercession,
that you may seriously endeavor to Imitate his excellent Example.

I. Point. Consider with how great an Affection, Patience, Constancy and
Humility Saint Joseph Exercised all those Humble and Laborious Actions, that
belonged to so painful a Trade; and to his Domestic Affairs. Consider with
what Concern, Tenderness and Compassion he beheld our Savior Laboring with
him; consider what courage his Presence and Assistance gave him in all his
Labors; and with what Content he performed 'em for the Maintenance of JESUS
and his Blessed Mother; how joyfully also he Assisted 'em both on all
occasions, and with how pure an Intention he performed each Action, both to
please, and to express his Love toward God. Who does not envy Saint Joseph's
Happiness in this particular? And who would not wish himself in Saint Joseph's
place to do the same? Do but help those for God's sake you live withal, or
that want your Assistance, and you will have the same Merit and Reward.
Consider also what Joy you should have had to serve JESUS and MARY as Saint
Joseph did; Exercise the same Acts of Charity to God's Image, your Neighbor,
as he did to JESUS, and he his promised the same reward as if you did it to
himself. Quamdiu fecistis uni ex his fratribus meis minimis, mihi fecistis.
Matthew. 25. v. 40.
What you have done to the least of these my Brethren, you have done it to me.
Reflect also upon God's Presence, who beholds, helps and encourages you whilst
you Labor, and you will have the same Comfort in your Labors which he had;
Labor purely to please God for the Love of God, and to do the Will of God, and
you will have the same Reward as if you had Wrought and Labored as Saint
Joseph did, to maintain JESUS. Who says his Cibus meus est facere Voluntatem
ejus qui misit me. Joan. 14. v. 34.
Meat is the fulfilling the Will of his Father. O how did Saint Joseph do all
this? And how pleasing did this make him in God's Sight? His chief delight
being to do God's Will.

II. Point. Consider that his Conversation with JESUS and MARY, was so pleasing
to him, that he avoided all other Conversations, to which the Will of God did
not particularly lead him; consider whither the Conversation you have with
these in Prayer, be as pleasing to you^ as to make you quit all other
unnecessary Conversations; see whither you prefer Retirement Silence and
Conversing with JESUS and MARY, before all other Conversations in this world
Consider also Saint Joseph's Modest behavior, his Silence, Recollection,
Temperance and Mortification, both in Eating and Drinking, and Imitate him in
these: Reflect upon his Pious Discourses with JESUS and his Spouse, and
frequently Practice the same, by such like Pious Aspirations and Colloquies as
he made to them: Consider how he pondered and laid up in his Heart (after his
Spouses Example) all the Divine sayings of JESUS, and do you also hearken unto,
keep-in memory and reflect upon those Divine Inspirations, whereby JESUS also
speaks to you, in Prayer or at other times. Consider how his Heart was Inflamed
by the words of JESUS, and how without doubt he often expressed it to his
Spouse, as the Disciples did by this their Interrogation. Nonne Cor nostrum
ardens erat in nobis dum loqueretur. Luke. 24.32.
Was not our Heart Inflamed whilst he spoke within us: And reflect how those
Flames also broke forth in his pious Discourses, and set others on fire. Who
would not have wished to have his Heart thus Inflamed, by enjoying this
delightful Conversation? Endeavor only in your Conversation to bring in Pious
Discourse, and you will invite him to come and Converse with you: Ubi sunt duo
vel tres Congregati in Nomine meo, ibi sum in medio eorum. Matthew. 18. v. 20.
Meet but those you Converse withal in his Name, and you will meet him; you
will always find him in the midst of 'em, darting Flames into your Heart.
Lastly, in your Conversation follow Saint Joseph's Example, in taking the part
and excusing the absent, when you hear 'em Blamed; and you will be secure from
faling into that ordinary Defect, which renders most Conversations Dangerous
and Displeasing to God, the Censuring or Backbiting your Neighbor.

III. Point. Consider Saint Joseph's Silence, Recollection and Interior Peace
of Mind, wherewith he performed all his Exterior Actions; whilst his Hands
Labored upon Earth, his Thoughts and Affections were employed in Heaven.
Consider with what Humility of Spirit, with what Perfect Obedience, and with
what Joy of Heart he performed all his Actions, having always before his Eyes,
the wonderful Obedience of JESUS both to himself and his Spouse; beholding him
verify what the Royal Prophet foretold that he should be, In Laboribus a
Juventute. Psalm. 87. v. 16.
In Labors from his Youth; and what the Holy Ghost also declar's, Et erat
Subditus illis. Luc. 2. v. 82.
That he was Subject to them. Who therefore can think even the hardest Labor,
too much to do for JESUS, who thus Labored for us? Who can think even the
Humblest and Meanest Employment below him, when with Saint Joseph he beholds
the Son of God stooping to the like; and Obeying Saint Joseph in the Meanest
and Vilest Offices: Beg of Saint Joseph to Inspire and put you in mind of these
or such like Thoughts in all your Actions, Labors and Mortifications, which he
had in his, that they may become pleasing to God, and both easy and profitable
to your self; whereby you shall not only Labor, but Pray continually. Imitate
him therefore in all you do, and beg of him to teach you this most profitable
Art, so pleasing to God of joining Prayer and Action together.

The Colloquie.
BEG of God, by Saint Joseph's Intercession, that Spirit wherewith he Conversed
with JESUS and MARY, and performed all his Actions, during those eighteen Years
he lived at Nazareth; whereby you shall not only make your self pleasing to God
in this World, but b^ acting after this manner, sha^^ obtain such a foretast of
th^^ next, as will make you thin^ nothing too hard, or too much for the
purchase of so great an^ everlasting a Happiness.

VIII. MEDITATION. Of Saint Joseph's last Sickness, Death, and Glory in Heaven.
Preparatory Prayer.
BEG of God to understand the Sentiments Saint Joseph had in his Sickness and
Death, and the Reward he now Possesses of all his Virtues.

I. Prelude.
IMAGINE Saint Joseph lying Sick upon his Deathbed, with our Blessed Savior
and our Lady on each side of him, imagine him sweetly giving up the Ghost. His
Soul carried by Angels to Limbo, and his Body decently Enterr'd in the Valley
of Josaphat by our Savior and his mournful Spouse; and after our Savior's
Resurrection raised to Life: Which also Ascended with him to Heaven, where he
placed him in the Seat next to that he had ordained for the Blessed Virgin his
Mother.

II. Prelude.
BEG Grace of God so to Liv^ as to enjoy the Assistance of JESUS, MARIA, JOSEPH
at our Death, and their Company also in Heaven.

I. Point. Saint Joseph according to Cedrinus, died a little before the
Baptism of JESUS, at seventy Years of Age, Assisted by JESUS and MARY.
Consider with what Joy and Resignation he suffered the Incommodities of
Sickness, and the Pang's of his approaching Death, knowing they would put an
end to all his Labors and Miseries in this World, and open to him the Gate of
Happiness in the next. Imagine what Comfort he Received from those Pious and
Fervent Acts, our Savior suggested to him. Consider what thanks our Savior
and Blessed Lady gave him, for all the Care and Pains he had taken of them:
Congratulating with him for the great Reward he was ready to receive for them
all. Consider also what thanks Saint Joseph Returned for their constant
Affection toward him, begging as the last Favor, their powerful help and
Intercession, for a happy passage to Eternity. And then consider with what a
Peaceful Resignation, and with what a Joyful and Smiling Countenance, he
rendered his Soul to God his Creator, by the Hands of JESUS his Redeemer.
Consider our Savior Closing his Eyes, and Composing his Sweet Countenance with
his Sacred Hands: Behold his Blessed Mother, recommending his Soul to the
Eternal Father of JESUS. O most happy Death! The certain Reward of a most Pious
Life. O Happy Joseph! Dying in the Merciful Arms of JESUS and MARY. Obtain for
me by your Pious Intercession, that I may so serve them during my whole Life,
that I may enjoy your and their Comfortable Assistance at my Death.

II. Point. Consider a great Company of Angels, sent by God to Conduct his Soul
to Limbo. Consider the Joyful tidings he brought thither of their Speedy
Deliverance; he having for thirty Years continually Converst with, and Served
the Messiah. Consider also what care our Savior and our Blessed Lady took in
Burying his Precious Body, according to Saint Hierom, in the Valley of
Josaphat, between Mount Olivet and Mount Sion; in the self same place where the
Virginal Body of his Spouse, was afterward for some Days to Repose. Thrice
Happy Soul thus Dear to God and his Angels! O most Precious Relics! Thus taken
care of by the Son of God, and Queen of Angels. Oh how estimable in God's
sight, is whatsoever belongs to his Saints and Servants? O Holy Joseph obtain
by your Intercession, that in Body and Soul I may so serve the Amiable JESUS
here, that they may be Loved and Esteemed by him hereafter.

III. Point. Consider that after our Saviors Resurrection, he took Saint
Joseph and several others his special Servants out of Limbo: Raised his Body to
Life after his own, and carried him to Visit and Comfort his Blessed Mother. O
what Joy! What Comfort! And with what Reason? Consider our Savior afterward
carrying him with him in Triumph, at his Ascension into Heaven; placing him
there next to the Seat prepared for his Blessed Mother; giving him power to
obtain all Favors for his Clients, together with a tender Heart of a Father,
and a tender Affection of a Spouse toward them. Consider also the Part he had
in the Mystery of the Incarnation, his bearing the Dignity of Spouse to the
Mother, and Foster-Father to the Son of God. Consider that the Labors, Pains,
and Dangers he underwent in their thirty Years Service, required such a speedy
Reward in Heaven: The Truth of which was Verified, by the Glory that appeared
about the Head of Saint Bernardine, when in a Sermon he declared this Truth.
Where he receives the Reward of Virgins, for his Fidelity to the Vow of
Virginity; the Reward of Doctors for Reducing so many Idolaters in Egypt, to
the Worship of the True God; Of Martyrs and Confessors in the Labors and
Dangers he Suffered for JESUS: And therefore he deserves the Crown of Virgins,
Doctors, Confessors and Martyrs; and to be Honored by all, above all, next
to JESUS and MARY.

The Colloquie.
O Powerful, Joseph Foster-Father to JESUS, and Spouse to MARY, who have the
Heart of a Father, and Affection of a Spouse for thy true Clients, and have
also the Power of JESUS and MARY joined with thy own, for their Assistance in
all their Necessities. Obtain for me such a Filial Confidence in thee, and such
a tender Affection for thee, as JESUS and MARY had; that I may obtain their and
thy Powerful Assistance in all the exigencies of this Life, and the happy
enjoyment of their and thy Company in the Life to come. Amen.

FINIS.
THE TABLE OF THE DEVOTIONS TO Saint Joseph Spouse to the B. V. Mary Mother of
Jesus.
THE Office of Saint Joseph. Page 3. The Litany of Saint Joseph. P. 15. The
Hymn in Honor of Saint Joseph. Page 20. A Votive Oblation to Saint Joseph, to
choose him for our Patron. Page 25. The Beads of Saint Joseph. Page 28. Seven
Prayers or Devotions Containing the seven Dolours and Joys of Saint Joseph.
Page 30. The I. Dolor and Joy of Saint Joseph. Ibid. The II. Dolor and Joy of
Saint Joseph. Page 32. The III. Dolor and Joy of Saint Joseph. Page 33. The
IV. Dolor and Joy of Saint Joseph. Page 34. The V. Dolor and Joy of Saint
Joseph. Page 35. The VI. Dolor and Joy of Saint Joseph. Page 36. The VII.
Dolor and Joy of Saint Joseph. Page 37. Eight Meditations for the Octave of
Saint Joseph. Page 41. I. Med. Of the Sanctification, Birth and Name of S.
Joseph. Ibid. II. Med. Of the Humble Vocation and Sanctity of S. Joseph. P. 48.
III. Med. Of the Marriage of Saint Joseph. Page 56. IV. Med. Of Saint Joseph's
Journey with the Blessed Virgin to Visit S. Elizabeth. P. 66. V. Med. Of the
Virtues Saint Joseph exercised at the Birth, Circumcision and Presentation of
the Son of God. Page 76. VI. Med. Of the Virtues Saint Joseph exercised in the
Flight of JESUS into Egypt, his Return from thence, and at his Loss of him in
Jerusalem. Page 87. VII. Med. Of Saint Joseph's eighteen Years Conversation
with Jesus and Mary at Nazareth. Page 96. VIII. Of Saint Joseph's last
Sickness, Death and Glory in Heaven. Page 109.

