THE CASE OF THE Creditors of Sr. Robert Vyner, Occasioned by the new
Subscribed Project.
THE Proposals which are lately Subscribed by Sir Robert Vyners Creditors, are,
that those Creditors shall agree to what shall be done by Seven Refferees, or
any Three of them, And Sir Thomas Meres (who acted vigorously for Sir Robert
Vyner, to get the Bankrupts Bill passed in 1685.) is now a Refferee, and acts
very Zealously in this Affair; And these Refferees, are to advise with Five
Council, or any Two of them; and one of those Two Council who act, is Sir
Francis Pemberton, who was of Council for Sir Robert Vyner in his lifetime,
and is row Council for the Executor, and for that reason ought not to be of
Council in this Case for the Creditors.

The Agreement is that the Executor shall have Seven thousand pounds in Money,
when the Creditors are paid Thirty pounds per Cent. for their Principal, and
then the Executor to come in as a Creditor for Three thousand pounds more, And
if the Acting Refferees, and Council, prove Friends to the Executor, there will
be many Contrivances for the Executor's benefit, but few for the Creditors; and
herein is couched a design, to get all Judgments and Encumbrances, levelled
with other Debts, although they have taken the due Course of Law, and have been
at great Charges for obtaining the same.

If the Commission of Bankruptcy can be renewed and proceeded upon (The Major
part of the Commissioners the last time of their Sitting before Sr. Roberts
Death, declaring that Sr. Robert was not proved a Bankrupt,) Then was Sr.
Roberts Will of no effect, and the Executor is only an Intruder, and in the
Laws against Bankrupts there are sufficient ways and methods forthwith to
compel a discovery from the Executor and all other persons concerned without
giving the Executor a Gratuity, but if a Commission cannot be now taken out and
proceeded upon, Then those which have Encumbrances ought to be first satisfied,
Sir Robert having made a particular provision also for them in his Will in
these words, viz. Out of which the Encumbrances being first satisfied, etc. And
the Executor has sworn duly to execute that Will, And after the Encumbrances
paid, All the Estate Real and Personal ought to go to satisfy the remaining
Debts, and after the Debts satisfied, then the overpluss to be disposed of
according to Sr. Roberts Will, and for a discovery of the Estates, several are
already known, viz. Estates in London, Middlesex, Leicestershire, Surry,
Warwickshire, Cheshire, an Estate in Ireland, and a Mortgage for a great Sum
upon a Noblemans Estate, and it is needless to give any thing for discovery of
what is already known, but as for discovery of what private Estates, what
Plate, what Jewels, what Money, what Debts due to Sir Robert, which the
Executor claims, or has possessed himself of, the Executors Proposal implies a
great concealment, but he Proved the Will the 4th of October, 1688. And has
yet put in no Inventory, nor Answered any Bill in Chancery for Discovery, but
stands in Contempt, and intends to make this advantage by contemning the law
whereby to enforce the Creditors to Comply with those strange proposals, it
will be a fine Example and Encouragement for Executors, for the future, to keep
close the Testators Estate, to stand in contempt of the Law, and to force the
Creditors to comply with their humors, but the Executor and several other
persons concerned will be quickly forced to discover upon Oath what Estates or
Effects they know of Sr. Robert Vyners, and such discovery shall be made
public for the general good of the Creditors, and perhaps will reach further
than what will be discovered by their giving Ten Thousand Pounds to the
Executor: However, after all that which is already known, or shall be by such
means discovered, shall be divided; If a further Discovery can after be made,
let something in the Pound be given for such further Discovery, but to give
something for nothing is very hard, or especially to give such a great Sum as
Ten thousand pounds for that, which about Ten pounds will procure, seems
unreasonable. If the Executor pretends Debts owing to him out of the Estate,
the Statute which Sir Robert Vyner confessed to him, the 27th. of January 1686.
for Twenty thousand pounds, payable in Six days time is Vacated; and the Sham
Encumbrances which are Charged on the Houses in London, are already detected in
Chancery: And if any such Things shall be attempted hereafter, they will be
easily found out.

There is now a Bill brought into the High Court of Parliament relating to
Bankrupts, whereby to compel Creditors to accept of such an Agreement, as the
Major part shall agree to: And the Executor of Sir Robert Vyner intends to take
advantage of this Bill and designs thereby to compel the Creditors to make him
an Allowance; The Creditors therefore of Sir Robert Vyner, ought to Petition
the High Court of Parliament, that if the said Bill pass, a proviso may be
therein incerted, for Excepting the Creditors of Sir Robert Vyner; and that Sir
Robert's whole Estate, real and Personal, may be disposed of to Trustees, to be
by them Sold, and that the Encumbrances may be first paid, and the Remainder
equally divided amongst the rest of the Creditors, and that the Overplus after
the Debts satisfied, may be disposed to such Charitable and other Uses, as are
directed by Sir Robert Vyners Will.


