The present condition of DUBLIN IN IRELAND;

WITH The manner of the Siege, and how it is straitened, By the Marquess of
Ormond, L. Jnchequin, etc.

Represented in two LETTERS, FROM A Colonel in Dublin, to his Brother a
Merchant in LONDON.

Dated at Dublin, June 22. 1649.

June 30 LONDON, Printed for Henry Crips, and Lodowick Lloyd. 1649.

Dublin June 22. 1649. Loving Brother,
I Wrote to you at large by the last Post of the 19. and 20. since which our
siege continues very close; their camp is within a mile and half of Dublin;
they begun to appear with their Horse on Wednenesday, and came within a mile of
our works, and sending out a forlorn hope of about 40. horse came within half a
mile, where about 30. of ours answered their charge, and shot Lieutenant Col.
Dungans horse under him, and so got him Prisoner; and Major Dungan his brother
(sons to Sir John Dungan) was deadly wounded, and we hear he is since dead, for
being carried to the Phoenix where their horse stood, he was speechless when he
came thither; our men brought off four of their horse, and blessed be God we
had but one man wounded, none slain. The Marquess of Ormond, and Lord of
Inchequin are resolved to have Dublin before they depart, but dare not with
what forces they have to storm it, but we hear they daily expect the coming up
of the Marquess Clenrikard, Lord Taffe, Lord Dillon, Viscount Costelagh, and
Oneale with their Forces, to come up suddenly; and then we must expect a sharp
storm. Their tents are pitched on this side Fingles, their Horse and Foot lie
all in our fight; our General is laboring hard to fortify against them, and
the Seamen from the Ships are come to help us; Col. Monk is abroad with 800. of
our horse to secure Tredagh, Trym, and Athbey, and after they are secured, we
expect some service to be done by them against the enemy; the papists Irish
men, as well Cityzens as the Army are put out of the City; we are (blessed be
God) in some reasonable possibility of the more safety thereby; and have hard
duty to attend the line daily, but great will, vigor and readiness is in all
men to perform the service; we have about 7000. foot with the Inhabitants
fighting men, and about 500. horse to face the enemy; the rogues are too well
accommodated for provisions, they eat and drink up our ruins; but we hope to
see theirs in the end, if our Friends in England will make have to releeve us;
our provisions consume very fast, and every thing is excessive deer, having now
neither fish nor flesh to come to our Markets. The Post ready to depart, I must
crave your prayers to God for us, and you shall have ours, so I rest, and
remain,

Your loving Brother, R. C.

Loving Brother,
MY last was of the 13. current, the day following went forth Col. Jones, our
General, with our Army, Col. Monk commanding the Foot, which were between
twenty five and thirty hundred, and about twelve hundred Horse, with four
pieces of Ordnance; the Army advanced against the enemy as far as Johnstowne
(within a a mile or two of the Nase) where they kept their Rendezvous, sending
forth Scouts of Horse to discover the enemy, and not expecting them to be of
that strength as afterward they found them to be, sought to pass over the
river Liffy, where the enemy made good all the passes against them, and
pitched there their Tents, as if they stood only upon a defensive posture; but
by our Scouts on Sabbath day at night, some returned, and seeing the Tents in
the place, reported that the enemy was still there, but by other Scouts they
were discovered, both horse and foot to be marching over the Mountains of
Wicklow, expecting to fall in between our Army and Dublin, whereupon our
General made his retreat homeward, and came within three or four miles of this
place, and there remained all yesterday: The Scouts last night discovering
again the advance of the enemy hitherward, our General (with all his horse and
foot) at one of the clock this morning came home (blessed be God) in safety: It
argued a great vigilance in him, and a provident care over this place, not to
engage our Army to put the whole Kingdom in danger; for if he had (as it might
have pleased God to give him the victory) engaged against the enemy upon such
disadvantage, he could not (without great hazard) be able to prosecute the
victory: besides, we had on Saturday last news, that the Scots were coming up
for our relief, but since we have a far greater doubt of them then before; our
next business (if the enemy be not already too strong in those parts) is to
strengthen the Garrisons of Trym, Athbay, and Tredath, who are in great danger,
and yet we shall be much weakened by parting with our men, and shall not be able
from time to time to relieve them, the enemy being fallen so far into our
Quarters, who are already within four or five miles of this place. We have lost
Kildare, but it cost the enemy very dear; for after three or four desperate
assaults made by them on the breaches made by their Cannon, having lost many of
their men, they sent for a party, and observing the undaunted resolution of
Lievtenant-Col. Huteson, and Capt. Dixon, who commanded the men there, and of
most of the men under them, although many of their men would not fight at all,
and are since gone to the enemy, that they gave our men quarter in two days to
carry away what they had, where was corn and meal that they could not bring
away, but spoiled what they could thereof. Ballesoman is besieged, and it must
be lost, because we cannot come to relieve them, nor send to them, nor hear in
what condition they are. We hear, that Owen Oneale, with his Forces, is joined
with them of Kilkenny against us, but we have no certainty thereof: But we
know, that the Forces under the Marquess of Ormond without them, are about
10000. Foot, and between 2500. and 3000. Horse, most of them very excellent
horse; we look for a siege, and are pulling down all the houses without our
Works near unto them, and are destroying any thing that may releieve the enemy.
We are in a very sad condition; for all the Contribution out of the Country,
which paid our Horse, is now lost, and we have not wherewithal to pay them; we
have neither Hay nor Oats to keep our Horse nor Oxen in Town, nor for our
Cattle; we must expect no more provisions out of the Country for our selves,
for the enemy is now possessed of what should relieve us; we must expect that
they will destroy all the Corn in our Quarters, and will be able to preserve
and gain all that is in their own, and will eat up all the grass in our
Quarters, and preserve their own, then you may consider what will become of
our horse the next winter: they are in a prosperous condition at present, and
like to do what they please, if aid come not sundenly, and money to pay them,
and those that are already here, and more provisions for them all; for Wheat is
here at five pound ten shillings, Rye at four pound ten shillings the quarter,
little to sell, and little money to buy it: Our Men of War are come from
Bewmorris, and diverse ships from Chester, and no men nor money; it is
impossible (in man's judgment) for us to hold out till aid comes from England,
for as yet we hear not of any ready at waterside to come, and when all the
shipping are come hither, it is like we shall have them to come thither, and
when our shipping returns, I pray God they may not mutiny again, and refuse to
come for want of means; for if we have not a prevalent party, wellwishers to
us, and to our Cause, that may over-sway our secret enemies that are amongst
them, that would cause delays till we are destroyed, we shall be lost indeed,
and much misery will thereby fall on our Kingdom of England, upon whose
account shall stand all the blood that has been maliciously shed in this
Kingdom, of the ancient, the honorable Ministers of Gods Word, the Widows,
the Fatherless, and the Infants that have been destroyed. Besides the want of
money, the dearth of all provisions, Cheese it self being at nine pence the
pound, will undo us, and which is far more dangerous, men will not engage
where is no man's to relieve themselves, their wives and children, but will seek
to go where the best means is to be had: your Diurnalls are not true, in that
there should be discord amongst our enemies: my Lord of Inchiquins forces are
now joined with the Irish as one man, and no such thing as the coming away of
any more of my Lord of Inchiquins horse to us; besides the first seven that
came, as was reported amongst us, but are all set on mischief to destroy us.

Our news by this Post makes mention of a good agreement in England, (whereat
we greatly rejoice,) and it is a wonder to me they cannot sooner agree to
releeve us; the danger we are now in with him from time to time reported
amongst you these three months, and what has been done for us; and some of
the Jesuiticall faction to hinder relief coming to us, (not only from England,
but from France, and the low Countries) have raised reports from time to time
that Dublin was taken, or delivered up unto the enemy, and that it was too late
to send relief hither, and as fast as we could write to the contrary, have they
revived this report; I would they might (by their words) be taken notice what
men they are. But now I may write to you, truly I fear it will shortly come to
pass; I am sorry that our Friends are no more sensible of our poverty, and
miserable condition (if it were only the weekly loan, it were enough to
consume us, where a penny is not to be gotten) to pay 20. 30. and 40. l. a man,
and some 4. 5. l. a week, and many that have lent great sums, are now starving
for want of bread, who report amongst you, that we are here in a very good
condition; whereas moreover they know, we have not men enough to defend our
quarters, nor money to pay those we have. Good Brother farewell, I knew not
whether I shall see you again, or that I may again write unto you, for my
resolution is according to my power (as the Lord shall give me strength) to be
amongst my company to defend this place, yet I would not have you to forget me,
nor to neglect what I have desired at your hand; I hope the Lord will defend
this place, and that every one that puts his trust in him shall be delivered,
to whose blessed protection I commend you, and rest ever,

R. C.

FINISr

