THE CASE Of the OWNERS of more than Sixty Thousand Acres of Rich and Valuable
LANDS, Bordering upon the FENNS, called, BEDFORD-LEVEL:
SHOWS,
THAT the Lands of the several Petitioners, and their Ancestors in all times
past, have been defended by Sufficient Banks, and the Waters descending upon
the same, have been carried off by Large and ample DRAINS and OUTFALLS into the
River of GREAT-OWZE, and can have no other way for Passage of those Waters to
Sea.

THAT by means of a DAM and SLVICE, set upon the said River of OWZE, by the
Corporation of Adventurers, on Pretense of Draining the South part of the said
LEVEL. The ancient Flow and Course of the Waters, in the said River, being
Stopped and Diverted. The bottom of the said River OWZE, is become so Raised
and Silted up, that all the said Drains and Outfalls, are entirely Choked and
stopped up, and can never be Recovered without Reducing the said River to its
former Condition.

THAT besides the Loss of those Drains by the Occasion aforesaid, the Waters of
the said FENNS by other Works of the said Adventurers are let in, and suffered
to run through many of the Petitioner's Lands, under Pretense of being conveyed
by those Works, to Newer OUTFALLS made by them into the said River OWZE; which
OVTFALLS of the said Adventurers are in like manner Choked and Stopped up, so
as the Waters intended to be Conveyed, as aforesaid by overflowing or soaking
through the Adventurer's Bank and Works, have for diverse years past overflown
and drowned many thousands of Acres of the said Lands, which are become
Receptacles for the said FENN Waters, and of no use to the Petitioners, to
their inestimable Damage, and the utter Ruin of many Families, Widows, and
Orphans.

THAT the Lands already, and which for diverse years past have been thus Drowned
and Annoyed, are as follows, viz. In the Town hips of Downeham Stow-Bardolf
and parts adjoining on the East Side of the said River OWZE 1800 Acres.

In the same Townships on the West Side the said River OWZE 6000 Acres.

In the Hundred of Marshland, and Towns of Wiggen-Hall, and parts adjoining
20000 Acres, besides the loss of their Roads and Highways, which are become
Impassable; and the Mischiefs and Damages still daily Increasing: And beside,
the imminent Danger they at present lie under, of a total and general Drowning
and Destruction by the said FENN Waters.

THAT the Lands pretended to be Drained by the said Dam and Sluice are but a
Part of the said LEVEL, and generally the worst Lands, the Inheritance of
diverse thousands of Acres thereof, being yearly sold for less than 4 d. per
Acre, and other Parts for like inconsiderable Rates.

THE Petitioner's said Lands were before these Mischiefs, generally VVorth, to
be Let, one with another, from 10 to 20 s. per Acre per Annum.

THAT notwithstanding many Complaints and Applications to the Corporation of
Adventurers, who are by the late Statute of 15 Car. 2. made sole Commissioners
of SEWERS within the said LEVEL, and so far as their Works extend, and all
other Commissioners excluded, there being no Appeal, but to themselves against
their own Acts, Defaults, and Injuries, the Petitioners could never obtain any
Relief.

THEY therefore humbly Pray, That the said DAM and SLVICE may be removed; the
said FENN Waters restrained, and their Lands for the future preserved according
to the several Complaints and Cases in their respective Petitions appearing.


