THE CASE OF THE Undertakers and Promoters of the Bill for the Courts of
Conscience for the Borough of Southwark, the City and Liberties of Westminster,
the Tower Hamlets, and the remaining Out-Parishes of the County of Middlesex
within the Weekly Bills of Mortality.
THat Mr. Thomas Pretyman with others, have been for several Years last past
concerned in endeavoring to obtain an Act for Erecting a Court of Conscience
for the several places abovementioned, and have Expended great Sums of Money,
besides loss of Time, and great Attendance in carrying on the same; And in
order to the Accomplishing thereof, in the Year 1685, did bring in a Bill to
the then Parliament to that effect, and after the first Reading did pay their
full Fees (as by Acquittance will appear) in order to a second Reading; but by
the sudden Adjournment, and afterward Prorogation and Dissolution of the said
Parliament, it could take no effect, to the great damage of the said
Undertakers, who now upon a fresh Encouragement, and at the Request of several
of the Inhabitants of the Borough of Southwark, and others of the County of
Middlesex, as likewise of several poor Prisoners that have lain long in Prisons
for small Debts under Forty Shillings (as by their several Petitions to this
Honorable House may appear) have brought in a second Bill to the same purpose,
and after the first Reading paid in their full Fees in order to a second
Reading, which is since done, and the Bill referred to a Committee, where they
have likewise continually attended, and paid all Adjournment Fees, and all
other Expenses whatsoever to this day.

That the Bill being now likely to take effect, there are several Persons
(unknown to the Undertakers) Petitioning, and making their Applications to have
their Names inserted as Clerks and Registers of the respective Divisions,
though they have never been at one Penny expense, nor taken the least pains in
the Management of it.

The Undertakers therefore do humbly refer themselves to the Honor and Justice
of this Honorable House, where they cannot but hope, as a Recompense of their
Trouble and great Charge, and an Encouragement to others to undertake things of
the like nature for the Public Good, they shall have the benefit of having
their Names inserted in the several Divisions as Registers and Clerks, with the
Powers thereunto belonging, preferable to any others, so long as they shall
behave themselves well in their respective Places and Employments.


