The Case of the Manor of Epworth in the Isle of AXHOLM, in the County of
Lincoln, concerned in the Bill for an Act for settling the Level of Hatfield
Chase, humbly presented to the Right Honorable the Commons of England in
Parliament assembled.
HAtfield Chase, and the places adjacent, lying contiguous in the several
Counties of York, Lincoln, and Nottingham, and containing about sixty thousand
Acres of Ground are all in one Level; concerning which, Sir Cornelius Vermeuden
a Dutchman, in the second year of His late Majesty of ever Blessed Memory,
contracted with His Majesty, being Lord of the Soil for the Draining thereof
(and therein also for those of Epworth, being about Thirteen thousand Acres,
and part of that Level, though no part of the Chase) wherein the King
(graciously intending not to prejudice the Commoners) declared, That the
Commoners should first be agreed with, before Vermeuden should begin the work.

The said Isle is wholly in Lincolnshire, and the Manor of Epworth, consisting
of twenty Towns, Thorps, and Hamlets (wherein the Tenants there are very
numerous) is in length about seven miles, and lying between the River of Trent
on the East, and Hatfield-Chase, and diverse Manors in Yorkshire on the West,
which are Drained through the Manor of Epworth into the said River, and so it
becomes very advantageous to the Participants, but hurtful to a great part of
the Manor of Epworth; which the Participants make a very Sink or Pan to
receive the Waters cast upon it, to ease and make dry Hatfield Chase, and the
other Manors which lie on the West.

The Tenants in the same Manor claim Right of Common of Pasture, Turbary, and
to dig Earth there at their pleasures to improve their Upland, and other
Privileges, which they and their Predecessors have had time out of mind.

The said Manor came to the Crown by Exchange in the Reign of the late Queen
Elizabeth, and the Tenants say that long before that, viz. In the time of King
Edward the third, and now three hundred years since Sir John Mowbray was Lord
of that Manor, and made an approvement of the wastes there by virtue of the
Statute; whereupon he and the Tenants came to an Agreement, and (besides
several Grants which he made to particular Tenants) he made a Deed to Eleven of
the Tenants particularly named, and to the rest of the Tenants in general
words, whereby he confirmed all their former Rights and Privileges, and
debarred himself and his heirs of all future Approvements by that Deed, being
an ancient Charter now extant Against which Charter, and other Grants; there
can be no Approvement by Law, without express consent of the Tenants, All the
Law Books being clear, That against Common by Grant, there can be no
Approvement.

The Ground in Question is 7400 Acres parcel of the said 13000 Acres within the
Manor of Epworth.
THe Undertakers, who call themselves Participants within the Level of Hatfield
Chase say, they have a Decree in the Exchequer. The Tenants say further, That
the Participants have two Decrees, but the one Enterferes and clashes against,
and almost wholly destroys the other. The Participants say, Three hundred and
seventy of the Tenants consented. The Tenants answer; first, That the
Dissenters are near three times as many, and many of them the greatest
Freeholds; and that those who are named in the said Decree, are diverse of them
such as never had Right of Common; some are named three or four times over to
swell up the number; and by the surname only with a blank, and some by names
never heard of before to li^e in the Isle, and some were counterfeited.
Secondly, They that did consent were drawn thereunto by sore and very hard
pressures; neither is there any submission to be found upon Record, under the
hand of any. Thirdly, The consent was only a Submission to an Award of the
Attorney General, which Award was Decreed without ever hearing a Deposition
re^d; neither was any of those said to consent ever served with Process to
answer the Bill whereupon that Decree was obtained, being gained by Vermeudens
practice and combination with four persons fined in Star Chamber One thousand
pound a ^eece for Riots, and sentenced to pay Two thousand marks damages to
Vermeuden, and to stand committed to the Prison of the Fleet: Which four
persons together with one Newland and Agent of Vermeudens, combined (that they
might free themselves from the danger of that sentence) to answer a Bill in the
Exchequer at Vermeudens Suit, on the behalf of themselves and others of the
Parish of Haxey in general words (particularly naming none) and to confess
(though falsely) the charge of the Bill to be true, being never served with
Process, nor having authority from the other Parishes, but subscribed an
authority to some of themselves, with about eighteen hands which they got more
to it, being persons also fined or drawn in by them. These four persons, and
the said Newland the Agent for Vermeuden, upon an information exhibited against
them in Star Chamber by some of the Town of Misterton-Relators, were for these
and other abuses done to the Country, sentenced to stand on the Pillory with
Papers, in the next Markets adjoining, and to make restitution of money
extorted from several of the Tenants, under color of execution of a warrant to
a Sergeant at Arms; and one of them was sentenced to come to the Exchequer Bar
with Papers in his Hat, and there to acknowledge his false answer which he had
given in that Court to the prejudice of the Country. These persons nevertheless
escaped the shame and punishment due unto them (by tampering with and taking
off the prosecutors) by reason whereof the Sentence was omitted to be entered;
yet the truth of this appears by the Note-Book yet exta^t in Star Chamber,
and may be proved by witnesses yet living, who were by and present at the time
of the Sentence. Fifthly, The Participants bribed the Tenants Solicitor.
Sixthly, the Decree was ten years in gaining, aid is in length thirteen or
fourteen skins of Parchment, which may justly render jealousy and suspicion in
the obtaining.

The Participants second Decree was upon hearing of their own Bill, which was
exhibited to stay the Commoners Suits commenced at Law. This Decree declares,
That the Parties who are not named in the former Decree, (which are very
numerous) are not bound, and that they are at liberty to proceed at Law. And as
to those who are named, it declares that they are no othewise bound, but whilst
that first Decree stands unreversed; and in persuance of that second Decree,
the Tenants have had two Verdicts in the Title, Heir^n Tail and Feme Coverts
are also declared by that Decree not to be bound: And that Decree establishes
the possession no otherwise with the Participants, then it was when that Bill
was exhibited; since which, and after the Decree thereupon several verdicts
have been at Law, and the possession con^ued with the Inhabitants, till they
were now lately forced out by extremity of drifts of their Cattle, for
unreasonable Scots or Taxes of the Court o^ Sewers.

The Undertakers say they have been at great charges; the Tenant answer, That
though they have been at great charges in the whole great Level, yet their
charge has been but little within the Manor of Epworth, having made but one
new Cut, and scoured an old Drain through the Manor for their own advantage,
and stopped up three old Drains, and diverted the head ^^a fourth, which were
more beneficial to the Tenants.

The Participants allege, That whereas other Manors had but a t^rd part
allotted for their proportion, Epworth had near half. The Tenants answer, the
Lord having once approved, and no right in Law to approve again ^y reason of
the said Charter, the Undertakers (coming in against Law) ought not to have a
foot, but rather to make satisfaction for the wrong they have done to the
Country, all the best ground being taken from them, and the barren ground only
left to the Country. And this Case being different from that of Draining in
other places, why should not the Tenants now Drain and improve themselves,
being now willing and ready to make appear how they wi^ do it. Besides,

The Undertakers say they paid a great sum of money to the Crow, and that they
have General warranty. It is answered, the King gave warranty no otherwise in
the true meaning, but upon the terms in the Contract expressed. viz. That the
Commoners should be agreed with, before the work should be begun. Secondly that
the Tenants should be left in a better condition. Thirdly, The Land to be
conveyed, was to be Waste, Boggy, and surrounded Ground; and accordingly in the
close of one of the Contracts, ga^e warranty to his Attorny-General to pass the
conveyance according to the true intent thereof. The Undertakers failed on
their parts in all, and therefore the King was abused, the Country damnified,
and they ought on all sides to make recompense for doing what they were never
set on work to do, but by themselves.

The Participants say they have suffered very great damages by the R^ots. The
Tenants answer, That the Undertakers had a Commission of Oyer and Terminer to
try the Rioters, why did they not then proceed in a Legal way of Justice? and
why not now, but that the Law is against them? The Tenants therefore have
occasion to bless God, and thank His Majesty and the Parliament, for his
Gracious Pardon; and under all, are bold to rest upon the Law of the Land, by
which they are ready to stand or fall.


