THE PRACTICAL CHRISTIAN: OR, A Summary View of the Chief Heads OF PRACTICAL
DIVINITY; In order to The Begetting, Preserving, and Increasing the Life and
Power of Godliness in the Hearts and Lives of Professors; Laid down in a Plain
and Succinct manner, by way of Meditation.

Drawn up, and principally intended for the Use and Benefit of the Citizens of
Exeter; and especially those that were his peculiar Flock.

By J. B. once their Pastor.

I have more Understanding than all my Fathers, for thy Testimonies are my
Meditation,

Psalm. 119.99. Meditatio, Mentis Ditatio.

A Mind well Employed, is Grace well Improved.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible on London Bridge; and are
to be sold by Michael Hide, Bookseller at Exeter, 1670.

To the Candid Readers; especially those that were his Usual Hearers in the
City of Exeter.
Grace, Mercy, and Peace be multiplied from God the Father, through our Lord
Jesus Christ,

2 Timothy. 1.2.
Dearly Beloved in our best Beloved, and Dearest Lord and Savior.
KNowing, that shortly I must put off this my Tabernacle, even as my Lord Jesus
Christ has showed me, 2 Pet. 1.14; I have endeavored that you may be able
after my Decease, to have those things always in Remembrance, which I have
Taught unto you: In order to it, I have Selected and Contracted the choicest,
and most necessary Truths to be Known, Believed, and Practiced by you, for the
furthering of the Edification, Consolation, and Salvation of your Souls. I have
done all very briefly, plainly, and by way of Meditation. If you desire to know
the Reasons of my so doing, and committing all to Writing; you may be pleased
to take this short Account.

First, I have done it so briefly, that I might not burden your Memories, and
that your Heads and Hearts might be the more intent on the most special things;
such as are of nearest, and greatest Concernment to your Souls; and I hope that
I may say without Boasting, that I have written Much in a Little; and if you
will but weigh well what I have Written, you may find a great deal more Matter
than Words. I have backed all with Scripture-Proofs, (some with more, some with
less) that so you might the more clearly see the Truth of all; only citing the
Text, not the Words (but only to some places) that so the Book may not swell
too big.

Secondly, I have done it in so plain, and familiar a Style, that I might
condescend to the Capacity of the meanest Scholar in Christ's School; and
because Truth, when it is in the plainest Dress, is most Comely. It Is a sign
of a Weak Stomach, to mind more the Garnishing of the Dish, than the Meat in
it; the sin of too many here, and every where, to Like the Dressing more than
the Food; and to look more to the Words than to the Matter; and therefore my
Endeavor has been to do what the Wise Preacher did before me, Eccles. 12.10.
The Preacher sought out Acceptable Words, even Upright Words of Truth; that is,
profitable and Comfortable Words, True and Faithful Words, that so I might,
Prodesse magis quam placere; non alta, sed apta proferre; not High words, but
Fit words, because, as Good Matter without Fit Words, is but as Good Meat in a
Sluttish Dish; so Neat words without Solid Matter, is but Copiosa egestas, a
Gaudy Poverty; both together are most acceptable.

Thirdly, I have done it by way of Meditation, because it is only Meditation
that brings home any Truth to the Heart, and makes it useful, and profitable;
the Be which only lights on the Flower, and does not stay on it, gathers no
Honey; it is her abiding a while on it, that sucks out the Sweet of it: That
Person that takes a Cordial, and holds it only a little while in his Mouth, and
then puts it out, will find little benefit by it; so will He that Hears and
Reads the Word and never Meditates on it: it is only Meditation, that makes
every Truth sweet and profitable; and because (what Chrysostom says of Faith,
is true of Meditation) (...), it does make God, and Christ, his Precepts and
Promises, and all we See, and Hear, and Read, to be ours; it applies, and
digests, and assimilates us into the Nature of those Spiritual, and Heavenly
things we meditate on, 2 Cor. 3. ult.

Fourthly, I have put all in Writing. 1. Because as Abel by his Faith being
dead, yet speaks, Heb. 11.4. So, this Treatise may speak, and live, when I am
dead; as Christ and his Apostles, now in Heaven; yet by their Doctrine,
Examples, and Writings they preach unto the Saints on Earth. 2. That so what
has slipped out of your car, might be recalled by the eye Lam. 3.51. and the
Eye might affect the Heart, with what you have formerly heard. A good man's
Words may pass as Wind in the Air, when what he Writes, may prove of weight on
the Heart, as the Apostle's words did, 2 Cor. 10.10. Whence it is that
Sacraments (say some) excel Sermons, because in Sermons Truths are only Audible
to the Ear; but in Sacraments, things are Visible to the Eye. 3. Because by
Writing, Ministers they communicate their Labors not only to those at home,
but abroad; and so profit more by their Writing, than they do sometimes by
their Preaching. 4. Because by Writing, a Ministers Labors are more permanent,
and abiding upon the Heads, and Hearts of those that make use of them: Sermons
(as one, Well) are as Showrs of Rain, that Water for the present, when as Books
are as Banks, and Heaps of Snow, that lie long on the Earth, and keeps the Corn
more warm in the Winter. In all these respects, I have put Pen to Paper, and
communicated these Meditations to your Eye, as well as your Ear.

If any object, There are Books enough Printed, and of this Subject also of
Meditation. I grant it; I am of his Judgment who said, For Polemical Tractates
(which hold up different Opinions) A few are too many, but for Practical
Treatises (which press to the Duties of Holiness) Many are too few, which made
Austin to say, Vtile est plures libros, a pluribus fieri, the more, the better,
so long as they are helps to the promoting of Godliness. The Reasons is
obvious, because we find by sad, and general Experience, though most are
willing to know, yet very few are forward to practice what they know, and
therefore all helps little enough to quicken them to Duty; And the rather,
because what Aristotle said of his Ethics, is much more true of Gods, (...),
it is not Knowledge, but practice that denominates, and evidences any to be a
truly knowing Christian, and Religious Man. He that knows Gods will, and does
it not, is a Liar, 1 Epistle, John 2.4. A Fool, Math. 7.27. and worse than so:
the more any knows without Practice, the more like he is to the Devil, who
knows more than any, but practices nothing; besides, there is nothing will more
aggravate the sin, and Condemnation of Men at the last, than this, That they
have known so much, and practiced so little, Luke 12.48. Math. 10.14, 15.
Heathens at the last day, will wring their Hands, that they have known no more
of God, by the means vouchsafed them; but Christians will rend their Hearts,
that they have known so much of God to no better purpose: So as all Practical
Treatises, or Treatises quickening unto Practice, are few enough to awaken men
to their Duties. And as for those that treat of Meditation (as many Worthies
have done, whose Books I am not worthy to carry after them) yet I find none
that have Collected all necessary Practical Truths, and Duties into such a way
of Meditation, but either are too large, or too straight; and therefore, I hope
this may, through the Blessing of God, conduce much to the benefit of those, to
whom God shall give Hearts to make use of it, which is the Unfeigned Desire,
and Earnest Prayer of

Your Faithful, but Unworthy, Servant in the Work of the Lord, J. B.

THE CONTENTS.
Cap. 1. OF Meditation in general, wherein the Doctrine, Reasons, Uses: and
there What it is; the Kinds, Motives, Hindrances, Helps, and Directions, Page
1. Cap. 2. Contains the first Head of Meditation, viz. God and the things to be
meditated on in him, where 1. You have three Cautions, 2. What those things
are, as, Page 28 Sect. 1. 1. His Nature, what that is, and that he only is
Jehovah, Page 29 Sect. 2. 2. His Attributes; and here, on four things: 1. What
they are Page 32 2. Kinds of them, 3. The benefit of Meditation on them, Page
33 4. The evidences of an Interest in them, Page 38 Sect. 3. 3. His Word, Page
39 1. In general, What it is, the excellent Properties of it, the Precepts,
Promises, Threatenings and Examples in it, Page 40 2. The Covenant of Grace in
particular; and here, of, Page 42 10. things, what, and why so called; wherein
the Old and New Covenant agree, and differ, etc. Page 43 Sect. 4. 4. His Works,
1: Before time, viz. His Decree, Page 50 2. In Time, as, Page 52 1. Creation,
and, 2. Providence, Page 52 And in the providence of God to meditate, Page 53
1. On the kinds of Providence, which are two, as: 1. Of Mercy; where, of the
properties, Page 54 The Branches of it, sc. His Converting, Page 56 Protecting,
Providing, Disposing, Assisting, Correcting, Supporting, and refreshing
Providence, Page 58 2. Of Justice; and there, of six things, Page 66
2. The parts of Providence, which are three. 3. The extent of it. 4. The Ends
of it. 5. The Experiences we have had of it. 6. How to carry our selves under
glad, and sad Providence, Page 73 Sect. 5. 5. His Worship, where, 1. What it
is, 2. Where 3. When, 4. How, 5. Why he is to be worshipped, 82 Cap. 3. Of
Christ; and twelve things in and about him, as: Page 76 Sect. 1. 1. Who he is,
Page 100 2. What he is, Page 100 3. The infinite Love of God in giving him,
Page 101 4. Of Christ, in undertaking the Great Work of Redemption, Page 101 5.
The Loveliness of this Redeemer, Page 101 6. The Greatness of his Work, Page
105 7. The Ways and Means of his effecting our Redemption, Page 111 8. The
Privileges that come by Him, Page 112 9. The Evidences of our Interest in Him,
Page 1 10. The means of getting an Interest in Him, Page 13 11. The Motives to
labor after it, Page 116 12. How to walk worthy of, and suitable to, such a
Redeemer, Page 118 Cap. 4. Of the Spirit of God; and here, of five things, 1.
Who he is, Page 121 2. What his Office, 3. Evidences of our Interest in him,
Page 123 4. Motives to seek it, and, 5. Means to procure it, Page 127 Cap. 5.
Of Man, and in, and about him, 1. Of the fourfold state of Man, 2. The Four
last ends of Man, Page 133 3. Such things about the Soul, and Body, Tongue,
Tallents, Time, and Eternity of Man, as may most conduce to the Enabling Man to
the Answering God and Christ, and the Spirit, in what they have done for Man,
Page 206 Sect. 1. Of the Blessed state of Man by Creation; and here, on three
thing, Page 133 2. The cursed state of Man by Transgression, and here, of two
things, the Causes and Consequents, Page 135 3. His Gracious state by
Regeneration; and here, of Four things, Page 137 1. What, 2. Signs, 3.
Motives, and, 4. Means for it, Page 159 4. The Happy state of Man by
Glorification, and here, of five things: 1. what, 2. properties, 3. certainty,
4. who they are that shall partake in it, Page 165 5. Of Death, and here, on
two things: 1. Such things as may fit us for it, 2. Such things as may make us
willing to it, Page 173 6. Of Judgment, and here, on ten things, as the
Certainty, Uncertainty, the near approach of it, etc. Page 185 7. Hell, and
here, on ten things: What, and the Hideousness of the place, etc. Page 195 8.
Of Heaven, and here, on four thing; as what it is, the excellent Titles given
to it, etc. Page 201 Sect. 9. 9. Of the Soul, and here, of five things;
especially of the right ordering of our Conversation, in order to the Salvation
of our Souls, Page 206 Sect. 10. Of the Body; and here, of two things, 1. The
Admirable structure of it: and, 2. The excellent use of it, Page 234 11. Of the
Tongue; and here, on two things, 1. The ends wherefore God gave it, 2. The
Great need we have to employ it to those ends, Page 235 12. Of our Talents
Corporal, and Spiritual; and what need we have to employ them well, Page 236
13. Of our Time, wherein you have five or six things to be seriously thought
on; Page 237 14. Of Eternity; and therein of four things, Page 241 Cap. 7. Of
the World, and therein to Meditate on three things, as: 1. Those things in the
Creature that engage us to Love God, 2. Those things that disengage us from the
inordinate Love of the Creature, 3. The Duties we owe to God for the Creatures,
and What the Creatures teach us, Page 243 Cap. 8. Of the Good and Evil Angels,
by which God governs the World, Page 264 Sect. 1. Of the Good Angels; and here,
of three things, 1. What they are, 2. Their Office, 3. Our Duties in reference
to them, Page 265 Sect. 2. Of Evil Angels; and here, on these things; 1. That
there are such, 2. What they are, 3. How they became such, 4. What their
Office, 5. What their Properties, 6. What our Duties are in respect of them,
Page 274 Cap. 9. Of Occasional Meditation, from Morning to Evening; at Home and
Abroad, Page 301
The Reader is desired to mind these following Mistakes, which have escaped the
Press, by reason of the Author's absence.
PAge 8. for 2 Kings 8. read 2 Kings 6. ult. P. 9. for connected, r. converted.
P. 11. The six first lines should come in after the Spiritualness of Duty, the
middle of the Page. P. 12. leave out (The lives.) P. 49. after ruder, put in
the Old Covenant. P. 94. for Joel, r. Jonah 3.7, 8. P. 132. for providing, r.
propagating the Gospel. P. 136. at the bottom, after Satan, put in, That he did
not Cause you to abuse him. P. 138. after mentioned, leave out, to sin. P. 159.
for ru^. r. run. P. 160. for converting, r. conquering. P. 197. for
misericordis, r. misericordia. P. 274. for conversation, r. conversion. P. 260.
for Scriptures, r. Creatures. To see the Creatures.
A SYNOPSIS: O. R Body of Practical Divinity In Order To the begetting,
preserving, and increasing of the Life, and Power of Godliness in the hearts,
and lives of Professors, etc.
Psalm. 104.34. My Meditation of Him shall be sweet.


CHAP. I.
AMongst all Religious Duties, there is none more necessary, profitable, and
comfortable, to a Christian, than Divine Meditation; and yet, no duty that
Christians are less acquainted with, more backward to, and careless of, than
that: I have therefore made choice of this Subject to speak unto, and the more
fully, that I might thereby quicken my self, and you, to the more frequent
practice of it; and the rather, because Experience shows it, to be the life and
soul of Religion. Without Meditation, a Christian is but the Carcass of a
Christian; it is as easy for a Man to live without a Heart, as a Christian to
live a spiritual life without Meditation. And, because some complain of
scarcity or want of matter, others of plenty, or too much matter, and others of
distraction, or want of Method; I shall endeavor therefore, to select the
choicest things for Meditation through the body of Divinity, and reduce them to
their several heads: that so, how-ever you cannot remember them all, yet you
may have them still before your Eyes, and go on in the meditation of them, day
after day; or choose out such heads, as your present Exigencies most call for.

But first of all, before I enter on the particular heads of Meditation, I
shall open to you the nature of it, and press upon you the practice of it.

For the connection of the words, take it briefly thus: The whole Psalm is no
other than a Meditation of David's, on God's Attributes and Works.

In the first Verse, you have his Meditation on God's Attributes: In the 2d.
Verse to the 26. you have his Meditation on God's Works, first of Creation, and
then of Providence.

First, His works of Creation: and here, on the work of every day; as for
Example, the first day God made the Light, and that you have in the second
Verse; the second day he made the Heavens, Verse the second; the third day he
made the Earth, and the Water, and that you have Verse. the 5, to the 19; the
fourth day he made the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, and this you have Verse
the 19, to the 25; the fifth day he made the Sea, and the Fish in it, and this
you have in the 25th. Verse; the sixth day, he made Man, and the Beasts of the
Earth, and this you have in the midst of the rest, Verse. 14, 15, 16.

Secondly, Having meditated on the works of Creation; next, he proceeds to the
works of his Providence, Verse. 26. to the 31. And, from the consideration of
all these glorious Attributes and Works of God, breaks out into Gratulation,
Meditation, Affection, and Supplication, First, Gratulation, Verse 31, 32, 33:
Meditation and Affection, Verse the 34: and Supplication, Verse the last.

That which I have made choice of to treat on, is Meditation, Verse the 34.
Whence, the Observation is obvious to all.

Doct. That, It is the property of Saints to meditate on God, and the things of
God.

For the more profitable opening of it, we shall enquire into these things.

1. What Meditation is. 2. The Kinds of it. 3. Prove the Point. 4. Give you the
Grounds of it; and then, 5. Apply it.
First, What Meditation is: The word in the original has a double
signification, it is rendered sometimes Meditation, and sometimes Speech. So
some translates it: but our last, and the most [Meditation], and so I shall
handle it. This duty is several ways expressed in the Scripture, as for
instance. First, Sometimes, Remembering, as Psalm. 63. Verse. 6. When I remember
thee on my Bed, explained by the following words, and meditate on thee in the
Night -- Watches: Secondly, Sometimes it is called A thinking on God, Psalm.
48.9. We have Thought upon thy loving kindness, O God. Sometimes A musing on
God, Psalm. 143. Verse. 5. I muse upon the work of thine hands.

Q. But what is it?

A. In the general, no other than, The fixing of our thoughts upon a thing; or,
A serious musing on it, that we may the better understand it, and be more
affected with it. So as there are two special Acts in it; First, One direct
upon the thing meditated on; and the Second reflect, upon the Person
meditating. The first is an act of the mind, or the contemplative part of the
understanding; the second is an act of the conscience applying the thing unto a
man's self. The end of the first is to enlighten, of the second to better the
soul.

Secondly, For the kinds: It is either deliberate, and solemn, or occasional
and sudden. First, Deliberate, and Solemn, is, when we solemnly set apart some
time, and sequester our selves from all company, to think upon some spiritual
matter for the better informing of our judgments, warming of our affections,
and reforming our lives, as that of David in the 119 Psalm.

Secondly, Occasional and sudden, is that which is occasioned by such outward
objects, as by the providence of God are offered unto our senses, as that Psalm.
8. Verse. 3, 4. When I consider, etc. First, of deliberate and solemn
Meditation, I shall open it a little further to you, and therein show you a
little more clearly, What this is, and That this is the property of the Saints,
The grounds of it, and then Apply it.

First, It may be described thus; A serious fixing of our thoughts upon some
thing, with a particular application of it to our selves, so as to be affected
with it, and frame our lives according to it. First, (I say) it is a serious
fixing of our thoughts upon a thing; not a slight and transient thought, but a
fixed and dwel^ing thought, Psalm. 119. My meditation shall be of thee all the
day, Verse 97. Secondly, with particular application of into our selves, like
the good Houswife, Proverbs 31. and 16. She considers a Field, and buyeth it;
so gracious Souls consider of this, and that, spiritual subject and appropriate
it; that is, lay it to their heart, as it is expressed, Isaiah 57.1. The
righteous are taken away from the evil to come, and no man lays it to heart:
And Malachy 2.2. If you will not lay it to heart, etc. Thirdly, so as to be
affected with it: Psalm. 39.3. Whilst I was musing, the fire burned: Psalm. 119
50. This is my comfort in mine affliction: thy word has quickened me: And Verse.
52. I remembered thy judgments of old, and have comforted my self. Fourthly to
frame our lives according to it, as David, Psalm. 119 59. I considered my ways,
and turned my feet unto thy testimonies: And that First, because without
practice, all knowledge is but ignorance, 1 Epst. John 2.4. And secondly, it
will aggravate men's condemnation at the last, Luke 12.48.

Secondly, That this is the property of gracious Souls, you may see in David
here, and frequently elsewhere, Psalm. 63.6. and 143. Verse. 5. Psalm.
119.15.23.48.78.97.99.148. Then, Joseph, Genesis 24.63. And all other godly men,
Psalm. 1. verse. 2d. Malach. 3.16.

Thirdly, For the grounds of it; First, because they know it is their duty,
that which God has commanded, Joshua 1.8. 1 Timothy. 4.15. Colossians 3.2. Set
your affections on things above, etc.

Secondly, Their love to God: Love delights to think on the Person and Thing
beloved, Psalm. 119.97. Oh, how I love thy Law, it is my meditation all the day
long. Amor est ubi amat, non ubi animat, is an old saying, and as true as old,
The mind is where a man loves, and not where he lives. The more men love, the
more they think; and the more they think, the more they love.

Thirdly, The transcendent excellency of God, and the things of God, Psalm.
119.129. Thy testimonies are wonderful, therefore does my soul keep them.
Canticles 1.3. Thy Name is an Ointment poured out, therefore do the Virgins
love thee, Psalm. 3.2, 3.

Fourthly, Because they have received a new nature: They are made partakers of
the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. They are renewed in the spirit of their minds,
Romans 12.2. and thereby are taken off from these things below, to mind, affect,
and pursue those things above. Men of high, and noble spirits cannot endure to
be employed about low, and base things, but those of the highest and greatest
Concernment; so, Gracious Souls they account the things of the World, and the
Flesh too low for them, and desire to have their thoughts to be taken up with
God, and Christ, his Spirit and Kingdom, their precious and immortal Souls;
their safety and welfare here, and to all Eternity.

Such as the man is, such are his thoughts; The liberal man devises liberal
things, Isaiah 32.8. A good man out of the good treasury of his heart brings
forth good things, Math. 12.35.

Use, the First.
1. This shows us the reason why Professors are such Non-proficients in the
School of Christ; namely, because they are so seldom and slight in this weighty
duty of Meditation, rest in hearing, reading, and never think on it more: the
Devil will never trouble such; he cares not how much they are in duty, so he
can prevail with them not to think on it after.

Use, the Second.
For the humiliation of three sorts. First, Such as meditate not at all on God,
or the things of God, as natural, carnal, wordly Men do not, will not; Psalm.
10.4 The ungodly is so proud, God is not in all his thoughts, Viz. with any
delight.

Secondly, Such as have their Meditation on other things, as the ambitious Man
on his honor, the Covetous Man on his wealth, the Voluptuous Man on his
pleasure, the Merchant on his Ships, the Tradesman on his Shop, etc. none of
them any serious thoughts of God, or the things of God.

Thirdly, A worse sort there are that think on God, not to honor him, but
dishonor him; either have low and base thoughts of him, or wicked and ungodly
thoughts; First, Some that have low and base thoughts of God, as ignorant and
superstitious sorts of People, who conceive of God, as an old Man, sitting in
Heaven with a Crown on his Head, and a Scepter in his Hand, looking down upon
his Creatures, and governing the World; others, Though they do not conceive of
him so grossly, with a Bodily substance, but acknowledge him to be a Spirit, yet
not such a Spirit as he has revealed himself to be, a Pure, Holy, Just,
Omnipresent, Omniscient, Omnipotent Spirit; but conceive him to be such a one
as themselves, Psalm. 50.21. Secondly, Others, they have wicked and ungodly
thoughts of him; some, Atheistical thoughts, as those, in Job 21. Verse. 15. Who
is the Almighty, that we should serve him? Others, basphemous thoughts, as
they, Psalm 94. Tush! God sees not, God regards not; Others, distrustful
thoughts, as, 2 Kings 8. last. This evil is of the Lord, Why should I want any
longer upon him? Others, rebellious, contemptuous thoughts, as they, Psalm. 12.
Our Tongues are our own. Who shall control us? Jerem. 18.12. There is no hope,
we will walk after the imagination of our own hearts; and Chap. 44.17.

A Third Use, of Exhortation.
If you will evidence your selves to be Saints indeed, then to make this your
property and practice. That you may be the more willing to it, and able for it,
I shall do four things; First, Give you some Motives to it; Secondly, Discover
and remove the Hindrances of it; Thirdly, Give you some Helps to it; And,
Fourthly, Some Directions for it.

First, By way of Motive, to quicken you to it, Consider with me the Necessity,
Excellency, Utility, and sweetness of this Duty.

First, The Necessity of it, in many respects; as, First, The command of God,
that which he expressly requires, as you saw before, and may further, Deuteronomy. 6.6.
Job 37.14. Eccl. 7.15. Haggai. 1.5, 6.

Secondly, Because it is the end, wherefore he has revealed, and made himself
known to us, in his Word and Works, Psalm. 111.4. Isai. 41.19 20.

Thirdly, Because without Meditation no Conversion, David first considered hi^
ways, and then turned his Feet to God' testim nies, Psalm. 119 59. The Prodigal
first bethought himself, and then returned to his Fathers House, Luke 15. That
there is no Conversion without Meditation, appears, in that such as are
connected, are converted in this way, and Method; First, They he^r the Word;
Secondly are convinced of the Truth Thirdly, Meditates how much it concerns
them; Fourthly, by Meditation come to be affected with it; And, Fifthly, By
affection, are wrought over to a holy resolution of Faith and Obedience.

Fourthly, Because, without Meditation, you cannot profit by any thing you
hear, or read, out of the Word, or see in the works of God. A Plant may as soon
grow without watering, and Meat nourish without digesting, as a Soul profit in
holiness without Meditation: God provides Meat, sends his Ministers to Cook it,
and dress it; it is Meditation must Concoct it; otherwise like Meat undigested,
the Stomach will be burdened with it, and cast it up again; or, if it abide, it
will breed ill humors, and make them sick unto death. The Reasons are obvious;
First, Because, without meditation, the Seed of the Word will lie uncovered in
the Furrows of the Soul; and being uncovered, the Devil will come and steal it
away, as the Birds do the Seed in the Highway, that lies uncovered: Secondly,
Because, without meditation, we shall never be affected with what we hear, or
read out of the Word, Deutr. 6.6. These words which I command thee this day,
shall be in thy heart; and it cannot be in the heart, if we do not meditate on
it. Thirdly, Without meditation, it will not stay, or abide on the heart: it is
meditation that keeps it, and fastens it, and makes it like letters, Engraven
on Gold and Marble, to abide long; Fourthly, Because, Not to meditate on the
Word, is to offer contempt to the Word, as a Man does to that Person, and
thing, which he never regards to mind, and think on; and, Prove. 13 13. He that
despises the Word, shall be destroyed: Fifthly, Because, without meditation,
when Men come to lie on their sick and Deathbeds, their Eyes will be opened,
to see and bewail their folly; for a Man to walk in a way, and never consider
where he is going, and what mischief may befall him in it, How will he befool
himself? How will he wish he had hearkened to God's counsels? Deuteronomy. 32. Oh, that
men were wise, understood this, consider their latter end. Many have lamented,
when it was too late; let us take warning by others harming, Prove. 5.12, 13.

1. It is an Angelical service; the only and the chief Service (that we know
of) that the Angels are exercised in, sc. the meditation of God's glorious
excellencies, will, and ways, and works; and therefore, if we would attain to
the Height of Angels, it must be by Meditation: Dr. Holdsworth, on Psalm. 119.48.

2dly. A second motive is the transcendent Excellency of this duty: First, It
is a duty most pleasing and acceptable unto God, above all other duties; above
all Ear-service, Tongue-service, and Hand-service; if there be not Head and
Heart-service, he abhors all, Isaiah 29.13. But now meditation, that makes all
acceptable, whatsoever defects and failings there be in the rest; the reasons
are, First, Because meditation comes immediately from the heart, which is that
God principally looks to, and delights in: Secondly, Because the secrecy of it
is accompanied with more humility and sincerity, which are the graces God so
much prizeth. Thirdly, Because it is a duty ordinarily more full of
spiritualness and heavenliness, than other duties are. Fourthly, The excellency
of it, appears, in that nothing is able to hinder us from it no Time, nor
Tyrant, though they may from speaking, and acting, yet not from meditating and
thinking on God, and the things of God; the mind of the greatest Slave is still
free to think on what he will: Fifthly, It is that which will transform us more
into the Image of God, from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3. ult. As a Pearl, by the
frequent beating of the Sunbeams upon it, becomes more lightsome, and radiant,
like the Sun; so Meditation, not only makes the faces of Christians to shine,
but their lives in the Eyes of all, God, Angels, and Men; good, and bad:
Sixthly, In that it is an Anticipation of glory, a perspective to show us the
glory of Heaven, Jacob's Ladder to carry us up to Heaven, a taking possession
of Heaven in our minds, before we come there in our bodies; by this, we may,
with Stephen, see Christ standing at the right hand of God, ready to receive
us, and with Moses talk with God face to face, and with the Apostle be rapt up
to Heaven, and see that happiness we are loath to leave, and cannot utter what
it is, 2 Cor. 12.

The Third Motive is the great Utility of this duty, no duty more profitable
for Humiliation, Consolation, Edification, and Salvation.

First, For Humiliation: Meditation makes men look into, and seriously consider
the lives of their ways, the multitude and greatness of their sins, the
Circumstances that do aggravate them, the sad fruits, and effects of them, and
so humble themselves the more thoroughly under them: As Peter, after he had
denied his Lord and Master, when he reflected, and considered, whom he had
denied, and who he was that denied him, and how often he had denied him, it
made him go out, and weep bitterly; whereas on the contrary, if men never set
apart any time to meditate of the sinfulness of their nature, the evil of their
ways, and the circumstances by which they are aggravated, they can never be
humbled under them, as they ought, Jerem. 8 6. No man repents of his
wickedness; Why? because no man said, What have I done? etc.

Secondly, Most profitable for Consolation; First, Because it makes men to look
after the Remedy, the grace of God has vouchsafed to free them from sin, and
misery, and labor to know Jesus Christ, who he is, and what he has done, and
suffered for them, and what they must do to get an interest in his Merits,
Graces, Benefits; Secondly, It makes them to acquaint themselves with the
Covenant of Grace, which he has made and sealed in the blood of his Son, to
get an interest in it, and those many and precious promises of pardon and
peace, salvation and deliverance; all, Yea, and Amen, in Christ Jesus; as you
may see in David, Psalm 94.19. Whereas, without meditation, men are careless of
these things, and so deprive themselves of that support and comfort, which
otherwise they might have in time of trouble: Thirdly, That which will clear up
a work of grace, evidence them to be truly gracious Souls, according to that of
the wise man, Prove. 23.7. As he thinks in his heart, so is he. As a Man's
thoughts are, such is the man. Meditation (as one well says) is the
Touchstone of a Christian, it shows what Metal he is made of; it is a spiritual
Index, to show what is within, as the Index shows what is in the Book, so
Meditation shows what is in the heart. The godly Man thinks on God's Name,
Malachi 3.17. but for the wicked man, God is not in all his thoughts, Psalm 10.

Thirdly, Profitable for Edification, and building up the whole man in grace
and gracious practices: it betters the Head, the Heart, the Tongue, the Life.

First, It betters the Head, keeps out evil thoughts, and furnishes them with
good thoughts; it makes men look into the nature of things, to search the
Scriptures, whether things be so, or no; to examine their own ways, whether
they be good, or evil, and so to make the greater progress in ways of
well-doing, as David, Psalm. 119.99. whereas, without Meditation, all that men
read, and hear, is but -- rudis indigestaque moles, a kind of confused
knowledge. As it betters the Understanding, so the Memory; for it recalls
things forgotten, and imprints them the more deeply in the memory, rivets them
there, and turns them into blood and spirit, juice and marrow: whereas the
neglect of it spoils the memory, and makes them lose the benefit of all they
have heard, and read, and seen.

Secondly, It betters the Heart, for it makes men apply general truths to
themselves in particular, turns Brain-knowledge into Heart -- knowledge,
Contemplative-knowledge into Practical -- knowledge. And needs must it better
the Heart, seeing it excites and stirs-up the Affections to love and delight
more in what they hear, and read, Psalm. 39.3. Psalm. 119.97. It quickens also
to duty, and fits men for it, Psalm. 5.1. It sets the heart also in Tune; the
Musician first puts his Instrument in Tune, and then plays his Lesson: so
Meditation, it tunes the Heart, and then enables to holy duty: in a word, it is
the Wing of the Soul, by which it mounts up to Heaven, and takes a view of the
Celestial Canaan.

Thirdly, It betters the Tongue, it furnishes a Man with matter, and Method,
to speak unto God's glory, and other's edification, whether at home, or abroad;
in trading or traveling, whatsoever he is about: whereas without meditation, a
Scholar is no more, than what he reads out of his Book, and a Hearer no more
than what he hears out of the Pulpit. Hearing brings truth to the Ear, but
Meditation brings it into the Heart: The Be first sucks the flower, and then
by working in the Hive, makes Honey of it; so must Christians, after hearing,
work it on their hearts; or no Honey of Grace.

Fourthly, It betters the Life, in that it causes the Word to have power on
the heart, to persuade, and draw Men to the practice of it. 1 These. 1.5, 6.
Whereas without meditation, it has no influence upon the heart, as you may see
generally in those that neglect it; And it stands with reason, because Meat
(though never so well dressed) does not nourish us, is a burden, rather than a
benefit, being not digested; so is it with the food of the Soul, as we find in
those, by sad experience, that cannot endure to have it brought home to their
Consciences.

Fourthly, It Is profitable unto Salvation, 1 Cor. 15. verse. 1. Then are ye
saved, if you keep in memory what I have preached unto you, that is, so as to
meditate on it: And Psalm first, Blessed is the Man that delights in the Law of
God, and meditates therein Day and Night: Blessed with Grace here, and Glory
hereafter.

A fourth Motive, drawn from the sweetness of it. It must needs be very sweet;
First, Because, if it be delightful to wicked men, to think on evil, then much
more for godly Men to think on that which is good, and the chief Good:
Secondly, Because, it not only carries up the Soul to Heaven, but brings down
Heaven into the Soul: It is a beginning of the beatifical Vision, a handsel of
Heavens happiness, a fore-tast of Eternal Life. This is it made David say, The
meditation of him was sweet, and to account it sweeter than the Honey, or the
Honeycomb, Psalm. 19. and to esteem it above Thousands of Silver and Gold.
Psalm. 119. Thus you see enough by way of Motive. That which I shall do next,
will be, To remove the Letts that hinder Men from this duty; Because there is
not one Duty that meets with more rubs and hindrances, both from within and
without, than this of Meditation, especially from Satan, who sets himself most
against this, That men may not reflect upon their ways, and thereby be moved to
get out of his snare; It should be our wisdom therefore to break the Cords of
this Hellish Philistim; The benefit and comfort of it will make amends for all.

Q. But what are these Lets and hindrances?

Ans. They are either vain pretenses, or sinful lusts.

First, Vain pretenses; as for instance, First, Some, and the most pretend the
difficulty of it, that it is a very hard matter, to sequester a man's self, and
keep the heart close to God, in spiritual things. Answer, It Is true, it is so;
but consider, So are all excellent things, (...), But this should be no
discouragement, but rather an encouragement to labor the more after them; It Is
a hard work for Men to Plow, and Sow, and Reap; to digg in Mines for Gold and
Silver; to make long Voyages through many Storms: yet all this men are willing
to do, for gains-sake. How much more should we undertake this work of
Meditation; seeming, though never so hard and harsh in regard of the practice,
yet it is sweet in regard of the profit. This, as you have seen, betters head,
heart, tongue, life. Secondly, the hardness and harshness of it, is only at the
first entrance upon it, use and exercise will make it facil and easy; Christ's
Yoke, at the first putting on, seems heavy, but when it is once on, and worn a
while, it becomes easy, and will prove a Crown at last; It Is hard to get up to
the top of a high Mountain, but when a Man is up, he finds a very pleasant,
and delightful prospect, that abundantly recompenceth all his labor, and pain;
so will this duty of meditation, it will cause us to come down from the Mount,
as Moses, with our faces shining, and our lives also.

Secondly, Others pretend their weakness, and inability for this duty, in
regard of the blindness of their minds, dullness of their head, deadness of
their spirits; whereas these should quicken them, so much the rather to make
use of it, it being a special means to remove them. Men do not use to abstain
from food, or Physic, because they are weak, but rather make use of them, that
they may get better stomachs.

Thirdly, Others pretend want of matter: whereas this is a vain excuse, it is
not so much want of matter, as want of a heart, for a Man cannot look any
where, above or beneath, within or without, or round about, but he may find
matter enough to employ his head, and heart: the Book of the Creatures, the
Book of the Scriptures, of Providence, of Conscience, are full of profitable
matter, the consideration of our own sins, and corruptions, wants and
necessities, God's continued and renewed Mercies, and Judgments, will afford a
Man matter enough every Day to meditate on.

Fourthly, Others pretend want of leisure, they have so much business, as they
cannot attend it, a vain excuse, for they can find leisure enough to meditate
on vain and sinful things, for vain and foolish talk, and vain and foolish
pass-times, notwithstanding all their worldly occasions. And whatsoever else
men neglect, they ought to have an eye to, and a care of the welfare of their
Souls above all other things, this being the one thing necessary, in comparison
whereof all other things are unnecessary; as men are made to acknowledge, when
they come to lie on their Deathbeds.

Fifthly, Others pretend they want a convenient place, and time; A vain excuse
too; for however a man may not have so convenient a place for secrecy, and
solitariness, as he would, yet there is none that has a heart to the duty, but
he may find some place, or other to do it in. If not in the house with Daniel,
6.10. yet in the Field with Isaac, Genesis 24. And if he be hindered in the Day
time, yet he may do it in the Night with David, Psalm. 6. and Psalm 16. and
Psalm 119. Secondly, Other hindrances are the sinful lusts of the flesh;
First, all sin in general, it so dims and dazles the eye of the mind, as it can
no more behold spiritual Excellencies, than the Owl can the light of the Sun;
Secondly, Some sins in special keep men from it; as, First, Those sins we are
most inclined unto by our constitution, and complexion, these usually insinuate
themselves most, and Satan uses most to tempt unto, either to hinder us from,
or distract us in duty; Secondly, giving way to wandering, and roaving Senses,
vain and wicked thoughts, these keep out better: whence that, Jeremy 14.4. Oh
Jerusalem, wash thine heart from filthiness, how long shall vain thoughts lodge
within thee! The Vessel must first be cleansed of the filth in it, before it
can be capable of sweet and precious Liquor, especially the giving way to
ambitious, covetous, voluptuous thoughts, or inordinate affection to the
honors, riches, pleasures of the World, this you may find our Savior shows to
be that which keeps men from duty, or distracts men in it, Math. 13.22. Mark
4.19. Luke 8.14. These worldly and fleshly thoughts and affections, they are as
Bird-lime to the Wings of the Bird; so entangle the Soul, as it cannot soar
aloft on the Wing of Meditation: they are as Leaden-weights or Plummets tied at
the Legs, to keep men from ascending the Mount of the Lord, and therefore to
hearken to the counsel of the Apostle, Heb. 12.1. and as to keep out all
sinful, and worldly thoughts, so all religious thoughts, when they are
unseasonable, or impertinent to the present business in hand, seeing however
for the matter they be good, yet they are cunningly thrust in by Satan to
distract us in our present Meditation, that so by thinking on two things at
once, we should not receive benefit by either, therefore to watch against them,
and keep our hearts close to the subject we have made choice of to meditate on.
Thus for the Letts.

Thirdly, Follow the Helps to meditations; and the First may be this, To choose
out some special subject to meditate on, either concerning God, or our selves,
and not run from one to another: Secondly, Set about it with affection to it,
for what we affect, that we delight to think on; Thirdly, Get an inward
principle of grace, that may elevate your spirits, and mount your minds upward,
heavy things they naturally descend, because they have a principle inclining to
it: light things ascend, because they have a principle inclining to it. And
therefore (I say) get such an inward principle of grace, that may call us
upward; look as it is with a worldly-minded man, whersoever he is, or whatsoever
he is doing, still the World is in his thoughts; when he rises up, and when he
lies down, yea, and when he sleeps, he dreams of the World; nay, in his best
services, hearing, receiving, fasting, praying, still his heart is on his
honors, pro^^, pleasures; so it is with a godly man, that has received a
Principle of grace; wheresoever he is, and whatsoever he is doing, his heart is
still Godward, and Grace-ward, and Heavenward. As soon as he is awaked, he is
presently with God, and walks all the day after with God, as Noah, Genes. 11.6.
and at Night he endeavors to sleep with God, Psalm 4. [last]. His whole
conversation is in Heaven, Phil. 3.20.

A fourth help is temperance in the use of the Creature: this clears the head
from Vapors, the Body from humors, that would distemper it, and unfit it for
duty, and renders the Body every way serviceable to the Soul.

Fifthly, To keep a narrow watch over our Thoughts within, and our Senses
without, that they do not withdraw our hearts from what we are to meditate on.

Sixthly, Pray unto God so to fit us for it, assist us in it, and bless it to
us, as it may be honorable to him, and profitable and comfortable to us: So
much for the Helps.

The fourth thing I promised, was the Rules, and directions to be observed in,
and about it; and these respect the Person, the Gesture, the Place, the time,
and the manner; First, For the Persons that would meditate with profit and
comfort, they must be thus qualified, Holy, humble, chaste, and meek; First,
Holy, because unholy ones, neither will nor can meditate on holy things with
any affection or delight; Secondly, Humble, because God resists the proud, and
gives Grace only to the humble, James 4. Thirdly, Chaste, because such as are
laden with lust, are ever learning, and never come to the knowledge of the
truth, 2 Timothy 3.7. Fourthly, Meek, because passion blindes the mind, and
distempers the whole man.

Secondly, For the Gesture to be used in meditation, no certain rules can be
given, but every one to use that which he finds by experience to be most
helpful to him in duty: only in the general, that it be Reverential, and such
as may most stir up Devotion, and keep us most attentive to, and intentive on
the duty.

Thirdly, For the Place of meditation, we may meditate with Isaac in the Field,
Daniel in the Chamber, David in the Bed, Peter on the House top, Christ in the
Mount: it is not much material where it be, so we observe the counsel, (a great
Master in this Art gives) which is to have an eye to three things, Secrecy,
Silence, and Rest; The first excludes company, the second noise, the third
motion, all very useful to prevent distraction, which we are very subject to in
this duty.

Fourthly, For the time of solemn meditation, we should make Conscience of it,
before, in, or at every Duty of God's Worship; we should do well to set apart
some time every Day. Psalm. 4.3. A godly man is said to be a man set apart: as
God sets him apart for himself by Election, so he should set himself apart for
God, by Meditation; and when you do, to take the best and fittest season (for
every thing is beautiful in its season): now the seasons for performing this
duty, are either ordinary, or extraordinary; First, For the ordinary seasons,
they are either the Weekday, o^ the Sabbath Day; now here to observe these
Rules First, It will be profitable to meditate on som^thing every Day in the
Week, but absolutely necessary on the Lord's Day, as being in a special manner
sanctified and set apart for that purpose therefore called the Lord's Day,
Revel. 1.10. Because, he that is the only Author of it, ought to be the whole
subject of it on that Day; Secondly For the fittest time of the Day, no man can
prescribe to others, but every one to take that which he can best spare from
his particular calling, an^ wherein he finds himself best disposed for i^
Jacob used it in the Morning, Genes. 28.16. Isa^^ in the Evening, Genes. 24.63.
Peter in the Midday, Acts 10. David in the Night, Psalm. 63. The most free and
quiet seasons are the Morning, an^ the Evening, for the better imprinting
things i^ the memory, whence Bishop Hall, and Mr. Baxt^^ commended these
seasons out of their own experience: but we cannot prescribe to any; on^^ leave
every one, as he finds the temper of his body and spirit most inclined, and
disposed to; Thirdly, Though none strictly bound to any part of the Day, yet
none to leave themselves at random, and at large, to do it at any time of the
Day, but appoint some set-time for it, either the Morning or Evening, either
before or after Supper, or a little before we compose our selves to rest. The
reason is, because if we should leave our selves at random, we should never be
constant in this Exercise, but shift it off from one time to another: Fourthly,
When you have set the time, then be careful to observe it constantly (unless
some urgent necessity prevent) because otherwise fickleness, and unconstancy
will keep us from profiting by it, and soon make us weary of it.

Secondly, For extraordinary Seasons, they are amongst others, these; First,
When the spirit of God does in a more than ordinary manner move and incline to
it, when the Spirit lifts up the heart to Heaven, then to lift up with him, to
nourish and cherish those motions; Secondly, When you are under more than
ordinary trouble of Spirit, then to apply your selves to this duty, for
Cordials are never more seasonable than in times of fainting, Psalm. 94.19. 2
Cor. 4. 2 last verses: Thirdly, When either Age or sickness do summon us to
death, then is a fit season to meditate on God, and the things of God, when all
other things in the World begin to leave us, then to think on those things will
never leave us, for it is observable in the Saints, they have been most heavenly
in their mediations, affections, and expressions toward their end, as Jacob,
Genes. last; Moses, Deuteronomy. 33. and 33. chap. our Savior in the 14, 15, 16, 17.
chap. of John, we should follow them in the same practice. As the pulling down
of one Balance, is the lifting up of another; so the drawing down of the body
to Earth, should be the lifting up of the Soul to Heaven: As the Soul here is
usually at the worst, when the Body is at the best; so the Soul should be at
the best, when the Body is at the worst.

The fifth Circumstance, is the Manner how we are to perform this duty, and
that is thus, Cordially, reverently, seriously, affectionately, constantly, and
orderly: First, Cordially, because it is not the meditation of the head, but the
heart God looks unto: Prove. 4. My Son give me thy heart. Luke 2.19. Mary
pondered Christ's sayings in her heart, Psalm. 19. last, and 49.3. Secondly, To
do it reverently, remembering and considering he is a great King, and his Name
is dreadful amongst the Heathen, Malachy 1. ult.; therefore to take heed of any
unreverent, or careless behavior in his presence and worship, as being a great
dishonor to him, and that which he sharply reproves in those formal and lazy
Priests, Mal. 1. [about the end]; Thirdly, Seriously, so as to keep the mind
intent upon the business in hand, and not to give way to any other thoughts,
though they be good thoughts, because they are unseasonable at that time, and
will thrust out the other, and so make both useless: to keep also a narrow
watch over our hearts, and senses, that they be not avocated, or drawn aside by
other objects. Fourthly, Affectionately, so as to have our affections stirred,
and warmed, and wrought upon by those things we meditate on, as David here in
the Text, [My Meditation of him shall be sweet, and I will be glad in the
Lord]; so to think on spiritual, and heavenly things, as they may leave an
impression upon the Soul, as the Seal does on the Wax, that so your affections
may answer your cogitations, as the Wax does the Seal, and the Echo the voice;
As for Example, when you think on the glorious Majesty of God, to make your
hearts stand in aw of Him; when on his Love, Grace, Mercy, to have your Hearts
thereby indear'd to him: Secondly, When on Christ, the amiableness, and fullness
that is in him, and in him for you; to have your desires drawn out the more,
after nearer, sweeter, fuller communion with him: when on the Holy Ghost, his
sweet motions, and invitations, to have your Hearts opened to receive Him, and
obey Him in them: Fourthly, When on the Word, to do it with a particular
Application: Fifthly, When on God's Works of Mercy, and Justice, to have your
Hearts melt with the one, and tremble at the other: Sixthly, When on your
selves, your sins and corruptions, to be humbled under them; when on the
Evidences of God's love and grace, to rejoice in them: Seventhly, When on the
World, and the things of it, to have your hearts disengaged from them, and hang
loose to them; Lastly, When on Death, to live in a continual expectation, and a
religious preparation for it: when on the Judgment-Day to cast up your
accounts, and sit in judgment on your selves, that you may not be condemned
with the World: so think on Hell, as your Hearts may tremble at sin that made
it; and so think on Heaven, that your conversation may be there, where you hope
e're long to have your Habitation to all Eternity.

Fifthly, To do it constantly, so as to observe the due, and the appointed
time, or otherwise omission and intermission may soon cause amission, and so
dead the affection, as to become weary of it, and cast off the duty, and
therefore to be constant in it, and continue so long in it, until our hearts be
affected with what we think, and we receive some benefit by it.

Sixthly, To do it orderly, for God being a God of Order, he loves Order in us:
to this end to have an eye to three things, the Ingress, the Progress, and the
Egress: As for Example, to begin with Hearing, or Reading, and then go on with
Meditation, or thinking on it, and then end all with Prayer: for (as Mr.
Greenham well said) Hearing, and reading, without Meditation, is useless:
Meditation without reading, and hearing fruitless, and both without prayer will
be successless (miss a blessing). More distinctly and fully: First, for the
Ingress, or Entrance upon it, we are to prepare for it, by making choice of
some particular subject, most suitable to your present condition, and then lift
up an Ejaculation for the Lord direction, assistance, and blessing on it;
Secondly, For the Progress in it, to observe a Method in it, either such as
Scholars use to do in Meditation on a subject; as, First, The Definition, or
Description; Secondly, The Division, or kind, or parts; Thirdly, The Causes
efficient, material, formal, final; Fourthly, The fruits, and the effects, and
the like Logical heads, all which you may see exemplified in Bishop Hall's, and
Mr. Roger's Seven Treatises, or thus (which I conceive a more profitable way,
for our more ordinary sort of hearers, (being not acquainted with this art) to
proceed in your Meditations, as you are taught; First, On the Doctrine, then
the Proofs, then the Reasons, then the Uses, and in them the signs, motives,
means. You that have this Book (because your Memory is weak) to take it in your
hands, and begin with the first Head of Meditation, and then go on, Day after
Day, until you have gone through, and if there be any special subject, you
desire to meditate on, to look into the Contents: Thirdly, For the Egress, or
Conclusion of your Meditation; First, so reflect and look back, how we have
performed it: If not with profit, and comfort, then to take notice wherein we
are defective, and faulty, and humble our selves under it, and mend it the next
time: If we have reaped benefit and comfort by it, to bless God for it, and
conclude all with praise, for his gracious presence with us, and pray he would
make all effectual for the bettering of our heads, and hearts, and tongues, and
lives. And thus of Meditation in general. Next, because most complain of
scarcity, or want of matter; others of distraction, through want of Method, I
have therefore thought fit to select the choicest things for Meditation
(through the Body of Divinity) and reduce them to their several Heads, that so
however you cannot remember them all, yet you may have them still before your
eye, and go on in the Meditation of them, Day after Day.

CHAP. II.
AND first, I shall begin with solemn and deliberate Meditation; and after give
you some heads for sudden and occasional Meditation.

For solemn and deliberate Meditation, the matter of your Meditation may be
reduced to these 6, or 7 Heads, God, and Christ, the Holy Spirit, Man, the
World, and the good and evil Angels, by which God governs the World; First, I
shall show you what special things you are to meditate on in GOD, to begin with
him, who is the beginning of all things, and to be often, and much in
meditation on him, for the more we meditate on him, the more we shall know him,
and the more we know him, the more we shall love him, and the more we love him,
the more we shall desire him, and the more we desire him, the more shall we
labor after communion with him, not only in grace here, but in glory
hereafter: but here, in meditating on God, take with you these three Cautions:
First, To meditate on him in a way of faith, and not reason; because reason
cannot comprehend the Unity in Trinity, or Trinity in Unity. Secondly, Not to
conceive of God out of Christ, because God out of Christ is a consuming Fire,
Hebr. 12. last. Thirdly, Take heed of framing any Image of God in your minds,
he being a Spirit, and an Infinite Spirit, in all, and through all, and above
all; but to conceive of him (I say) in Christ (who is the express Image of the
Father) the Ladder by which we are to clime up to Heaven, to see, and know God.
One well expresses it thus; when I see the body of a living man, I know his
Soul is there also, and therefore when I speak to his body, I speak to his
understanding also, because they are together; so in viewing with the eye of my
mind the humane nature of Christ, glorious in Heaven, I do at the same time
look upon the Godhead, that being personally united unto it, for in him
dwells the Godhead bodily, (or Personally.)

Q. What are those things we are to meditate on, in GOD?

A. His Nature, Attributes, Word, Works, Worship.

1. His Nature, and here take notice what he is in his Being, and that he only
is Jehovah.

1. What he is in his Being: This cannot be conceived, much less defined by
finite Creatures, yet may be described so far, as he has revealed himself in
the Scripture, which is this, An Eternal, Infinite, Perfect, Incomprehensible
Spirit, distinguished into three Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, every
one Co-essential, and Coequal; To open this briefly; mind well, I say, he is a
Spirit, John 4.24. Now what a Spirit is, our Savior tells you, Luke 24.31.
John 1.18. sc. a Substance, or Being that cannot be seen, or felt: 2. I say he
is an Eternal, Infinite, Perfect, Incomprehensible Spirit: these Attributes
distinguish him from all other Spirits, as Angels, and the Souls of men; 1. He
is an Eternal Spirit, i. e. One that had no beginning, nor can have any end, 1 Timothy 1.17. To the King Eternal, etc. and Revel. 1.8. But now Angels, and the
Souls of men, though they shall have no end, yet had a beginning, were Created
by God, Genesis 12.1. 2. God, he is an Infinite Spirit, i. e. Such a Being, as
cannot be contained within any place, 1 Kings 8.27. Behold The Heaven of
Heavens cannot contain him, and Isa. 66.1. But for Angels, and the Souls of
men, they are contained within their proper places; 3. God, he is a perfect
Spirit, unto whom no degree of goodness, or excellency can be added, 1 John
1.5. Genesis 17.1. I am God All-sufficient. But for Angels, and the Souls of men,
they are capable of more degrees of goodness and excellency. 4. God is an
incomprehensible Spirit, Psalm. 145.3. His greatness is incomprehensible, 1
Timothy 1.16. He dwells in light unapproachable, we may more easily comprehend
what God is not, than what he is: but now, for Angels and the Souls of Men, we
may in some measure comprehend what they are, so far forth as God has revealed
it.

3. I add [distinguished into three Persons]. Here to take notice: 1. What a
Person is, sc. a distinct Subsistence, or being, having in it, the whole
Godhead, and distinguished from another, by his incommunicable properties, as
1. Of the Father, to beget, Psalm. 2.7. the Son to be begotten, John 18. and of
the Holy Ghost to proceed from both, John 15.26. 2. To take notice, why we say
Distinguished, and not divided, sc. because the Godhead, being one pure,
simple, unchangeable Being, it cannot be divided, or separated one from the
other, but are in one the other, as you may see clearly, John 14.9. Lastly, I
add Co-essential and Coequal, i. e. Every one true and very God, and not one
before the other, or greater than the other, being every one God, as appears,
in that the same names of God, and properties of God, and actions of God are
given to every Person in the Trinity: The Father God, Ephesians. 13. John 17.3. The
Son God, Isai. 9.6. Heb. 1.8. The Holy Ghost God, Acts 5.3, 4. 1 Cor. 3.16. To
take notice and meditate seriously on these things in the Nature of God,
because the ignorance and want of the serious consideration of it, is the cause
of so many misapprehensions of God, and aberrations from God.

2. That you may the better know what God is, to take notice that he only is
Jehovah, Psalm. 83.18. Thy Name only is Jehovah.

Q. What is the meaning of that?

Ans. This word Jehovah, it imports three things: 1. That he has his Being,
in, and of, and from Himself, being deemed Hava, or Hajah that signifies To
be, and be of himself and from himself. 2. It is he that gave a being to all
that have any being, as Isa. 44.24. I am Jehovah that made all things: and
Romans 11. last, Of him, and through him, and for him are all things, and Acts
17.28. 3. That it is he also that does, and will give a being to all his
words, Exodus 3.15. This is his memorial to all Ages, i. e. of his truth and
faithfulness in all Ages. Exodus 6 3. Where he says to Moses, that he appeared
to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, by the Name of All-mighty; but, by the Name of
Jehovah, I was not known to them, i. e. in making good his promise of
delivering them out of Egypt, and bringing them into Canaan. Now that which
you are here seriously to meditate on, is this, the wonderful and condescending
grace of God to us his poor worthless Creatures, he being Jehovah, having his
being, in, and of and from himself, might for ever have delighted himself in
himself, but being goodness it self would communicate it, in giving a being to
thi^ glorious Fabric of Heaven and Earth, and all that have any being in it;
the serious meditation of this, must needs affect our hearts, with love to him,
and delight in him, that he who had no need of us, should give a being to us,
that he who is so high, and holy above us, should humble himself to have
respect unto us, and have such precious thoughts and purposes concerning our
temporal, and Eternal well-being: this should make us break out in admiration,
and say with Job, and David; Oh Lord, what is man that thou should take
notice of him, make such account of him, set thy heart upon him, and so
magnify him, as not only to make a World for him, but have such precious
thoughts of love to him, respecting both his temporal and Eternal welfare, to
take him into communion with thy self here in grace, and promise him immediate
communion with thy self in glory?

Sect 2. On the Attributes of God, and here take notice of these things; 1.
What they are: 2. The kinds of them: 3. The benefit of a serious meditation on
them: 4. The Reasons why we should have such a serious meditation on them: 5.
The evidences of our interest in them.

1. What the Attributes of God are, sc. Certain Essential properties of God,
whereby he is pleased to make himself known unto us, who otherwise cannot come
to know him, Exodus 3. ult. otherwise called back-parts, not that God has any
back-part, or forepart, but because we can only have an imperfect knowledge of
him, as we have of a man, when we see him only by his Back; we may guess at
him, that it is such an One, but we cannot say expressly it is He, unless we saw
his Face.

2. For the Kinds of Attributes, they are either Incommunicable, or
Communicable,

(1.) Incommunicable are such, as are proper to himself, and not to be found in
the Creature, as these: 1, His Eternity, Psalm 90.2. 2, His Omnipresence, Jer.
23.33. 3, His Omnisciency, 2 King. 8.39. 4, His Omnipotency, Genesis 17.1. 5, His
Immutability, James 1.17. (2.) His Communicable Attributes are such, as are
found in the Creature; as, 1. His wisdom, 1 Timothy 1.17. 2, His holiness, Isa.
6.3. 3, His faithfulness, Psalm. 91.1. 4, His loving kindness, Psalm. 26.7. 5,
His goodness, Psalm. 31.19. 6, His Justice, Zeph. 3.5. 7, His Mercy, Exodus 34.6.
Q. Are these in Men, as they are in God? Ans. No, there is a double difference,
1. In men, they are only qualities, in God they are his very Essence. It Is an
Axiom in Divinity, Quicquid est in Deo, est Deus, Whatsoever is in God, is God.
In the Creature they are only in the Concrete, but in God in the Abstract. God
is not only loving, but God is love, 1 Epist. John 4.16. 2, In the Creature,
they are imperfect, but in some degrees: but in God they are perfect in their
full degrees; He is so just, and so merciful, as he cannot be more.

3. Take notice of the great Benefit that will come by a serious Meditation on
those Attributes. To help you in it; 1. A serious Meditation on God's Eternity,
will be effectual to keep us from minding, affecting, and pursuing too much
these terrestrial things, which perish in the using; and quicken us to get an
interest in an Eternal God, that will abide with us for ever, who is able to
make us Eternally miserable, or Eternally happy; to reward us with Eternal
Life, or to punish u^ with Eternal Death, Math. 25. last. 2. The serious
meditation of God's Omnipresence, will be effectual to keep us from sinning,
because of secrecy; remembering, though there be none else present, God is
present; though there be no eye or ear of the Creatures, yet there is the
All-seeing Eye, and the All-hearing Ear of God. This influence you may find it
had upon Joseph, Genesis 39.9. and Job 31.1, 4. and David, Psalm. 139.1 and will
upon us, if there be any fear of God before our eyes. The Eye and Ear of a
Magistrate and Minister, and a Holy-man has usually authority upon the worst
of men to restrain from sining how much more should the all-discerning Presenc^
of God. 3. The serious meditation of God's Omnisciency, or knowledge of all
things, even the most secret thoughts, and ends, and aims of me^ in all they
think, and speak, and do; will be an effectual means, to keep men from playing
the Hypocrites with God, and Men, being he is Omniscient, and knows the most
secret intentions (...) Men, searches the Heart, and tries the Rein^ to
render to every one according to their Work^ Jer. 17.9. So that however we may
deceive me^ and our own Souls, yet we cannot God, as Gal. 6.^ Which made the
Church to take heed of it, Psalm. 44.19. and Peter to approve his heart to
Ch^^^^ in the profession he made of love to him, Job. 21.17. 4. A serious
meditation on his Omnipotency, will be an effectual means to keep us from
immoderate fearing and doubting, fainting and sinking, in times of straights
and distresses, seeing it is all one to him to help, and relieve in the
absence, as well as the presence of means: by weak, as well as strong means;
yea, without means, and contrary unto means, and will do it, whilst he has
any work for us to do. This was it that supported and comforted David, 1 Samuel
30.6. and Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. and the three Children, Dan. 3.16. And
so will it us, if we will act says in it, remembering there is help with God,
when vain is the help of the Creature. Nothing impossible to God, Luke 1.

5. A serious meditation on God's Immutability, that will be an effectual means
to keep us from despondency, and questioning of his love, when he seems to hide
his Face, considering that he is Jehovah that changes not, Mal. 3.6. The same
yesterday, to day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8. unchangeable in his love, and
grace, and mercy to his. And therefore though we are to be humbled, under every
sin, even the least, yet not to question God's love, because of any, even the
greatest; so long as we are willing to see it, and leave it, Job 15.13. 6, The
serious meditation on God's Wisdom will be an effectual means to quiet our
spirits, in, and under all cross-providences, confusions, and commotions that
we see and meet with in the World, considering he has a hand in all, and
knows how to order, and dispose of all to his own glory, and the best good of
his chosen, Romans 8.28. Isai 30.6. 7, The serious meditation of his Infinite
Holiness, that he is glorious in holiness, Exodus 15. will be a mean^^ to keep
us from giving way to any unholiness in heart, or life, considering he is of
purer eyes, that to behold iniquity, (with the least approbation) Hab. 1.13.
and hates all the workers of iniquity Psalm. 5: 8, The serious meditation of his
Truth and faithfulness, will be a means to keep us from doubting, and
distrusting what he has spoken i^ his Word, considering he is faithful that
has sai^ it, and will do i^, 1 These. 5.23. He never spak^ any thing with his
Mouth, which he has not ful^filled with his Hand, Josh. 23.14.5. 1 King. 8.2^
9, The serious meditation of his Loving Kindness, that will be a means to
patient your spirit under the want of love from the Creature, the
changeableness of their love; considering, who^ God loves, he loves to the end,
John 13.1. eve^ with an everlasting love, Jer. 31.3. as it did D^vid, Psalm. 26,
3. and Psalm, 48.9. 10, The serious meditation of the infinite goodness of God
will quicken you to look up for all that good, (...) has purposed, and
promised, and you stand (...) need of for you, and yours, considering he is god
to all, especially to his: There Is no end of (...) goodness to them, Psalm.
31.19. How great (...) that goodness thou have laid up for them that s^^ thee!
11, The serious meditation on his Imp^^tial Justice, will make you fear to
offend him (...) any thing the least, considering he never di^ will, or can
connive at any sin, no not in his ow^ Amos 3.2. you only have, I known, I will
sure^^ punish you, etc. Nay, he would not spare it (...) his own Son that knew
no sin; yet, if He will ta^^ our sins on him, he would make him feel the
fierceness of his wrath, Lament. 1.12.

Lastly, The serious consideration of his infinite Mercy, will make you look up
to him for mercy, when you can find none from the Creature, considering his
Mercy is over all his Works; especially the Vessels of Mercy, he delights to
show mercy to them, Micah 7. end. And his mercy is from everlasting to
everlasting unto them, Ps. 103. and therefore to be much in meditation on
those. And that further, for these three Reasons.

1. Because, for Men to profess God, and not to give him the glory of his
Attributes, not to let them have authority, and influence on their hearts and
lives, is no other than religious Atheism; it ^s to deny God: for he were no
God, if not such (...) God, as he has revealed himself in his Word and Works,
Titus 1. last. They profess they know God, but in works they deny him, etc. And
how many of those religious Atheists have there been in those evil days that
are past, and still are to be found amongst Professors; who will speak much of
God, and more than others of his Attributes, Word and Works; and yet their
Conversation is (...) contradiction to their profession; pretend the ^^ory of
God, but seek their own honor; the public good, but intend their own
promotion; ^^at they unfeignedly love others, when they can ^ll the while
undermine the credit and comfort of such as differ from them in any Opinion,
yea and persuade others to disaffect them, that they ^ay the more affect them:
Take heed of this reli^^ous Atheism. God will certainly vindicate his ^^ory
from all such as rob him of the glory of his ^ttributes.

2. Therefore to be much and often in meditation on the glorious Attributes of
God, because there is great Authority, Efficacy and Influence in them to
restrain from sinning, and quicken (...) well-doing, and support us under
sufferings, (...) you saw in the forenam'd Example. And this (...) certain, you
will never evidence a work of grace or make any progress in it, unless you
suffer the Attributes of God, to have authority upon you hearts and ways.

3. Therefore to be much and often in the sen^^ous meditation of them; because
this will ma^^ your Faces to shine (like Moses) when you com^ down from the
Mount of Meditation, and tran^form you more and more into the Image of God from
glory to glory, 2 Cor. 13. last.

5ly. To meditate on what Evidences you have an interest in the sweet and
comfort of these A^tributes; because without this, you cannot ma^^ a particular
application of them, or reap any b^nefit, or comfort by them.

Q You will say then, How may we know wheth^^ we have an interest in them?

Ans. Briefly thus: Search and see whether G^^ be your God; for naturally all
men come into (...) World without God, Ephesians. 2.12. If God be (...) your God, God
in Covenant; then all these A^tributes of God are against you, and not for yo^
but if God be your God in Covenant, all his A^tributes are yours, his wisdom to
direct you, (...) Power to protect you, his Truth and Faithfuln^^^ to be your
Shield and Buckler, his Mercy (...) Goodness to follow you per all your days;
and (...) that is His, is yours, to comfort you here, at Crown you hereafter, 1
Cor. 3. last. Romans 2.7, 8.

Q But how shall we know, God is our God in Covenant?

Ans. 1, See if Christ be yours, then God is yours, 1 Cor. 3. last. 2, If you
be God-like, like to Him in his nature, and in your lives, desire, and
endeavor to be holy, as he is holy, 1 Pet. 1.15. 3, If you be such as hearken
unto, and obey the Call of God out of evil Company, separate your selves from
communion with sin and sinners, 2 Cor. 6. two last. 4, If you be such as do not
rest in and content your selves with any degree or measure of godliness, but
labor still after more and more, 2 Cor. 7.1. 1 John 3.2. Math. 5. last. By
these (to name no more) you may know whether God be your God; and if so, then
all his Attributes are yours to meditate on them, and make application of them,
for your supportation, and consolation, Amen.

3. Meditate on the Word of God: and first on the Word in general, and then the
Covenant of Grace in particular.

1. On the Word of God in general: and in, and about the Word, to meditate on
the transcendent Excellency of it, the excellent properties of it, the
Precepts, Promises, Threatenings, and Examples in it.

1. On the transcendent Excellency of it: Consider that it is no other than an
Epistle of the great God, written from Heaven, indicted by his Spirit, conveyed
by his Son, unto his Church; and witnessed, and sealed by the blood of Martyrs.
Oh, what wonderful condescension of the great God, is this, to his poor
worthless Creatures, that, when he might have left us still in our contracted
blindness, and suffered us to grope through inward, to outward and eternal
darkness; He should cause the light to shine forth once more upon us, and
reveal his mind and will, how he would have us to walk, and to worship him, so
as to enjoy him in grace here, and in glory to all Eternity hereafter. How
should the consideration of it affect our hearts, make us to prize and to value
this blessed Book, to love and delight in reading of our Father's Letters; and
the rather, because it is the great Charter of our Peace, our evidence for a
better life, and our Eternal Inheritance, 1 Ep. John 5.13. These things have I
written unto you, that believe on the name of the Son of God, that you may know
you have Eternal Life.

2. To meditate on the excellent properties of it; as 1. The Divinity of it,
that it is all, and every part of it, divinely inspired, 2 Pet. 1. last. 2, The
infallibility of it, that it never did, or can deceive any, being the word of
him, that is truth it self, and has said, Heaven and Earth shall pass before
one Iota or title of it go unfulfilled, Luk 16.17.

3. The All Sufficiency of it, that it contains all things necessary to be
known, believed, and practiced to salvation, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. 4, The Authority
and Efficacy of it, on the Conscience to humble, and comfort: when Men and
Angels cannot by all they can say, or do, one word of God, dropped into the
Conscience by the Spirit of God, is able to humble the proudest sinner, and
raise up the most dejected Soul, so as to make him to acknowledge, God is in it
of a truth, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25.

(3.) To meditate on the Precepts, Promises, Examples, in the Word; First,
First, The Precepts, that they are good, and just, and holy, Romans 7.12. as you
may find David did, Psalm. 119.15.23. And when you meditate on the Precept, to
remember that there is no Precept, but is backed with a promise of acceptance,
assistance, and a reward. Secondly, Meditate on the Promises in the Word, that
they are many for number, exceeding great for quantity, and precious for
quality, 2 Pet. 1.4. All, the godly man's; called therefore the Heirs of the
promise, Heb. 6.17. Promises of all things concerning life, and godliness,
this, and a better, that he will give grace, and glory, and withold no good
thing, Psalm. 84. the end. That they are all, Yea, and Amen, in Christ Jesus, 2
Pet. 1.20. Still to go to them, as the Be to the Flower, and suck sweetness
out of them, and when you meditate on them, remember still, God is as faithful
in performing, as gracious in promising, 1 These. 5.33. Thirdly, On the
threatenings of the Word, that they are infinitely more dreadful, than the
threatenings of men: the threatenings of men can reach only to the Body, but the
threatenings of God unto the Soul, Men's threatenings only to this life, but
God's to all Eternity, Math. 10 28 Fear not them which kill the Body, but are
not able to kill the Soul, but rather fear him who is able to destroy both Soul
and Body in Hell; and here remember God is as righteous in making good his
Threatenings, as his Promises: there is only this difference, he promises that
he may fulfill, but threatens that he may not fulfill. Fourthly, On the
Examples in the word of mercy, and goodness to the obedient, and Justice and
Severity to the disobedient; and when you meditate on them, to take notice,
There is no Example in it but is for our instruction; and has a promise, or a
threatening in the Bowels, and Bosom, of it, Romans 15.4. 1 Cor. 10.11.

Secondly, Above all, to meditate on the Gospel, or the New Covenant of Grace:
and in, and about that to meditate on these 8. things, 1. What it is; 2. Why
called the Covenant of grace; 3. Why a new Covenant; 4. Wherein the old
Covenant and new agree, and differ; 5. What those special spiritual things are,
contained in the Covenant; 6. What Signs there are of a Person's being actually
in Covenant; 7. The Means for it, and the Motives to it.

1. What it is; viz. That Second Contract, or Agreement, which God the Father
made with Christ, and in Him with all his Elect, To give them Christ, and all
that is Christ's, even all things that pertain to life, and godliness, upon
their believing in Him, Psalm. 84.11. 2 Pet. 1.3, 4. Secondly, Q. Why is this
called a Covenant of Grace? A. In opposition to the Covenant of Works, which
God made with Adam in the state of Innocence: That promised Life and Salvation,
upon condition of doing the whole will of God; this, only upon condition of
believing, and giving God the glory of his grace in it; Ephesians. 2.8, 9. 3dly, Why
is it called the new Covenant? In opposition to the old Covenant of grace, made
with the Jews under the Law: The old Covenant is the revelation, and
dispensation of the Covenant before the coming of Christ; the new Covenant, the
Revelation, and Dispensation of it, since the coming of Christ. 4ly. Wherein do
the old and new Covenant agree? A. In two things: First, In the substance,
which is one and the same in both; viz. Life and Salvation by Jesus Christ, 1
Cor. 10.1, 2, 3. Revel. 13.8. Heb. 13.8. Secondly, In the way of receiving Life
and Salvation, to wit, by Faith in Christ, Act. 15.10, 11. Heb. 4.2. Then,
Fifthly, Q Wherein they differ? A. In three things, the clearness, easiness,
and efficaciousness of it; First, In the Clearness: in the new Covenant, Christ
and the benefits that come by him are more clearly revealed unto us, than to
them under the old: they had it under types, and shaddows, and Ceremonies,
which things are now done away by Christ, Heb 8. last. Secondly, In the
Easiness; the service of the old Covenant was a Service, they were not able to
bear, Act. 15.10. But Christ's Yoke is easy, and his Burden is light, Math 11.
last. Because he has freed us from those heavy Yokes and Burdens that lay on
them, as, of many costly Sacrifices, long and tedious Journeys, prohibition of
many Meats, observation of many Days, Rites, and Ceremonies; from all which we
are freed by Christ. Thirdly, In the Efficaciousness o^ Power of it: there was
less of the influence of the Spirit of grace, given to ordinary believers under
the Law, than to those under the Gospel; this plentiful Effusion of the Spirit,
being reserved unto the time of Christ's Ascension, John 7.39. Ephesians 4.7, 8. Heb.
7 18, 19.

(Sixthly,) What those special spiritual blessings are, which are promised in
the Covenant: which are first, in general, That God will be a God to them, Genesis
17.7. and a Father, 2 Cor. 6. last. that is, He will do, all God and a Father
can, as he can do all things; and is as willing, as he is able, Psalm. 84.11. 1 Timothy 4.8. More particularly, First, That he will give them his Spirit to work
all in them, and for them; Ezekiel. 36.26. Luke the 11. Secondly, That he will
give them the sanctifying knowledge of himself and his will, Ezekiel. 36.26.
Thirdly, That he will pardon all their sins, and look upon them as righteous in
his Christ, 2 Cor. 5.19, 21. Fourthly, That he will sanctify their natures, to
the mortifying of their corruptions, and the quickening of their graces, Romans
6.4, 5. and 8. the 13. Jer. 31.33. Ephesians. 2.1. Fifthly, That he will take away
their heart of Stone, and give a heart of Flesh; the double Spirit, and give a
single Spirit; the froward Spirit, and give a teachable Spirit, Ezekiel. 11.19.
and chap. 36. Sixthly, He will not only give grace, but growth in grace,
Malach. 4.2. Lastly, That he will never leave the work of his grace, until he
has perfected grace in glory, Jer. 32.39, 40. Phil. 1.6.

Seventhly, To meditate of the Signs of being actually in Covenant; as, First,
a lively faith working by love to God, and all that is God's, John 3.16. Gal.
5.5. Secondly, A Reciprocation of promises: as God promised to be our God, so
we to be his People, Deuteronomy. 26.16, 17. as he promised to give Christ, and grace,
and glory, so we promise faith, and love, and new obedience. Thirdly, The
Counterpane, or Copy of the Covenant, they that enter into Covenant one with
the other, you know each Party has a Counterpane, or Copy of it: so is it
between God and the Soul, as the Covenant is reciprocal, so the Copy of the
Covenant is drawn on the heart, Jeremy 31.34. Fourthly, They have the Spirit of
God to reveal, and make known this Covenant to them, Jeremy 31.34. and to
enable them to do what is required in the Covenant, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. Fifthly,
Such as are in Covenant they have the fruits, and effects of of it; as, First,
Softness of heart, Ezekiel. 11.19. Secondly, Sincerity of obedience, Ezekiel. 11.19,
20. Thirdly, Growth in grace, 2 Cor. 7.1. Fourthly, Perseverance in grace, Jer.
32.39. Fifthly, A conscionable care to renew their Covenant with God upon every
breach of it, Jer. 50.5.

Eighthly, To meditate on the means of getting an interest in the Covenant, if
you do not yet find your selves actually in Covenant; as, First, To humble your
selves under the abuse of his grace in the first Covenant; Secondly, To give
him the glory of his grace in vouchsafing to enter into another, and a better
Covenant, not only to give grace, but perseverance in grace; Thirdly, To be
willing to Covenant with God, as he with you, Deuteronomy. 26.16, 17. This Day the
Lord thy God has, etc. Fourthly, To close with the great design of God, in
saving of poor lost sinners, in making such a Covenant with them in Christ, and
in order to it to renounce the former Covenant of works, all your own
righteousness; and desire with the Apostle to be found only in Christ, having
his righteousness that is by faith, the righteousness of God, Phil. 3.9.
Because by the works of the Law, no Flesh living can be justified, Romans 3. The
Jews going about to establish their own righteousness, made void (to them) the
righteousness of Christ, Romans 10.3. Yea, and you are to renounce all other
Covenants, with Sin, Satan, and the World, for God will never enter into
Covenant with those that are in Covenant with his Enemies, Isai. 28.15. 2 Cor.
6.14. to the end. Fifthly, To go unto God, by servent, and constant Prayer, and
entreat him to remember his Covenant, and glorify his grace in it upon you, by
giving his Spirit for the enabling you to close with his great Design in the
Covenant, That he would put his Law in your heart, and write it in your inward
parts, and give you that new Spirit, which may cause you to walk in his
Statutes, and keep his Commandments, and do them, Ezekiel. 36.

Ninthly, To meditate on the many and weighty motives there are, to quicken
every one to get an interest in this Covenant of Grace; as, First, The sad, and
miserable condition of all such, as are without Covenant. They are without God
in the World, and without hope, viz. of a better life, After this, Ephesians. 2.12.
They must look to be judged by a Covenant of works; and if Men be not able to
yield obedience to any one command of God, as they ought, and yet bound to
yield obedience unto all the whole Law, or no life, (do, they must all, or die
eternally for the breach of the least Commandment, Deuteronomy. 27. last); The
consideration of this should make every wicked man tremble to continue a moment
in his natural, unregenerate state, and speedily to come unto Christ. Yet
further, consider the miserable condition of men in this: so long as they are
without Covenant they cannot expect any blessing or mercy from God, either
corporal or spiritual, outward or inward; for all blessings, and mercies, they
are conveyed to a People, in, and by virtue of the Covenant, Zach. 9.11.
Whatsoever men have and enjoy, being out of Covenant, they have it in wrath,
and not in mercy; as a curse, and not a blessing, Mol. 2.2. Secondly, Meditate
on the happy and blessed estate of such as are actually in Covenant: they have
an interest in God, and Christ, his Spirit, and all that is theirs, 1 Cor. 3.
two last. Hos. 2.18. to the end. And as all that is good, in God, and Christ,
is yours; so all that evil that is yours, in Christ's, Your sins, 2 Cor. 5
last, and your sufferings, Isaiah 63. He is afflicted in all your afflictions.
Secondly, You may go boldly to the Throne of Grace, for the supply of all your
wants, Heb. 4. last, and with assurance to be accepted, and answered, in
whatsoever you shall ask, according to his will, 1 Ioh 5.14. Thirdly, It Is that
will bring you comfort in the saddest condition you are, or can be in. When
they spoke of stoning David, He encouraged himself in the Lord his God; 2 Samuel
23.5.

Again, To meditate on the excellent properties of this Covenant, How that it
is the most free, sweet, full, and unchangeable Covenant; First, For the
Freeness of it: there was nothing in Us to move him to it, but his own grace,
therefore called a Covenant of grace; nothing required on our part, but only
faith, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, Acts 16 31.
Secondly, For the Sweetness of it; you may see it in these three things: First,
He requires no more of us, than he promises to work in us by his Spirit, Ezekiel.
36.27. Secondly, He promises to overlook all our unwilling trespasses,
faultings, and failings, where they are bewailed by us; and to accept the will
for the deed, the endeavor for the work, 2 Cor. 8.12. our imperfect obedience
for perfect, Heb. 11.17. Thirdly, He will look upon, accept of the perfect
Obedience, the full satisfaction of Jesus Christ for us; as if we had yielded
i^ in our own Persons, 1 Epist. John 2.1. Thirdly, To meditate on the fullness
of this Covenant, that i^ contains promises of all things concerning life, and
godliness, this life and a better, 2 Peter 1. 1 Timothy 4.8. That he will be a
Sun, and a Shield give grace, and glory, and will withold no good thing,
Psalm. 84.11. Fourthly, On the unchange ableness of this Covenant, that it is an
everlasting Covenant, Jer. 17.7. Jer. 32.39, 40. Mal. 3.6. Heb. 13.6.

Tenthly, To meditate on the duties you owe to God, in respect of this new
Covenant of grace, as, First, To be still admiring, and adoring the free, and
rich grace of God, in making such a Covenant with you, notwithstanding you had
abused this grace, in the first Covenant; and that he should bring you forth
under the dispensations of the new Covenant, that so far excels the old, as you
have seen, in the clearness, easiness, and efficaciousness of it; and further
should so manifest and magnify his grace toward you, as to make his Word, and
Rod, effectual to bring you within the Bonds of the Covenant.

Secondly, Study well this Covenant of grace, and acquaint your selves, more
and more with the many, and precious promises, contained in it: Especially
those that most concern your present wants and necessities, and labor to suck
out the sweet, and comfort of all, by Meditation, Faith, and Prayer.

Thirdly, Let it be your care to walk worthy of, and suitable to, the grace of
the new Covenant; remembering you are under a better Covenant, than that made
with them under the old Testament, and therefore you ought to have better
lives, seeing you have a better Mediator, and better Promises, and better
Means, than they had, and therefore should have better Conversations: The
mysteries of the Gospel are more clearly revealed to you, Christ's Yoke is an
easy Yoke, and his Burden a light Burden, in comparison what they were under;
his Spirit poured out more plentifully than heretofore, upon ordinary
Believers: and therefore all these should be, as so many Engagements, so many
encouragements to a morehumble, holy, spiritual, and Heavenly walking before
the Lord; and a more thankful, cheerful, faithful, and fruitful service of the
Lord, Luke 1.74, 75. 2 Cor. 7.1. 2 Pet. 1.4. to the 12. 1 Cor. 15. last.

Fourthly, Having at any time relapsed into sin, (especially gross, and
scandalous sin), to renew, as our humiliation under it, so our Covenant of more
circumspection, and watchfulness against it, after that Example, Jer. 50.5. And
the rather, because there is a great proneness in us, as well as others, unto
backsliding, and there are continual outgoings of corruption in us, as well as
others, to deal falsely with God, in our Covenant, as they, in Ps 78.36, 37. And
therefore our duty is (that who are in Covenant with God) upon our breach of
Covenant, to renew our Covenant of more circumspection for the future,
especially in times of Affliction, and on Days of Humiliation, and when we are
to draw near to God in that great Ordinance of the Lord's Supper; but still
remember we go out of our selves, and fetch strength from God's Covenant, to
enable us to it, Ephesians. 6.10. And thus much of the Covenant of Grace.

Now, Fourthly, the Works of God.
Sect. 4. And the Works of God are either, his Works before time, or in time.
First, His Work before Time is his Decree: now the Decree of God is his
unchangable purpose with himself from all Eternity, concerning the making of
the World, and all the Creatures in it, especially Men, and Angels, their ends,
and the means to bring them to those ends, for the manifestation of his glory,
Ephesians. 1.11. And in, and about this Decree, we may profitably meditate on these
things.

First, The infinite goodness of God in having us, in his heart, for so much
good, not only before we were, but before the World was, even from all Eternity.

Secondly, The distinguishing love of God in this, that we being all in his
hands, as the Clay in the hands of the Potter, to make either Vessels of Mercy,
or Vessels of Wrath, he should not appoint us unto Wrath, but to obtain
Salvation by Jesus Christ, 1 These. 5.9.

Thirdly, The infinite wisdom of God, in appointing, not only the ends of all
his Creatures, but the means to bring them to those ends, Hosea 2.21, 22.

Fourthly, On the unchangeableness of this Decree, Mal. 3.6. I am Jehovah that
changes not, 2 Timothy 2.19. All these should make us cry out with the Apostle,
Romans 11. last. (...)! Oh the depth of the wisdom of God!

Secondly, For his Works in time; they are Creation, and Providence: First,
Creation, and herein, 1. Take notice what it is, sc. that first outward act of
God, whereby according to his Eternal purpose, of nothing, by his very Word he
made the World, and every Creature in it very good, Genesis 1. last.

Secondly, To look into, and study this Voluminous Book of the Creation,
wherein every Page will afford you fresh matter of Meditation, and every
Creature have a Tongue to tell you of those glorious Attributes of God that
shine forth in all, especially in that curious Masterpiece of Man, Psalm.
139.14. I am fearfully and wonderfully made, etc. and here to meditate on these
five things, the Eternity of God, the Almighty Power of God, the infinite
wisdom of God, the unsearchable goodness of God, and the excellent end
wherefore he did all this.

First, The Eternity of God, he must needs be an Eternal Being, seeing he was
before all Beeings; he that made Time, and all things, must needs be before
Time, and all things, and so Eternal, without beginning, and without end, Psalm.
102.25, 26.

Secondly, The Almighty Power of God, in that He was able to make so great, and
glorious a Fabric, and all things in it of nothing, by his very Word, Psalm.
89.11, 12, 13.

Thirdly, The infinite wisdom of God, in making all things in such an
excellent Order, harmony, and beauty, appointing every Creature its proper
place, and use, making all serviceable one to another, and all to the good of
the Universe: Psalm. 104.24.

Fourthly, The unsearchable Goodness of God, in that, notwithstanding he was
infinitely good, and blessed in Himself, without a Creature; yet should
communicate his goodness, and blessedness, to the Creature, Acts 17.24, 25, 26.
His goodness also appeared, in making every Creature good, and providing all
things for the good of the Creature: but above all, in making the World, and
all things in it for Man, and man for Himself. What should the Meditation
hereof, but cause all of us to be still singing, and saying with David, Psalm.
18 1. Oh Lord, how excellent is thy Name in all the Earth! Oh Lord, what is man
thou should take such notice of him, and make such account of him!

Fifthly, To meditate on the excellent end of his doing all this, viz. that he
might have his glory from us, Revel. 4. last. He did not make any thing, for
any need he had of it, or of us; but, that he might discover his unsearchable
goodness to us, and to this end did create us, after his own Image, gave us a
reasonable, and understanding Soul; whereby we might come to know him, and
contemplate all his glorious excellencies, which shine forth in the Creation of
the World: for the invisible things of God, viz. his Eternal Power, and
Godhead, are seen by the Creation of the World, Romans 1.20. and therefore a
just cause of humiliation to us, that we eye him, and answer him no better in
the ends of our Creation: but of this more hereafter.

The Second Work of God in Time, is, His Providence.
In this Head of Meditation, I shall stay the longer, because it is generally
so much neglected: and in opening of it, I shall do these things; First, Show
you, What it is; Secondly, Give you some Grounds for your Meditation on it;
Thirdly, Show you, What those things are you are to meditate on, in, and about
it.

First, What it is, viz. That continued act of God, whereby He takes notice of,
preserves, and governs, all, and every Creature, to those ends, and by those
means, which he appointed with Himself, to the glory of his Name, and the good
of his Elect.

Secondly, For the Grounds, or Reasons, why you are to meditate on this; First,
Because it will make you to acknowledge God in all your ways, Prove. 3.6.
Secondly, It will cause you to see the loving kindness of the Lord, Psalm.
107.43. Thirdly, It will quiet your Spirits under whatsoever befalls you, Job
1. last. Psalm. 39.9. Fourthly, It will enlarge your hearts in thankfulness for
his distinguishing providence over you, Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3. Psalm. 116.1, 2.
Yea, it will make you admire, and adore him in them, as it did David, Psalm.
8.3, 4 Psalm. 144.3. 2 Samuel 7.18, 19. Fifthly, It will wonderfully quicken you
to an holy dependence on Him, for the future, as Jacob, Genesis 48.15. and the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.10.

Thirdly, For the things to be meditated on, in the providence of God, they
are these; the kinds of it, the parts of it, the extent of it, the ends of it,
the experiences you have had of it (all full of admiration!): and how to carry
your selves under all sad and glad Providence.

First, For the Kinds of it: First, There is God's general Providence over all,
from the greatest to the least; and there is his special Providence over his
Church, and People, in a special manner, taking notice of them, and the care
of them: which made Austin to cry out, (O bone Omnipotens;) Oh good God, which
do so govern all, as not to neglect any; so look after thy Children, as if
all were but one; and so respects every one, as if one were all.

Secondly, The providence of God, are either the providence of his Mercy, or
of his Justice.

First, For his merciful Providence: here take notice of, and meditate on, the
properties of this Mercy, and the special branches of this mercy.

First, For the properties of this mercy; First, It Is a free mercy, He is
merciful to whom he will be merciful, Rom 9.15. Secondly, That it is a rich
mercy, Romans 10.12. Thirdly, An everlasting mercy, Psalm. 103.17. To whom he is
once merciful, he is ever merciful, he can as soon forget to be, as forget to
be gracious, and merciful to his; and, more then so, Fourthly, He delights to
show mercy to his, Micah 7.18.

Secondly, Meditate on some of the special Branches of this Mercy to the Body,
to the Soul; First, To the Body as these, the Lord's forming, and fashioning
us, so handsomely, and comely in the Womb, bringing us forth in perfection of
parts, upholding our Souls so long in life, giving and continuing to us the use
of our Senses and Limbs, when others want them, and would give a World for them
(if they had the use of them); and all these from God, and not from Parents;
and all of free grace, there being no more in us, than others, to move Him to
this Mercy, and to distinguish us, as he does in his Mercies, so as to give us
health, when others are in sickness; and strength, when others in weakness; and
maintenance, when others in wants; and liberty, when others in bonds; and
peace, when others in trouble: should also give us perfection of parts, when
others are Monsters; give us our sight, when others are blind; our hearing,
when others are deaf; our speech, when others are dumb; our feet, when others
are lame. The serious meditation on these Body-mercies, will let us see, what
abundant cause we have of thankfulness, and improving all to his glory.

Secondly, To meditate on God's special Mercies to your Souls, as these: his
Electing-mercies unto life, his enlightening mercy, with the saving knowledge of
himself, his Calling-mercy, not only to the knowledge, and profession, but the
faith, love, and obedience of the Gospel; his adopting mercy to be the Sons and
Daughters of the everliving God; his justifying-mercy, freely of his grace, his
Sanctifying-mercy with his grace, his strengthening and establishing-mercy, in
the ways of grace; the continuance of the precious means, and seasons of grace,
to build you up still further in grace, and gracious practices; In short, the
giving Himself to be your Father, and Portion; hs Son to be your Redeemer, and
Savior; his Spirit to be your Sanctifier, and Comforter. Serious meditation on
these Soul-mercies will cause you to say with David, Psalm. 103. Praise thou the
Lord, O my Soul, etc.

More particularly, distinctly, and fully, To meditate on these merciful
providence: His converting-providence, his protecting-providence, his
disposing-providence, his correcting-providence, his supporting-providence, and
his refreshing-providence.

First, His Converting-providence, in bringing us forth under the light of the
Gospel, and causing the light of his glorious grace, in the face of Jesus
Christ, to shine into our hearts, to turn us from darkness, to light, and from
the Power of Satan, unto God; in placing us under a faithful Ministry, and
blessing the Ministry to our Conversion, and Edification, in saving-knowledg,
and grace, when he leaves others (under the same Ministry) in their dark, dead,
Christless, and graceless condition; Amongst other things which Beza in his
last Will, and Test^ment, gives thanks for, this was the first and chief, that
at the Age of 16. Years, God had called him to the knowledge of the truth.
Although we cannot tell the Time or Person, yet if we can find the Work, a
thorow-change of heart, and life; let us still remember to meditate on God's
distinguishing-love, and grace, and mercy in it.

Secondly, Take notice of, and meditate on God's Protecting-providence, how he
has watched over us, and ours, from the Womb, to this very Day, protecting us
from many sins, temptations, and dangers, we have been exposed to, and others
have miscarried by; as for instance, from the rage of Satan, malice of Men,
violence of the Creature, from Fire, falls, many tormenting sicknesses, and
diseases, others lie groaning under; how wonderfully and graciously, we have
been preserved from the Sword, Famine, Pestilence, in those evil days that
lately past over us: When so many thousands were swept away by them, we and
ours were made up amongst his Jewels, had our lives given us for a prey, he
turned our Captivity, and restored our liberty, and since lengthned out our
tranquillity, and made us dwell in safety, quiet from the fear of evil, and that
in the midst of many fears, and dangers, sad expectations, and great
provocations; Take notice also of, and meditate on his providence, as over
your selves, so yours, especially your little ones: How wonderful is God every
day in the preservation of them; I shall give you an instance only of one.
Diverse being in a Family, to fast, and pray, a little Child went out to a Pond
much frozen (being Winter), either to slide, or whip his Top: in the Pond was
made two holes, for the safety of the Fish, and taking up of Water; into one of
these holes the Child fell: being soon missed, and searched after, he was found
in one with his arms spread over the Hole: had the Hole been wider, or he not
so soon looked after, he might have perished; the Reporter of it was an
Eyewitness of the deliverance. And may not some of you speak of the like
deliverance of yours? Above all other protecting providence; I shall commend
to your serious, and thankful meditation; First, That God has hitherto, and
still does protect a little Flock of Sheep in the midst of a World of Wolves,
and Lions, and Bears, and Tigers, which are continually set on mischief; The
Second is this, that God maintains, and upholds a little grace in life, and
vigor, in the midst of such an abundance of corruption. The reason is obvious,
because though the World be the Devil's, the Church is God's; though corruption
be ours, yet Grace is the Lord's; and he has promised, though the Devil, and
his Instruments rage never so much, Yet the Gates of Hell shall never prevail
against it, Math. 16.18. and where he has begun a good work of grace, he will
never leave his own work, till he has perfected it in glory, Phil. 1.6.

Thirdly, Take notice of, and meditate on God's Providing-providence, how he
has provided for you, and yours, from time to time, in all your wants, and
streights, at such a time he raised up friends to you, to supply your wants; at
such a time, he sent Customers into your Shops, and gave you vent for your
Commodities; at such a time he prosper'd your labors, and when you had but
little, made it enough to satisfy you and yours. You may remember, many of
you, when your estate and condition was very low, but now God has so prosper'd
you, as you have attained to a great Estate; you should therefore think on the
goodness of God to you, in it; and labor to answer him in the end of it, by
doing the more good with it, as God requires, Deuteronomy. 5.15. Deuteronomy. 26.5, 6. and
Jacob did, Genesis 32.10. It Is storied of Agathocles, a King of Sicilly, who
having been a Potter's Son, would always be served at his Table with Earthen
Vessels, to mind him of the mean and low estate he was in at the first; you
should do likewise, remembering, and considering, that if you be proud of it,
and more covetous than ever (as the most are) God has times, and ways enough
to humble you, and make you poorer than ever; you should learn also from the
Providing-providence of God for others, to trust him for your selves, and
yours, whatsoever your streights, and necessities are. You have examples in
sacred and Ecclesiastical stories to encourage you, as, the Lord's preserving
the poor Widow, and her Family by a little Meal in the Barrel, and Oil in the
Cruse; the Lord's sending the Ravens to seed Elijah (who were more likely to
feed on it, and him) and afterward to go in the strength of that food 40. days
together. Elizabeth Young, Martyr, answered the Persecutor, If you take away my
Meat, I trust, God will take away my Stomach; One Martyn lying hid, in the time
of the Parisian Massacre, had a Hen that came constantly every Day, and laid an
Egg, by which he was sustained for a Fortnight together. And some of you have
heard, or read, how by a Miracle of Mercy, God relieved Rochel in a straight
Seige, by an innumerable company of Fishes, cast upon the shore; I need not
instance in any more; your own, and others Experience can ^uggest many.

Fourthly, To take notice of, and meditate on God's Disposing-providence of
you, and yours; and that not only infinitely beyond your deserts, but above
your Prayers, Faith, and Hope. Plato being ready to die, gave thanks for three
things; First, That he was made a man; Secondly. That he was born in Greece;
Thirdly, That he lived in the time of Socrates. If a Heathen, much more should
Christians take notice of God's gracious Disposing-providences, as, amongst
others, these, That he gave us a being amongst Men, and not amongst Beasts;
amongst Christians, and not amongst Pagans; amongst Protestants, and not
amongst Papists: that we were born of such godly Parents, as gave us good
counsel, and good example, brought us up under godly Schoolmasters, and
Tutors, and Ministers, to go in, and out before us, in soundness of Doctrine,
and integrity of Conversation; that God gave us our Lot, and Habitation in
such a Place, where we found many Benefactors, and many good Counselors, many
Body, and Soulfriends; and where we had many helps, and encouragements, and
opportunities for the doing, and receiving of good: How at first, you thought
to be of such a Calling, but God disposed you to another more fit for you, and
you for it; once you thought to have led a solitary life, and live like a
Hermit, but God made you know that you were not only born for your self, but
the glory of God, and the public good; you thought once to have matched into
such a Family, and with such a Person, which if you had, you had been undone,
but God so disposed, as to give in the heart of another Companion, every way
more meet for you, in Religion, Disposition, and Conversation, and brought you
into such a Family, as you have cause to bless God for it all your days, and
break out, and say, Oh the All-wise, gracious, disposing providence of my God,
Praise thou the Lord, O my Soul, etc. Believe it Christians, it is a sweet thing
to eye God in his wise Disposals: it will mightily strengthen our faith in his
Promises, Providence.

Fifthly, Take notice of, and meditate on his Assisting-providence, in, and
under what he has called us to do, and suffer: you may remember the time, when
we have been full of fears, and doubts, how we should go through such a service,
and undergo such a hardship, but we have graciously found the Lord coming in
mightily to assist us, and carry us through all, to his Glory, our own, and
others comfort: thus Paul found it, 2 Cor. 12.9, 10. 2 Timothy 4.16, 17. And thus
also should we, did we but look up to him for it: for his promise is, if we
acknowledge him, in all; he will order all for us, Prove. 3.6. If we cast our
care on him, he will take the care of us, 1 Pet. 5. If we commit our thoughts,
and ways to him, he will establish us, Prove. 16. Psalm. 37. and by the
experience we have of his presence with us, and assistance of us, we shall be
enabled to live by faith in him, for the future, Isaiah 40.29.

Sixthly, Meditate on his Correcting-providence: how that; of very
faithfulness, it is he has corrected you; if he had not, you had gone on still
in such and such evil courses, and the neglect of such and such duties, but
(blessed be God) you now can say with David, It Is good for you that you have
been so afflicted, for you have learnt thereby to keep God's Statutes. If you
had not been so afflicted, you should have been as vain, and proud, earthly,
and covetous, Sensual, and Voluptuous, as others; and therefore not to repine
at the Rod, but bless God for it; for the truth is, as (one well) The best of
us are but like a Boy's Top, that will go no longer than it is whipped: too many
will not mend their pace, and run the ways of God's Commandment without a Rod;
and therefore to hearken to that Counsel of the Apostle, Heb. 12.5, 6. My Son,
despise not the Chastisement of the Lord, etc.

Seventhly, To take notice of, and meditate on his Supporting-providence, under
the Rod, how that as God of his faithfulness has corrected us, so of the same
faithfulness he has not taken away his loving kindness: though we have not
been without correction, yet we have found much compassion, have had abundant
experience of his supporting-grace under such, and such pains, fears, troubles,
temptations, and corruptions: he has not layn more on us, than he has given
us strength to bear, he has corrected us in much measure and mercy, and has
been our strength in, I, and our Salvation out of all, Psalm. 34.

Eighthly, To take notice, and meditate, on his Refreshing, and
Reviving-providence. How has the Lord remembered, and made good his promise to
you, from time to time, as that Isaiah 57. of not contending for ever; and that
Psalm. 111.7. of remembering you in your low estate; and that of Job listing you
up, after he had cast you down; and that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1. making your
consolations to abound, as your sufferings have done. Has not the Lord heard,
and answered your Prayers for your selves, and others, and comforted you for
the time, he has afflicted you? and therefore in all, and for all, to bless
him, and live still by says in him, as David did, Psalm. 31. from the first to
the 10. Verse. and Moses, Deuteronomy. 6.18, 19. and Deuteronomy. 10.10. and Hannah, 1 Samuel
1.27. And, that you may still find supporting mercy under, and refreshing, and
reviving mercy out of all your afflictions, To meditate on the many sweet,
gracious, and holy ends God aims at, in all your afflictions; as, First, in
respect of God, you are so afflicted, that he might give you more experience of
himself in his greatness, and his goodness, in his sin-revenging Justice, and
in his grace-rewarding Mercy. 2 Chronicles. 33.13. (then) Manasseth knew God to be
the Lord; he knew it before, but then by experience, that God was able to
humble the proudest sinner: Secondly, In respect of Christ we are so afflicted,
that we may be made conformable to our Head, Romans 8.29. who was consecrated
through affliction, Heb. 2.10. and that we might have the fruit of his
purchase. In 1 Cor. 3 21. you may find Death it self (the chief of all
afflictions) is reckoned up amongst those Goods and Chattels he has purchased:
and if Death be yours, then certainly every other Affliction is yours, and for
your good, 2 Cor. 2.11. 2. In respect of Satan; First, That we may have the
more experience of his Wiles; and, Secondly, That we may prove him a Liar, as
Job did in the first and second Chapter; and, Thirdly, That being sensible of
our own weakness, we may be made to fly to our Captain for wisdom to discover
it, and strength to resist him; and hereby be assured of Victory over him in
the end; that he will in due time tread Satan under our Feet, Romans 16.
Fourthly, In respect of the World, we are so afflicted; First, That it may be
an Evidence to us, that he has chosen us out of the World, Joh. 15.19.
Secondly, That hereby he might wean us from the World, considering the vanity,
uncertainty, insufficiency, and un^atisfactoriness of all Creature Comforts.
Fifthly. In respect of others, in the World, we are so afflicted: First, That
God may distinguish us, from them, whose Portion is only in this life, Psalm.
17. (at the end.) Mal. 3. last. Secondly, That he may teach us to sympathize
with others in their afflictions, whom we are apt to forget, until we pass
under the same, or the like affliction, Amos 6. beginning. Sixthly, In respect
of our selves, our corruptions, our graces, our duties, our comforts: First,
Our sins, that he may discover some, humble us under others, purge out others,
and prevent others, Deuteronomy. 8.11. Secondly, In respect of our graces, that he may
try them, and discover them, exercise them, and establish them, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7.
Thirdly, Our duties, that we may be more minded of them, made more forward to,
fervent, frequent, and constant in them; Isaiah 26.16. Hosea 6.4, 7, 8.
Fourthly, Our comfort, that as our sufferings abound, so our consolations may
by Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 1.

Ninthly, To take notice of, and meditate on the Use, you and the People of God
have made of those providence: First, Search and see, What benefit you have
reaped by them: remember at such a time God corrected you with such a great
affliction, a long sickness; at such a time gave you great success in your
affairs, distinguished you from many Persons, and Families in your enjoyments.
Has these distinguishing providence distinguished you in your thankfulness,
serviceableness, and fruitfulness? Have you been more humbled, purged,
spiritualized, and Heavenliz'd by them? then they are sanctified, and in mercy
to you; otherwise not, if you be not bettered by them, but the worse for them,
more proud and wanton, forgetful of God, and others, that want them; as God
has distinguished you in his Mercies, so he will at last in his Punishments.
Secondly, See, whether you have been quickened by them, to bring more glory to
God in the Place, he has set you. God has done this and that, for you above
others; Ask your own hearts, what you have done for Him above others: Hannah
after many Prayers, and Tears, obtained a Child from the Lord; she in token of
thankfulness, gave him back again to the Lord, 1 Samuel 1.27. Have you done
likewise? God has given you health, and strength, and wealth, gifts and graces
above others; have you given them back again, for the honoring, and serving
Him above others? if not, you will one day repent bitterly, as he did, that had
been more careful to serve his Master on Earth, the King of England, than the
King of Heaven and Earth. (Woolsey).

Thirdly, See what good you have done to others by these distinguishing
Providence. Has God's goodness to you, wrought more goodness in you to others,
stirred you up to do more good to the Country, Church, State, Place, City,
Family, wherein God has set you? Have your Husband, Wife, Children, Servants,
Friends, and Acquaintance, been the better for you? if so, then these
Providence have been in Mercy to you, but otherwise, if God has been so good
to you, and you have done no more good for Him, and His; you have minded only
your selves, and lived only to your selves; you will one day wish, you had been
among the Number of the poorest, and miserablest Beggars, than what you are, to
have so much, and do no more good with it; yea, the very Heathens will rise up
in Judgment, and condemn you, for they could say, Non nobis nati, they were not
born for themselves, but their Country; Another, Mallem mihi male esse, quam
molliter vivere (Seneca) I had rather be sick, than be idle, and do no good.
And thus you see, What those things are, you are to meditate on, in, and about
God's merciful Providence.

Secondly, Take notice what you are to meditate on, in, and about the
Providence of his Justice, and Judgments; as these, the Equity, the
Impartiality, the Severity, the Unsupportableness, and the Unavoidableness of
his Judgments, and our Duties in respect of them.

First, The Equity of his Judgments, that God is most righteous in all, and can
do none wrong, and punishes all less than they deserve, Ezra 9. Ignorant
Persons, and wicked Men, would make him a God, made all of mercy; but you must
know, and consider, He is as just, as he is merciful, and Infinite in both: as,
Infinite in Mercy to Pardon the Penitent, so Infinite in Justice to Punish the
Impenitent. Whence you shall find, that where his Nature is laid down, He is
described by his Justice, as well as his Mercy, Exo. 34.6, 7, 8. and Nah. 1.2,
3, 4.

Secondly, The Impa^tiality of his Justice, and Judgments. He never did, nor
will connive at any sin, or sinner; He did not in his own Son, who knew no sin,
yet because He took upon Him our sin, therefore He laid upon Him the fierceness
of His Wrath, Lament. 1.12: and if He would not spare sin in His own Son,
certainly he will not in others, that go on impenitently, and securely, in any
sin; for there is no respect of Persons with God. He regards not the Rich more
than the Poor, the Noble than the Ignoble, the Wise than the Simple: He will
spare neither King nor Subject, High nor Low, Rich nor Poor, Old nor Young; no
not His own People, if they sin against Him, Amos 3. You only have I known of
all the Families of the Earth, therefore I will surely punish you for your
Iniquities.

Thirdly, The severity and terribleness of His Judgment in all Ages, upon
Persons, Families, Towns, Cities, Kingdoms, Countries, all impenitent, and
incorrigible sinners; you may see it in His Judgments on the old World, Sodom
and Gomorrah, Egypt, and Jerusalem. You may read more in Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28.
Psalm. 7.11, 12, 13. Psalm. 11.5, 6, 7. Isaiah 1.33. Mal. 4.1: Zeph. 1. to the
end.

Fourthly, Meditate on the unsupportableness of God's Judgment, Psalm. 90.11.
Who knows the power of thy anger? Ezekiel. 22.14. Can thy heart endure, or thy
hands be strong in the day that I shall deal with thee? Isaiah 33.14. The
sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness has surpised the Hypocrites, Who
shall dwell with devouring Fire, and everlasting Burnings? and Nahum. 1.2, 3.
Jer. 10.10.

Fifthly, On the unavoidableness of his Wrath, Amos 9.1. to the 6. Though they
dig to Hell, thence shall my hand take them; though they clime up to Heaven,
thence will I bring them down.

Sixthly, To take notice, and meditate on the Duties the Scripture frequently
calls upon you to perform, in respect of the Judgments of God. (...) shall but
name a few, because they are obvious to you in reading the Scriptures; as
these, To take notice of them, and lay them to heart, to searc^ and try your
ways, what special sins of your^ have had a hand in pulling down, and
continuing of these Judgments upon you and others; T^ humble your selves before
the Lord under them for your sins that were the cause of them; To accept of the
punishment of your iniquity and acknowledge the Lord is not only righteous, but
gracious in punishing you less than you deserve; And, Lastly, To turn every one
of you from the evil of his doings, and learn righteousness by his Judgments,
that are on the Earth, Isaiah 26.9.

Secondly, To meditate on the parts of Providence, which are three,
Observation, Preservation, Gubernation; First, God, He observes, and takes
notice of all, and every Creature, Pro. 15.3. His Eyes run to and fro through the
Earth, beholding the evil, and the good; Heb. 4.13. All things are open and
naked to him, with whom we have to do; but, especially he observes and takes
notice of his Own, Psalm. 33.18. Behold, the eye of the Lord i^ upon them that
fear him, and hope in his mercy; Psalm. 34.15. His Eyes are upon the righteous,
and his Ear open unto their Prayer.

Secondly, God preserves all and every Creature, Man and Beast, Nehem. 9.6. but
especially his Children, Job 5.19. Isaiah 43.1, 2.

Thirdly, God, He governs all, and every Creature, to those ends, and by those
means which He has appointed, He Rules in all the Kingdoms of the World, but
especially in Jacob, Isaiah 46.3. He is their God, and Guide unto death, Psalm.
48. last. All these parts of Providence are full of wonder, that God being so
High and Holy above the Creature, should humble Himself, to respect things done
in Heaven, and Earth; that He should not only give a Being to the Creatures,
but uphold them in their Being, that he should not only vouchsafe the means to
bring them to their ends, but order and dispose of all those means to those
ends; Oh the wonderful condescension of the great God, to his poor worthless
Creatures, Psalm. 31.19. Oh how great is thy goodness! etc. Then,

Thirdly, To meditate on the extent of this Providence, not only to every
Creature, but to the least act of every Creature, so as not a Sparrow falls on
the ground, or Hair from the Head, or a Tyle from the House, or a Word from the
Mouth, or an Answer from the Tongue, no nor a Thought from the Heart, without
the Lord, Mat. 10.29, 30. Pro. 16.1.

Fourthly, Meditate on the ends of his Providence, viz. His own glory, and the
good of his Church, and People. Whatsoever He does in the World, He does in
relation, First, To his own glory, Romans 11. last. And, Secondly, Man's good:
Romans 8.28.

Fifthly, Meditate on the Experience you have had of God's faithfulness, and
goodness you have had in all his Providence: and this will not only enlarge
your hearts in thankfulness for the present, but quicken, and strengthen you to
an holy dependence, and confident expectance of the like for the future, as it
did the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1.9, 10 To help you herein, you shall do well to make
(...) Catalogue, and keep a Diary of God's special providence; to take a Book,
and write down the most remarkablest Providence of God, over you, and yours:
often read them over, and ponder them well in your minds; and that, First,
because you may find this to have been the practice of the Saints, To observe,
and register God's dealing with them, and theirs, to speak of them, and erect
Monuments in memorial of them, Psalm. 77.12. Esther 9.26. 1 Samuel 7.10. Secondly,
Because there is an equity in it, Shall God take notice of us, and we not take
notice of Him? He remember us and we forget Him? Thirdly, There Is a kind o^
necessity of writing down these special Providence, in regard of the weakness
of our memories which are so apt to forget them. Fourthly, Great will be the
profit of it, the fight of such a Catalogue of gracious Providence, will so
much the more affect our hearts with love to so good a God, and quicken us to a
holy dependence on Him, and therefore to follow others in the practice of it.
And to help you in it, I shall acquaint you with some special Promises, for the
strengthening your faith in His special Providence; as for instance: First, For
His Converting-providence, you have a promise, Acts 3. last. Acts 26: 18.
Secondly, For His Protecting-providence, you have a promise; Job 5.19. Psalm.
125.1. Thirdly, For His Providing-providence, Psalm. 34.10. The Lions shall
lack, and suffer hunger, etc. Psalm. 37.19. Fourthly, For His
Directing-providence, Prove. 3.6. Psalm. 32.8. Fifthly, For His
Assisting-providence, 2 Cor. 12.9. Sixthly, For His Correcting-providence,
Psalm. 89.31. Revel. 3.19. Seventhly, For His Supporting-providence, 1 Cor.
10.13. Eighthly, For His Refreshing-providence, Jer. 3.12. Hosea 6.1. Lastly,
For His teaching us to profit by all these Providence, Isaiah 48.17. I am the
Lord that teaches thee to profit, Isaiah 27.9. This shall be the fruit, the
taking away of their sin. To act faith in all these promises, and communicate
your experiences to others, and tell them what God has done for you, and his,
as they give us an Example, in Psalm. 44.1.23. And thus of the Works of God.

Sixthly, Rules how to carry our selves under prosperous, and adverse; glad,
and sad Providence, Personal, Family, National.

1. Under prosperous and glad Providence.

1. Take heed of concluding the special love, and favor of God to you, because
of your prosperous condition in the World: for no man can know love, or hatred,
by these outward things, Eccles 9.1. The wicked have, usually, the most of
them, Job 21. Psalm. 73. Because it is their portion in this life, Psalm. 17.
end. And yet such is the deceit of Men's hearts, as the most fetch the
Evidences of God's love to them from their prosperity in this World, from the
abundance of these outward good things, which they enjoy, as health, wealth,
honor, birth, beauty, gifts, parts, knowledge, utterance, and the esteem they
have in the World above others, and that amongst the wise, and the godly:
whereas men may enjoy all these, and yet want the special love of God,
(special, I say, not God's general love) for you are to ma^k well, there is a
double love of God, general and special; 1. General to all Men, of which you
may read, Mark 10.21. Jesus beholding, loved him, (says the Text, of the young
Man.). 2. There is God's special love to his Elect, of which you may read, 2
These. 2.16. John 13. Now God's general and common love is manifested in
bestowing on Men these outward temporal good things, as on the young Man, that
came to Christ, to know what he must do to inherit Eternal Life; But for His
special love, that is manifested in giving Spiritual blessings, as Christ, and
his Spirit, and Grace, Faith, Repentance, Love, etc. His Fatherly Correction,
and Chastisements, Heb. 12.6. And therefore take heed of concluding the special
love of God. because of your prosperous condition, without an interest in
Christ, and a work of grace.

2. Watch against those Evils, prosperity usually leads men into, as these, 1.
Forgetfulness of God, Deuteronomy. 6.12. Psalm. 106.7.20. so as to depart from the
living God, Deuteronomy. 32.15. and deny him; Job 21.15. And as of God, so of the
afflictions of Joseph, Amos 6.6, 7. And as of God, and of others, so of
themselves, their own latter end, Lament. 1.9. Jerusalem remembered not her
latter end, therefore she came down wonderfully: Secondly, Pride and disdain of
others, that come short of their measure, as Psalm. 73.4, 5, 6. Psalm. 10.4. 1 Timothy 6.17. It Is hard to keep a low Sail under a high condition. Men's blood,
and their Estates usually rise and fall together. Thirdly, Sensuality and
voluptuousness, as in the rich Fool, Luke 12.19 Fourthly, Security and
fearlessness of Judgment, Jos. 28.19. Math. 24.38, 39. Fifthly, Neglect, and
contempt of God's Word, and Worship, Jer. 22.23. I spoke to thee in thy
prosperity, and thou said, I will not hear.

3. You are to take notice of, and make conscience of those duties, which God
calls you unto, in, and by your prosperity, as these, 1. To eye God in all, as
Jacob did, Genesis 31.9. When he was about to leave his Uncle Laban, he told his
Wives, God had taken away his Father's Cattle, and given them to him. And
after, when he met with his Brother Esau, and found favor in his sight; he
said, I have seen thy face, as the face of God, Take what is brought thee,
because the Lord has dealt graciously with me, Genesis 32.10, 11. A great
Cardinal writing down in his Diary, what such a Lord, and such a Prince, and
such a Pope had done for him, but not a word of God; one reading it, said, This
Man remembered his friends, but forgot God. And so still do too many; but take
heed of it, it is the next way to have God strip you of all.

2. To walk humbly under your prosperity, and the abundance of these outward
good things; being unworthy of, and less than the least of God's mercies. As
our sins are greater than the greatest of God's Judgments, ( Ezra 9 13.); so
our duties less than the least of God's mercies.

3 To live still thankfully for his distinguishing goodness to you, and when
you find the sweet of any mercy, remember still to give him his glory still to
bless the Lord, that takes pleasure in his People, and delights to see his
Servants prosper, Psalm. 35.27. Deuteronomy. 8.19.26.5.

4. To serve the Lord the more cheerfully for the abundance of all his
goodness, as having thereby more leisure from worldly employments, to attend on
the service of God, and more opportunities and abilities for the promoting of
the worship of God amongst others. It Is noted of Jehoshaphat, when the Lord
prospered him, his heart was lifted up in God's ways, 2 Chronicles. 15.6, 7. and
David's study, Psalm. 116.12. What shall I render unto the Lord for all his
benefits.

5. To be more helpful to others, making a supply of others wants out of your
abundance, as the Apostle exhorts, 2 Cor. 9. remembering we are but Stewards of
what we have, Luke 16.1, and therefore be willing and ready to distribute to
the supply of others wants, and necessities, as the Command runs, 1 Timothy 6.18,
19. and Gal. 6.9, 10.

6. To moderate our selves in the use of our Creature Comforts, and not take so
much liberty and delight in them, as you may, 1 Cor. 7.30, 31. Phil. 4.5.

7. To sympathize with others in adversity, Heb. 13.3. Remember those in Bonds,
etc. Lastly, Consider how soon your day of prosperity may be turned into a day
of adversity; Summer will not last all the Year, therefore wise men provide for
Winter, the Sun will not always shine, the Weather will not always be calm, we
know not how soon a Storm may arise, and therefore in a day of prosperity, to
look for a day of adversity, in wealth for poverty, in honor for dishonor, in
health for sickness, in life for death, Job 3.25.14.14. All the days of my
appointed time, etc. Revel. 16.7. And that you may be prepared for a day of
adversity; 1. Hearken unto that of Eliphaz, to Job, chapter 22.21. Acquaint thy
self with God, and be at peace, labor to make your peace with God, by Jesus
Christ, and this will fit you for, and enable you to bear adversity, Romans 5.1.
3. He that has secured his Eternal state, will not much regard the loss of his
temporal estate, Heb. 10.34. they took joyfully the spoiling of their Goods,
etc. And therefore hearken to that, 1 Cor. 7.30. The time is but short, etc.
Get off your hearts from Creature Comforts, and you will more easily part with
them, when God calls for them, as the Apostle, Acts 21. What do you weeping,
etc? Thus much of your carriage under prosperous Providence.

For adverse and sad Providence, mind well these Rules, Take heed of some
things, and practice others.

(1.) Take heed of some things, as these, the taking up hard thoughts of God,
murmuring thoughts against God, despising and desponding thoughts under the
Rod, envious thoughts of others prosperity.

1. Take heed of taking up hard thoughts of God, of questioning God's love
under the Rod, for however prosperity be no mark of God's special love, yet
Adversity is, as you may see clearly, Heb. 12.6. and Revel. 3.19. Whom I love,
I rebuke and chasten. Q. But you will say, To whom is it a pledge of God's
special love? Ans. Not to all, but some, not to the wicked, but the godly; Not
to Cain, but to Abel; not to Esau, but to Jacob, Romans 9. Mal. 1. To all that
unfeignedly love God, Prove. 8.17. I love them that love me. Q How shall I know,
I truly love God? Ans. Thus, 1. If thou love nothing out of him, or without
him, or in comparison of him, and can readily part with all for him, Mat.
10. end. 2. If thou art one that make conscience of yielding obedience,
universal and constant obedience in thy desires and endeavors, to all his
Commandments, John 10.15.21. Q. But when is afflictions an evidence of God's
special love? Ans. Only then when they are sanctified. Q. How may we know that?
Ans. Briefly thus, when they lead men to repentance and a reformation of heart
and life; Jer. 31.18, 19. Job 34.29.

2. Take heed of murmuring, and repining-thoughts under your afflictions, and
that 1. Because it is that which God expressly forbids, and exemplarily
punishes, 1 Cor. 10.10. 2. That which makes Men like unto the Devil, for this
is his sin and punishment, who is still repining and rising up against God,
provoking him the more, 1 Pet. 5.8. 3. It Is fruitless and bootless, to strive
with God, he will be too hard for men, and will afflict them the more, Jer.
17.19. Do they provoke me to anger, do they not provoke themselves to the
confusion of their faces? And 1 Cor. 10.22. Do we provoke the Lord to
jealousy, are we stronger than he? 3. You do by your impatience, but afflict
your selves the more, make your burden the heavier, Impatiens aegrotus
crudelem facit medicum. It is just with God to lay on more strokes, as a Father
on a stubborn Child.

3. Take heed of despising and desponding thoughts under the Rod. God forbids
both, Heb. 12.5. My Son despise not the chastning of the Lord nor faint, when
thou art rebuked of him; a Christian must be careful to avoid both Extremes,
despising and desponding thoughts; First, Not to despise the Rod, by slighting
it, that which the Lord complains of, Jer. 5.9. Thou have stricken them, but
they have not grieved. Though it be a sin to faint under it, yet it is a
greater, to slight it and despise it, and therefore made the aggravation of
Ahaz wickedness, [This is that Ahaz, which in his afflictions trespassed more
and more, 2 Chro. 28.22.] Secondly, Take heed of desponding thoughts, for if
thou saint in the day of adversity, thy strength is but small, Prove. 24.10. No
sin more dishonorable to God, to Christ, to the Spirit, to a Man's Soul than
Desperation; that which robs God of the glory of his grace, Christ of the glory
of his Merits, the Spirit of the glory of his Power, and sinks Soul and Body
into everlasting destruction.

4. Take heed of envious thoughts of others prosperity, that which the best are
subject to, under their own adversity, as you may see in David, Psalm. 73.3.
until he went into the Sanctuary, and saw the end of such ungodly prosperous
ones, how suddenly they were brought to desolation, even in a moment, Psalm.
18.19. And therefore let not thy heart envy sinners, etc. Pro 22.17.

2. For the things to be practiced, they are these, 1. In the day of adversity,
consider, Eccles. 7.14. Consider, 1. Whence-ever it comes, who or whatsoever be
the Instrument, God is the Author, Amos 3.6. Is there any evil in the City, and
I have not done it? and Psalm. 39.10. Affliction comes not out of the dust,
neither does trouble spring out of the ground, Job 5.6. But from an allwise
disposing providence; Can a Bird fall into a snare, where there is no Ginn?
Shall there be any evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3.6,
7. The Bird seems to be taken by chance, and yet taken by providence; though
the Bird did not see the snare, yet the Fowler did, and did set it purposely
for him: So afflictions may seem accidental to us, but yet intended by God;
though we do not foresee them, yet God did fore-appoint them, 1 These. 3.3. See
more to this purpose, 1 Samuel 2.7. Is. 45.7. Hos. 8.14.

2. Consider what they come for, sc. for sin. Though there be other causes, yet
this is always one cause, Lament. 3.39. Wherefore does the living man complain,
etc? Psalm. 130. last. Miea. 7. I will patiently bear the indignation of the
Lord, because I have sinned, If sin lies heavy, all afflictions will be light.
Luther gives this reason, why he slighted the rage of the Pope, the Emperor,
and all his Enemies, They are all little to me, (says he) because sin is so
weighty.

3. Consider to what end they come, Romans 8.28. All things work together for
good, Genesis 15.20. Heb. 12. He corrects us not for his pleasure, but for our
profit, Phil. 1.19. I know this shall turn to my Salvation.

4. Be careful to justify God, in, and under all, even the greatest
afflictions. As Ezra 9. Thou have punished us less than we deserve. Psalm. 119.
of very faithfulness thou have corrected me: and the Church, Lament. 3. It Is
the Lord's mercy we are not consumed, Isai. 24.15. The command is, Glorify God
in the Fire, sc. of Affliction, which is as a Fire to try you, humble, purge
you, and purify you.

5. Be filent and patient under it, as Job. 1. last. and David, Psalm. 9.9.
Remembering and considering wnatsoever your sufferings are; 1. They are from a
Lord, whose will cannot be resisted; and a Father whose will ought readily to
be obeyed; a wise Father, that knows what is better for his Children, than they
do for themselves, a compassionate Father, that will not afflict too much,
because he knows whereof they are made, that they are but dust, Psalm. 103. nor
too long, least the Spirit faint, and the Soul that he has made, Isai. 57.
Secondly, Because whatsoever your sufferings are they are little or nothing, in
respect of what our sins made Christ to suffer. 2. In respect of the many and
bitter things many of his Saints have, and do suffer. 3. Those evils our sins
deserve we should suffer. 4. Those Eternal sufferings Christ has redeemed us
from. 5. That exceeding excessive weight of glory that will follow these
sufferings, 2 Cor. 4. end.

3. In respect of those many sweet, gracious and holy ends God has in the
Afflictions of his; which you saw before in your Meditations on God's
supporting grace.

6. Lastly, To hearken unto, and obey the voice of God in his Rod, Mica. 6.9.
The Lord's Voice cries unto the City, etc. The Rod of God has a Voice, as
well as the Word: when Men will not hearken unto, and obey God's Voice in the
Ministry of the Word, then God sends his Rod, and awakens Conscience, opens
Men's Ears, and Seals up instructions. Q. But what is the Voice of the Rod, what
does it teach and instruct men in? Ans. That you have in four places of
Scripture; 1. That of Job 22.21. Acquaint thy self with God, and be at peace,
so good shall come unto thee. 2. That, Lament. 3.39. Wherefore does the living
man complain, let him search, and try his ways, and turn again unto the Lord.
3. That of Peter, 1 Pet. 5.6. Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God,
and he will exalt you in due time. 4. That, Ezekiel. 18.31. Cast away all your
transgressions, and make you a new Heart, and a new Spirit, For why will you
die, O House of Israel!

7. To be thankful, that as God of faithfulness has corrected us, so of the
same faithfulness he has not taken away his loving kindness; That he has
corrected us in so much measure and mercy, dealt not with us according to our
deserts, but the multitude of his free, tender, and unchangeable mercies; our
afflictions not so many and great, but God's mercies more and greater, if not
in temporals, yet in spirituals: though poor in the World, yet rich in Christ,
though we want the smiles of the World, you have the favor of the great God,
though not the riches of the World, yet we have the riches of grace, though not
the pleasures of the World, yet the peace of a good Conscience.

8. Not only to be thankful for them, but joyful in them, and under them,
though not in respect of the nature of them, which is evil, for so they are not
joyous, but grievous, Heb. 12. Yet in respect of the concomitants, Pardon and
Peace, and the consequents, Salvation and Glotification, as they, 1 These.
1.4.6. This is the meaning of that James 1.2. My brethren, count it all joy,
when you fall into diverse Temptations, or Afflictions. There are two Sights
(says Luther) the Devil most delights-in, To see a wicked man merry, and a
Saint sorrowful: but there are two Sights that do intollerably vex him, sc. To
see a sinner mournful for his sin, and a Saint joyful under his sufferings,
Luther's Colloq. Mensal. Cap. 37. And therefore, I say, be joyful and
comfortable under all your affl ctions, in respect of the blessed issue, and
fruit of them; as the Saints before us, Acts 5. last, Romans 5.3, 4.

9. To be fruitful under them: What that fruit is, you are to bring forth under
them, you may see in Isai. 27.9. By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged,
etc. And David, Psalm. 119.67. It Is good for me that I have been afflicted.

10. To live still by faith in God's promises, and providence, for supporting
Grace under, and deliverance out of all, as the Saints have done before you;
First, You have many promises to encourage you; take notice of, and meditate on
a few, 1 Cor. 10.13. Psalm. 91.15. Isai. 41.10.27.9, 10. Psalm. 34.19. Secondly,
You have many also of the Saints going before you in this; as, Job 15 13.
David, Psalm. 42 last. Psalm 9.10. Paul, 2 Cor. 1.10. And we are commanded to
follow them in the same practice, Heb. 10.35. end.

Lastly, To follow all with Praver, that Faith and Patience may have their
through and perfect work, The Rod may be sanctified before it be removed, That
as your sufferings abound, so your Consolations may abound by Jesus Christ;
Amen.

The Fifth Head, concerning the Worship and Service of God.
Sect. 1. About this, to meditate on these sew things: What it is, Where, and
When, and How, and Why we are to worship God.

1. What it is: for the understanding of this, to consider; Servants (you know)
owe unto their Lord a service of honor, and of labor, for the protection, and
provision they have from them; and such do we owe to our Sovereign Lord and
Master, Mal. 1.6. So that this worship of God, it is that Homage, and service,
which every one owes unto Him, and which he requires and expects from them, and
for their Creation, Redemption, Vocation, and the daily protection, and
provision, he makes for them, Math. 4.10. Deuteronomy. 10.12. and verse. 21. Psalm.
29.1, 2. And here to take notice; This Worship of God, it is either External, or
Internal; First, External, God is to be worshipped with the Body, and every
part of it, Joshua sell on his face, and worshipped, Josh. 5.14. Moses bowed
his head, and worshipped, Exodus 4.32. David lifted up his hands to God, and
worshipped; Psalm. 63.4. Jesus lifted up his eyes to Heaven, and prayed, John
17.1. The reason is, because the Bodies of the Saints shall be glorified with
God hereafter, and therefore they are to glorify him with their Bodies here,
Romans 12.1. I beseech you Brethren, by the mercies of God, present your Bodies a
living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God. Secondly, Internal worship, is a
worshipping God with the Spirit, as well as the Body; it being that, God
especially calls for, John 4.24. Phil. 3.3. And this is sometimes called, a
fearing of God, Deuteronomy. 6.13. a loving of God, Jam. 2.5. a delighting in God,
Psalm. 37.3. and, a trusting in God, Psalm. 16.1.

Secondly, For the Place, where he is to be worshipped: it is not only in this,
and that place, as ignorant superstitious persons fancy, but He is every where
to be worshipped; and, that in the observance of all those religious duties,
which He requires, in public, private, and secret, Isaiah 2.2. Psalm. 122.1.
Genesis 18.19. Job 1.5. Jer. 10. last. Mat. 6.6. Then,

Thirdly, For the Time that he is to be worshipped by us: as in all places, so
at all times; as on the Week days, by beginning, continuing, and ending the day
with him, so especially on his own day, the Sabbath Day; because although every
day be his, yet this in a special manner His, Psalm. 18.24. This is the day
which the Lord has made, this is the Day which he has sanctified, and set
apart wholly for the worship of Himself, Isaiah 58. last. And as this is the
day he made for his own glory, so for Man's good; the good of his Body, and of
his Soul. The good of his Body, that he might not tire out himself in the
service of the World; but especially the good of his soul, that he might by a
Sabbath on Earth, be minded of, and fitted for an everlasting Sabbath in
Heaven; by communion with God in Ordinances here, he might be made to long
after that place, where he has promised to be all in all, without Ordinances,
Rev. 21.22, 23. To this end, he has appointed it to be the Schooling-day, and
Market Day, and Feasting-day, and Sealing-day to the Soul; therefore in a
special manner, to be careful of giving God his worship upon this day, in the
observance and performance of all those duties of piety and mercy, that he
requires from you in public, private, and secret: and here to mark, that you
spend not only a part, but the whole day in the worship and service of God, and
that upon these accounts; First, Because He rested the whole day, and created
nothing the Seventh-day, but finished all before on the Six days; Secondly,
Because he sanctified, and set apart the whole day for Himself, and therefore
not to rob him of any part, seeing he has dealt so bountifully with us, as to
give us Six days for the service of our selves, and reserved but One for the
service of Himself. Thirdly, Because the duties of God's Worship on that Day
are so many and weighty, as a whole Day is little enough to perform them as
they ought.

The Fourth Circumstance, that is especially to be thought on, is the right
manner, How we are to worship God: because God looks not so much to the matter,
as the right manner of worshipping Him, and abhorrs and rejects the work,
without the right manner, as you may see fully, Isai. 1.11. to the 21. Jer.
7.8, 9. Mal. 1. last. Q Well, what is this right manner of worshipping God?
Ans. It is to worship Him by a right Rule, from a right Principle, and to a
right End; 1. By a right Rule, sc. the Rule of God's Word, Isai. 8.20. Psalm.
119.9. According to his own Institutions, and not Men's Inventions; In vain do
you worship me, etc. 2. From a right Principle, sc. in the Name of Christ,
Colos. 3.17, and the strength of Christ, Joh. 15.5. From Faith, Heb. 11.6. and
Love, 1 Peter 2.1. 3. To a right end, sc. the Glory of God, and the Salvation
of your Souls, 1 Cor. 10.13. Phil. 1.19. Q. But what are those Rules in the
Word, according to which we are to worship God? Ans. first, More general, as
these; Preparation, and affection before; attention and reverence in; and
meditation and practice after, Eccles. 5.1. Psalm. 66.18. Acts 16.14. Hebr. 12.2
last. Luke 2.19. John. 13.17.

Secondly, More special Rules for the worshipping of God, are such, as respect
the sanctifying of the Sabbath, Prayer to God, Hearing of the Word; Reading of
the Scriptures, Receiving of the Lord's Supper, singing of Psalms, religious
Fasting, and Feasting, and holy Conference. For the acceptable, comfortable and
profitable use of these, you are to meditate on some things before, in, and
after every one: I shall but name a few, to help your Memories, and quicken
your Devotion.

First, For the right sanctifying of the Sabbath, to take notice of, and
meditate on these things, before, in, and after the Sabbath; First, Before the
Sabbath, to remember the Sabbath before it comes. Secondly, To prepare for it,
by ordering your Worldly affairs, so as they may not hinder you; and to
sequester your thoughts from all other things, that you may intend the duties
of the Sabbath, Exodus 20.8.

Secondly, When the Sabbath is come, to consecrate it as a holy Rest to the
Lord your God, not thinking your own thoughts, or speaking your own words, or
doing your own pleasure, but the Lord's, Isaiah 58.13. To begin, continue, and
end the Sabbath with God. And that you may do so, to observe these things;
First, To rise early on the Sabbath, after the Example of Christ; and when you
awake, to bless God for another day of grace: in rising up, to think on your
Resurrection at the last Day to glory: in putting on of your apparel, to think
on the command of putting on the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 13. end. After you
have Apparel'd your selves, to remember the duties required of you before, in,
and after the public Assemblies: First, Before, to sequester your thoughts
from all things of the World, and the Flesh, to mind only, and wholly God, his
Day, and Worship. Secondly, To pray by your selves, and with the Family for
God's presence, with assistance in, and blessing on his Ordinances to you, and
yours, and all his; especially on the Ministry of the Word, that it may be made
effectual to all the ends, he has appointed it, as the conviction, conversion,
humiliation, consolation, edification, and salvation of all those that belong
to the Election of grace. Thirdly, As you are going to the public Assemblies,
to remember where you are going, that you are going into the Presence, not only
of men, but God; that-God, who will be sanctified by all that draw nigh to him,
or will be sanctified upon them, Levit. 10. To consider also, what you are
going about; a business of the greatest consequence in the World, To converse
with God, and to enjoy communion with God, and hear that Word, which will make
you better, or worse, soften, or harden you; will bring you nearer to Heaven,
or Hell; and will be, either the savor of life, or death to you, 2 Cor. 2.16.
Secondly, As you are entering into the public Assemblies, to think, and say,
with Jacob, How dreadful is this place? It is no other than the Gate of Heaven,
to set your selves in the presence of the great God, and carry your selves
there, with all fear, and reverence; seeing there are not only Men, but the
Angels, and the Great and Holy God, to take notice, both of your inward, and
outward behavior: And see you stay, and not depart without the Blessing.
Thirdly, After the public Assemblies, as you go home, to meditate on what you
have heard; when you come home, search the Scriptures, whether things are so;
to repeat, and confer with those in your Family about it; to press the
remembrance, and practice of what you have heard, on your selves, and them;
after this, to go apart, and spend the rest of the day in Examination, what you
have profited; and in meditation on the Word, and Works of God, and that
Eter^^^ Sabbath you are to celebrate hereafter in Heaven, where you shall keep
a Sabbath, not only without weariness, but with infinite delight; and then
conclude the Sabbath with prayer and praise: pray for a blessing on the truths
made known to you, and for the pardon of all those infirmities you have
discovered before, in, and after duty, in public, private, or secret; and that
God would accept of your weak endeavors, and unfeigned desires to honor him,
in, and for, the all-meritorious Intercession's sake of Jesus Christ. And then
praise God, for one Sabbath more, liberty of communion with Him, his Presence
with you, assistance of you, and blessing of his Ordinances to you; and so end
the day, as you began it. As you gave Him the first of your thoughts, when you
rose; so give Him the last of your thoughts when you lie down, that so your
dreams may savor of your Sabbath Days exercises.

Thirdly, After the Sabbath, to hold forth in your lives, and conversations,
all you have heard, and prayed for; that so the blessing of the Sabbath may
bring a blessing on all your labors the Week following, Amen.

The Second Duty, is Prayer to God.
And here, First, before Prayer, to meditate, First, On the infinite distance
between God, and you, as Creatures, especially such finful Creatures, Eccles.
5.2. Secondly, To make your addresses to the Throne of Grace, only in the Name,
Worthiness, and Mediation of Jesus Christ, Col. 3.17. Thirdly, To take notice
of the special sins, you are to confess, the evils you are to ^^precate or pray
against, the good things you are to Petition, and the Mercies you are to return
thanks for; Fourthly, Because we know not how to pray as we ought, To beg the
Spirit of Grace, and Supplication, to help your infirmity, and keep your hearts
close to Him in duty: Fifthly, To remember, that we pray for all men,
especially for Kings, and all that are in Authority, 1 Timothy 2.2, 3. and for all
Saints, Ephesians. 6.18.

Secondly, In the time of Prayer, remember to do it with humility and
reverence, Heb. 12. end. In sincerity and truth, John 4.24. With feeling and
servency, James 5.16, 17. and in faith and love, Heb. 11.6. 1 Timothy 2.8.
Thirdly, After Prayer to look-after an Answer. Live what you have prayed, and
labor in the use of the means, for that you have prayed, as you are commanded,
Prove. 2.3, 4.

The Third Duty, is Hearing the Word.
First, Before Hearing, remember whom you go to hear, not only Man, but God,
who speaks in, and by Man, 2 Cor. 5.20. Secondly, Because man can but speak to
the Ear, beg the Lord to give his Spirit, that may speak to the heart. Thirdly,
That the Spirit may make the Word effectual to the end God has appointed it,
take heed you come not with prejudice against the Minister, or the Word spoken
by him, James 1.21. 1 Peter 2.1. Fourthly, That you endeavor to bring, humble,
honest, and upright hearts to the hearing of the Word, Luke 8.15. Micah 2.7.
Does not my word do good to him that walks uprightly? Secondly, In the time of
Hearing. First, To set your selves in the special presence of God, and
remember, He observes not only your outward but inward carriages, with what
hearts every one comes, and sits before him, 1 Samuel 16.17. Ezekiel. 33.31.
Secondly, To attend heedfully to the things that are spoken; as Lydia did, Acts
16. Thirdly, To apply particularly, what is spoken, not to others, but to your
selves, as John's hearers did, Luke 3.10. Because what is spoken to one, is
intended to all, Mark 13. last. and, unless it be applied by faith, it will not
profit, Heb. 4.11. Thirdly, After Hearing; First, To discourse of what you have
heard, and not, as the manner of too many is, to talk presently of other
Persons, and Things; Secondly, To search the Scripture, with the noble Beraeans
whether things be so, or no, Acts 17.11. Thirdly, To work all into your hearts
and lives, by Meditation, Prayer, and Practice, because the promise of a
blessing runs only to such, Psalm. 103.17. and Luke 11.28. Otherwise, without
practice, every Sermon will be preached over by God, and Conscience again, at
the last Day, with such horror, and terror, as you will never be able to hear
it, John 12.48.

The Fourth Duty, is Reading of the Scriptures.
First, Before it, to think what a great blessing it is to enjoy this blessed
Book, and have liberty to look into it, when it is denied to many others, not
only amongst the Papists, but amongst us, through their own, and their Parents
neglect of learning them to read. Secondly, To remember, that this is a duty
that lies upon all Persons, private, as well as public; People, as well as
Ministers, both to read the Scriptures: First, In respect of the express
command of God, Mal. 4.4. John 5.39. Col. 3.16. Secondly, In respect of the
great benefit, and comfort that comes by it; 2 Timothy 3. the 3 last. Romans 15 41.
Psalm. 1.2. Revel. 1.3. Thirdly, In reading; First, To lift up an Ejaculation,
for understanding of it; praying with David, Psalm. 119.18. Open my eyes, that I
may see the wondrous things of thy Law: Secondly, To read with Application, as
David, Psalm. 40.8. It Is written of me, that I should do thy will: It was no
where written so of David in particular, only he applied the general command to
his particular. Thirdly, After reading, with David also, to hide God's Word in
your heart, Psalm. 119.11. And see that you order your conversation, according
to it, Verse. 9.

The Fifth Duty, is Receiving the Lord's Supper.
First, Before it, to see whether you can find your selves in a state of
grace, and that you have those Sacramental graces of knowledge, faith,
repentance, obedience, love, and an appetite to this Ordinance; all which are
required to qualify, and fit Souls for communion with Jesus Christ, in that
Ordinance. This duty of Self-examination, you may see expressly required, 1 Cor.
11.28. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat, etc. Because otherwise
without grace, it will be a Seal to a Blank. Secondly, To stir up, and exercise
those graces, before you come, 2 Timothy 1.6. Otherwise you will receive
unworthily, as the Corinthians did, because they did not renew their
repentance, before they came, 1 Cor. 11.30, 31. Thirdly, To draw nigh to God in
it, to those ends he instituted it, and appointed it; as, the commemorating of
Christ's love in dying for us, the expressing of our thankfulness, the
strengthening of our faith, the weakening of our corruptions, and the getting of
more grace to walk with God, and work for God, and live to God.

Secondly, In the time of Receiving; First, To fix your eyes on the Sacramental
actions, in, and about the Elements; Secondly, To meditate seriously on those
things, signified by every action about them. Thirdly, To get your hearts
affected with godly sorrow for your sins, which were the principals in the
death and sufferings of the Lord Jesus: and a spiritual rejoicing in his love,
that was content, to die, that we might live; and to be made a curse, that we
might have a blessing through him. Fourthly, To pray unto the Lord, that he
would bless his Ordinance unto you, to all those holy ends, he did appoint it,
and you receive it, viz. the Mortification of your lusts, the Vivification of
your graces, your perfect Justification, further Sanctification, and future
Salvation by Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, After the Sacrament, to make Conscience of an answerable carriage in
the observance of all those religious duties required of you, in public, and
private, as First, Thankfulness for Jesus Christ given to you, and for you, for
his instituting this Ordinance, to put you, and keep you, in remembrance of
him, the liberty and opportunity, you have had to partake in it. Secondly,
Examination, what benefit we have sound by being at the Table of the Lord.
Thirdly, A careful endeavor to express, and hold forth the Virtue, and the
Efficacy of it, in a more humble, holy, spiritual, and heavenly walking, and a
more faithful, cheerful, fruitful service of God in our several places.

The Sixth Duty, is Singing of Psalms.
(First,) Before it, to make a wise choice of such Psalms, as may be most
seasonable, and suitable to the present occasion; (Secondly,) In singing,
remember to sing, First, with understanding, Ps. 47.7. 1 Cor. 14.14. Secondly,
With the Spirit, Verse. 15. that is, see that our Spirit go a long with our
voice, because Non vox sed votum, etc. It Is not so much the voice, as the heart
God looks to. Thirdly, With grace in the heart, Col. 3.16. that is, from an
inward gracious frame of heart, and with the actings of our graces in singing,
as faith, fear, love, joy, etc. Fourthly, To sing unto the Lord, Ephesians. 5.19.
that is, unto the praise and glory of the Lord, Psalm. 101.1. Isai. 5.1.
(Thirdly,) After singing, to set about the service of the Lord, with more
cheerfulness, for the abundance of all his goodness, Deuteronomy. 28.47. To discourse
together also of the matter you have sung, and quicken one the other unto duty,
as you are required, Col. 3.16.

The Seventh Duty, is Religious Fasting.
First, Before it, to lay aside all servile work the Night before, that you may
mind the weighty service of the Day following; Secondly, To rise earlier on
that day than other days, having such an occasion of humbling your selves;
Secondly, On the Day of your Fast; the duties required of you are, either
outward, or inward; First, The outward, as the forbearing of those things,
which at other times are lawful, and convenient; as, First, All Worldly
employment, and labors of our calling, Joel 1.14. Levit. 16.29, 31. Levit.
23.32. Secondly, The use of all Food (unless in case of weakness, and hazard of
our health, for God will have Mercy, rather than Sacrifice, ( Hosea 6.6. Mat.
12.7.) Otherwise there must be an abstinence from all Meat, Joel 3.7. Thirdly,
Costly Apparel, and Ornaments, Exodus 33.4, 5. Jonah 3.6. Fourthly, Matrimonial
benevolence, 1 Cor. 7.5. Joel 2.16. Fifthly, All carnal delights and pleasures,
Joel 2.16. 1 Samuel 12.20.

Secondly, The inward duties are; First, Fasting from sin, Isaiah 58.4.
Secondly, Humiliation of Soul under sin, Joel 2. Thirdly, Earnest Supplication
for the pardon of sin, Joel 3.8. Fourthly, Personal reformation, or turning
from all sin, Joel 3.8.

Thirdly, After Fasting, to conclude all with works of mercy, Isai. 58.6.
Secondly, Take heed of resting in the Work done, remembering the chief part is
yet behind, viz. the reformation of our ways. Thirdly, Be careful to make good
your Vows and Covenants of more circumspect walking. Fifthly, To wait upon God
for a gracious answer, as David did, Psalm. 85. I will hearken what God will
speak.

The Eighth Duty, is Religious Feasting or Thanksgiving.
First, Before it, to remember and consider; It Is the Homage, and Rent, we owe
to him, for all he has, and does, for us; and which he expressly commands, and
we promised to him in the times of our troubles, and distress, fasting and
humiliation, Psalm. 15.15. Psalm. 22.25. 1 These. 5.18. Secondly, It Is all the
return that we can make to him, and that which he is pleased to accept, though
his Name be above all thanksgiving, Neh. 9.6. Psalm. 50. last. Therefore as we
have the sweet of any mercy, still remember to give him his glory. Thirdly, To
see that your Persons be fit for it, to be godly and righteous Persons, Psalm.
33.1. Ungodly, and unrighteous ones, are altogether unfit, Psalm. 50.18. Prove.
17.7. Jam. 3.10.11. Fourthly, To present all your praises, and thanksgiving in
the Name of Christ, to beg your acceptance of it, in, and through his
Mediation, and Worthiness, 1 These. 5.10. Ephesians. 5.20, Heb. 13.15. Rev. 8.34.

Secondly, In the time of thanksgiving; First, To see, that it be with the
soul, and the heart, Ps. 57.74. and with every faculty of our Souls: as, our
understanding, 1 Cor. 14.15. with our Judgment prizing it, according to it is
worth, Psalm. 31.19. the memory treasuring up God's mercies, there to think upon
them, Psalm. 103. My Soul forget not all his benefits. With our affections,
especially these two: 1. Love. Psalm. 116.1. I love the Lord, because he has
heard my voice; and Joy, Psalm. 33.1. Rejoice in the Lord ye righteous, for it
becomes the just to be thankful; and Psalm. 92.4. Secondly, As inwardly, with
the Heart; so outwardly, with the Tongue, Psalm. 63.7. Psalm. 66.16. Whence the
tongue is called our [glory] because we are to glorify him with the tongue,
Psalm. 108. And to do it with our tongues, thus: First, By acknowledging God is
worthy to receive all praise, Rev. 5. about the end. Secondly, By lifting up of
God's Name, and speaking of those glorious Attributes, which shine forth in
God's mercies, as Revel. 11.16, 17. Thirdly, By telling it to others what God
has done for us, and ours, Psalm 22.22. and Psalm. 66.16, 17. Fourthly, By
exciting, and stirring up others to praise God, as David, Psalm. 148. Where you
may find, he calls upon all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth, to do so.

Thirdly, After our solemn Thanksgiving, to be especially careful of expressing
it in a suitable life: it is only this, is the life of thanksgiving, and finds
acceptance with God, Psalm. 50. last. Without this all outward gratulation, is
but dissimulation, and a further provocation. And, that you are really thankful
in your lives, to manifest it, thus; First, By a greater hatred of sin;
especially this sin of Unthankfulness, Psalm. 130.4. Secondly, Greater care of
discharging the duties of piety to God, Psalm. 116.16, 17. and charity unto men,
Nehem. 8.10, 11. not only to their bodies, but their souls, Psalm. 51.12, 13.
Thirdly, By a suitable walking before God, and serving him cheerfully for the
abundance of all his Goodness, Deuteronomy. 28.47. Deuteronomy. 6.10. Deuteronomy. 10.12.

The Ninth Duty, is Holy Conference.
First, Before it, to set up resolutions of declining conference about other
Men's Persons, and other Men's Affairs, 1 These. 4.11. Study to be quiet, and
meddle with your own business. To decline also all controverted points, and
apply your selves only to practical; to discourse of the things of God, and
Christ, and his Spirit, and the graces of the Spirit, what they are, and what
evidences you have of them, the fourfold state of Man, the four last things:
what experiences you, and others have had of God's providence over you, and
yours: how he delivered you at such a time from such a danger, and did help you
in such a strait: how you got power over such a temptation, and such a
corruption: how you were enabled to, and carried through such a duty. Secondly,
To consider of some special spiritual Subject, that may be most seasonable, and
suitable to the Persons you conferr withal, their disposition and condition,
either inward or outward. Thirdly, To look up and entreat the Lord, so to
direct your hearts and tongues, as you may speak to his glory, and others
edification, Ephesians. 4.29.

Secondly, In the time of Conference, to take heed of some things, and practice
others; First, To take heed of rash speaking, Pro 8.13. Secondly, Too much
speaking, Prove. 10.19. Prove. 29.17. Thirdly, Disorderly speaking; those to
begin first who are first in place, and gifts, Job 32.4, 5. Fourthly,
Vainglorious speaking, Prove. 27.2. Fifthly, Censorious-speaking, Mat. 7.1.
Sixthly, Contentious speaking, more for Victory, than for Truth, James 3.16.
Where envy and strife is, there is Confusion, and every Evil Work. And,
Secondly, Other things to be practiced; as these, To see your speech be wise,
deliberate, humble, meek, gracious, and profitable.

Thirdly, After Conference, to observe what you, and others have profited by
it: give him the glory of his grace to you in it, and by the sweetness you have
found in it, to long after that place where you shall all be perfected in love;
Thus much of the manner of worshipping God, that so you may worship Him in such
a right manner.

Sect. 5. Fifth-Circumstance, in and about the worship of God, is, Reasons, why
every one is to give God the Worship due to him; 1. Because not only our duty;
that we owe to him, and he commands, Math. 4.10. Revel. 22.9. but our
Privilege, Deuteronomy. 4.6, 7. 2. The greatest honor the Creature is capable of;
not only Men and Angels, but Christ himself accounted it so, Isa. 43.1.

Lastly, Because Ordinances, wherein, and whereby God is worshipped, are the
Meeting places between God and his Saints, wherein they hold sweet communion
one with the other, and what we must do to get, preserve, and increase this
communion; First, To get communion with God, to this end: First, See you have
union with God; because without union, no communion, and to clear up your union
with God, to see that Christ be yours, because he is a God to none out of
Christ. Ephesians. 2.14. and that Christ is yours, to see that his Spirit be yours,
Romans 8.9. and that the Spirit is yours, to see that you have the sanctifying
work of the Spirit, 1 These. 5.23. Secondly, That you may have communion with
God, you are to make this the main end of your drawing near to God, in the use
of his Ordinances: for the sincerity, and hypocrisy of a Man's Spirit, is seen
in the end, he proposes to himself in duty. Now there are two ends, every one
should propose to himself, in drawing nigh to God in duty: First, That God may
be more honored by them; Secondly, That we may enjoy more of God, more
discoveries of his love, and further influences of his grace, more enlightening,
enlivening, mortifying, sanctifying, quickening, strengthening, and establishing
Grace.

Secondly, To preserve communion with God: First, To see you have no communion
with sin, and sinners, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. 1 John 1.6, 7. Secondly, To keep close
to God in duty, for there is no such way to keep God close to us, as to keep
close to Him, 2 Chro. 15.2. I am with you whilst you are with me.

Thirdly, To increase communion with God, to come with an Appetite to it, to
carry our selves humbly in it, and after it, to hold forth the life and power
of it, in your conversations; and by the sweetness you find in it, to long the
more after immediate, perfect, and everlasting communion with Him in Glory,
Amen. Thus of the things to be meditated on, in, and about GOD.

CHAP. III. The Second Head of Meditation, is, Our Lord Jesus Christ.
THe things to be meditated on, in, and about Him, I shall reduce to these
Twelve Heads; First, Who He is. Secondly, What He is. Thirdly, The Infinite
love of God in giving such a Redeemer to Man, and only to Man. Fourthly, The
infinite love of Christ in undertaking the great Work of Redemption for Man.
Fifthly, The amiableness, and loveliness of this Redeemer: Sixthly, The
greatness of this Work of our Redemption. Seventhly, The ways and means of his
effecting our Redemption: Eighthly, The privilege that come by an Interest in
Him: Ninthly, The evidences of it. Tenthly, The Means to procure it.
Eleventhly, The Motives to it; And, Twelfthly, How to walk worthy of, and
suitable to this Redeemer.

Sect. 1. First, To take notice, Who Jesus Christ is, viz. the Eternal Son of
God, who in the fullness, of time took to his Divine Nature, our humane Nature,
and so became God, and Man, in one Person, that he might be a fit Mediator to
go between God and Man, to reconcile God to man, and man to God, Gal. 4.4, 5. 1
Colos. 20.21. (Man) because man had finned, and Justice required that nature,
which had offended, should make satisfaction; and (God) that he might be able
to undergo the wrath of God due to our fins, and his suffering might be of
infinite value, to purchase salvation for us; his sufferings for a time, being
more, than if all men, and Angels, had suffered to all Eternity.

Secondly, What Christ is to His, viz. that, He is the only remedy which God
has vouchsafed against Man's misery, Acts 4.12. No other Name given under
Heaven by which we can be saved. Joh. 8.24. If you believe not that I am he,
you shall die in your sins: and therefore it is a gross Error, A man may be
saved in any Religion, so he walk according to the Rules of it; and as he is
the only remedy, so he is an All-sufficient remedy, has thoroughly trod the
Wine Press of God's wrath, fulfilled and brought in everlasting righteousness,
and so able to save to the uttermost, all such as come to God by him, Heb. 7.26.

Thirdly, To meditate on the infinite love of God to Mankind, in vouchsafing
such a Remedy to us, and none to the fallen Angels, Heb. 2.16. and John 3.16.
God so loved the World, that he gave, etc. with such a Sic as has no Sicut,
such a So as has no Like; so as cannot be conceived, much less expressed.

Fourthly, On the infinite love of Christ in the voluntary undertaking this
great Work for us, and standing between the wrath of God, and out Souls, when
the whole Creation trembled at it, Psalm. 40.8. This is such a love, as passes
love, and passes knowledge; Men, and Angels not able to comprehend, what the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height, is of this love of Jesus Christ to
poor sinners, Ephesians. 3.18, 19.

Fifthly, To meditate on the amiableness, or loveliness of Christ, in himself;
that your hearts may be drawn out the more after him, Cant. 5. last. He is
altogether lovely, all desirable, in his Names, Nature, Offices, Graces,
Actions, Passions, and Benefits, purchased by him for us.

First, In his Names: His name is as an Ointment poured out, Cant. 1.3. God
has given him a name above every name, that at the Name of Jesus every Knee
should bow, Phil. 2.9. And this Name JESUS, so full of sweetness, that (as
Bernard has it) it is Mel in ore, melos in aure, Jubilus in cord, Honey in
the mouth, Music in the Ear, and a Jubilee in the Heart; so sweet, that
Austin, after his Conversion, delighted not to read any Book, wherein was not
the Name Jesus. And for his Name Christ, how full of sweetness is this so
called, because he was Anointed to be the Mediator, King, Priest, and Prophet
of his Church. You may read more of his precious names, Isai. 9.6.

Secondly, Altogether lovely in his Natures, both Divine, and Humane; First,
For His Divine Nature, He is God, Co-essential, Coeternal, and every way
coequal with his Father, and therefore styled God's-fellow, Zach. 13.7.
Secondly, For His Humane Nature; as He was Man, so He was a Just, and Innocent
Man, Mat. 27.19. A good man, that always went about doing good, to the Souls,
and Bodies of others, Acts 10.38. An eminent Man, above all Men, fairer than
all the Children of Men, Isai. 45.2. and that both in Soul, and Body* And needs
must, as being without all sin, (from which all deformities come) especially in
his state of Exaltation, as the Apostle tells you, when he met with him in the
way of his Persecution, Act. 26.13. At midday, O King, I saw, in the way, a
light from Heaven, above the brightness of the Sun, shining round about me, etc.

Thirdly, Altogether lovely in his Offices, o^ Mediatorship, Priestly,
Prophetical, and Kingly Office; First, His Office of Mediatorship, for first he
has reconciled by this, God and Man, Law and Gospel, Mercy and Justice;
Secondly, Hereby He has opened a way for us, into the Presence o^ God; whom we
could no more draw nigh to, without Him, than the Stubble to the consuming
Fire, Heb. 12. last.

Secondly, For His Priestly Office, He is altogether lovely in that; First,
Because He is a Priest, not after the Order of Aaron, but the Order of
Melchisedeck, Psalm. 110.4 Aaron was a temporary Priest, but Christ an Eternal
Priest. Secondly, In that, He was not only a Priest, but Altar, and Sacrifice;
all which, never any before Him was, Isaiah 56.67. and 60.7. Thirdly, A Priest
that sprinkles Persons, and Services with his precious Blood; so as to take
away the iniquity of our holy things, and render all acceptable to his Father,
Ephesians. 1.6. 1 Pet. 2.5. Fourthly, A merciful High Priest, that cannot but have a
fellow-feeling of all our infirmities, Heb. 11.15. and knows how to succor
them under their temptations, Heb. 2. end. Fifthly, A Priest that is holy,
harmless, separate from sinners, and so able to save them to the uttermost,
that come to God by Him seeing He ever lives to make Intercession for them,
Heb. 7.25.

Thirdly, Altogether lovely in his Prophetical Office; A Prophet that excels
all other Prophets; First. In that all other Prophets were but Types of this
Prophet, even Moses himself, Mat. 10.27. Heb. 3. Secondly, Other Prophets could
speak only to the Ear, but Christ to the hearts of men; other Prophets could
only instruct, but not convert: Christ does both, Revel. 3.7. Christ in
speaking, makes his to live, Joh. 5.25. Thirdly, Other Prophets could reveal
but a part of God's will, Christ he makes known the whole will of God, John
15.15. Heb. 1.1, 2. Fourthly, All other Prophets had their Authority and
Commission from Him, He his from Himself, Mat. last, the last. Ephesians. 4.11. In a
word; such a Prophet, as he is the Angel's, Surety, and Mediator of the
Covenant: the Angel, as he goes from God to us, and us to God; the Surety as he
undertakes for us; and the Mediator he goes between God and us.

Fourthly, Altogether lovely in his Kingly Office; for, He is King of kings, a
King that excels all other Kings in His wisdom, power, righteousness, mercy;
Secondly, A Universal King; over all Nations, and all Creatures in the World,
Math. 28. All Power is given to Him in Heaven and in Earth, and Ephesians 1 22.
Thirdly, He is a spiritual King; a King that sets up his Throne in the Hearts,
and Consciences of Men, which other Kings cannot; however the Pope, and his
Pope lings will usurp it, Revel 18.13. Fourthly, He is an everlasting King,
wh^^e Kingdom can never be shaken, Heb. 12.27. Of whose Kingdom there is no
end, Daniel 2.44. Fifthly, Altogether lovely in his Graces, and that both
inherent in him, and diffusive from him.

First, Inherent in him, therefore do the Virgins love him, and run after him,
Cant. 1.2. and the Angels worship Him, Heb 1. And he must needs be so, because
in Him, is the fullness of grace and truth, John 1.14. and he has the Spirit
without measure, John 3 34 and is anointed with the Oil of gladness above his
fellows, Heb. 1.9.

Secondly In his diffusive graces, for, from his fullness it is, we all receive
grace for grace, Joh. 1.16. that is grace like to that in Christ, and one
degree and measure of grace after another, 2 Cor. 3. last.

Fifthly, He is altogether lovely in his actions, for never man spoke as he
spoke, Joh. 7.40. and never man did as he did, Joh. 9.39.

Sixthly, A together lovely in his Passions, never any man suffered what he
did, or as he did; nor suffered so willingly, patiently, constantly, a^ he did,
Lament. 1.12. Behold and see, if there were ever sorrow like to my sorrow, etc.

Lastly, He is altogether lovely in the benefits he purchased, which are either
Fundamental, or Consequential; First, For the Fundamental, they are the^e;
First, Reconciliation, Colos. 1.21. Adoption, John 1.12. Justification, Romans
5.1. 2 Cor. 5.21. Sanctification, Ephesians. 2.1. Acts. 26.18. Glorification, John
17.21.

Secondly, For the Consequential benefits, these you have, Rom 5.1, 2, 3 1 Cor.
3. the two last.

Sixthly, You are to meditate on the great Work of ou^ Redemption by Jesus
Christ; and in it of these particulars The greatness of the Person that
redeemed us; the greatness of the Price wherewith; the greatness of the misery
from which; the greatness of the happiness to which he redeemed us; the
compleatness of this Redemption; and the Evidences you have of your interest in
this Redemption.

First, On the greatness of the Person that redeemed us: No other but the
Eternal Son of God, every way Coequal with his Father; and whoever heard of a
King, that gave his Son, or a Prince that ever offered voluntarily to lay down
his life for Enemies, Rebels, and Traitors? and yet behold, God, and Christ
has done this for us: Gal. 4.4.

Secondly, On the greatness of the Price, wherewith he redeemed us, with no
other than his precious Blood, 1 Pet. 1.18.

Thirdly, The greatness of the misery, from which he has redeemed us, Verse.
13. from that Vassal age, and slavery we were in, to sin and Satan and the
World, Death, Judgment, and Hell, 1 These. 1.10. Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3.

Fourthly, On the greatness of the happiness, unto which he has redeemed us,
viz. To be Heirs and Coheirs, with himself, Romans 8.17. 1 Pet. 1.10. Fifthly,
On the compleatness of this Redemption, as he has completed it for us, Heb.
9.12, 26. So he makes us stand complete in himself, 2 Col. 10.16. Sixthly, On
the evidences you have of your interest in this Redemption, Three whereof you
have, 1 Cor. 1.30. to whom Christ is made Redemption, to them he is also made
wisdom to enlighten them, and righteousness to justify them, and holiness to
sanctify them; A fourth Evidence you have, 1 Pet. 1.18. They are redeemed from
their vain Conversation, and made new Creatures, 2 Cor. 5.17. Fifthly, They are
redeemed from all iniquity, Tit. 2.14. Not only from the condemning, but the
commanding power of it, Rom 6.14. Sixthly, They are made a People, Zealous of
good works, Titus 2.14. and are redeemed out of the hands of their Enemies,
that they may serve the Lord without fear, in righteousness and holiness, all
the days of their life, Luke 1.74. Seventhly, To meditate on the ways, and
means of his effecting this our Redemption, as these, his Incarnation,
Conversation, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, Session, and Intercession, at
the right hand of God.

First, About his Incarnation, to consider and take notice that the Word was
made Flesh, Joh. 1.14. And the End wherefore he took our Nature, was that he
might make us partakers of his Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. He, the Son of God,
became the Son of Man, that we the Sons of Men might be made the Sons and
Daughters of the great and ever-living God, John 1.12. Isaiah 56.5. In the
Incarnation of Christ, to take notice of these two Branches of it, viz. his
Conception, and Nativity.

First, For his Conceptiont; herein to meditate; First, On the wonderful manner
of it, it being not after the manner of other Men, but by the over-shadowing of
the Holy Ghost, Luke 1.35. Secondly, The Reason of it, that He might be pure,
and free from Original sin, wherein all others are conceived, and born, Psalm.
51.5. Joh. 3.6. Thirdly, The End of it, that He might, by the purity of his
Conception, cover the impurity of our Conception.

Secondly, In the Nativity of Christ; First, Take notice of whom it was, He was
born; And why so? First, That he was born of a Virgin, to fulfill the
Scripture, Isaiah 7 14. Behold a Virgin shall conceive, etc. And so born, that
he might be without the least spot, and contagion of sin; wherein all others
are both conceived, and born, Psalm. 51. Secondly, Of the Virgin Mary because
the Messiah was to come of the Tribe of Judah, Heb. 7.14. and the Seed of
David: of which stock Mary came, as you may see in the Genealogy, Luke 3.

Secondly, To meditate on the use we are to make of it, namely this, That as
Christ was conceived, and born for us, so we be careful to look to this, that
He be conceived and born in us; or we can never expect to receive any benefit
by his Conception, and Birth for us.

Secondly, To meditate on the Conversation of Christ, and consider how He walked
and lived in the World: which you may find, in the Gospel, to have been, Very
wisely, inoffensively, humbly, holily, spiritually, heavenly, and actively, for
the glory of God, and the good of Souls; such must our Conversations be,
conformable to the pattern set before us, that so having good Consciences, they
may be ashamed, who have, and would slander our good conversation in Christ, 1
Pet. 3 16. 1 Epist. John 2.6.

Thirdly, In the Passion of Christ, to meditate on these Particulars, the
Matter of his sufferings, the Causes of his sufferings, the Manner of his
sufferings, and the Use we are to make of his sufferings.

First, The Matter of his sufferings, what it was that He suffered: which was,
First, The Vailing of His glory under our Flesh. Secondly, The imputation of
the sins of the whole World, 1 Pet. 2.24. Thirdly, The fierceness of his
Father's wrat^, Lam. 1.12. and the Curse due to all our sins, Gal. 3.13.
Fourthly, The rage of Men and Devils in the prosecution, and persecution of him
unto death; Even the shameful cursed death of the Cross.

Secondly, The Causes of his sufferings; First, The efficient Cause, that was
God, Isaiah 53.10. Acts 2.23. Secondly, The instrumental cause was the Devil,
and his Instruments, Judas and the Jews, Luke 22.53. Thirdly, The meritorious
cause, our sins, Isaiah 53.3, 4. 1 Pet. 2.24. Fourthly, The final cause, that
He might bring us back again to God, 1 Pet. 3.18. and Redeem us from Eternal
sufferings, and sweeten, and sanctify all our temporal sufferings.

Thirdly, For the manner of his sufferings, that was, First, Willingly, without
compulsion: Secondly, Patiently, so as he was, as a Sheep dumb before the
Shearer, Isaiah 53. Thirdly, Constantly unto Death.

Fourthly, For the use you are to make of his sufferings, which is this: To be
willing to suffer a little from him, and for him, who has suffered so much
from us, and for us; and the rather, First, Because by his sufferings he has
freed us from Eternal sufferings, sweetened and sanctified all our temporal
sufferings: Secondly, Because he has promised, if we suffer with Him, we shall
Reign with Him, 2 Timothy 2.12. Thirdly, Because, if we choose rather to sin than
suffer for him, we must expect to suffer for ever in Hell, Mark 8. last.
Fourthly, Because all the sufferings of this life, are not worthy the glory
that shall be revealed, Romans 8.18. 2 Cor. 4.17. This light and momentary
affliction, etc.

Fourthly, In the Resurrection of Christ, to meditate on these things; First,
The truth and certainty of his Resurrection: we have the testimony of God,
Angels, and Men for it, 1 Cor. 15.3. to the end. Secondly, On the Ends of his
Resurrection; as, First, That he might declare to all the World, that he was
the Son of God, true and very God, Romans 1.4. Secondly, That He might manifest
to all the World, that he had fully satisfied the Justice of God, John 16.8, 9.
Heb. 2.13, 14. Thirdly, That He might strengthen our faith in that full
satisfaction, and reconciliation He has made for us: whence, that Romans 4.
last. He died for our offenses, and rose again for our Justification; and hence
that Triumph, Romans 8.34. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea
rather that is risen again, etc. Thirdly, The evidences you have in the Merits,
and Benefits of Christ's Resurrection. Whether he be risen as our Head, and
will raise us up hereafter to glory: which we may know thus; if we be risen
with him, and by him, from a state of death, to a state of life, and grace,
called the first Resurrection, Revel. 20.6. Such only shall have an interest in
the benefits of the second Resurrection, at the last day, John 5.28. Fourthly,
What you must do to get an interest in the first Resurrection, that you may
come to have the comfort of the second; and that is to attend constantly on the
Ministry of the Word, and to beg the Spirit of Christ to quicken that Word,
that it may quicken your dead Souls, according to his promise, John 5.25.

Fifthly, In the Ascension of Christ, to meditate on these things; First, The
truth of it, by the testimony of Angels, and Men, Acts 1.10, 11. Luke 24.51, 52.

Secondly, The End of his Ascension, to show that he was true and very God, in
that he could lift up his Body into the Air: 2. That he might open the Gate of
Heaven for us, which we had shut by our sin; and prepare a place for us in it,
Heb. 10 19, 20. John 14.3, 4.

Thirdly, Take notice of the use you are to make of the Ascension of Christ,
which is, To ascend daily in our hearts and affections to him, Colos. 3.1; 2.

Sixthly, In the Session of Christ, at the right hand of God; First, To take
notice what it is, viz. that Equality of Glory, and Dignity, Authority, and
Power He has with his Father, Phil. 2.6.9. Ephesians. 1.20.

Secondly, To meditate on the End of his Sitting there, which is, First, That
He may Rule and Reign, until he has made all his Enemies his Footstool, 1
Cor. 15. Secondly, That he may assure us, that as he sits there in our name,
and nature, so he will cause all his at the last to sit with him upon the same
Throne of glory, Rev. 3.21. Thirdly, The use that we are to make of it, which
is the same, Col. 3.1, 2.

Seventhly, In the Intercession of Christ, First, To take notice what it is,
viz. the presenting of his active and passive obedience to his Father, for the
procuring all that grace and mercy he has purchased, and his Father has
promised to his Elect; or, if you will, thus, That part of his Priestly Office,
whereby, for his satisfaction sake, he desires, wills, and procures, for all
his Elect, the acceptance of their Persons, and Services, and the remuneration
of all their weak endeavors for his glory, Revel 8.3, 4. Revel. 14.13.

Secondly, Meditate on the Ends of his Intercession; as, First, That we may
have the benefit of all he has done and suffered for us; which we could not,
had he not gone into Heaven to make Intercession for us, Heb. 9.7.24. Secondly,
That so he might take away the iniquity of our holy things, and render our
Persons and services acceptable to his Father, and so be able to save us to the
uttermost, 1 Epist. John 2.12. Heb. 7.25.

Thirdly, The use that we are to make of it, and that is, In all our services,
still to draw near to God in the name of Christ, and beg the acceptance of our
Persons, and Service, and all that grace we stand in need of, for his
Intercessions sake, Col. 3.^7. Heb. 4. last. But then,

Eighthly, To meditate on the great Privileges that come by Jesus Christ to
such as have a true, actual and real interest in Him; as, 1. Remission of all
our sins, 2 Cor. 5.19. 1 John 17. Rev 15. 2. Imputation of Christ's
righteousness, 2 Cor. 5.20. 3. Reconciliation to God, 1 Colos. 20. And thereby,
1. Peace with God and Conscience, Men and Angels, Romans 5.1. Col. 3 15. Isai.
11.6. Hos. 2. end. Heb. 1. last. 2. Communion with the Father, and the Son, 1
John 1 3. 3. A spiritual right and title to all Creature Comforts, which are
lost by the Fall, 1 Timothy 4.45. and all that is God's and Christ's, all his
Attributes, Promises, Providence, 1 Cor. 3. 2 last. 4. A sanctified use of
every estate, both of Prosperity and Adversity, Health and Sickness, Life and
Death, Romans 8.28. All things work together for good, etc.

4. Privilege, Adoption of us into his Family, to be the Sons and Daughters of
the great and ever living God, Ephesians. 1.5. Joh. 1.12. 1 John 5.1.

5. Sanctification of our natures, Acts 26.18. Sanctified by Faith in Christ, 1
These 5.21. The God of Peace sanctify you, throughout, etc 2 Pet. ^.4. Whereby
we are enabled to die unto sin, and live unto righteousness, 1 Pet. 2.24.

6. Acceptance of our Persons, and all our Services, notwithstanding all our
infirmities and imperfections, Ephesians. 1.6. 1 Pet. 2.5.

7. Inhabitation of his Spirit, to assist us in all our duties, and lead us in
all our ways, 1 John 3 last. Romans 8.14.26.

8. Confirmation and establishment in a state of Grace, Joh. 10.18. 1 Pet. 1.5.

9. The continual Intercession of Jesus Christ for all that Grace and Mercy we
stand in need of, Heb. 7.25. 1 John 2.2, 3.

10. Lastly, The Consecration of Souls and Bodies, Romans 8.30. John 17.22.

Tenthly, To meditate, (if you would have the comfort of the forenamed
Privileges); To meditate (I say) on the Evidences of an actual and real
interest in Christ: and that, 1. Because it is expressly commanded, 2 Cor. 13.5.
Examine your selves whether you be in the faith, Know ye not that Ghrist is in
you, etc. 2. Because the most do deceive themselves herein, flatter themselves
that they are Christ's, and Christ is theirs; because they are baptized into
his Name, and make a profession of him: to whom Christ will say at the last
Day, I know you not, etc. Luke 13.25. And therefore to search and see, the
interest you have in Him, be not only nominal and professional, but actual and
real; Q. Well then, How may we know it? Ans. By the Grounds of it, the Means of
it, and the Fruits of it.

1. By the Grounds of it, whence it arises; and they are these. 1. A sight and
sense of their lost condition, that they came into the World without Christ:
before Men be convinced of this, they will never look out after Christ, Ephesians.
2.12. 2. It arises from sound Humiliation, under the fight and sense of their
lost condition, so as to be willing, upon it, to break off the League between
the Soul and every sin: for a Graft must be cut off from the old Stock, before
it can be set into a new; This you may find in those new Converts, Acts 2.37.
And the Jailer, Acts 16.29. 2. You may know it by the Means of it: now these
are four. whereof there are two on Christ's part, sc. His Word, and his Spirit;
and two on our part, sc. Faith and Love: By these, as so many Bands and
Ligaments, the union is made between Christ and the Soul. By the two former,
God draws the Soul home to Christ; By the two latter, he unites and knits it to
Christ.

1. The Word of Christ: that is the Ordinance, by which he cuts them off from
the old Stock, and ingrafts them into the new, Acts 26.18. therefore called the
ingrafted Word, James 1.21. Now Souls are cut off from the old Stock, by sound
Humiliation under their sinful and miserable condition by nature, so as to be
willing to have the League broken between the Soul and every sin, to part with
all for Him: And they come to be ingrafted to Him, when they are made willing
to receive Him on Gospel-terms, not only as their Savior, but their Ruler.

2. Another Means, and the principal, is the Spirit of Christ, 1 John 3. last.
which the Lord gives effectually to accompany his Word, for the cutting them
off from the old Stock, and ingrafting them into the new: and this the Spirit
does by convincing them of sin, righteousness, and judgment, Joh. 16.8. By
being in them, first a Spirit of Bondage, and then of Adoption, Romans 8 15. By
mortifying of their Corruptions, Romans 8.13. and quickening them with Grace,
Verse. 10, 11. 1 Cor. 6.11.

3. Another Means, or Band of our union with, and interest in Christ, is a
lively Faith, taking us off from our own righteousness, and causing us to rest,
and rely only on the righteousness of Jesus Christ, for Justification and
Salvation, Joh. 3.16. Phil. 3.9.

4th. Means, or Band, is an unfeigned Love to Christ for his lovely Self, and
all his Members for his sake, Joh. 14.21. 1 John 3.14.

3. You may know it by the fruits of it, which are especially these; 1. A
through change of heart and life, 2 Cor. 5.17. 2. Subjection and obedience to
his Laws and Commandments, Joh. 14.15.21. and 15.14. Then are you my friends,
if you do whatsoever I command you, and Heb. 5.9. 3. Conformity to him in heart
and life, doing and suffering, living and dying, Romans 6.5, 6. 1 John 2.6. 2 Timothy 2.12. 4. A constant adherence to him in faith, love, and obedience, with
full purpose of heart not to depart from him, Heb. 3.14.

Tenthly, To meditate on what we are to do for the getting, and clearing up our
interest in Christ, and all he has done, and suffered for us: to this end mind
well a few directions; as, First, Look to this, that you be thoroughly convinced
of, and humbled under your sinful and miserable condition out of Christ, so as
to find your selves in a lost, and undone condition, Luke 19.10. Sick in Soul
with the confideration of it, Mat. 9.13. Burdned with, and weary of your sins,
Mat. 11.29. And pricked in your hearts, as they, Act. 2.37. for this is the
first work of the Spirit of God, in bringing in a Soul to Christ, viz. the
convincing him, and humbling him under his sin, and misery by reason of sin,
Joh. 16.8.

Secondly, To hunger, and thirst after an interest in Christ, above all other
things in the World, Isaiah 55.1. Revel. 22.17. so, as with the Apostle, To
account all things but loss, and dung, in comparison of it, Phil. 3.

Thirdly, You are to be willing to take Him on Gospel-terms, such as he therein
offers himself; as these, First, To take Him in all his Titles, and Offices,
not only as your alone Jesus, but Lord and Christ, Romans 13. end, Put on the
Lord Jesus Christ, and so, Acts 16.31. Secondly, Be willing to deny our selves,
and t^^e up his Cross to follow Him, Mark 8.34. willing to part with all, and
every sin, yea all, and every thing, to follow Him, as Christ advised the young
man, Luke 19. Sell all thou have, and come and follow me, etc. For, as a Noble
Lord said well, That Person may be deceived, that thinks to save any thing by
his Religion, but his Soul: meaning, his Religion might cost him the loss of
all. Thirdly, Give up your selves to Him in a Universal, sincere and constant
obedience, and conformity to Him, and all his commands; expressly required, Heb.
5.9. Heb. 3.14. John 15.14. Fourthly, You are to endeavor to lay hold on Him,
and close with Him, and be united to him by faith, and love, Romans 11.19, 20.
Ephesians. 3.17. Gal. 5.6. John 14.21. And that you may, to wait constantly on the
Ministry of the Word, and beg the Spirit of God, effectually to accompany it,
for the begetting, and working of this faith, and love, whereby you may be
actually, and really united to him, and made one with him, 1 Cor. 12.13.

Eleventhly, To meditate on the motives and encouragements you have to get and
clear up your interest in Christ. You have seen enough in what has been said
before, yet take two or three more; First, Consider the miserable condition of
a man our of Christ in these particulars; First, So long as Men are without
Christ, they are without Covenant, without hope, and without God in the World,
Ephesians. 2.12. Secondly, They lie under the guilt of all their sins, Romans 3.19. and
that you cannot stand under the guilt of one sin, that first sin, how much less
under the guilt of such innumerable sins. Thirdly, You remain still in
Vassallage and slavery, unto the basest and (...) Tyrants, Sin, Sa^an, and the
World, Ephesians. (...) Fourthly, You sin in all you think, and (...) do, Pro. 15.8.
Romans 8.7. Titus 1.15. (...), Every thing you have, and use, is accur^ed to
(...) Deuteronomy. 28 16. to the end. Mal. 2.2. Sixthly, The^^ (...) but a step
between you and Hell, John 8.21. 1 Cor. 6.9. Mat. 25. last.

Secondly, Consider the happy estate of a man in Christ: he is freed from all,
that is truly evil, and instated in all that is truly good; First, He is freed
from all evil, both of sin, and punishment, from the evil of sin, both the
guilt of it, and the filth of it, 1 John 1.7. Romans 8.1. Romans 6.14. Secondly, He
is instated in all that is good: As the Wife is by her marriage, in all the
honors, riches, pleasures of her Husband; so is the believing Soul, in all the
honors, riches, and pleasures of Christ, 1 Cor. 3. end. As Christ is a King,
so are Believers made Kings to God, Rev. 1.6. As he is Heir of all things, Heb.
1.3. so they are Heirs, and Coheirs with Christ, of the same Kingdom, Romans
8.17. they are complete in him, Col. 2.10. A third motive may be this, The
great willingness, and readiness of Jesus Christ to receive, and save poor lost
sinners, such as are willing to take Him, and accept of Him upon Gospel-terms;
this appears in these Particulars.

First, That his desire is toward his Cant. 7.10. Swears, as he lives, he
desires not the death of a sinner, Ezekiel. 33. so as the fault is Man's, and not
his, if any be not saved. John 5.40. you will not come unto me, that you may
have life. See this clearly in that Book, Entitled, The Self condemning Sinner.

Secondly, In that he offers Himself freely to all without exception of any
that will come to him in a way of faith and love, Isaiah 55 1. Rev. 22.17.
Thirdly, In that he invites all to come to him, that find their want and need
of him, Mat. 11.29. and promises to cast away none that come to him, John 6.37.
Fourthly, In that he sends his Ministers to woe, and beseech them in the name
of Christ to come in, and be reconciled to God; 2 Cor. 5.20. Fifthly, In that
he bewails their folly that will stand out against him, and their own
salvation, Mat. 23. Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest the Prophets, how
often would I have gathered thy children together, as the Hen gathers her
chickens, and you would not.

Lastly, You are to take notice, how you are to walk worthy of, and suitable
to, so dear a Redeemer, and precious Savior, by imitating him in his carriage,
both toward God, and Man, in his doings, and sufferings: 1. His doings, 1
Epist. John 2.6. He that says, he abides in him, ought to walk as he walked;
Q. But you will say, Can any walk, as he walked? He was void of all sin, we are
sull of sin. A. There Is a double (As); one that imports Equality, and another
Similitude: as it imports equality, it is impossible for any to walk as he
walked; but as it imports similitude and likeness, so we may, and must walk
after him. As a Scholar that writes after his Master's Copy, he begins every
Line, as his Master begins, and ends as he ends; he frames every Letter as his
Master frames it, joins letters and syliables together, as his Master does,
though there be no equality: he cannot write as well as his Master, yet there
is a similitude, he labors to imitate, and write like his Master; So true
Christians, though they cannot live, and walk so exactly, as Christ did, yet
they labor to come as near to him, as they can, to imitate, and follow him,
though not in his divine acts, which he did as God, and as Mediator, which is
impossible, yet in his moral and humane acts, which he did as Man; so they
labor to make him their only pattern in their carriages, both toward God and
man; First, In their carriage to God: now for his carriage toward God, that
was full of piety, full of says, full of zeal, full of heavenly-mindedness:
First, Full of Piety, Heb. 7.26. He was holy, harmless, separate from sinners,
1 Pet. 2 22. He did no sin, neither was there any guil found in his mouth; and
we required to follow him in that, 1 Pet. 1.15. 1 Ep. John 3.2. Secondly, Full
of faith, ever confident of his Father's presence, assistance, and acceptance
in whatsoever he did, even in his greatest desertion on the Cross, crying my
God, my God, He held fast his faith; and we required to follow him in thi^,
Isaiah 50.10. Heb. 3.14. 1 Pet. 1.13. Thirdly, He was full of zeal for God,
both in public, and private; First, In public, the Zeal of God's House even
consumed him, John 2.15, 16, 17. Secondly, In private, He went about doing
good, to the bodies and souls of others. Acts 10.38. We are to imitate him in
this, it being the end of our Redemption, Titus 2.14. The end of his correction
of us, Revel. 3.19. Fourthly, He was full of heavenly-mindedness, still
extracting spiritual and heavenly discourses from worldly and Earthly
occasions, John 4.10. Joh. 13.2. John 6.26, 27. and we are required to follow
him in this, Col. 3.1, 2. Phil. 3 20. Secondly, Follow him in his carriage
toward man: now for that, you may observe in the Scripture, it was full of
wisdom, innocence, truth, justice, humility, meekness, love, mercy and pity to
others: and we commanded in the Scriptures to imitate him in all these: First,
In his wisdom and innocence, Mat. 10.16. Secondly, In his truth, Ephesians 4 24.
Thirdly, In his justice and righteousness, Romans 13.7. Luke 1.6. In his humility
and meekness, Mat. 11.20. In his patience, 1 Pet. 2.21, 22, 23. In his love to
all, even our very Enemies, Mat. 5.44, 45. Ephesians. 5.2. and in mercies to the
Bodies and Souls of men, Romans 12. the 3 last. James 5. 2 last. In his pity and
compassion, Gal. 6.1. 1 Pet. 3.8. Jude 22.23. Thus for his doings. Secondly, To
imitate him in his sufferings: 1 Pet. 2.21. Q. How did Christ suffer? A. 1. He
suffered willingly, none could compel him to it, John 10.18. You must follow
him in this, when God calls unto it, as the Apostle, Acts 21.13. Secondly,
Christ suffered patiently, Isaiah 53.7. Heb. 12.2. we to follow him in this, as
we are commanded in the same place, to look unto Jesus; and, 1 Pet. 2.21. tread
in his steps. Thirdly, He suffered believingly that God would support him and
deliver him, so must we, 1 Cor. 10.13. Fourthly, He suffered fruitfully, so as
to learn obedience by his sufferings, Heb. 5.8. so are we, Micah 6.7, 8. Revel.
3.19. Fifthly, Christ suffered constantly even to the death, and so are we
required, Rev. 2.10. Thus of Christ.

CHAP. IV. The Third Head, the Spirit of God, called the Holy Ghost.
IN, and about him, to meditate on these things; First, What he is. Secondly
What his Offices. Thirdly, What signs you have of the Spirit's Inhabitation. 4.
Motives to get him. 5. Means to procure him; and 6. The means to preserve and
increase communion with him.

First, What the Spirit of God, or the Holy Ghost is, viz. the Third Person in
the sacred Trinity, proceeding from the Father and the Son. And here to take
notice of three things; First, That he is a distinct Person from the Father and
the Son, and the Third Person in Sacred Trinity, 1 Epist. John 5.7. Secondly,
That he is true and very God, as well as the Father and the Son, as is evident;
1. By testimony of the Scripture, Acts 5.3, 4. Why has Satan filled thy heart
to lie unto the Holy Ghost? thou have not lied unto man, but God: 2. By Reason,
1. Because He is the Author, and Inditer of the Scripture, Acts 28.25. 2 Pet.
1.21. 2. Because the Scripture ascribes those Attributes to him, that are
proper to God, as Eternity, Heb. 9.14. Omnisciency, 1 Cor. 2.10. Omnipresency,
Psalm. 139.17. Omnipotency, 2 Timothy 2.7. Isaiah 11.2. Thirdly, Because those
works are applied to him, which are proper to God, as Creation, Genesis 1.2. and
Conservation, Job 33.4. Psalm. 33.6. Regeneration, and Sanctification, John 3.6.
1 Cor. 12.6. Fourthly, Because the divine worship is given to him, as Mat.
28.19. Go Baptize them in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
Therefore true and very God.

Thirdly, That he proceeds from the Father and the Son, is evident, John 15.26.
and hence he is called the Spirit of God, Romans 8.11. and the Spirit of the Son,
Romans 8.9. and so much the word (...) signifies, because he is spired, or
breathed from them, as you may see further, John 16.14, 15.

Secondly, To meditate on the Offices of the Spirit, and these either respect
Christ, his Word, or his Church; First, For those respecting Christ, they are
these; First, The Spirit formed Christ's humane nature in the Womb of the
Virgin Mary, Luke 1.35, 36. Secondly, The Holy Ghost anointed Jesus Christ, as
he was Man with gifts, and graces, and that without measure, and having thus
consecrated him, and furnished him with gifts, for the great office and work of
a Mediator, he with God the Father sent him into the World, for the
accomplishing that work, Isai. 61.1. and 11.2. Acts 10.38. John 3.34. John
1.32. Thirdly, The Holy Ghost descending from Heaven, and resting upon him
visibly in the shape of a Dove. did publicly show him, and Seal him in his
Baptism, Mat. 3.16. Fourthly, The Holy Ghost witnesses that Jesus Christ, who
was crucified, was the Son of God, the true Messiah, Act. 5.31.32. He
witnesses also to the Doctrine of Christ's Resurrection, in which he was
declared mightily to be the Son of God, Romans 1.4.

Secondly, For the Offices of the Spirit, in, and about the Word of God, take
notice, first, 'twas He inspired holy Men of God with the mind, and will of
God, infallibly dictated it unto them, and guided them in the penning, or
writing of it, 2 Pet. 1.20. Acts 1.16. Mark 12 36. Heb. 9.8.

Fourthly, He quickens the Word, so as to make it effectual to quicken dead
Souls: without Him it is but a dead and a killing Letter, John 6.63. He makes it
quick and lively in operation, to the dividing between the Soul and the Spirit,
the Joints and the Marrow, the searching-out, and discovering the secrets of
the heart, Heb. 4.12. 1 Cor. 2.4. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. It is he that speaks by it
to the Churches, Revel. 2.7. Revel. 3.22. Rev 14 13.

Thirdly, His Offices, in respect of the Church and People of God, these are
either common to all, or peculiar to the Elect; First, For those common to all,
they are such as these; First, To give life, and preserve life in all, Job
33.4. Ps. 139.14, 15. Secondly, To bestow gifts, and abilities on men, for
their particular callings, and functions, both sacred and civil, as 1 Samuel
11.6. Judges 11.29. 1 Cor. 12.9, 10. Mat. 7.22. Thirdly, Restraining-grace,
whereby they are kept from many evils, which they would otherwise run into, as
Abimelech, Genesis 20.6. Fourthly, To act and over-act all the gifts, and parts,
and power of men to his own glory, and the good of his Church and People, Zach.
4.6.

Secondly, For those that are peculiar to the Elect, they are such as these:
First, To unite them unto Christ their head, and the mystical Body of Christ
the Church, 1 Cor. 12.13. 1 Cor. 6.17. Secondly, To inhabit or dwell in them,
as his House, and ^emple, Rom 8.11. 1 Pet. 4.17. Thirdly, To illuminate them
with the saving, sanc^i^^ing, experimental knowledge of God in Christ, John
16.13. Fourthly, To convince them of sin, righteousness, and judgment, John
16.8. First, Of Sin, particularly the sins of unbelief, and disobedience to the
Gospel, that This is (...) which lays them open to the wrath of God, in Life
and Death, and after Death, John 3. last. Mark 16.16. Secondly, Of
righteousness, how that there is none in them to make them stand acceptable in
the sight of God, the Garment of their own righteousness, and good works is a
Garment too short to cover their nakedness: their own righteousness is but as a
filthy Rag, but the righteousness of Christ that is a perfect righteousness,
such as God accepts for poor sinners, and makes them stand so righteous in
God's sight, as if they had never sinned; this appears, in that Christ is gone
to the Father, which he could not have done, if he had not fulfilled all
righteousness. Thirdly, Of Judgment, how that he has judged and condemned the
Serpent and his Seed, the Devil, and the wicked World, so as they shall never
prevail against his Elect, Mat. 16.18. The Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it; and that there is true and sound judgment to be found only in the
Christian Religion, and not in any Idolatrous and false Religion; and that
Christ has the government of his Church upon his own Shoulders, and all that
subject and submit unto his Government, shall by it, judge and condemn, at last,
the wicked World, 1 Cor. 6.1. Fifthly, To humble them under, and mortify in
them the deeds of the Flesh, Romans 8.13. Sixthly, To quicken them with spiritual
Life, Romans 8.11. Regenerate and sanctify them, John 3.5. and Evidence it to
them, 1 Cor. 6.11. Seventhly, To help them in, and under all their infirmities
in duty, Romans 8.26. John 14.26. Eighthly, To direct, and guide them in all
their ways, Romans 8.14. Psalm. 143.10. Ninthly, To support, and comfort them in
all their sorrows, and sufferings, Romans 5.5. John 4.26. Tenthly, To witness to
their Spirits, that they are the Children of God, Romans 8.16. Eleventhly, To
Seal them up to the Day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. Ephesians. 1.13. Twelfthly, To be
the earnest and first fruits of their Eternal Salvation, Ephesians. 1.14. Romans 8.23.
Lastly, To confirm, strengthen, and establish them in every good word and work
to the end, Ephesians. 1.13. Ephesians. 4.12, 13. Again,

Thirdly, To take notice of, and meditate on the Evidences you have of the
receiving, and indwelling of the Spirit of God in you, because, If any have not
the Spirit, he is none of Christ's, Romans 8.9. 1 Ep. John 4.13. Hereby we know
he dwells in us, and we in him, by the Spirit which he has given us, 1 John
3.24. Q. But how may we know that we have received the Spirit, and that he
dwells in us? A. Thus, 1. By the way, and means, in and by which he is given,
and received; and that is the Ministry of the Word, Acts 10.44. Whilst Peter
spoke, the Holy Ghost fell on those that heard him; and hence the Ministry of
the Gospel is called the Ministry of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6. and Men are said
to receive the Spirit, by the hearing of Faith, Gal. 3.2. Secondly, You may
know you have the Spirit by this, if you can find the foregoing acts, and
operations of the Spirit, upon the hearts of the Elect: If he be an
enlightening, enlivening, mortifying, sanctifying, quickening, strengthening, and
establishing Spirit in you, as you know you have life, by your breathing,
moving, walking; so you may know you have the Spirit of God, if he breathe and
move in you, and enable you to walk in the ways of God's Commandments; more
especially by this, if you find him to be a spirit of sanctification in you, to
sanctify you throughout in your whole man, and in your whole Conversation; for
He is a Spirit of Holiness, Romans 1.4. and sanctifies all his, 1 Cor. 6.11. so,
as with David, to hate every false way, and have respect to every command of
God, Ps. 119.6.12.8. Thirdly, You may know it by this, if you be careful not to
quench the Spirit, 1 These. 5.19. or grieve the Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30. but heedfully
to hearken to his Voice, Isai. 30.21. and follow his guidance, Romans 8.14. Gal.
5.25. Fourthly, By this, if you go wholly out of your selves in every duty, and
enter upon it, as, in the name of Christ, so, by the strength of his Spirit, as
you are exhorted, Ephesians. 6.10. and David did, Psalm. 71.16. Fourthly, If you find
that you have not yet received the Spirit, then to meditate on the many, and
weighty motives there are, to quicken you to labor after the Spirit. I will
but name a few, drawn from the Necessity, and the Utility of it.

1. There is an absolute Necessity of having the Spirit of God, and that in
these two respects. 1. Because, without the Spirit of Christ, you can receive
no grace from Christ, for it is the Spirit that is the sole Author, and Worker
of grace in any, therefore called the Spirit of Grace, Zach. 12.10. And the
Spirit of Sanctification, Romans 1.4. and the spirit of knowledge, and the fear
of the Lord, Isai. 11.2. 2. Because, without the Spirit, you cannot perform any
duty; so as to please the Lord, and to profit by it. As for instance, (1.) Not
hear the Word, for without the Spirit, the Word is but a dead and killing
Letter, 2 Cor. 3.6. It was he that opened the heart of Lydia, to attend unto
what was spoken, so as to live by it, Acts 16. (2.) Not to pray effectually
without the Spirit, Romans 8.26.

2. Many and great will be the benefits that will come to you, by having the
Spirit: 1. He will be a Spirit of Inhabitation to dwell in you, honor you so
far, as to make you his House and Temple, 1 Cor. 3.16. 2. He will be a Spirit
of Illumination, to enlighten you with the knowledge of God's mind and will, to
teach you all things, John 16.12. and bring all things to your remembrance,
John 14.26. 3. A Spirit of Sanctification, Romans 1.4. To sanctify you
throughout, in Spirit, Soul, and Body, 1 These. 5.23. To enrich you with all
sanctifying graces, Gal. 5.22. (4. A Spirit of Consolation, to cheer up your
Spirits in and under affliction, Romans 14.17. John 14.16. (5. A Spirit of
Intercession, teaching to pray, Romans 8.26. (6. A Spirit of Direction, to guide
you in all your ways, and lead you into all truth, Romans 8.14. and 16.5. In a
word, a Spirit of Adoption and Salvation, Rom 8.16. Ephesians. 1.13. and therefore
in all these respects, to labor after the Spirit of Christ. But you will say,
What must we do to procure this Spirit?

5. You must take notice of, and meditate on the means of procuring the Spirit,
which are, amongst others, these, 1. You are to give the Spirit the glory, that
is due to him; Well then, Q. What must we do to procure the Spirit? A. 1. You
are to give the Spirit the glory, that is due to him by acknowledging him to be
true and very God, every way equal with the Father and the Son; to believe in
him, and rest on him, for illumination, sanctification, and salvation, as well
as the Father, and the Son: for, the ignorance and unbelief of this, our
Savior shows to be the cause, why the World receives him not, John 14.17.
Secondly, You are to know and acknowledge that by nature you want the Spirit of
God, and thereupon to hunger and thirst after him: for the promise is, he will
pour out his Spirit upon such, Isaiah 44.3. John 7 37, 38. Thirdly, You are to
attend, and wait upon God in the Ministry of the Word, wherein the Spirit is
given, Acts 10.44. Gal. 3.2. Fourthly, You are to love the Lord Jesus Christ,
and express your love by keeping his Commandments, for Christ has promised to
give his Spirit unto such, John 14.15, 16, 17. Fifthly, You are to be earnest,
and constant in Prayer for the Spirit, to be given in, to enlighten, and enable
you to every duty God calls you to: the gift of the Spirit is, a great gift,
and the greatest next to Christ, his Son; too great indeed for us to ask, but
not for God to give, for he delights to give, and do great things for his, and
not only commands us to ask him, but makes many promises to encourage us, Ezekiel.
36.25, 26. Joel 2.28, 29. Zac. 12.10; most clearly, Luke 11.13. Fifthly, If you
would have the Spirit, to obey the Spirit in his motions, and excitements
within, and without, Isa 30.20, 21. and take heed you do not resist, grieve or
quench the Spirit, Isai. 63.10. Ephesians. 4.13. 1 These. 5.19.

Sixthly, Having obtained the Spirit to take notice of, and meditate on the
means you are to use for the preserving, and increasing communion with him; as,
First, To take heed of, and shun such sins, as cause him to depart; for
instance, 1. Take heed of quenching the Spirit, 1 These. 5.19. now the Spirit is
quenched, as Fire is, either by withdrawing Fuel, or casting-on of Water, and
filth; so is the Spirit, when Men either neglect the means, and seasons of
grace, or else hearken unto, and cherish the motions of sin, and Satan, and the
World: hence that Exhortation, Isai. 30. To hearken unto the Voice behind us,
and not turn to the right hand, or to the left. Secondly, Take heed of grieving
the Holy Spirit of God, Ephesians. 4.30. Now the Holy Spirit is grieved, as by all
sin, so especially by open and scandalous sins, such as lying, dissembling,
idleness, rotten communication, unbridled passion, anger, wrath, revenge, as
you may see clearly, Ephesians. 4 25. to the end. Thirdly, Take heed of resisting the
Holy Ghost, which is a higher degree of sinning, when Men and Women, not only
refuse to hearken unto the Voice of the Spirit in the Ministry of the Word, but
even fall fowl on the Doctrines, and truths, that are taught out of the Word,
and quarrel with the Ministers for their plain, and faithful dealing with them,
as the Israelites did with Jeremy 43.1.2. and the Jews with Stephen, Acts 5.71.
Fourthly, Take heed of tempting the Holy Ghost, as Ananias, and Sapphira did,
Acts 5.1. to the 10. Q. When do Men tempt the Holy Ghost, to take vengeance on
them? A. You may see in that place, when they will profess, and pretend that
which is not in them, as faith, and love, and obedience, (which are the most
eminent fruits of the Spirit) and yet are wholly void of them; when Men will
profess, and pretend they seek the glory of God, the public good, the weal,
and comfort of others, as well as themselves, and yet do nothing less, but seek
only their own private, Worldly, and fleshly interest, care not what become of
others, let them sink or swim, all is one to them; and worse than so, to promote
their own private interest, will be still plotting and practicing mischief
against others; still instilling prejudices, into the heads, and hearts, and
tongues of others, and yet profess, and pretend the quite contrary. This lying
and dissembling of Professors is that which tempts the Holy Ghost to take
vengeance on them sooner, or later, for their audacious robbing Him of those
glorious Attributes, of his Omnipresency, Omnisciency, Omnipotency, and to
exemplarily punish such as dare to sin, not only against the light of the Word,
but the Dictates of the Holy Spirit in their Consciences. Fifthly, Take heed of
defiling his Temple, for if any Man defile the Temple of God, him will God
destroy, 1 Cor. 3.17. Q. Who are they that do so? He tells you there, they are
professing believers: Whereby do they defile his Temple? They defile it by
corrupt Doctrine, and manners, by dividing-Principles, and practices, causing
Rents, and Schisms, Parties, and Factions, as you may find they did, Verse. 4 5.
They also that defile their Bodies by Fornication, and Uncleanness, 1 Cor.
6.13, 18, 19.

Secondly, If you would hold, and maintain communion with the Spirit, as to
shun the forenamed Evils, so to observe, and make conscience of these following
duties: First, To hearken unto and obey the calls of the Spirit, to faith, and
love, and obedience. Isai. 30.21. Secondly, To nourish, and cherish the inward
motions of the Spirit, checking for evil, and exciting to good, 1 These. 5.19.
Thirdly, To live in the Spirit, Gal. 5.25. That is, as we live a natural life
by him, so to live a spiritual life to him, that we may be fitted to enjoy an
Eternal Life with him. Fourthly, To walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5.16.25. That is,
to follow the Direction of the Spirit, Verse. 18. For as many as are led by the
Spirit of God, are the Children of God, Romans 8.14. Fifthly, To enter upon, and
perform all duties, in, and by the assistance of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.10. To pray
in the Holy Ghost, Jude 20. Ephesians. 6.18. To preach in the evidence, and
demonstration of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.4. To love in the Spirit, Col. 1.8. and
exercise all Graces in the manifestation of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.7. and
rejoice in the comforts of the Spirit, Acts 9.31. Sixthly, Labor to be filled
with the Spirit, Ephesians. 5.18. Not to content your selves with any measure of
grace, but still laboring to grow in grace, and gracious practices, 1 Cor. 15.
last. To be filled with peace, and joy in believing, and abound in the hope of
glory, through the Power of the Holy Ghost, Romans 15.13. Seventhly, To preserve
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.3. that is, to endeavor
it, though we cannot effect it, as we would, because of the many and great
remainders of corruption in the best, that oppose and obstruct it, yet (I say)
t^ endeavor it, as the Apostle exhorts, Phil. 1.27. and 3.15. Lastly, To sow
in the Spirit, Gal. 6.8. that is, lay out your substance and worldly good to
spiritual uses, for the maintenance of Christ'^ Ministry, and Ordinances, the
providing of the Gospel, and encouragement of others in the way of holiness, if
you refuse to honor the Lord wit^ your substance, and bestow it only upon your
selve^ and yours, you do but sow to the flesh, and of the flesh shall reap
corruption; but he that sows (...) the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life
everlasting Verse. 8. Lastly, What grace you have receiv'^ above others, or you
have been enabled to exerci^^ above others, or good duties you have been
enabled to do above others, when you have been mo^^ enlarged in it above
others, take heed of arrogating any thing to your selves, remember to g^^
wholly out of your selves, and to give the Spir^^ the glory of his grace to you
in it, as the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.10. and be still careful to walk the more
humbly before God, and Man, Micah 6. So much of the Spirit: Nextly,

CHAP. V. The Fourth Head of Meditation, is MAN.
IN and about Man to meditate on the Fourfold Estate of Man, the Four last
Things or Ends of Man, and such things in the Soul, and in the Body about the
Tongue, Talents, Time, and Eternity of Man, as may most conduce to the enabling
of you to answer God, and Christ, and the Spirit in all they have done for man:
First, To meditate on the Fourfold Estate of Man: his blessed state by
Creation, cursed state by Transgression, gracious state by Regeneration, and
happy estate by Glorification.

Sect. 1. First, His blessed estate by Creation, and here to take notice of,
and meditate on these things; First, That he was made the most excellent of all
the visible Creatures: Secondly, That he was made in the most excellent manner.
Thirdly, That he was made to the most excellent ends.

First, He was made the most excellent of all the visible Creatures, as
appears, First, In respect of the structure of his Body, and the endowments of
his Soul, of which we shall speak hereafter: Secondly, In that he was made
after his own Image in knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness, Genesis 1.26.
Ephesians. 4.24. Col. 3.10. Thirdly, In that he was made the Habitation, and Temple
of the Holy Ghost. 2 Cor. 6.16. Fourthly, In that he was made Lord over all the
Creatures, all subjected under his Feet, and all for his use, Genesis 1.26. Psalm.
8. Fifthly, In that he was made the Epitome, or abridgment of the whole
Creation, there being nothing in the World, but there is some thing in Man,
like unto it: as, touching God, we believe Him to be a Spirit, touching the
World, we know it to be a Body; in Man we have an abridgment of both, namely of
God, in respect of his Spirit, and of the World, in respect of his Body. As in
the World there are some things visible, and some things invisible, so in Man a
visible Body, and an invisible Soul: as in the World, some Creatures live the
life of Vegetation, as Plants, some the life of Sense, as Beasts, some the life
of Reason, as Angels; in Man you have all these kinds of life. In a word, as
(one well) Man is God's Text, all the Creatures are Commentaries on it.

Secondly, Meditate on the excellent manner of Man's Creation: 1. Whereas all
other Creatures were made by a bare and simple command, God did but say the
word, Let there be Light, and there was Light; and so in the rest: When God
made Man, it was not without Divine Consultation, the sacred Trinity did not
barely speak the Word, Let there be Man, but they consulted together, saying,
Let (Us) make Man, Genesis 1.26. Not that God needed it, but to show that He
intended to make Man a more excellent Creature than the rest. 2. He not only
consulted about the making Man, but He put his hand to it, for he formed Man of
the dust of the Earth, and breathed into him the breath of life, Genesis 2.7.22.

Thirdly, Meditate on the excellent ends wherefore God made Man, namely to
contemplate those glorious Excellencies of his, which shine forth in the work
of Creation, and show forth to others the glory that is in them, to be quickened
by it, to serve him in all, and for all, and that he might be for ever happy in
communion with Him, and enjoyment of him in all, Prove. 16.4. Isai. 43.7. Rev.
4. last. 1 Cor 6. last. The serious meditation of these things will cause us to
admire, and adore Him in what he has done for man, and to say with David, Lord
what is man, etc. Psalm. 8. Fearfully and wonderfully am I made, O how precious
are the thoughts of thee, Psalm. 139. This also should bequicken Man to serve
Him cheerfully in all, and for all that should make all for us, and us for
himself, or else will shame and confound us, at the last, that all his
Creatures should serve him better by the very instinct of nature, than we by
the instinct of grace.

Sect. 2. Secondly, To meditate on the cursed Estate of Man, by transgression:
and here to meditate on these two things, the Causes of it, and the
Consequences of it.

First, The Causes of it, and these either External, or Internal: 1. External;
and here, First, The efficient cause the Devil, the Devil having fallen himself
from God, by his disobedience, out of enmity against God, and envy of Man's
happy condition, vehemently desired, and endeavored the fall of Man, that so
he might have the more company both in sin and punishment: whence our Savior
styles him a Liar, and a Murderer, from the beginning, Joh. 8. And Peter tells
us, He walks up, and down, like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, 1
Pet. 5. The 2d. outward cause was Instrumental, viz. the Serpent, Genesis 3.1. Q.
But could a Serpent speak? A. It was not the Serpent but the Devil in the
Serpent, therefore called the old Serpent, Rev. 20. Q. But why did he make use
of the Serpent, rather than any other Creature. A. 1. Because of his subtilty;
the Serpent being more subtle than any other Beast of the Field. 2. In respect
of his activity to move up and down more nimbly, and creep in, and out of the
Garden, unseen of Adam, who was the keeper of it. Q. But why did not Eve fear,
and mistrust the Serpent, and the Devil in it. A. 1. she feared not then,
because she had no sin then, and there was no enmity then, between Man and the
Creature. 2. She did not mistrust any mischief, because it is probable she was
ignorant of the fall of the Angels; had she known it, she would have watched
more narrowly against him. Q. What may we learn here that the Devil made use of
the Serpent, because of his subtilty? A. If there be any Person or gift more
excellent than other, the Devil will be sure to make use of it, for the doing
more mischief, as he did of the Scribes and Pharisees, and the Rulers of
Israel, because they were more learned, and honorable, Joh. 7.48, 49. And
therefore the greater any Man's parts and place is, it should be his wisdom to
be the more watchful against Satan, and cause him to abuse them, to the
dishonor of God, the wronging of others, and the wounding of his own Soul.

Secondly, For the internal and principal cause of Man's Fall, that was the
abuse of his own freewill, because he freely and voluntarily transgressed, and
broke God's Commandment in eating the forbidden fruit, Genesis 2.17. Eccl. 7.
last. Therefore God no way accessory to it, nor could be the Author of it, as
some wicked ones have thought, and taught: for God used all means both before,
and in his Creation to prevent it, as in his making him after his own Image,
and endowing him with knowledge, and power to do what he required, and in that
he immediately instituted a Sabbath, to put him and keep him in remembrance of
his duty to God: therefore every man to justify God, and condemn himself.

Secondly, To meditate on the Consequents of the Fall, which is Sin, and the
Curse. By our first Parents disobeying the command of God, in eating the
forbidden Fruit, there followed the curse of God upon Adam, and all his
Posterity: and this Curse, it comprehends under it three things, Guilt, Filth,
and Punishment; every Son and Daughter of Adam came in guilty of that first
sin, as you may see clearly, Romans 3.9.19. Especially, Romans 5.12, 17, 18, 19. Q.
And how so? When as they were not then born, Is it Justice in God to punish all
for one Man's offense? A. Yes, 1. Because Adam's sin was not peculiar to his
Person, but common to all Mankind, Adam sustaining the place, not of a
private, but a public Person, he was the Father, and Root of all Mankind, and
received whatsoever good he had, not only for himself, but all his Posterity.
Had he stood in obedience, he and his had continued in that blessed Estate,
wherein they were created, but now falling from that by his Rebellion, he
brought the Curse upon himself, and all his Posterity. Divines illustrate it
thus: In Murder, though the hand only kill, yet the whole Man becomes guilty.
In a Parliament, what is done by the Knight of the Shire or the Burgess of a
City, is said to be done by all that made choice of them. When a great Person
commits Treason, he does not only disinherit himself, but his posterity; the
consideration of this should cause every one to take to heart that first sin,
and humble himself before the Lord under it. That you maybe the more
effectually humbled under it. 1. To consider of the greatness of that first
sin, how-ever it may seem a small matter in the eye of carnal reason, to eat a
little forbidden fruit; yet (as one truly) Peccare in minimo, peccatum non
minimum) To sin, this did so much the more aggravate their sin, that they would
offend so great, and good a God, for so small a matter, that when God had given
them liberty to eat of all other Trees in the Garden, yet they would not deny
themselves in this one: besides, this first sin is that contains in the bowels
of it, may other crying sins, as Apostasy, Infidelity, Curiosity, Blasphemy,
Pride, Presumption, Murder, etc. In a word, was the cause of all other sin, and
misery upon the Creature, and of the Damnation of all Souls, that have been,
are, or shall be damned, and therefore we have every one great and continual
cause of humbling, and abasing our selves before the Lord under the
consideration of it.

Secondly, As there followed guilt, so filth, or the defilement of the whole
Man with sin original, and actual, and here to meditate what these are, and
what special things in them are to be meditated on, for the humbling of our
Souls, and the keeping us from closing with Temptations to them.

First, What sin is? viz. The transgression of the Law of God, either revealed
in the Word, 1 Ep. Joh. 3.4. or written in the heart, Romans 2.14, 15. and here
about sin, to take notice, and meditate on the ugly, filthy, hurtful, hateful
nature of it: 1. For the ugly nature of sin, it is not only evil, but the worst
of all evils, and the cause of all other evils, that it is most contrary to
God's most Holy Nature, that which made the Devil a Devil, and Hell to be Hell,
without which the Devil would be a blessed Angel, and Hell would be Heaven;
that also that could not be expiated, and done away by the death, and
bloodshed of all the Creatures, but only by the precious heart-blood of the
Lord Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Meditate on the filthy nature of it, as, it is compared to the
Excrements of Man, Isai. 4.4. and called the (...) the Excrement of Excrements,
or superfluity of naughtiness, James 1.21. yea not only filthy in the concrete,
but filthiness it self in the abstract, 2 Cor. 7.1. Q. But how does this
appear? A. In that it defiles a man in all, and all to him: 1. It defiles him
in all, every faculty of Soul, every power of Body, Mat. 15.19, 20. whence
Solomon calls the sinner a loathsome Person, Prove. 15.3. because sin is that
which makes him loathsome to all, to God, and Man, and Himself. 1. To God,
Zach. 11.8. my Soul loatheth them. 2. Loathsome to Men, especially good Men,
Psalm. 15.4. Prove. 29. last. Isai. 66.24. 3dly. That which makes men loathsome
to themselves, when God once opens their Eyes to see it, and brings them home
to himself by Repentance, Ezekiel. 36.31. Job 42.6. Romans 6.21.

Secondly, As it defiles a Man in all, so all to him; all his Relations, all
his Enjoyments, all his Actions, natural, civil, religious, Titus 1.15. To the
impure, all things are impure, the Word is a killing Letter, the Sacraments
Seal up Damnation; in short, of so defiling a nature, as all the Water of the
old World, could not wash away the stain of it, nor all the Fire of the last
Judgment, and of Hell, will be able to burn up the dross of it.

Thirdly, Meditate on the hateful nature of sin, how hateful it is to God, and
good men. 1. To God, it is the only object of his hatred, he hates nothing, but
as it is sinful, not the Devil, but only as sin made him a Devil. 2. That it is
so hateful to God, appears, in that he hates it wherever he sees it. Even in
his own Son, who knew no sin, yet because he took our sin upon him, he so
manifested his hatred of it, as he would not spare the severe punishment of it
in him; because the Creatures could not strike a stroke hard enough, he was
pleased to bruise him, Isai. 53.16. and to lay upon him the fierceness of his
wrath, Lament. 1.12. Secondly, As hateful to God, so to all good men, Psalm.
139.21. Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee, search me, and try me, etc.
Psalm. 119.128. I hate every false way; the Martyrs so hated sin, as they chose
rather to burn at the Stake, and undergo any torment, than give way to any sin;
Anselm (Archbishop of Canterbury) was wont to say, that if he saw Hell on one
side, and sin on the other, and he must of necessity choose one; he would
rather choose Hell, without sin: and no wonder, for where there is no Sin,
there is no Hell.

Fourthly, On the hurtful nature of sin, this appears, 1. In that it is the
greatest Enemy to God, to Christ, to the Spirit, to Us: 1. To God, it is that
which seeks to un-Throne Him, and un-God Him, and there is no true and loyal
Subject, but will endeavor the death of him that seeks the death of his
Sovereign Lord and King. Secondly, The greatest Enemy to Christ, that which
brought him from Heaven to the Cross, made Him sweat Blood, under the
apprehension of his Father's wrath due to him, and to cry out on the Cross, to
the amazement of Heaven, and Earth, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
Thirdly, The greatest Enemy to the Spirit of God, that which quenches, and
grieveth, and vexes, and resists him, makes him to leave his Habitation; and
when he goes out, the Devil comes in with seven worse Spirits than ever, Mat.
12.45. Fourthly, The greatest Enemy to Us, that which deprives us of all good,
Isai. 59.2. and exposes us to all evil, Romans 2.8, 9, 10. pulls down all manner
of Judgments on Persons, Families, Towns, Cities, Kingdoms, Countries, Prove. 8.
last. Romans 1.16. Ephesians. 5.5. That which makes every man to come in with a Cry,
and go out of the World with a Groan: So much of Sin in general.

Secondly, For Original sin, that you may be effectually humbled under it, to
take notice of, and meditate on these things: 1. What it is: 2. The several
Titles given to it, with the Reasons of them: 3. The Parts of it: 4 The extent
of it: And, 5. The fruits of it: First, What it is: for the understanding of
this, you are to Note, that Original sin is taken either actively or passively,
First, Actively, for the sin of Adam, in eating the forbidden fruit, and is
called by Divines, Peccatum Originans, the beginning-sin, or the sin giving a
beginning to all other sins. Secondly, Passively, for the corruption of nature,
flowing from that first sin of Adam, and is called, Peccatum Originatum, or sin
taking a beginning from that first sin of Adam, and this is that which we are
to speak unto and may be described thus, A privation of Original righteousness,
and a depravation of the whole Man with unrighteousness; Justly derived from
the loins of our first Parents unto all their Posterity, by reason whereof,
every Man and Woman is conceived, and born in sin, brings into the World with
them the Seeds of all sin, is inclined to all evil, and averse to all that is
good. 1. There is a deprivation of Original righteousness, wherein Man was
created, Romans 3.10. There Is none righteous, no not one. Secondly, A depravation
of the whole man with unrighteousness, Gal. 3.22. The Scripture has concluded
all under sin, not only (...) all Men but (...) all things in man, for the word
is in the Neuter Gender: and it is further evident, by the Apostle's Prayer,
for Universal Sanctification, 1 These. 5.23. Implying an Universal Corruption.
Thirdly, I say, justly derived from the Loins of our first Parents, to all
their Posterity, as you may see, Genesis 5.3. Adam begot a Son, in his own
likeness, that is, a sinner like himself, Job gives the reason, Job 14.4. Who
can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? and so does our Savior, Joh. 3.6.
Mat. 7.18. and Jam. 3.11, 12. Fourthly, I add, [by reason whereof every one is
conceived and born in sin] this David acknowledges, Psalm. 51.5. and Isai.
48.8. The Lord styles Israel a Transgressor from the Womb. Fifthly, He brings
in with him the Seeds of all sin even the vilest, that ever were conceived, or
acted by Men, or Devils, as the Chaos contained in it the Seed of all
Creatures, so the corruption of our nature, the Seeds of all sin, Prove. 27.19.
as in Water, Face answers to Face, so does the heart of Man to Man. Sixthly,
Are inclined to all evil, Psalm. 36.4. Jer. 8.6. Isai. 5.18. Nitimur invetitum,
etc. as the very Heathen could observe and say. Lastly, I add, [and averse to
all that is good], Romans 8.7. Gal. 5.17. Jer. 18.12.

Secondly, For your further humiliation under it, take notice of the odious
Titles given to it with the Reasons of them: 1. It Is called Original sin: 1.
Because it was ab origin from the beginning of Man's Fall: Secondly, Because
it is cum origin, with the beginning of every man. Thirdly, Because it is
Origo, the Beginning, Root, and Fountain of all actual sin: Secondly, It Is
called the sin that dwells in us, Romans 7.17. because it remains in all unto
death: Thirdly, It Is called the sin that easily encompasseth us, Heb. 12.1. or
that soon overtakes us, and keep us from running the Race set before us:
Fourthly, It Is called concupiscence, or lust, Jam. 1.14, 15. Romans 7.7. Because
it is the Mother of all unclean lusts, motions, and desires. Fifthly, It Is
called the old man, Romans 6.6. because it came from the old Adam. Sixthly, It Is
called the Flesh, Joh. 3.6. Gal. 5.17. because it acts, and discovers it self
in, and by the Flesh. Seventhly, It Is called the Law in the Members, Romans 7.23.
because it Rules as a Law. Eighthly, It Is called the work of the Devil, 1 John
3.8. And Hell, that sets on Fire the whole course of nature, Jam. 3.6. because
it came from the Devil, and from Hell, and leads to the Devil and, Hell without
repentance.

Thirdly, To Meditate on the parts of it, to wit, an absence of all good, and a
presence of all evil, an emptiness of all righteousness, and a fullness of all
unrighteousness.

Fourthly, That you may be the more thoroughly humbled, meditate on the extent
of it; How does this corruption of nature, like a Leprosy, overspread the
whole man, Soul and Body, every faculty and power of both: 1. For the faculties
of the Soul, it fills the mind with blindness, the will with perverseness, the
conscience with deadness, the memory with unfaithfulness, the heart and
affections with deceitfulness and sensualness, which every one's experience too
sadly evidenceth: Secondly, For the parts and powers of the Body, they are all
naturally instruments of unrighteousness and unholiness, Romans 6.13.19. And all
the Senses, in-lets, and out-lets of sin, and vanity, 1 Ep. Joh. 3.16. So as in
the flesh there dwells no good thing, Romans 7.18.

Fifthly, To meditate on the fruits and effects of it, how that by reason of it
you were conceived and born in sin, having in your natures the Seed of all sin,
a proneness to all evil, and an aversness to all good: so that you see, if you
had no other sin to bewail, this were enough to humble you all your days, and
to make you miserable to all Eternity, and therefore to be much in meditation
on it, and walk humbly before God, and Man, continually under the consideration
of it, and that for these Reasons: 1. Because it is the Mother-sin, Jam. 1.14.
Mat. 15.19. Secondly, Because though all actual sins be repented of, and done
away, yet this Root of bitterness remains still, and will until it be quite
plucked up by death. 3. Because to bewail actual transgressions, and not the
corruption of nature is that which the Lord complains of, Ezekiel. 16.22. 4.
Because a Man is never truly humbled under his actual sins, unless he bewail
also his original sins, seeing it is the corruption of nature that inclined and
carried him into actual sin: and therefore if you look into the humiliations of
God's People, you shall find them to bewail, as their actual, so their original
sin, as Job, Job 40.4. Isai. 6.5. David, Psalm. 51.5. Paul, Romans 7.24. and Mr.
Bradford the Martyr, that when he saw any break out into any Enormity, would
smite upon his Breast, and say, Lord, what a wicked heart have I, and what
cause have I to give glory to distinguishing grace, that I am not as vile as
the vilest: and therefore if you would have any evidence of the truth, and
soundness of your humiliation under your actual sins, be sure always to take to
heart, and bewail original sin, the Fountain, and rice of all; and to this end
remember to meditate frequently, and seriously of what I have briefly opened to
you, in and about it.

Thirdly, To take notice and meditate on your actual sins, and that you may be
the more thoroughly humbled under them, to mind well What it is, the Kinds of it,
the multitude, and greatness of them.

First, What actual sin is, to wit, Every evil act, or motion arising out of
the corruption of nature, in thought or affection, word or action, contrary to
the revealed will of God in the Word, or the Conscience; binding over a man to
the curse of the Law, Deuteronomy. 27. last.

Secondly, For the Kinds of it: First, It is either by way of Commission, or
Omission, when any thing is added to, or taken from the Word; both condemned,
Deuteronomy. 4.11, 12. Revel. 22.18, 19. Secondly, It is either of ignorance, or
knowledge; both damnable, but especially the latter, Luke 12.47, 48. Thirdly,
It is either a sin of infirmity, or a reigning sin: First, A sin of infirmity
is such a sin, as a Man falls into but seldom, and besides his purpose, and
with reluctance also; when he sees it, does mourn for it, prays for pardon of
it, and power over it, and watches more against it, Psalm 17.3. I have purposed
my Mouth shall not offend. Romans 7.15. The evil which I do, I allow not.

Secondly, A reigning sin, is when a Man commits any evil, and omits any good,
wittingly, or wilfully makes a Trade, or a Custom of it; lives and lies
impenitently in it, expressly forbid, Romans 6.12. The former is the sin of the
regenerate, the latter of the unregenerate.

Fourthly, It is either pardonable or unpardonable: First, Pardonable sin is
every sin, even the greatest that a man is willing to repent of, Isaiah 1.18.
Isai. 55.7, 8. Secondly, Unpardonable sin, is, not only that against the Holy
Ghost, but every sin, even the least that a man is unwilling to see, and to
leave, and resolves to persist impenitently in it, Mat. 5.19. James 2.10.

Thirdly, The degrees of actual sin, all sins are not alike, but some greater,
and some lesser, Nemo repent fit pessimus, none arise to the height of sin,
but by degrees: and the degrees by which sin arises to the height, are these,
1. The thought of it. 2. The pleasure of it. 3. The consent to it. 4. The
practice of it. 5. The custom of it. 6. Obstinacy in it. 7. Defense of it. 8.
Boasting of it, and glorying in it. Lastly, Desperate and final impenitency in
it, which is the perfection of it. If you would be kept from the last, not to
yield to the first; for these several degrees of sin, they are as so many links
in a Chain, take hold of one, and you will draw the rest after, James 1.15.

Fourthly, That you may be the more thoroughly humbled under your actual sins,
take notice of, and meditate on the multitude of your sins, both your own
Personal sins, and your other Men's sins.

First, Your own Personal sins: to this end, take notice what have been your
sins by way of commission, in thought, word, and deed; what have been your
sins, by way of omission in public, private, secret; what have been your sins
of imperfection before, and in, yea and after duty? What have been the sins of
your Childhood, Youth, and riper Age? What have been your sins against Law,
Gospel, Word and Rod, Mercies and Corrections, Personal, Family, National.

Secondly, That you may see your other Men's sins, take notice wherein you have
been faulty toward them by way of commission, or omission, as Superiors,
Interiours, Equals.

Fifthly, That you may be the more thoroughly humbled, meditate on the greatness
of your sins: to this end, Consider first the greatness of the Majesty, against
whom every sin is committed, viz. no other than the great God, against whom the
least offense is greater than the greatest offense against the greatest
Potentates on Earth; He being an infinite God, they but finite Creatures.
Secondly, A God of infinite Holiness, who cannot look upon any the least sin,
with the least approbation, but infinite detestation, Habback. 1.13. Thirdly, A
God of infinite goodness, from whom we have had being, and well-being, Soul,
and Body, and whatever is good for both us, and ours, and all of free and rich
grace.

Secondly, To consider the baseness of our Persons, that presume to sin,
against so great, so holy, and so gracious a God, no other than poor Worms of
the Earth, sinful dust and ashes; vanity, nothing, less than nothing, Isai.
40.17. Thirdly, The greatness of the Price that was paid for the expiating, and
taking away of sin, to wit, no other than the precious blood of Christ, the
only begotten Son of God, the least drop whereof is of more worth than ten
thousand Worlds, being the Blood of Him, who was God, as well as Man: for ten
thousand Worlds could never have purchased the Pardon of the least sin, being
all but finite Creatures.

Fourthly, Consider the smalness of the Cause moving Men to sin against so
great and good a God, What is it that most Men and Women do dishonor God, and
damn their Souls for, but a little transitory, bitter-sweet pleasure? uncertain
perishing profits? fading, vanishing breath, and applause of men, and therefore
it must needs be a great offense, to sin against so great a God, for so small a
matter, which makes the Lord himself to complain of it, Ezekiel. 13.19.

Fifthly, Consider the Circumstances in, and about the acting of your sin, as
the time, place, manner, Person: for these circumstances exceedingly aggravate
sin; as for Example, when such a sin is acted by a public Person, or in a
public place, to the scandal of others, and the disgrace of profession, not
only of ignorance, but knowledge; of weakness, but wilfulness; not only once,
or twice, but often, and that against many vows, and promises to the contrary,
notwithstanding Word, Rod, Mercies, and Judgments, and all the ways, and Means,
and Methods God has used to the contrary, to reclaim and bring home poor
wretched sinners to himself, and save them from self-destruction. A serious
Meditation on these things will be an effectual means, through the blessing of
God, to break the heart for sin, break off the heart from the love, and liking
of all sin.

The third Consequence of Man's Fall to be taken notice of, and meditated on
for our more through humiliation, before the Lord, is the punishment, and misery
that fell upon man, and all his Posterity, by reason of that first Rebellion of
man. And this Punishment is double, Privative and Positive: First, For the
Privative punishment of man's sin, or the punishment of Loss it consists in
these Particulars. First, The loss of God's favor (which he enjoyed in a
perfect manner by Creation) so, as now, every one comes into the World, a
Child of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. an Enemy to God, and God to him; both his Person,
and all his actions abominable to God. 1. His Person, Romans 8.8. 2. His Actions,
Prove. 15.8. Isai. 1.13, 14. Titus 1.15. To the impure all things are impure;
the Reason is, 1. Because the Tree must be good before the Fruit can, Mat.
7.18. the Person accepted before the work can. 2. Because the works of natural,
carnal Men, are not done by them in a right manner, as knowledge, faith, and
love, without which God regards them not, Prove. 19.2. Heb 11.6. Romans 13.8. None
are done to a right end, viz. the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. and therefore
both their Persons and services abhorred and rejected of God, Isai. 1. Jer. 7.

Secondly, As Man, by his Fall, lost the favor of God, so communion and
fellowship with God, which he enjoyed in a glorious manner, before the Fall;
but since the Fall, Men are without God in the World, Ephesians. 2.12. and are
estranged from the life of God, Ephesians. 4.18.

Thirdly, Man by his Fall deprived himself of the Image of God, in which he was
created, and contracted on himself, and his Posterity, the Image of sin, and
Satan, Joh. 8.44. Romans 5 12.

Fourthly, By his Fall, he came short of the glory of God: had Man continued in
obedience, it is more than probable, that he should have been translated from a
terrestrial, to a celestial Paradise, but by his Rebellion, he outed himself
and his, of both.

Fifthly, Man by his Fall lost his Native dignity: by Creation, he was made
little lower than the Angels, Psalm. 8. but by his Fall he was degraded, and
made lower than the Beasts that perished Psalm. 49. last. For, 1. By this he
lost his honorable title, as he the Child of God, so we the Sons and Daughters
of the ever living God, Isai. 56. Luke 3. presently after the Fall, styled
Children of Men, Psalm. 90.3. Children of the World, Luke 16.9. Children of
Wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. Children of disobedience. Coloss. 3.6. Children of the Devil,
Joh. 8 44. Children of Hell, Mat. 20.25. 2. They lost that glory, luster, and
beauty, they had by Creation, in Soul and Body, as you may see, 1 Cor. 12.23.
Jude 23 Isai. 1.5, 6. 3. They lost that great pre-eminence they had over the
Creatures; he that was Superior to all, was made inferior to all, Psalm.
49.20. Isai. 1.3. Jer. 8.7. The Prophet puts them to School to all, to learn of
the Creatures: 4. As Man lost his pre-eminence, so his authority over all, he
that was Lord over all, became a Slave to all, who, instead of serving Man,
rebels against Man, labors to pick out his Eyes, Pro. 30.17. to eat his Flesh,
and lap up his Blood, 2 King. 9.36.

Sixthly, Man lost his liberty, by Creation he was a free Denizen, and Citizen
of the World, all at his command; but presently after the Fall, became a Slave,
and was in Bondage to all, the Devil, the World, and the Flesh: 1. To the
Devil, taken and carried Captive by him to do his pleasure, 2 Timothy 2 last. Ephesians.
2.2. 2. To the World, so as to be drawn aside from that which is good, and
drawn into evil, by the baits and allurements of it, on the one hand, and the
menaces and persecutions of it on the other, 1 Epist. Joh. 4.5. whence that of
James 4.4. Ye adulterers and adulteresses, etc. and 1 John 2.15. 3. To the
Flesh, to do whatsoever it shall suggest, for the gaining and retaining of
honor, and profit, and pleasure, Romans 6.16. John 8.34. 2 Pet. 2.19. and in
this slavery and bondage all Men and Women are by nature, and that not
unwillingly and grudgingly, but readily and cheerfully, and with the greatest
delight, so far from being desirous to be brought out of it, as they account
those their greatest Enemies, that would endeavor to bring them out of it,
Jer. 18. There is no hope, but we will walk every ^ne after the imagination of
our own hearts, Jer. 43.1, 2, 3. Jer. 44.16, 17. Thus you see the greatness of
the punishment of loss, Et heu quantum mutatus ab illo! How much is Man altered
from his first estate? Tristis and Lacrymosa commutatio; a most sad and
lamentable change you see, from favor to wrath, from fellowship to banishment,
instead of the Image of God, the image of sin, and Satan; for glory, misery;
for dignity, infamy; for dominion, subjection; for liberty, slavery.

Secondly, For the Positive part of punishment, or the punishment of Sense,
that followed the fall upon every Son, and Daughter of Adam; and that was the
curse of God, Gal. 3.10 and what is this curse? but the infinite, and
unsupportable wrath of God, and all manner of Plagues, Judgments, and Miseries,
in Life, at Death, and after Death: 1. In this life, in Soul and Body, in Name,
and Estate: 1. In Soul, blindness of mind, hardness of heart, Isai 6.9. a
reprobate sense, Romans 1.23.26. strong delusions, 2 These. 2.11. horrors of
conscience, Isai. 65.13. seconded with Hellish despair, and blasphemy, as in
Cain, Saul, Judas. 2. In Body, all manner of aches, sicknesses, diseases, Deuteronomy.
28.21. to the end. 3. In name, infamy, shame, reproach, Deuteronomy. 28.^^ 37. 4. In
Estate, losses, crosses, curses; in getting cares, in keeping fears, in losing
sorrows, and that many times unto death, Deuteronomy 28.16. Jer. 12.13. Mal. 2.2. I
will curse your blessings, yea, I have cursed them already.

Secondly, In the end of this life, death the King of terrors, Romans 5.12. Romans
6. last. Job 18.14.

Thirdly, After this life, if men die in their sins impenitent^^: 1. As soon as
the Soul is separated from the Body, it is immediately carried by the Devil
into Hell, Luke 12.20. and there kept in Prison till the Day of Judgment, 1
Pet. 3.19. the Body thrown into the Grave, where Death gnaws upon it, as upon
Carrion in a ditch, with the mouth full of Earth, and the Belly full of Worms,
and the Carcass full of stinch. 2. At the Day of Judgment, by the Almighty
Power of the Lord Jesus Christ (the Supreme Judge of Heaven and Earth) the Soul
is brought out of Hell, and the Body out of the Grave, out of which, as soon as
it begins to peep, it shall behold the whole World on Fire about its Ears,
Christ on his Throne of Glory, the Saints, whom they derided and persecuted,
taken up into the Clouds to be assessors with Christ in Judgment upon the
wicked World; whilst they with the Devils, are left below to stand forth
before the Tribunal of Christ, and hear that dreadful Sentence, Depart ye
cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, wherein
every word is a Hell, before they come to Hell. 3. After the Sentence is past,
all wicked Reprobates shall be thrust away from the Judgment Seat of Christ,
and thrown into Hell, with the Devils, there to lie and fry, and cry under
easless, endless, and remediless torments. And thus much of the cursed state of
man by transgression, and the things to be meditated on in it. That your
meditation on them may be the more effectual to cause you speedily to hye out
of it: 1. Beg the Spirit of God to convince you thoroughly of the truth of it, it
being no other than what God has spoken in his Word, and we find by bitter
experience: 2. Labor to be truly sensible of, and deeply humbled under the
fight and sense of it, so as to give no rest to your selves, until that you are
brought out of it, for the promises of mercy run only unto such; Mat. 9.13.
Luke 19.10. Mat. 11.29. And that you may be truly sensible of, and effectually
humbled under it, beg the Spirit of God to prick your hearts with the
consideration of it, as he did those Converts, Acts 2.37. and tremble to stay a
moment in your unregenerate estate, as the Jailer, Acts 16. when Paul had
preached unto him: 4. Be willing to receive Jesus Christ on his own terms, not
only as your Jesus, but your Lord, and Christ, John 1.12. Romans 13. end. Lastly,
Hearken to that Counsel of your Lord, and Savior, Mark 1.15. Repent, and
believe the Gospel, and then his promise is to receive all, and cast away no
one Soul that comes to him, and rests upon him for Conversion, and Salvation,
Joh 6 37. Amen.

Sect. 3. The third state of Man, is his gracious state by Regeneration, and
here to take notice of, and meditate on these things. First, The free, and
unsearchable love of God to us in it. 2. The nature of it, what it is, and
wherein it consists. 3. The differences of true grace, from false grace, from
restraining grace. 4. Degrees of true sanctifying grace. 5. The signs of it. 6.
The privileges of such as have it. 7. The motives to it. 8. The means for the
maintaining, increasing, and persevering in it.

First, For the free unsearchable love and grace of God to his, in not leaving
his Elect in their fallen cursed condition, but in his appointed time,
effectually calling all such as belong unto his Election of grace, out of a
state of nature, into a state of grace. God might have for ever passed by
fallen Mankind, as well as he did the fallen Angels: though he looked in mercy
upon some, he might have passed by us, amongst others of fallen Mankind; and
therefore that God should pass by others, more noble for birth, and it may be
more sober, and civil for conversation, and look upon us, wallowing and
weltring in our blood, and filthiness, and say unto us, Live, this should
exceedingly affect our hearts, and make us still to be admiring, and adoring
the free, rich, and unsearchable love, grace, and mercy of God to us in Christ,
Ezekiel. 16. Psalm. 103.

Secondly, That we may do this with more profit, and comfort, to take notice,
what this state of grace is: and for the understanding of this to know there is
a double grace, (...), and (...) the first and the second grace; the first,
whereby our Persons are accepted; the second, whereby they are sanctified; the
first, is no other than the free love, and favor of God, whereby he accepts us
in Christ, and for his sake forgives all our sins, and gives us his Spirit, to
renew and sanctify our natures, Romans 11.6. Ephesians. 2.8, 9. The second grace is no
other than a special gift of that grace, and favor of God, otherwise called in
the Scripture Regeneration, John 3.6. and Renovation of the Image of God, Ephesians.
4.24. and Sanctification of the whole Man, 1 These. 5.23. and the Divine Nature,
2 Pet. 1.4. Godliness and holiness, 1 Timothy 6. And it may be described thus, a
work of the Spirit in the Ministry of the Word, deriving from Christ their
head, unto all his Elect, spiritual life, grace, or holiness, and diffusing it
throughout the whole Man, whereby they are enabled to act and move Godward,
Grace-ward, and Heavenward.

Thirdly, To take notice of, and meditate on the differences of true grace from
false grace; for Ephesians. 4.14. the Apostle speaks of true holiness, in opposition
to false, and feigned: now these differences are especially in three things; as
first, true sanctifying grace is from an inward principle, infused by the
Spirit of Grace, Psalm. 40.8. Romans 7.22. but that in the Hypocrite, is only from
an outward principle, as shame of the World, fear of punishment, and the like.

Secondly, True grace makes Men to approve all their thoughts, and words, and
ways, to God's all-seeing eye, Job 31.4. Job 42.4, 5. John 11.17. A Hypocrite
dares not do so, he approves them only to the eyes of men; so long as Men think
well of him, he cares not what God thinks.

Thirdly, True grace makes Men humble, the more knowledge they have, the more
they see, and bewail their ignorance, as that wise Man, Pro. 30.2. I am more
brutish than any Man, and I have not the understanding of a man, viz. in
comparison of what he ought to know of God; the more faith he has, the more he
bewails his unbelief, as the Father of the possessed Child, Mark 9.24. The more
love he has, the more he bewails his want of love, and calls upon his Soul to
love God more, Psalm. 116. But now a Hypocrite he is proud of the grace he has,
and thinks he has more than he has, and that both God, and man should respect
him the better, as the Pharisee, Luke 18. I thank God I am not as this
Publican, etc. Q. But wherein does renewing Grace, differ from restraining
Grace? A. Especially in two things: 1. Restraining grace, only keeps Men from
the acts of sin, but does not mortify sin. Abimeleck's lust was restrained,
when God with held him from Sarah, Genesis 20.6. but not mortified; whereas, where
there is renewing Grace, sin is subdued, as well as restrained, Romans 8.13.
Secondly, Restraining grace, keeps men from sinning, out of a servile fear of
punishment; but renewing grace makes men forbear, out of a fillial fear of
offending, Genesis 39.9. Psalm. 130.4. Thirdly, Restraining grace keeps men from
sinning, no longer than they are under the means of restraint, as godly
Magistrates, Ministers, Parents, Masters; when they are dead, or removed, then
they can neglect the Worship of God, and be as vile as the vilest: when there
was no King in Israel, every one did what was good in his own eyes, Judge.
17.6.18. but renewing grace, where it is, it makes, and keeps men, ever the
same; and the worse the times are, the better are they, Genesis 6.9.

Fourthly, To take notice, and meditate on the degrees of grace, all have not
the same measures and degrees of grace, but some more, and some less, whence we
read of some strong men in Christ, others weak, Prove. 15.1. Some Babes in
Christ, and others grown Christians, 1 Cor. 3.1. Some Trees of righteousness,
Isai. 61.3. Others bruised Reeds, Mat. 12.20. and God has wise and holy ends
in this; as, 1. To put a difference between Heaven, and Earth: here we are but
renewed, and sanctified in part (how-ever it be in every part) but in Heaven,
the Spirits of just Men are made perfect, Heb. 12.23. Grace there is perfected
in glory, Ephesians. 4.13. Secondly, God will have it so, to teach us to live in a
continual dependence on that fullness there is in Christ for us, that we may
still go to him, and receive from him grace for grace, John 1.16. that is one
degree and measure after another. Thirdly, That he may display his glorious
Attributes, as his infinite wisdom, All-mighty Power, unchangeable grace, in
carrying on the work of grace, until he has crowned grace in glory, 2 Cor.
12.9, 10. Q. But seeing there are different degrees of grace, some have more,
and some less, How may a Man know that he has any truth of grace? even the
least degree of saving grace? A. You may know it by these two things; 1. A
continual complaint of the want of grace, and the weakness of grace, in
comparison of the strength of corruption, as the Father of the possessed Child,
this is made by our Savior the Sign of truth of grace, Mat. 5.3. Blessed are
the poor in Spirit: that is, who are spiritually poor in their own sight, and
sense. 2. You may know it by earnest desires, and endeavors after more grace,
as in Nehemiah 1.11. and the Church, Isai. 26.8. Christ pronounces them
blessed, that hunger, and thirst after righteousness, and promises they shall
be filled, Mat. 5.6. Q. But how shall we know our desires after grace, to be
true desires? A. Briefly thus, 1. If they be industrious in the use of the
means, and all means, 2 Cor. 7.11. 1 Pet. 2.2. Secondly, If they be fervent
desires, like David's, Psalm. 42.1. more after spirituals, than temporals, Psalm.
4.6. Thirdly, If they be restless desires, until we obtain, Psalm. 119.20. My
Soul breaks for the longing it has to thy judgments at all times: Thus of
the evidences of grace in general. Now,

Secondly, Take notice of the evidences of some particular graces, as
knowledge, faith, repentance, obedience, love, fear, and hope: but here before
I speak unto them, take this caution, he that has one of these graces in
truth, has seminally all, and every sanctifying grace; how-ever he do not see
it; as he that has one link of a Chain, has the whole Chain; so he that has
one saving, sanctifying grace in truth, has all: what is said of original sin
(una essentia, sed multiplex efficientia) is true also of sanctifying grace,
though but one in it self, yet it is vertually all. I shall give you only three
evidences of each; such as desire more, may see them in other Books, where they
are fully handled.

1. For the truth of sanctified knowledge, it is thus evidenced, it is
experimental, practical, and humble: First, Experimental, Phil. 1.9. Secondly,
Practical, Psalm. 111. last. Thirdly, Humble, Prove. 30.2.

2. For the truth of sanctifying faith, it is thus evidenced, it is a
self-emptying, working, converting faith; 1. It is a self-emptying, or
self-denying faith, it makes a Soul to deny his own righteousness in point of
Justification, and acceptance, and with the Apostle desires to be found only
in Christ's righteousness, Phil. 3.8, 9. to disclaim also his own ability, for
any thing that is spiritually good; 2 Cor. 3.5. and to enter upon duty, only in
the Name and Strength of Christ, Phil. 4.12. Secondly, It is a working faith,
that which works by love to God, and unto others, for God's sake, Gal. 5.6. It
is still working-out corruption; Acts 15.9. and working-in grace, Acts 26.18.
Thirdly, It is a conquering faith, that which enables a Soul to with-stand, and
overcome temptations from within, and without, 1 Ep. John 5.4. This is the
victory that covercomes the World, even our faith: Q. What Is meant here by
World? A. Partly the Men of it, that lie in wickedness, 1 Ep. John 5, 19. and
partly the lusts of the World, as the honors, riches, and pleasures of it, 1
Ep. John 2.16. so victorious, as it enables them to hold fast their confidence
to the end, Heb. 3.14. Heb. 11.19. and makes them more than Conquerors over all
their spiritual Enemies, Romans 8. the end.

3. For the truth of repentance, that is evidenced thus; It is a universal,
sincere, and continued repentance: 1. It is universal for all, and every sin,
little as well as great, secret as well as open, one as well as another, Psalm.
119.104, 128. Secondly, It is sincere, from the heart, Joel 2.13. Thirdly, It
is continued and renewed daily, as we renew our provocations, Ephesians. 4.26. Let
not the Sun go down on your wrath.

Fourthly, The truth of obedience, evidenced thus. 1. It is universal without
partiality, John 15.14. 2dly. Sincere without hypocrisy, 2 Chronicles. 28.9. 3dly.
Constant without Apostasy, Mat. 10.22. Rev. 2.10.

Fifthly, The truth of your love thus evidenced. 1. It is spiritual for Grace
sake, and the Truths sake, 2 John 2. to the Elect Lady, whom I love in truth,
and for the Truths sake. 2. It Is impartial, to one Saint as well as another,
Colos. 1.4. 3. It Is permanent, and abiding unto death, like Ruths to Naomi; the
ground of it is Gods unchangeable love to his, Jer. 31.3.

Sixthly, The truth of your fear of God, thus evidenced. 1. If you fear to sin,
rather then to suffer, fear the displeasure of God, more than the displeasure
of Man, Luke 12.4, 5. 2. If you fear him for his Mercy, as well as his Justice;
his Goodness, as well as his Greatness, Psalm. 130.4. Hosea 3. last. 3. If you
fear to sin against him in secret, where there is no eye to observe you, but
only Gods, as Joseph, Genesis 39.9. and Job 31.1, 4.

Seventhly, The truth of your hope in God, thus evidenced. 1. If it be grounded
on the Scripture, Romans 15.4. 2. If it purify the Heart, and sanctify the
Life, 1 John 3.3. 3. If it cause you patiently to wait on God, for the
fulfilling his promise, 1 These. 1.3. If now you would know, whether you are
brought out of a state of Nature, into a state of Grace, try your selves by
these clear evidences out of the Word of God; or, believe it, (Friends) God,
and Conscience, and Satan, will try you to the purpose, at the last, when you
will wish (but all too late) you had hearkened unto Counsel, and tried your
selves; if you cannot find yet these evidences of such a gracious state, be
exhorted in the next place.

Eighthly, To meditate on the many and weighty Motives the Scripture lays
before you, to quicken you, to look into and labor after a work of Grace as
the absolute necessity, the transcendent Excellency, and the great Utility of
it.

1. There is an absolute necessity of it. 1. In respect of the Decree of God,
because he predestined his to Grace before Glory, to be conformable to the
image of his Son, Romans 8.29. in Grace here, and in Glory hereafter, Ephesians. 1.4.
2dly. In respect of the revealed Will of God, 1 These. 4.7. This is the Will of
God, even your Sanctification. 3dly, A necessity of it, in respect of your
Salvation, for without Regeneration, no Salvation, John 3.6. without Holiness,
no Happiness, Heb. 3.14.

2. There Is a transcendent excellency in it, for Grace is no other then the
Offspring of God, a beam of the Divine Majesty, John 1.13. a spark of the
Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. that which is called elsewhere the Name of God, Isa.
57.15. the Seed of God, 1 John 3.9. the Will of God, 1 These. 4.3. the Image of
God, Ephesians. 4.24. the Life of God, Ephesians. 4.18. the Glory of God, Romans 3.23.
Exodus 15.11. because God sees more of himself in a gracious Soul, and more of
his own Glory, in the poorest Saint, then in all the glory of the World, Isa.
43. begin. 2. Because it is that which puts a luster on all other things,
Honor, Wealth, Birth, Beauty, Gifts, Parts, all without Grace, is but as a
Jewel in a Swines snout, Embroiderings on a Fools Coat; whereas a little true
sanctifying Grace, honors the poorest in the eyes of God, of Angels, and
Saints, Isa. 43. Psalm. 15. Psalm. 16. All my delight is in the Saints.

3. Consider the great Utility and Benefit that comes by Grace. 1. It will
interest you in all the Promises, 1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness is profitable for all
things, it has the promise of this Life, and that to come. 2. It will fortify
you against all the temptations of Satan to unbelief. Does the Devil tempt you
to distrust Gods love to you, and your right to Heaven, charge you with
Hypocrisy? why, pull out the evidences you have of a Work of Grace, and let
him show (if he can) if ever any wicked man, or Hypocrite, had such evidences;
the Devil may sooner prove himself a Liar, then a Saint to be a Hypocrite. 3.
It will bring you contentment, and make you a gainer in and by every condition,
as it did the Apostle, Phil. 4.11. 1 Timothy 6.6. 4. It will sweeten and sanctify
every estate and condition to you, Prosperity, Adversity, Health, Sickness,
Life, Death, Romans 8.28. 5. It will support, cheer and comfort you in every
estate, both of Life and Death, 2 Cor. 1.12. 6. It will not only accompany you
to the Grave, where all other things leave you, but to the Tribunal of Christ,
and never leave you, until it has crowned you with Glory, Col. 3.4.

Ninthly, To meditate on, and make use of the means God has revealed, and
commands you to ^se, to get out of a state of Nature, into a state of Grace:
What are they? Mark a few. 1. You must be willing to see, and be sensible of,
and humbled under your want of Grace, as they, Acts 2.37. and the Jailer, Acts
16.30. 2. You must labor to be united unto Christ, the Fountain of Spiritual
Life and Grace, for the Son quickneth whom he will, John 5.21. and John 1.16.
from his fullness we receive Grace for Grace; and 1 John 5.12. He that has the
Son, has Life. 3. You must prize, and value it, hunger, and thirst after it
above all other things in the World, Isa. 55.1. Rev. 22.17. 4. You must go to
the Covenant for it, and beg the Lord to remember his Covenant, and glorify
his Grace, in giving in that Grace to you which he promises in the Covenant,
Psalm. 84.11. and tells him this Grace is, as free for you as for others, and
will be as glorious on you, as on others; and you shall give him the glory of
it here, and to all eternity. Read and ponder well that excellent place, 2 Cor.
9.8. A sufficiency of Grace in him for you. 5. You must wait constantly on the
Ministry of the Word, which is the only ordinary means of getting it, James
1.21. 1 Pet. 1.23. when ever you come to hear the Word, remember to beg the
Spirit of God to quicken his Word, that it may quicken your dead Souls, whereby
you may be enabled to stand up from the dead, and act as new Creatures in a
state of Regeneration, to God, and for God; It is the Spirit alone that
quickens, John 16. and him that God has promised to such as ask him, Luke 11.
And therefore I say, still remember to beg the Spirit of God, and wait upon him
in the ministry of the Word, till he come to breath into this Spirit, Life, a
Life of Grace, that may fit you for, and entitle you to, a Life of Glory, to
quicken and encourage you.

Sect. 4. Take notice of the happy estate of Man by Glorification; and what
those things are you are to meditate on, in, and about that, are these: 1. What
this Glory is, and wherein it consists. 2. The Properties of it. 3. The
certainty of it. 4. Who they are that shall partake of it.

1. What this glory is? In the general, it is no other then the luster or
beauty of a person, or thing that draws admiration after it, and it is either
External, Internal, or Eternal. 1. External, is that state and pomp men have in
the World, and draws the eyes of others after it; of which you may read Genesis
45.13. You shall show my Father of my glory in Egypt; that is, of the pomp,
state, and honor I am exalted to. 2. Internal Glory, is that within, in the
Soul, in the excellent Gifts and Graces that it is endowed withal, Psalm. 45.
The Kings Daughter is all glorious within; and Numb. 6.27. where God said to
Moses, He should bring Joshua before the Priest, and put some of his Glory and
Spirit upon him. 3. Temporal Glory, Is that which he promises to his in this
life. Prove. 22.4. The reward of humility, and the fear of the Lord, is Riches
and Glory. 4. Eternal Glory, Is that which God will confer upon the Saints in
Heaven: If you ask what that is? we must answer in the words of Austin,
Facilius est excogitare, quid non sit, quam quid sit: It cannot be conceived,
much less expressed, yet as they guessed at the fruitfulness of the Land of
Canaan, by the mighty clusters of Grapes they brought thence; so may we at the
glory of Heaven, by that glymps the Scripture holds forth of it. That you may
have the clearer sight of it, we will consider it comparatively, with that
which is in the World, and then absolutely as it is in it self.

First, If we compare it with that glory, which is visible in the World, we may
guess somewhat at the transcendent excellency of it. You may see abundance of
glory in all the Works of God, especially in those Celestial Bodies above, the
Sun, the Moon, and the Stars: but alas, what is this to the Glory of Heaven? And

If in Heavens outward Court such glory be;
What is the Glory which the Saints do see?
Du. Bartas. 2. Consider it absolutely in it self. And here take notice of the
Glorious Place, and Glorious Company, and Glorious Endowments of Soul and Body;
the Glorious Employments of both, and the Glorious Privileges the Saints shall
enjoy there.

1. For the Glotious Place; that is, the highest Heaven, that which the Apostle
calls the Third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12. and this place is, Verus and totus Olimgus,
wholly Light, not only bespangled here and there with glittering Stars, but as
one great Sun, and that which is increased by the admirable splendour of the
glorified Body of Jesus Christ, and those millions of glorified Saints, whose
Bodies there shall shine, not only as the Stars, Dan. 12. but as the Sun, Mat.
13.43.

2. For the Glorious Company. There you shall have the society not only of all
your Christian Alliance, Friends and Acquaintance, that have lived and dyed in
the Lord, but of all the Holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Saints;
not only of the Glorious Angels, but the ever blessed Trinity, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost: and if the company of a few humble, upright, cheerful Christians be
so sweet here, how sweet must communion be with all these?

3. For the Glorious Endowments.

1. Of the Soul. As soon as the Soul is separated from the Body, it goes to the
Spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12. It is perfected in all its
Faculties, Understanding, Will, Memory, Affections. 1. For the Understanding;
It is perfected in the knowledge of God, and all that is good, 1 Cor. 13.10, 11,
12. Here we are but as in the Grammar School, there we shall be in the
University; here the knowledge most have, is but the least part of that they
shall know there, of God and the Creatures, of the Mysteries of Religion, and
the Secrets of Nature. 2. For the Will; there shall be in it a perfect
conformity to the Will of God, we shall will all that is good, and that more
freely, and with more alacrity, then here we ever willed any pleasure of this
life. 3. For the Memory; It shall be so perfected, as to remember all that is
good, and nothing that is evil, so as to be troubled for it, but rejoice rather
in this, that we are freed from it. 4. For the Affections; These shall be
wholly taken up with, and rest upon God, and all that is good, the measure of
our love, and delight in him, shall be to love and delight in him without
measure.

2. For the glory of the Body, you may read it 1 Cor. 15.42, 43. 1. It shall
be an incorruptible body, freed from all possibility of dying and suffering,
Luke 20.35. Rev. 17.16. 2. It shall be full of beauty, shining not only as the
Stars, but as the Sun, Mat. 13.41. made like to Christ's glorious Body, Phil. 3.
last. 3. It shall be a most vigorous Body, able to do any thing. Etiamsi velit,
terram movere, (says Anselm) able to encounter legions of Devils and
Reprobates, by the almighty power of God dwelling in it. 4. A Spiritual Body;
Not that it shall be turned into a Spirit, but endowed with such spiritual
qualities, as it shall be agile, active, and nimble in the Service of God, like
a Spirit.

3. To meditate on the glorious employments of Soul and Body, both shall be
continually exercised in the highest services, viz. the singing of the Songs of
Moses, and the Lamb, the singing of continual Hallelujahs to God our Father,
for Christ our Redeemer, by the ever blessed Spirit our Sanctifier and
Comforter.

4. To meditate on the glorious privileges of Soul and Body there, which are
either Primitive or Positive.

1. Primitive, in a freedom of all evil, both of Sin and Punishment. 1. Of Sin,
not only from the power of it, but the very being of it; not only from sin, but
from all temptations to it, and occasions of it, Rev. 21. last. 2. Of
punishment, Bevel. 21.4. Rev. 22.3. tryumphing over all, 1 Cor. 15.55. O death,
where is thy sting? etc.

2. For the Positive privileges, they are these, 1. The continual presence of
God, 1 These. 4. last. there we shall ever be with the Lord. 2. The beatifical
Vision of God, 1 John 3.2. O beata visio, videre Deum in nobis, nos in Deo, and
Deum in se ipso, (says Bernard) What a blessed sight will this be, to see God
in us, our selves in God, and God in himself, so far as our finite natures are
capable of. 3. The nearest Union that can be, not only of a Gracious, but a
Glorious. 4. Immediate, perfect, and everlasting communion with God, where
there will be no need of Magistrates, Ministers, Ordinances, but God will be
all in all, Rev. 21.21, 22. 5. Perfection of Holiness both in Nature and Life,
Ephesians. 5.23. Pure, as he is pure, 1 John 3.2. And Perfect, as he is perfect,
Mat. 5. last. Not only in parts, but in degrees. 6. Fullness of Joy, and Rivers
of Pleasure, which are at Gods right hand for evermore, Psalm. 16. last. 7. An
everlasting Sabbath; here we have but a weekly Sabbath, there an eternal
everlasting Sabbath; here we keep a Sabbath with much weatiness, there we shall
keep it with infinite delight, Heb. 4.9. There remains a rest for the People of
God, and this is a transcendent Rest, an uninterrupted Rest, an universal Rest,
a perpetual Rest, where we shall rest from all sinning, sorrowing, suffering,
and with the whole Quire of Heaven shall be still singing Hallelujahs to God
the Father, for God the Son, by God the Spirit, to all Eternity, and still
following the Lamb, with Crowns on our Heads, and Palms in our Hands, and
tryumphant Songs in our Mouths.

2. Meditate on the properties of this Glory. 1. It Is a revealed Glory, Romans
8.18. Here it is hid from the eyes of the World, and often from the eyes of
Christians themselves; but there it shall be revealed, at the last day, before
all the World, and the wicked World be made to acknowledge it, to their shame,
and confusion of face, Col. 3.3, 4. 2. A full Glory, Psalm. 16. last. so full as
the Apostle is not able to express it, 2 Cor. 4.17. so full of Glory, that if
the Saints themselves were not upheld by the almighty power of God, they could
not stand under it; so full of glory, that because it cannot enter into them,
they shall enter into it; Well done good and faithful Servant, enter into thy
Masters joy, Mat. 25. 3ly, An eternal glory, such as they shall not only enjoy
for millions of years, but to all eternity, Mat. 25. last. 2 Cor. 4.17.

3. To meditate on the certainty of this Glory. That it is most certain, there
is such a glorious state for the People of God, is evident upon these
infallible grounds. 1. Because it was prepared for them from before the
foundation of the World, Mat. 25.34. Heb. 11.16. 2. Because they are prepared
for it, they are said to be Vessels prepared unto Glory, Romans 9.23. 3. Because
God predestined his unto it, from all eternity, Romans 8.29. 2 These. 2.13, 14.
4. That which they are called unto, 2 Pet. 1.3. 1 Pet. 5.10. 5. That which
Christ has purchased with his precious Blood, Ephesians. 1.14. Rev. 5.9, 10. 6.
That which he made intercession for whilst he was here upon earth, John 17.24.
and still does now in Heaven, Heb. 7.25. 7. That which he has made many
promises of, and seconded them with his Oath, Heb. 6.17, 18. 8. He has given
his Spirit as the earnest of it. 9. He has given the beginnings of it in Grace
here, which is but glory begun. 10thly, and lastly, He is gone into Heaven to
take possession of it in our Name and Nature, and has promised he will come
again, and take us to himself, John 14.3. and accounts not himself fully
glorified, until his Body, and every member of it, be in the same glory, Ephesians.
1. the end. And,

Lastly, Consider who they are that have a right and title to this Glory, what
evidences the Scripture holds forth of it; As, 1. an effectual Vocation, 1
These. 2.12. 2. Justification, Romans 5.3. Romans 8.29. 3. Sanctification, Matthew.
19.28. More particularly the having and exercising these Graces; 1. Sanctified
Knowledge, John 17.3. 2. A Justifying Faith, John 3.16. 3. An Evangelical
Repentance, Acts 3.19. 4. A Gospel Obedience, Heb. 5.9. 5. An unfeigned love to
the Saints, 1 John 3.14. Lastly, A loving looking and longing for the
appearance of Jesus Christ in Glory; by all which the Saints are described in
the Gospel, 2 Timothy 14.8. Titus 2.14. Heb. 9. last. Rev. 22. last. So much of
the fourfold state of Man.

The Second Head of Meditation about Man, is the four last Things or Ends of
Man, DEATH, JUDGMENT, HELL and HEAVEN.
WE are to meditate on every one of these, and that on these grounds; 1. On
Death; because Death were no Death, if Judgment did not follow in comparison;
and Judgment no Judgment, or nothing so dreadful, if Hell did not follow; and
Hell no Hell in comparison, if it did not deprive men of Heaven. 2. Therefore
to meditate on these last Ends of Man, because it is the Lord himself advises
his unto, and that in a very pathetical manner, Deuteronomy. 32.29. Oh that men were
wise, that they understood this, that they considered their latter end; and the
Prophet Jeremiah, (Jer. 5. last.) he puts this question, What will you do in
the latter end? He would have them know there is an end, and to think seriously
what will become of them in the end. 3. Therefore to meditate on each of these;
as 1. on Death, because it will be a notable means, 1. to make us apply our
hearts unto Spiritual Wisdom, Psalm. 90.12. 2. To restrain us from sin, lest
Death should find us in it, or presently after it; As a Copy of Writing is
safest from blotting, when dust is cast on it, so we are safest from sinning,
when we remember that we are but Dust, (Callamy). 3. A notable means to quicken
us to repentance; an instance you have in Waldus, A rich Merchant of Lions in
France, who seeing one drop down dead in the streets, went home, repented, and
changed his life, studied the Scriptures, became a Teacher and Father of those
Christians called the Waldenses, or the poor Men of Lions. Therefore,

2. To meditate on the great and terrible day of Judgment, because it will be
as a curb to restrain from sinning, so a spur to quicken to duty, 2 Cor.
15.9.10, 11.

3. Therefore to meditate on Hell, because it will be a notable means to keep
us out of Hell; whence one advises thus, Descendamus viventes, ut non
descendamus morientes, (Bernard.) Let us often look down into it, that we may
never fall into it.

4. Therefore to meditate on Heaven, because it will make us more willing to
leave Earth to go to Heaven, whenever God calls for us; the reason why so few
go to Heaven when they die, is, because they never thought of Heaven, until
they came to die, (Calamy.)

First, On DEATH.
In it to meditate on those things that may fit you for Death, and those things
that may make you willing to die.

First, On those things that may fit you for Death; as 1. that it is one of the
chiefest parts of Wisdom, that which God (you saw) wishes to Man, in a most
pathettical manner, Deuteronomy. 22.29. Oh that men were wise, etc. 2. The original
procreant cause of it, viz. Sin; Romans 6. last. The wages of sin is death,
therefore as often as you are tempted to sin by the present credit, profit, and
pleasure of it, to think on the fruit of it, Romans 6.21. What fruit had you in
those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? 3. On the certainty of it: In the day
that thou eatest of it, in dying thou shall die, that is, thou shall most
certainly die, Genesis 2. and Heb. 9.27. It Is appointed for all to die. 4. The
uncertainty of it; as nothing more certain, so nothing more uncertain, (Ut
morior scio, sed nescio, ubi, quomodo, quando.) That I shall die, I know, but
where, how, and when, I know not: It Is a Proverb, When Health is highest, Death
is many times nighest; 1 Thessalonians. 5.3. When men cry peace, then comes sudden
destruction. To day the Sermon-Bell tolls to call you to Church, to morrow it
may be the Passing Bell to summon you to the Grave; and therefore to wait for
it, at all times, and in all places, in all manner of ways, because all things
come alike to all, Eccles. 9.1. 5. To consider to die, is but once to be done;
and that which is but once to be done, had need to be well done, or we are for
ever undone; if this work be not done, or but half done, at the time of dying
there is no doing or finishing it afterward, Eccles. 9.10. As the Tree falls,
so it lies; as Death leaves men, so Judgment finds them, Heb. 9.27. 6. To
meditate on the terribleness of Death, (...), the King of Terrors, Job 18.14.
and needs must, seeing it separates those two friends, Soul and Body, delivers
up the Soul immediately to stand forth before the Tribunal of Christ, to
receive his peculiar Sentence of Damnation, before the Judgment Day comes; and
after the Sentence, to be carried by the Devils into Hell, and throws the body
of the wicked into the Grave, where Death gnaws upon it, as upon Carrion in a
Ditch; puts an end to all his temporal felicity, and begins his eternal misery;
strips him of all the comforts of this life, and brings him to eternal torments.

5. To meditate on the means you are to use to use to fit you for Death, and
they are, amongst others, these; 1. To acquaint your selves with God, and make
your peace with him by Jesus Christ, as Eliphas counsels Job, Job 21.22. 2. To
get and clear up your interest in Jesus Christ, who has destroyed Death, and
him that had the power of Death, Heb. 2.14. 3. To pull out the sting of Death,
by Faith in the Blood of Christ, and repentance for every known sin, 1 John
1.7. Acts 3.19. to see that Sin die ere you die, for it is one of the terriblest
threatenings in the Book of God, John 8.21. If you believe not that I am He, you
shall die in your sins; and Luke 13. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise
perish: And therefore, Antequam moriaris moriantur in te vitia, before thou
dyest, be careful to see that sin die. 4. Labor to die daily, as unto sin, so
unto the World, 1 Cor. 7.29. The time is but short, and the fashion of this
World passes away; it is the worst husbandry in the World, to have Grace to
seek when men should make use of it, and the sick Bed is the worst time of all
others to seek it in, being then scarce able to think on any thing, but Pain,
and Death, and Hell. 5. To get and clear up a Work of Grace, that may entitle
you to Glory, or there will be nothing else able to stand by you, and comfort
you; all things in the World, without a Work of Grace, will, (like Job's
Friends) prove miserable Comforters. 3 John 3. Except a man be born again, etc.
Flesh and Blood shall never inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15. 6. Not only
look to this, that you have Grace, but that you keep it in exercise; not only,
that you have Lamps, and Oil in them, but that you trim them against your
Lord's coming, Mat. 25. that is, that you act and exercise your Graces,
especially these, your Faith, and Patience, Heb. 6.12. your
heavenly-mindedness, and contempt of the World, Phil. 3.20. 7. That you get and
keep good Consciences, this will be light in darkness, and life in death, Prove.
14.32. The Righteous has hope in his death. 2 Cor. 1.12. This is our rejoicing
in the testimony of our Consciences, etc. Isa. 38.2. Remember how I have walked
before thee in Truth, etc. Lastly, It was Moses's Prayer, and let it be yours
daily, Teach us, Lord, so to number our days, as we may apply our hearts unto
Wisdom, Psalm. 90. In a word, Let the ends of all your thoughts be, the thought
of your latter end, that so when you come to die, you may have nothing else
left to do, but to die; and whenever Death comes, you may bid it welcome in
the Name of Christ; and when you are to die, to die in charity with all, in
obedience to God's Call, and in Faith to go to, and be for ever with the Lord.

Secondly, To meditate on such things, as may not only fit and prepare you for
death, but meditate on such things as may make you willing to die, and help you
to die comfortably; What are they? Mind here well, for they are of special use
to you; As first,

1. The certainty of another, and a better life, after this, nothing so sure,
as that by what you have seen already by the testimony of Scripture, and many
weighty grounds of it, in your meditations on the Life of Glory.

2. Meditate on the evidences you have of an interest in that better Life of
Glory, as your interest in God, in Christ, in the Spirit, and in the Graces of
the Spirit, as your effectual Vocation, Justification, Adoption,
Sanctification, and those Graces unto which it is promised, as Saving,
Sanctifying Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, Obedience; love to the Saints, the
Truth; sincerity and uprightness of your heart, in all, to which you may see it
frequently promised, Psalm. 84. to the end, Psalm. 37. v. 37. Isa. 57.2.

Thirdly, To meditate on the many and weighty grounds God has given to
encourage your Faith, and strengthen your Patience, and cause both to have
their perfect work.

1. To encourage your Faith: as 1. his immutable decree, 2 Timothy 2.19. 2. His
unchangeable Love, Jer. 31.3. 3. His everlasting Covenant, Jer. 32.39. 4. His
continual Intercession, Heb. 7.25. 5. His almighty Power to keep them through
Faith unto Salvation, 2 Pet. 1.4. however we should let go our Faith, yet he
will hold it fast by his Spirit.

2. The grounds to strengthen our Patience: 1. It Is a Lord, whose Will cannot
be resisted; a Father, who ought readily to be obeyed; a wise Father, who knows
what is better for his Children, then they do for themselves; a pitiful
tenderhearted Father, that is afflicted in all the afflictions of his; that
will not afflict his too much, because he knows whereof they are made, that
they are but Dust, nor too long, lest the Spirit faint, and the Soul which he
has made; a Father from whom they have received all the good they have had,
and therefore to be contented to receive a little evil; and the rather, because
it is in order to their spiritual and eternal good, Romans 8.2.

Ah! but the pains of my Body are great, and the pangs of Death are bitter; but
to quiet your spirits under these, Consider, 1. That the pangs of Death, are
sometimes less then the pains they feel before; as to Mr. Bolton, who said to
his Friend, that asked him, How it was with him when the pangs of death were
upon him? He said to him, Your cold hand is the greatest pain I feel, (in his
Epistle to the Four last Things). 2. You are content to undergo a great deal
of pain here, for a little gain; how much more should you for an eternal gain?
These pains are but like the throws in Travail, to bring forth eternal Life.
3. Whatsoever your pains and sufferings are, they are little, or nothing to
those your sins made Christ to suffer, and that many of his dear and precious
Saints have, and do suffer, and to those eternal sufferings Christ has
redeemed you from, and that exceeding excessive and eternal weight of glory
that will follow your sufferings, 2 Cor. 4.17.

Fourthly, To meditate on the many and great evils that Death will free you
from; as 1. from a body of Sin and Death, that is still inclining you to evil,
and indisposing you to good, still dulling, deading, and distracting you in all
the services you do. 2. From a wicked World, wherein continually we see and
hear what does, and should more vex our souls, 2 Pet. 2. 3. From the dissension
of Brethren, who are continually undermining the credit and comfort one of
another, which made Melancton so willing to die; when a Friend of his asked him
how it was with him, and whether he were willing to die? He answered, Oh yes,
Not only that he might be freed from a body of Sin, and Death, and a wicked
World, but from the dissension of Brethren, and go there where all shall be
perfected in love. 4. From a malicious Devil, that is still tempting us to
evil, and discouraging us from all that is good, walking up and down like a
roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5. In a word, from all
Labors, Pains, Fears, Doubts, Sorrows, Sufferings, Rev. 14.13. Rev. 21.4.
Death will perfectly cure you of all Diseases, Corporeal and Spiritual at once,
both an aching Head, and an unbelieving Heart; a sickly Body, and a distempered
Spirit; the best Physician that ever you met with.

Fifthly, To meditate on the many and great benefits Death will help you to, as
that glorious Place, Company, Employment, Privileges you saw before in the
Life of Glory, the continual Presence of God, the blessed Vision of God, the
immediate, perfect, and everlasting communion with God, perfection of Holiness,
fullness of Joy, and an everlasting Sabbath.

Sixthly, To consider the evil of being unwilling to die: By this, Christians
manifest too much ignorance, unbelief, hypocrisy, love to the World,
senslesness of the body of Sin and Death, that World of wickedness they live
in, and hereby procure more disquiet to their Spirits, and hasten Death the
sooner upon them, besides the great unreasonableness of it, that when God
should be so willing of their company, they should be so unwilling of his; and
when Christ should be content to leave Heaven, and to come to Earth for them;
they should be unwilling to leave Earth to go to Heaven, that they might enjoy
him, and know, and profess it to be best of all to be with Jesus Christ.

Seventhly, To meditate on the good of being willing to die. Hereby you will
make a virtue of necessity, seeing you cannot put it off, therefore you will
voluntarily yield to it; hereby you will manifest your hatred of sin, contempt
of the World, Faith in God's Promises, Love to God, desire of immediate
Communion with him, honor your Christian Profession, and make Death the less
terrible to you.

Eighthly, and Lastly, Consider what the Apostle says 1 Cor. 13. to the end;
Death is yours; Yours no way to hurt you, but every way to do you good.

1. No way to hurt you, because however it be a Serpent, yet it is a Serpent
without a sting; by stinging of Jesus Christ to death, it lost its sting; so
that though it may hiss, yet it cannot hurt; however the Devil brought Jesus
Christ unto the Cross, unto Death, unto the Grave, yet therein Jesus Christ
out-shot the Devil in his own Bow, spoiled Principalities and Powers, and made
a show of it openly, tryumphing over them on the Cross, Col. 2.15. And that it
can no way hurt you, appears further by these Particulars. 1. In that it is not
the destruction or annihilation either of Soul or Body, but only the
alteration and change of their condition for the better: As for instance; 1. In
the Body. The Body, by Death, is freed from all pains, and miseries, and
calamities, and all sin, which is the cause of them; as sin brought Death into
our bodies, so Death carries sin out of the body; and however these vile bodies
be dissolved into dust, yet they shall be raised up again, at the last day, and
be made like unto Christ's Glorious Body, Phil. 3. last. 2. For the Soul; It
shall be no loser, but a great gainer by Death, and that three ways. 1. In the
place it goes unto, viz. from Earth unto Heaven. 2. In the excellent qualities
it shall be endowed withal, viz. perfection in all the faculties of it, as it
goes to the spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12. 3. In the excellent
company it goes to enjoy, leaving the company of sinners here, and going to
enjoy the company of Saints and Angels, and the ever blessed Unity in Trinity.

2dly, In that it cannot hurt us, appears in that it can never dissolve the
Union between Christ and a believing Soul, but brings it to a nearer, sweeter,
and fuller Union; of a Gracious, makes it a Glorious Union; however it
separates Soul and Body one from the other, yet it cannot separate either from
Jesus Christ; the Soul, upon Death, goes immediately unto Christ in Paradise,
and Christ goes down with the Body into the Grave, where it sweetly rests, as
in its Bed, in the Arms of Jesus Christ, until the morning of the Resurrection
of the Just, Isa. 57.2. 1. It can never break the Covenant of Grace between God
and the Soul, for it is an everlasting Covenant, Genesis 17. And he has not only
promised to be their God unto Death, but after Death, and to all eternity. 2.
It can never untie the Marriage-Knot between Christ and his Spouse, for he has
betrothed her unto himself for ever, Hos. 2. And whom he loves, he loves to the
end, John 13.1. even with an everlasting love, Jeremiah 31.3. 3. It can never
reverse those grants of Grace that God has vouchsafed his, as the grants of
Reconciliation, Justification, Adoption, Sanctification, Salvation, for the
Gifts and Callings of God are without repentance, Rev. 11.29.

3dly, As it is no way able to hurt you, so it will every way do you good.
Though it be the last enemy that shall be destroyed, yet of an enemy it shall
be made a friend, and the best friend that ever you had: How so? Why, because
Jesus Christ, by undergoing Death, and lying in the Grave, he has altered the
nature both of Death and the Grave; Death of a King of Terrors, it made a
Prince of Peace; of a passage to eternal Death, made a passage to eternal Life
unto all that do believe; the Grave that is a loathsome Dungeon to the wicked,
is made a sweet restingplace to the Saints. That you may the more clearly and
fully see the good will come to you by Death, and so be made the more willing
to it, and cheerfully resign your Spirit into the hands of God, when he calls
for it, take serious notice of these ten following Particulars.

1. Death is no Death to a true Believer; It Is not his last day, but the
beginning of an everlasting day.

2. Your dying day, will not be your worst day, but your best day; better is
the day of a man's Death, then the day of his Birth, (says Solomon) Eccles.
7.1. it being the egress of all misery, and the ingress of eternal felicity.

3. A Christians dying day, it will be his enlarging day, when he shall be set
at liberty out of the Prison of the Body, and brought home to his Fathers
House, 2 Cor. 5.8. It is but as Christ styles it, His departing and going to
the Father, John 13.1.

4. A Christians dying day, will be his resting day, wherein he shall rest from
all sinning, sorrowing, suffering; from all temptations, corruptions,
vexations, Job 3.17. And who desires not rest?

5. His dying day, will be his reaping day, having sown here in Tears, he shall
reap in Joy; reap the fruit of all the Sermons they have heard, all the Prayers
they have made, all the Tears they have shed, all the Sighs and Groans they
have uttered, all the good Thoughts they have had, all the good Words they have
spoken, all the good Works they have done, all the Evils they have suffered,
and all they have forgotten to do and suffer, Mat. 25.34. When saw we thee an
hungry, and fed thee not? etc. Then Christ will remember them, and say, In that
you did it unto them, ye did it unto me: Yea, there is not the least good work
that any have done for any of his, but it shall be remembered and rewarded, even
to a cup of cold Water, Mat. 10. last.

6. A Christians dying day, will be his conquering and tryumphing day over all
his Enemies, Sin, Satan, and the World, Death and Hell; here we are in a
continual warfare, there is not a day, hour, or moment wherein we can rest,
either from corruption within, or temptation without; but then, there shall be
an end of all, then we shall triumph over all, in the words of the Apostle, 1
Cor. 15.55. Oh Death, where is now thy sting? etc.

7. A Christians dying day, will be his transplanting day, from Earth to
Heaven, from Misery, to Glory; from a Valley of Tears, to a Valley of blessed
Visions; from a howling Wilderness, to a heavenly Paradise: It is no other then
a straight Gate, to a Palace of Glory; a dark Entry, to the Inheritance of the
Saints in Light. And oh! Who would not be willing to exchange a Sodom for Sion,
an Egypt for Canaan, Misery for Glory.

8. A Christians dying day, it is his uncloathing day of a body of Sin and
Death, and the clothing him with his House from Heaven; his putting off his
old Rags of Sin and Corruption, and his putting on of the White Robe of
Christ's Righteousness, and with it the Robe of Glory.

9. A Christians dying day, it is his marriage day with the Lamb, the King of
Saints; and if the day of a Believers espousals be so sweet, how sweet will the
marriage day be? Rev. 19.7.

10. A Christians dying day, will be his corronation day, wherein Christ will
crown all those that love his appearance with the Crown of Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.8. where they shall be still following the Lamb, with Crowns on their
Heads, and Palms in their Hands, and tryumphant Songs in their Mouths, Rev.
5.11, 12, 13. Mix these Meditations with Faith and Prayer, and you will find
them mighty, through God, not only to make you willing, but even long, with the
Apostle, to be dissolved and be with Christ, which is best of all, Phil. 1.23.
Amen and Amen.

Secondly, That which follows DEATH, is JUDGMENT.
Sect. 6. In, and about the Judgment Day, to take notice of, and meditate
seriously on, these things. 1. The Certainty. 2. The Uncertainty. 3. The near
approach of it. 4. The great solemnity of it. 5. The universality of the
Persons to be judged. 6. The impartiality of it. 7. The strictness of the
account. 8. The terror of it to the Wicked. 9. The comfort of it to the Godly.
10. What we are to do to escape the terror, and enjoy the comfort of it.

1. Meditate on the Certainty of it. However wicked men, and atheistical
wretches, scoff, and say, Where Is the promise of his coming? yet he will most
certainly come to Judgment, for he has appointed a day that he will judge the
World in Righteousness, by that Man Christ Jesus, Acts 17.31.

2. On the Uncertainty of that day: He will come to Judgment, in a day and hour
[that] knows no man, no nor the Angels in Heaven, Mat. 24.36. He will come as
a Thief in the night, 2 Pet. 3.10. and in an hour when men think not of, Mat.
24.44. As the Lightning out of the East, Matthew. 25. and as Travel upon a Woman
with Child, 1 These. 5.3.

3. To think on the near approach of that day; Phil. 4.5. Let your moderation
be known in all things; for the Lord's at hand, says the Apostle. And James
5.8. The coming of the Lord draws nigh; and verse. 9. Behold, the Judge stands
before the door. If he were so near then, doubtless he cannot be far off now;
now he is ready to come to Judgment, if not the general, yet remember your
particular Judgment may be before the next morrow.

4. Meditate on the great solemnity of that day; Then the Trumpet will sound to
summon all the World before the Judge of all the World, 1 These. 4.16. Mat.
25.31.

5. On the universality of that Judgment: 2 Cor. 5.10. We must all appear
before the Judgment Seat of Christ, high and low, rich and poor, young and old,
none to be exempted, not the greatest Potentate, Rev. 6. to the end. I have
read of a wicked King, that on his deathbed fell a weeping, and being asked by
his Brother why he so wept? Answered, Oh, (says he) to think that I who have
judged others, must stand forth to be judged my self.

6. The impartiality of that Judgment. He will judge the World in
Righteousness, Acts 17.31. There will be no respect of Persons, no Advocate to
plead the cause of wicked Men, no Bribes to be taken in that Court.

7. Of the strict account that is to be made in that day of all men's most
secret Thoughts, Words, and Works. First, Their Thoughts, Romans 2.16. Secondly,
Their Words, Mat. 12.36. Thirdly, Their works, Eccles. 12.14. And the Books
wherein all these are written, Rev. 20.12. I saw the dead, etc. Q. What are
these Books? A. There are five, the Book of the Creatures, the Book of the
Scriptures, the Book of God's Remembrance, the Book of Conscience, and the Book
of Life.

8. The terror of that day unto all found out of Christ, and enemies to him,
and of all other days the most terrible to the wicked and ungodly of the
World; and that 1. in respect of him that is to be their Judge, the Lord Jesus
Christ, whose Name they have blasphemed, whose Creatures they have abused, who
Sabbaths they have profaned, whose Gospel they have disobeyed, whose Grace
they have despised, whose Spirit they have despighted, whose Ministers they
have contemned, whose Children they have persecuted; He to be their Judge, who
is infinite in Knowledge to find out every sin and sinner, infinite in Justice
to render to every man according to his work, infinite in Power to ^^row Soul
and Body into Hell: If in the time of his humiliation, he struck so many
Soldiers to the ground with his Voice, when they came to apprehend him, Quid
faciet judicaturus qui haec fecit judicandus, (says one): If he did this when
he was to be judged, what shall he do when he comes to judge; his presence will
be so terrible, as the [greatest] will call to the Rocks and to the Mountains
to fall upon them, and hide them from this presence of the Judge, R^^. 6. about
the latter end. 2. The terror will be the more, in respect of the dreadful
manner of his coming, in that he will come suddenly, in an hour that men think
not of, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, 1 Cor. 15. as Travail upon a
Woman with Child, 1 These. 5. as a snare upon all the sons of Men, Luke 21.35.
And, as suddenly, so most gloriously will he come, with thousand thousands of
his glorious Angels and glorified Saints, Dan. 7.10. And in flaming fire,
rendering vengeance to all that know not God, and obey not his Gospel, 2 These.
1.7, 8.3. It will yet be more dreadful, in respect of the separation that will
be then made of [them] from all the Godly; those wicked ones that upon the
Earth scorned to take the left hand, or sit in the lowest place, shall then be
forced, whether they will or no, to take the left hand, and stand below amongst
the Goats, and with the Devil and his Angels, when the Godly shall be taken up
into the Clouds, and shall be Accessors with Jesus Christ, in Judgment upon
the wicked World. 4. The terror will yet be greater in respect of that most
just and dreadful sentence that is to be passed upon them, Depart ye cursed,
etc. Wherein! every word is a Hell, before they come to Hell, breaths out
nothing but Fire and Brimstone, is enough to break the heart of a sinner, and
add a new degree of misery. To depart from so Glorious and Gracious a Presence,
were Hell enough, but they must depart with a Curse, and not only so, but into
Fire, and that everlasting Fire, and that with no other Companions but the
Devil and his angels insulting over them, with hellish ^espight and stinging,
exprobations of their folly and madness, in neglecting so great a Salvation as
was tendered so often to them; and l^sing Heaven for a base Lust.

9. Meditate on the exceeding great joy and comfort to all true Believers and
gracious Souls, the most joyfullest and comfortablest day that ever they knew,
and that in many respects; mind them well. 1. In respect of the Judge, Quia
idem erit Judex qui patronus, qui mediator et pontifex, (says Ambrose) He to
be our Judge who is our Advocate, our Mediator, our merciful high Priest, our
dear Head and Husband; and who will be afraid to appear before such a Judge. 2.
In respect of their enemies, it will be a day of Revelation, Vindication,
Exultation. First, A day of Revelation, Romans 8.19. when those who were censured
to have been Hypocrites, shall be found to have been true Nathaniels; those
that were censured to have been Factious and Rebellious against their
Governors, shall be found and acknowledged to be the only true and loyal
Subjects, the best Friends to Church and State; when those that were censured
to have been but precise Fools, shall be acknowledged even by the wicked
themselves, to have been the only wise Men, and themselves the very Fools, as
he brings them in the 5th of Wisdom, We Fools, etc. Secondly, A day of
Vindication, when God will avenge himself upon all the enemies of his Church
and People, Luke 18. beginning. So as Joshua dealt with the five Kings of
Canaan, God will deal with all the Enemies of his People, command them to be
brought forth, and make his Saints to tread on the necks of their Enemies, Rev.
17.6. and render tribulation to all that have troubled them, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6.
Thirdly, A Day of Exultation, When the Saints shall exult and triumph over all
those that have over them here, Psalm. 44.14. in the morning the Just shall have
dominion over the wicked. 3. In respect of their Friends, it will be a day of
mutual association, and hearty congratulation; for at that day there shall be a
meeting, not only of Soul and Body, but all godly Parents and Children,
Husbands and Wives, Masters and Servants, Friends and Acquaintance, that have
loved, lived, and dyed in the Lord, never to part any more, but delight in one
the other; yea, a meeting of all the Holy Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles,
Martyrs, Saints, that ever have been in the World; and which is still more, of
all the glorious Angels; and which is the sum of all, the most sacred and ever
blessed Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. 4.
The most comfortable day, in respect of themselves, because it will be a day of
Redemption, Exaltation, Remuneration. 1. A day of Redemption from all sin and
misery, not only of their Souls, but of their Bodies, Romans 8.23. Whence that
of our Savior, Luke 21.28. When you see these things, lift up your heads, for
the day of your Redemption draws nigh. The word in the Original, (...), has
an emphasis in it, and imports not only a Redemption from misery, but a
restoration to liberty, a day of Exaltation to the highest degrees of Glory;
for when Christ shall appear, they shall appear in Glory, Col. 3.4. and such
Glory as will make him and them to be admired, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. When the Angels
that minister to them in life and death, shall then perform the greatest office
to them, gather together the Elect from the four quarters of the Earth, and
separate them from all further communion with the wicked; take them up into the
Clouds to meet the Lord in the Air, 1 Thessalonians. 4. and set them at his right Hand
to be Accessors with him in judgment upon the wicked World; such honor have
all his Saints, 1 Cor. 16.1. and more then so, and which is more then all
hearts can conceive, but they that feel it, they shall be welcomed by the Lord
Jesus Christ, with that ravishing imbracement and extatical leaps of their
rejoicing hearts, at the pronunciation of that blessed Sentence, Come ye
Blessed, etc. And immediately after, ushered along by the Angels with Jubilees
and Songs of Triumph, through the Clouds, into the Presence Chamber of the King
of Kings, and there ever be with the Lord, 1 These. 4.27. 3. A day of
Remuneration, when God will crown his own grace with glory, and will render to
every one according to his works, Rev. 14.13. Rev. 22.12. When God will reward
all the Fasts you have kept, all the Prayers you have made, all the Tears you
have shed, all the good Works you have done, all the Evils you have suffered,
all the Offices of Love and Kindness you have showed to him and his, Mat. 10.
last. Then the Crown shall be set upon your Heads, the Royal Robe of Christ put
on your backs, all see and know you have not served God for naught; that in
keeping of his Commandments there is great reward, even an exceeding, excessive
and eternal weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17.

10. And Lastly, Meditate on what we may do to escape the terror of that day,
and enjoy the comfort of it. Q. What is that? A. To observe and make Conscience
of those duties the Scriptures hold forth in reference to that day.

As, 1. In general to prepare for it, expressly required, Mat. 24.44. Be ye also
prepared, for in an hour ye think not, will the Son of Man come. And this
Exhortation, you may find backed with a double Argument; the first drawn from
the blessed estate of such as are prepared, verse. 49, 50. Q. But how are we to
prepare for Judgment? A. 1. By being diligent, that we may be found of him in
peace; the use the Apostle teaches you to make of it, 2 Pet. 3.14. That is, to
see your peace be made with God, in and through Jesus Christ; of your Enemy, he
be made your Friend, Ephesians. 2.14.

2. You are also to give diligence, that you may be found of the Lord without
spot or blemish; as he further exhorts, verse. 14. That is, That you endeavor
to get the guilt of sin, and the spots of sin, to be washed away in the Blood of
Christ, 1 John 1.7. That you break off also all, and every sin, by speedy and
unfeigned repentance; the use the Scripture teaches us to make of this day,
Acts 3.18, 19. Repent, that your sins may be blotted out when the time of
refreshing comes from the presence of the Lord, etc. see Acts 17.30. to the end.

3. To erect every one a Tribunal in his Conscience, it being the end wherefore
God puts Conscience within every one; and having done so, to search out after
every Malefactor against God, to apprehend, accuse, judge, and do execution
upon every sin; and then the promise is, if we remember, he will forget; if we
confess, he will forgive, if we judge our selves, he will not condemn us with the
World, 1 Cor. 11.32.

4. To get and furnish our Lamps with Oil, to wit, the Oil of Grace, and to
trim them that exercise those Graces, that so you may be ready to enter with
the Bridegroom whenever he shall come to call for you, Matthew. 25.10. Amongst
others, be sure you have these three Graces in Act and Exercise. 1. A filial
fear to sin against God: The more you fear sin, the less you will fear judgment;
therefore tremble to sin now, that you may not tremble at judgment hereafter;
this use the Scripture teaches you to make of it, 1 Pet. 1.17. Rev. 14.7.
Eccles. last. last. 2. Get an unfeigned love to God and the godly; for if our
love be perfect or true, we shall have boldness in the day of judgment, 1 John
1.17. 3. Look to the sincerity and uprightness of your heart in all your ways;
For if our hearts condemn us not, then we have confidence toward God, 1 John
3.21. That is, We should stand with boldness before the Judge; but on the
contrary, if our Conscience condemn us, the Judge will much more, verse. 20. and
therefore herein I exercise my self, to have a Conscience void of offense,
(says the Apostle) Acts 24.14, 15. Why, you may see 2 Cor. 5.8, 9, 10. We must
all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, etc.

5. You must be willing to stand up for, and make a bold confession and
profession of Christ here, if you will have him to own you hereafter before all
the World, Mat. 10.32. But if you be ashamed of him, he will of you.

6. And Lastly, You must hearken to that of our Savior, Luke 21.36. Watch and
pray always, that you may be accounted worthy to escape all those things which
shall come to pass, and stand before the Son of Man. 1. Watch for his coming,
as to general, so to particular Judgment, which you know not how soon it may
be; Blessed is he that watches and keeps his Garment, Rev. 14. Blessed is the
Servant, whom when his Lord shall come, does find so doing, Mat. 25. 2. Pray,
pray without ceasing, that whenever he comes, you may be able to bid him
welcome, and lift up your heads, because your Redemption draws nigh, Amen.
These special things you are to meditate on, in, and about the Day of Judgment;
and the rather, because many and great will be the benefits of it. For, 1. it
will make you to take the more heed to your thoughts, words and ways, seeing
all must come to judgment. 2. It will quicken you, to get and clear up your
interest in Christ, and make him your Friend, that so you may find him an
Advocate instead of a Judge. 3. It will cause you to erect a Tribunal here, and
sit in judgment on your selves, that so you may not be condemned with the
wicked World. 4. It will stir you up to a more faithful discharge of your
duties, as it did the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.8, 10. Knowing the terror of the Lord,
we persuade men, and labor, that whether present or absent, we may be accepted
of him. 5. It will make you take heed how you censure and judge others, Romans
14.10. and slight what others censure and judge of you, 1 Cor. 4.3, 4. Seeing
we must all be ^udged of the Lord, and we are sure he will judge (...) ^^^teous
judgment, acquit the Innocent, and condemn only the Nocent.

Thirdly, Of HELL.
In and about that, to meditate on these things, What Hell is. The hideousness
of the place. The greatness of the punishment, both of loss and sense. The
eternity of it. How inexpressibly they bewail their folly in bringing
themselves there. What they would be willing to do and suffer they might get
out of it. And what our duties are in respect of it.

1. What Hell is, viz. That place which God has prepared and appointed to be
the habitation of the Devil, and wicked Reprobates, to punish them with
everlasting torments, for the praise of the glory of his Justice. That there is
such a place, is clear out of the Word, Mat. 25. last. Mark 9.43, to 49. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9.

2. The hideousness and dreadfulness of the place, called, A great Deep, a
bottomless Pit, Rev. 9.1. A Prison, 1 Pet. 3.19. Darkness, and utter darkness,
Mat. 22.13. A Lake of Fire, Rev. 19.20.

3. The greatness of the punishment there, both of loss and sense. 1. Of l^ss,
not only of all Honors, Riches, Pleasures, and Comforts of this Life, but a
separation for ever from the gracious presence of God, and bliss of the Saints,
2 Thessalonians. 1.9. (Quod omnium omnino suppliciorum summum quo Deus homines punire
potest) The greatest punishment God can inflict upon the Creature; Nam uti
videre Deum ipsissima beatitudo est, ita Deum videre non posse maxima
damnatorum poena est, (says a Father) As the happiness of the Saints consists
in the Vision of God, so the misery of the damned, in that they are deprived of
the presence of God; this is that which they call paena damni, the punishment
of loss. 2. For the paena sensus, the punishment of sense; That is so great, as
it cannot be greater, Luke 16.23. I am horribly tormented in this flame, (says
Dives). And needs must it be so, 1. In respect of the things they are to
suffer, as the Worm that never dies, and the Fire that never goes out, Mark
9.44. A Fire that so far exceeds in torment this earthly Fire, as real Fire
does painted Fire; now Fire of all torments is the greatest, and Fire with
Brimstone of all fires the hottest, Rev. 21.8. Isa. 20.23. And as extremity of
fire, so some think of cold, because it is said, There shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth. 2. The torment is so great, in respect of the extent of it,
because it is to be inflicted on the whole Man, Soul and Body, every faculty
and power of both, none here being free from sin, none there shall be free from
punishment; and if the pain of one member sometimes be unsufferable here, what
must the torture of all? if a drop of God's Wrath be so bitter, what will be
the Sea of God's Vengeance? 3. So great in respect of the ground of their
suffering, to wit, the infinite wrath of God, which the whole Creation cannot
stand under, much less a poor weak sinful Worm of the Earth.

4. To meditate on the eternity of the punishment in Hell. After the damned
have been in those torments as many thousands and millions of years, as there
be Creatures in the World, and motions in those Creatures, they are as far from
ending, as at the first beginning; for the wicked shall go into everlasting
punishment, Mat. 25. last. There the Worm of Conscience never dies, and the
Fire of Hell never goes out; and if a gnawing o^ a Worm in the Tooth or the
Bowels, the holding of the hand or the foot in the fire but a few ^ours be
unsufferable, what will the eternity of it be? Well might he cry out, Oh!
Eternity, Eternity, Eternity, in Hell, for ever, for ever, for ever. Eternity
is enough to make the least punishment (though it were but the biting of Fleas,
or stinging of Ants) intolerable.

5. Meditate on the remedilessness of those torments. As they are endless, so
they are remediless, Insernus sine misericordis quos tenet cruciat, (says one)
There Is neither Silver nor Gold, Wit nor Policy, Might or Power can help;
neither Tears nor Prayers, Sighs nor Groans, Vows nor Promises, Cries nor
Wishes never to have been, or to have been the vilest of Creatures, will be
heard or prevail, no nor any Creature in Heaven or Earth to interceed for them;
nay, should all the Angels and Saints in Heaven fall down at the feet of Christ
to beg mercy for one Soul, it would be to no purpose, Christ would deny them
all there, without mercy, without pity, without remedy they must lie and cry,
and never die; whence that pathetical wish of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 32. Oh that men
were wise, etc.

6. Meditate on the sad company wicked men shall have in Hell: Viz. No other
then the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25.41. And if Job complained that he was a
Companion for Owls, Job 30.29. and David cries out, Woe is me that I dwell in
Mesech, etc. Psalm. 120.5. How will the wicked then, to have no other Companions
than the Devils? If the appearance of an evil spirit be so dreadful to them
here, what will it be to be still in their company and never suffered to go out
of it? Consider well but these two things: 1. Their ghostly deformity, they
make Hell look black, (as one says). 2. Their deadly antipathy, they are
filled with rage against mankind; and therefore, having been temptors here,
they become for ever tormentors there.

7. Meditate and consider, before it be yet too late, how inexpressibly the
damned in Hell do, and will for ever bewail their folly and madness, in
hearkening to, and following the temptations of the Devil, the World, and the
Flesh, and misspending their health and strength, time and tallents, in the
service of them; and neglecting so great Salvation, as was so frequently and
affectionately offered them from time to time.

8. Meditate and consider what those damned Souls in Hell would be willing to
do and suffer if they might come out thence, and have one offer more of a
Christ, Life and Salvation; doubtless they would be willing (in testimony of
their thankfulness) to spend every moment of time from the beginning of the
World to the end, (could they live so long) in the most holy, pure, strict,
precise manner they possibly could, and would be content also to suffer
whatsoever Men or Devils should invent, or impose, so they might but escape the
eternity of those hellish torments; but all in vain, for out of Hell there 's
no redemption, Psalm. 49. Once in Hell, and for ever in Hell.

9. And Lastly, Meditate on the duties you are to perform, if you would escape
those endless, easless and remediless torments of Hell. Q. What are they? A. I
will but name a few. 1. Be still blessing God for Jesus Christ, and Jesus
Christ for undertaking the great Work of Redemption, from the wrath to come. 2.
Get and clear up your interest in him, and his redemption, by the directions I
have given you before. 3. Be careful speedily to hearken unto, and accept the
offer of Christ, and Life, and Salvation in him, before it be too late. 4.
Hasten as fast as you can out of the Suburbs of Hell, I mean, your natural
unregenerate estate, an estate of ignorance, unbelief, impenitency,
disobedience, for this is the broad way to Hell. 5. Learn from what you have
seen, to hate and fear, and fly from all and every sin, as you would from Hell;
and the rather, because it is worse then Hell, it being that which made Hell to
be Hell, and therefore to hearken to the counsel of our Savior, Mark 9.43. If
thy hand offend thee, cut it off; it is better for thee to enter into life
maimed, then having two hands to go into Hell, etc. 6. Be willing to do and
suffer what ever God shall be pleased to call you unto here, rather then by
refusal to throw Soul and Body into Hell Fire; Heb. 12.5. Fear not them which
can only kill the Body, etc. 7. Pity poor Souls, who are every day running and
posting in the broad way to Hell, and labor by your Counsels, Exhortations,
Admonitions, Prayers, Tears, Examples, to turn them back: It may be they will
be angry with you for it, but it is better they should be angry with you, then
God should be angry with you for not doing it; better you should feel a little
of their wrath, then they and you lie under the eternal wrath of God, that you
may not. 8. Be persuaded your selves, and do you persuade others to look every
day into Hell, that you may not fall into Hell; and that you may look to the
purpose, think, and think again, think every day, and all your days, of those
things I have laid before you, how unconceivably miserable the condition of the
Damned is in Hell, and yet you (of free and rich Grace, wonderful patience, and
long sufferance) out of Hell, who have deserved it as well as others; you yet
have a day of Grace, when it is past to others; and therefore whilst it is
called to day, harden not your hearts, but turn every one of you from your evil
ways, that he may turn away his wrath, and you may escape the damnation of
Hell. Amen.

Fourthly, Of HEAVEN.
In and about it, to meditate on those things I directed you before, in, and
about the Life of Glory, that glorious Place, and glorious Company, and
glorious Endowments, and glorious Employments, and glorious Enjoyments the
Saints shall have, there add to those, these two or three particulars more;
What Heaven is, The excellent Titles given to it, The glorious Objects we shall
see there, And the perfect happiness we shall for ever in joy there.

First, What Heaven is, viz. The highest and most excellent of places, called,
the Heaven of Heavens, and by the Apostle, the Third Heaven. This God has
prepared and appointed to be the Habitation of the Glorious Angels, and all the
Blessed Saints, who have lived and died here in the Lord, to reward all their
faithful services here, with everlasting bliss and happiness, to the praise of
the glory of his Grace, Mat. 25.34. last. 1 Thessalonians. 4. last.

Secondly, Take notice of, and meditate on, the excellent Titles given to it in
Scripture; as for instance in some, 1. In respect of the loving and kind
imbracements of it, it is called Abraham's Bosom, Luke 16. 2. In regard of the
pleasure and delight of it, it is called Paradise, Luke 23.48. and the Joy of
the Lord, Mat. 25. and the Fullness of Joy, Psalm. 16. last. 3. In regard of the
greatness and spaciousness of it, it is called God the Fathers House, John 14.2.
The City of the Living God, Heb. 12.22. The Kingdom of God, Luke 12.32. A
Heavenly Kingdom, Mat. 7.21. A Kingdom which so far excels all earthly
Kingdoms, as Heaven does Earth; and further, The Kingdom of God, whose Kingdom
infinitely excels all other Kingdoms, as he does all other Kings. 4. In regard
of the dureableness and continuance of it, it is called an Inheritance, Acts
10.32. and a rich and glorious Inheritance, Ephesians. 1.18. The Inheritance of the
Saints in Light, Colos. 1.12. An Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, that
fades not away, 1 Pet. 1.4. 5. In respect of the Honor and Glory of it, it is
called a Crown; and that we may not think it to be a Crown gotten by Injustice,
it is called a Crown of Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.8. And lest we should think it
to be like earthly Crowns, subject to change, it is called an Incorruptible
Crown, Luke 9.25. and a Crown of Life, James 1.12. And that we not think it too
mean a Crown, it is called a Crown of Glory, 1 Pet. 1.4. An eternal weight of
Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. which all other Crowns and Jewels do but darkly shadow
out; It is, as one says, A superlative transcendent Phrase, such as is not to
be found in all the Rhetoric of the Heathens, because they never treated of
such a Theme, or with such a Spirit as the Apostle did.

Thirdly, Meditate on the Glorious sights we shall have there. Austin wished he
might have seen three things before he died, Rome in its Glory, Paul in the
Pulpit, and Christ in the Flesh: but the Saints shall see better sights there,
They shall see, not Rome, but Heaven in its Glory; Paul not in Pulpit, but on
the Throne; Christ not with a crucified, but glorified Body: They shall behold
the King in his beauty, Isa. 33.17. And what a glorious sight will this be? And
which is more then all, the ever blessed Vision of God in himself, and God in
us, and our selves in God.

Fourthly, To meditate on those things wherein the happiness and blessedness of
the Saints consist, viz. In a removal of all evils, and a confluence of all
good things.

1st, In the removal of all evils, which may be reduced to these three heads,
viz. (...) Evil of Sin, The Evil of Temptation, The Evil of Affliction.

1. The Evil of Sin. The Saints shall not only be freed from the power of sin,
but from the very being of sin; Grace here weakens Sin, but Glory there will
wholly abolish it, Rev. 21. last. No unclean thing shall enter there.

2. From the Evil of Temptation. Here we are continually subject unto
temptations, from within, and from without, from the Devil, the World, and the
Flesh; but there shall be freed from all; though in Paradise, yet none in
Heaven, no Serpent can creep in there, nor any wicked one to vex our righteous
Soul, or any corruption left to incline us to evil.

3. From the Evil of Affliction. Here we are continually subject to one
affliction or other, in Body or Soul, Name or Estate, our selves or ours; but
there freed from all: Rev. 21.4. God shall wipe away all tears from our eyes.
This happiness consists,

2dly, In a confluence of all good things. The Saints there will be blessed in
their Bodies, in their Souls, in their Company, in the security and perpetuity
of all. 1. In their Bodies; their bodies made immortal, most beautiful,
vigorous, active and glorious bodies, as you saw before, 1 Cor. 15.42. Phil. 3.
last. 2. For the Soul; the Understanding, Will, Memory, Affections, all
perfected in their acts and operations, 1 Cor. 13. 3ly. For their Company; They
shall have communion with all the glorious Angels, and glorified Saints, and
the sacred Trinity in Unity, God blessed for ever. 4. For the security and
perpetuity of this blessed condition, it runs parallel with God to all
eternity, Mat. 25. last.

Fifthly, To meditate on the duties you are to perform, for the getting and
making sure Heavens happiness to you; as amongst others, these. 1. To see you
be conformed to Christ in holiness, because without holiness, no happiness,
Mat. 5.8. John 3.3. Heb. 12.14. Romans 8.29. 2. To strengthen your Faith in this
happy condition, by the consideration of this, That Christ, your Head, is gone
into Heaven, and taken the possession of it in your Name and Nature, Heb. 6.20.
and has promised to come and take you to himself; that where he is, you may be
with him, and that for ever, John 14.3, 4. 3. To admire and adore the infinite
love of God to you in Christ, in preparing for you, and appointing you to so
happy and blessed a state after this miserable life here, saying still with
David, Lord, what is Man, and I amongst the Sons of Men, that thou should
have such thoughts of love, and eternal love to me? Psalm. 103.1. Praise thou
the Lord, O my Soul, etc. 4. To contemn the World, and all the glory of it, in
comparison of that glory above, as David did, Psalm. 4.6. and the Apostle, Phil.
3.7, 8. 5. To quicken and encourage your selves and all others, especially your
near and dear Relations, to lay out themselves, all they are, and can, for the
making sure Heavens happiness to them, 1 Cor. 15. last. 2 Pet. 1.10, 11. 6. To
be still loving, looking, and longing for the appearance of Christ in Glory,
that when he appears, we may appear with him, as the promise runs to such,
Colos. 3.4. 2 Timothy 4.8. Titus 2.13, 14. Rev. 22. last. Great will be the
benefit of meditation on these things, it will put life and vigor into all
your actions, 1 Cor. 15. last. and all your passions, Romans 8.18. One hour in
Heaven, will make an abundant recompense for all your sufferings here.

CHAP. VI. The third Head of Meditation, in and about Man, are such things in
SOUL and BODY, and about the Tongue, Tallents, Time, Eternity of Man, as may
most conduce to the enabling of Man to answer God, and Christ, and the Spirit,
in all they have done for Man.
First, The SOUL.
TO meditate in and about it, of these Particulars, The Nature of it, The Worth
of it, The greatness of the Loss of it, The greatness of the Salvation of it,
The Conscience God has put into it to mind you of all.

First, The Nature of it, what it is, sc. A spiritual Substance, Invisible,
Immortal, Created of God, United to the Body, and endowed with admirable
faculties, of Vegitation, Sense, and Reason.

Secondly, To meditate on the transcendent worth or excellency of it: This
appears,

1st. By the excellent Majesty of which it is an Image; nothing so much
resembles God, as the Soul. 1. In Spirituality. 2. In Immortality. 3. In the
infinity of Comprehension or Duration.

2dly, By the excellent price was paid for the Redemption of a Soul; not Silver
and Gold, but the precious Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.18. Had all
the Creatures in the World laid down their lives, they could never have done
it; being finite Creatures, they could never have satisfied an infinite Justice.

3dly. By the excellent end, and the use of it, it being made to contemplate
all those glorious Excellencies that are in God, and in God for us.

4thly, The transcendent excellency of it, above the Body, and above all the
World.

1. Above the Body. 1. The Body, but an earthly Substance, the Soul a heavenly
Substance. 2. The Body is a material and visible Substance, the Soul a
spiritual invisible Substance. 3. The Body cannot live without the Soul, but
the Soul can and does without the Body. 4. The Soul not made for the Body, but
the Body for the Soul, as the Box for a Jewel, and the House for the Inhabitant.

2. Above all the World. One Soul's of more worth then all the World, then ten
thousand Worlds; as appears in this, That all the World, and ten thousand
Worlds cannot content and satisfy the Soul, no more then a Barley Corn can
fill the World; the Soul is of so large and vast a capacity, as it is able to
conceive of, and desire millions of Worlds.

Thirdly, Consider the greatness of the Loss of a Soul. There Is no loss to be
compared to the loss of a Soul, because he that loses it, loses all; not only
himself, but God, and Christ, and Grace, and Glory, both this World, and that
to come; and this loss an irrecoverable loss, Mat. 16.26. What will it profit a
man to win the World, and lose his Soul? Or what will he give in exchange for
his Soul? Suppose a Man had all the Honors, Riches, Pleasures the World could
afford him, what will it avail him in the day of death, when he must part with
all, and his Soul too, and never recover them more? Men may lose these things
of the World, and recover them again, (if God sees good) as you may see in
Job's Case, to whom God restored all that he had taken from him, and doubled
all to him in the latter end, Job 42. But now for a Soul, that being lost, can
never be recovered; it is not a World, nor ten thousand Worlds can recover the
loss of a Soul, it cost more to redeem a Soul, Psalm. 49. Whereas you see the
great folly of men, in selling and losing of their Souls; What do they get by
their sin, but the Curse and Wrath of God, with the loss of their precious
Souls?

Fourthly, To meditate on the greatness of the salvation of a Soul, and the
means to procure the salvation thereof.

1st. The greatness of the salvation of the Soul; this appears, by the
greatness of the Author of it, no other then the great God, Titus 3.5.

2dly, The greatness of the price paid for it; no other then the precious Blood
of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.18.

3dly, The greatness of the evil we are saved from; As, 1. The Curse of the
Law, Gal. 3.10, 13. and the rigor of the Law, Romans 7.5, 6. 2ly, From the reign
and dominion of sin, Romans 6.14. 3. From the tyranny of Satan, Col. 1.13. Col.
2.15. 4. From the evil of the World, John 16. last. 5. The sting of Death, and
the slavish fear of it, Heb. 2.14, 15. 6. The wrath to come, 1 These. 1.10.

4thly, The greatness of the good things we are saved and brought unto, viz.
The Life of Grace here, Ephesians. 2.1. and the Life of Glory hereafter, Col. 3.4.

Fifthly, To meditate on the means. To make sure and procure the means of
Salvation to you, which are briefly these. 1. To see and acknowledge your
selves lost in your selves, Luke 19.10. 2. To humble your selves under the
consideration of it, James 4.9. Luke 13.31. 3. To turn every one from the evil
of his ways, Ezekiel. 18.30. Isa. 55.7, 8. 4. To lay hold on Jesus Christ, by a
lively Faith, John 3.16. Acts 10.43. 5. To get a new Nature, 2 Cor. 5.17. 2
Pet. 1.4. 6. To lead a new Life, a Life of Holiness, 1 Pet. 1.15. and to order
your Conversation according to the rules of the Word, Psalm. 50. last. To him
that orders his Conversation aright, I will show the Salvation of God. Now
here, to take notice what it is to order our Conversation aright, (I shall stay
a little the longer, because the Conversation of most, are such an open
contradiction to their Profession.) Now by ordering our Conversation aright, is
meant, a putting of our Life in a method and order; a Saint must not walk at
random, or at large, but in a regular and orderly way, Col. 2.5. that is,
According to those rules laid down in the Scripture, the Law, and the Gospel;
and these Rules, according to which we are to order our Conversation, they are
either more general, or more particular.

First, For the General Rules; You have them laid down in two places, the first
in the Old Testament, Micah 6.8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good. Q.
Where has he showed Man his duty? A. Why, in his Word; there God has laid
down plainly what the Duty of every Man is, to God, and others, and himself, so
as there is no Man or Woman can plead ignorance, and say, he knew it not to be
his duty, for God has plainly revealed it in his Word, what is good; how that
all in his Word is good, and will do good to him that does it, Micah 2.7. Do
not my Words do good to him that walks uprightly? And what the Lord requires of
thee; What is that? 1. To do justly, i. e. To make Conscience of all the Duties
of Justice and Righteousness, required in the second Table, to render to every
one his due; and do unto others, as you would have others do unto you; which is
the Law and the Prophets. 2. To love Mercy; that is, To show mercy to the
Bodies and to the Souls of others, as you have opportunity, Gal. 6.10. Heb.
13.16. 3. To walk humbly with thy God; This comprehends all the Duties of the
first Table, as the two former of the second Table. So as the meaning in short
is this, Thou shall set God always before thee, give him the Homage, Worship,
and Service that is due to him; approve thy heart to him, in all the service
thou tenderest to him; humble thy self under thy fallings, and failings;
acknowledge, when thou have done all, thou art but an unprofitable Servant, and
desire only to be found in the perfect obedience of Jesus Christ: More clearly
and fully you have these Duties laid down, Titus 2.11, 12. The Grace of God,
bringing Salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching us, that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present World: Soberly, in respect of our selves; Righteously, in
respect of others; Godlily, in respect of God.

Haec tria perpetuo meditare adverbia Pauli,
Haec tria sunt vitae regula sancta tuae.
Make these three Adverbs the subject of your continual Meditation, and the
proposed Rule of your daily Conversation: Your duty here is, as every day. 1.
To watch against, and deny ungodliness; that is, Those sins forbidden in the
first Table, so called, because they are immediately against God. And worldly
lusts; that is, all sins forbid in the second Table, called Worldly, because
they have the World for their Object and Subject. 2. It follows, and that we
should live soberly; the former contained the negative commands of the Law,
these latter the affirmative commands of the Law; to note unto us, it is not
enough to be negative Christians, but we must be also affirmative Christians,
Isa. 1.16, 17. Cease to do evil, learn to do well.

1. Your duty is, to live soberly, in respect of your selves; that is, to be
moderate in your desires, and use of all Creature Comforts, as Meat, Drink,
Apparel, Recreation, Phil. 4.5. 1 Cor. 7.30.

2. Righteously, in respect of your Neighbors; that is, To act and exercise
Righteousness in all your Thoughts, Affections, Words, Actions, Tradings and
Dealings with others, made a sign of one that shall dwell in God's Holy Hill,
Psalm. 15.

3. In respect of God, to carry your selves Godly, or God-like; to be Holy, as
he is Holy, in all manner of Conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15. that is, Publicly,
Privately, Secretly, Daily, Hourly, Continually, 2 Cor. 7.1. Rev. 2.10. To
quicken you to this godliness, to meditate on that place, 1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness
is profitable to all things, and has the promise of this life, and that to
come; that is, Has all the blessings of Heaven and Earth entailed to it; it
gives a Christian much in Possession, all the Promises of this Life; and
infinitely more in Reversion, the Life that is to come.

Godliness will be profitable whilst you live, sweeten and sanctify every
state and condition to you and yours, Prove. 20.7. and will be much more
profitable, when you die; when you are to leave all other things, this better
part shall never be taken from you, Luke 10. last. Thus of the general Rules.

Secondly, For the more particular Rules, respecting the right ordering of our
Conversation, they either respect God, or Christ, or the Spirit, our Selves,
and others.

1st. For those respecting God, they either concern his Attributes, Words,
Works, Worship. 1. For the Attributes of God, you ought to know them, and to
walk sutably to them; let them have authority, and influence on your Hearts,
and Ways, to keep you from sinning, and quicken you to well-doing, according
to the directions given you before. 2. For his Word: To do nothing, but what
you have a warrant for out of the Word, Isa. 8.20. Psalm. 119.9. Whereby shall a
young man cleanse his way, but by taking heed to thy Word? John 5.39. 1 John
4.1. Acts 17.12. Romans 12.2. Prove what is the good and acceptable Will of God:
God has appointed it to be a Light to our Feet, and a Lanthorn to our Paths,
Psalm. 119. He that walks not according to it, walks amiss. Mat. 22.29. Ye err,
not knowing the Scriptures. As you are to walk according to the Word, so every
part of it, the Precepts to obey them, Psalm. 119.2. the Promises to trust in
them, Psalm. 9.10. and the Threatenings to fear them, Hebak. 3.16. 3. For the
Works of God, you are to eye God in his ways of Justice and Mercy, and to be
humbled under the one, and thankful for the other; to admire him, and adore
him, in what you cannot comprehend him; as the Apostle, Romans 11.33. Oh the
depth of the riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! how unsearchable
are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out! 4. For the Worship of God, I
have given you directions before, yet I will add these, to have an eye in the
Worship of God to a right Person, Place, Manner, Time, End.

1. The duties of God's Worship, must be performed by a right Person; as for
instance, The Preaching of the Word, and the Administration of the Sacraments,
only by a faithful Minister, called and sent by God, and his Church; because
these are public Duties, and therefore to be performed only by a public
Person: So Prayer in the Family, and instruction of those in it, by the head of
the Family, God having laid the charge of it upon him, Deuteronomy. 6.6. Heb. 7.7.

2. The Religious Duties, must be performed in a right place, as the Public in
Public, Private in Private, Secret in Secret; the reason is, because though
there be no place forbidden, yet there be some places more convenient for some
Duties then others.

3. That there may be order, they must be observed and performed in a right
time, and in due season; as works of our general Calling in their season, and
of our particular in their season; Duties of our general Calling, especially on
the Sabbath Day, and every morning and evening, Psalm. 92.2. The duties of our
particular Calling, only on the week day, and the greatest part of the day; the
reason is, Because there is an appointed time for every purpose under Heaven,
Eccles. 3.1. And because what the Wise Man speaks of, a word spoken in a
season, is true of an action done in season; it is very beautiful, like an Apple
of Gold in a Picture of Silver.

4. For the right manner, I gave you directions before at the beginning; only
remember still this, all be with fear and reverence, Heb. 12. end. and in
Spirit and in Truth, John 4.24. God abhors those that draw near with their
Lips, and their hearts are far from him, Isa. 29.13.

5. For the right ends you are to propose in every duty, they are, That God may
be glorified, others Edified, your Souls Sanctified and Saved, 1 Cor. 10.31.
Phil. 1.20. John 15.8.

2dly, There be other Rules respecting Jesus Christ. If you would order your
Conversations aright, you are to do what you do in Knowledge, Faith,
Repentance, Obedience, Love.

1. In Knowledge; because this is Life eternal, to know thee the only true God,
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, John 17.3. And because all Obedience,
without Knowledge, is but blind Obedience.

2. In Faith: That God will accept of your Persons and Services in him, Ephesians.
1.6. 1 Pet. 2.5. Because without Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb.
11.6. And whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin, Romans 14.23.

3. To do it in Repentance: Because so long as men live, and lie impenitently
in sin, God will not regard any thing they do, Psalm. 66.18. Psalm. 50.18.

4. In Obedience to his command: Because he is the Author of Salvation only to
as many as obey him, Heb. 5.9. And such as yield Universal Obedience, their
unfeigned desire, and earnest endeavor, Psalm. 119.3. Mat. 5. last. John 15.14.

5. To do all ye do, in Love to Jesus Christ, as the Apostle, 2 Cor. 15.14. The
love of Christ constrains me: Because, without Love, all Religious Duties will
profit us nothing, 1 Cor. 13. That you may be enabled to all this, you are to
make Christ your Principle, your Pattern, and your Scope in all: 1. Your
Principle, to fetch Grace and strength from him to do it, because we can do
nothing without him, John 15.5. And it pleased the Father that all fullness
should dwell in him, that we from that fullness might still be receiving Grace
for Grace. 2. To make him your Pattern, to walk as he walked, 1 John 2.6. How
that was, you may read in the Gospel, wisely, inoffensively, etc. as we showed
you before in your Meditations on Christ. 3. To make him your Scope and end in
all you do, that Christ may be magnified in your Bodies, in Life, and Death,
Phil. 1.19, 20.

3dly, Other Rules respect the Spirit of God; as these, 1. To hearken to, and
obey his Call unto Faith and Repentance, Isa. 30.21. 2. To nourish and cherish
his motions within, in the Conscience, checking you for evil, and exercising
you to duty; and take heed you do not resist him, as they, Acts 5.21. nor
quench the Spirit, 1 These. 5.19. nor grieve the Spirit, so as to cause him to
depart, Ephesians. 4.30. 3. To beg his help and assistance in every duty of your
particular and general Calling, Ephesians. 6.10.

4thly, There are other Rules respecting our selves. If you would order your
Conversation aright, so as to have God's gracious Presence with you, Providence
over you, and Blessing upon you all the day long, then to mind and observe well
these Rules. To begin the day with God, and continue it with God, and end it
with God.

1. To begin the day with God, by giving him the first of our thoughts, when we
awake, going apart; when you are up, to read the Scripture, meditate on the
Word, pray unto God for your selves and others, Mat. 6.6. James 5.16.

2. To continue the day with God thus. 1st. By a faithful, diligent, and
fruitful discharge of the duties of your Calling, Prove. 10.4. 1 These. 4.6. 2ly,
By a moderate, seasonable, and thankful use of the Creatures, Prove. 23.2.
Eccles. 10.17. 1 Cor. 10.3. 3dly. By walking with God all the day long,
approving all your thoughts, and words, and ways to his blessed Word, and
all-seeing eye of God, eying his glory in all, as you are commanded, Genesis 17.1.
1 Cor. 10.31. 4ly. By walking as becomes the Gospel, Phil. 1.27. Q. How is
that? A. Thus, To see that your walking be an Humble, Holy, Heavenly, Meek,
Patient, Contented, Faithful, Cheerful, Fruitful Walking. 1. An Humble walking
before God and Man, Micha 6.8. Ephesians. 4.2. 2. An Holy walking, 1 Pet. 1.15. 3.
An Heavenly walking, Phil. 3.20. 4. A Meek, Patient, and Contented walking, in
every estate and condition, Phil. 4.11. Heb. 13.5. James 5.7. 5. A Faithful,
sincere and upright walking, Genesis 17.1. Prove. 10.9. 6. A Cheerful serving him
for the abundance of all his goodness, Deuteronomy. 28.47. Lastly, A Fruitful living
under the means and ways vouchsafed, John 15.5. Herein is my Father glorified,
that you bring forth much Fruit to God.

3. To end the day with God. 1. By reflecting and looking back on our carriage
the day before, toward God and Man, wherein we have been peccant and faulty, by
way of commission, in thought, word, and deed; by way of omission, in public,
private, secret; and by way of imperfection before, in, or after any duty; to
humble our selves under it, to renew our peace with God, by Jesus Christ, and
renewing our Covenant of more circumspection, and better obedience for the
future. 2. By observing what providence, sad, or glad, we had experience of
the day before, and to be humbled and thankful accordingly. 3. By closing up
the day as you began it, with Reading, Meditation, and Prayer. 4. By giving God
the last of your thoughts, when you lie down to sleep, as you gave him the
first when you did awake, that so your sleep may be the more sweet and
comfortable to you; and whether you sleep or wake, present in the body, or
absent from it, you may be accepted of the Lord, found in peace, and be
received into everlasting peace, that eternal rest which remains for the
People of God, 2 Cor. 5.9. Heb. 4.9. Amen.

5thly, There be other Rules, which respect others: For the right ordering our
Conversation, toward those within the Family, and those without the Family.

[1.] Those within the Family. That you may order your conversation aright
toward them. 1. You are to make your Families little Churches, in the
observance and performance of those Religious Duties you ow to God, and the
Souls of those under your charge, as those that I have already directed you in,
viz. A careful sanctifying of the Sabbath, a heedful attendance on the
Ordinances of God, Prayer evening and morning with the Family, reading of the
Scriptures, singing of Psalms, repetition of Sermons, instruction of those
under your charge in the Principles of Religion, correction of their evils, and
encouragement of them in ways of well doing; for all these (we find) expressly
required of Governors in their Families, Jer. 10. last. Numb. 20.4. John 5.39.
Col. 3.16. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. all observed and practiced by the Saints before you;
in which respect their Houses are called Churches, Romans 16.5. 1 Cor. 16.19.
Philemon 2. 2. Every one to study, and acquaint others under them, with their
relative Duties, each to the other, as Husband to Wife, and Wife to Husband;
Parents to Children, and Children to Parents; Masters to Servants, and Servants
to Masters; and to go one before the other in the observance and practice of
them, because we find Examples generally more prevailing then Precepts: and
herein lies the Life and Power of Godliness, viz. In a Faithful, Fruitful,
Cheerful discharge of our Relative Duties; whence you shall find the Apostle
more frequent and full in pressing them in his Epistles, then other Duties:
What those Relative Duties are, you have many Books to help you in, (as Gouge,
and Caudry, and others) to quicken you unto a conscionable care of these
things; consider, in short, it is the greatest good you can do, not only for
your Families, but for the Parish, Town, City, Country, Church and State you
live in; for general experience shows us, that they are Families, which are
Seminaries and Nurseries of all good and evil, and therefore to have a special
eye to, and care of Family Duties; and the rather, because the conscionable
performance of these Duties, bring down all manner of blessings in Families;
but the neglect, all manner of Judgments, 2 Samuel 6.11. Jer. 9.10, 25. Besides,
there is nothing will bring you more peace and comfort at the last, when you
come to lie on your sick Beds, and stand forth before the Tribunal of Christ;
and nothing more afflict you at the last, and torment you in Hell, then the
neglect of those Souls under your charge, and giving them such wicked counsel,
and evil example.

[2.] For those without the Family. They are either public or private persons;
1st. For public Persons, they are either Magistrates or Ministers, These are
to discharge their Relative Duties to the People under them, and People theirs
to them.

1. For Magistrates. If they would order their Conversation aright to those
under their charge. 1. They are to take notice of, and consider in whose room
they are, and to whom they must give an account of all their actions, sc. God
and their King, whose Mouth, Eyes, and Ears they are, 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7. 2. That
as they Rule and Govern by God, so they ought to Rule with God, and for God, 2 Samuel 21.5. 3. That they ought so to bear the Sword, as to be a terror only to
evil doers, and the praise of them that do well, Romans 13.3, 4. 4. To endeavor,
that all under them, live a peaceable and quiet life, in all Godliness and
Honesty, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. 5. To this end, every one, to be so qualified as Jethro
advised Moses, Exodus 18.21. Able Men, such as fear God, Men of Truth, hating
Covetousness.

2. For Ministers. If they would order their Conversation aright, amongst other
Rules, to remember and walk by these. 1. To be instant in season and out of
season, to reprove, exhort with all long-suffering, 2 Timothy 4.2. 2. To give
attendance to Reading, to Exhortation, to Doctrine, to meditate on, and
continue in these things, 1 Timothy 4.13. and 4.16. 3. To look to this, that their
hearts be upright with God, in the discharge of their Duties, that they seek
not their own, but the Glory of God, 1 These. 2.4, 6. That serve the Lord Jesus
Christ, and not their own belly, Romans 16.18. That they mind more the feeding,
then the fleecing of their flock, 1 Pet. 5.3. 4. Above all, That they be
Patterns to others of good works, as the Apostle exhorts, 1 Timothy 4.12. and 3.1,
2, 3, 4. and Tit. 2.7, 8. And that, 1. because general experience shows, that
People are more led by the Life, then the Doctrine of Ministers; are led more
by the Eye, then the Ear, 1 Samuel 2.17. 2ly, Because otherwise they will pull
down more in one hour, then they will build up all their lives. 3. Because
otherwise, their Doctrine will be at the last, a Bill of Indictment against
themselves; and having Preached to others, will be found Cast-awayes
themselves, 1 Cor. 9.27. And therefore it concerns Ministers to look well to
their lives, especially that they be not found amongst those wicked ones, Isa.
56.10, 11, 12. And as Ministers are to be Patterns in all other Graces, so
especially in two Graces; 1. Humility, 1 Pet. 5.5. Love to their Fellow
Brethren, 1 Pet. 3.8. 2. And love to their People, as the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.11.
Whence they are called Fathers, 1 Cor. 4.15. and Nurses. 1 These. 2.7, 8. to
note that tender love and affection they ought to have to the People committed
to their charge, and especially their Souls.

1st. As Magistrate and Ministers to discharge their Duties to the People under
them, so People to discharge their Duties to the Magistrates and Ministers set
over them.

1. To Magistrates. If you would order your Conversation aright toward them,
then you are to give them that Love, Fear and Reverence, Obedience and Prayer
for them the Scripture frequently calls for, Romans 13. from 1, to 9. 1 Pet.
2.13, to 18. Titus 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. The reason you have, Psalm. 82.6. because
they are Gods, non (...), sed (...); not by Essence, but Office, because they
are in the room of God, and are to govern for God.

2. For Ministers. If you would order your Conversations aright to them, you
are to give them that Love, Reverence, Maintenance, Protection, and Prayer, the
Scripture also frequently calls for 1 These. 5.12, 13. Heb. 13.17. 1 Cor. 16.10.
2 These. 3.1. The reasons you have 2 Cor. 5.20. Because they are Ambassadors for
God; and Ambassadors, by the Law of Nations, ought to be honored of all, and
to have suitable respects to the greatness of the Person that sends them: If
such honor be due to Ambassadors of Men, how much more to the Ambassadors of
God, to whom all, both Kings and their Ambassadors, must give an account of
their carriage to Him and His Ambassadors.

2dly, For Private Christians. The Rules that are to be observed by them, for
the right ordering of their Conversation one toward the other, respect their
Thoughts and Affections, Words and Actions.

First, Respecting their Thoughts. And in order to this; 1. Take heed of
instilling, receiving, and nourishing prejudices in your minds against others;
for this is a very great and provoking evil. 2. That you may be kept from it,
take notice, 1. What it is. 2. Why you are to avoid it.

1. What prejudice is, viz. A prejudging, or a preposterous judgment of Persons
and Things, before they be examined and tried. Should a Judge pass Sentence on
a Person or Action, before he had examined it, he should err, though the
Sentence were just, seeing he never looked into, nor knew the grounds on which a
Person spoke, or did this and that thing. More plainly, Prejudice is an evil
Opinion, which a man takes up of another, for something he has spoken and
done, contrary to his Judgment and Practice, not knowing or considering the
ground on which he did it.

2. Now such as would order their Conversation aright to others, must take heed
of it, because it is a very great pernicious and provoking evil; as too sad and
general experience shows it to be, to the great dishonor of God, scandal of
Religion, and the hurt of their Brother; as for instance.

1. This prejudice is that which makes men take up hard thoughts, of those of
whom God has good thoughts, and to instill these evil thoughts into the Heads
and Hearts of others, that they may disengage the affections of others, and
draw their affections only unto themselves.

2. It makes men to rob God of his Glory, and give it to Men.1. To rob God of
his Glory, in stepping up into his Throne, and sitting in Judgment on their
Brother, and that sometimes for a particular Act, and it may be for a thing
indifferent to their Brother, though not to them. Now what says the Apostle,
Romans 14.4. Who art thou that judge another man's Servant? and verse. 10. Why
do thou judge thy Brother, and set at naught thy Brother? we shall all stand
before the Judgment Seat of Christ. 2. It makes men to give glory to men, in
crying up some, and crying down others; which the Apostle expressly condemns in
his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 3.3. and whatsoever thoughts they have of their wisdom
in it, he tells them, the Lord knows their thoughts to be vain; and their duty
is not to glory in men, so as to set up one above the other, (when all are
faithful and sound in the main) seeing all are their Servants in Christ, verse.
20.21, 22. 3. This prejudice it makes men to separate, and withdraw communion
from those, with whom God has communion; and that in those essential Duties of
God's Worship, as Word, Sacrament, Prayer, wherein all are expressly required to
worship God together: Yea, and makes them not only to separate themselves, but
persuade others to do it, lest they partake in other men's sins. 4. It Is that
which makes Professors to rest in duty, and neglect the actings of Grace
before, in, and after Duty, especially that Grace of Love, (which Christ makes
the chief Character of a Disciple, and without which, God abhors and rejects
all other duties that men perform, 1 Cor. 13.) that also which causes them to
dissent in their love, how that they do love others of a contrary Opinion and
Practice; and yet can neglect, if not worse, even persuade others to cast off
all offices of love to them, never remembering or considering the command is
express, Romans 12.9. Let love be without dissimulation, 1 John 3.18. Let us not
love in Word and Tongue, but in Deed, and Truth. 5. That which keeps men from
abundance of good they might do to others, and that they might receive from
others, because they think they ought to have no communion with them; so as
this prejudice is like choler in the Stomach, that imbitters all wholesome meat;
and however it receives it, yet casts it up again. 6. That which makes men to
murder others Bodies, Souls, Names and Estates: 1. Their Bodies; by causing
grief to them, and such grief as brings sometimes sickness and weakness on
them, if not death. 2dly. Their Souls; by intterrupting their peace, and
exposing them to temptations, which made David for to pray, Psalm. 123.3 4. Have
mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us; for we are exceedingly filled with
contempt, with the scorning of those that are at ease, and with the contempt of
the proud. 3dly, Their Names; by blotting and blurring them with lies, and
tales, and slanders, 4thly, Their Estates; By taking off the Hearts and
Affections of others from any way sympathyzing with them, and succouring them
in their wants and necessities. Now he that said, Thou shall not commit
Adultery, said also, Thou shall not Kill, James 2.11. And the Killing there, is
principally killing by the tongue, as is clear from the contexts; and will it
not be a sad thing one day for Professors to be found amongst Murderers of
their Brethren; 1 John 3.15. He that hates his Brother, is a Murderer. Lastly,
This prejudice, is that which multiplies divisions in Families, Parishes,
Towns, Cities, Kingdoms, and opens a gap to the common Enemy, to invade, enter,
and prey upon all, to the great reproach of Religion, sadding of God's People,
and the rejoicing of wicked men, if not the utter ruin of Church and State;
and therefore in all these respects. 1. To take heed of instilling, receiving
and nourishing prejudices against any of God's Faithful Ministers, or People,
especially take heed of evil and mischievous thoughts against others, expressly
forbid, Prove. 3.29. Devise not evil against thy Neighbor that dwells quietly
by thee, Zach. 8.17. Let none imagine evil in his heart against his Neighbor.
For this you may find, ( Prove. 6.7.) is one of those six things that the Lord
hates. 1. Take heed also of over-valuing thoughts of some, and undervaluing
thoughts of others, (when both are godly) for there ought to be no respect of
persons in matters of Religion; God is no respecter of persons, he regards not
the rich more then the poor, Job 34.19. the noble, then the ignoble; the wise,
then the simple; and you ought to be followers of God in this, because if you
have respect to persons, ye commit sin, and are convinced of the Law, as
transgressors, James 2.9. And therefore the command is express in the first
verse. My Brethren have not the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect of
persons. 2. As not to take up hard thoughts, so to have good thoughts of others
of whom God has good thoughts, how differing soever from you in Opinion and
Practice, seeing so long as we are here, (there being different degrees of
Light given in by God unto Christians) there will be different apprehension of
things; it is that which the Apostle exhorts unto, Philip 3.15, 16. Let us
therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded; and if in any thing you be
otherwise minded, God shall reveal it unto you; nevertheless, whereunto we have
already attained, let us walk by the same rule. It is our duty (what in us
lies) to labor after Unity in Opinion and Judgment; that which the Apostle
presses by many Arguments, Phil. 2.1, 2. But yet, however, seeing we cannot
attain to Unity in Opinion, we ought to express Unity in Affection; that which
the Apostle presses by many more Arguments, Ephesians. 4.1, to 7. Thus of the
Rules concerning our Thoughts.

Secondly, For the Rules respecting our Affections. 1. That you put off anger,
wrath malice, etc. Col. 3.8. Ephesians. 4.26. 2. That you put on (as the Elect,
Holy, and Beloved of God) bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind,
meekness, longsuffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another; and
above all, you put on Love, (the bond of perfectness) that which like a Bond
knits Christians, and Graces, and Duties together, Col. 3.12, 13 14. See that
all your things be done in Love, 1 Cor. 16.14. because this is the best
Character of a Disciple of Christ, John 13.35. And all duties, without love,
will profit nothing, 1 Cor. 13.8. To see also this love of yours be a sincere
love, without dissimulation, Romans 12.9. and a real love, not in word and
tongue, but in deed and truth, 1 John 3.14. To love them, not for Opinions
sake, or Parties sake, for that is to love a man's self in them, but for
holiness sake, the truths sake, 2 John 1. To love them as Saints, and so to
love all, one Saint as well as another, Col. 1.4. To love them, as we do love
our selves, Romans 13.8, 9. And you know how we love our selves, we would do no
hurt to our selves, so neither should we unto others; we would do all the good
we can to our selves, so should we to others; we would have others to
sympathize with us in all our wants, sorrows, and sufferings, and so should we
with others, Romans 12.15. 1 Pet. 3.8. Gal. 6.1. Heb. 13.3. We would have others
constant in their love to us, and so should we in our love to others; for
charity, true charity, abides for ever, 1 Cor. 13. last. And the Apostle's
exhortation is, Heb. 23.1. Let Brotherly love continue, and the rather, because
God's love continues to his, and we would have it continue unto us, therefore
ours should continue to him and his.

Thirdly, For the Rules respecting our Speeches, we are to take heed of some
things, and to practice others.

1st. The things you are to take heed of, they are these. 1. Take heed of
speaking of other men's Persons, or Affairs, when you have no call to it, 1
These. 4.11. Study to be quiet, and meddle every one with his own business. 2.
Take heed you speak evil of no man, Titus 3.2. The Reasons you have, James
4.11. because he that speaks evil of his Brother, and judges his Brother,
speaks evil of the Law, and judges the Law: Because the Lord hearkens and
hears every word you speak against any of his, Jer. 8.6. Ezekiel. 33.31. And what
is spoken against any of his, he takes as spoken against himself, Mat. 25. More
especially, you are to take heed of all rash and uncharitable speaking, and
censuring others that differ from you in Opinion and Practice, it being the
Character of a Hypocrite, Mat. 7.5. that which does expose them to the judgment
both of God and Man; especially take heed it be not for a particular error or
evil; for as one Swallow makes not a Summer, so neither does a particular error
or evil denominate any to be a Heretic or a sinner. If God should fall out
with men (as they do one with the other) for particular Offenses and
Differences, woe, woe, would be unto them; such should mind well what Christ said
to the Pharisees, He that is without sin, let him cast the first stone, John
8.7. Not that he approved of her sin, but condemned their uncharitableness. 3.
Take heed of slandering and backbiting speech, expressly forbid, Levit. 19.16.
Thou shall not go up and down as a Talebearer, Deuteronomy. 24.9. Remember what God
did to Miriam, when you came out of Egypt; What was that? He smote Miriam with
a Leprosy for speaking evil of his Servant Moses, Numb. 12.8, 9. Exemplarily
also did he punish this slandering Tongue in Doeg, Psalm. 52. And therefore take
warning, lest you be made examples to others, that would not take example by
others. 4. Above all, take heed of slandering public Persons, God's
Magistrates and Ministers; for they being in God's place, he will more severely
punish the wrong done to them, as you may see, Deuteronomy. 33.11. Jude 9.10. 5. Take
heed of dissembling, false lying speech, as being that which is plainly forbid,
Col. 3.9. That which evidenceth such to be of their Father the Devil, John
8.44. God's Children, are Children that will not lie, Isa. 63.8. Zeph. 3.13. A
deceitful tongue shall not be found in their mouth; that which shuts men out of
Heaven, Rev. 21. last. and gives them a hotter and a lower place in Hell,
Matthew. 24. last. 6. Take heed of all soothing flattering Speech, for the
gaining and retaining the favor of others; there is a woe pronounced against
such, Isa. 5.20. and God threatens to cut off such flattering tongues, Psalm.
31.5. Job 17.5.

2dly, Other things are to be practiced; as, 1. Watchfulness over your words,
to see they be wise, deliberate, gracious and profitable, Ephesians. 4.29. 2. If
there be any difference between you and others, to seek and accept of
reconciliation, Mat. 5.23. and 18.15. 3. To exhort one another daily, lest any
ones heart be hardened through the decitfulness of sin, Heb. 3.13. 4. To
admonish, reprove, and rebuke sin in others, according to the disposition of
the Person, and the nature of the offense, Levit. 19.17. Gal. 6.1. Col. 3.16.
5. To edify one the other in Grace and gracious Practices, 1 Thessalonians. 5.11. Heb.
10.24, 25. 6. To pray one with the other, and for the other, Ephesians. 6.18. James
5. Lastly, To communicate your Gifts, and Graces, and Experiences, you have had
of God's faithfulness and goodness in his Promises and Providence, after the
Example of David, Come, and I will tell you what he has done for my Soul.

Fourthly, For your actions and carriage toward others; if you would order
your Conversation aright, observe these Rules. 1. Not to retaliate or revenge
any wrong done to you, in word or deed, but commit all to him, who judges
righteously, after the example of Christ, as you are expressly required, Prove.
20.22. and 24.29. 1 Pet. 2.21, 22. Romans 12. three last verses. 2. No man to
seek his own things only, but the things of others, Phil. 2.4. not his own
weal, but the weal of others, 1 Cor. 10. end. 3. To walk wisely, both toward
those without and within, Col. 4.5. Ephesians. 5.15. Matthew. 10. Be wise as
Serpents. 4. To walk inoffensively, giving no just offense to any in word or
deed, in apparel or recreation, as Zachary and Elisabeth, Luke 1.6. and the
Apostle, Acts 24.16. and we are all command^d, Mat. 10.16. 1 Cor. 10.32. For
God chose us before the foundation of the World, that we should be holy and
unblameable before him in love, Ephesians. 1.4. and Romans 12.18. As much as in you
lies, live peaceably with all men, Romans 14.19. Follow after those things which
make for peace, Heb. 12.14. And that you may walk and live thus peaceably. 1.
To take heed of all unpeaceable lusts, such as these, Pride, Passion, Envy,
Jealousy, Censoriousness, Selfishness, Affectation of Popularity, glorying in
Men, having the Faith of our Lord Jesus in respect of Persons: for, James 4.1.
From whence comes Wars and Fightings? are they not hence, from your lusts that
are within you. 2. To labor after peaceable Principles; for unless there be a
principle of peace, or a peaceable disposition within, there will not be long
any sound, or lasting peace without. 3. To get peaceable Graces, as amongst
others, these, Wisdom, Humility, Sincerity, Amity, Meekness, Self-denial, etc.
4. To make conscience of peaceable duties, especially these two. 1. The
renewing of our peace with God, and God will make others to be at peace with
you, Tranquillus Deus, tranquillat omnia; God's Promise is, If a man's ways
please the Lord, he will make his Enemies to be at peace with him, Prove. 16.7.
2. To pray one another affections into a peaceable frame, that he who makes
those of one house to be of one mind, would also make those of one and the same
Church, to be of one and the same mind; if not of the same Opinion in every
thing, yet of the same Affection and Conversation.

The fifth thing then to be meditated on, in, and about the Soul, is the
Conscience, which is that faculty God has put into the Soul, to mind us of all
these duties; in and about the Conscience, to take notice,

1. What Conscience is, viz. That Faculty God has placed in the Soul, to take
notice of all our Affections, Speeches, Actions, and to pass sentence on them,
according to the nature of them, by such principles of Light as it has
received.

2. What the Offices of Conscience are; as 1. To be a Schoolmaster to teach
and make known what Sin and Duty is. 2. To be a Notary, to take notice of all
our inward and outward behavior. 3. To be a Register, to write down and record
all. 4. To be a Witness, either to excuse or accuse. 5. To be a Judge to pass
Sentence, either of Absolution or Condemnation. 6. To be an Executioner, to
comfort or afflict according to the nature of the actions.

3. To meditate on the great authority and power of Conscience, to make a man
happy or miserable, as being God's Deputy or Vicegerent to act for him; the
best Friend, and the worst Enemy; that which comforts and speaks for us, when
others discomfort and speak against us, and that both in life and death, 2 Cor.
1.12. This is our rejoicing, in the testimony of our Consciences, etc. Isa.
38.3. Therefore should you meditate on these things about the Soul; 1. On the
Nature of the Soul, what it is, that so you may look more after it then you
have formerly done. 2. Therefore on the worth of the Soul above the Body,
because this will make you slight and undervalue both in comparison of the
Soul; prize and keep your Souls as your chiefest Jewels; to mind more the
feeding and clothing, preserving and cherishing of your Souls, then your
Bodies. 3. Therefore to meditate on the greatness of the loss of it, because it
will put you more on a care of using the means for the welfare of it, and that
you do not hazard the loss of it, for the gain of all the World. 4. Therefore
on the greatness of the Salvation of it, that hereby you may be quickened to
give all diligence in the use of the means for the Salvation of it, 2 Pet. 1.5,
10. giving all diligence, etc. 5. Therefore to meditate on those things about
the Conscience, that they should make you fear and tremble to offend, and wound
Conscience, and the more careful to preserve the peace of a good Conscience, as
it did Joseph, Genesis 39.9. and the Apostle, Acts 24.16.

Secondly, Of the Body.
In and about it, to meditate on two things; 1. The admirable Structure; and,
2. The excellent use of it.

1st. On the admirable Structure of it, both inwardly and outwardly.

1. Inwardly. The inward frame so admirable, as David wonders at it, Psalm.
139.13, to 17. I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made, etc.

2. For the outward form of it. 1. Man was made naked, whereas all other
Creatures have Scales, Horns, Feathers, and nothing so beautiful and comely as
Man; nakedness was an Ornament before the fall. 2. Man was made with the
Countenance upward, whereas all other Creatures have it downwards. 3. With
Speech to express his mind, to the edification and comfort of others. 4. With
Hands, which all other Creatures want, whereby he might rule and govern the
Creatures, feed and cloth himself, and dispatch all his business.

2dly, To meditate on the excellent and honorable use of the Body, in that God
has made it not only the Organ and Instrument of the Soul to work in and by
it, but the Habitation of the Holy Ghost to dwell in it, and his Temple to
offer up Spiritual Sacrifice to God in it; the meditation of this will make you
the more watchful and careful to preserve it in purity and chastity, 1 These.
4.4, 5. to use every sense and member of it, as Instruments of Righteousness
and Holiness to the glorifying of God, Romans 6.19. 2 Cor. 6. last. Romans 12.1.

Thirdly, Of the Tongue.
In it to meditate on the ends wherefore God gave it, which are especially two.

1. To glorify God; whence the same word in the Hebrew, that signifies Tongue,
signifies Glory, because we are to glorify God with it, Psa. 108.1. and 35.28.
and 63.5. 2. To edify others, Psa. 37.30. Ephesians. 4.29. The building them up in
Saving-Knowledge and Grace, 1 These. 5.11.

2. To consider the great need we have to employ it to these ends. 1. Because
God hearkens and hears if any man speaks aright, Jer. 8.6. 2. Because God has
corrected rash and unadvised speaking in his most eminent Saints, as in Moses,
Psalm. 106.32, 33. 3. Because, for every idle word that men shall speak, they
must give an account at the Day of Judgment. 4. Because in the right usage of
the Tongue, the fear of the Lord, and the comfort of a man's life does chiefly
consist, as you may see by comparing the 11th verse, with the 12 and 13 of the
34th Psalm. The serious meditation of this, will make us take better heed to
our tongues, as it did David, Psalm. 39.1. and pray with him, Psalm. 141.3. Set
thou a watch before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips: To look to this our
Speeches, be wise, deliberate, gracious and profitable.

Fourthly, Of the Talents.
In and about them, consider. 1. There are none but have some Talents given of
God, to employ, for the glory of God, and the good of others; some have Talents
of Gifts and Grace, more means and seasons of Grace then others; some have
Talents of Health, Strength, Wealth, Honor; some more, some less; some ten,
some five, some one; and all these put into their hands to employ for their
Lord and Masters advantage, for the glory of God, and the good of Souls, their
own and others, especially those under their charge, as you may see, Mat. 25.
And to whom much is given, much will be required, Luke 12. And therefore to
enquire every one what Talents we have received, and how we have prized them
and improved them; whether we have or do employ them to the ends God gave them,
and as our Consciences and Conversations can witness for or against us, to be
humbled and thankful accordingly.

2. To consider what abundance of Peace, Joy, and Comfort, the well employment
of these Talents will bring unto you, when you come to lie upon your
Deathbeds, Isa. 38.3. Remember how I have walked before thee in Truth with a
perfect heart, (says Hezekiah): and what abundance of horror and terror will
fall upon your spirits, if you neglect your Talents, or the misimployment of
them, as it did upon him, that cried out at his end, Diem perdidi, Deum
perdidi, meipsum perdidi; I have lost the day, my God, and my self: To the one
he will say, Well done good and faithful Servant, thou have been faithful in a
little, I will make thee Ruler over much: To the other, Take him and bind him
hand and foot, and cast him into utter darkness, etc. To the one, Come ye
Blessed, for I was an hungry: To the other, Go ye cursed, etc. for I was an
hungry, and ye gave me no meat, etc. Mat. 25.

A serious meditation on these things, will stir you up to a more diligent and
careful employment of your inward and outward Talents, to the glory of God, and
the good of your own and others Souls.

Fifthly, Of Time.
In and about that, to meditate on these things.

1. The preciousness of Time; so precious it is, that on the well or ill
employment of it, depends the eternal welfare, or ill-fare of your Souls; so
precious, as all the Gold and Silver in the World cannot purchase one moment of
it when its past; which made one cry out bitterly, (A World of Wealth, for an
Hour of Time) so precious, as nothing the damned in Hell will more bewail, then
the loss of it; and if there were any hope of getting out, would employ it
better, even from the beginning of the World to the end, could they live so
long.

2. Consider the greatness of the work we have to do, and the little time we
have to do it in: 1. For the greatness of the Work; it is to glorify God,
serve our Brethren, save our Souls, clear up our interest in Christ, make our
Calling and Election sure, work out our Salvation with fear and trembling; and
how little time have we for the doing all this? Ars longa, vita brevis. Let us
ponder it seriously, it is but a moment of time, (in comparison of Eternity)
and on this moment depends the eternity of our well-being or ill-being, and
therefore concerns us very much to spend it very well; and the rather, because,
Tam diu vivimus, quam been vivimus, We have lived no longer then we lived well.

3. Consider the uncertainty of our time here; Our days on earth are as a
shadow, and there is none durable or abiding, 1 Chronicles. 29.15. Solomon says,
There Is a time to be born, and a time to die, Eccless. 3.2. but mentions no
time of living, as if it were so short, that it were not worth the naming; and
this short time, when it is past, cannot possibly be recalled; and the time to
come none of ours, the time present only is ours, and therefore see that be
employed well in some duties, either of our particular or general Calling; we
should be either like Christ, always doing good, or like Mary, still receiving
good, Heb. 3.13. 2 These. 3.1. Behold, now is the accepted time, etc.

4. Consider how highly, not only the wise Christians, but the very Heathens,
have prized time so, as to account that day lost, wherein they have not done
some good with Tongue, or Pen, or Purse; and therefore how much more should
Christians, that have more light to show them the weightiness of their work,
and the brevity and preciousness of their time. To meditate on the express
command, Ephesians. 5.15. Redeem the time, because the days are evil. Here take
notice of three things. 1 From what you are to redeem the time. 2. Unto what.
3. Why.

1. From what you are to redeem the time: You are to redeem it out of the hands
of those who would steal it away from God and your Souls; as, 1. Idleness and
her Daughters, viz. vain Imaginations, and idle Discourses. 2. Worldliness and
her Daughters, viz. inordinate carking and caring, toyling and termoiling about
the things of the World. 3. Voluptuousness and her Daughters, viz. vain
sporting, rioting, feasting, proud apparelling, immoderate and unseasonable
sleeping. These we find, by sad and general experience, to take up and consume
the most of the precious time of men and women; therefore you should do well to
reflect and look back, wherein you have been peccant and faulty, how much of
your precious time has been stolen away by these time-devourers; how much
time has been spent every day in Eating, Drinking, Sleeping, Tricking,
Triming, Fidling, Dancing, Carding, Dicing, and the like vain Sports; and how
little in Hearing, Reading, Praying, Meditation, holy Conference, etc. How much
the vanities of the World, carnal Pleasures, needless Visits, unprofitable
Discourses, and unnecessary Recreations have eaten up, and to humble your
selves under it, and redeem your time out of the hands of these Thieves for the
future; more especially, to ask your own Consciences, and look into your
Conversation, how you have employed the time of your Youth, the means and
seasons of Grace, the opportunities you have had of doing and receiving good,
the times of affliction, either Personal, Family, National, what good you have
gotten or done in and by all; otherwise very Heathens will rise up in judgment
against you. Take notice,

2. What you are to redeem it unto, viz. The promoting of the Glory of God, the
public Good, and your spiritual and everlasting Welfare, Isa. 43.3. Ephesians.
1.6. Psalm. 137.5. John 6.27.

3. For the grounds why you are so to redeem it; you have it here in the Text,
Because the days are evil, full of the evil of Sin, full of the evil of
Punishment; never did iniquity more abound, and never was the wrath of God more
revealed from Heaven, then in our days; and therefore to redeem time, that we
may be fitted for the worst of times, and the best of days.

Lastly, Meditate how bitterly men have bewailed the loss of their time on
their Deathbeds, and do still in Hell, and what they would be willing to do
and suffer, if they might have further time; but all in vain, in vain did she
cry out, Call back Time, Oh call back Time; Time being past, not a moment to be
recalled.

A serious meditation of these things, may (through the blessing of God) be an
effectual means to make you prize and improve better your time then ever you
have done.

Sixthly, Of Eternity.
Sect. 14. In and about it, to take notice of, and meditate on these things. 1.
What it is. 2. The kinds of it. 3. How near we are to it. 4. How bitterly men
will bewail, at the last, the loss of a Blessed Eternity.

1. What Eternity is? scilicet, An intell^ctual Sphere, (as one observes) whose
Center's every where, and Circumference no where. For the better understanding
of it, take notice, there is a double Eternity; one a part ante, and another a
part post; one that has neither beginning nor end, another that has a
beginning, but no end. For the first; so God only is Eternal, Isa. 43.10, 13.
Rev. 22.1, 8. And the things of God, as his Attributes, as his Truth, Psalm.
117.2. Mercy, Psalm. 136.1. Righteousness, Psalm. 119.142, etc. For the other
Eternity, which has a beginning, but no end, This the Eternity of Angels and
Men, and this Eternity is that we are to speak of.

2. For the kinds of Eternity. There is a double Eternity, of Woe and Joy,
Misery and Felicity. 1. Of Woe and Misery, that shall befall the wicked; and of
Joy and Felicity, which shall be bestowed on the godly, Mat. 25. last. The
wicked shall go into everlasting punishment, but the Righteous into Eternal
Life. And what folly and madness then is it, for a temporary delight to lose
eternal happiness? Momentanium quod delectat, eternum quod Cruciat.

3. We should consider, that we stand every day before the door of Eternity,
and we know not how soon we may lanch forth into that Ocean, from whence
there is no return.

4. How bitterly men will bewail at last (when it is too late) their folly and
madness, in losing a Blessed Eternity, and incurring a Cursed Eternity; how
unconceiveably miserable it will be for men to lose Heaven and lie in Hell, so
long as God is God. He found it, by bitter experience, that cried out on his
Deathbed, Oh Eternity, Eternity, Eternity! in Hell for ever, for ever, for
ever! This word ever, will break the hearts of men before ever they enter upon
the borders of Eternity; and therefore think seriously upon it, before it be
too late, and let it be your morning and evening Thoughts. The serious
meditation of it, may (through the blessing of God) be an effectual means to
take off your hearts from these perishing things of the World, and the
pleasures of sin here, which are but for a season; keep you from envying the
prosperity of the wicked, and repining at your own adversity, all being
momentany, in comparison of Eternity, and make you look out after an interest
in an eternal God, and Christ, and Spirit, and Grace, and Glory; and do
whatsoever you do in your particular and general Calling, upon eternal grounds,
and to eternal ends. Amen.

CHAP. VII. The World, and the Creatures in it.
IN and about this, to meditate on three things.

1. Those things in the Creatures, that engage our hearts to love God. 2. Those
things in the Creatures that disengage our hearts from inordinate love to, and
pursuit of the Creature. 3. Those duties we owe to God for the Creatures, and
the Creatures teach us to perform to God.
First, To meditate on those things in the Creatures, which discover the love
of God to us, and that engage our hearts again to love him. As for instance,
The Magnitude, Multitude, Variety, Beauty, Structures, Virtues, Sympathy and
Antipathy of the Creature.

1. For the Magnitude or Greatness of the Creature; Who can measure the breadth
of the Earth, and the depth of the Sea? (says the wise man) Eccles. 13. And if
the Earth be so great, how great is the whole World? The Earth is but a Point,
in comparison of the Heavens Circumference.

2. For the Multitude of the Creatures: Who can number the Sand of the Sea? and
if not the Sand, much less all the Creatures that are in, and under, and above
the Earth; all the Secretaries of Nature cannot number the kinds of the
Creature, much less the Individuaes, Jer. 33.22. Psalm. 104.25.

3. For the Variety of the Creatures. This is much more wonderful. As there are
innumerable Kinds of Creatures, so there are kinds of diverse forms and fashions
one from the other. Amongst so many thousand Pebles on the Seashore, you
cannot find two stones alike in all things; amongst so many thousand Herds of
Cattle, you cannot find two Beasts alike in all things; amongst so many
thousand Men and Women that are in the World, you cannot find two persons alike
in all things, but they differ in Face, or Voice, or Gesture.

4. For the Beauty of the Creature. How has the Lord bedeckt the Heavens with
Stars, the Earth with all variety of Beauties, well dressed Gardens, fruitful
Orchards, green Meadows, pleasant Woods, sweet Fountains, Crystal Streams, all
variety of Colors; so as Solomon in all his Royalty, was not clothed as the
Lilly, Matthew. 6.29.

5. For the Structure of the Creatures, how admirable is this? In the least, as
well as the greatest; the Soul of a little Fly (says Austin) excels the
glorious Body of the Sun; the Teeth of a Moth, as wonderful as the Tusks of a
Boar; the Thigh of a slender Gnat, not inferior to the Thigh of the hugest
Elephant; the Wings of a Butter-fly, may compare with the Wings of an Eagle.
There Is not the least Creature, but is so admirably framed, as all the Artists
in the World not able to mend or make the like.

6. For the Virtues of the Creature. How wonderful is this in the Elements
above, and the Planets beneath, in the Herbs, and Trees, and precious Stones;
there is no Creature, even the vilest and basest, but is good for some use or
other.

7. For the Sympathy of the Creatures, and the Antipathy between them. How
strong is this? No reason can be given of the sweet agreement between the
Lodestone and the Iron, the Lilly and the Garlic, nor of the mortal hatred
between the Swan and the Eagle, the little Birds and the Owl.

A serious meditation on these things, will not only discover the great love
of God, and draw out your hearts the more in love to him, who has done all
these things for you.

Secondly, To meditate on those things in the Creatures that may disingage your
hearts from the inordinate love of them, and the eager pursuit of them; amongst
others, on these things, The Vanity, Uncertainty, Unsatisfactoriness,
Commonness, Unprofitableness, Deceitfulness, Hurtfulness, and the great folly
of men in making them their portion.

1. On the Vanity of them. Being things in show, rather then in substance;
appearance, rather then reality; Prove. 23.5. Will thou set thine eyes upon that
which is not? Viz. In respect of any advantage and comfort, when God withdraws
himself from the Creature, then they are like standing Pools in Summer, dried
up, when the Creature comes to make use of them; yea, they are not only vain
in the Concrete, but vanity it self in the Abstract; verily, Man in his best
estate is altogether vanity, Psalm. 39.5. Not only thus, the Man, but every
Man; not in his worst, but best estate; not only in parts, but in every part,
altogether vanity: and if Man, the very best of Creatures, how much more those
Creatures which God made for Man: What is Honor, but Magnum nihil, a glorious
Fancy? Acts 25.23. What is Wealth, but a little white and red Earth? What is
all pleasure here, but a little bitter sweet? Solomon that extracted the
quintessence of all, concludes, after the trial of all, all is vanity and
vexation of Spirit.

2. Meditate on the uncertainty of them. 1 Timothy 16.17. Charge them that be
rich, they trust not in uncertain riches; So uncertain, as like Tennis-Balls,
they are banded up and down from one to another; they cannot promise a day or
an hours continuance to you, or you to them, Prove. 23.5. Riches take to
themselves Wings, and fly away like a Partridge, in one man's Field to day, in
another to morrow; many of great estates are on a sudden brought to naught, by
Fire, Water, Thieves: How often have you heard of such and such in honor to
day, and disgrace to morrow; a Rich Man one day, and a Beggar another; in
health and jovial to day, and dead, nay (it may be) damned to morrow: be warned
by others harms.

3. Meditate on the Vnsatisfactoriness of them. They that have most of them,
are never satisfied with them, Eccles. 1.8. Eccles. 4.8. Eccles. 5.10. Isa.
55.1. Wherefore do you lay out your Money for that which cannot satisfy? You
have instances of it in all times: The Rich Fool in the Gospel, not content to
have his Barns full, but he must pull them down to build them bigger: Absalom
not content to be a Kings Son, but he must aspire also to his Fathers Throne:
Ahab not content with a Kingdom, but is sick after Naboths Vineyard. We need
not look so far back, our latter times give us too sad Examples; he that has
climed the Ladder of Preferment, high enough to break his neck, yet will
endeavor to climb higher and higher, ut lapsu graviore ruat, that he may have
the greater fall; he that by base and unjust Courses has scrapt together a
great heap of Wealth, more then he knows well how to despose of, yet is still
laboring to add House to House, and Field to Field, and Bag to Bag, till he
has added Hell to all; he that has run riot into all manner of excess, and
even glutted himself with the pleasures of the Flesh, will yet be still adding
Drunkenness to Thirst, and Fuel to the Fire of Concupiscence, until he has
brought Poverty into his Estate, and Rottenness into his Body, and Destruction
both upon Soul and Body; So unsatisfactory are all those things here below;
that like the Fire, Grave, Sea, and Hell, they have never enough.

4. The Commonness of them. How that all these worldly things are common to the
Wicked, as well as the Godly; God gives Riches to them to whom he will never
give Grace here, nor Glory hereafter; Riches were never an evidence of Gods
Love here, or Salvation hereafter; but only an Interest in Christ, and Grace
from Him. Men may have Riches, and yet be damned; Heirs, and yet be damned;
Gifts and Parts, and yet be damned; for all these earthly things are common to
the wicked with the Godly, Eccles. 9.1. and usually wicked men enjoy more of
them then the Godly, Job 2. Psalm. 73. because it is their portion in this
Life, Psalm. 17. end.

5. Take notice of the Unprofitableness of them. Mark 8.36. What will it profit
a man to win the World and lose his Soul; they cannot profit a Man's Person,
neither his Soul, nor Body, nor his Posterity; they may seem to profit in a day
of Prosperity, but not of Adversity, a day of common Calamity, Sickness, Death,
Judgment. 1. They cannot profit or better a man's person; it may make him a
worse, but not a better man; he may conceit himself a better man, and the men
of the World may esteem him the better for his abundance of these things, his
high Place, his brave Apparel, his great Revenues; but God esteems no man the
better for these things, Job 34.19. Job 36.19. 2. They cannot profit or better
the Soul, hurt it they may, and do; as for instance; 1st. They keep them from
looking after piety, Luke 14.18. 2ly, They distract them in duty, Ezekiel. 33.31.
3ly, It makes them unfruitful in duty, Mat. 13.22. They may better his outward
condition; he may eat more, and go finer, and lie easier; but they cannot
better his inward condition, help to Pardon, or Peace, Grace, or Glory: Thou
and thy Money perish with thee, that think the Gift of God may be purchased
with Money, said Peter to Simon Magus, Acts 8.20. God will not give away his
Graces (as the Indians do their Gold) for Gaudes and Rattles, Toys and
Trifles. 3. Unprofitable to the Body. Can Honor or Wealth buy Health, or get a
stomach to meat, or procure ease, rest, and sleep? No, we find by experience
the contrary; he that has most of these outward things, can but eat, and
drink, and cloth himself; and so does a poor man, and with more comfort and
contentment, many times, then the Rich, and has usually a a better appetite to
his meat, and more sweet sleep after his labor, Eccl. 5.11. Job 20.22. 4.
Unprofitable likewise to his Posterity: How often have you seen after that men
have toyled and turmoiled in the World all their days for their Children,
their Children to be either suddenly snatched away from their Wealth, or their
Wealth from their Children: How often have you seen the Proverb made good,
Covetous men have either Prodigals or Fools to their Children; such as either
presently consume it away, or are soon cheated of all: If you would observe it,
you may find many Parents bewailing their folly at the last, that they have
toyled so much in the World for such wicked and rebellious Children; and many
Children cursing the time that ever their Parents left them so great and
ill-gotten Estates, according to that Job 21.19. 5. However they may afford
them some comfort in the day of prosperity, and in a day of peace, yet not in
the time of Adversity, and in a day of Calamity in a day of Sickness, Death,
and Judgment. 1st. Not in a day of common Calamity, when the Judgments of God
are upon the Land, Sword, Famine, Pestilence, 1 Samuel 12.21. Prove. 11.4. Zeph.
1. last. Ezekiel. 7.19. 2ly, In Sickness; It is not high Places, honorable
Titles, full Bags, great Revenues, that can prevent or remove Stone, Gout,
Strangury, Fever, or any Sickness or Pain; it is true, they may procure
Physicians, and Medicines; but those kill, rather then cure, without the Lord.
3ly, In the hour of Death, Job 27.8. What is the hope of the Hypocrite, though
he has gained, when God takes away his Soul? All the Rich Fools Wealth, could
not keep his Soul one night longer, Luke 12.15, 20. 4ly, In the day of
Judgment, all the World is so far from profiting, as they shall see all in fire
about their ears, and have nothing left but an account how they got, and kept,
and employed it; and the more they have had of this Worlds good, and the less
good they have done with it; and the more they have abused it, the more and
greater will be their torment. 5ly, All they have of the World, cannot save
them from Hell, Luke 16.23. Rev. 21.8. nor mitigate their torments there; Dives
could not procure a drop of Water to cool his scorched tongue, Luke 16.24, 25.
So as you see clearly and fully, what unprofitable and helpless things these of
the World are without Grace, they cannot free from any thing that is truly
evil, Sin or Pain; nor help to any thing that is truly good, Pardon or Peace;
they cannot keep sickness from the Body, or trouble from the Mind, or terrors
from the Conscience, or the Soul out of Hell; they may make men worse, but
never the better.

6. Think on the Deceitfulness of the things of the World. They do promise to
men much help and comfort, or rather men promise to themselves much by them,
but both they and themselves deceive themselves, and meet with bitterness
instead of sweetness, and trouble instead of comfort, therefore called
deceitful Riches, Mat. 13.22. Like Jael, seeds men with Milk, but pierces
their heads and hearts afterward with sorrow; like Joab and Judas, who salute
with a Kiss, but stab to the heart.

7. On the Hurtfulness of them: Especially being got and kept by unlawful
means, and used and employed to unlawful ends, they keep them from a great deal
of good, and expose them to a great deal of hurt. 1. They keep men from a great
deal of good, as the minding the glory of God, and the good of Souls, both
their own and others, keep them either from using the means of Grace, or from
profiting by them, Ezekiel 33.31, 32. Luke 18.19. 2. Expose them to a great deal
of evil, both of Sin and Punishment, the wrath and curse of God and Man both
here, and to all eternity in Hell, as you may see clearly, Eccles. 5.13. 1 Timothy
6.9, 10. James 5.1, 2, 3. Hence it is that Solomon styles them, not only
Vanity, but vexation of Spirit, because they are still vexing men either with
cares in getting, or fears in keeping, or sorrows in losing; and our Savior
compares them to Thorns, because they are still piercing both head and heart
with troubles in getting, and grief in parting with them.

8. Meditate on the great folly and madness of men, in minding, affecting, and
pursuing these things of the World before, and more then the things of God, and
Christ, and his Spirit, and Kingdom, and the welfare of their own precious and
immortal Souls: The Spirit of God brands them frequently in the Scripture for
Fools, or the Fools, and the worst of Fools, Prove. 1.22. Mat. 23.17, 18. Luke
12.19, 20. and not without cause.

1. He is a Fool that is not able to discern between Copper and Gold, Pebles
and Pearls, that will part with the richest Coin, for the richest Counter; what
are all temporal things, in comparison of spiritual and eternal Excellencies,
but dross and dung, (...), offal and Dogs-meat, in comparison of Christ, Grace,
and Glory, as the Apostle styles them, Phil. 3.

2. He is a Fool, you know, that minds only things present, and nothing for
the future; A wise man foresees the evil and hides himself, but a fool passes
on and is punished, Prove. 22.5. A wise man fore-sees and fore-casts his
business, but a fool does neither: And such fools are all worldly wise men, all
for this present World, and nothing for another. I have read a story of a
certain great Man, that having many Houses, was wont every month to go from one
House to another, and send Harbingers before to make provision for him; at last
falling sick, and drawing toward his end, a Servant of his came to visit him,
and asking him how he did, Oh, (says he) I am going to another World; Master
(said he) you were wont here to send Provision before you to your Houses here,
have you done so for another House, your eternal House? Oh no (said he) that is
my folly and misery.

3. He is a fool that will hazard and adventure his life for a toy and a
trifle, and put off a business for the present of greatest consequence, to
another day, when yet he knows not whether he shall have another day; and yet
this is the greatest folly of worldly wise men, though they hear often that
there is but one thing necessary in the World, in comparison whereof all other
things are unnecessary, viz. the Salvation of the Soul, yet will hazard that,
to gain the World, and put off that to the last and weakest hour, when they can
scarce think upon any thing else but pain; and then when it is too late, lament
their great folly and madness in it.

Thirdly, Meditate on the duties you ow to God for the Creatures, and the uses
you are to make of the Creatures; I shall but name a few: As,

1. To contemplate those glorious Attributes of God, which shine forth in the
Creatures, as his Eternity, Omnipotency, infinite Wisdom, and unsearchable
goodness to Mankind, in making a World, and all things in it for him, and him
for himself; and that, first, Because it is expressly commanded, Eccles. 7.13.
Job 37.14. 2. The practice of the Saints, Psalm. 77.11, 12. Psalm. 143.5, 6. all
Gods People, Psalm. 111.2. 3. Because it is the end wherefore God made Man, and
gave him a reasonable Soul; not only that he should barely view the Creatures,
but contemplate his glorious Attributes that shine forth in them. There Is no
skilful Artificer that will take it well to have his skill not taken notice of
in the works he does; much less will God, and it will exceedingly agravate men's
sin and condemnation at last, that they have so much taken notice of, and
admired the works of men, and so little taken notice of the great and glorious
Works of God in the Creation of this glorious Fabric of Heaven and Earth.

2. Duty, to learn those good things in the Creatures, which they do teach us
in, and by the instinct of Nature: for all the World is but a great School, to
teach us the knowledge of God, Romans 1.20. Creatio Mundi Scriptura Dei,
Universus Mundus, Deus Explicatus, (as one says well) The whole Creation is a
Scripture of God, the Heaven, the Earth, and the Sea.

3. Great Leaves of that Book; the Creatures contained in them, as so many
Lines, by which God would read a Divinity-Lecture to us, all the Creatures but
a Ladder made of many steps to raise us up to God, and as it were, a pair of
Spectacles, whereby we may read God, and the invisible things of God more
clearly and plainly, Jenkins on Jude.

But what are those things the Creatures teach us?

They all teach us Obedience, Love, Unity, and dependence upon God, a desire of
freedom from that bondage our sin has brought upon them.

[1.] They all teach us Obedience to God, for they all keep their station in
which God has set them; they all do what God commands them, and leave undone
what he forbids them. 1. They all keep their station; the Sun rejoices to run
its course, the Sea keeps within its Banks, the Earth stands fast upon her
Foundation; only Man is fallen from it. 2. They do whatsoever God commands
them; Psalm. 19.1. The Heavens declare the Glory of God, etc. the Sea, and the
Winds, and all fulfill his Word, Psalm. 148.8. 3. They leave undone what he
forbids them; the Fire burns not, the Sea stands on heaps, the Sun stands
still, and goes backward ten degrees; the Fire descends, and the Water ascends
at his command; all the Creatures have an ear to hear their Creator, only Man
is deaf: Yea, (and mark farther) they not only obey their Creator, but they
obey him in a right manner: For, 1. they serve him only, and not us any further
and longer then we serve him; therefore he is called the Lord of Hosts, because
all is at his command, to teach us, as to obey him, so him only, and men no
further then they obey God. 2. They serve him cheerfully, Psalm. 19. The Sun
rejoices as a Giant to run his course; and so ought we, for the abundance of
all his goodness to us, or else are threatened to serve our enemies in the want
of all things, Deuteronomy. 2.8. 3. They serve him constantly day and night, and are
never weary of doing him service; so neither ought we, 1 Cor. 15. last. Be
steadfast, unmovable, etc. Gal. 6.9. Be not weary of well doing, etc. 4. They
serve the Lord freely, by the instinct of Nature; how much more should we by
the instinct of Grace. 5. They waste and consume themselves in the service of
us, to teach us to spend our selves, and be spent for God.

[2.] They all teach us to love God, as being all fruits and tokens of his love
to us; and refuse to love us, if we neglect to love him; the Sun denies its
Shine, the Clouds their Rain, and the Earth its Fruits; they teach us also as
to love God, so to love others for God's sake, especially those that are nearly
related to us; for they generally love those of the same kind, and are very
tender over their Mates, and to their young ones.

[3.] They all teach us unity amongst our selves, for they all combine and
conspire in one, for the good of the whole; they all prefer the good of the
whole, above their own particular: the Fire will descend, and the Waters
ascend, rather then there shall be a vacuum in Nature; though they be of
contrary qualities, yet they do not trouble, but help one the other; the Fire
warms the Air, the Air preserves the Water, the Water moistneth the Earth; one
Element is a good Neighbor to the other, and all to teach us, we should not be
hurtful, but helpful one to another, and prefer the public, before our own
private good.

[4.] They all teach us dependence on God, for being, and well-being, Psalm.
147.9, 10. The eyes of all things look up to thee, etc. To teach us to look up
to God, and to have our dependence upon him, for our selves and ours, and to be
careful about nothing, Phil. 4.7. Matthew. 6.26. to the end.

[5.] They all teach us a desire and longing, to be freed from that bondage our
sins have brought upon them and our selves, Romans 8.19, 22. And shall the
Creatures sigh and groan under our burdens, and we not under our own?

A third Duty, is this, To bewail the first sin of ours, which brought such
vanity and vexation upon the Creatures: God at first looked down upon all that
he had made, and lo it was all very good, Genesis 1. last. useful and profitable
to man; but no sooner had Man sinned, but all became, not only vain and
unprofitable, but vanity of vanities, and vexation of spirit, Eccles. 1.

4th Duty, Take heed you do not give those affections to the Creature, which
are due only to God, as our Love, Fear, Desire, Delight, Sorrow, Hope,
Confidence; for this is to rob God of his Glory and give it to the Creature;
that which is expressly forbid, Col. 3.1, 2, 3. therefore to take heed of it:
And,

1. To take heed of inordinate love to them, so as to be unwilling to part with
them at the call and command of God; for this is to love the Gift more then the
Giver; and this is no other then spiritual Idolatry and Adultery, Col. 3.5. and
James 4.4. This also the next and readiest way to be deprived of them, and to
have a cross, if not a curse, in them: Besides, if you love them too much, be
sure you will grieve the more when they are taken from you, and be made to wish
you had never loved them so much, for then you should not have grieved so much,
and by both, so dishonor God, disgrace Profession, and bring distempers upon
your selves, and therefore love not the World, nor the things of the World, 1
John 2.15.

2. Take heed of inordinate fear of them, so as to fear their displeasure, more
then Gods, so as to be drawn by them to displease God to please them, because
they cannot hurt you or help you without God. Isa. 51.12, 13. Who art thou that
art afraid of Man that shall die? etc. and God is able to plague you, not only
here, but to all eternity hereafter; and therefore, says our Savior, Fear not
them that can only kill the body, etc. And what says the Apostle? Gal. 1.10,
Go I about to please men? if so, I should not be the Servan^ of Christ.

3. Take heed of inordinate desire of the Creatures: For consider, 1. they are
no way able to s^tisfie your desires; the more you have of them, the more you
will desire of them, Eccles. 4.8. Hab. 2.15. He enlarges his desire as Hell,
and can never be satisfied: And this is the just Judgment of God upon men, for
their inordinate desire of them; and therefore let your conversation be without
covetousness. Remember there is nothing can satisfy the desire of the Soul,
but God. Fecisti nos Domine propter te, etc. Thou have made us, O Lord, for thy
self; and our hearts are restless until they return unto thy self, (says
Austin) and therefore. Isa. 55.1. Why do you lay out your money for that which
is not bread, and which cannot satisfy? 2. Because it is a sin of a very
provoking and pernicious Nature. 1. Of a provoking Nature, being no other then
spiritual Idolatry and Adultery, as you saw before, and may further in this,
that such Worldlings are said to sacrifice to their own Nets, Hab. 2.16. to
make their belly their God, Phil. 3.19. 2. Of a pernicious Nature, that which
shuts out God, and all that is good, John 5.40. Mark 4.9. Gal. 5.17. and lets in
Satan, and all that is evil, 1 Timothy 6.9, 10.

4. Take heed of inordinate delight in them, of rejoicing in them, more then in
God or without God; for they are all but broken Cisterns, that can hold no
Water of Consolation to refresh you in a time of need; they all are but like
Job's Friends, miserable Comforters; that delight and comfort men have in them,
is more outward then inward. Prove. 14.15. I^ laughter the (...) is heavy, and
all that comfort transitory and vanishing. 1 Cor. 7.30. The time is but short,
and the fashion of this World passes away, and usually ends in more
melan^^^lly and heavy-heartedness afterward, and without repentance in end^^^s
torments, Luke 16. Rev. 18.7. Look how much pleasure as she has had, so much
torment gi^^ unto her; and therefore, Jer. 9.23 ^hus says the Lord, Let not
the Wise Man glory in his Wisdom, nor the Mighty Man in his Might, nor the Rich
Man in his Riches; but let him that glories, glory in this, That he
understands and knows me, etc. For what is all men's carnal Wisdom and Policy
(...) out Grace, but Folly; and all their (...) Weakness; and all their Riches,
but (...) Psalm. 49.6, 7.

5. Take heed of inordinate grief for the loss of them; God being the Sovereign
Lord of his Creatures, he may dispose of (...) seems good to himself, when he
takes away any thing he takes but his own; and he will never take away any
Creature-Comfort, but when he sees it most for his glory and your good; he
never takes away a Temporal, but he offers a better, viz. a Spiritual and
Eternal Comfort; and for you to be impatient and discontented, is but to
provoke him to take off another; and therefore take heed of it, because worldly
sorrow often brings death; or if not so, yet makes men more unserviceable to
God, to Men, and to themselves: whence that of our Savior to his Disciples,
when they grieved at the tidings of his short departure from them, John 14.12.
Let not your hearts be troubled, etc.

6. Take heed you do not place your hope or confidence in any Creature, either
your own, or their Wits, Wealth, Policy, Power, to support, supply, help and
comfort you in an evil day; for vain is the help of the Creatures, they are all
but helpless helps, they cannot help themselves, much less others; when God
shall stretch out his hand against evil doers, then both he that helps, and he
that is helped, shall both fall together, Isa. 31.3. Prove. 15.19. and
therefore, Psalm 146.3. Trust not in Princes, and 1 Timothy 6.17. Trust not in
uncertain riches; Trust not in them, because they are uncertain, a Fire may
consume all in an instant, or Death may suddenly snatch you away from all, as
it did the Rich Fool; and then how will you bewail your folly in putting so
much confidence in them, and expecting so much good from them; and therefore
take heed of it; and hearken to the council the Psalmist gives you, Psalm. 62.
If Riches increase, set not thy heart on them; and pray with David, Turn away
my eyes from beholding vanity; O Lord incline my heart unto thy Testimonies,
and not unto Covetousness, Psalm. 119.36.

7th Duty. To seek the Scriptures, and use them, so that God may have the
Glory, and you the comfort. How is that? Mark well:

1. To seek them only in the second place after Spiritual and Eternal
Excellencies, Matthew. 6.33. John 6.27. This will sweeten and sanctify all your
Temporals, and make them true Blessings unto you.

2. To seek them only in and by the use of lawful means, for it is infinitely
better you should be without them, then you to have the curse of God with them,
and lose your precious Souls by them.

3. To seek them not for themselves, not for your own selves, for this is to
make them your chief good, and set them up in the room of God, but to seek them
for God's sake, the Churches sake, and your Souls sake.

1. For God's sake: That you may be quickened and enabled by them to serve him
the more faithfully, cheerfully, and fruitfully, in them, and by them, and for
them; for this is the end wherefore he gives them, that they may be helps, and
not hindrances in the Worship and Service of Him, Deuteronomy. 28.47.

2. To seek them for the Churches sake: That you may be the more able by them
to promote Religion, propagate the Gospel, and supply the necessity of the
Saints.

3. For your Souls sake: That you may both procure and improve the means and
seasons of Grace, have the more time and leisure to attend on the Word, holy
Conference, Meditation, etc.

In short. If you would have comfort in seeking these outward things, seek them
in Christ, with Christ, and for Christ.

1. In Christ; See that you have a spiritual right to them, in and by him.

2. With Christ; That you may have his presence in the use of them.

3. For Christ; That he may have the more glory from you by them.

^^^y, and Lastsy, Make a spiritual use of them; For this you may observe to
have been the pract^^e of the Saints in the Scripture, and of our Lord and
Savior himself, by Corporeal Things, (...) h^s Hearers to the meditation of
Spiritual Things; by earthly, to heavenly Bread and Water, John 4. John 6. from
the S^wing of the Seed, to (...) them of the Preaching of the Word. Ma^^ 13.19.
From the Reaping of the Harvest, to (...) of the last and general Judgment.
Verse. 39. All to teach us to (...) Spiritual Use of the things we see and use,
we should imitate him in it; as for instance. In those excellencies we showed
you in the Creatures;

1. From the greatness of the Creatures, we should be led to contemplate the
greatness of our God; if they be so great, much more he that made them; Altior
Caelo, profundior Inferno, latior Terra, Mari dissutior, nusquam est, and
ubique est, (says Bernard); He is higher then Heaven, lower then Hell, broader
then the Earth, wider then the Sea, no where, and yet every where, Isa. 40.12,
15.

2. From the multitude of the Creatures; we should be led to consider the
honor of the Creator. If a Kings Dignity consist in a multitude of Subjects,
and a Fathers Honor in the multitude of Children, how infinite must the
Dignity and Honor of God be, that has so many Subjects, and Servants, and
Sons, as there be Creatures in Heaven (...) Earth.

3. From the variety of the Creatures, we should be led to contemplate the
wisdom of the Creator. Psalm. 104.24. O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in
wisdom have thou made them all: the Earth is full of thy riches: Romans 11.33.
(...)! Oh the depth and riches of the wisdom of God, etc.

4. From the beauty of the Creature; we should be led to think of the infinite
and incomprehensible beauty of God, who pu^s all this beauty in the Creatures,
and therefore must needs have it infinitely in himself.

5. From the admirable structure of the Creatures; we should be led to consider
the infinite knowledge of God, and the wonderful power of God, as Moses; Exodus
15.11. Glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders; and David,
Psalm. 136.4.

6. From the secret and hidden virtues of the Creature; we should be led to
contemplate the admirable perfections of God, who has put so many perfections
into the Creature; he must needs be most perfect in himself, from whom all
others come, James 1.17.

Lastly, From the Sympathy and Antipathy in the Creatures; we should be led to
consider of the Sympathy between Christ and his Members, and Antipathy between
the Seed of the Woman and the Serpent.

Therefore should you meditate on these things in the World, and the Creatures
of it, that God may have his glory in them, and you the comfort of them, and
whilst you live in the World, may be enabled to live above the World, and mind,
and prepare, and fit for a better World.

CHAP. VIII. The last Head of Meditation is, concerning the Good and Evil
Angels, by which God governs the World.
THat God governs the World not only by men, (as Magistrates and Ministers)
but also by Angels good and bad, is evident out of the Scripture.

1. That good Angels are employed for the good of God's Church and People, you
may see clearly, Heb. 1. last. Are they not all Ministering Spirits? etc. And
Dan. 10.13, 14. As it was the Angel Gabriel that withstood the Prince of
Persia, so the Angel that led Israel into Canaan; as you may see by comparing
the 20th, with the 31th Chapter of Exodus.

2. That he uses the Evil Angels in the Government of the World, for the
punishment of wicked men, you may see Job 1.6, 7. 1 Kings 20.20, 21, 22. To
begin with the Good Angels.

First, Of the Good Angels.
Sect. 1. In and about them, to take notice and meditate on these things, What
they are in their Nature, What their Offices, And what our duties are in
respect of them.

1. What they are; they cannot be perfectly defined, only generally described,
as the Scripture holds them forth, thus; Spiritual Substances, created in the
beginning very good; and Blessed, excelling all other Creatures; in their
Endowments, such as keep their first estate, and are still attending upon God.
1. That they are Spiritual Substances, is evident Heb. 1.14. 2. That they were
created in the beginning, is clear Col. 1.16. 3. That they were created
perfectly good, and blessed, Genesis 1. last. 4. That they excel all other in
their Endowments, Ephesians. 3.10. They are called Principalities and Powers. When
the Scripture would express the excellency of a Person or Thing, it uses to do
it by the excellency in Angels, 2 Samuel 14.7. My Lord is as an Angel of God, 1
Cor. 13.1. 5. That they keep their first state, Jude 6. 6. That they
continually attend upon God, Dan. 7.10. Mat. 18.10.

2. To take notice what their Office is, Heb. 1.7. Who makes his Angels
Spirits, and his Ministers flames of fire; so much the word Angel imports,
Angeli vocabulum, nomen officiae, non naturae; the name of Angel points out
their Office, and not their Nature; their Nature is to be Spirits, but their
Office is to be Angels, or Ministers, or Messengers.

Q. 1. But to whom do they discharge this Office, and what are their Offices?

A. They minister to God, and Christ, his Church and People.

1. To God; in continual adoring and worshipping him, praising and giving glory
to him, Isa. 6.3. Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts, Luke 2.14. Rev. 5.12.
They minister to God and Christ, by standing continually in his presence, to
know and do whatever is his will and pleasure, Psalm. 103.20, 21.

2. For Christ; they give him the same worship they do unto God, Let all the
Angels of God worship him; and were all along at his command and service,
attended on him in his Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, and shall,
at the last day, in his coming to Judgment; as you may see clearly in reading
the Gospel, Luke 1.13. and 22.43. and 24.5, 6. Acts 1.10, 11. Mat. 8.38. and
13.49.

3. They minister to the Church and People of God, in Life, and Death, and
after Death.

1. In Life: They Minister both to the welfare of their Bodies and Souls, in
watching over them, and protecting them from evil, Psalm. 34.7. Psalm. 91.10, 11.
instructing and directing, quickening, encouraging, and comforting them in that
which is good, Dan. 8.16, 17. Dan. 9.12. Genesis 24.7. Genesis 32.1. Isa. 6.6, 7.
Rev. 22.9.

2. In Death: They are about their Beds, refresh them in their Sufferings, as
they did Christ in his Agonies, stand ready to receive their Souls, and to
carry them (as they did the Soul of Lazarus) into Abraham's Bosom, Luke 16.22.

3. After Death: They watch over their Bodies, as Michael the Archangel did
over the Body of Moses, Jude 9. And at the last day they shall open their
Graves, and bring out their Bodies, and secure them from the fire, that it
shall not hurt them, as in (...) these three Children in the Fiery Furnace,
Dan. 3. And whereas the Devil, will then be most raging, the good Angels will
restrain them, and stop their mouths, as they did stop the mouths of the Lions,
when Daniel was cast into the Den; after this, they will gather together all
the Elect from the four quarters of the Earth, Mat. 24.31. and separate them
from the Reprobates, Mat. 13.40. Take them up into the Clouds, to be Accessors
with Christ in Judgment on the wicked World, 1 Cor. 6.1. and join with them
(...) praising God, Rev. 4.9, 10. and Rev. 5.11, 12. and 7.9, 10.

Q. 2. What are our duties in respect of the good Angels?

A. These are many and weighty, though little known, and less practiced by the
most; and therefore mind them well.

1. To admire the wonderful love of God, in honoring us with such glorious and
blessed Guardians; not only vouchsafing his own protection, and the protection
of his Son and Spirit, but also of his blessed Angels; Is not this matter of
admiration? what are the Angels, but the most glorious Creatures in the World,
the glorious Courtiers of Heaven? No Prince on Earth has so glorious a Guard,
as every Saint, even the poorest has, every day and night, and therefore to be
still admiring and adoring this wonderful love of God, and say, Lord, what is
Man, and I among the Sons of Men, that thou should honor me so far, as to
give thy Angels a charge to minister to me, and watch over me every day and
night.

2. To glory in this privilege, above all other privileges in the World, that
we have such high and excellent Creatures to minister to us, and to be our
Guardians. If men have a great and long Train at theit heels, of great and
Noble Persons, in Silk and Satin, and Golden Chains, how do they run after
them, and gaze upon them; whereas, alas, all this bravery is but beggary to the
Glory of those that wait upon the Saints; they have higher and more glorious
attendance, those noble and glorious Courtiers of Heaven: men need a fair day,
and a clear Sunshine, to discover their bravery, or half the show of it is
lost; but now nothing can darken the glory of the Saints attendance; Mat. 28.2,
3. And behold, there was a great Earthquake, for the Angel of the Lord
descended from Heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from the door, and
sat upon it; his countenance was like Lightning, and his Raiment white as Snow.

3. Take heed you do not injure any, the least of God's Saints, the poorest,
meanest, most contemptible of them: Why? Because they have the glorious Angels
to wait upon them, and minister unto them; Mat. 18.10. See that thou despise
not one of these little ones, for I say unto you, the Angels behold the Face of
my Father. Why should any think them unworthy of their company and countenance,
when the greatest Angels think them worthy of their attendance and service; if
any wrong them, the Angels will certainly right them. When the Sodomites rose
up against Lot, the Angel smote them with blindness, and rescued Lot out of
their hands. If Balaam go about to curse God's Israel, an Angel stands in the
way with a drawn Sword to withstand him; If proud Sennacherib threaten to
destroy Hezekiah and his People, an Angel goes forth and slayes, in one night,
a hundred eighty and five thousand in his Army. And therefore take heed of
wronging any of them any way.

4. Be quickened hence to honor and serve that God more cheerfully, that has
so highly honored and encouraged you in the service of him, as to appoint the
Glorious Angels to attend upon you in it; shall they that are so high and holy
above us, stoop so low as to attend upon us, and Minister to us, at God's
command, and shall not we, who are so inferior to him, readily do service to
him, who is so high above us, and has no need of our service, and whose
service cannot any way reach to him, but only to our selves? And when our
honor and happiness is wrapped up in it; what a shame were this, and what an
aggravation will this be upon all idle Servants at the last day!

5th Duty, To carry our selves so, as we may enjoy the benefit, sweet, and
comfort of this glorious and blessed Privilege, the Ministration and Service
of the Angels.

Q. How is that?

A. Mind well, it consists in these Particulars.

1. To take more notice of this glorious Privilege then ever you have done: If
you have been ignorant and heedless of it heretofore, take the shame of it, and
labor to get a more distinct knowledge of it, and get your Faith confirmed and
established in it; for is it not a foul shame, that such glorious Spirits
should take notice of us, and minister to us, and we take no notice of them.

2. To see that you be such Persons as God has given his Angels a charge over.
Who are they? 1st. Such as fear the Lord, Psalm 34.7. 2ly, Such as keep in
God's Ways, the ways of his Commandments, Psalm 91.1. 3ly, Such as
continually pray to God for their direction and protection, as Abraham's
Servant did, Genesis 24.7. and the Israelites, Numb. 20.16. 4ly, Such as are Heirs
of Salvation, for they minister only unto such, Heb. 1. last.

3. To carry your selves reverently in their presence, and take heed you do
nothing that should offend and grieve them; whence that, 1 Cor. 10.11, 12. A
Woman ought to cover her Head, because of the Angels; that is, (as Mr. Perkins
says) not only in respect of God's Ministers, but the Angels; and not without
great reason. 1. Because they are present to observe our carriage in all the
Service of God. 2. Because they are Holy Spirits, and cannot endure to see any
unholy or unclean behavior.

4thly. To imitate the Blessed Angels, especially in these four things, 1.
their Humility, 2. Piety, 3. Charity, 4. Alacrity. 1. Their Humility; Though
they be glorious Spirits, yet they are content to stoop to the meanest Servants
of God; at God's Command they came down from Heaven to bring glad tidings of
Salvation to poor Shepherds, are willing to wait on those that are despised of
men, Mat. 18.10. how much more should we stoop to one another, and serve one
another in love: see the command, Romans 12.3.16. 2. To imitate them in their
Piety; They are God-like, Holy, as he is Holy, therefore called (...) Holy
Angels; Mark 8.38. And we are command^^ (...) be Holy, as God is Holy, 1 Timothy
1.15. They seek nor their own Glory, but the Lords, Isa. (...) so we are
commanded, 1 Cor. (...) They stand ready pressed to know and do the Will of God,
Psalm. 103.21. And we are commanded, Tu^^ 3.^. Be ready to every good work. They
do it also zealously, Dan. 9.21. He make (...) Angels a flame of Fire; and this
we are comm^nded, Rev. 3.19. Be zealous, and amend. And they do it constantly,
Matthew. 18.10. And we are commanded, 1 Cor. 15. last. Be steadfast, u^^oveable,
always abounding in the Work of the Lord, etc. Gal. 6.10. Be not weary of well
doing; And all this is no other then what we are taught to pray for in the
Lords Prayer, in these words, Thy will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven;
That is universally, sincerely, cheerfully, constantly. 3. In their Charity;
They not only love one another, but they love us; and in love to us, they are
content to stoop to any Service, wherein they may express their love to us, how
much more should we love one the other, and (as the Apostle exhorts) serve one
another in love, and the rather, because it is the express command of Christ,
and he has given himself an Example of it, and made it the chief character of
a Disciple of his, John 13.35. 4. To imitate them in their Joy; They rejoice
continually in the Glory of God, the Exaltation of Christ, the Conversation of
Sinners, the Salvation of Souls, the Glorification of the Saints, together with
themselves; how much more should we rejoice in these things; seeing the benefit
redounds not so much to them as to us?

6th Duty: Not to fear the malice and rage of the Evil Angels; for however the
Evil Angels endeavor to do all the mischief they can to the Godly, and God
permits them to do it to wicked men, Psalm. 78.49, 50. and sometimes to afflict
the Godly, Job 1.6. yet here is our comfort, All the Godly have the Good Angels
to protect them, that they cannot hurt them as they would; however Evil Angels
may have a permission from God to do them evil, yet the Good Angels have
always a Commission from God to do them good, Psalm. 103. to the end. And the
power of Good Angels is more and greater then of the Evil, they having lost
much of it by their fall, and therefore not so much to fear them. A King that
has his Guard about him, fears no danger; how much less should we, who have,
though not of men, yet a Guard of Angels, 2 Kings 6.16.

7th Duty: Not slavishly to fear Death, but to welcome it whenever it comes,
seeing it is the last Office the Angels do for the Saints here to attend on
their Deathbeds, and take the care of their Souls, and carry them after Death
to the Spirits of Just Men made perfect, Luke 16.22. Heb. 12.22.

Lastly, Remember still to return God the Glory of this Glorious Privilege,
the enjoyment of the Ministry of Angels, and all the good and comfort you have
reapt by it; The Shepherds ( Luke 2.20.) having heard of the glad tidings
brought by the Ministry of Angels, they returned glorifying and praising God,
but not the Angels; the Angels ought to have their due reverence and respect
for their Ministry, but we are to give the honor and glory of it only to God:
Thus Daniel 6.22. and Peter, Acts 12.11. they did not ascribe the deliverance
to the Angels, but unto God that sent his Angels. And great cause have we to
glorify God in, and for their Ministry.

1. In respect of the great honor God conferreth on us, in vouchsafing such
honorable Guardians to us.

2. In respect of the great good that comes to us by them; not only in
protecting us from those evil spirits which rule in the Air, but the quickening
and leadings, to the following and guidance of his ever blessed Spirit of Grace.

3. Because they are only instruments in God's Hand, it is God alone is the
Author of all the good we receive by them. Make these uses of the Ministry of
Angels, and you will be sure to reap much benefit and comfort by it, and to
have them still to attend upon you, and minister to you in Life and Death, and
after Death. 1. In Life; to preserve you from evil, and to encourage you in
that which is good, to comfort you in, and deliver you out of trouble. 2. In
Death; to stand about your Beds, and keep off the evil Spirits, and cheer up
your own Spirits, arm you against the terrors of Death; and as soon as your
Soul shall be separate from the Body, to carry it to the Spirits of Just Men
made perfect; And, 3. after Death, at the last and great Day, to open your
Graves, and bring out your Bodies, and take them up into the Air to the
Accessors with Jesus Christ in judgment on the wicked World, and after that to
conduct you into Heaven, there to be for ever with the Lord, and with them
still glorifying God the Father, for God the Son, by God the Spirit, to all
Eternity. Amen.

Secondly, For the Evil Angels and Devils.
Sect. 2. In and about them, to take notice of, and meditate on these things:
1. That there are such. 2. What they are. 3. How they became such. 4. What
their punishment. 5. What their Office or Work is. 6. What their Properties or
Qualities are. Lastly, What our duties are in respect of them.

1. That there are such evil Spirits or Devils, is abundantly manifest by the
testimony of the Scripture; and their frequent Temptations, Apparitions,
Possessions and Dispossessions, the Scripture often mentions, in the Old and
New Testament. In the Old, we read that the Devil was a lying spirit in the
mouth of the false Prophets, 1 Kings 22. and that Satan stirred up David to
number the People, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. and how he afflicted Job, cap. 1. and that he
stood at the right hand of Joshua to resist him, Zach. 3.1. In the New
Testament, we read how he tempted Christ, Mat. 4. and how Christ cast him out
of many possessed by him; as for those Atheists and Epicures that question it,
they have, some of them, been forced to acknowledge it here to their horror and
terror ere they dyed; if they do not here, they shall hereafter; Qui non
credunt, sensiant, they shall find and feel it hereafter, that Hell is no
Fable; and the Devils are no Nominals, but Reals; not imaginary, but afflicting
Spirits, Spirits ordained for Vengeance; tempters of men here to sin, and
tormentors hereafter for sin.

2. Take notice what they are; This you may understand by the several names
given to them in Scripture: as, 1. in respect of their nature, they are called
Spirits, i. e. Spiritual Substances, or Substances without a body, whereby they
are distinguished from the Souls of Men that are united to their Bodies, 1
Kings 22.21. Matthew. 18.6. Luke 10.20. 2. In respect of their corrupt nature,
they are called Evil Spirits, Luke 8.2. 1 Samuel 18.10. 1 John 3.12. 3. They are
called lying Spirits, 1 Kings. 22.22. and unclean Spirits, Matthew. 10.1. 4ly, In
respect of their great knowledge, they are called (...), or (...), Levit. 17.7.
1 Cor. 10.20. i. e. Understanding Spirits, which we read, or Devils; though
they be more fitly called Devils, because they are continually doing evil. 5.
In regard of their Pride, Power, and Dominion in the World, they are called the
Prince of the Air, Ephesians. 2.2. and the Godd of this World, 2 Cor. 4.4. 6. In
respect of their Properties, he is called the Tempter, because continually he
is tempting to evil; and the Deceiver, because he always deceives men in the
promises he makes; and Accuser, because he is still accusing God to Man, and
Man to God; and the Destroyer, because he is still plotting and practicing
ruin and destruction unto Souls, 1 Pet. 5.8. So as put all together, the
Devils are evil and wicked Spirits, abounding in knowledge and power to do
mischief, still tempting to sin, employed about, delighting in nothing else.

3. How became they such evil Spirits? For the understanding of this, you are
to take notice; 1. That they were by creation good, and as good every way as
the Elect Angels, as Understanding, Wise, Pure, Potent, every way equal, and no
way inferior to the Good Angels, Genesis 1. last. 2. Though they were created
good, and as good as the Elect Angels, yet they voluntarily fell from this good
Estate, and became as evil as they were good John 8.44. Jude 6. The Angels that
left their first estate, etc. The cause of their fall was their sin, 2 Pet.
2.4. God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to Hell, etc.
What their special sin was, is not clearly revealed in the Scripture, but
probably conceived to be their pride, from that place, 1 Timothy 3.6. where he
advises, That a Minister should not be a Novice, lest being lifted up with
pride, he fall into the condemnation of the Devil; implying, that their sin was
either pride, or mixed with pride.

4. What their punishment is; And this consists in two things. 1. The great
corruption of their Nature, whereas by Creation they were very good and holy;
by their fall they became extremely evil, and the greatest enemies to holiness,
whereas by Creation they had the Knowledge of of God's whole Will, and an
actual conformity to it; by their fall they were deprived, though not of their
Natural, yet of their Supernatural Knowledge, and all Sanctified Knowledge; and
this Knowledge they have now, it is accompanied with an implacable hatred of
God, and obstinate impenitency, and final desperation. The second part of their
punishment is, The Curse of God, or the Infinite and Eternal Wrath of God,
which St. Peter lays down in four branches; Having sinned, 1. They were cast
down, viz. out of Heaven. 2. Cast into Hell. 3. Under everlasting Chains of
Darkness. 4. Reserved to the Day of Judgment, for the full pouring out of
God's Wrath and Vengeance upon them. In the interim, they are permitted to come
out of that local place of Hell, and to walk up and down in the World, for the
punishment of the wicked, and the exercising of the Godly.

5. To take notice what their Office and Work is; And that is, To be a Tempter,
an Accuser, a Tormentor; these three the Devil is continually exercised in. 1.
He is a continual tempter unto sin, and therein behaves himself as a subtle
Serpent, and discovers himself to be that wicked One. 2. He is a continual
Accuser of God to Man, and Man to God, and one Man to another; and therein
shows himself to be a Deceiver, and a Murderer, and the Father of Lies, John
8.44. 3ly, He is a continual Tormentor and Troubler of men for sin; and therein
shows himself a Fiery Dragon, and a Roaring Lion, and (...), the Destroyer of
Souls; this work God permits him to be employed in, in a double respect. 1. The
Wicked; and, 2. the Godly; to punish the one, and exercise the other. 1. To
punish and plague the wicked. 1. In their Souls; and that 1. by giving the
Devils power to tempt them to sin, and prevail over them by his temptations, as
over Ahab's false Prophets, 1 Kings 22.22. 2ly, By giving power to them, to vex
and to terrify their Consciences, 1 Samuel 16.14, 23. An Evil Spirit was sent to
vex Saul; and Psalm 78.49. Evil Angels were sent to vex and terrify the
Egyptians. 2. To punish them in their bodies, by giving leave to the Devil to
possess them and torment them, rend and tear them in pieces, as History tells
us he has done the bodies of many wicked Heretics, Blasphemers, and
Apostates; and at last to carry them to Hell, as he did Dives, Luke 16. Then,
2ly. their Office is to exercise the Godly: 1. Sometimes in their Bodies, by
afflicting them, as he did Job's Body, Job 2.7. 2. In their Souls, by suffering
Satan to tempt them, and trouble them, though not finally prevail over them, as
over the wicked; however Satan sought to winnow Peter like Wheat, yet Christ
prayed that his Faith should not fail, Luke 22.32. Though he buffeted Paul, yet
God promised his Grace should be sufficient for him, 2 Cor. 12.7, 9.

6. What their Properties and Qualities are: They are very Knowing, Subtle,
Powerful, Wicked and Malicious Spirits.

1. For their Knowledge; That must needs be very great. 1. In that by creation
they were like to the good Angels in Knowledge. 2. Their knowledge since has
been much increased by the long experience they have had of all God's
Revelations and manifestations in the World, Job 1.8, 9. But yet however they
know so much, and more of God then others, yet they know not men's hearts, but
only by conjecture, for it is only God's prerogative to be the searcher of the
heart, 1 King 8.39. Neither do they know what the Grace of Regeneration is, nor
what the comforts of the Spirit are, for these are props to the Elect.

2. For their Subtilty; we read of the Wiles of Satan, Ephesians. 6. and the Depths
of Satan, Rev. 3. This subtilty of theirs, appears in these Particulars. 1. In
the observing every ones Constitution, and Disposition, Place, Employments,
Endowments, suiting his temptations accordingly. 2. In that he makes choice of
the fittest Instruments to accomplish his designs, and thereby has prevailed
over the wisest men, as Adam and Solomon. 3. In transforming himself sometimes
into an Angel of Light, insinuating his suggestions under a show of the motions
of God's Spirit, and making men to believe such Vices to be Virtues, and such
Virtues to be Vices. 4. His subtilty appears, in beginning with the lesser, and
then greater temptations, and reserving the greatest and strongest, for the
last and weakest hour.

3. For their Power; They are styled Principalities, Powers, and Dominions,
Ephesians. 6.12. and the Devil is called the strong man armed, Luke 11.21. and a
roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5.8. a great red Dragon, Rev. 12.3. the God of this
World, 2 Cor. 4.4. That he is so powerful, appears, 1. In that he can hurry
their Bodies up and down in the Air, as he did Christ's, Matthew. 4.6. Luke 8.29,
33. 2. In that he can raise Tempests, Job 1.16, 19. 3. In that he can bring
Distempers on the Body, and on the Mind, Luke 13.16. Luke 9.31. 4. In that he
can overthrow Houses and Buildings, Job 1.18. 5. Break Chains and Bars, Mark
5.4. 6. Stir up Humors of Lust and Choler, as in the Sodomites; any thing that
is within the compass of Nature, or may be done by natural means: But yet
here is our comfort, though he be so strong, Christ is stronger, 1 John 4.4. and
he has bruised his Head, spoiled Principalities and Powers; he has so limited
his Power, that he cannot do what he would; as for instance, 1. He cannot work
Miracles, that is, such things as are above, and contrary to Nature, for that
is God's Prerogative; it is true, he may counterfeit them, as he did by the
Egyptian Sorcerers, but not work any true Miracle, that being proper to God;
whence the Egyptian Sorcerers were forced to say of those true Miracles God did
by the hand of Moses, This is the Finger of God, Exodus 8.19. 2ly, He cannot
force the Will of Man, for this is contrary to the Nature of the Will to be
forced; and therefore they wrong the Devil, that lay the blame of their evil
practices on the Devil, for he could never force them to sin, without their
consent; he must have a double commission, first from God, and then from men,
before he can draw them into sin. 3. He cannot do any thing that naturally he
has power to do without the Lord's Permission, for he could not touch Job's
Body, until the Lord gave him leave, Job 2.6, 7. nor so much as enter into the
Swine, till Christ gave him leave, Mat. 8.31.

4. For his wickedness; He is extremely wicked, whence he is called (...), that
wicked one, so called, to note his special wickedness; as God is styled the
Holy One, to note his perfect Holiness, so the Devil the wicked One, to note
his perfect wickedness, Mat. 13.19, 38. 1 John 2.13. and 5.18. And justly is he
so called; 1. Because he is so in his own nature, full of nothing but
wickedness: It Is true, God at first created them holy and good, but by their
fall they deprived themselves of that original Righteousness, and filled
themselves with all unrighteousness; they were by creation, Spiritual
Excellencies, but by their fall they became (...), Spiritual VVickednesses,
Ephesians. 6.12. 2. Because they are the Authors of all wickedness in men; he is a
Liar, and the Father of it; a Murderer, and the Father of it, John 8.44. All
sin has its rice from Satan, either in whole or in part; the first sin that
ever was committed in the World, was by his instigation, Genesis 3.1, 2. and
whatsoever sin is still conceived or committed by any creature, the Devil has
some hand in bringing it to pass; whence sins are called the Works of the
Devil, 1 John 3.8. because he works together with men, and has a hand one way
or other in drawing men to sin, as David to number the people, 1 Chronicles. 21.1.
and Ananias and Saphira to lie unto the Holy Ghost, Acts 5.3. But yet here
still remember, though the Devil has a hand in every sin, it does not excuse
the sinner, because however he tempts, yet he cannot compel to sin, only
persuades to it by Arguments: for every man is tempted, when he is drawn aside
by his own lusts and enticed, James 1.14. It Is first, a wicked heart that is
the Mother, and then the Devil the Father that begets and helps to bring forth
sin.

5. For their Malice; This is not less, but rather greater then their power,
and the chief part of their wickedness; hence it is called the Great Dragon,
and the Roaring Lion, which of all Creatures are most cruel, and (...), the
Adversary, 1 Pet. 5.8. the Enemy, Matthew. 13.39. The Enemy, because he is the
greatest and most universal Enemy to God and Man, and all the Creatures. 1. And
principally to God, by laboring what he can to ungod him, and set up himself
as God in the World, and requiring others to adore and worship him as God,
continually blaspheming God, and stirring up his Children to do evil, Rev.
16.9, 11. 2. The greatest Enemy to man, seeing his malice cannot reach so high
as God, therefore (like the Panther, of whom it is storied, he will fly upon the
Picture of Man) he will bend his utmost malice and rage against man, who was
created after the Image of God, and had a Redeemer vouchsafed to him, and not
to them. 3. The greatest Enemy to all the Creatures for God's sake, and Man's
sake, so that he would destroy them all, were it in his power, and God did not
restrain him; seeing he cannot do the mischief he would to them, he will vex
them and torment them what he can, as he did the poor Swine whom he carried
headlong into the Sea. Above all, he is the greatest Enemy to Jesus Christ,
because he took the Nature of Man, and not of Angels, and came into the World
to rescue Man out of his power; and as to Jesus Christ, so to all the Saints,
because they are brought out of his Kingdom, into the Kingdom of Jesus Christ;
therefore as Pharaoh pursued the Israelites when they were got out of his Land,
so the Devil does the Saints when they are got out of his hands, with all the
rage he can, seeing he cannot keep them from Grace, he labors to keep them
from the comfort of Grace, seeing he cannot keep them out of the way to Heaven,
he labors to discourage them in the way thither what he can.

7thly, Take notice what our duties are in respect of those evil Spirits; As,

1. To tremble at the severity of God against them, in casting them off for
ever; and to adore the lenity and mercy of God to us, in vouchsafing a Redeemer
unto us, when he did none to the fallen Angels.

2. To take heed of all sin, especially those sins which resemble men to the
Devil, as Pride, Envy, Malice, Lying, Slandering, false Accusing of others,
tempting others to sin, and hindering others from Good; for these you may find
in the Scripture to be the sins of the Devil, especially the last, Acts 13.10.
Thou Child of the Devil, thou enemy of all Righteousness, will thou not cease
to pervert the right ways of the Lord? said Paul to Elymas.

3. To search and see whether you are under his Power and Dominion, yea or no;
for all Men and Women are so by Nature, as you may see, Ephesians. 2.2. 2 Timothy 2.
last. whence he is called the Prince of the Air, John 14.30. and the God of
this World, 2 Cor. 4.4. because he rules like a Prince, or rather like a
Tyrant; and governs like a God, or rather like a Devil, as he is, in all wicked
men, holding them, and leading them like Bears by the Snout, like Dogs in a
Chain, and has them (as the Centurion had his Servants) at his beck and
command, to commit any wickedness, for Honor, Profit, and Pleasure in the
World. Now for the signs and characters of such as are under his power, the
Scripture gives amongst others these: 1. Wilful blindness, when men shut their
eyes against the Light, and refuse to see sin to be sin, and duty to be duty,
because they are loath to leave the one, and do the other, John 3.19. 2 Cor.
4.4, 5. 2. Impenitency in a course of sinning, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. when men give
up themselves to the service of Sin and Satan, and will not be reclaimed from
it, Romans 6.16. John 8.34. 3ly, Security and senslesness of God's displeasure,
because he lets them alone in their evil courses, and does not presently punish
them, Luke 11.21. where all things are at peace, there the strong man keeps
possession, Psalm 50. ver. 18. to the end. 4. And principally Derision,
Opposition, and Persecution of Righteousness and Holiness in others, Acts
13.10. These are the black marks of Satan's dominions in men.

4th Duty. Be persuaded speedily in the use of the means to get out of his
Dominions, because so long as you are under the power of Satan, you are under
the power of Sin, and the power of the Law, and the power of the World, and the
power of Death, Judgment, and Hell. 1. Of Sin, Romans 6.12. 2 Timothy 2. last. 2.
The power of the Law, both the rigor and the curse of it, Deuteronomy. 27. last. 3.
The power of the World, 1 John 4, 5. 4. The power of Death, and Judgment, and
Hell, Romans 6. last. Eccles. 12. end. Heb. 9.27. Psalm 11. end. Psalm. 9.17. The
wicked shall be turned into Hell; and therefore in all these respects to labor
speedily to get out of his Dominions. To this end,

1. Be willing to be convinced of this truth, That all men naturally are under
the power of Sin and Satan, for it is that which the Scripture speaks expressly,
Ephesians. 2.2. and this is the first work of the Spirit in the conversion of a
sinner, John 16.8.

2. Labor to be sensible of, and humbled under the sad condition of being in
vassallage and slavery to Sin and Satan; thus those Converts were, Acts 2.37.
They were pricked in their hearts, and cried out, Men and Brethren, etc. That
you may be the more sensible of it, and humbled under it, consider, it is the
saddest of all other conditions, so, as the condition of the Israelites under
Pharaoh, and Gally-slaves under the Turk or Pope, is little or nothing to this;
that being only of the Body, this of the Soul; that a sensible slavery, this an
insensible, until God make them sensible; that an unwilling slavery, but this
men are most forward to, and delight in, until the Lord come in and overpower
their wills, and of unwilling, make them a willing people in the day of his
power, Psalm 110. as he did them, Acts 2.37.

3. Take notice of him, who was appointed and anointed by God the Father to
rescue you out of his power, viz. the Lord Jesus Christ, Isa. 61.1. He has
destroyed Death, and him that had the power of Death, Heb. 2.14. and has
destroyed the works of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. to lay hold on him by a lively
Faith, and that Ransom he has paid for your Redemption, Ephesians. 1.7. 1 John
1.7. Acts 16.31. Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved.

4. Be willing to cast off the service of Sin and Satan for the future, and to
give your selves only and wholly to the service of Jesus Christ, Romans 6.16, 17.
Sin is the snare and the chain by which the Devil holds men in his power, and
repentance breaks that snare and chain, and sets them at liberty, 2 Timothy 2.
last. Acts 3.19. Repent, that your sins may be blotted out, etc.

5. Wait constantly on the Ministry of the Word; the means he has appointed to
turn men from Darkness to Light, and the Power of Satan to God.

Lastly, Go unto God by earnest and constant Prayer for his Spirit, to make his
Word effectual for the translating you out of the Kingdom of Darkness, into the
Kingdom of his dear Son, Col. 1.13.

5th Duty. If you find that you are such as have been rescued and redeemed by
Jesus Christ out of the power of Satan, which you may know farther by this; if
you are such as truly believe in Christ, and are sanctified by Christ, Acts
26.18. and labor to crucify the flesh with the corruptions and the lusts,
Gal. 5.24. and are not conformed to the World, Romans 12.2. but walk in a
contradiction to it, get victory over it, 1 John 5.4. then your duties are such
as these: Continue to bless God for it, and rejoice in it above all your
rejoycings; not slavishly to fear his Power, Malice, Rage for the future; and
to carry your selves so, as still to be preserved from being hurt by him.

1. To be continually blessing the Lord Jesus Christ for rescuing us out of the
power of Satan, as the Saints have done before us, Psalm. 86.12, 13. Psalm.
103.1. the Apostle, Romans 7. last. 1 Cor. 15.55. and to bless him not only for
our selves, but others, Romans 6.17, 18. and the rather, considering we were by
nature under the power of Satan as well as others, and nothing but his own
Grace that rescued us, and plucked us out of his snares; to bless God that has
and does so wonderfully preserve us from the power, malice, and rage of Satan
and his Instruments: Is it not wonderful that we should lie down in peace, and
sleep in peace, and arise in peace, and walk up and down in peace, and enjoy so
much peace and quiet in the midst of so many Devils, and devilish minded men,
the safety and preservation of the three Children in the Fiery Furnace; of
Daniel in the Lions Den; of Jonah in the Whales Belly, was wonderful; and
truly, no less wonderful is it that we enjoy our lives, and the comforts of it;
so many precious privileges for Soul and Body, in the midst of so many Devils
and devilish minded men; and the rather, considering not only their great
power, but their great number, malicious nature, deep subtilty, and continual
activity to plot and practice mischief; we can never be enough in blessing God
for his great Mercy and Goodness to us, in restraining and preserving us from
the power, malice, and rage of the Devil and his Instruments.

2. As to bless God, so to rejoice in this privilege we have by Jesus Christ,
of being rescued out of his power, and being preserved in and under all our
fears and dangers, as the Apostle, Romans 8.33. and not without cause; you know
how poor Captives rejoice, when they are rescued out of cruel and oppressing
hands of Turk and Pope; and how poor condemned Malefactors rejoice at the news
of a Pardon, how much more should we that the Lord Jesus Christ has rescued us
from the vassallage and slavery to Satan, and procured a Pardon for all our
sins; this should make us rejoice, and again rejoice, Phil. 4.4. rejoice
evermore, 1 These. 5.

3. Not to fear him too much, so as to be kept from duty, or drawn into sin by
him; for this is to worship the Devil instead of God, and to provoke God to
leave you unto his power, and therefore to take heed of fearing him with such a
slavish fear as to be kept from duty, and to be drawn into evil; remember and
consider well, however the Devil be full of subtilty, malice, and power, yet
Christ he is the Wisdom of the Father, and knows how to out-wit him, and to
out-work him; Greater and stronger is he that is in you, then he that is in the
World, 1 John 4.4. He has already spoiled Principalities and Powers,
tryumphing over them on the Cross, Col. 2.15. Has them all in a Chain, Jude 6.
so as they cannot go an inch farther then their Chain; can do nothing without
his permission, not so much as enter into a Swine without his leave; however
they may prevail over wicked men, to carry them, Souls and Bodies, into
destruction, yet they cannot over true Believers, such as he has rescued out
of his power; I have prayed that thy Faith fail not, (says Christ to Peter)
and not only for him, but all others that believe in his Name, John 17.20. The
Devil may prevail sometimes by God's permission, to the spoiling of their
Goods, the afflicting of their Bodies, the troubling of their Spirits, yea (and
it may be) the loss of their life, but never to the prejudice or loss of their
Soul; God may give way to them to let them separate us from worldly things, but
never from the love of God in Christ Jesus.

4. To carry our selves so, as we may still be protected from the power,
malice, and rage of Satan and his Instruments, to this end, To take heed of
some things, and practice others. 1. To take heed of these things, that as you
do not fear him too much, so you do not slight him too much, much less provoke
him, and seek for help from him.

1. Not to slight him too much, so as to be secure, rush upon his temptations
and presume on your own strength of Grace to withstand them; for if he had so
much power over man in the state of Innocence to give him a fall, much more in
the state of Apostasy; as you may see in the Examples of David and Peter; if he
has shaken the tallest Cedars, much more such poor low shrubs as we are.

2. As not to slight him too much, so not to provoke him too much, as many
ignorant profane wretches do, by reviling and railing on him, daring and
challenging him, he should do his worst, rashly and indiscreetly rushing into
those places given up to his possession, for this is but fool-hardiness, and
many have sadly smarted for it; therefore take warning by others harm. You may
read Jude 9. The Archangel would not rail at the Devil, but only said, The
Lord rebuke thee; this being spoken in Faith, will soon quell him and subdue
him, rather then railing terms: Remember, and consider, the Devil is forward
enough to do mischief, and needs not to be provoked to it.

3. Above all, take heed you be never drawn to seek help from him in the time
of trouble and distress, as many ignorant profane persons are: For,

1. It is that which God has expressly forbid, Levit. 19.31. Levit. 22.6.
Levit. 20.6. Isa. 8.19. 2. That which he has exemplarily punished, as in
Ahaziah, 2 Kings 1.3, 6. and in Saul, 1 Chronicles. 10.13, 14. 3. Because it is a
departing from the living God, and a serving the Devil; which is such a crying
sin, as the Lord himself bids Heaven and Earth to be astonished at it, Jer. 12.
For the things that are to be practiced, they either respect his Temptations
in general, or else those hideous and hellish ones to Atheism, Blasphemy,
Self-murder in particular.

First, For the remedy against his temptations in general, you are to do these
things: To arm your selves against them, to stand upon your watch, and resist
him steadfast in the Faith.

To arm your selves against him, according to those directions of the Apostle,
Ephesians. 6. from 11 to 19. in which words you have these things observable.

1. If you would be protected from him, you must have Armor. 2. This Armor
must not lie by you, but be put on. 3. What kind of Armor this is, no other
then Spiritual Armor; For we fight not against flesh and blood, but against
spiritual wickednesses in high places, verse. 12. and therefore our Armor must
be Spiritual and not Carnal, such as Popish Armor, Exorcisms, Crucifixes,
Holy Water, etc. This Armor is fashioned on the Devils Anvil; and this
Mystical Leviathan esteems no more of it, then Iron, and Straw, and rotten
Wood. 4. You must have the several pieces of this Armor, which are partly
Defensive, and partly Offensive.
1st. For the Defensive Armor, there are five pieces of it; The Girdle of
Truth; Breast plate of Righteousness; The feet shod with the preparation of the
Gospel of Peace; The Shield of Faith; and the Helmet of Salvation: By which are
meant, the principal Virtues and Graces Christians are to be armed with against
the temptations of Satan. To open these briefly to you.

1. By the Girdle of Verity; you are to understand Sincerity and Truth, with
which you are to arm your selves against all temptations to Guile and
Hypocrisy; for God's Children are Children that will not lie, Zeph. 3.13. and
we are exhorted to put away all lying, and to speak every one the truth to his
Neighbor, Ephesians. 4.25. 2. By the Breast Plate of Righteousness; you are to
understand, a good Conscience, and a righteous Conversation, with which you are
to arm your selves against all temptations to iniquity and unrighteousness,
Luke 1.47. 1 Thessalonians. 4.7. 3. By the feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel
of Peace; you are to understand the many precious promises of Pardon and Peace,
with which you are to arm your selves against all temptations to despondency,
under the persecutions and afflictions you meet with in the way of Holiness. 4.
By the Shield of Faith; you are to understand a true and lively Faith in
Christ, and those Promises which are all, Yea and Amen, in him; with which you
are to arm your selves against all temptations to unbelief, that so those darts
of Satan may not fire and trouble your spirits. 5. By the Helmet of Salvation;
you are to understand a well-grounded hope of Salvation, with which you are to
arm your selves against all temptations to despair, 1 Thessalonians. 5.8. These are the
several pieces of Defensive Armor.
2ly, For the Offensive Armor, or the Weapons you are to use, they are two,
the Sword of the Spirit, and Prayer.

1. The Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God; you must not suffer this
to sleep in the Scabbard, but weld it against Satan, as Christ did, Mat. 4.
Thus it is written, etc.

2. To take the other Weapon, Prayer, without which the Sword of the Spirit
will do little good; for as it was said of Scanderbegs Sword, it would do
little without Scanderbegs Arm; is much more true of this, it will do us but
little good without the Lord's Arm; and therefore still to ply the Throne of
Grace, for his Spirit to go along with his Word, and by it to give you power
and victory over Satan.

Having thus furnished your selves with Armor and Weapons, you must stand upon
your Watch. Had you an Enemy that were potent and politic, that watched every
opportunity to do you mischief, you would heedfully keep your watch against
him, would you not? how much more against Satan, the Adversary, an Enemy so
full of Power and Policy, and that continually walks up and down like a roaring
Lion, seeking whom he may devour.

And here, that you may keep your Watch; 1. You must be careful to avoid all
those things which may give him an occasion to tempt you, especially these two,
Idleness, and Evil Company; for your own, as well as others experience, will
tell you, by these the Devil most prevails, and therefore to watch against
them, as the wise Man exhorts you, Prove. 5.8. and 23.31.

2. You are to hearken to the counsel of Peter, 1 Pet. 5.8. Be sober, and
watch; without sobriety, no watchfulness: Intemperancy in the use of the
creature exposes men to sleep, rather then to watch; and therefore if you
would be able to keep your Watch, you must be sober, that is, moderate in your
desires to, and in the use of all Creature Comforts, Honors, Riches,
Pleasures, because these are the Baits under which he hides his Hooks of
Temptation that they may not be discerned; and therefore, Phil. 4.5. Let your
moderation be known in all things.

The third direction; You must resist him in all his temptations, especially
unto those sins you are most inclined to, by your particular Constitutions,
Places and Callings, and then the Promise is, he shall fly, James 4.7. That you
may do this the more effectually, have an eye to two things.

1st. The right manner of resisting him, that is thus, Speedily, Universally,
Courageously, Self-denyingly, Wisely, and Constantly.

1. Speedily, in the first injection of any evil motion, Ephesians. 4.26. Give no
place to the Devil; no lodging to any evil thought, Jer. 4.14. For if this old
Serpent get in his head, he will soon draw in his body after; therefore to
break his head by withstanding the first motion.

2. Resist him Universally in every temptation, the least as well as the
greatest; take heed you do not slight him, because it is a small one; a small
leak may sink a Ship as well as a great, and a little sin sink a Soul to Hell
as well as a great, where it is allowed of, and lived in, Mat. 5.19.

3. Resist him Courageously, seeing your Captain, the Lord Jesus Christ, has
given him his deaths wound, spoiled Principalities and Powers, and made a show
of it openly, tryumphing over them on the Cross, Col. 2.15.

4. Do it Self-denyingly, going out of your selves, and laboring to be strong
in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6.10.

5. Do it Wisely, so as to observe what he most aims at, for he uses to fit
his temptation to every ones disposition, and observes what every one most
loves and delights in.

Lastly, Do it Constantly, not giving over until you have got the victory, for
the promise of reward is only to those that overcome, Rev. 3.21. There is no
safety in flying, no piece of Armor for the back, and therefore to choose
rather to die manfully, then fly cowardly, Heb. 10. last. If any draw back, my
Soul shall have no pleasure in him.

2dly, To furnish your selves with Arguments, whereby you may be enabled to
resist all his temptations to sin, such as these; the purity of God's Nature;
the severity of God's Justice; the ugly, hateful, hurtful nature of sin; the
dear price that was paid for the expiating of it; the terrible threatenings of
God against sin; the many precious promises God has made to such as deny
themselves in it, and the certainty of victory, if we continue to fight against
it, Romans 6.14. Mich. 7. to the end. And thus of the Remedies against the
Temptations of Satan in general.

Secondly, I shall give you a few directions against his hideous and hellish
temptations to Atheism, Blasphemy, Self-murder, etc. and so conclude this
Subject: And here,

1. Take notice that there is no temptation that befalls any, but is common to
all, 1 Cor. 10.13. and therefore let not the Devil persuade you none have such
wicked thoughts as you, for Prove. 27.19. As in Water face answers to face, so
does the heart of one man unto another, even the vilest, every one being
equally corrupted by nature.

2. It Is God's usual manner, when he is about to convert any, and pull them
out of the snare of the Devil, to let loose Satan upon them, to exercise and
afflict them with the injection of such hideous hellish thoughts of Atheism,
Blasphemy, Self-murder, etc. that so he may humble them the more thoroughly, and
work them to a serious consideration of their spiritual and eternal condition.

3. Consider Christ was assaulted with such Atheistical blasphemous
self-murdering thoughts, as you may see, Mat. 4. from 1, to 11. and he was
tempted with them, that he might have a fellow-feeling of your infirmities, and
know how to succor you under your temptations, Heb. 2. end. and here is our
comfort, he has vanquished him for us, Col. 2.15. Heb. 2.14. therefore to
reject him steadfastly in the Faith, the promise is, He shall fly and fall.

4. When Satan would tempt you to despair, because of the hideousness and
hellishness of these thoughts; remember him of what Christ told him, that he
was a liar and a murderer in it, John 8.44. For it is not the multitude or
greatness of sin can shut any from Mercy, but only unbelief and impenitency;
be but willing to see and leave sin, and you cannot desire so much mercy, but
there is infinitely more in God for you; Isa. 55.6, 7. Let the wicked man
forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, etc. Oh but says the
Devil, This promise is made only to such as turn from their wicked thoughts,
but you do not, you have swarms of wicked thoughts arising in your minds, and
therefore you cannot expect a pardon. Tell Satan he is a liar in this, for
though they arise there, they have no entertainment there, which is only that
which God condemns, Jer 4.14. No man can keep a Bird from flying over his head,
but he may from nestling there; so however you cannot keep Satan from injecting
such wicked thoughts, yet you may and ought to resolve in and through the Grace
of Jesus Christ, not to give way to them; and so long as you do so, know in the
next place,

5. These atheistical and blasphemous thoughts, they are only your crosses, but
Satan's sins, they shall never be charged on you so long as you hate them, and
are burdened with them; however, there be much of your corruption in them, God
will never impute that which you do not allow of, as the Apostle comforts
himself, Romans 7. The evil I do, I allow not, etc.

6. If you would get power and victory over these hellish injections, you must
take notice of Satan's drift and scope in them, and labor to disappoint him in
it. His scope is, To rob God of the glory of his Grace, and either keep you
from duty, or distract you in it, and make you weary of it, and therefore to
cross him in his end; which that you may do, mind well these particulars.

1. That you do not conceal but reveal unto some wise, faithful, experienced
Minister or Christian, what it is that does so much trouble you, that they may
advise and direct you what to do, in and under such a temptation; and when you
do it, take heed you do not like the Lapwing, cry farthest from the Nest;
reveal some things, but conceal that which chiefly troubles you, for that will
but keep and increase your trouble, and therefore to be faithful to God and
others, and your own Souls, in your confessions and complaints of your
corruptions and temptations.

2. Take heed you do not reason with Satan about those wicked thoughts that so
much trouble you, for he is too old and cunning a Sophister to parley with, and
will be sure to disquiet you the more.

3. When such atheistical blasphemous wicked thoughts arise, though you are to
be humbled under them, and lift up an ejaculation for pardon and power over
them; yet take heed, be not over dejected and cast down by them, so as to cast
away your confidence; for the more he sees you are afflicted with them, the
more he will inject them.

4. The more he labors, by his injections, to keep you from duty, and distract
in duty, do you labor to be the more forward to duty, and intent in duty; and
when he sees that he is slighted, he will trouble you the less, and grow weary
of his injections.

5. When such wicked thoughts arise in your mind, labor to cross them with the
contrary good thoughts, and that you shall find will abate much the power of
them.

Lastly, Take notice of, and make Conscience of those duties which God requires
of you, in order to your victory over such hellish temptations to atheism and
blasphemy, and the like; as these, 1. Patiently to submit unto God's correcting
hand, and take heed of breaking forth into passion, or any unseemly carriage
under them, as the Prophet gives you an example, Mic. 7.9. 2. Be thankful to
God that it is not worse with you, and that you find any support under them, as
you may find the Church was, Lam. 3.22, 23. 3. Be content to stay and wait
God's time, till he come and take off Satan, and speak peace unto you, for it
is only he can do it, and not Men nor Angels, as you may see clearly, Job
34.29. and he has promised to do it in his time, Isa. 57.11. Isa. 54.7, 8. And
therefore to wait his time, as the Saints have done before you, Isa. 8.17.
Psalm 85.8. I will hearken what God will speak, etc. If you thus wait upon the
Lord, the Lord will wait to be gracious unto you, Isa. 30.18. and will shortly
tread Satan under your feet, Romans 16. and either speak peace to you on Earth,
or for ever in Heaven, Isa. 64.4. Isa. 57.2. And therefore to conclude, let me
persuade you to hearken unto, and follow the counsel of the Prophet, Isa.
50.10. Who is there amongst you that fears the Lord, and obeys the Voice of
his Servant, walks in darkness and sees no light? let him trust in the Name of
the Lord, and stay himself upon his God: So long as you are such as fear to sin
against the Lord in the least thing, and are careful to obey the Voice of his
Servant, in the ministry of his Word, the Lord himself tells you, He is your
God; and your duty is, to trust in his Name, and to stay your selves upon him
for Light and Comfort, Pardon and Peace, Salvation and Deliverance from Sin and
Satan, and all the powers of Darkness. Amen.

And thus much of Solemn and Deliberate Meditation, in and about which I have
showed you those special things you are to meditate on, in, and about God, and
Christ, and the Spirit, and Man, and the World, and the Good and Evil Angels,
by which God governs the World. That you may with more profit and comfort
meditate on them, look back to the Rules I gave you for the right manner of
performing this duty, especially mind these two things, The doing of it Orderly
and Constantly.

1. Orderly. Begin with God, and then go on day after day with the other Heads,
until you have gone through all, and meditate on one thing one day, and another
thing another day: And because your memory is weak, take your Book to look
into, and call things to your remembrance, and make choice of that Subject
which may be most seasonable and suitable to the present occasion, and your own
and others necessity.

2. Be careful to be constant in it; because constancy will imprint them the
more in your memory, and work them the more home upon your heart; keep you in a
sweet spiritual and heavenly frame; prepare and fit you more for Death and
Judgment, whenever it shall please the Lord to call you to it: Do but make
experience awhile, and you will find so much sweetness in it, and profit by it,
as you will continually bless God that you have been so directed to it, and
quickened in it.

CHAP. IX. Of Occasional and Sudden Meditation.
There Is nothing we see or do, from our rising up to our lying down, but gives
us some occasion of Spiritual and Divine Meditation; and therefore it should be
our endeavor, to take notice of it, and improve it to the Glory of God, and
our own and others spiritual advantage in the way homeward to Eternal Life,
because the most are ignorant, or not so well acquainted as they should with
this Divine Art of Extracting Spiritual out of Temporal things. For your help
and furtherance herein, I shall briefly direct you in a few Particulars, from
the beginning of the day to the end, and so conclude this Subject: Pray mark
them well.

I.
WHen you awake, to give God the first of your thoughts, As David, Psalm 139.
When I awake, I am presently with thee; How precious are the thoughts of thee
unto me! To think also of our duty of awaking out of Sin unto Righteousness,
Ephesians. 5.14. and of our awaking at the last day out of the Grave, by the sound
of the Trumpet, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. This you may find was David's thought, Psalm 17.
last. When I awake, I shall be satisfied with thy likeness. Remember, sleep is
but the Image of Death, the Bed the Grave, and the Morning of the Resurrection
at the last Day.

II.
When you have had a sweet nights rest, think thus, If natural rest be so
sweet, refreshing and reviving, how much more is Spiritual Rest, and will be
Eternal Rest? Oh what cause have you to bless him that has given his Beloved
Rest, when others have been altogether restless, and others, it may be, slept
their last sleep? Think and say to thy Soul, Oh how justly might thou have
been awakened out of thy sleep at midnight (as the Egyptians were) with a cry,
or else have slept the sleep of Death; whereas we have layen down in peace and
slept, because the Lord sustained us.

III.
When you see the light of the day shining into your eyes, think and say, If
the light be sweet, and it be a pleasant thing to behold the Sun, Eccles. 11.7.
Oh how excellent is thy loving kindness, in causing the Son of Righteousness to
arise with healing in his Wings upon us, Mal. 4.2. Oh what great cause have we
to bless God for the Light of Life, especially for the Light of the Gospel, the
Light of Grace here, and the hope of the Light of Glory hereafter; to beg also
of God to lift up the Light of his Countenance upon us, and help us to walk in
the Light of his Countenance all the day long.

IV.
When you are about to rise, think upon the first Resurrection to Grace here,
and the second Resurrection to Glory at the last day, because without an
interest in the first Resurrection, you can never expect an interest in the
second; and therefore to be careful, as you rise out of your beds, so to look
to this, that you arise out of sin unto newness of Life.

V.
When you put on your clothes, think on sin, which was the cause both of your
nakedness and your need of Apparel; to be humbled under the one, and keep you
from priding your selves in the other; think also what infinite cause you have
also to bless God for Jesus Christ, that he has fulfilled and brought in
everlasting Righteousness, whereby your nakedness might be covered, and you
might stand amiable in his sight, without spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5. end. And
therefore when you put on your Apparel, remember to put on the Lord Jesus
Christ, Romans 13. end. and put him on wholly for Justification, Sanctification,
Consolation, Salvation; and take heed of spending too much time in apparelling
your selves. It is reported of one Pambo, that seeing a Gentlewoman dressing
her self all the morning by the Glass, he fell a weeping; and being asked Why?
He answered, Because this Woman had spent all the morning in dressing her Body,
and I scarce one hour in dressing my Soul.

VI.
When you look into the Glass to see what is amiss about you, remember to look
into the Glass of the Word, to see what is amiss in your hearts and lives, and
to order your Conversation according to it, Psalm 119.9. Where withal shall a
young man cleanse his ways, but by taking heed to thy Word?

VII.
When you begin to wash your hands and face, think of that Fountain which God
has opened to wash in, from sin and from uncleanness, Zach. 13. What infinite
cause have you to bless Jesus Christ, that was willing to shed his precious
heartblood for you to wash in; and the love of the Spirit to you, in opening
your eyes, and revealing this Fountain to you, begging of him, That he would
put you in and wash you, and rinse your Souls and Bodies more and more from
your remaining filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, 2 Corin. 7.1.

VIII.
When you are about to go apart into your Chamber or Closet, to read the Word,
and pray unto God in secret: Think thus, What a mercy is it to have this
liberty which is denied unto many. What a mercy is it to look into that blessed
Book of the Scriptures! Lord open mine eyes that I may see the wondrous things
contained in it. What a mercy also is it, to have access with boldness and
confidence to the Throne of God, when we cannot to the throne of Men, to go to
him also as my Father, and a Father not only able, but as willing as able to
supply all my wants; that sees in secret, and has promised to reward me
openly, Matthew. 6.6.

IX.
When you are to pray with the Family, think thus, What a mercy is this that I
have a Family to pray with and for, and that we have all health and liberty to
pray together, and that any have hearts to join with us in Prayer, and are not
as too many are in other Families, scoffing Ishmaelites, and profane Esaues.

X.
When you are about to employ your selves about the duties of your particular
Calling, Remember that as God requires every one should live in a Calling, so
that every one be diligent in it, because it is the diligent hand makes rich;
yet not to labor so much after the meat that perishes, as that which endures
to eternal Life, John 6.27.

1. So to labor in your particular Callings, as that you may be more
serviceable to God, and helpful to others in the duties of your general Calling.

2. That you be faithful and just, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6, 11, 12.

3. That you be useful and fruitful, not seeking only your own profit, but the
weal and benefit of others, Phil. 2.4. 1 Cor. 10. about the end.

4. That you be Spiritual and Heavenly, careful to trade for Heaven as well as
for Earth, and lay up a stock of Grace that will stand by you, when all other
things will fail you and forsake you.

XI.
When you are trading and trafficking, buying and selling, and making any
bargain, think on the best Bargain, that which will make you rich for ever;
that of the wise Merchant, who sold all he had to purchase the Pearl, Matthew.
13.44. Think of buying the Gold tried in the fire, Rev. 3.18. and buying the
Truth that will save your souls, Prove. 23.23. And whilst you look after the
gain of the World, think on that of Isa. 55.1. Wherefore do you lay out your
money for that which cannot satisfy? etc. And that of our Savior, What will
it profit a man to win the whole World, and lose his Soul? etc. And that of
Christ to Martha, Luke 10.42. Martha, Martha, thou art cum bered about many
things, but there is one thing necessary, etc.

XII.
When you are about to take a Journey, as you are trevelling in the way, think
on this, Your life is but a Journey, you are in a constant motion to Eternity,
every action is but a step, every day and hour brings you nearer to Heaven or
Hell, and therefore you had need look to this, that you be in the right way,
that you may not miscarry for ever; and to this end, to pray to the Lord that
he would remember his promise, Psalm. 32.8. He would instruct in the way wherein
you should go, and guide you by his eye; that he would be your God for ever,
and guide you unto Death, guiding you by his counsel, until he has received
you into Glory.

XIII.
When you are about to use the Creatures in the Morning, at Noon, and Evening,
think thus; Oh what a great Housekeeper is the Lord that provides for the
whole Family of Heaven and Earth; What a bountiful Master do I serve, that
provides so liberally for me, and me above many; and not only gives the
Creature, but an appetite to it, when many of his want both. When you are
eating Bread, think on the Bread which came down from Heaven to feed your
Souls, and how blessed they are that eat of this Bread in the Kingdom of
Heaven, Luke 14.15. Think also on that of our Savior, Man lives not by bread
alone, but every word that proceeds out of the Mouth of God: Though Bread is
the Staff of our Life, it is the Blessing of God is the strength of that Staff;
and he that maintains our natural Life by dead Creatures, is as able to nourish
our Souls in Spiritual Life, to Eternal Life by dead Ordinances, how weak and
contemptible soever they see^ in the eye of Carnal Reason.

XIV.
When you walk abroad and view the World, think what a great and mighty a God
is he that made so great and mighty a Fabric out of nothing, by his very Word;
think what a precious Soul you have, that is of more worth then all the World;
and what cause you have therefore to value it above all the World, and not to
hazard it for the gaining of the World.

XV.
When you look up, and behold the glory of the Heavens, the Sun, the Moon, and
the Stars; think and say with David, Lord, what is Man, that thou should make
all this for Man? the greater Light to rule the Day, and the lesser to rule the
Night, Psalm. 8.3. If the Light of Heaven be so sweet, how sweet is the Light of
thy Countenance? If there be so much glory and influence in the Sun of the
World, what is there in the Son of Righteousness? And how great will the glory
of the Saints be at the last day, when their glorified Bodies shall outshine
the glory of the Sun? Oh how glorious is the Church that is clothed with the
Sun, and has the Moon under her feet! Revel. 12. When you take notice of the
Moon borrowing of her Light from the Sun, and losing her light at the rising of
the Sun, every month changing her appearance, increasing or decreasing her
Light; think how like our life is to the Moon, full of changes, and variety of
conditions: And from whom is it we must receive any light of comfort under
them, and be directed in them, but from the Son of Righteousness?

XVI.
When you look up and behold the Clouds, and see how they are supported without
any outward means, and carried up and down like Feathers in the Air, God can as
easily support his under all clouds of temptation; when you see those Clouds
dispersed by the Beams of the Sun, then think how easily one Beam of the Son of
Righteousness can scatter all the clouds of temptation; when you see the
Clouds, think upon Jesus Christ, who as he went up to Heaven in the Clouds, so
he will come again in the Clouds to Judgment.

XVII.
When you look downward and behold the Earth, think from whence you came, and
where you must return; Dust thou art, and to dust thou must; that it is the
Mother of us all, and the place appointed for all the living; your bodies must
descend first into the Earth, before they can ascend up into Heaven; and
therefore as the Grave waits for us, we should wait for it. When you behold the
fruitfulness of the Trees and the Plants of the Earth, how every one brings
forth its Fruit in due season; such are or ought to be every Godly Man and
Woman, Trees of Righteousness, bringing forth Fruit to God; otherwise it will
be a foul shame for Christians to remain barren and unfruitful under such
plentiful dews and droppings from Heaven.

XVIII.
When you feel the powerful operation and working of the Air, and of the Winds,
though you do not see them; think thus, If I believe there is Air and Wind,
though I do not see them, then I should much more believe there is a God that
made them, though I do not see him; and if there be so much power and virtue in
them to preserve and take away life, how much more in God that puts this power
and virtue into them.

XIX.
When you walk abroad and view the Fowls of the Air, and the Beasts of the
Earth, and the Fish of the Sea, and the rest of the Creatures; think thus, they
were all made for my use and service, and therefore are as so many Obligations,
and should be as so many encouragements to serve God in all, and for all, and
above all, see Job 12.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. There is no Creature but teaches us
something.

1. Ask the Beasts, and they will teach you, the Ox and Ass to know and
acknowledge their Owner, Isa. 1. The Horse and the Mule, they will show you the
stubborn and refractory nature of Man, the Sheep our wandering dispositions, and
to know, hearken too, and follow our Shepherd, John 10. To be dumb like a Sheep
before the Shearer, and not open your mouths as Christ was, Isa. 53. and the
Lamb will remember you, how Christ was brought as a Lamb to the slaughter; and
that though he was like a Lamb without spot and blemish; the Dog and the Swine
will mind you of the uncleanness of sinners, and the hatefulness of Apostasy,
in causing men to return with the Dog to the Vomit, and the Sow to her
wallowing in the Mire; the Serpent will teach you wisdom, in preserving your
selves, and the Ant in making provision for the future.

2. Ask the Fowls of the Air, and they will teach you, says Job; to trust in
God for a livelihood, Mat. 6.26. and to know your times and seasons for every
work, Jer. 8.7. The Dove will teach you Innocence and Sympathy; the little
Birds to sound forth praises to God every morning and evening.

Cantat a lauda Deo, lauds gratissima summo, Hinc vos in grat^s gratu lacessit
avis.

3. Ask the Fishes of the Sea, and they will teach you, says Job. The Sea, by
her continual fluctuating and foaming, will mind you of the continual
unquietness and res^lesness of wicked men, Isa. 5^.20. They are like the
troubled Sea, etc. The Fish of the Sea, they will show you the misery of want
of Government, they being every one without a Ruler, so as the lesser are still
devoured of the greater, Hab. 1. Why have thou made m^n like the Fishes of the
Sea? etc.

XX.
When you are to go to wait an God in the use of his Ordinance, think what a
mercy it is to have the Doors of God's Sanctuary open, when they are shut to
others; to see Souls flock to the Ordinances, as the Doves to the Windows; that
some Souls might still be added to the Church, and brought into Christ; and
built up further in Grace and gracious practices: When you are to hear the
Word, remember you are not only to hear a Man but God, who speaks in and by
Man, who has said, His Word shall not return in vain, but surely prosper to
the end he sends it, Isa. 55. last. And if it be not the savor of Life, it
will of Death, 2 Cor. 1. end. When the Sermon is ended, remember, though the
Minister have done, the Sermon is not done, until you have done and practiced
it; if it be not practiced, it will be preached over with more terror another
day, when you will not be able to hear it.

XXI.
When you are walking abroad, and meet with any Christian Friend, think if it
be sweet with a dear Christian Friend upon Earth, Oh how sweet will it be to
meet with all in Heaven? When you hear of any good news from them, then think,
Oh what good news has Christ brought from Heaven, and did the Angel sing at
the time of his Birth, and has the Spirit of God brought home and spoken unto
my heart; if it be bad news that you have heard, yet think and comfort your
hearts with this, However you have sad expectations from Earth, yet you have
comfortable expectations from Heaven, God, and Christ, and the Spirit is yours,
and will be for ever yours, 1 Cor. 3. last. Psalm. 112.7. When you hear of any
Prodigies or dreadful appearances of God in the Heaven, or the Earth, or the
Sea, then think and say, How terrible, O Lord, art thou in all thy ways! Who
knows the power of thy anger! what mean these dreadful tokens of thy
displeasure make me and all to fear and tremble before thee! When you see or
hear the corruption of men to break out into Drunkenness, Uncleanness,
Blasphemy, Persecution, etc. then think and say as Bradford the Martyr, Lord,
what a wicked heart have I, what cause have I to give glory to Grace that keeps
under corruption in me, that does not break out in me as in others. When any
cross or affliction befalls you on the day, in Body, Soul, Name, Estate, think
and say, Lord what sin is it that thou correctest? show me my sin, sanctify
this affliction, and do me good by it: When any mercy is renewed upon you and
yours, think and say, Oh how great is that goodness thou have laid up for them
that fear thee, and that thou workest daily for the Children of men, Psalm. 31.

XXII.
When the day draws toward an end, remember you are nearer to your end by
one day, then you were in the morning; as the night approaches toward you, so
do you to the Grave, and for ought you know may be your last day: When you look
up and see the Stars appear in the Heaven, think thus, Though your life here be
hid with Christ in God, yet when he shall appear, you shall appear with him in
glory, Col. 3.4. and then your bodies shall shine as the Stars, Dan. 12. When
you see the dark night to come upon you, and you begin to light Candles, then
think if outward darkness be so uncomfortable, how much more is the inward
darkness of the Soul, and utter darkness in Hell! if the light of a Candle be
so comfortable, how comfortable is the Life of Grace here, and will be the Life
of Glory hereafter: When you are about to put off your Clothes, think thus, It
will not be long ere I must be uncloathed of this body of Sin and Death; and if
I be so willing to the one, why not to the other, that I might be clothed with
my House from Heaven, 2 Cor. 5.2. And if I be so willing to go into Bed to take
my rest, that I may have renewed strength for Body and Spirit to fit me for the
service of the next day, why should I not be as willing, and more willing, at
God's call, to lay down my body in the Grave, there to rest from all sinning,
sorrowing, suffering, and to be raised up at the last day with renewed and
perfect strength both in Soul and Body, to be still serving and glorifying God
to all Eternity. Remember still, O my Soul, thy sleep is but the Image of
Death; the Bed, the Image of thy Grave; and the Sheets, of thy Winding Sheets;
the biting of the Fleas, but the gnawing of the Worms on the Body; the crowing
of the Cock in the morning, the sounding of the Trump of God at the last day by
the Voice of the Archangel; Awake ye dead, and come to Judgment, Isa. 57.2. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.

Lastly, When you are about to sleep, labor to sleep with precious thoughts of
God, for such as your thoughts are, when you are about to sleep, such will your
thoughts be when you awake. When we rake up fire in the Ashes at night, so we
usually find it in the morning; and such, I say, as our thoughts are of God
when we sleep, will be when we awake. In a word, Think of your sleeping in
Jesus, and your awaking and appearing with him in glory in the morning of the
Resurrection. And thus I have, as briefly as I could, with any profit to you,
directed you how to make a Spiritual use of whatsoever presents it self to your
senses, from morning to evening, at home and abroad: What remains, but that we
put in practice what we see to be our duty; motives to i^, and directions for
it, you have had before. I need not add any more, only this consideration,
there is a double use God expects we should make of every Creature, a natural
and a spiritual; and if we should content our selves only with the natural use,
without the Spiritual, we should lose the one half, and the best half of that
comfort in the Creature which God gave it for; and we shall do no more then
natural carnal sensual men, yea the very Beasts do; and therefore if we will
evidence our selves to be Christians indeed, that mind the welfare of our
Souls as well as our Bodies, then to apply our selves more then ever we have
done to the practice of this sweet, weighty, and profitable duty of Meditation,
both Solemn and Occasional. Which that we may, blessed Lord, thou who have put
it into the heart of thy weak and unworthy Servant, to study and write these
things, for the good and comfort of thy People; be thou graciously pleased, by
the effectual working of thy Holy Spirit, to make them useful to all, into
whose hands they shall come, for the promoting and carrying on the Work of
Grace in their hearts and lives, and the furthering of their everlasting
Salvation.

Oh Lord, I pray thee let it not be in vain that this or any other help is
afforded them, but do thou give success to the weak endeavors of thy unworthy
Servant, so as there may be glory to thee, profit to them, and comfort to him
who has found that grace in thy sight, to be accepted and enabled to be any
way instrumental for their help and comfort in the way homeward to everlasting
life. This is, and shall be, the Prayer of

Your Affectionate and Ancient Pastor, J. B.

FINIS.

