THE CASE OF THE CREDITORS, OF Joseph, and Nathaniel Hornby, In Relation to the
Bill of Mrs. Katherine Fitz Gerald Villers, Widow of Edward Fitz Gerald
Villers Deceased.
THE great Question with Relation to the said Creditors is, whither there ever
was any such Deed of Settlement Executed as is recited in the Mortgage, for
2000 l. made in May 86 by the said Edward to Sr. Theophilus Oglethorpe in which
it is recited, that the said Edward had Power to grant or Mortagage the Lands
in the Bill for raising any Sum, not exceeding 12000 l. for payment of the
Debts, or Portions for his Younger Children: Now the Reasons that induce the
Creditors to believe there was a Deed Executed with such Power is, for that the
Mortgage was made within three Months after the Deed of Settlement, and the
Draught of a Settlement was produced to Counsel, which was affirmed to agree
with the Deed; and therein there was such a Power as is recited in the Mortgage
to Sr. Theophilus and Mr. Edward Villers, the Mortgager was esteemed a
Gentleman of that Worth and Honor, that he would not have offered it as a
security, in case he had no such Power.

Now admitting the Case to be otherwise, and that Mr. Edward Villers was
mistaken, and had no such Power as is recited in the Mortgage, and that the
Power he had was only what is given him by a Deed of the 24th of February 1685
which was produced to the Committee on Saturday last, whereby he had liberty by
his last Will, or any other Writing by him to be perfected, to grant or convey
the Estate for raising 12000 l. for the better provision for his said Wife, or
Portions for his Younger Children: Then the Question will be how far this
Mortgage may be made good in a Court of Equity, considering the several
circumstances that attend the Case: For first, if Mr. Edward Villers had
Mortgaged the Estate for any Sum for the Maintenance of his Wife, that Money,
when raised, had been in his own disposal, there being no provision to the
contrary, in the Deed produced to the Committee.

Secondly, in that very produced Deed, Mr. Villers had power to grant Leases
for Three Lives, or 41 Years, reserving a Moiety of Rents usually paid; Now
this was giving such a Power over the Estate, as might have Enabled him to
Raise a much greater Sum, by let^ing Leases at one Half of the Rents, and if
the Mortgage to Sir Theophilus, had been by Lease of the whole Estate,
reserving but a Moiety of the Rent, it had been a good Security, and he might
have enjoyed the Estate subject to the provisoe, persuant to the Power in such
produced Settlement.

But besides all this, Mr. Villers by his Will, in which he Charge the Estate
with 12000 l. gives 2000 l. thereof to his Wife, besides such of the Childrens
Portions as should Die before they became Payable: Now certainly this 2000 l.
ought to be Accounted as part of his Personal Estate, to pay a Creditor, where
there is no other Assetts.

Now, if the Creditors of Hornby can(as they are Advised they may) be Releived
in a Court of Equity upon this Mortgage, which is since legally Assigned, and
Conveyed to Trustees for their Benifit, 'Its humbly hoped this Honorable
House, in case they Pass this Bill, will make provision f^r their Receiving the
said Debt.

Note, The Creditors of Hornby, were never heard upon the matter, when the Bill
was before the Lords, or had any Notice thereof, till the same was in the
Printed Votes.


