THE CASE OF THE FRENCH PROTESTANT Ministers.
KING CHARLES the Second, upon the 28th of July, 1681. Issued forth His Most
Gracious Declaration of His Granting Protection unto the Poor Distressed French
Protestants, who were or should be enforced to forsake their Native Country to
avoid the Persecution against them there upon the Account of their Religion:
Whereby the said Ministers (judging it their Pastoral Duty not to desert their
Wandering Flocks) being encouraged to come over into this Realm, left all that
was or could be dear in France unto them (except their Wives and Families) to
withdraw themselves hither with them for Shelter and Protection.

That upon and since their coming hither, they have received very considerable
Relief toward the Subsistence and Maintenance of themselves and Families, from
the Charity of the English Nation, as they shall never forget, so they with all
Due and Humble Gratitude acknowledge.

But in regard that what they have heretofore so received, is long since Spent
and Consumed, being refunded back by them (...) the Nation in their Expenses
for Provisions for their Families; and that little they receive Yearly, is far
short of what their Necessities do require.

They most humbly Pray, That some Annual Allowance may be setted upon them by
Act of Parliament, for their Future Maintenance, either out of a Yearly
Imposition to be laid (as bath been done for other-Uses heretofore) upon the
Hackney-Coaches in and about the Cities of London and Westminster, or by such
other way, as the Wisdom of the Right Honorable Houses of Parliament shall
think fi^^^^^ and their Charity judge proportionate to the Necessities of Poor,
Helpless Exiles and their Families.


