THE Only REFUGE OF A Troubled Soul, In time of Trouble and Affliction. OR, The
Sweet and Soul-Ravishing MYSTERY of the Apple Tree; Explained and laid open, in
Two Discourses from Cant. 2.3. for the Comfort and Encouragement of the True
Believer, in the midst of the worst and sorest Afflictions which can (possibly)
befall him in this World: And the Awakening the most secure Sinner, who is yet a
Stranger to the said Mystery.

Published at the earnest and importunate Request of several Godly Persons, who
heard the same Preached.

Come, Trembling Sinner, hasten, taste, and see,
What Fruit grows on the Spouses Apple Tree.
By J. Barry, an unworthy Minist. of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1700.

To his Highly Honored Friends Doctor John Tarlass, Physician to St. Thomas
his Hospital in Southwark, and his truly Religious Consort.
Honored Sir, and Virtuous Madam.
I Do sincerely own, and ingeniously Acknowledge my self so highly obliged to
you both, for your great Kindness and Respect shown to unworthy me and my
Family; since we (Providentially) came (as Pilgrims and Strangers) into
England, that I am really concerned that I can (hitherto) but Retaliate in
verbal Acknowledgments. The Divine Providence seeing it best for me to keep me
low (in outward) and by that means to render me incapable of that Duty; which
the Care, Pains, and constant Diligence of an Able and Faithful Physician
obliges to.

It is well known both to your selves and my Friends and Relations, who were
Eye and Ear Witnesses of the near Approaches I made toward the Grave. How that
I owe my Life (under God) several times (over and over) to the great Skill,
Care, and Faithfulness of Ingenious and Faithful Doctor Tarlass: And I do now
own and Acknowledge the same to the Praise of Jehova the Great and Chief
Physician, and the deserved Commendation of Doctor Tarlass his worthy
Instrument. I hope (dear Sir) I shall be Enabled to carry to the Grave a
becoming Remembrance of your Christian Kindness, and Tender Respect shown and
expressed (on all Occasions) toward the most unworthy of Christ's Ambassadors;
who, (through special Grace) can say (in truth) that he prizes and values his
present Poverty and Reproach occasioned by his Love to, and Zeal for the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, more than he does all the Honor and Riches which this vain
flattering and bewitching World is capable of advancing to.

And I greatly hope, and sincerely pray, that the ever Blessed God (who has
endowed you with so Excellent a Gift of Understanding, and discerning the State
and Condition of Human Bodies, and of distinguishing between the manifold and
various Maladies and Distempers to which they are obnoxious (even to an
Excelling the most of Physicians now in London) and who has Crowned your
Labors with such Success as bespeaks you preferrable and desirable (above all
of your Function) by those Patients who have experienced your Skill and
Faithfulness: That this ever Blessed God (I say) who has done for you what is
now mentioned above; what, I am capable of expressing, may prove your spiritual
Physician in that needful Hour, when decaying Nature is breathing out its
Vltimum Vale to the present World is, and shall be the Prayer and Cordial Wish
of your highly obliged and thankful Patient; who shall not cease (whatever
others think or say of you) to Trumpet out your deserved Fame and real Worth,
while I enjoy the Faculties of Memory and Speech. And what I pray, and wish God
may be to you in a dying Hour, the same I pray and wish he will be to your dear
and Religious Consort, in whom you are so greatly Blessed. And for both your
sakes (to whom I own my self for ever obliged) I heartily pray, that God may
work out for his own (by the effectual Call of his own Spirit) your dear
Posterity, that when you are called off, and they (by Providence) are called on
the Stage of public Service; they may be Actted by the same Spirit whereby ye
are both Acted; so as their Usefulness in their Day and Place, may render and
bespeak them as serviceable and desirable as their Parents, the which if God
vouchsafe them (as I hope he will) they will then live truly Honorable, and
die lamented, as I am confident you will whenever you go hence.

My prefixing your worthy Names to the ensuing Treatise will (I hope) be looked
on as a making Amends for my great Deficiency and shortness in Handling so
sweet and excellent a Subject; especially in the Esteem and Judgment of those
who have the same value for you both, as I have. The Method I have taken in
owning your Kindness will (I greatly hope) be no way displeasing, seeing I know
not how otherwise to do it to my own Satisfaction. I conclude this short
Dedication with my hearty well Wishes and Prayer to God for you both; that the
Subject of the Appletree (so weakly handled in the ensuing Treatise) may be
(through the Powerful Influence of the Holy Ghost in both your Souls) made as
delightful to you in reading it, as it was to me in Studying and Preaching it;
and as Ravishing as it was to those at whose earnest Request I have been
prevailed with to Publish the same. I am (Honored Sir) and virtuous Madam,

Your ever obliged Friend James Barry.

THE PREFACE TO THE Christian Reader.
Courteous Reader,
WHen first I Preached on this sweet and delightful Subject, (the Appletree) I
little thought or expected to have been seen in Print. So far was I (and still
am) from judging my self capable of handling so Mysterious and Profound a
Subject, as it really deserves to be handled.

That which induced me to a Willingness to Publish my Thoughts and Conceptions
about it; I lay down in two Particulars.

First, The real Sweetness and Soul-ravishing Delight which (with the Spouse) I
found under the Shadow of the Sweet and Precious Jesus, who is (Allegorically)
set forth in this Metaphor, whose Fruit has often revived and exhilerated my
fainting Soul, while I continued sitting under his Divine Shadow; to keep and
secure me from being scorched to death by the violent Heat of the tempestuous
Storms which have been raised against me by the powers of Darkness; and which
have (incessantly) followed me, since I was (effectually) called out of a State
of Nature; especially, since I was called to the Work of the Ministry. The only
Wise God saw it good to permit Satan and his Instruments, not only to commence,
but even to maintain and keep up a sharp War against me; that I might know
(experimentally) what a shadow this Appletree affords to poor Bewildred Soul,
and how that there is no other shadow than can secure a poor (...)

Secondly, The delightful Sweetness which several Savory-spirited Christians
declared they met with (to the Joy and rejoicing of their Spirits) in the
handling this Subject. Since when, I have been often and more than ordinarily
importuned by several, both in City and Country to Publish (in Print) what they
heard me deliver on the Appletree Subject. They not doubting, but that the
Spirit of Christ which made it so delightful and ravishing to themselves, would
make it the same to other Believers, if once Printed. At their earnest Request,
I did make a Promise of Publishing the same, when I found my self (thereunto)
Encouraged by Providence.

All the Harm I wish thee (kind and charitable Reader) is; that the Spirit of
Truth (who Inspired Solomon the Penman of that Glorious Mystery handled in this
short Treatise) may gra^iously vouchsafe unto thee such a measure of the
Anointing from above, as may Render thee capable of understanding; and applying
thy self (by Faith) the things held forth, and contained in it, that so thou
may (Experimentally) come to taste and feel the sweet Joy and Delight
wherewith the unworthy Author met, in Studying and Preaching the same: And
wherewith those godly Believers (who heard it Preached) did meet, at whose
Importunity I have now Published the same for the public Good: If thou find
any Comfort, and Soul Advantage by reading it; let it be a Motive to stir thee
up to join with me in (heartily) requesting, the more Learned and Experienced
of the Bridegrooms Friends and faithful Ambassadors, to supply my great
Deficiency and shortness, in setting forth the Commendation of this
(Incomparably) Excellent Appletree; in whose Shadow and Fruit consists the very
Life (and the Ail) of all true Believers, both here, and hereafter. If it
happens thou think me too sharp and too b^ld in handling the Papist, the
Quaker, and Arminians, etc. In this Treatise I heartily desire thee to consider
but two things for preventing Prejudice in thy Spirit; either against the Truth
(herein) discovered, or against the Instrument by whom the Providence of God
sees fit to make the Discovery to thee.

First, The apparent Disparagement which the Principles and Practices of the
above mentioned Heretics put upon the ^hurches Appletree, in that they hold
and teach; that Christ's Righteousness (alone) is not sufficient to justify a
Sinner at the Bar of God, without the Sinners Qualifications) as concauses with
Christ's Righteousness) in Justification. This is a disparagment to Christ (the
Churches Appletree) which the God of Love and Patience (himself) cannot bear.
Deuteronomy. 18.18. Jo. 5.23. And should not I (herein) Patrizare, that is, Imitate my
Father in decrying and condemning such a Christ debasing and Soul damning
Principle; I should not (by being silent herein) evidence my self to be the
Adopted Son of God.

Secondly, Boldness for God, and Zeal for the Honor of his Son, are some of
those blessed Effects which the Shadow and Fruits of the Appletree produce in
all true Believers, who sit under the shadow, and feed on the Fruit of the
Churches Appletree. Acts 4.13. Gal. 4.18. To convince any (hereof) who question
the Truth of what I now assert; Let such but once get saving Acquaintance with
this Appletree, by sitting under its comfortable and delightful shadow in time
of the most raging Storms they meet with, and by feeding (believingly) on its
Fruit: And in case they become not bold and zealous for God and Christ, I shall
be willing to bear the ignominious Brand or Character of a false Prophet.

Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at Peace, thereby God shall come unto
thee, Job. 22.21.

O taste and see that the Lord is good^ blessed is the Man that trusts in
him, Psalm. 34.8.

Sermon I.
Cant. 2.3. As the Appletree among the Trees of the Wood, so is my Beloved
among the Sons; I sat down under his Shadow with great Delight, and his Fruit
was sweet to my taste.


AMong all the Metaphors whereby the Wisdom of God has seen sit, to set forth
the Excellency and Commodiousness of Christ his Son; as he is designed for the
Happiness and Comfort of poor elected Sinners: None so sets him forth (to the
life) as this of the Appletree, as will most plainly appear by two things.

First. By explaining (or unfolding) the Sense and Meaning of the Spirit of God
in this Allegory or Metaphor.

Secondly, By a due and scriptural Application of the same to the Souls of
poor, weak, tempted Believers, for the Relief and Comfort of whom the same is
left upon Record.

I begin with the first (viz.) to Explain and unfold the Sense and Meaning of
the Spirit of God in this Allegory or Metaphor.

The design of the Spirit of God in this Allegory is, (I humbly conceive) to
set forth the incomparable and transcendent Excellency of Jesus Christ, above
all other of Adams Children, and that on a twofold Account.

First, On the Account of what he is in himself.

Secondly, On the Account of the great Work he is designed and called to by his
Father.

First, On the Account of what Christ is in himself; he far (and unspeakably)
transcends all the Children of Adam, so witnesses the Spirit of God concerning
him, Psalm. 45.2. Thou art fairer than the Chlidren of Men, Grace is poured into
thy Lips, therefore God has Blessed thee for ever. To this also witnesses the
Church of God (the true Spouse of Christ) which is acted and guided by the
Spirit of God, Cant. 5.10. My Beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among
ten thousand. and ver. 16. His mouth is most sweet; yea, he is altogether
lovely. This transcendent Excellency of Christ (in himself) on which account he
Excells all the Children of Adam, is to be considered with respect to two
things.

First, In respect of his Godhead, as Christ is God, he is blessed with an
uncreated essential Excellency above all Created Beings, from whom (as such)
all created and communicated Excellency in Angels and Saints flows and springs,
Zach. 13.7. Jo. 17.5. Phil. 2.9. Heb. 1.3.

Secondly, In respect of his Humanity, Christ is (transcendently) more
Excellent than all the Children of Adam, and that on a twofold Account.

First, On the account of the Spotless Purity and perfect Integrity of his
Human Nature, whereby a Foundation was laid for uniting the elect World to God
in a Bond of an Everlasting Union. Had not the Humanity of Christ been
spotless, and free from all Stain of sin; it could not (possibly) have been
capable of Union with the Divine Being, Psalm. 5.4. Mal. 1.13. 2 Cor. 5.21. It
is on this Account that Christ is styled the Lamb of God, Jo. 1.36. John speaks
with Allusion to the Pascal Lamb under the Law, which was to be a Lamb without
Spot or Blemish, Exodus 12.5. To this also alludes the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet.
1.19. But with the precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without Blemish, and
without Spot.

The sinless Purity of his Human Nature, and the exact Conformity of all his
Human Actions to the demand of Gods Law, are here intended.

Secondly, On the Account of the extraordinary Anointing of the Spirit, poured
out on the Humanity of Christ, to sit and meeten him for the great Work of
Mediation between God and elect Sinners. Of this Christ himself gives an
Account by the Evangelical Prophet, Esa. 61.1. The Spirit of the Lord God is
upon me, because the Lord has anointed me, to Preach glad tidings to the meek,
etc.

This was excellently held forth in the Person of Aaron the High Priest (under
the dark Dispensation of the ceremonial Administration) an Eminent and Glorious
Type and Shadow of Christ the Elects High Priest, Psalm. 133.2.

It is like the Precious Ointment (upon the Head) that ran down upon the Beard,
even Aarons Beard, that went down to the Skirts of his Garment: The material
Oil wherewith Aaron (Christ's Type) was anointed, did prefigure and type out the
Effusion of the Spirits, Gifts and Graces on the Human Nature of Christ to fit
and qualify him for the Work the Father has sent him about; this anointing
was poured out on Christ without measure, as witnesses the Scripture, Jo. 3
34. For he whom God has sent speaks the Words of God, for God gives not the
Spirit by measure unto him: This is further backed and confirmed by Colos. 1.19.
For it pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell. And Colos. 2.9.
For in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.

Besides the personal Anointing of Christ's Human Nature, wherewith the Father
anointed him above his fellows, Psalm. 45.7. there was a (Soul enriching) Stock
of Grace put into his Hands (as Mediator) in time to be communicated to all the
Elect, who are to be the Members of his Mystical Body: Hence it is, that
Believers are said to receive of Christ's Fullness; Jo. 1.16. And of his Fullness
have all we received, and Grace for Grace. Ephesians. 4.7. But unto every one of us
is given Grace, according to the measure of the Gift of Christ.

Christ (as God) is the Source and Fountain of all the Graces of Believers, as
God-man, he is the Meriter and Purchaser of all Grace for them; and Christ (as
Mediator) he has the dispencing Power committed to him (by the Father,) to
communicate to, and bestow upon every Member of his Body, what measure of Grace
he pleases.

Secondly, Christ (far) excels all Adam's Children, on the account of the Work
to which the Father designed him in Eternity, and whereto he (in time) called
him.

This great Work is to reconcile God and elect Sinners together, by the
Interposition of his Mediatorial Righteousness, to make up that Breach which
the Sin (and Apostasy) of Adam had effected between God and the Elect, and to
keep and continue them in an everlasting Covenant of Love and Peace, so as that
there should never be any Possibility of their being at Enmity any more for
ever, 2 Cor. 5.19. to wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the World unto
himself, not imputing their Trespasses to them. By World in this, (as in other
places) is intended the elect World, for whom Christ was made Sin and a Curse;
and between whom and God (his offended Father) he stepped in (as a Mediator) to
make Peace, by offering up himself in Sacrifice to God's Justice, 1 Timothy 2.5,
6. for there is one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ
Jesus.

Who gave himself a Ransom for all, to be testified in due time.

Compare with this, Jo. 10.15. and Jo. 17.9. and it will (plainly) appear, that
Christ became a Mediator of Redemption and Intercession for God's Elect, and
none else.

If what has been said, concerning what Christ is in himself, and the great
Work to which the Father has designed and called him, be rightly considered,
it will appear, (beyond all Contradiction) that he infinitely excels and
transcends all the Children of Adam. None of Adam's Posterity were ever
qualified like him; neither were any of them ever called to so great and
glorious a Work as he was: this in the general.

But more particularly, to come to the Allegory or Metaphor, by which his
transcendent Excellency is (allegorically) set forth, there are three things in
the Apple Tree which bespeaks the Lord Jesus, a Nonesuch to the Elect.

First, The Lowness and Comeliness of the Apple Tree above other Trees: It grows
lower and nearer the Ground than other Trees (usually) do.

The matchless Lowliness and Humility of Christ is (hereby) set forth; none
could ever compare with him herein. Mat. 11.29. Take my Yoke upon you, and
learn of me, for I am meek and lowly.

This is anciently Predicted of him, as appears Zach. 9.9. Rejoice greatly O
Daughter of Zion, shout O Daughter of Jerusalem, behold thy King comes unto
thee; he is just, and having Salvation, lowly, and riding upon an Ass, and upon
a Colt, the Foal of an Ass, Mat. 21.4, 5. Six things wherein this will appear.

First, His condescending to become his Father's Inferior; first as a Son, (a
Relation which imports Superiority and Inferiority) Psalm. 2.7. I will declare
the Decree the Lord has said unto me, Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee, etc. Jo. 3.16. For God so loved the World, that he gave his only
begotten Son, etc. Jo. 14.28. For my Father is greater than I.

Secondly, As a Servant, to do his Work; Psalm. 89.20. I have found David my
Servant, with my Holy Oil have I anointed him. Esa. 42.1. Behold my Servant,
whom I uphold, mine Elect, in whom my Soul delights.

* This Inferiority of Christ to God, is to be understood in respect of the
Office he voluntarily took on him (for the Elects sake,) not in respect of
Nature or Essence, as appears Zach. 13.7. Awake O Sword against my Shepherd,
and against the Man that is my Fellow. Jo. 10.30. I and my Father are one. Heb.
1.3. Who being the Brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his
Person, etc.

Secondly, His condescending to assume the Humane Nature: Heb. 2.14. Forasmuch
as the Children did partake of Flesh and Blood, he also himself took part of
the same. Verse. 16. For verily he took not upon him the Nature of Angels, but
he took upon him the Seed of Abraham.

There are two things, which (if considered) will put a bright Luster on this
Act of Christ's Condescension.

First, The Baseness of the Matter of that Body he assumed, viz. A Clod of
Earth, and that the worst of Earth, viz. Red Earth; so the word Adam in Hebrew
signifies.

Secondly, The abject State and wretched Condition into which it fell, by the
Apostasy and Rebellion of Adam, to which he knew he must become subject. Hence
it is, he is styled a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief. Esa. 53.3, 4.
Romans 8.3. For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak, (through the
Flesh) God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh, etc.

Thirdly, In his being Born of mean Parents. Christ (as God) did single out and
choose the Womb in which his Humanity was to be Conceived; which was not an
Empress, a Queen, or some Lady of Rich and Noble Extraction, (according to the
Flesh) but a mean and despicable Maid, of a mean and poor Family, so poor, that
she was not able to compass a Lamb, but must be trusting to a pair of Turtle
Doves, for a Sacrifice, Luke 2.24. compared with Lev. 12.8. I marvel which of
all the wise Men, or the Professors of this Age would freely make such a Choice
for themselves or theirs? Christ had regard to the Promise, not to Riches or
Honors.

Fourthly, His taking on him the form of a Servant. Psalm. 40.6. Sacrifice and
offering thou did not desire, mine Ears thou diggedst through. David
(personating Christ) speaks with Allusion to to Exodus 21.6. where the Law for
Servants is set down, that Ceremony of Boring the Servants Ear through with an
Aull, did prefigure Christ's perpetual Servitude (to his Father) until he should
finish the Work he had undertaken to go through with, Jo. 17.4. I have glorified
thee on the earth, I have finished the work which thou gave me to do. Phil.
2.7. And made himself of no Reputation, and took upon him the form of a
Servant, etc.

Fifthly, The Objects of his Choice whom he loves and delights in, (viz.) the
poor and despised ones of the World.

The design of the Scriptures (now quoted) is not to assure us, that all poor
ones in this World, are to be Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven; or that all
who are richly (or nobly) born after the Flesh, shall die damned: But the
design is to show, that very few (comparatively) of the rich and noble of this
World are saved.

Worldly greatness and saving Grace very rarely meet together in the same
Person, when they do, none on Earth prove more lowly minded, and abundant in
Love to, and Zeal for God, than such, Ja. 1.9, 10. Let the Brother of low
degree rejoice, in that he is made high. But the rich, in that he is made low,
etc.

A second thing in the Appletree which (Allegorically) sets forth the
Excellency and Usefulness of Christ to the Elect, is its spreading and shadowy
Nature. As the Appletree is of singular Use and Advantage to Human Bodies, to
shelter them from Storms and Showers; so the Lord Jesus (spiritually fled or
run to by Faith) is useful and advantageous to the Souls of Gods Elect in time
of spiritual Storms. Christ is set forth (in Scripture) as the only Shadow of
Security to the Children of God in time of all their Distress and Tribulations,
Esa. 4.6. And there shall be a Tabernacle for a Shadow in the day time from the
heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a Covert from storms and from rain.
Esa. 25.4. Thou have been a strength to the poor, a strength to the needy in
his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat, when the blast
of the terrible ones is as a blast against the wall.

The Prophesies (now mentioned) are to be understood of, and applied to Christ
and the Elect, and none else. Christ is a Shadow to them and to none else; and
none in Earth or Heaven can secure them from the dreadful Storms they meet with
but he, and none besides him.

The doctrinal Observation which Naturally Results from the former part of the
Text: is, That Christ the Son of God (Allegorically) set forth by the
Apple Tree is a shadow of Protection to the weakest Believer, let what storms
will come on him in this World. Or thus; in the most distressed, and deplorable
Case, and Condition, a Believer can (Possibly) be in, (in respect of Sin and
Misery) He is (for ever) secured from perishing, being found under the shadow
of Christ's Protection.

Besides the words of the Text; that in Esa. 25.4. is a full, and convincing
Proof of the Observation now laid down. To which; many other Scriptures may be
added out of both the Old Testament and the New. But omitting many Quotations:
I shall proceed to a more clear and convincing Demonstration of the truth of
Doctrine now Asserted. And that by an Enumeration of the several particular
Storms, wherewith the weak Believer must look and expect to meet, before he
Arrives at Heaven And out of all which Christ will most certainly deliver him.

There are six sharp and dreadful Storms, wherewith Gods Elect meet be ween the
Cradle and the Crown in Glory; from all which, the shadow of Christ's
Mediatorship covers and secures them for ever.

First, The storm of the Laws damnatory Sentence which thunders out Curses and
eternal Death on all Adams Children (none excepted) Romans 3.19. Now we know that
what things the Law says, it says to them that are under the Law: that every
mouth may be stopped; and all the world may become guilty before God. Gal.
4.10. For as many as are of the works of the Law, they are under the Curse: for
it is written, cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are
written in the Law to do them.

Here Is a Storm which is like the Avenger of Blood (under the Law) it will
never be laid, till the awakened, convinced Sinner be either in Hell, or
sheltered under the shadow of Christ's mediatorial Satisfaction given to off
nded Justice for the sinners of God's Elect. From this Storm none can secure
but the Lord Jesus, Jo. 8.36. If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye
shall be free indeed. Romans 10 4. For Christ is the end of the Law for
Righteousness to every one that believes. When the elect sinner flies for
Refuge to the shadow of Christ's mediatorial Satisfaction, from the terrifying
sentence of the Laws Malediction and Curse, the Law sounds a Retreat. It
cease to pursue the sinner, or to threaten him any more with Damnation. As
the Avenger of Blood was not to follow the Manslayer into the City of Refuge,
so neither will the Law pursue with Curse and Vengeance the believing sinner,
who has gotten under Christ's shadow.

Secondly, The bitter Agonies of a wounded Conscience when the Laws Terror
reaches the Soul, and (like fire) drinks up the very Spirit of a poor sinner,
so that he knows not which to go, or what to do for Ease and Healing. Oh! who
but Christ's mediatorial shadow can shelter such a wounded Soul: It is
mavelous to think what various and pitiful shifts the bewildered sinner makes
to shelter himself from this storm, and to lick the Wound whole, which the
killing Terror of the Law has given the Soul and Conscience within. The
distressed sinner lying bound in the Laws Prison; and ready (every moment) to
sink into final Desperation under the insupportable burden of its own Guilt,
according to that in Pro. 18.14. But a wounded Spirit who can bear, of this Job
seems to complain most bitterly, Job 6.4. The Arrows of the Almighty are within
me, the Poison whereof drinks up my Spirit, the Terrors of God do set
themselves in array against me. He is filled with perplexing Thoughts, what he
had best to do in this sad and deplorable Condition. Do, and live, being the
Principal derived from the first Adam, to the Trade of working he goes;
thinking, and hoping (with his Father Adam) to hide and cover (from the Eye of
God's Allseeing Knowledge) his spiritual Nakedness and Deformity, with the
Figleaves of his own Performances. Somewhat he must do, in order to help and
save himself, but how or where to begin, he finds himself at a loss. Hence
those Queries, what shall we do? Acts 2.37. Mark 10.17. Acts 16.30. which
plainly shows, that all Adams Children (when awakened by the Terrors of God's
Laws) do seek for Life and Salvation in a way of Works, this is further
confirmed by Romans 10.3. For they being ignorant of God's Righteousness, and
going about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves
to the Righteousness of God.

One while the Sinner resolves with himself he will amend his sinful Course,
and be (for time to come) a better Man: He will say his Prayers, he will
confess and break off his sins, he will forsake his vain Companions and sinful
Pastime; and the Church and serving God he resolves he will frequent, and
constantly attend.

He will now take on him a strict Profession, a Church Communicant he must be,
to the Sacrament he goes, and from that to other Duties; such as Fasting, and
Almsdeeds, and keeping up a strict Watch over himself, in all his ways: He is
(now) not the same Man he was before, he can (with the Pharisee) boast of his
negative and positive Righteousness, Luke 18.11.12. And now he thinks and hopes
the work is done, albeit he was never nearer Hell and eternal Ruin than by
these acts of Morallity (Negative and Possitive) he has brought himself. He
has been (all this while) but scouring and making clean and bright the outside
of the Cup and Platter, not heeding or regarding the Filth and Nastiness which
cleaves to the inside.

A change of State he is a Stranger to; External Reformation he takes to be the
Conversion which must fit him for Heaven; though most certain it is, that no
Reformation, but what flows from an effectual change of State, will evidence or
prove a Man to be a real Convert. Such an External Reformation may qualify a
Man for Church Communion, but never for Heaven: And it is to be feared, that
there is but very little, even of this visible Reformation in some Churches,
who seem (at least in their own, and other Injudicious Peoples Conceits) to be
far purer and holier than their Neghbour Churches, who make not so much a Noise
and Blunder as they themselves do.

There are some Churches (so called) who (for want of Charity) monopolize a
pure Church State to themselves, as if Christ had no true Gospel Church (in
this day) besides themselves; whose Preachers and Rulers are of so impetuous a
Spirit, as drives them to the very Precipice of Anathematizing all but
themselves: As if the Doctrine of God's Grace, and the Form of a true
Gospel Church State were to be found no where but among them; these are like
violent Storms and Showers which will not hold long, and (indeed it is pity they
should. All I shall further say of such, is the Lord rebuke their furious (and
Bedlam-like) Spirit, and give them to see, and (in time) to be convinced, how
far wide they are from what they fancy they have attained to, (viz.) a
Christ-like Spirit, and a true Conformity to the Pattern of God's House, a
thing so much boasted of, and gloried in, and that without cause. The Word of
God assures us (up and down) that no Works (or Duties) which sinners are
capable of performing, can possibly give Ease or Peace to that Conscience,
which the Law of God (set home by the Spirit of Bondage) has wounded. Healing
and Peace are to be found no where, but under the shadow of Christ's
Satisfaction; there being nothing short of what satisfies Divine Justice (for
the violation of the Moral Law) which can satisfy and quiet the Conscience of
a wounded sinner, Job 5.18. For he makes sore, and binds up; he wounds,
and his hands make whole. Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

A third Storm wherewith the elect meets; is, the fiery Assaults and
Temptations of the Devil. They are called fiery from their sad and dreadful
Effects in the Soul and Conscience of the poor distressed sinner; they being
(to the Soul) what Poison and Fire are to the Body. Ephesians. 6.16. Above all,
taking the shield of Faith, whereby ye shall be able to quench all the fiery
Darts of the wicked. The Darts (here intended) are the Assaults and Temptations
of the Devil, which are injected (or cast) into the Soul suddenly, and
invisibly; as Darts are cast or shot by an unseen Enemy: which, when they find
Entrance, they (immediately) inflame the Soul, as poisoned Darts or Arrows
(hardened in Fire) Invenom or Poison the Body: These Temptations (or satanical
Injections) are numberless, and of various sorts; sometimes to Presumption,
sometimes to Desparation, sometimes to Atheism, sometimes to Blasphemy, against
the Majesty of God; sometimes to one Wickedness, and sometimes to another.
Satan is a busy Enemy, and a Restless Enemy; always tempting, and that all
Men, and to all manner of Folly and sin; on which very Account, he is (by the
Spirit of God, styled (in the Greek) (...). The Tempter, who is always busy at
his Trade; piercing to know what is in Men, that so he might (accordingly) suit
his Baits to the Disposition and Temper of Adams Children, whom he seeks to
prey upon. Yea, so restless and unwearied is he at his Trade of throwing (or
injecting) his fiery Darts into the Soul, that he will not loose the time of
Men's sleeping. Satan (in this case) is like an Enemy, that surprises in the
dead of the Night, when Persons are buried in Sleep and Security: And as in
Nature, no Alarm is so amazing and frightful, as that which is given in the
dead of the Night; so (as Experience teaches) no Temptation makes a sadder
Hurricane in the Soul, than the night Sallies, which he makes on the Soul, when
the Person is buried in sleep. Now, in such Storms as these, what can poor
tempted Souls do, were it not for the shadow of Christ's Cleansing and Healing
Virtue? herein the Brazen Serpent (in the Wilderness) did eminently type out
the Lord Jesus Christ his Virtue, to heal and cleanse the Sting and Pollution
given (and occasioned) by the infernal Serpents stinging temptations.

No way possible for Help or Cure in this Case, but flying (by Faith and
Prayer) to the shadow of Christ's healing and cleansing Virtue. It is on this
very Account, that the Grace of Faith is preferred above all the other Parts of
the Christians spiritual Armor; in that it looks (and flies) to Christ
immediately for Help and Cure.

No sooner has the Devil cast in his Soul affrightning Dart into the Soul of a
True Believer; but the Grace of Faith (like an expert and experienced Soldier,
who whips up the Granado thrown in by the Enemy, and throws it back on the
Enemy again) repels and throws back the fiery poisoned Dart injected by Satan.

A fourth Storm wherewith the Elect soul meets; is, the Wrath of God seared for
sin. Not that God is indeed Wrath with the Elect sinner as he is with the
Reprobate, who has no share or part in his Sons Redemption: But Satan and
carnal Reason, do represent God as a wrathful Enemy to the sinner; this the
poor sinner fully concludes to be so, and from hence he feels a miserable
Hurricane within himself, as if God were (indeed) his Enemy, and designed to
damn him for transgressing his Just and Righteous Law: That the elect sinner
(as Adams Child) is born Heir of the Curse, Partaker of a Nature as polluted
and vile, as Hell (it self) can make it; and likewise obnoxious to the Wrath
threatened for the breach of the Law, and that according to do and live; sin and
die; is, and must be granted.

But that he (being Elect, and chosen of God in Christ) is under the Curse, and
in danger of being seized by the Wrath of God; is no less than Blasphemy to
think, or say, and that for these Reasons following.

First, Because of the Compact and Agreement between the Father and the Son,
concerning the Elect in Eternity. By virtue of which Agreement, the Elect are
not only secured from the Curse of God's Law (by Christ their Vademony and
Surety, being made a Curse for them according to Esa. 53.5. Gal. 3.13.) But
they are also secured (in Christ their Head, and covenanting Representative) of
eternal Life, according to 2 Cor. 5.21. 6 Cor. 1.30.

Secondly, Because of the Plenary and full Payment (by way of Purchase and
Redemption) which Christ the Elects Undertaker has made to Gods Justice for
them.

Concerning which, I am not afraid to affirm; that neither the strict Law of
God, nor yet his Justice, can demand more (by way of Satisfaction for the sins
of the Elect) than is to be found, in that one Oblation, which he offered to
God, when he (through the Eternal Spirit) offered himself without Spot to God,
etc. Heb. 9.14. Heb. 10.14.

Thirdly, Because of the declared Satisfaction of God the Father, with that his
Sons Mediatorial Performance, according to Esa. 53.11.12. Mat. 3.17. Jo. 16.10.

Fourthly, Because it would be a charging God the Father with Injustice, to
hold or say, that he looks that the same Debt should be twice paid: First, by
Christ his Son (whom he himself chose and anointed to this very Work of
redeeming his Elect Captives.) And secondly, by the Elect (Personally)
themselves, such a practice as this would be hissed at by graceless Moralists;
and shall Man be more Just than God? Job 4.17.

Fifthly, Because it would be an everlasting Stain and Reflection on the Name
and Honor of the Lord Jesus Christ, as if he had engaged in a work which he
proved not able to accomplish, (viz.) to redeem God's Elect, and to secure them
from the Curse of God, in case the Elect be still under that Curse and Wrath.

The Point then which I conclude upon, is this, (viz.) That God's Elect are
either secured from the Curse of the Law, and delivered from the Wrath of God;
or else, there must be some defect in the Justice of God, or in the Mediatorial
Satisfaction of the Son of God (the Elects Surety) but there is (there can be)
no Defect in the Justice of God, nor yet in the Mediatorial Satisfaction of the
Son of God the Elects Surety.

Therefore, the Elect of God are secured from the Curse of the Law, and
delivered from the Wrath of God. Romans 8.23. Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of God's Elect, it is God that justifies. Gal. 3.13. Christ has
redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us. 1 These. 1.10.
Even Jesus, who has delivered us from the wrath to come. From what has been
said, it will necessarily follow; that the Storm and Hurricane occasioned by
the fear of the Wrath of God in the Soul of an Elect sinner) is rather from the
sentence of the Law, not rightly understood, than from any actual Execution of
the Curse, and Wrath of God upon him for sin.

Whatever Thoughts or Apprehensions the Elect sinner has, concerning the Wrath
of God, which raises such a terrifying storm in the Conscience, this is an
undoubted Truth; that nothing but flying to the Shadow of Christ's Mediatorial
Satisfaction, can allay that storm, and give the troubled Soul inward Comfort,
Job 33. Then he is gracious unto him, and says deliver him, etc. Heb. 6.18.
Who have fled for refuge to the hope set before them, etc.

A fifth storm, wherewith the Elect sinner will frequently meet in the World,
is, the scorching Heat of Tribulations, and outward Persecutions: of this our
Lord (himself) has had large Experience (none more) and of this he has
forewarned all his following Members, who are to follow him in the
Regeneration, In the World ye shall have Tribulation, etc. Mat. 10.22. And ye
shall be hated of all men, for my Names sake, etc. 2 Timothy 3.12. Yea, and all
that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution.

This was the Path wherein the (now) Triumphing Martyrs followed the Captain of
their Salvation, who was made perfect through suffering, Heb. 2.10. These kind
of storms are very uneasy and frightful yet they must be gone through by those,
who follow the Lamb to the Kingdom of Heaven. It is here, as it is with those
Merchants, who covet to partake of the Riches in the Indies: They must expect
to meet, not only with contrary Winds, but with fearful storms, and dreadful
Hurricanes too, before they can come to possess the desired Riches of that
Country: And of all storms, the Hurricane is most frightful and dangerous, the
same being occasioned by a meeting of all the four Winds (together) opposing
each the other, with all their strength. When but one of the Winds blow, though
it blow not only fresh, but boisterously; yet if the Ship has but Sea-room
enough, she will weather the Point; yea, albeit the Wind chop about from one
point to another.

But when all the four Winds blow in their full strength together, the Ship
knows not which way to steer her course: All she can do, is to commit her self
to the Mercy of the restless Sea; which (like a Gulf) is ready (with open
Mouth to swallow her up. When it comes to this, the Mariners hope of escaping
with their Lives, is at a very low Ebb, if any Hope (at all) be left them. And
surely, did not the overruling Providence of Heaven watch over poor Mortals, in
such Hurricanes, the great Deep must be their Tomb.

As there are natural Storms (which attend the Children of Adam, threatening the
Life and Comforts of their Body) so there are spiritual Storms; which (as
designed and managed by the Devil) strike at, and threaten the very Life and
Comfort of the Soul. As the former of these, so also the latter; they admit of
degrees, some Souls (as well as some Bodies) they meet with (and pass through)
far greater and sharper storms than others.

And as the common Care and Providence of God, is to be seen and acknowledged
in preserving the Bodies of Men, from perishing by the former. So, his special
Care and saving Providence is to be seen, and thankfully acknowledged, in
preserving the Souls of the Elect, from perishing by the latter.

And as the storms at Sea are occasioned by the four Winds, East, West, North
and South Winds; so the spiritual Storms which threaten and endanger the Soul
they proceed from, and are occasioned by a fourfold Party.

First, The Devil, (who ever since his Apostasy) is become an implacable and an
irreconcilable Enemy; as to the Majesty of God, so also to the Souls of Men;
who has (on this very Account) the names given him (both in Hebrew and in
Greek) which signify and import the same thing with his Nature, (viz.)
Destroyer. So the Names of Abaddon (in Hebrew) and Apollyon (in Greek)
signify, as the Learned know, Rev. 9.11.

Secondly, the World (I mean the wicked of the World) which is not only at
Enmity with God, but a real Hater and Persecutor of all that love God, and bear
his Blessed Image: These the Devil makes use of in his service. The Devil makes
use of these (in his Service) as they are his Children, and Servants, Jo. 8.44.
Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the Lusts of your Father ye will do, Gal.
4.29. But as then he that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that was
born after the Spirit even so it is now.

Thirdly, Corrupt Nature, which i^ the worst Enemy a Man has, and which is
that which gives the Devil the greatest Advantage (against a Man's self) of any
thing in the World: This Corruption of Nature lies in two things First, The sad
and wretched Aversion of the Heart to God, and all things spiritually good.
Secondly, The Devil^ like Propensity of the Heart and Soul, to what is hateful
to God, and really Destructive to the Man's own self Were it not for this
Corruption o^ Nature, the Devil and his other Auxiliary Forces could do
nothing, which would prove of any Avail, to Ruin or undo a Soul; but herein
lies his great Advantage that he has within a Man's self, a Party or a
Principle which (i^ the Spirit and Grace of God prevent not) he can (by his
serpentine Craft, and Lyon-like Fury) stir up, and draw forth to such a degree,
as will cause the Man to cry out and say; that his worst and most destructive
Enemy is within himself; and that were it not for that, he need not value or
fear all the Storms and overwhelming Hurricanes, which all the Legions of
Apostate Angels in Hell, and all the Pollitick and Mallicious Persecutors in
the World, could possibly devise or raise against him. Were it not for the
Tinder of Heart Corruption, the Devil would soon grow weary of throwing into
the Soul the poisonous Sparks of his Infernal Temptations. The Prince of this
world comes (says Christ) and has nothing in me, Jo. 14.30. No Immorality
(in Practice) whereof to accuse him; neither any Pollution (or Corruption) in
the assumed Nature; on which his Temptations could possibly catch hold, and
herein lay Christ's and the Elects Advantage. For had the Tempter found the
least matter in Christ, on which his Temptations could fasten, the Elect (for
whom Christ undertook as Vademony and Surety, would have been over and over
miserable and wretched, to endless Eternity.

The fourth Party who has a Hand in those Storms wherewith Elect sinners do
meet in this Life; is, God himself; who (by the Methods his wise Providence
takes with the Elect) seems (t^ outward appearance) to design their utter Ruin,
this the Devil (frequently (...) suggests to the Soul; and this the poo^
bewildred sinner is (easily) perswade^ to credit. And when matters come t^ this
pass, that when the Poor sinner i^ surrounded with perplexing Trials o^ all
hands; the Billows and Waves o^ all kind of Temptations being read^ even to
cover his Head, and swallow him up: He concludes, that God himself is his
Enemy, it must needs be very dismal with the poor sinner in such (...)
Condition,

There are four things (especially i^ respect whereof, the poor sinner may be
said to be in a Storm, in each of which the four Parties (above mentioned) may
have a hand.

First, Extreme Poverty and outward Streights, which is a very sore Trial^ and
a Burden so heavy (especially to those who have sometimes enjoyed Plenty, and
Fullness) that many have sunk under its Weight; some hanging themselves, some
drowning themselves, and others cutting their own Throats; not able to bear the
Reproach of outward Poverty.

Secondly, Black Reproach upon the Name and Reputation, this is a Storm harder
to go through, than most Men think, till they come to be tried thereby. Oh! how
does the Spirit that is in Adam's Children, lust to Envy, and Revenge, when
they meet with Affronts in their good Name and Reputation? To be miscalled and
misrepresented among Men; to be accounted not fit (or worthy) to live among
Men: Proud Nature cries out, Flesh and Blood cannot bear it; What! to be so and
so abused, to have my good Name taken away, I Will die before I Will pocket (or put
up) such an Affront, such an Abuse: Either Arrest the Person in an Action of
Slander, or Peg him to the Wall. And in case any peaceable Friend dissuade from
such revengeful Practices; What Is the Reply? What! unman my self? be accounted
a Coward? to be laughed at by every body? this is the Language of the first
Adams Nature: Ja. 4.1.5. But where the work of Renovation has past on a
sinner, his Note is changed; His unman my self is turned into undog my self,
undevil my self.

Let but the Experience of the most mortified Believer, be called in to speak
to the Point; and it will be readily acknowledged, that Reproach and Slanders
on the Name and Reputation, are not easily gone through, it is a sharp and a
trying Storm. Reproach and Contempt from Men (especially from Inferiors) was a
part of Jobs Trials, Job 30.1. And had he not been Blessed with such an
extraordinary stock of Patience, he could never have born it as he did.
Reproach has broken mine heart (said Holy David) Psalm. 69.20. And others had
Trials of cruel Mockings, etc. Heb. 11.36.

Thirdly, To be smitten in the Body with Sickness and wasting Distempers, when
the sad Symptoms of Death and Mortality invade languishing Nature: This goes
close to the very Root, it being a stroke at the very Being of Nature,
threatening its Dissolution; this is a storm which will cause the Face of the
strongest and stoutest of Adam's Children to gather Paleness, and will put the
Sons of Men into sorer Frights, than any of the former Storms, which were so
uneasy when Death (that all-conquering King of Terrors) looks the dying Man
full in the Face; it is a difficult thing to go through the Pangs and Agonies
of a dying Hour.

Fourthly, Soul Desertion. When the Clouds from above interpose between the
sensible Manifestations of God's Love and Favor, and the benighted deserted
Soul: When the Waves and Billows (from God) are commissioned to pass over the
poor Soul, as if its utter Ruin were designed by God. This is a Storm indeed,
and the hardest to be wrestled with, by the Man who has been frequently
visited with the sweet and Soul-ravishing Embraces of God's Love,

Either of these four Particulars, (if it be sharp on a poor Man) it may be
compared to a sharp Storm at Sea; occasioned by either of the four Winds, which
may set a Man hard to it.

But when all four come on a Man (at once) then the Soul is made to understand
what a spiritual Hurricane means.

A Man may loose his All in this World, his Substance may be lost, his Trade
may fail, he may come to be as poor as Job; and yet (being in Esteem for his
Goodness and Honesty, he may have Trust and Credit among his Neighbors; and so
may (in time) recover his Losses.

If a Man may be clouded (as to his Name and Credit) among Men, and yet (having
of his own wherewith to subsist in the sight and midst of his Traducers and
Reproachers) he may make a pretty good shift to weather the point.

A Man may be extreme poor, he may be blackened with Reproach, he may be
visited with bodily sickness; yet, having sensible Communion with God, none of
these single storms can overset him; because, the discerned Smiles of God's
reconciled Face, supplies all the other wants.

But for the same Person to be stripped of all visible Substance, and to become a
Proverb of reproach among all sorts (as well Friends as Enemies) to be smitten
in his Health, and to feel himself under the actual Arrest of Death (...) And
at the same time, for God to seem to write bitter things against him, and to
carry it toward the Poor Soul, as if he were become the Man's Enemy, if there
be a spiritual Hurricane (this side Hell) this is one.

All these bitter Ingredients met together in that sad Hurricane, which the
Devil was permitted to raise against Job. His Substance swept all away, and he
left as empty handed, as when he came into the World. He was cast out of the
kind, and charitable Thoughts of all (as well his Friends and nearest
Relations) as Enemies and Strangers; and the God of his Life and Comfort too,
did set himself in Battle Array against him. Oh! what a Hurricane was this
Holy, Upright hearted Man in, it must needs be very sore and sharp, when such a
Mirror of Patience lets fly such Expressions, as to Curse the very day of his
own Birth. Job 3.1, 2, 3. and to wish himself to be ameer Nonentity. ver. 16.
with other Expressions full of unbecoming Reflections on that Just, Holy and
Tremendous God, whom he loved and feared above all things. It were worth while,
if those deluded and graceless Perfectionists, who talk so boastingly and
ignorantly of a sinless Perfection; had power to consider (without prejudice)
how far Job was from that sinless Perfection, they teach and affirm is
attainable in this Life; and for Proof whereof they bring in Job for one
Instance: Asserting, that he was perfect in their Sense, let Job's great
Impatience (in the time of his sore and sinking Trials) together with his own
Acknowledgment of his Imperfection (in Sanctification) be weighed in the
Balance of an unbyassed and unprejudicate Consideration, and then will it
(convincingly) appear, how vain, and altogether contrary to God's Truth, and
the Experience of all true Believers, that silly Opinion of theirs is.

If I justify my self, mine own Mouth shall condemn me: If I say I am perfect,
it shall (also) prove me perverse, Job 9.20. If I wash my self with Snow water,
and make my hands never so clean, yet shall thou plunge me in the Ditch; and
mine own Clothes shall abhor me, ver. 30, 31. Holy David was somewhat near to
Job, in point of Troubles and Afflictions, as appears by Psalm. 42.7. Deep
calls unto deep, at the noise of thy water-spouts, all thy Waves and thy
Billows have gone over me. And in Psalm. 142.4. I looked on my right hand, and
beheld; but there was no man that would know me, refuge failed me, no man cared
for my Soul. Other Instances might be (here) brought in, to show what
Hurricanes the Saints of God have gone through, and yet it has not been in the
power of those Hurricanes to overset, or overcome those Servants of the Living
God. The higher and sharper the storms were, the closer Faith did cling to its
Object; witness Job's fixed Resolution. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in
him, Job 13.15. That of David also is to the purpose; Yea, though I walk
through the valley of the shadow of death, yet will I fear no evil, Psalm. 23.4,

These, and all the most Eminent Saints of God (Recorded in Scripture) whenever
they felt any thing of a storm approach them, their way they took for self
Preservation, was to run (by Faith and Prayer) to the shadow of Christ. And as
they, so every true (and uprighted-hearted) Believer, when he finds himself
stripped of all outward Accommodations, forsaken of all Relations, and familiar
Friends; made an Obloquy of the blackest Reproach, compast about with the
shadow of Death, and the Face of God (himself) seeming to Frown on the dying
Believer; yet, in the very height of his Extremity, his Faith will catch hold
of the Appletree, and there will hold, come Life, come Death. Oh! the
Excellency and Power of a Divine Faith.

To apply what has been discovered, concerning Christ's Suitableness and
Commodiousness to answer the necessitous Condition of poor sinners from this
Metaphor of the Appletree; let the first Use be of Information, I will Branch
it forth into six particular Branches.

Branch the first, Learn hence how sacrilegious and wicked the Doctrine of
Popery is, which allows and teaches, that there are more Mediators between God
and Sinners, besides Jesus Christ; the continual use Papists make of the Virgin
Mary and other Saints (in their Praying to God) is an evident proof hereof.
They that doubt hereof, let them (for their own Satisfaction) look into the
Rosary (or Ladies Psalter) which is the poor besotted Papists Vade mecum. The
which, whoever reads (comparing the same with the Word of God) will soon be
convinced of the Idolatry of the Church of Rome. The Spirit and Word of God
assures us, that there is but one (only) Mediator between God and sinful Men;
and that the Man Christ Jesus is that Mediator. For there is one God, and one
Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. But now has he
obtained a more excellent Ministry, by how much (also) he is the Mediator of a
better Covenant, which was Established upon better Promises. Heb. 8.6. And to
Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, Heb. 12 24.

To convince you of this sacrilegious and damning Doctrine, I offer three things
to serious Cosideration. First,

The Word of God no where gives that honorable Title of Mediator to any but
the Son of God.

Secondly, None was ever found by the Wisdom of God, who was capable of such an
high Office, and that for two Reasons.

First, Because the Mediator who must come in between God and sinners, must be
God, as well as Man. Now it is most certain, that neither the Virgin Mary, nor
any other of the Saints (of whom Papists make use as Mediators) are God.

Secondly, Because none of the Creatures (to be Redeemed) were able to
encounter with the Death and Miseries, through which the Mediator was to go, in
making up the Breach between God and the Elect. Neither Virgin Mary, nor any
other Saint shed their Blood on the Account of Ransoming sinners. I have
trodden the wine press (alone) and of the people, there was none with me, Esa.
63.3. And I looked, and there was none to help; and I wondered that there was
none to uphold; therefore, mine own Arm brought Salvation unto me, and my fury
it upheld me ver. 5. Is Christ divided? was Paul Crucified for you, etc. 1 Cor.
1.13. This Work of bearing sin (as a Surety for sinners) was for
(unconceiveably) great, that I am very bold in affirming, that had the Virgin
Mary (that Capital Idol of the Romish Synagogue) with all the other Saints,
whom the Papists join with her; as Coadjutors (or fellow Helpers) to make her
Mediation, and Intercession (in Heaven) the more successful, joined with her,
in lying under the weight of the sins of God's Elect: It would have sunk her,
and them to, into the nethermost Hell; yea, and all the Angels of Heaven, had
they been under that Load.

It never (yet) belonged to any to be a Mediator of Intercession, but to him
that was a Mediator of Redemption. These two constitutive Parts of a complete
Mediator, must never be parted, they are both in Christ, and in none other in
Heaven or Earth, Esa. 53.12. with the Scriptures already Quoted. To which, I
add a third Reason, (viz.) Because neither Virgin Mary, nor any other Saints or
Angels, were ever nominated or appointed to that High and most Sacred Office by
God the Father. This is Christ's Right (excluding all others) and that by the
Privilege of his Birth. I will declare the Decree, the Lord has said unto me,
thou art my Son, this day have I Begotten thee. Ask of me, and I will give
thee, etc. Psalm. 2.7, 8. to this great Office he was Anointed, and set apart by
the declared Will and sacred Oath of him who cannot lie or change. The Lord
has sworn, and will not repent; thou art a Priest forever after the Order of
Melchizedech, Psalm. 110.4. Neither of these things can be said of the Virgin
Mary, or any (mere) Creature without horrid Lying, and Blasphemy against the
Glorious and ever Blessed Trinity.

Branch the second, Learn hence how near akin to Popery such be, who
(notwithstanding they declare against Popery) lay the stress of their Hope of
obtaining any Mercy, on their own (worse than Threadbare) Performances.

Such Persons sacrifice to their own drag, Hab. 1.16. Their own deep
Humiliations, their Prayers, their Fastings, their Almsdeeeds; something of
their own Qualifications must claim the Honor of procuring the favor and
kindness God shows them; or at least be brought in (collaterally) with Christ's
Merits, as the procuring Cause of the Mercy they receive. How do these kind of
Professors extol and and advance the Honor and Dignity of the Lord Jesus
Christ.

These, instead of running to shelter themselves under the shadow of this
Appletree, (viz.) The Righteousness and Satisfaction of Christ. They run to the
false covering of their own Qualifications; ascribing their success unto them,
not to Christ. How little differing from downright Papists are these? Esa. 30.1.

Oh! how hard a thing is self-denial? for a Man to do duty, and not to trust to
it. For a Christian to be all in Christ, and nothing in himself, in the point
of Merit and Trust, to obtain the good he wants.

These are as great strangers to the Grace of the Gospel, and will (in the end)
be found as far from the Kingdom of Heaven, as those Papists from whom they
think they separate; being no better than those foolish Virgins in Mat. 25. who
(for want of the Oil of Grace in their Hearts) were shut out of Heaven. He that
is a Christian (in Truth) as he devolves the whole concerns of his Life and
Salvation, on the Lord Jesus Christ, to be secured by him (alone) and in his
own way; so he ascribes the Praise of every Blessing he receives for Soul and
Body, to Christ the Son of God (not excluding God the Father and the Holy
Ghost) such a Soul knows it, to be high Sacrilege to ascribe any part of the
Praise of his Salvation to any but God. Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but
unto thy Name give Glory, for thy Mercy, and for thy Truths sake, Psalm. 115.1.
For my Names sake will I defer mine Anger, and for my Praise will I refrain for
thee, that I cut thee not off, Esa. 48.9. Not for your sakes do I this, says
the Lord God, be it known unt^^ you, be ashamed and confounded for your own
ways, O house of Israel, Ezekiel. 36.32. To which I will only add, that of our
Savior. So likewise ye, when ye have done all these things which are commanded
you; say, we are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our duty to
do, Luke 17.10. In the Scriptures (now Quoted) it is most plain, and
conspicuous to any who are not either judicially or wilfully blind, that all
occasion is taken away from saved sinners, of ever boasting of any worth or
goodness of their own in the sight of a Holy God. Ephesians. 2.9.

Branch 3d. See and learn hence what little Cause or Reason any true Believers
have to be dismayed or discouraged at any Difficulties, which lies in their way
of Duty to God.

He who sits (by Faith and humble Dependence) under the shadow of this Almighty
Redeemer, and All-sufficient Savior; needs not fear, though all the World were
up in Arms against him: For most certain it is, (the Word of God and rooted
Experience) assures me of it, that Christ will either blast and confound all
the crafty Policy and Strength of the Believers Enemies, that they shall not
be able to touch him (so as to spoil him) or else, he will endue the Believer
with an Heroic Spirit of Fortitude, and heavenly Courage; whereby he shall be
enabled to suffer patiently and constantly for the Cause of God, which is
unspeakably better, and (every way) more eligible to that Believer; who would
give an Evidence of his Faith in, and his Love to the Person, and Cause of his
Beloved Jesus. I, even I am he that comfort you, who art thou, that thou
should be afraid of a man that shall die; and the Son of man that shall be
made as the grass? Esa. 51.12. Fear not, for I have Redeemed thee, I have
called thee by thy Name, thou art mine; when thou passest through the waters, I
will be with thee, and through the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when
thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame
kindle upon thee, Esa. 43.2, 3.

Branch 4th, Learn hence the Reason why the most potent and subtle Adversaries
of true Believers, are not able to prevail against them, to ruin them, Every
sound Believer who sits under the shadow of Christ, they are built upon that
Rock, which can neither be moved by the blast of the most raging Persecutors
Threats and Accusations; nor yet pierced by the most poisoned Arrows, their
Envy and Malice can shoot at the Believer.

The storms may blow, and the Waters (of all kind of Afflictions) may flow at
such a boisterous rate, as may cause all Beholders (yea, the Believer himself)
to think and conclude, that God is become his Enemy, and that his utter
Overthrow is designed by God; and yet the Believer shall be safe, and come off
Victor, and Conqueror at last.

A right (sound hearted) Believer, when surrounded with the Billows and Waves
of the most amazing Tribulations, he may be likened to Noah's Ark, though he may
be hedged in with Afflictions, as the Ark was with Water, both from below, and
from above (at the same time) yet shall he be kept from sinking, as the Ark
was. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is
peace, Psalm. 37.37. Of the true Believers it is said, He that touches you,
touches the Apple of his (namely Gods) Eye, Zach. 2.8.

And upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it, Mat. 16.18.

Use 2d. of Exhortation, Oh! that all who hear or read this, would be persuaded
to acquaint themselves with this Appletrees shadow, so as to hasten under it;
before those impending storms (which threaten all unregenerate sinners with
Curse and eternal Death: And those depopulating Judgments of God, which
threaten to lay Englands Pride and Wickedness in the dust of Contempt) break
out, and sweep all the Contemners of Christ and his Gospel, before them.

For Motives hereto, consider (with greatest Seriousness) these six Motives
following.

Motive the first, All who are not found sitting under the shadow of this
Appletree, they are open to all those amazing and destroying Storms, which hang
over the heads of God provoking and Christ despising sinners.

Oh! Sinner, Sinner! thou who go to Church, and who come to the Meetings
of God's People, and say thy Prayers, making a great show in the Profession
of the Protestant Religion; what will come of thee, if thou be found sitting
under the shadow of thy own Righteousness, when the storm comes? Take this
warning from a despised Dispenser of God's Holy Word, who (through special
Grace) can say, he would not take the Glory and the Riches of Hypocritical
England, to tell thee a Lie in this greatest of Concerns: Neither thy running
to the Church, nor thy hastening to thy solemn Fases in the Meetings, thy
gilded Prayer Book, or thy graceless Prayers, composed and made by strength of
thy natural Parts, and uttered with never so much Zeal and melting Affections,
will keep thee from the dreadful Storms of God's Judgments when they come;
nothing short of Christ's shadow will secure thee, to hide and shelter thee from
the overflowing Scourge when it comes, Esa. 28.18.

Motive (2d.) Consider how blessed and happy the true Believer is (above all
other) let what storm God pleases come, and come it as soon as God pleases, by
day or by night; when the Believer is either asleep or awake: He is secure, the
shadow of this Appletree, overspreads and covers him so, as the storms which
ruins others, can do him no harm. He that dwells in the secret place of the
most high, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty, Psalm. 91.1. And as the
true Believer has a shadow to protect him from the most violent storms which
can possibly come on a sinful Nation: so he has an Anchor hold in Heaven,
which will keep him steady and faithful to Christ, and his Gospel; when
temporary notional Professors (who are strangers to Regeneration, Work) fall
away from their Profession, like Leaves in Autumn, or like untimely Fruit,
which come, to no Perfection. These will prove themselves to be of their
number, who built their House on the Sand, which House may stand for a while,
and promise very fair in the time of outward Peace and Tranquillity; while they
may enjoy their religious Liberty (by Human Law) and whilst their Profession
and their outward secular Interest can go hand in hand together: No Man can
discern between such and real Converts. It is in this case, as when two Men
walk (or travel) together, having a Dog following them; no Man who knows
neither the Men, nor yet the Dog, can tell whether of the two Men is Master of
the Dog. But when these two Men come to part, then the Dogs Master is presently
known from the other, the Dog will (most certainly) follow his own Master. When
Religion and worldly Advantage, Credit, Honor and Freedom from the Cross, come
to turn the back on each other, then the Temporary Professor (who company'd
with Christ in the visible Communion of his Saints, all the time of outward
Peace) will openly discover, which of the two he served all the time of his
hypocritical Profession, Christ (in Religion) or the World.

If ever the Penal Laws come in Fashion again in England, or the Dragooning
Allamode of France, find Entrance into these Kingdoms; then will it appear,
what kind of insides Englands Professors have; Read with a holy Trembling the
Scriptures following, Mat. 7.26, 27. Mat. 13.21. Jo. 6.26. 1 Timothy 5.6.

* The Violence of the storm, which comes by Temptation, may, (for a time)
stagger a real Believer, but it can never overset him, so as he should suffer
shipwreck of his Soul, or of that Noble Grace of Faith, whereby he keeps hold
of that Rock of Ages, whereon he is built, Mat. 7.25. Mat. 16.18. 1 Cor. 10.13.
2 Pet. 2.9.

Motive (3d.) Consider how ineffectual all other Shadows and Covering will
prove to poor Christless Mortal^ in the time of Storm and Tempest. If Safety
and Preservation (from Eternal Ruin) be to be had under the shadow of Christ's
Mediatorial Righteousness alone, then it will (necessarily) follow, that all
Papists, Arminians, Socinians, Quakers, and Freewillers are i^ a most desperate
and damnable Condition, while they continue at a distrance from the Covering of
Christ's Righteousness: And not only those Heretics (now mentioned) but (also)
those foolish Virgins (as above hinted) who remain unconverted in the outward
visible Communion of the Churches of Christ.

The Apostatical Church of Rome (that Mother of all spiritual Harlots, Rev.
17.5.) tells the World, that out of her Communion, there is no Salvation to be
expected. The Spirit of God (on the contrary) assures us, that all those who
forsake her not, shall be made actual Partakers of her Plagues when the time of
her Visitation comes, Rev. 18.4. and shall be made to drink of that Cup of
God's Wrath, which is prepared for her, and all who live and die in her
Communion. Rev. 16.19. When this comes to fall on that Synagogue, it will then
appear (to the Experience of the Worshippers of that Monstrous Beast) whether
the sweet and intoxicating Wine of her Fornications, which (with so much
delight) she and her Lovers so often drank out of her golden Cup, will be able
to quench or allay the Anguish and (unconceiveable) Pain occasioned (in their
Souls and Consciences) by that Cup of God's Wrath, which they will be made to
drink off, even the very dregs; according to that in Psalm. 75.8. For in the
hand of the Lord there is a cup, and the wine is red: (as red as the Martyrs
Blood slain by the Horns and Teeth of the Romish Beast) it is full of mixture,
and he pours out of the same: but the dregs thereof all the wicked of the
earth shall wring them out, and drink them.

* Mark this Reader! Shall wring them out, and drink them: It shall not be
Arbitrary in them (or left to their choice) whether they will drink it or not;
drink it they must and shall, will they, nill they: for the Cup is in the Hand
of Omnipotency, not in the Hand of the wicked.

Motive (4th.) Consider with Seriousness, and Tremble to think, how suddenly
the Storms (now impending and threatening England) may break out, and fall upon
the Nations. Storms (all know) arise, and come suddenly and unexpectedly; and
by so much the more startling and uneasy are they, by how much they come
unlooked for, and unthought of. It was (doubtless) a great Aggravrtion of the
Israelites Misery, to look for and expect Peace and Comfort, when nothing came
but Trouble and Disappointment. Jer. 8.15. And it will (most certainly) be one
of the most aggravating Circumstances, which will attend the fatal and dismal
Destruction which will befall the unbelieving secure Generation, which will be
on the Earth, when the Son of God shall come to Judgment: that it will come
upon them suddenly and unlookt for. For when they shall say Peace and Safety;
then sudden Destruction shall come upon them, as travail upon a woman (with
Child) and they shall not escape. 1 These. 5.3.

Oh Reader! Think and consider with thy self (as I have often done) and is it
so, that I (even I) must die? and is it certain, that my dying Hour is
uncertain? O my Soul! what is the matter that I am so unconcerned, to enquire
what the true State of my Soul is (not knowing but that Death may seize me
while I am reading this Book) how suddenly may I be Deaths Prisoner? And in
case I be snatched away from off the Stage before I have gotten under the
shadow of the Appletree: I am an undone Man, my time is ended; my Wit and Parts
(wherein I prided) will take wing, and the Choice I have made (in the
bewitching World I lived in) will (convincingly) prove me a Fool.

Some Men (who want Faith to believe the Word of God) cannot believe that there
are any such things as Witches in the World. But when Death comes, if it find
them from under the shadow of the Appletree; they will find (by sad and woeful
Experience) that the World it self, (whose Vanities and painted Nothings they
have courted and preferred before the Appletree) is the greatest and worst
Witch of all.

As the Partridge sittteh on Eggs, and hatcheth them not: so he that gets
Riches, and not by Right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his
end shall be a fool, Jer. 17.11. For what shall it profit a Man, if he shall
gain the whole World, and loose his own Soul? Mar. 8.36. Thou fool! this Night
thy Soul shall be required of thee; and then whose shall all those things be
which thou have provided? Luke 12.20.

Motive (5th.) Consider how long the Patience and Forbearance of God has
waited upon thee, calling on thee, and inviting thee to come under the shadow
of this Appletree, and yet (perhaps thou never yet have had a serious Thought
about it. Thou art it may be 20, it may be 30, perhaps 40, yea, 50. or 60 years
old, and can not tell whether thou shall be damned or saved. Oh! wonder at
God's matchless Forbearance and Patience toward thee; that thou art not in
Hell, among the damned Despisers and wilful Rejecters of the Son of God; of
whose Recovery and Salvation, there is (now) no Hope or Possibility. And
besides all this, betwixt us and you there is a great gulf fixed, so that they
that would pass from hence to you cannot; neither can they pass to us, that
would come from thence, Luke 16.26.

Motive (6th.) Let the last Motive be the Consideration, that for ought Men or
Angels can tell, God may never give thee another Call, in case thou slight
this: He may forbear thee not a day, not an hour, nay, not a moment longer. His
Sword is drawn, and his Bow ready bent, to execute his Vengeance upon thee, for
the Abuse thou have put on all his Goodness toward thee: B^^ especially for
the Slight and Contem^^ thou continuest to put upon his So^^ Jesus Christ,
Psalm. 7.11, 12, 13. Therefore Sinner! whoever thou art, wh^^ read or hear
the present Ca^^ and Caution: look narrowly to th^^ Hits, one denial more to
God's Ca^^ and Invitation may (perhaps) do th^^ Business, and (if God strikes
thee, o^^^ lets fly his Arrow at thee) the nex^ Word thou utterest, or Thought
tho^ think may be in Hell Torments ^^ where thou shall neither behold nor
hea^^ tidings of the Appletree, to shade o^^^ hide thy forsaken Soul from the
worst o^^^ Storms that ever thou were in. Oh ^^ pity, pity thy immortal
never-dying Soul, while thou art out of Hell; if tho^ once get into that
bottomless Pit, (...) Pity will ever be shown thee by either God, Angels or
Saints.

Sermon II.
Cant. 2.3. And his Fruit was sweet to my Taste.


A Third thing in the Appletree, which (Allegorically) sets forth the
Excellency of Christ, is its Fruitfulness; from which I observe the following
Doctrine, (viz) That as the Shadow of Christ's Protection secures the real
Believer from all kind of Storms wherewith he meets: So the Fruit of Christ is
Sweet, and most delightful to his Taste, while he is in a Militant Condition
this side Glory.

By the Fruit of Christ (in the Text) is to be understood, the unspeakable and
Soul-saving Benefit which flows (to all true Believers) from his Mediatorial
undertaking, and are all briefly couched up in that one passage of the Apostle
Who of God is made unto us, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and
Redemption, ^ Cor. 1.30.

Under this General, four things are comprehended; of each of which, notice
shall be taken, and due Improvement made for the Comfort and Encouragement of
Poor Tempted Believers.

First, By the Fruits of Christ are intended the Personal Graces of the Lord
Jesus Christ, these are all sweet, and delightful to a real Believer; and they
are said to be so on a threefold Account.

First, On the Account of the Purchase which the due and full Improvement of
those Graces (in him) has made for God's Elect. Hence those Expressions of the
Apostle, Acts 20.28. To feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with
his own Blood. Ephesians. 1.14. Which is the earnest of our Inheritance, until the
Redemption of the purchased Possession to the Praise of his Glory.

That Stock of Grace put into the first Adams Hand, to be improved for himself
and us (his Posterity) was lost, and (thereby) both he and we (in him) are
become mere Bankrupts, incapable of ever paying to Justice a Ransom for our own
Redemption. But the Stock of Grace wherewith the second Adam was Entrusted (for
God's Elect) it was improved to the uttermost, for the everlasting Advantage of
God's chosen. Here by Christ has purchased (for the (Elect Justification,
Sanctification, and all other Good, spiritual and temporal.

Secondly, The personal Graces of Christ are sweet and delightful to the real
Believer, on the Account of their being both the Original, from which the
Graces of the Believers receive their first Rise, and their After Nourishment,
Christ's Fullness is the Fountain, the Graces in Believers are the Streams (or
Springs) which flow therefrom.

Hence we have that Expression of the true Church of real Believers, Psalm. 87.
last verse, All my springs are in thee. From this, Christ assures all
Believers, of the Infallible Certainty of their Eternal Salvation. Jo. 14.19.
Because I live, ye shall live also. Jo. 15.4. Abide in me, and I in you; as the
Branches cannot bear Fruit, except they abide in the Vine: no more can you,
except ye abide in me.

Thirdly. The Imputation of the Perfection of Christ's Graces to the Believer;
is that, which renders both the Believers weak Graces, and all his Imperfect
Performances acceptable, and pleasing to God.

They who question or oppose this, will find it a hard task to show in what
other Sense the Scriptures following are to be taken. Ephesians. 1.6. To the praise
of the glory of his Grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the Beloved.
Rev. 8.3. And another Angel came and stood at the Altar, having a golden
Censer; and there was given unto him much Incense, that he should offer it with
the Prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altar, which is before the Throne.

The highest and most refined Acts of Sanctification in Believers (even those
Acts which come nearest to that sinless Perfection, which is every Believers
Duty to strive after) they are imperfect; and therefore stand in need of the
spotless Sanctification of the Mediator to recommend them to God. Pertinent to
the purpose in hand, is that of Augustine, Domine lavas lachrymas meas, O Lord
wash thou my Tears of Repentance. Unto him that loved us, and washed us from
our sins in his own Blood. Rev. 1.5. And have washed their Robes, and have made
them white in the Blood of the Lamb. Rev. 7.14.

Secondly, By the Fruit of Christ we are to understand his Word; this is the
meaning of the Spouse, in Cant. 5. last verse, His mouth is most sweet; yea, he
is altogether lovely.

Here the Words of Christ are (Synechdochically) intended, by which the Love
and Grace of God (to sinners Elect, and chosen in Christ) is revealed in the
Gospel, and made (sensibly) manifest in the Conscience of true Believers, by
the Holy Ghost, with this accords that of the Psalmist, How sweet are thy words
unto my taste? yea, sweeter than honey to my mouth, Psalm.

Three things there be which bespeaks the Words of Christ sweet and delightful
to a real Believer.

First, The Suitableness of them to a Believers necessitous Condition.

What is it which bespeaks the Gospel of Christ to be so sweet and preferrable
before the Law, but the Suitableness thereof to poor distressed sinking Souls?
the Doctrine thereof being a System of sweet and precious Promises, suited to
every Condition Believers can be in in this Life. According to 2 Cor. 1.20. For
all the Promises of God (in him) are yea, and (in him) Amen, to the Glory of
God by us. And 2 Pet. 1.4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and
precious Promises that by these ye may be made partakers of the Divine Nature.
The Suitableness then of the Words of Christ's Mouth, is one thing which
bespeaks them sweet and delightful to a real Believer; what is (or can be) more
suitable to a Creature (who is dying of the Wounds given him by sin) than the
glad Tidings and Discovery of a Savior; who is both Able and Willing to save
and reconcile him to God: The Spirit of the Lord (says Christ) is upon me,
because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor, he has sent me
to heal the broken hearted; to preach Deliverance to the Captives; and
recovering of Sight to the blind, to set at Liberty them that are bruised, Luke
4.18.

What makes bodily Medicaments (or Plasters) so valued, and desirable, but
their Suitableness to the Distemper, or Ailment of the Body?

A Promise of the Everlasting Covenant of God's Grace, suited to the afflicted,
tempted and despairing Condition of a poor Sinner: It is like Physic, or a
Plaster suited to the Body. When the poor sinner inwardly feels (through the
powerful Influence of the Holy Ghost) the healing Virtue of the Promise; Oh!
how sweet and comfortable is such a Promise to that Soul? I will never forget
thy Precepts (says Holy David) for with them thou have quickened me, Psalm.
119.93. Every experienced Believer can (more or less) tell how surpassing all
other words the Words of Christ are; and that on the account of their
Suitableness to the necessitous and streightened Condition they have been in.
Hence the Commendations given (by real experienced Believers) to the Word of
Christ, above all other Writings and Sayings whatever. I was (says one
experienced Believer to another) in such and such a Straight, and the Spirit of
Grace brought such and such a word (of Promise) to my Mind and Thoughts, and
thereby relieved and comforted my drooping, pensive Spirit. And (says another)
I was so and so tempted in such a place, at such a time, even to a bordering on
the very Verge (or Precipice) of Desparation and Ruin: And when I concluded my
self past all Hope of escaping, the Blessed Spirit brought to my Remembrance
such and such a Promise, which was (every way) suited to the tempted Condition
I was in; and thereby my Spirit was stayed and helped. Oh! how blessed a
Privilege are those Souls blessed with, who can speak these things
experimentally?

Secondly, The Words of Christ are sweet to a real Believer, on the account of
the Seasonableness of them.

This was one of the needful Qualifications, which was to be in Christ, to make
him a complete high Priest, (viz.) to know how to time Deliverance and Comfort
to poor fainting desponding Souls. Esa. 50.4. The Lord God has given me the
tongue of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season to him
that is weary, etc.

The Spirit of God (by Solomon) tells us, that a word fitly spoken, is like
Apples of gold, in Pictures of silver, Prove. 25.11. Here we are to understand,
that a word in due time and place, and pertinent to the purpose. As (beyond all
dispute) it is Amiable and Ravishing to the Eye, to behold so orient and
dazzling a sight as Apples of Gold (drawn to the Life) in Pictures of Silver:
So, (undoubtedly) a word of Counsel and Comfort brought Home to the Conscience
of a doubting wounded Sinner, ravisheth and gladdeth the broken Heart, As cold
water to a thirsty Soul, so is good news from a far Country, Prove. 25 25. When
the word suited to a poor tempted Souls Distress, is brought home in the nick
of time (as we say) Oh! how sweet is it then?

Thirdly, A third thing which bespeaks the Word of Christ sweet to a real
Believer, is the Holy Ghost his Efficiency and quickening Power accompanying
the same, what we say of corporal Bread, Raiment, Physic, Drink, etc. what can
they avail to comfort and nourish the Body, without the Spirit of God bless and
sanctify their use, to the end for which they are appointed?

The same may be truly said of the Word and Sacraments, etc. what can they
avail for the Souls good, if the Efficiency and quickening Influence of the
Spirit of God go not along with their use?

It is for want of this quickening Virtue (of the Spirit of God) that so many
Sermons are Preached, and so few sinners really Converted. It is for want of
this quickening Efficacy of the Spirit, that so many Ordinances of Religion are
attended and enjoyed by thousands of Professors, without any sensible or
visible Growth in Grace.

The Word of God is like a well made Knife or Razor, though never so keen and
sharp, yet without a living Agent they can neither Cut nor Shave. So the Word
of God, neither the Law can awaken, convince or wound the Conscience for sin:
Nor yet the Gospel Heal or Comfort a Soul in Distress, without the Energy and
quickening Efficacy of the Spirit of God.

There are two sorts of People, who (hereby) appear to be in a woeful Condition?
First, such as frequently hear and read the Word, Receive Sacraments, and go
the Round in all external Acts of Religious Duties, and yet without any motion
of spiritual Life, from the Spirit of God in their Souls. These are like blind
Horses in a Mill, going round all day long, always treading in the same Tract,
not seeing or considering where they are, or what they are doing. These keep to
the Form (in a Customary way) but heed not the inward Power, which is that
which renders all Acts of Religious Worship both pleasing and acceptable to
God; and which proves the Soul to be (in Reality) a living Member of Christ's
Mystical Body. Esa. 29.13. 2 Timothy 3.5. Rev. 3.17.

Secondly, There be others who (in pretense of internal Motion, and Power in
the Soul from the Spirit, who (to avoid the Damning Formality of the others
(now mentioned) will not only neglect, but even slight the Word and Ordinances,
reflecting on the Word as a dead Letter; and the Holy Institutions of Christ
(in his Churches) as carnal, poor, empty and beggarly Elements. Some (of these)
are Seekers (in plain English Quakers) who are always learning, But never come
to the knowledge of the Truth, 2 Timothy 3.6.7. Others are super-ordinanced, who
have gotten above all ordinary Means. These (in their own Conceits at least)
are so near Perfection, that they need not the use of outward. Ordinances.
These are gotten (in outward Show and Profession) above Ordinances, but never
yet were they acquainted with true Piety.

Both these sorts are under the powerful working of an Infernal Spirit of
Delusion, which feeds their Souls with Chymerical Whimsies, and Enthusiastical
Dreams, instead of the Doctrine which is according to Godliness.

These wretched Extremes are to be (carefully) shunned and avoided, as the as
the Paths which lead to Hell and Eternal Ruin. The sure way hereto, is to keep
within sight and hearing of the Shepherds Tents. Cant. 1.8. Be^are of false
Teachers, and avoid the Doctrine which has not God's Word for its Foundation.
Esa 8.20.

In hearing and reading, and all other Ordinances of Religious Worship; see
that the outward Form, and the inward Power be not separated. Those things
which God has joined together, must not be put asunder. Esa. 59.21. Mat. 19.6.

That great Man Augustine used to call the Word of God, Creating Words, Verba
Div^na (says he) sunt verba creativa; And that on the account of the
quickening Energy and Power that goes along with them. This is a Truth, which
has been acknowledged ^s well by Enemies, as by Friends to the Truth. Jo.
7.46. The Officers answered, never Man spoke like this Man. Luke 24.32. And
they said one to another, did not our Hearts burn within us, while he talked
with us by the way, and while he opened to us the Scriptures?

He that brags of the Word of God, and is a Stranger to the Power thereof (in
his own Soul) he is an hypocritical Formalist. He who boasts of the Power of
the Spirit within, and holds not the Form of sound Words, indicted by the
Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, to be a Rule of Faith and Holy Life; he is a
deluded Enthusiast: From both these Extremes, the Care and Faithfulness of the
Great Shepherd, will keep all who are given him by the Father.

Thirdly, The Works of Christ are all sweet to the true Believer.

By Works (here) I intend the Works of his Mediatorial Undertaking

Among the gods there is none like unto thee, O Lord, neither are there any
works like unto thy Works, Psalm. 86.8. Besides the Works of Creation and
Providence, which are common to the whole Trinity; there are Works which are
Peculiar to Christ as Mediator, I will reduce them to six Heads.

First, His Work of Incarnation, or his Assuming the Human Nature, into Unity
with his Sacred Godhead. This is the Mystery of all other Mysteries; and of
this, the Temple and Tabernacle (of old) were shadowy Types. To this Mystery,
that in Prove 8.31. had reference, even before Christ came in the Flesh; yea,
before the Birth of Time it self (if I may so speak) rejoicing in the habitable
Parts of his Earth, etc. The (then) intended Union between the Godhead and our
Flesh, is (in that Scripture) pointed at, and this is chiefly intended by John,
Jo. 1.14. And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, etc. And by Paul
in 1 Timothy 3. last. And without controversy great is the Mystery of Godliness,
God was manifested in the flesh, etc.

There are three things (especially) which bespeak the Incarnation of Christ to
be sweet and delightful to the true Believer.

First, The gracious Condescension of Christ to lodge in the Believers Nature.
Thus to do, was a Favor and Privilege denied the Angelick Nature which fell
by Apostasy; it being designed and intended (only) for the Seed of Abraham,
Heb. 2.16. For verily he took not upon him the Nature of Angels, but he took
the Seed of Abraham.

This is one Principal Reason why the Devils are so (Implacably) set against
the Lord Jesus Christ, and all who bear his Image. Because Christ became a
Mediator between God and Abraham's Seed, but not between God and themselves.
Mark 1.24. Let us alone, (cried those Apostate Spirits in the Possessed) What
have we to do with thee? etc.

These Devils knew they had no Interest (or Propriety) in Christ, as a Savior.
He took not their Nature on him, he was never designed (by God who sent him
into the World) as a Savior for any but Abraham's Seed, and this inrages them;
so will all the wicked Reprobates (of the World) swell with Spite and Madness
against the Son of God, and all the Elect whom he came to Redeem: They are
(herein) acted by the Spirit of their Father. John 8 44. Ye are of your Father
the Devil, and the Lusts of your Father ye will do, etc.

Secondly, That Firm and lasting Union which (by Christ's Incarnation) is
effected between the ever Blessed God and true Believers.

As by Adam's Apostasy, both himself and all his Posterity (in him) were
Ejected (or cast) out of God's Favor and Communion, which was (evidently seen
in Adam's Ejection (or his being cast) out of the Earthly Paradise, the Type of
Heaven. Gen 3. last. So by Christ's uniting the assumed Nature of Abraham's
Seed to God; an unshaken and an immovable Foundation is laid for an Everlasting
Union between the Elect ( Abraham's Seed) and God.

As the Union between Christ's Godhead and his Humanity is (for ever)
Inseparable; so the Union and Bond of Friendship between God and Believers,
shall never be Nulled (or made void) let Devil, World, corrupt Nature, Death
and Hell do what they can.

The Names of the two Pillars in Solomon's Temple intimated, and (Typically)
shadowed forth (to the Faith of the Believers under the Old Testament
Dispensation) that the spiritual Temple, which is the Church of God's Elect,
being built and resting upon the Pillar of God's Omnipotency; it shall never be
prevailed against by the powers of Darkness. 1 Kings 7.21. To these two Pillars
( Jachin and Booz) the Spirit of God (in John) alludes Rev. 3.12. Him that
overcomes I will make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, etc.

Thirdly, The Fruit and Effect of that Union (viz.) sweet Communion, and
Everlasting fellowing Fellowship with Father, Son and Holy Ghost. As is the
Union, such will be the Communion. 1 Jo. 1.3. That which we have seen and
heard; declare we unto you, that ye also might have Fellowship with us; and
truly our Fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. Ver. 7.
But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have Fellowship one with
another, etc.

Secondly, The Work of his Humiliation and self Abasement.

Christ's Incarnation, and his humbling himself (in the assumed Nature) are two
distinct things. The Incarnation (in order of Nature) must precede (or go
before) his Humiliation; the former was in order to the latter. To make make it
obvious and plain, Consider the two Natures of Christ; which constitutes him
fit for the great Work of Mediation between God and and sinful Men.

First, His Godhead. As Christ is God, he is no way capable of being humbled.

Secondly, His Humanity (the Nature in which he was humbled) Reason teaches
that before he could humble himself (in the assumed Nature) that Nature must
first be (Actually) in Being.

As touching God's assuming the Human Nature, it cannot (properly) be called or
thought an Act of Humiliation. And that because (as is already hinted) the
Godhead is not capable of being humbled. To which I add, that the Godheads
assuming the Human Nature, is no way a humbling, but rather an Advancement (and
that the highest and greatest that ever was (or ever will be) granted and
vouchsafed to any created Being) to the Human Nature. This Act of God, in
uniting (to himself) the Human Nature, was a high Act of matchless and
unparalleled Condescension to Abraham's Seed, his Elect, and chosen in Christ.

It will (then) be demanded wherein Christ's Humiliation consisted?

To which I answer in two Particulars.

First, In his laying aside and not pleading the Perfection of his sinless
Nature, and the perfect Conformity of his Life, to the Law of God. If the Lord
Jesus had not stood as a Surety (for the Elect) the Curse of the Law could no
way Reach or take hold of him; and the Reason is, because he was never guilty
of transgressing the Law.

Christ was Made (not Born) under the Law. So says the Spirit of Truth. Gal.
4.4. It is one thing to be Born under the Law, and it is another thing to be
Made under the Law.

To be Born under the Law, presupposes that Party Partaker of a sinful,
polluted Nature, which lays him open to the Sentence and Curse of the Law.

To be Made under the Law, presupposes Christ's voluntary Act of subjecting
himself to the Law of God: Not only to the preceptive commanding Part of it,
that he might keep the Law for the Elect of God, for whom he became a Surety:
But to the minatory and cursing part of it too, to the end, he might be made a
Curse for them; and that by bearing (in his own Body and Soul) the Laws-curse
which was due to Gods Elect, for their breach of the Law. Phil. 2.7. But made
himself of no Reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made
in the likeness of Men. And being found in Fashion (as a Man) he humbled
himself, and became obedient unto Death, yea even the Death of the Cross.
(...). Sed ex^^anivit semet ipsum, he emptied himself. The word properly
signifies he ^ob'd (or he utterly emptied) himself, he debased or made himself
vile. And this he did himself, it was neither his Fathers, nor any of his
Enemies Act. This is to be taken in no other sense, than (as was said already)
his laying aside, and not pleading his own spotless Innocence; whereon, if he
had stood, no Accusation (brought in against him) would have held water, to
cast him at the Law Bar.

Secondly, His voluntary subjecting himself to a Liableness, to stand charged
with all the sins of God's Elect (as truly, as if they had been (Personally)
committed by himself) together with the Shame and Curse due for them.

Christ standing bound (for the Elect) could object nothing against Gods just
Proceedings against him, seeing i^ was his own voluntary Act to become their
Surety; neither God, Angels o^ Men could force him to it. On this Account it
was that he stood speechless at the Laws B^r. Esa. 53.6. A^ we like sheep have
gone astray, w^ have turned every one to his own wa^ and the Lord has laid on
him the Iniquity of us all. Ver. 7 He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet
(...) opened not his Mouth; he is brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a
Sheep before her Sheater is dumb, so he opened not his Mouth. What was the
reason of this profund Silence, when not only his Reputation, but his Liberty
and his dear Life too lay at stake? No other Reason can be given by Men, or
Angels for it but this, (viz.) His voluntary Act in striking hands with his
Father, as a Sponsor or Surety in the behalf of the Elect, in whose room (as
their Representative) he promised to see all their Debts) (fully) discharged.
And that by a most exact keeping the Law for them, and by bearing (to the
uttermost) the Shame, Curse and Death; to which, the Law sentenced the Elect
for sin. The Blessed Redeemer having thus laid himself under a legal Tie (or
Obligation) to God (his Father) when Justice called him to hold up the Hand at
the B^r, in order to his coming to a full and legal Trial: He had not one word
to object against the severity of the Laws proceeding against him; though he
had not the least spot of sin (of his own) to be charged with, yet having
undertaken (as a Surety) for the Elect, their sins (though never so many horrid
and vile) he must take them as his own: And (...) he did, witness his own
Acknowledgment at the Laws Bar. Psalm. 4^.12. For innumerable Evils have
compassed me about, mine Iniquities have taken hold on me; so that I am not ab^
to look up, etc. The numberless Numbers of the Elects Iniquities were by God
imputed and charged to his Account, and he (the Immaculate spotless Lamb of
God) takes them as hi^ own, according to Esa. 53.8. and 1 Pe^ 2.24. who his own
self bare our sins in his own body, on the Tree, etc. They who deny a change of
Persons between Christ and God's Elect, do bu^ bewray their own Unskilfulness
in thi^ greatest of Mysteries; And (in pretense of opposing Antinomianism)
sufficiently demonstrate themselves to b^ the worst, and most pernicious
Antinomians (now) in London.

For, most certain it is, (and Go^ will make such Men know it soone^ or later,)
that in the same sense where in Christ was made a sinner (at the Bar of Gods
Law) the Elect of Go^ stand justified at the Throne of Grace As the Lord Jesus
Christ could be n^ other way made (or proved) a sinner but by Gods imputing to
him the Iniquities of the Elect, to which he himself agreed and consented; so,
Elect sinners can no other way be Partakers of a spotless justifying
Righteousness, but by Gods imputing that of his Sons to them. As all the Guilt
and Defilements which (by sin) came on Gods Elect, were imputed to, and charged
on the Son of God; so, all that Mediatorial Righteousness (both Active and
Passive) which Christ performed and fulfilled, to answer the Laws demand, was,
and is imputed to, and charged on the Elect in effectual calling, for their
free, and full Justification from all charge of sin; and he (or they) that have
the face to deny this, do sufficiently prevent any others studying Arguments to
prove them Heterodox, and unsound in this Foundation Doctrine of Justification,
wherein they who are made Partakers of the Anointing of the Spirit of Christ,
cannot but see and stand convinced, that the whole current of Sacred
Scriptures, and of Orthodox Protestant Divines (both Non and Conformists) are
(full ^tive) against them.

Thirdly, The Death of Christ is sweet, and delightful to the true Believer.

Three things there be, which bespeaks it so to be.

First, In that Christ's dying the cursed Death (to which the Elect were liable)
was the consummating Act o^ the Execution of God's Law upon him and (in him)
upon all the Elect o^ God. It was Luthers Observation and Saying, upon the Son
of Gods being put to Death, that the two greates^ Potentates on Earth were (on
the Cross) striving for Victory, (viz) The Law of God, and the sinless So^ of
God.

The Law falls on Christ (as the greatest of Transgressors) as he stood charged
with all the most horrid Abominations, that the Eye of Gods Om^nisciency
foresaw the Elect should eve^ fall into.

The Laws knows (or shows) n^ Mercy, though Christ be the Son o^ God, and the
Lawmakers too; yet Satisfaction must be given, which give occasion (here) to
mind the Reade^ of the Old Maxim, Lawmakers mu^^ be no Law-breakers. I am
certain that Maxim was never (yet) more truly verified and made good in n^^
case, than it was in this of Christ bearing and undergoing the Penalty (...)
his own Righteous and Just Law. The Law cries out against Christ (in whose
Person all the sins of God's Elect did meet) here is a Transgressor, a Sinner,
(the greatest that ever appeared at God's Bar: And that on the account of the
innumerable Rebellions and Transgressions of all the many Millions of God's
Elect, which lay upon him, though he was never touched with the least stain of
Corruption in his assumed Nature: Neither was the least Deviation (from the
Recti^ude of the Law) ever found in his Practice and Life, yet he is the Party
who is like to satisfy Justice, for all those Debts he has taken on him to
discharge; and seeing that the principal part of the Debt which he took on him
to pay, (viz.) Actual Conformity to the Righteous Demands of the Law is
(undeniably) found in him: And that there remains (now) nothing to discharge
and clear off, of what he has undertaken (as a Surety) but to under go a
bodily Death, to answer the Accessory Debt, whereto the Elect became obnoxious
by Adam's first Rebellion, let him die that shameful, ignominious and cursed
Death of the Cross.

Thus the Law Sentenced and Condemned him as a Malefactor, and the blackest
Criminal that ever held up Hand at the Bar of any Court of Judicature, either
Human or Divine.

The Law having passed on him, he was delivered up to Justice, to the end the
Curse of the Law might be inflicted on him; his Executioner (in this doleful
Tragedy) must be his own Dear and Tender Father, who Loved him (from
Everlasting) and will (to endless Eternity) love him, as he loves himself. Yet,
notwithstanding Die he must, and that by having the Sword of his Fathers
vindicative Justice sheathed in his very Bowels, till his very Soul was powered
forth like Water. Awake O Sword^^ against my Shepherd, and against the Man that
is my Fellow. Zach. 13.7. etc. Because he has powered out his Soul unto death,
etc. Isa. 53.12. I am poured out like water, and all my Bones are out of joint,
my Heart (...) melted l ke Wax in the midst of my Bowels. Psalm. 22.14. He that
spare^ not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, etc. Romans 8.32.

Here Is an Argument of the Fathers Love to Elect sinners, which can never be
overthrown. Jo. 3.16. For God so loved the World, that he gave his only
Begotten Son; that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
Everlasting Life. In this was manifested the Love of God toward us, because
that God sent his only Begotten Son (into the World) that we might live through
him. 1 Jo. 4.9.

Here Is also a clear Discovery, what little Reason the poorest and weakest
Believer has to question, or doubt of Christ's Love to him or her. What! step
in between thee and Hell, and not love thee? To take all thy Guilt and filth of
sin upon himself: And (for the same) to be made a Curse, that thou poor undone
sinner might be made the Righteousness of God in him) and not love thee?
When the incensed Justice of God was up in Arms against thee, and just ready to
fall on thee, for Christ his own Son to step in between thee and that fatal
Stroke, which (had it fallen on thee) would have completed thy Misery, and
have put thee beyond the reach of all Possibility of ever being saved. I say,
for Christ to step in between thee and that fatal Stroke, and to suffer the
Sword that would have killed thee, to be lodged in his own Bowels, was as
strong and convincing an Argument that he loved thee, as any can be made use of
by God himself. Never was there greater and more end aring Love, in one Party
toward another, than the Love wherewith God the Father, and Christ his Son
loved the Elect: Neither can God, Angels, or Men lay down stronger and more
convincing Arguments to prove or confirm it so to be; than God the Fathers
Readiness and Willingness, to Sacrifice his own, and only Son, whom he loved
equally with himself; and the Sons Willingness to lay down his Life, and not
only so, but consenting to be made a Curse for the Elect. Oh! matchless and
astonishing Love, who ever knew, or heard of the like, except it self? I am the
good Shepherd, the good Shepherd gives his Life for the Sheep, Jo. 10.11.
Greater Love has no Man than this that a Man lay down his Life for hi^ Friend,
Jo. 15.13. But God commends his Love toward us, in that while we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us.

Hereby perceive we the Love of God, because he laid down his Life for us, etc.
1 Jo. 3.16.

And as the Just and Righteous Law of God did not spare the sinless Son of God,
when Arraigned at his Bar, (as a Surety for sinners:) So, neither did the Son
of God flinch, or shrink in the Contest, till he had vanquished and overcome the
Condemning Power of the Law; leaving it and all the other Enemies of his Elect
Nailed to the Cross, having (by his Death on the Cross) put to death, the
Damnatory Sentence of God's Righteous Law against God's Elect; and spoiled all
Principalities and Infernal Powers of that accusing Power they had (by sin)
obtained against God's chosen: Yea, having rifled Hell (it self) with Death,
and the Grave (those destroying and devouring Enemies of Mankind) so as that
nothing was left in the way, to obstruct or hinder the Elects safe Arrival in
Heavenly Glory: And all this by the Virtue and Merit of that Satisfaction he
gave to the Justice of his Father, by obeying the Law both Actively and
Passively in the Assumed Nature: On this Account it is, that there remains
(now) no Condemnation (in force) against that Man or Woman which believes in
the Son of God.

The Moral Law is (indeed) a Law (or Rule) of Holy Living to all Believers, and
as a Looking-glass to discover to Believers the Spo^s and Defects, which
abounds in their Hearts and Lives, (while in a state of Imperfection) and to
show them the continual need they stand in of the Blood and Righteousness of
Christ the Mediator, till they come to the end of their Race. But to condemn or
sentence any true Believer in Jesus, to Damnation or Eternal Death, the Moral
Law has no Power. There is therefore now no Condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus, etc. Romans 8.1. Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law,
being made a Curse for us, Gal. 3.13. And can this be any other than sweet to
true Believers, especially to such as have lain so long in the Laws Prison,
till the Irons thereof have reached even to the very Soul?

Secondly, The Death of Christ is most sweet and delightful to the true
Believer, in that, in Christ's Death all the Sins and Iniquities of the
Believer, were Arraigned and put to death, so as the Believer shall never,
never be Arraigned or Condemned for them, either here or hereafter.

There were two things in sin, by which the Elect of God were held captives.

First, the Guilt of sin, which lays them open to Condemnation and the Wrath to
come. From this the Active and Passive Obedience of Christ set them for ever
free (as has been already observed.)

Secondly, The defiling Power of Indwelling sin; this also is slain and put to
death in the Death of Christ, and by Virtue hereof, it is, that every Believer
(in Jesus) is made to die to sin, in Heart and Life; through the powerful
Efficiency of the Holy Ghost, (inwardly) applying to the Soul of the Believer,
the Efficacy of the Mediator's Death.

For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak, through the Flesh, God
sending his own Son in the Likeness of sinful Flesh; and for sin, condemned sin
in the Flesh, Romans 8.3. For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin,
that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him. 2 Cor. 5.21. Who his own
self bare our sins in his own Body on the Tree, 1 Pet. 2.24.

Let this Caution be observed and improved by every true Believer, (viz.) that
not the Being of indwelling sin, but its condemning and reigning Power are
condemned and put to death in the Death of Christ: So as that that indwelling
sin, which yet remains in a justified Believer, shall never, either lay him
open to Condemnation, or to keep the Believer under its captivating Power, as
before Regeneration it did. He will subdue our Iniquities, and thou will cast
all our sins into the depth of the Sea, etc. Mic. 7.18. For sin shall not have
Dominion over you, for ye are not under the Law, but under Grace. Romans 6.14.
For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works
of the Devil. 1 Jo. 3.8.

He that is born of God does not commit sin, ver. 9.

Thirdly, The Death of Christ is most sweet to a true Believer, in that the
Curse which sin put into bodily Death, it is by Christ's Death taken away; to
every Believer the Curse due to sin was the very Sting of Death, so witnesses
the Holy Ghost. The Sting of death is sin, etc. 1 Cor. 15.56. This Christ the
Surety of the Believer bore, that the Curse in Death might be turned into a
Blessing to all the Members of Christ, (viz.) All who savingly believe in him.

There are some (whose Names I am unwilling to mention) who tell Men that
bodily Death is a Part of the Curse due to sin; and that the Believer (as well
as the Unbeliever) must undergo, and bear it (as such) namely the Curse which
is due to the Believer for sin.

From whom I do (and shall) for ever dissent, and that for the two Reasons here
following.

First, Because Death puts an end to all a Believers sinning, and sorrowings,
which occasioned holy Master Dod's Saying; that Death was the greatest Friend
to a true Believers Grace, that is in the World: For (says he) that which
Praying and Hearing, and Sacraments, etc. do but help to weaken, (viz.) sin in
the Heart and Life of the Believer; Death comes, and with one stroke cuts it
off. And at the same time (and with the same Blow) puts an end to all the
Believers Sorrows and Afflictions. And if this be a Curse to a Believer, for my
part, I do not understand, what it is to be Blessed.

Though Death (in it self) be a Curse to the first Adam, and his Children (as
it is the Wages of sin, Romans 6.23.) yet, to them who are in Christ, that Curse
is turned into a Blessing; so says the Holy Ghost, whose Testimony goes beyond
all other Testimonies, in Matters of Faith. See Rev. 14.13. And I heard a voice
from Heaven, saying, write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord: From
henceforth, Yea says the Spirit; that they may rest from their labors, and
their works do follow them. And of such, it is also said, And God shall wipe
away all Tears from their Eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither
sorrow nor crying; nither shall there be any more pa^n, for the former things
are passed away, Rev. 21.4.

Secondly, Because Death, not only perfects the Grace of a true Believer; but
it is also an Inlet to the Kingdom of Glory. On these two Accounts it is (I
doubt not) that the day of Death is preferrable before the day of ones Birth.
Eccles. 7.1. A good Name is better than precious Ointment; and the day of
death, than the day of ones Birth. On the same Accounts (I do not question)
Paul did prefer to die, rather than to continue in the Body, as he himself
tells us, Phil. 1.21. For to me to live is Christ, and to die is Gain.

Herewith (also) concurs 1 Cor. 3.22. Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or
the World, or Life, or Death, or things present, or things to come; all are
yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. In this Enumeration of
Particulars of second causes, wherein the Members of Christ are said to be
interrested; I understand the same thing to be intended, which is held forth in
that general Assertion. And we know that all things work together for good, to
them that love God, to them who are the called, according to his purpose, Romans
8.28. And is not this a sweet Fruit to a Believers spiritual Taste.

Fourthly, The Powerful and Glorious Resurrection of the Lord Jesus from the
Dead, is most sweet, and delightful to the true Believer.

That Christ was raised up from Death, is beyond controversy.

Acts 2.24. Whom God has raised up, having loosed the pains of Death, because
it was not p ssible he should be holden of it. Acts 17.31. Because he has
appointed a day, in the which he will judge the World in Righteousness, by that
Man whom he has ordained; whereof he has given Assurance unto all Men, in
that he has raised him from the dead. Romans 1.4. And declared to be the Son of
God, with Power, according to the Spirit of Holiness, by the Resurrection f om
the dead.

This Resurrection of Christ from the dead, can be no other than sweet to all
true Believers, and that on a threefold Account.

First, As it is God the Fathers Actual Discharge to Christ the Public Head,
and Representative of Gods Elect; and to them (in him) from that sin of theirs,
which he (as their Surety) stood charged with; and from the whole of that Debt,
which he undertook to pay for them.

As Christ's Active and Passive Obedience was the full Payment of Believers
Debts to God, so Gods raising him from Death, was Gods Actual Discharge to his
Son, and (in him) to all Elect Believers; to assure them, that the Debt which
Christ his Son undertook to pay for them, is now fully paid and satisfied,
witness his Actual Release and Discharge from the Prison of the Grave; where
Christ (as Undertaker and Surety for Gods Elect) was detained until the Justice
of his Father said, it is enough: I am now satisfied (to the full) every Iota,
and Tittle of the Law, is by him perfectly obeyed, both Actively and Passively:
I have no more to lay to his (or the Elects) Charge, for whom he became a
Surety. Discharge him, let him be set at Liberty; as Christ the Son proved
faithful to the Father, in performing (to the utmost) what he had undertaken,
for securing the Fathers Glory, and the Salvation of the Elect, committed and
given in charge to him by the Father. So, God the Father proves Just and
Righteous to Christ, in giving him (under the Hand of his Unerring Spirit of
Truth) a full Release and General Discharge, not only for himself, but for his
Redeemed ones also. Of this, Christ had not the least doubt, when he struck
Hands with his Father; he knew his Father to be the God of Truth, who could not
lie, or deal unjustly with any; much less with his own (only) Son, who he could
not but know, would stick at nothing (though it were to empty himself) and to
become nothing.

And, which was worse, to be made a Curse, to finish the Work his Father had
given him to do. For the Lord God will help me, therefore I shall not be
confounded; therefore have I set my Face like a Flint, and I know that I shall
not be ashamed; He is near that justifies me, who will contend with me? Let us
stand together, who is mine Adversary? let him come near to me, Isa. 50 7, 8.

What was (of old) predicted by this Evangelical Prophet, concerning God the
Fathers justifying his Son (upon his finishing the Work he had undertaken to go
through) it is now declared, and made known by the Gospel to be (Actually)
accomplished and made good, according to those (and other the like) Predictions
of him.

I have glorified thee on the Earth, I have finished the Work which thou gave
me to do, Jo. 17.4, 5. And now O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self,
with the Glory which I had with thee, before the World was. All Power is given
me in Heaven, and in Earth, Mat. 28.18. Him has God exalted with his right
hand, to be a Prince and a Savior to give Repentance to Israel, and
forgiveness of sins, Acts 5.31. And without Controversy great is the Mystery
of Godliness; God was manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, etc. 1 Timothy 3.16.

Let the Believer who either hears or reads this (concerning Christ's being
Raised from the Dead) but seriously weigh and consider of how great Concern
this Act of Gods releasing Christ is, to secure and strengthen the Foundation
of the Believers Comfort and Assurance; and he will find that the oftener he
chews this Cud, by serious Meditation (accompanied with fervent Prayer to the
Throne of Grace) the sweeter this Fruit will be to his Taste. How comes it to
pass, that some poor Tempted Believers do often Hear, and Read of God's having
Raised Christ his Son from the Dead, and yet they hear and read it, as if they
themselves were no way concerned in it; it is as a dry Chip to them, they taste
no sweetness in it. The Reason hereof is, they do not consider, neither can
they believe, that God (in Raising his Son from the Dead) has (Actually)
declared from Heaven, that he is now (Actually) reconciled to, and at an
Everlasting Peace with all Believers; with the poorest and weakest (as well as
with the strongest) Believer. And therefore, the sure and only way for a poor,
weak, tempted Believer, to relish and taste the Sweetness of this Fruit, is, to
Act Faith on the Resurrection of Christ, appropriating the Virtue and Merit
thereof unto himself thus; and has God indeed Raised up his Son (Jesus Christ)
from the Dead? And that as he was the Surety and Representative of all the
Elect, and was God's Design (in raising him) to give a public Testimony to
that Satisfaction, which he himself received, at the Hands of Christ in the
behalf of God's Elect. Why then, most ^ertain it is, (none but Liars against
God can deny it) that no sin (of God's Elect) remains unsatisfied for; which
had they not been, the Just and Righteous God would never have ^uffered their
Surety to have (so much as) peeped out of his Prison the Grave) in which he
(that ^ver Blessed one) lay confined, until God's time of discharging him
(accor^ing to Promise) was come.

What Reason then can thou show O my drooping disponding Soul) ^^hy thou
should fear an Arrest ^^om God for those sins; for which Christ thy Surety
was already Arrested and Committed; and from which also, he was (Actually)
Acquitted, and Legally Discharged by that great God (against whom thy sins were
committed) whereof his Glorious and Powerful Resurrection (from the Dead) is a
full and convincing Proof? See, and consider how the Holy Ghost Argues, in the
behalf God's Elect. Who shall lay any thing to the Charge of God's Elect? It is
God that Justifieih. Who is he that Condemns (...) It is Christ that Died,
yea, rather that is Risen again; who is even a^^ the Right Hand of God, who
also makes Intercession for us, Romans 8.33.34.

The Interrogation (or Question) (here put) implies a strong Neg^tion; and the
plain English (or meaning) of it is, that in vain is it for any Enemy of Gods
Elect to bri^^ (before God) any Bill of Indictme^^ (or Accusation) for sin
against an^ of God's Elect. The Argument where by this is enforced, is twofold.
First Gods own Act (already past) it God that Justifies, he against who^^ sin
has been committed; and w^^^ (alone) has the Right and Power to forgive it:
He has (on full Satisfaction given to his Justice (by the Surety of his Elect)
Pardoned the sins of all the Elect, who are (now) virtually pardoned and
justified, in that Justification past on Christ their public Head and
Representative.

Secondly, The Death, Resurrection (from the Dead) and Intercession of Christ
the Elect's Surety.

First, His Death, this was the con^mmating Act, whereby he complea^ed the
Payment of our Debt, for which he became bound to God for ^he Elect.

Secondly, His Resurrection from the ^ead, which is God's Discharge from hat
Obligation he lay under, as the ^^rety of the Elect.

Thirdly, His Work of Intercession ^^t God's right Hand) to which ^ace and
Office he would never have ^^^n admitted, had not the Passage ^ereto been
cleared up and prepared (...) the Satisfaction given. There can ^^en be no
Reason shown, why, or ^^erefore the weakest Believer should ^^r being damned,
or sent to Hell (...) his sins; seeing his Redeemer and Surety is raised from
the Grave. And is (Actually) ascended from the lower pars of Gods Earth, to sit
at his right Hand, in the highest Heavens; to enter on the Glorious Work of
Interceding (with God his Father) for him, a poor, shattered tempted Soul.

Object. But my sins are so many and great, and my Faith so very, very weak,
that I am often assailed with fearful Doubtings and Questionings whether I be
one of those Elect in whose behalf, Christ received that Full and Actual
Discharge from God the Father.

To this I Answer in the Particulars following.

First, Suppose thy sins do (f^ Quantity and Quality) not only equalize, out
outdo the crying Abominations of any (now in Glory. Nay, not only so, but (I
will add the Abominations of any (nay a the) Reprobates in Hell (except t^
unpardonable sin, which many in the place have committed) I say, su^pose thy
sins were as many, and great as the sins of those (now me^tion'd) yet if thou
seriously consider the unconcieveable Worth, and the infinitely
incomprehensible Value of the price paid to God's offended Justice for the sins
of the Elect: There will appear no real or solid Ground to fear the Greatness
of thy sins, in case the numberless Numbers of the Elects sins, were thy own
sins (personally) and that there were a Thousand Millions of Elect Sinners more
than there be Stars in the Firmament. Yet, the Shoulders of that Almighty
Savior (who became Surety for Gods Elect) would bear them all, and that
without any danger of sinking under their Weight, Remember that place, Heb.
7.25. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost, that come unto
God, by him etc. To which, let m^ (for thy Comfort and future Encouragement (in
believing) add the Mercy of Jehovah, which (with the Merit of Christ's
Satisfaction for sin) is so (every way) Infinite and Incomprehensible, that it
swallows up, and outdoeth all the Power that can be in sin, to damn or ruin any
Elect Sinner; for whom Christ (the Son of God) Dyed and Rose again. All the
Breaches of God's Law are the Acts (or Omissions) of Finite Creatures. But the
Mercy of God in pardoning Sinners and the Merit of Christ, his Obedience and
Sacrifice, to deserve and obtain their Pardon, they are the Mercy and the
Merits of an Infinite God. And as soon might a little Wren (or Sparrow) Dive
into the deepest part of the Sea, and ascend up again to give an Account of its
Depth, as any created Being can be capable of sounding or Fathoming the
investigable and bottomless Depth of God the Fathers pardoning Mercy, and of
Christ's the Sons Merit, to purchase the Elects Pardon.

Secondly, And what though thy Faith be so weak, so very, very weak, as thou
complainest it is; this need not hinder thy Comfort in feeding on this best,
and sweetest of Fruits. For thy Faith, though it be never so weak, proves it
self to be a Divine Faith, by its Operation in thee. First, In that it empties
thy Heart of all conceited Rigteousness of thine own, whereby Satan and corrupt
Nature would have thee to look for Life and Salvation.

Secondly, In that it carries thee out to rest under the shadow of Christ's
Mediatorial Satisfaction, hoping and expecting Life and Salvation by his Merits
alone. Though all Men's Stomachs be not equally sharp at Table; yet, he that
has the least Stomach, might eat to as great Satisfaction and Content, as he
that eats most. Let thy Faith be never so weak, thou will find (by Experience)
that the oftener thou do taste of this Fruit of Christ's Death and
Resurrection (with Application thereof to thy self) crying out (Believingly) My
dear Lord Jesus Christ, who died to discharge the Debt of my sins. and who rose
again for my Justification, the sweeter and the more delightful will it be; and
not only so, but thy poor weak Faith will (by this means) gather strength day
by day.

Thirdly, And as touching those fearful Doubtings and Questionings, whether
thou (in particular) be one of those Elect, for whom Christ dyed, and rose
again. I need say no more, than to assure thee, that this has been the Case of
the most eminent Saints (now) Triumphing in Glory; when in a Militant State, as
thou now art; that Soul that was never troubled with Doubtings and Questionings
about his State, was never yet blessed with a right saving Faith. Not that these
Doubtings are of the Essence of true Faith, or as if thou were not bound to be
humbled for them (before God) and obliged to strive against them: But an
Argument they are that thou art acted by a twofold Principle, and that the
Devil is now discovered to be thine Enemy. Both which, effectually proves thee
to be one of those Elect for whom Christ both died and rose again.

Secondly, The Resurrection of Christ is sweet to a a true Believer: As the
same is a sure and certain Pledge of his own (and all other Believers) being
raised, not only from a State of Mortality, but also from a State of Imperfect
Grace. The Resurrection of Christ (the Believers Surety) is the Ground and
Foundation of a Believers both rising more and more to Newness of Life: And of
his being raised again out of the Dust of Death, to partake in the Glory of the
last Resurrection, Romans 6.4, 5, 6. 1 Cor. 15.49.54. Phil. 3.21. Jo. 6.40.

Thirdly, The Resurrection of Christ is sweet to the Believer; as it is an
invincible Argument to prove, that Christ his Surety (having once died, and by
his Glorious Resurrection overcome Death) he is never more to dye, so
witnesses the Holy Ghost. Romans 6.9. Knowing that Christ being raised up, from
the Dead, dies no more; Death has no more Dominion over him. Rev. 1.18. I am
he that lives, and was dead; and behold I am alive for evermore, etc.

The Ground hereof is, the infinite Satisfaction given to his Fathers Justice
(for the sins of the Elect) by that one Death, which he underwent. If it were
possible for Christ to dye a thousand times over, and over; his dying so many
Deaths could not be more Satisfactory (to the Justice of God) (for the sins of
the Elect) than was that one most shameful, bitter, and cursed Death of the
Cross, which he suffered, and underwent (once) for all. Romans 6.10. For in that
he dyed, he dyed unto sin once; but in that he lives, he lives unto God.

God the Father has (now) no more sin to charge on him, than what he stood
charged with (on the Cross) when he said (on his giving up the Ghost) it is
finished. Jo. 19.30. Heb. 10.14. For by one offering he has perfected (for
ever) them that are Sanctified.

It is not in this Case, as it has been with (but too) many of Adam's Children
(and is in this very day) who have been forced to pay over and over, the self
same Debt. Such is the Baseness and Knavery of the Oppressors of the Age we
live in.

God (the Father of Christ) is not such a Creditor, he is a Just and a
Righteous God: And being so, there is no Ground to fear that ever he will Twit
(in the Teeth) either Christ, his Son (the Elects Surety) or any poor Believer,
with those Sins which Christ once satisfied for.

This Fruit is passing sweet to that Soul, who frequently feeds on it.

Fifthly, The Glorious Ascension of Christ (from Earth to Heaven) is most sweet
to the true Believer, and it is so on a twofold Account.

First, As it proves the complete Conquest and Victory of Christ (the Believers
Head and Surety) over all the Enemies of God's Elect, of whom it was spoken (by
way of Prediction.) Thou have ascended on high, thou have led Captivity
captive, etc. Psalm. 68.18. These things are (Prophetically) spoken of Christ
(by way of Allusion or Comparison, and which are by the Apostle Paul applied to
Christ's Glorious Ascension, Ephesians. 4.8. The Metaphor is taken from earthly
Kings and mighty Potentates; who (when they had got the Victory over their
Enemies) used to bind to their Chariot Wheels the Chief of the Enemies,
dragging them along in Triumph. Thus did the Lord Jesus (the Surety of Gods
Elect) when he Ascended to Heaven, he led Devil, Sin, Curse of the Law, World,
Death, Grave, and Hell, Captives; so that they can never more slave (or insult
over) any of God's Elect; this is intended by Christ in Jo. 16.33. In me ye
shall have Peace, in the World ye shall have Tribulation; but be of good cheer,
I have overcome the World. And the same is intended by Paul in Colos. 2.15. And
having spoiled Principalities and Powers, he made a show of them openly,
Triumphing over them in it. This also is intended in Rev. 1.18. I am he that
lives, and was dead, and behold I live for evermore; and have the Keys of hell
and of death. The term Keys, denotes the universal Power which Christ (by
dying) Achieved over all the Enemies of his Redeemed ones.

Christ's Ascension from Earth to Heaven, is every true Believers Triumph over
all the Powers of Darkness of this World, so witnesses the Spirit of God. Nay
in all these things we are more than Conquerours, through him that loved us,
Romans 8.37.

Secondly, Christ's Ascension to Heaven is sweet to the true Believer, on the
Account of the personal Appearance he makes there, for all the Members of his
Mystical Body.

That Christ is entered Heaven, as the (...) or Forerunner of his Members, is
expressly set down and affirmed for the Comfort and Encouragement of all true
Believers. Whether the forerunner is (for us) entered, even Jesus made an high
Priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedech, Heb. 6.20. For Christ is not
entered into the Holy Places made with hands, which are the figures of the true;
but into Heaven it self, now to appear in the Presence of God for us, Heb.
9.24. And there are three Ends for which he so appears.

First, That he might represent his Members Spotless and Blameless, in the
Virtue and Merit of that Obedience, which (he himself) as their Representative
performed (on Earth) to answer the Demand of the Law.

It is on the Account hereof, that the Spouse of Christ, (viz.) the Church of
true Believers is by Christ (himself) styled and accounted all fair and
Spotless. Thou art all fair my Love, there is no Spot in thee, Ephesians 4.7. Cant.
4.7.

That he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having Spot or
Wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be Holy, and without Blemish,
Ephesians. 5.27. And ye are complete in him, etc. Colos. 2.10.

Secondly, That he might enter on the Possession of the purchased Inheritance,
which he himself purchased for his Members. Ought not Christ to have suffered
these things, and to enter into his Glory? Luke 24.26. And if I go and prepare
a place for you, I will come again and receive you unto my self; that where I
am, there ye may be also, Jo. 14.3. The Believers Life and Crown are in the
Hands and Keeping of Christ (to be secured for them) till they arrive at
Heaven, where he is. Which is the Earnest of our Inheritance, until the
Redemption of the purchased Possession, unto the Praise of his Glory, Ephesians.
1.14. And has raised us up (together) and made us sit together in Heavenly
Places in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.6. This is a Mercy, and an Inestimable
Privilege given by God to the Elect; that the Life of their Souls, and all the
Glory and Blessedness whereto God elected them (in Christ his Son) is deposited
(by God the Father) in the Hands of Christ, who will never fail or betray them:
On which Account it is, that the condition of the poorest and weakest Believer
(living) is in a better and (infinitely) safer State, than the first Adam and
his Posterity, were in before the Fall. The Reason whereof is this, (viz) the
Life and Salvation of the first Adam and his Children, depended on the
Obedience of a Mutable Agent; who might (and did) fall, and come short in
fulfilling the condition of that Covenant of Works under which they Acted (for
Life.) But the Life and Salvation of the Elect, is now secured in Christ
(God-Man) who can as soon cease to be what he is, as he can forget, or neglect,
or suffer the poorest and weakest of those committed to him (by the Father) to
perish. And is not this a most sweet Fruit?

And I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never perish, etc. Jo.
10.28. And this is the Fathers Will which has sent me, that of all which he
has given me, I should loose nothing, but should raise it up at the last Day,
Jo. 6.39.

Thirdly, That he might enter on the Great and Necessary Work of Intercession,
which leads to the Sixth Particular comprehended in the general term Works.

Sixthly, The Intercession of Christ is most sweet to the true Believer. There
are six things in it which makes it so.

First, The Propriety the Believer has in it; yea, even the meanest and
weakest Believer has as real a Propriety therein, as the strongest. Who is he
that condemns? it is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is
even at the right hand of God, who also makes Intercession for us, Romans 8.34.
My little Children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not: and if any
Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, 1 Jo.
2.1.

Secondly, Whatevever Christ Prays for, he (most certainly) obtains it; of this
he had Experience, when on the Earth, before he had (Actually) discharged the
Debt, which he took on him for the Elect. And Jesus lift up his Eyes, and said,
Father I thank thee that thou have heard me: And I knew that thou hear me
always, Jo. 11.41, 42. Who in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up
Prayers and Supplications, with strong Cryings and Tears unto him, that was
able to save him from Death, and was heard in that he feared, Heb. 5.7. But now
seeing all Righteousness is by him fulfilled (according to what he undertook)
and he (in the Merit thereof) not only Ascended from Earth to Heaven, but even
sat at the Father's Right Hand; what is it that the Father can deny him?
especially, when what he prays for, is (before) in the Heart and Promise of God
(his Father) to grant him, and that in a way of Recompense, for the faithful
Discharge of the Trust reposed in him by his Father. Psalm. 2.8. Esa. 53.12.

There are some poor trembling Believers, who (when they need such or such a
Mercy, and know not what they shall do without it) dare not beg the Mercy they
want; The Mercy is so great, and they themselves so (every way) unworthy, they
think it great Presumption to seek or pray for it. Let such turn their Eye off,
from staring and poring on their own Unworthiness; keeping it fixed on the
Incomprehensible Merit and Worthiness of the Lord Jesus Christ; and then, let
them keep back from God's Throne of Grace, and give way to Discouragement if
they can. It Is Christ's Worthiness (not the Believers Qualifications) that
prevails with God.

Oh! poor distressed fainting Soul, who art even swallowed up of that Gulf of
Sinfulness, Distraction, Deadness, and Heart Hardness whereof thou complainest.

Consider and remember (for thine Encouragement) that when thou find thy
self unable to pray, there is one (at God's Right Hand) praying for thee, whom
God the Father knows not how to deny, or throw off: So prevalent (with him) is
that Efficacious Intercession of his own Son, who was Consecrated thy High
Priest, by God's own Sacred Oath. The Lord has sworn and will not repent, thou
art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedech, Psalm. 110.4. And having
such an High Undertaker for thee (with God) so my part, I cannot conceive what
should discourage or drive thee back from Wrestling with God, till ( Jacob
like) thou overcome him. This is the Use that God himself would have the
weakest Believer make of that great High Priest. Let us therefore come boldly
to the Throne of Grace, that we might obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help in
time of need, Heb. 4.16.

Thirdly, There is, there can be no Case or Condition so desperate or wretched,
(in respect either of Sin, or of Affliction) out of which Christ (by his
Intercession) cannot rescue and save the temp^ed, fallen and deserted Believer.
Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is Mercy, and with him
there is plenteous Redemption; and he shall Redeem Israel from all his
Iniquities, Psalm. 130.7, 8. The Lord preserves the simple, I was brought low,
and he helped me. Psalm. 116.6. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of
Temptations, etc. 2 Pet. 2.9. There has no Temptation taken you, but such as
is common to Man; but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted
above that ye are able to bear, 1 Cor. 10.12. To which I will only add,
Wherefore he is able also to save them to the utmost, that come unto God by
him; seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for them, Heb. 7.25. And can
any Fruit be sweeter than this to a poor Distressed Tempted and Despairing Soul?

Fourthly, By the Intercession of Christ the Peace and Reconciliation (procured
by his Meritorions Sacrifice) is kept up and con^inu^d for ever. For unto us a
Child is Born, unto us a Son is Given; and the Government shall be upon his
Shoulders, etc, Esa. 9.6.

The keeping up, and continuing the Peace between God and the Elect, as
necessary as the first Procurement of it. As by the Meritorious Virtue of his
Sacrifice, he has procured Peace with God for the Elect, so by the renewing
Efficacy of his Spirit in the Souls of Believers, and his prevailing
Intercession in Heaven for them; he continues and keeps up that Peace. Psalm.
37.23, 24. Jer. 32.40. Rev. 8.3, 4.

Fifthly, The Intercession of Christ (in Heaven) is the cause of Application of
all the Good, spiritual and bodily, which Believers receive at the Hands of
God. As the Procurement of all Good (for the Elect) depends on Christ's
Sacrifice; so the Actual Application thereof to them, depends on his
Intercession. And whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name, that will I do; that the
Father may be Glorified in the Son. If ye ask any thing in my Name, I will do
it, Jo. 14.13.14.

In the sixth place, (to add no more,) The Intercession of Christ with his
Father (in Behalf of the Elect) is not a matter of precarious Entreaty, but of
Justice and Equity, wherein he cannot be put off. He intercedes for no Favor
or Mercy, but what he first paid (...) price for, on the Behalf of his Elect;
and therefore it must not be thought a matter of mere Entreaty, but of Equity
and Justice, for God to (...) to Believers what they ask in Christ's Name.

To what has been observed concerning those six several sorts of Works, which
are Peculiar to Christ (as Mediator between God and Sinners) I will add one
more, and it is his Providential Work of Gubernation (or Ruling the World) and
that (as all the rest of his Works) is most sweet to the true Believer.

That the Government of the World is (in a way of Recompense) committed (by the
Father) to Christ, is plain, by his own Declaration thereof to his Apostles.
All Power is given to me in Heaven and in Earth, etc. Mat. 28.18. The same
witnesses Paul, And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be
Head over all things to the Church, Ephesians. 1.22. The same also Apostle to the
Philippians says, Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a
Name which is above every Name. That in the name of Jesus every Knee should
Bow, both of things in Heaven, and things on Earth, and things under the Earth,
Phil. 2.10.

That the Works of Providence are also sweet to the true Believer; seven things
will make it Appear.

First, God's King (who Rules the Providential Kingdom here on Earth) he is
also the Believers King.

That Christ is God the Fathers King, is plain and evident from the Scriptures
abovementioned, to which may be added Psalm. 2.6. Yet have I set my King upon
my Holy Hill of Zion.

From these Scriptures it is plain, that God has committed the Government of
all things (in his Providential Kingdom) to Christ his Son, to be improved for
the Good and Advantage of God's Elect.

The Prospect which Balaam had hereof, put him on declaring the Victoriousness
and Felicity of the People of God, above all other People on Earth. The Lord
his God (says he of Israel) is with him and the Shout of a King is among them,
Numb. 23.21.

That Christ is the Believers King, is evident from the Scriptures following:
Esa. 33.22. For the Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is
our King, he will save us, Rev. 15.3. And they sang the Song of Moses (the
Servant of God) and the Song of the Lamb; saying, great and mavelous are thy
Works, Lord God Almighty, Just and True are thy Ways, thou King of Saints.

Of Kings it is said, Regum est parcere Subjectis, and debellare superbos. It
is the Part (or Property) of Kings, to deal gently with these who submit
readily to their Rightful Authority; but to subdue and vanquish their Enemies,
who submit not to the Yoke of Duty.

This Property of a King, will be found to be in God's and the Believers King,
above all the Crowned Heads that ever breathed on Earth.

For as Christ is God the Father's King, to Sway the Scepter of his pardoning
Mercy, and Gospel Grace in the Hearts and Lives of the Elect; who (in effectual
Calling) are made his willing Subjects: He will by his Almighty Power defend
and save them from all adverse Powers which seek to spoil and ruin them: He
will not only defend and protect them from all Enemies and Dangers, but he will
carry it gently, and tenderly toward them, under all their Weaknesses and
Infirmities. But toward the wicked, who refuse and reject his Yoke, he will
vanquish and subdue them: Not by the Scepter of his special Grace, as he deals
with God's Elect: But wiht that Iron Rod, which the Father has put into his
Hand (for this very end) He will break them to pieces, Psalm. 2.9.

But those mine Enemies which would not that I should Reign over them, bring
them hither, and slay them before me, Luke 19.27.

This is (undoubtedly) a high Privilege and Mercy, wherewith God's Chosen are
(Eternally) Blessed above the rest of the Race of Adam, to be under the
commanding Power and (Everlasting) successful Conduct of such a King. The
Damned in Hell would give ten thousand Worlds (if they had them at command) to
be under the Conduct of this King. But for their opposing and despising this
precious and sweet Redeemer; they are (judicially) given up to the Tyranny of
such a King, as knows no Mercy; who instead of saving, will continue to torment
and destroy, Rev. 9.11.

This Lord Jesus, He, and He alone (excluding all others) is the Head and King
over the Church of God's Elect. None will claim such a Privilege, but the Man
of Sin, and such as are akin to his Antichristian Hierarchy. Christ is (to the
Church of the Living God) a Head of saving Influence, as well as a Head of
Commanding and Protecting Power, which none in Heaven or Earth can pretend to,
without borrid Blasphemy.

Were this very Point but rightly understood, and (by Faith) applied as it
should, it would make the weakest Believer in England as bold as a Lion, in the
ways of his Holy Profession. But for want of this, even Ministers themselves
shamefully Cowardice when Christ's Enemies appear Rampant.

Secondly, There is not that Creature in this Providential Kingdom, which is
not subjected to the Power of Christ. The Lord has prepared his Throne in the
Heavens, and his Kingdom rules over all, Psalm. 103.19.

All Power is given me in Heaven and in Earth, Mat. 28.18. Thou ^ast put all
things in Subjection under his Feet, Heb. 2.8. I am he that lives, and was
dead, and behold I am alive ^or evermore; Amen, and have the Keys ^f Hell and
of Death, Rev. 1.18.

Thirdly, Not only the Creatures, but ^ven all their natural Influences and
Motions are subjected to the Power of Christ; yea, the Craft and Subtilty of
all the Churches Enemies are subjected to him. No Fire can burn no Water can
drown; no Thieves ca^ rob, no Persecutor can hurt, without Christ.

It is a sure and an infallible Rule i^ Divinity, that as no second Cause ca^
(of it self) do good to a Man, (...) neither can it do him harm. We^ this one
Rule but rightly understood, and practically improved, i^ would free the Minds
and Spirits (...) true Believers, from many foolish a^ panick Fears, which
(frequently) i^vade them, to not only a lessening but also to a keeping out
that Comfort, to which (as Believers) the^ have Right, and which they may
(o^dinarily) enjoy, were it not for the^ wretched Neglectiveness herein. When
at any time (or in any Case) (...) meet with a Disappointment and Abuse, a
Loss, or a Cross from a^ Creature (whatever) I cease to complain or murmur in
God's Present that which strikes me into a profou^ Silence, is the
Consideration and B^lief that such and and such Accidents ^ould not fall out,
without the Providence of God; the Hand of God (...) think I) is in this
rebuking Providence: My Soul! lay thine Hand upon thy Mouth, and cease
quarrelling with second Causes; lest by going too far (that way) thou rob the
Almighty of the Attribute of his Sovereignty, and give it to second Causes, as
if they could do any thing without him.

On the other hand, when my Meat Comforts and Relieves fainting Nature; when
the Bed and Sleep Re^resh the weary Body; Oh! (think I) ^ow good is God?
Without whom, any Meat, my Bed, my Sleep, etc. would do me no good.

When (at any time) I am in great Streights (as often God knows I am) when this
or that Instrument steps in to my Succor, my Faith (though weak) is as busy
as a Be, calling on me, to take notice of the Hand of Providence in the
present Mercy. Thus, if I and other Believers, did do more and oftener than we
do; it would be better with us (in point of Comfort) than it is.

But we live more by Sense, tha^ we do by Faith; and that is the Reason why we
are such Strangers to solid Comfort in our own Spirits.

Fourthly, There is not the most contingent Accident, which falls ou^ (in the
World) but the Providence of the Lord Jesus orders the same, whether it be for
chastening or comforting poor Mortals.

Who is he that says and it comes t^ pass, when the Lord commands it not?
Lam. 3.37. Shall there be Evi^ in the City, and the Lord has not done it? Amos
3.6.

What but the Cosideration and Belief of this, struck Holy David dumb before
God, when under the Afflicting Rod of God; I was dumb I opened not my Mouth,
because tho^ did it, Psalm. 39.9. As has been already observed, there is
neither Good nor Evil, that can fall out without Christ. Neither does it (from
hence) follow, that those Creatures which are Active in the Business of Sin,
are therefore Excuseable; and that, because they Act from an ill Principle; and
to an end vastly differing from what Christ designs, in permitting it. Or that
the Praise and Thanks which is due to God's Instruments (in serving us) should
not be given them in due time and place. Neither will it hence follow, that a
Believer is to stand stock still (like a Sheep) to be robbed or murdered, if he
sees himself any way capable of making a lawful Defense. The Reason is because
self Defense is a Natural Principle; and that Man or Nation that would not
stand up, to resist an Enemy who seeks their utter Ruin, would not only
(herein) fall short of the very Bruits; but they would be Accessory to their
own Murder, which is the worst sort of Murder. In this Case the true Believer
is to look on the the Doctrine of Non-Resistance, as a Doctrine which smells rank
of Rome; and which was ^ontriv'd and brought into these Kingdoms (by the Romish
Emissaries) on purpose to manacle English Men; that (by that means) under
color and pretense of Religious Obedience to Authority; England might become
incapable of preserving it self from the Ruin designed against it by Rome and
France.

The Protestants in England (and in all the other Nations about us) have cause
to Adore and Praise the Providence of Christ, for the Entrance which it gave to
the Jesuits into Magdalen College; and its permitting the Bishops being sent
to the Tower. For, had not these two things (Providentially) fallen out, when,
and as they did; P^ssive Obedience, and Non-Resistance had ruined the Kingdom
before this time. But Glory to God on high, who has pitched on one, to Rule and
and Govern his Providential Kingdom (here on Earth) whose All-seeing Eye
penetrates into all the Dark and secret Counsels of his Peoples Enemies: And
who knows (Exactissime) most exactly, when to time his Peoples Deliverance. May
this wonderful Work of Providence never be forgotten in England.

How much of the Jesuits Infernal Craft and Policy, there is in the
Principles of the People called Quakers, to forward Englands Overthrow, would
be worth while for all true Protestants and true English Men (who love their
Country and the Protestant Religion) to consider.

Fifthly, That the most dismal Dispensations (which fall out in the World)
shall be all managed by the Providence of Christ, for the Good and Advantage of
true Believers; yea, even Sin it self, (with the most sharp and bitter
Afflictions, which spring from that bitter Root) shall most certainly work for
the Good and Advantage of Christ's true Members, according to that in Romans
8.28. And we know that all things work together for good, to them that love
God, etc.

This Assertion that Sin (it self) works for Good to Believers, has not only
startled, but stirred up some to make a great Noise in the Kingdom, (and that
in pretense of opposing and beating down Antinomianism) to withstand, and decry
this as a dangerous Doctrine; and that which Encourages Men to commit, and
continue in the Practice of Sin.

Those who are of this Spirit, and Principle will find (sooner or later) how
wide they are off the Truth, and how injurious they are; not only to the
Doctrine, which is according to Godliness, but to the Peace and Comfort of
Christ's Members; who are able (both from the Word of God, and their sanctified
Experience) to contradict this, their contradicting God's Truth. Concerning
which, I will only say two things in this place, reserving the vindicating this
Doctrine to a more seasonable Opportunity.

First, I do affirm (in the fear of the great God) that none (on Earth) do more
hate and loath Sin than those Persons who find in their Experience, that God
has done them unspeakable Good by their Sins; and herein I shall (I doubt not)
be seconded by the Suffrage, not only of all Orthodox Divines, but of all
serious and Experienced Christians.

Secondly, I do affirm, that it no more follows (from hence) that a true
Believer will, or can take Encouragement to commit or continue in the Practice
of Sin: than it follows, that he will (or can) venture to drink down deadly
Poison, because he is told, that an Able and Skilful Physician is (by his Art
and Skill) able to Extract out of the rankest Poison, an Antidote to Expel
Poison, or that a Believer should be willing to throw himself off the Top of a
House, which he cannot but expect will issue in breaking his Bones; because he
knows that such, or such a Bonesetter is skilful at setting Bones.

England is come to a sad Pass, when the People are grown so wise (in their own
Conceits) that they think themselves able to instruct and teach their Teachers;
the Sense hereof endangers the most faithful and lively Reprovers (for God) in
this formal and sleepy Age, being struck dumb, not well knowing either what to
Preach, or how to speak to their Auditory, without snuffing and offending them.

If we press People to the necessary Duries of practical Holiness, then we are
accounted Legal Preachers; Men who Preach up Moses, and who are for being
justified by Works.

If we Preach up Justification by the alone R^ghteousness of the Son of God,
freely imputed by God's Act of free and sovereign Grace, without any thing of
the Sinners own Qualifications joined (as Con-causes) therewith: Then we are
accounted Antinomians, we Preach Free Grace, Free Grace; and who sees not (who
have their Eyes open) this to be a sad Prognostic of God's approaching
Judgment on the Land?

God sometimes causes the Tongue of his faithful Reprovers to cleave to the
Roof of their Mouth, that they shall not be able to reprove or warn a
rebellious People, who are to be plagued with the Scourge of God's Judgments,
as in the Case of the Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 3.26. And I will make thy Tongue
cleave to the Roof of thy Mouth, that thou shall be dumb; and shall not be to
them a Reprover, for they are a rebellious House.

The like Instance we have Recorded in the Prophet Amos. They hate him that
reproves in the Gate, and they abhor him that speaks uprightly. Here was the
Sin of that Day, they would not bear or endure to be touched by God's Reprovers.
And God takes such a Way and Method with them, as to cause them to see and read
their Sin, in the Punishment which was to come upon them: which was, That when
they stood most in need of a faithful Monitor or Reprover, even then, when the
Rod of God was heavy upon them, they should not have him; read and compare Amos
5.10.13. With this agrees that of Paul to Timothy, where he tells him, That the
time will come, wherein Men will not endure sound Doctrine, but after their own
Lusts will they heap up unto themselves, Teachers having itching Ears, 2 Timothy
4.3. This day is this Scripture fulfilled in England. For, by woeful Experience,
the true Ambassadors of Christ find, that they can reprove no kind of Error in
Religion, but one or other is presently touched, even to a being (rootedly)
prejudiced against the Minister. I Will hear this railing Preacher no more, he
Preaches against other Men's Religions; and what has he to do with the Papists?
with the Quakers? with the Arminians? Cannot he Preach the Gospel? And so in
like manner, if the Preacher comes close to particular Faults, as the Pride in
Apparel in Professors, Men's taking a Liberty now and then to be Drunk; now and
then to Game, and to spend their precious Time in Alehouses and Taverns,
chatting and prating away the time which should be spent at Home, in the
Family; or in the Closet, in working out their own Salvation with Fear and
Trembling, they cannot bear faithful and plain dealing. I know (says the
guilty Conscience) he means me, I like it not.

This is harsh Preaching, I Will hear it no more; I like such, and such better.
Such a Preacher, he Preaches Free Grace clearly; and such a Minister, he
Preaches the Love of God sweetly. When (perhaps) neither the Preacher (so
highly commended and cried up for a Non-such) nor yet he that so commends him,
understands (savingly or experimentally) what the Grace of God means, or how
the same is made the Sinners.

It even amazes me to think, how few of those Preachers, who (now) pass current
for Free Grace Preachers, will be owned by Christ at the great Day, for right
Gospel Preachers: And how few of those who make so great a Noise in crying such
up, will be found what they seem to be (viz.) true and sound hearted Believers.

This is not designed as a Stumbling Block or a Discouragement in the way of
any weak Believer, but rather for a seasonable Warning or Caution to empty
Talkers, who think highly of themselves; to take heed they prove not
mististaken in their Opinion of themselves. Wherefore let him that thinks he
stands, take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor. 10.12.

Sixthly, In the darkest Night of Affliction and Temptation, the sweet Smiles
of Christ's Face will cheer and comfort the true Believer.

The Pillar of Cloud in Moses his time, it was both Darkness to the Egyptians,
and Light to the People of God. Exodus 14.19, 20. The same Dispensation may be a
Cross for Good to Gods Child, and a dreadful Curse to a Reprobate.

The Knowledge and Belief hereof, put the Church upon giving that seasonable
Caveat to her boasting Enemy; who (in the time of God's chastizing her for Sin)
did not a little rejoice at the Afflictions of the Church, concluding that
those Afflictions were the Forerunner of the Churches Destruction. Rejoice not
against me, O mine Enemies, when I fall I shall arise, when I sit in Darkness,
the Lord shall be a Light nuto me, Mic. 7.8.

Fatherly Chastisements, and Fatherly Love do very well consist together, so
says Christ; who (as he is God) knows all things; and who (as he is Man) found
it in his own Experience, that his Father (the God of Love) who loves him (his
Son) as he loves himself; yet when venting his dislike of, and his Displeasure
against the Sins of the Elect charged on Christ: He handled him so sharply and
severely, that the Son of God found a Necessity of crying out (in the
Bitterness of his Soul) My God! my God! why have thou forsaken me? Mat. 27.46.
And yet God was still his God, and his dearly loving Father for all that. As
many as I love (says Christ) I rebuke and chasten, etc. Rev. 3.19. Yea, so far
are Afflictions and Tribulations from being a Token of God's being a Man's
Enemy, that (indeed) to be exempt and free from them, is an Argument that the
Person is none of Gods. But if ye be without chastening, (then are ye Bastards)
and not Sons, Heb. 12.8.

* Gods Afflictive Dispensations are to his own Children the purging Pills,
whereby God, the Great and only Wise Physician, will purge out of the Heart and
Affections of his Children, those Remains of Sin yet abiding in them. And as in
Nature, those Pills (or that Potion) which are Bitterest, and which makes the
Patient sickest, are the best for curing, though they are hardly gotten down:
So in Christianity, those Corrections and Chastenings (from God's own Hand)
which are the sorest and sharpest to corrupt Nature; they are Attended with the
greatest Efficacy, to kill Indwelling Corruption in the Believer.

Before I was Afflicted (said Holy David) I went astray, but now have I kept
thy Word, Psalm. 119.67. And in another place, I know, O Lord, that thy
Judgments are right, and that thou in Faithfulness have Afflicted me, Psalm.
119.75. When the darkest and most dismal Cloud of Affliction and Trouble, seems
to overcast the true Believer, and not only to overcast him, but to compass him
about, so as there appears no likelihood of his Escape. yet, even then there is
a Bright side in that Cloud, which shines on the Believers Inside, to comfort
and encourage him, in Trusting in and Relying on God, in the way of Believing
and Dependence.

And not only so but we Glory in Tribulation also; knowing that Tribulation
works Patience; and Patience Experience and Experience Hope; and Hope makes
not ashamed, because the Love of God is shed abroad in our Hearts, by the Holy
Ghost which is given to us, Romans 5.3. Blessed be God, even the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Mercies, and the God of all Comfort; Who
comfort us in all our Tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which
are in any Trouble, by the Comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of
God, 2 Cor. 1.3, 4. Nevertheless God that comfort those that are cast down,
etc. 2 Cor. 7.6.

Seventhly, and lastly. The Lord Jesus Christ (the Head and King of all true
Believers) being Pilot, to sit at the Helm of all Affairs (wherein the Glory of
his Father, and the Salvation of his Elect are concerned) he will so Steer the
Course of all second Causes in this World, as not one of his Believing Members
shall ever come short of a Safe and Happy Arrival at Glory; but shall (most
infallibly) be securely conducted through all Storms and Hurricanes, which can
possibly arise, to overwhelm and sink the true Believer.

Let what Times soever God pleases come; let what Calamities soever fall out in
the Land; Plague, Famine, Civil War, Foreign Invasion, Penal Laws, Bishops
Court, Devil, World, indwelling Sin: Let all come upon thee (at once) and
display the Banner of their Force, Policy, and Malice against thee, to ruin
and destroy thee; yet thou (who art a real Believer) art safe (being secured
under the sh^dow of the Appletree) and not only safe (from any Harm which can
come to thee by such Storms or Enemies.) But thou shall be (infallibly) assured
of safe Landing in Heaven, and that by Virtue of that Universal Conquest and
Victory, Achieved by thy Head and King, over all his and thy Enemies: And his
having gone through all those kind of Storms which thou fear thou shall meet
with (and that as thy Representative) and has shot the Gulf of Death; and is
now (Actually) Possessed of thy Crown and Mansion in the highest Heavens, whereto
the Efficacious Virtue and Power of thy Redeemers Ascension, will in a very
short space of time, bring thee to behold and enjoy the great and unspeakable
things which he has purchased for thee, and for all that truly Love, and long
for his Appearing.

God is our Refu^e and Strength, a very present Help in Trouble; therefore will
not we fear, though the Earth be removed, and though the Mountains be carried
into the midst of the Sea: Though the Waters thereof rear and be troubled;
though the Mountains shake with the swelling thereof, Psalm. 46.1, 2, 3. Whither
the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus made an high Priest (for ever)
after the order of Melchizedech, Heb. 6.20.

What has been observed from the latter part of the Text, concerning the
Fruits of the Appletree, which are so sweet to the Taste of a true Believer;
many things might have been spoken by way of Application, both to the Comfort
and Joy of all true hearted Believers; and also to the Terror and Amazement of
all Papists, Quakers, Arminians, etc. who are destitute of the Fruit of this
Appletree. When spiritual Famine (from God) comes on these graceless (because
Christless) Souls, when they come to be Hunger-bitten, and their starved Souls
languish away in them, for want of the Fruit they now ridicule and scorn: Then
will that dreadful and killing Word take hold of, and be (Actually) fulfilled
in them. Esa. 65.13. Therefore thus says the Lord God, behold my Servants
shall eat, but ye shall be hungry: behold my Servants shall drink, but ye shall
be thirsty: behold my Servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed. Behold
my Servants shall sing for Joy of heart, but ye shall cry for Sorrow of heart,
and shall howl for vexation of Spirit.

This is (and will be) the Doom of all those who sit not under the Protecting
Shadow of this Appletree. The Fruit of this Tree is sweet to none but to those
to whom its Shadow is Delightful.

The Shadow and the Fruit belongs to none but to God's Elect, even Christ's
Redeemed ones.

Well therefore may the Believer cry out, and say (with the Prophet) Although
the Figtree shall not Blossom, neither shall Fruit be in the Vine; the Labor
of the Olive shall fail, and the Field shall yield no Meat: The Flock shall be
cut off from the Fold, and there shall be no Herd in the Stalls: Yet will I
rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my Salvation, Hab, 3.17.18. The
Mediatorial Righteousness of God Man is upon me, and his protecting Care and
Providence is over me, for my Covering, to shelter me from the Laws Curse. From
the Agonies of a fearful Conscience; from the dreadful Temptations of Satan,
and from the deserved Wrath of God. Here Is my hiding place in time of Storm and
Tempest, of whom should I be afraid, Psalm, 27.5.

Whenever a Storm arises, whether raised by Satan or the World, or by my own
corrupt Nature, or by Gods deserting,, or hiding his Face for a time: I
presently (by Faith and Prayer) run to the Appletree and take up my place under
its Shadow, crying out (with Holy David,) Keep me as the Apple of the Eye, hide
me under the Shadow of thy Wings, from the wicked that oppress me, from my
deadly Enemies who compass me about, Psalm. 17.8, 9. No sooner am I set down
under that refreshing Shadow, and become sensible of my Safety, but I presently
fall upon solacing my spiritual Senses, with beholding and feeding upon its
Fruit; applying unto my self (by Faith) the saving Benefits of Christ's personal
Graces, and the Improvement he has made of the same for me, a poor Worm;
together with the saving Benefits of his Word and Works, (as above discovered)
appropriating each Particular unto my self. Thus the Improvement which my dear
Lord Jesus made of the Anointing, poured out upon him by the Father (to fit him
for the Work of Mediation) it is mine. The Promises of the Everlasting Covenant
of Grace (which are suited to every Condition, I either am, or can be in) they
are mine. That wonderful and amazing Work of his Incarnation (or becoming Man)
it is mine. It was to Unite me to God, in a nearer and firmer Bond of Union,
than was between God and me in the first Creation.

The Work of his unparalleled and matchless Humiliation (in my Nature) it is
mine. It was for me, to prevent my Perishing by the Damning Pride of my
corrupted Nature, and to merit and purchase for me Gospel Humility.

That Work of his (perfectly) obeyed the Moral Law (in Heart and Life) it is
mine, he obeyed the Law for me as my Surety.

The Death which he suffered and underwent it is mine. It was for me that he
might unsting Death for me, and to give full Satisfaction to Justice for my
breaking the Law, that my Sins might be Arraigned and put to death in his
Death. The Guilt of Sin can (now) no more condemn or cast me at God's Bar;
neither can its reigning Power (from henceforth) detain me as its Captive (or
Slave) that I should obey it, in the Lusts thereof: The Resurrection of Christ
(from the Dead) it is mine. He Rose for my Justification, hereby I am fully
Assured (from under the Hand of the Spirit of God) that the Whole of my Debt
(for which Christ my Surety Actually Died and lay confined in the Grave) is new
fully Discharged; I am (from henceforth) no more liable to the Arrest of the
Law, for Sin; for that the Justice of God has (by raising my Surety from the
Dead) Released and Discharged me.

The Ascension of Christ (from Earth to Heaven) it is mine. be Ascended for me
(as my Surety, and Representative) to present before his Father; the Success of
his Negotiation, which he undertook (for me) when on Earth. The complete and
perfect Righteousness he fulfilled for me, to answer the Laws Demand, and the
Universal Conquest and Victory which he by that Rig^^eousness has Achieved
over all his and my Enemies, he makes open show of them in Heaven.

Besides this, he Ascended to enter upon the Possession of that Crown and
Mansion in Heaven, which he himself purchased for me; the which he has (as my
Forerunner) taken into his own keeping for me, until I have accomplished the
Service, to which he has appointed me on Earth.

The Intercession of Christ (in Heaven) is mine. He sits at the Fathers right
Hand, to lay my Case (in all its various Circumstances) open before Gods Throne
of Grace, pleading (in my Behalf) the Price which he himself has paid (to
Justice) for the Procurement of all the Good I stand in need of, till I come to
the end of my Race.

And to Encourage my coming to God's Throne of Grace (in Prayer) with a Humble
and Holy Boldness, to obtain (in the Virtue and Merit of the Price he has
paid, and the Intercession he makes in Heaven) the Mercy and Deliverance which
at any time (or in any case) I stand in need of.

The Providence of Christ (whereby he governs the World) it is mine.

He Orders and Rules all Creatures (or secondary Causes) wherein I am
concerned, for my Advantage and spiritual Good. Devil, World, Indwelling Sin,
Poverty, Reproach, Friends, Enemies, Adversity, Prosperity, Health, Sickness,
Life and Death. No further will the All (and Overruling) Providence of Christ
suffer any of these to move (or stir) then he will order for my Good, and
Eternal Advantage.

Matters being brought to so Excellent an Issue (through the powerful Operation
of the Holy Ghost) my Soul finds it self under a Holy Constraint of crying out,
(Admiringly,) Here Is Fruit indeed! none could ever compare with it, of these
Celestial Fruits; that Feast of Fat things (promised in Esa. 25.6.) is made up,
and they are by Christ himself intended in those Words; For my Flesh is Meat
indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed, Jo. 6.55. What the Prime and Fatness of
Beasts and the most delicious and purest of Wines are to feast and satiate the
Body.

The Flesh and Blood of Christ the Son of God (as held forth in the Gospel and
by Faith, applied and fed upon) is unspeakably more to the Soul of a true
Believer to feed his spiritual Hunger, and to quench his spiritual Thirst. The
Believer while he finds himself (thus) overcast with the Shadow of the
Appletree, and his spiritual Senses so (unspeakably) cheered and ravished with
its Fruit; he cries out with Peter on the Mount (at the Transfiguration of
Christ) it is good to be here, Mat. 17.3. There Is no Shelter like this of the
Appletree, which secures from all manner of Storms, be they inward or outward;
from Devil, from the envious (wicked) World, from Heart Corruption, or from God
hiding his Face, Neither is any Fruit to be compared to its Fruit. A Fruit
which never fails a Hungry Soul (which feeds on it) to feed, to fatten, to
corroborate the Soul against all spiritual Qualms and Faintings of Soul. A
Fruit which (as soon as tasted) brings the perplexed, melancholy, distracted,
despairing Heart and Mind to Rights again. A Fruit which is so far from
cloying, or surfeiting the Believer; that the more and the oftener he makes use
of it, the more does he long to be at it again. This Fruit produces in the
Soul of a Believer such a Holy Dropsy (or unquenchable Thirst) as nothing
short of the Beatifical Vision (in Heaven) will perfectly cure, Rev. 7.16.

Come then, Oh! come all ye Poor, distressed, melancholy, despairing Souls,
who dread the Terrible Sentence of the Law; who are frightened by th^^ Devils
Temptations, who are read^^ to die away in Despair, of the Agonies and Wounds
which Sin has occasioned in your Consciences; ye who are afraid, ye shall
perish for want: And are afraid that God's Wrath will be your Portion for ever,
hasten under the Shadow of the Spouses Appletree, lest the Avenger of Blood
overtake thee And for thy Encouragement know it, that this Appletree affords
Shelter to all comers, to all sorts of Sinners. The oldest Sinners, the vilest,
and most notorious Sinners who breath this sic^ Hell and Destruction; all will
find Welcome, none will be rejected who have a mind to come. All that the
Father gieth me shall come unto me, and he that comes to me, I will in no wise
cast out, Jo. 6.37. Ho! Every one that Thirsts, come ye to the Waters, and he
that has no Money, con^ and Eat; yea, come buy Wine and Milk without Money and
without Price, Esa. 55.1, 2. And the Spirit and the Bri^^ say, come; and let
him that heare^^ say, come; and let him that is athir^^ come, and whosoever
will, let him ta^^ of the Water of Life freely, Rev. 22.1. All other spiritual
Physicians (and Means of Cure) will be found Insignificant, and of no value.
Here Is the Physician who must cure thee, if ever thou be saved. Jo. 8.36. Acts
4.12. And I dare (boldly) to assure thee, that the whole World cannot afford
thee a safer Physician, with whom to trust thy Sin-sick dying Soul, than this
dear Lord Jesus, under whose Hands never any Soul yet miscarried, and for
cheapness never was the like. The Scriptures last quoted make this plain, to
which I will (only) add, that of the Apostle Paul. Wherefore he is able (also)
to save them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him; seeing he ever lives
to make Intercession for them. Heb. 7.25. And in a better and more Encouraging
Place of Scripture I cannot end.

FINIS.

