THE CASE OF THE Master-TAYLORS residing within the Cities of London and
Westminster, and the Weekly Bills of Mortality.
HUMBLY OFFERED To the Consideration of the Right Honorable the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled, in relation to the Great Abuses
committed by their Journeymen.
THAT toward the latter of End of last Summer, when the Master Tailors were in
the greatest Hurry of Business, occasioned by a more than odinary Run of Trade,
their Journeymen (not content with the same Wages and Hours of Working as
usual, which their Masters, when in Their Station, were well satisfied with)
taking Advantage thereof, and likewise of the Universal Extravagance at that
Time prevailing, did (after several unlawful Assemblies) enter into a Solemn
Combination, having their Names entered into a Book for that Purpose, to compel
the Masters to Raise their Wages, and Lessen the Hours of Working,
notwithstanding the Laws in Force for Regulating Laborers and Journeymen; Viz.
The 5th of Q. Eliz. Cap. 4. sect. 21. settled 15 Hours in a Day for Working, as
has been ever since continued, and at much lower Wages than they have now,
allowing for the Difference of the Times.

THIS Combination of the Journeymen-Taylors was come to such a Height, that
Complaint being made to His Majesty's Justices of the Peace against those
Offenders, as Loisterers, several of them were bound over to the Sessions, and
others to appear in His Majesty's Coart of King's Bench; and their
Subscription-Books were also seized, by virtue of the Secretary of State's
Warrant: Yet they still continue Obstinate, and persist in putting the
abovesaid Difficulties upon their Masters, to the great Prejudice of Trade in
general. They also collect great Sums of Money Weekly, to support their
unlawful Combinations and Confederacies, to the great Prejudice of the Families
of such of them as are Married; which Proceedings are of very ill Examples to
Journeymen of all other Trades, as is sufficiently seen in the Journeymen
Curriers, Smiths, Farriers, Sailmakers, Coachmakers, and diverse other Arts and
Mysteries, who have actually entered into Confederacies of the like Nature; and
the Journeymen Carpenters, Bricklayers and Joyners, have taken some Steps for
that purpose, and only wait to see the Event of a Law for Regulating the
Journeymen-Taylors.

THE Master-Taylors, after several Difficulties occasioned by the Proceedings
of their Journeymen aforesaid, applied to Parliament; and the Honorable House
of Commons were pleased to Pass the Bill now depending before Your Lordships,
in order to prevent the like for the future; and therein did grant to the
Journeymen, what they principally insisted on, Viz. Shortning the Hours of Work
from 6 o'Clock in the Morning, 'till 8 of the Clock at Night, instead of Nine,
which was the usual Custom, Time out of Mind.

THE Master-Taylors came into the lessening the Hours of Work, in order to
indulge their Men, and make them easy, if possible; which Hour of a Day taken
off from their Work, will occasion the Loss to their Masters according to the
Computation following: l. s. d. One Hour's Work per Diem lost to the Master per
Annum, for each Journeyman, the Master loses 2: 12: 00 If a Master keeps Ten
Men at Work, he loses Annually 26: 00: 00 If he keeps Twenty Men at Work, he
loses Annually 52: 00: 00 If he keeps Thirty Men at Work, he loses Annually 78:
00: 00

FROM the foregoing Calculations, it appears, what great Loss the Masters will
sustain, and that the Wages settled by the Bill now depending, ar ethe utmost
that the best Journey-Men can possibly Earn; and if higher Wages were to be
allowed to the said Journeymen, the Masters must either raise the Prices of
making Clothes considerably, or else be inevitably ruined.

BY the Bill now depending before your Lordships, when at the Honorable House
of Commons, the Journeymen were very desirous to have a Clause inserted, to
oblige their Masters to pay them their Wages by a summary Way before Justices
of the Peace, which the said Masters also readily complied with; and for want
of Payment, the said Justices of the Peace are empowered to commit the said
Masters to Gaol, without Bail or Mainprize; which is putting the Masters under
the same Restrictions of the Justices, as their Journey-Men are, and is what
they then seemed to be contented with at the House of Commons.

THAT the Journeymen do still combine to raise their Wages to Half a Crown and
Three Shillings per Diem, and out of the said extravagant Wages, they are
spirited on by designing Persons, to collect Large Sums for the Support of such
Journeymen in Idleness, as are not to comply with Reasonable Wages; and also
expend Large Sums of Money in Law and Soliciting, to oppose the Passing of the
Bill now depending before your Lordships; which, if the same should pass into a
La, would render both the Masters and their Men easy in the said Trade.

HE Mastes humbly conceive, That the leaving for the future (if Occasion should
require it) the altering and settling of the Wages and Hours by the Justices,
at a General Quarter Sessions, from Time to Time, as they shall see Cause, is
entirely consistent with the Liberty of the Subject, and according to former
Laws in the like Cases; viz. That of the 5th of Q. Elizabeth, and that of the
1st of K. James I. give the same Powers to Justices at the Quarter Sessions.
The Journeymen have the same Privileges in Appealing, as the Masters have, by
the present Bill.

WHEREFORE, the Masters humbly Pray, That the BILL, as it no^ stands, may pass
into a LAW.

The CASE of the Master-Taylors, etc. Humbly Offered To the Consideration of
the House of Peers, in relation to the Great Abuses committed by their
Journeymen.


