THE CASE OF THE ARMY SOBERLY DISCUSSED.

LONDON: Written and Printed by Friends to Religion, and Well-wishers to the
Army. July 1647.

Worthy Friend:
YOu have asked of me, Upon what Grounds I have adhered, and do adhere still,
unto the Parliament in their late War; and yet disavow the Army in their
behavior toward the Parliament; which many well-meaning people think
warranted by the aforegoing example: as also how I can answer that other
Allegation, viz: that they are for the Liberty of the Subject, and are
sellicited by sundry Petitions of the Countries; and some go so high as to say,
That as the Parliament is above the King, so the people is above the
Parliament; and that the Army does but act in the Name and Right of the People.

To all this I shall answer as distinctly as I can (though a man can hardly
speak or write of so confused a business, without some confusion in his own
mind) and clearly give you an account of my thoughts in the matter, and the
grounds upon which I go.

First, The Parliament has an undoubted legal Authority, during their Sitting,
to impeach, and judge, and punish Delinquents in the highest rank of Subjects;
and to prevent, and suppress the Power of Tyrany; as is abundantly showed in
Declarations and Treatises, and is Confessed by the King Himself in his Answer
to the 19. Propositions. But the Army has no kind of Right, as an Army, to do
any thing but to obey their Officers under the Parliament.

Secondly, The Parliaments Authority was, and is ratified by a Law, agreed to
by the King; that it should not be dissolved, not adjourned but at the pleasure
of the Houses. But the Army was Voted to be disbanded, and the times and places
nominated for their disbanding their several Cegiments; and Commissioners from
both Houses sent down to the first Rendevous, with Money to pay, and disband
them; and so to go on to the rest.

Thirdly, The Parliament never did pretend to be above the King, but only to
have a Power to endeavor to save the Kingdom in time of Danger, in case the
King would not consent to the means of it; for which they often Petitioned him;
and He acknowledging the Danger, yet refused to consent to the necessary way of
seeling of it. But the Army, when they first refused to disband, did not so
much as pretend any other reason for it, but only their own not being
satisfied in their Demands as Soldiers: and what they have since presented for
Justice, and the Peoples Rights, do more and more appear pretended to conseal
such Designs as are not yet ready for Discovery.

Fourthly, the Parliament never offered to seize on the Person of the King (or
of the Prince) though they might have easily done it, before he went to York,
but only followed Him with Petitions after Watre proclaimed, until he would
receive no more. But the Army have dared to seize on the King being quiet at
H^lden^y according to the Order of both Houses, and agreement of both Kingdoms,
and attended by Commissioners from both Kingdoms; and to carry him away by
force, and the Parliaments Commissioners also as prisoners unto the Army. And
though the General and chief Officers disclaimed the knowledge of it, yet they
detain him still, and have expressed so great discontent at the Houses
demanding him to be conveyed to Richmond, as amounts to an absolute denial; so
as the Houses have been constrained to insist no longer upon His coming thither.

Fifthly, The Parliament are without all contradiction the Representative Body
of the Kingdom, specially the. House of Commons, being chosen by the
Freeholders of the several Countries, and Inhabitants of the several Towns and
Cities; and the House of Peers have an undeniable Right of Judicature by the
Laws of the Kingdom. And withal, for the settling of the Militia, a great part
of the Counties of the Kingdom did Petition them, with thousands of hands out
of every County. But the Army has no tolerable pretense at all to call
themselves the Kingdoms Army, or to Represent them; for the people chose them
not, but the Parliament chose them, not to say with the discontents of
multitudes of the people, and for the Petitions of some Countries to the Army,
as if they did make them their Representees. First, the Army was in actual
disobedience against the Parliaments Votes for their disbanding before any one
Petition was brought them. Secondly, no other County has yet petitioned them,
but those amongst whom they were: whereas the Parliament sitting quietly at
Westminster, the Countries took long journeys to come up in great multitudes
with their Petitions to them. Thirdly, the Petitioners out of the several
Counties are very few (as is very well known, especially for Essex, Suffolk,
and Norfolk) in comparison of them that joined not with them. And certainly,
the lesser part of a County cannot represent the whole County; much less four
or five Counties represent the whole Kingdom. Fourthly, there would be found, I
believe, if they were counted aright, many more Petitioners out of the City of
London (although they now seem to have forgotten it) for the disbanding of this
Army, and take in with them some of those Counties that are now said to
Perition to the Army for their Rights, then all the Armies Petitioners can
amount too again.

Sixthly, For the Peoples being above the Parliament, and the Armies
representing the people (to speak somewhat more of that which with some is the
Great Plea for the Army) I believe this will never be made good by Religion, or
Reason, or the Laws of Nature, or of any Nation, especially in the sense of
some, whose Books talk of our Sovereign Lord the people. First for Religion,
there is not a shadow of it in all the Word of God, to make the people (even
the lowest of them) the higher Fowers: God says, By me Kings reign, and
Princes decree justice: By me Princes rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of
the Earth. But he says no where, by me the People reign, and they are all
Judges. He says to the Princes and Judges, I have said ye are gods: He never
says so of, or to the people. Secondly, For Reason, who can imagine, that so
many millions as are in our Nation can agree to any Acts of Rule or Government,
more then to choose in their several places Rulers and Governors (as a King, or
a Parliament) who when they are once chosen, cannot be, upon any pretense of
Reason, put from their Rule by the People, unless they do in like manner agree
to their putting out, as they did to their choosing, where there is no Law to
guide in it. Much less can the whole people in reason be competent Judges of
the fitness to put them out, if they had any such power; unless the
abominable wickedness of such Trustees be altogether undenyably manifest by
the facts, or by uncontrollable proofs; which how far the whole people of a
Nation is capable to take, and to judge of, so as to exercise such rule, may
easily appear to any ones reason that will exercise it. And least of all can
they judge of the fitness of particular things to be done, when they have
never heard them debated, or any reasons against their own conceits resented;
or judge of the fitness of a whole Army of above 20000. men to be their new
Representees to aw and Command their Parliament, and legal Representees.
Thirdly, for the Law of Nature, that gives all Authority originally to the
father of a family, and where many of them agree to make a City, or
Commonwealth, the residue of the family cannot avoid the Government agreed
upon by their Fathers and Masters, and have nothing to do to overrule it in the
least, though they be ever more in numbers then the Fathers or Masters of
families. Yet the new Doctrine of the Peoples Sovereignty extends to give power
to all servants and children grown up, as well as to their parents and masters.
And I am very much deceived, if very many in the Army (the pretended
Representees of the people) be not servants and Prentices not yet free, and
children unmarried, whose parents are yet living, who but in obedience to the
Parliament, and for the Public service would never have suffered them to go
from them to be Soldiers, and do not new allow of any of their dealings.
Fourthly, for the Laws of Nations, there is no Story or Record of any Nation
that I could ever read or hear of, where the whole multitude of the people
without exception or distinction, had the Sovereign Power in their hands by way
of exercise; no, not at Rome, or Athens, or the most Democraticall and popular
Cities, but certain Tribes only, and the Freemen of those Tribes: and much
less in large Countries and Nations. Fifthly, I would be contented (for my
part) as to my outward condition to acknowledge the peoples sovereignty (it I
might not be judged as an offender, though accused by the Army) till the major
part of the whole people of this Nation did or could rationally take notice of
my offense, and sentence me for it. For to do this, they must either meet
together all in one place (and will Salisbury-plain or any other larger place
suffice for the meeting?) and all heat the proofs, and what witnesses voice can
reach them all? or else if they meet but in several Counties, what place will
suffice for the major part of most Counties in England? if you take in all the
people, servants, and children, and laborers, and beggars, and all? And then
again, unless they at last derive their power to Representees, how long time
will the trial of the offense last what ever it be supposed, till all the
Countries of England one after another have heard the proofs, and given their
sentences. And then if my Case have but any difficulty in it, and some of the
Countries acquit me, and others condemn me; how then must the matter go? by
the greater part of the Countries? or rather by the greater number of the whole
Nation summoned up together? and what if the sums be questioned as not right?
(as when the Pole is denied in Elections) who shall judge whether the major
part are against me or for me? unless every where they pole, and all that pole
subscribe to a writing showing their number. And then at the last, who shall be
trusted to gather the Votes of all the Countries, and give assurances to the
Nation that they deal faithfully in the sum, and neither acquit not condemn
at their own pleasure, but according to the Votes of the whole Nation certainly
and plainly? If I might be secure till all this were rationally resolved for
practice, I would not fear any accusation amongst men. And how then can this
Army with any color pretend, that the whole Kingdom of England has Entrusted
them to urge the Parliament to do them right? (which is an implicit sentence
against the Parliament as guilty of great Injustice) or demand in the name of
the People of England Justice upon the accused Members of the House of Commons?
There are but five Counties at the most, out of which any have brought
Petitions; and in none of those Petitions (for they are Printed) are those
Members accused; not yet is the Army Authorized in them to accuse whom they
please: Much less is it said, that those Petitions were from the major part of
those Counties met together, or subscribing severally. And then how far is it
(I beseech you) from the major part of the Kingdom? and by what Authority
derived from our Sovereign Lord the People, (if they will still have them to
called) can they show their Warrant to accuse those Membe a in the name of the
Army? or of the People of England, as the House of Commons has by the known
Law, and constant Custom, to accuse any in their own Name, and in the Name of
all the Commons of England?

Thus far I have given you an account of part of my Grounds on the one side,
and the other: You may be weary of reading thus much; for I am sure I am weary
of thinking so long together of so strange a business; though I desire to
think of it with as great quietness of mind as the business will bear: of
which my moderate Language will to you at least (I hope) bear witness. Another
time, if you desire it, I may tell you the Remainder of my thoughts of this
matter. Mean time, and ever, I Rest

Your faithful Friend.

FINIS.

