THE CASE OF THE City of London.
1. THE City of London is a Body Politic by Prescription, and many Charters,
Confirmed by Magna Charta, and many Acts of Parliament, whereby it has many
Powers and Privileges, which belong to the Freemen only of the Body, Exclusive
to all others. 2. The chief and highest Privilege of the said City, or Body
Corporate, and of all the Freemen thereof, is a Power to make Bye-Laws for
their own better Government and Advantage; and whilst the Freemen exceeded not
the numbers that could meet and consult together, they were Assembled, and made
such Laws for themselves as they thought fit. 3. When the Freemen were too
numerous to Consult in one Assembly, after various ways practiced to have
themselves represented in Councils about their good Government: It was at last
agreed, (some Hundreds of Years since) That a competent number of the Freemen
should be Yearly Chosen at the Wardmotes, to represent in Council the whole
Body of the Commonalty of the City, and to act and consent for them in making
their Bye-Laws, and ordering all the greatest concerns of the City; and those
Freemen so Chosen by all the respective Wards, have had, and still have the
name of the Common Council of the City, who, together with the Lord Mayor and
Court of Aldermen, make up the Court of the greatest Authority, under the name
of the Mayor, Citizens, and Commonalty of the City of LONDON. 4. There are many
Inhabitants within the several Wards, who are not Freemen of the City, or
Members of the said Body, who are nevertheless Bound (as all Residents are) to
come to the respective Wardmotes, wherein the said Members for the
Common Council are yearly Chosen; and all those Inhabitants, though not Free of
the City, if they pay Scot and bear Lot, have always had Voices in the Choice
of the Constables, Quest-men and Scavengers for their Ward, and may be Chosen
to those Offices which concerns equally all the Inhabitants in the respective
Wards, as they are Inhabitants of those Precincts, though no Members of the
Body Politic of the City.


But the said Inhabitants that are not of the Body of the City, do now claim to
have Voices in the Election of the Freemen, that are to represent the whole
Body Corporate of the City in Common Council, because they are Chosen at the
Ward-mote, to which such Inhabitants are summoned, though they do not pretend
that they are capable to be Chosen; and upon the like ground the said
Inhabitants also claim to have Voices in the Election of the Aldermen of the
said City, or Body Corporate.

Query 1. Whether by the Charters Incorporating the City, the Inhabitants
within the Wards, not being Members or Freemen of the City, have any Right to
give their Voices in the Election of the Aldermen or Common-Council-men of the
same?

Query 2. Whether the Permission of such Inhabitants as are not Free of the
City, and by Negligence, Connivance, or otherwise, to have given their Voices
in some such Election at the Ward-motes, do give them any Right or just Claim
to the Privilege of Freemen in the Choice of the Aldermen and
Common-Council-men of the Body Corporate of the City?


