The CASE of the Churchwardens and Vestry of St. Savior in Southwark.
THE Wardens of the Parish Church of St. Margaret, now known by the Name of St.
Savior in Southwark, were, by Letters Patents 27 Hen. 6. made a Body
Corporate, and confirmed by Act of Parliament 28 Hen. 8.

The Monastery of St. Mary Overy in Southwark being soon after dissolved, the
Parishioners of St. Margaret and St. Mary Magdalen Overy were by Act of
Parliament 32 Hen. 8. United, and made into one Parish, called by the Name of
St. Savior in Southwark, and the Churchwardens thereof were then made a
Perpetual and Able Body Corporate.

Which said Parish of St. Savior's, Anno 1556. upon a General Meeting, and
unanimous Consent of the then Inhabitants, there was, for the better Rule,
Profit and Quiet of the said Parish, a Select Vestry of Thirty Persons chosen,
which were to have Succession by the Survivors Election of others in the stead
of any dying or departing the Parish, and had the Choice of succeeding
Churchwardens, and together with them the Government of the Parish.

By which Vestry the said Parish was well and peaceably governed for above
Eighty Years, until the late unhappy Wars, when in the General Calamity of
Government the same was broken and discontinued, and then the Government and
Managery of Parochial Affairs being various, great Discords and Inconveniences
arose among the Inhabitants, to the great Prejudice of the Parish; for
appeasing whereof, and Prevention of Tumults and Routs upon Elections in a
Parish so large, the Churchwardens and Parishioners Petitioned King Charles
II. (of Blessed Memory) to be freed from the Populace, and reduced to their so
Ancient Government of Thirty Men.

Whereupon the said King Charles in Council was graciously pleased to refer the
Matter to George then Duke of Albemarl, and the Lord Bishop of Winton, and whom
they should nominate, which were the then Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the
Lord-Chancellor, and the Lord Bishop of London, who being all present together,
upon the Humble Address of the then Churchwardens and Inhabitants, and full
Hearing of the whole Matter, granted Leave to the Churchwardens to convene the
Inhabitants in their Parish Church for the choosing of such Vestry of Thirty
Men, which by the Consent of the then Churchwardens, (viz.) Die Dominico 14
August, 1664. was done, and Twenty-four added to the Six Churchwardens then in
being, which made the Number of Thirty Persons, who by successive Elections
have ever since fairly managed the Affairs of the Parish, and now do, to the
great Satisfaction of the greater Part of the Inhabitants.

The Church Wardens of St. Savior's, in the Name of John Bingham and others,
for a considerable Sum of Money, did purchase in free Soccage of King James I.
by Letters Patents, in the Ninth Year of his Reign, the Rectory and
Parish Church of St. Savior's aforesaid, and all Glebe-Land, Tithes, Tenths,
Oblations, Profits, etc. and what else did then belong to the Rector-Church of
St. Margaret and St. Mary Magdalen Overy, or to the said Rectory and Church of
St. Savior's, being formerly Part of the Possession of the said late dissolved
Priory, and are thereby obliged to keep a fit House for a Grammar School for
teaching the Children of the said Parish, and to provide a sufficient Master to
teach them, and to pay him 20 l. per Annum, and 10 l. Yearly to an Usher, and
also Two Able Chaplains to Preach in their said Church, and to pay them 30 l.
per Annum each, which was accordingly done till 1672. and then the Sallaries of
the said Chaplains was by Act of Parliament advanced to an 100 l. per Annum
a-piece, and the Schoolmasters to 30 l. per Annum, which has been duly paid.

Note, That by the Acts of Parliament 24 Car. 2. the Church Wardens, etc. are
Empowered to Raise upon the Inhabitants, in Lieu of Tithes, any Sum not
exceeding 350 l. per Ann. besides Charges of Collecting.

Wherefore it is hoped the Promises considered that the Bill eititled Bill for
regulating of select Vestries etc which tends to an Annual ^^ of vestry men by
the Populace shall not prejudice this constitution; but that the Honorable
House of Commons will press the same by Excepting it out of the said Bill, or
by some other m^^^^ which in their great Wisdom shall to theem seem meet.

THE CASE OF THE Churchwardens and Vestry of St. Savior in Southwark.


