THE CASE OF Sir THOMAS PILKINGTON, Knight. (Now Lord Mayor of LONDON) Sir Thomas
Player, Knight. deceased; Slingisby Bethell, Esquire Henry Cornish, Esquire deceased;
Samuel Shute, Esquire deceased; Samuel Swynock, John Deagle, Francis Jenkes,
deceased; Richard Freeman, John Jekyll, Robert Kaye and John Wickam, all now,
or late Citizens of London; as to the Riot pretended to be committed by them in
the Election of Sheriffs in the Year 1682.
IT is an undoubted Truth, That nothing stood more in the way of the Tyrannical
and Popish Interest, than the Liberties and Privileges of the City of London;
and amongst those Liberties and Privileges, the Power of Electing Sheriffs for
London and Middlesex was that which chiefly obstructed their Malicious and
Wicked Designs; and for that reason, their Principal Contrivance was, to
subvert and destroy such Right of Election, which they accomplished in a
shameless and impudent manner, whereby the Strength of the Conspiracy may
appear, but not the least show of Candor or Justice.

The Election of Sheriffs for London and Middlesex, and of many other Officers,
belongs to the Citizens of London in Common Hall assembled; and Elections have
always been, or ought to have been made by the Majority of the Common Hall: And
when a Poll has been demanded on the behalf of any in competition, it ought to
be granted; and the Lord Mayor cannot by Proclamation, or otherwise, dismiss or
dissolve the Common Hall before the Poll is finished. And this was found to be
the Custom in a time free from Faction, before the Lord Chief Justice Vaughan
by a Jury of Citizens, in an Action upon the Case brought by Mathusalem Turner,
against Sir Samuel Sterling, late Lord May or of London, as may be seen by the
Record entered in the Common Pleas of Easter Term, 23 Car. II. Roll. 363.

At a Common Hall, held the 24th of June 1682. a Poll having been begun and
continued for several hours for the Election of Sheriffs for the said City and
County of Middlesex, wherein Tho. Papillon and John Duboys, Esqs; and Dudl.
North and Ralph Box, now Sir Dudl. North and Sir Ralph Box, were Competiors;
the then Lord Mayor, Sir John Moor, with diverse others in his Company, came
from his House to Guild Hall, with great Shouts and Huzza's of his Companions,
and disturbed the then Sheriffs in their Proceedings in taking the Poll, and
took upon him, contrary to the Custom beforementioned, to adjourn the
Common Hall before the Poll was finished, and made Proclamation for all People
to depart, and so went back again in the same manner became. And this may
reasonably be concluded to be the result of the Advice given him by Sir Leoline
Jenkins, then one of the Principal Secretaries of State, who dined with Sir
John Moor that day, or at least was with him just before he came to Guild Hall,
and was a great Adviser in this Affair, whose Opinion Sir John Moor (as is
supposed) was pleased to take for the obstruction of the Free Election of
Sheriffs, though he knew at the same time, the Court had caused Proceedings to
be had against the City by Quo Warranto for the destruction and subversion not
only of this Liberty of Election of Sheriffs, but also of all other the
Privileges and Franchises of the ^^^y; and whether Sir John Moor did behave
himself as an honest man, and good Citizen, to follow the Advice of an Enemy in
a matter of this Consequence, let all indifferent men judge.

Notwithstanding this Disturbance by the Mayor, Sir Thomas Pilkington (now Lord
Mayor) and Samuel Shute, Esquire, being then Sheriffs of London, and (being
advised by Eminent Lawyers, and Ancient Cit zens, That the Taking and
Adjourning of the Poll did belong unto them, and not unto the Mayor) proceeded
in taking the Poll, and finished the same in a peaceable manner: upon the
casting up whereof, it appeared that Mr. Papillon and Mr. Dubois were duly
elected Sheriffs for the year ensuing by a very great Majority of above 1100
Voices; for which Proceeding, the said Sheriffs were within some short n="*"
June 26, 1682.
time after committed by the Privy Council to the Tower of London, and an
Information for a Riot, for the Cause abovesaid, was in 1682. exhibited by Sir
Robert Sawyer, then the King's Attorney General, against them, and diverse other
Eminent Citizens. To which Information the said Sheriffs being brought to the
Bar by Habeas Corpus to be bailed, were forced to plead presently; which they
did, Not guilty; and Issue being thereupon joined, a Venire facias Jur was
awarded to the Sheriffs, which ought to have been to the Coroner, the Sheriffs
being Parties.

Sir John Moore finding that upon a fair Election he could never hope to do the
Courts Drudgery, insisted, That by his Prerogative (as he called it) as Mayor,
he had the Choice of one of the Sheriffs; and that he had named Sir Dudley
North as such; and that the Common Hall must confirm his Choice; and that if
but One only Voice of all the Common Hall was given for Sir Dudley, it was
sufficient: And that he might have the other Sheriff of the like
Qualifications, he did sometimes insist, That he had a Negative Voice upon the
Election; and He and his Adherents so far prevailed upon the Court of Aldermen,
that they took upon them to set aside the said Election, and appointed another
to be the 5th of July following, and summoned a Common Hall for that purpose;
at which Mr. Papillon and Mr. Dubois were again duly elected by the like
Majority of above 1100 Voices.

Notwithstanding this Majority, Sir John Moor and his Associates had the
Confidence to declare Sir Dudley North and Mr. Box (now Sir Ralph Box) to be
duly elected: Whereupon Sir Ralph Box desiring to be excused, chose rather to
pay the usual Fine, than serve in that Office whereunto he was never elected.

After this, in September, another Common Hall was held for the election of one
Sheriff in the room of Sir Ralph Box, at which the like number of Voices were
given for Mr. Papillon and Mr. Dubois, as at the former Common Hall; and yet
Sir Peter Rich (whose Name we could never learn was so much as put to Vote in
order to Election) was declared elected by Sir John Moore and his Associates,
without the least color of Right or Justice.

On the 28th of September, Sir John Moore and his Adherents (after having
filled Guild Hall with the Trained Bands, to terrify such as opposed their
unjust Proceedings) caused Sir Dudley North and Sir Peter Rich to be sworn
Sheriffs: At which time Mr. Papillon and Mr. Dubois tendered themselves to be
sworn, but were rejected.

The Conspirators against the Liberties of the City and Nation, laid this as a
Ground work to justify what they had so unjustly done, and to punish the most
Worthy and Active Citizens who opposed them in their Designs; thereby
contriving, That these Sheriffs, thus unjustly imposed upon the City, should
empannel Juries not only to try the best Citizens as Rioters and Malefactors
for doing their duty, but also all such as had, or should, either in London or
Middlesex, show themselves Englishmen in opposing the Designs of the Court,
which tended to the utter destruction of our Religion and Liberties. And, to
speak truth, from hence, and from unduly imposing a Lord Mayor a short time
after upon the City, may be justly dated the Loss, Ruin, and Mischief that
has since that time ensued in this Nation, not only to the loss and
destruction of multitudes in their Lives, Liberties, and Families, but also to
the great hazard of the utter Extirpation of the Religion and Liberties of
Englishmen.

It may be remembered by the way, That whenever Sir John Moore and his Party
had occasion to use Council for the carrying on their Designs with some show of
Law, Mr. Saunders, afterward Chief Justice, and Sir George Jefferies, since
Lord Chancellor, were the persons advised with, and heard before the Court of
Aldermen, as to the Legality of Sir John Moore's Actings, etc. when Sir John
Moore knew well, that the Quo Warranto against the City had been brought upon
the Advice of the Former, and that the Other had often sworn the destruction of
the City-Liberties, and that Both of them had sold themselves to do what
mischief they could to the City and Nation: So that, had not Sir John Moore had
a desire to be misled, he would never have asked or taken Advice from such Men
in such a Concern. But to return to the Proceedings in Westminster Hall upon
the Information, where the Defendants found as much Partiality, and as little
Justice, as in the City.

In Michaelmas-Term, 1682. several Motions were made on the behalf of the
Defendents at the Kings Bench-Bar, That the Venire facias Jur' might be awarded
as the Law did direct, (which was to the Coroner): But all the Answer that was
given, was, That the Defendants were well enough, and had no reason to
complain, as the Venire facias was then awarded; when in truth they knew well,
That had the Venire been once awarded to the Coroner, he must have returned the
Jury, and then the Defendants might have expected an indifferent Trial; Mr.
Broom the Coroner not being in the Conspiracy for the destruction of the
Liberties of the City; and the awarding of the Venire facias being in all Cases
the Act of the Court, the Court failed of their duty, in not ordering the same
to be directed to the Coroner, according to Law: And the Law in this particular
being well known to every Lawyer, is a strong Argument, That such failure of
the Judges in their duty in so plain a Case, proceeded from Corruption rather
than Ignorance, as will more fully appear by what follows.

In Hillary-Term following, several others of the Defendants pleaded to Issue
to the said Information; after which the Attorney General obtained a Rule of
Court to amend the Record as he should think fit. The Defendants moved against
this Rule, but in vain; and hereupon Mr. Attorney made a suggestion on the
Roll, That Mr. Pilkington (now Sir Thomas Pilkington) and Mr. Shute, two of the
Defendants, were Sheriffs of London at the time of the Plea pleaded;
notwithstanding which, he prays the Venire facias may be awarded to the
Sheriffs; which was done, and entered upon Record accordingly; and so that
Issue, as to the Sheriffs, was continued to Hillary-Term following.

The Sitting after Hillary-Term, a Record and Writ of Nisi Prius, returnable in
Easter-Term following, was brought down to be tried at Guild Hall. Upon calling
the Jury, the Lord Gray of Werk, one of the Defendants, challenged the Array,
for that two Knights were not returned upon the Panel; which Challenge was
allowed by the late Chief Justice Saunders, and the Trial for that time put off.

According to the Law, and the Course of the Court, that Record and Writ ought
to have been returned and filed in the Crown Office, and no new Venire facias
ought to have issued out for returning of a new Jury before the first day of
Easter-Term; and there ought to have been fifteen days at the least between the
Test and Return of such Venire facias, otherwise the same, and all the
Proceedings thereupon, ought, upon Motion to the Court of King's Bench, to be
quashed: Yet notice was given for Trial of the said Cause to be had within
fourteen days after the beginning of Easter-Term, upon a Venire facias Jur'
Test in Hillary-Term before; whereby, if the Postea, or Record of Nisi Prius,
wherein the Lord Grey's Challenge, so allowed as aforesaid, had been filed, it
would have appeared that there had been concurrent Process of the same nature
upon the said Information, which was illegal; and upon showing such Process had
issued out, the Court must have adjudged all Proceedings thereupon to be set
aside, either before or after Verdict.

After Notice of, and before the Trial, the Defendants by their Council
endeavored several days to move the Court, That the Writ and Record of Nisi
Prius last mentioned, might be filed, and for a Copy thereof; but could not be
heard, by reason of Trials at Bar for several days, that hindered it; and
thereupon they moved at the Side-Bar, and the Judges bid the Council move the
Court; which could not be done until after the Trial, by reason aforesaid.

At the Trial, which was the 8th of May, 1683. before any of the Jury were
sworn, two Challenges to the Array were in due manner made: The one was to this
effect, That Sir Dudley North and Sir Peter Rich, who returned the Jury, were
not Sheriffs of London: The other was, That the matter to be tried was, To try
Sir Dudley North 's Title to the Sheriffwick; showing in particular, how his
Title would be in question: So that it appeared the Jury then returned was to
try, Whether he had Title or not to be Sheriff.

The Chief Justice Saunders overruled both these Challenges as frivolous:
Whereupon the Defendants by their Council moved him to seal their Bill of
Exceptions, which they tendered him in Court ready ingroned for that purpose*
but he then refused to seal it, and promised to do it at his Chamber, or to
that effect.

Hereupon the Trial went on, and the Defendants were found guilty by direction
of the said Chief Justice, upon proof made, That some of them had continued
together after the pretended Adjournment, and Proclamation made by Sir John
Moore, then Lord Mayor; and that others had been at Guild Hall before such
Adjournment, and others after all was over, the least breach of the Peace not
being proved against any of them; and, amongst others, Mr. Bethel was found
guilty, although he was not present at any time, at or near Guild Hall, when
the pretended Riot was committed.

Within Two or Three days after this Trial, the Defendants, by Sir W. Williams,
and Sergeant Thompson, their Council, made application to the said Chief
Justice Saunders, to Seal the Bill of Exceptions which had been tendered him in
Court at the Trial, which he in a great rage refused, saying. That he was not
such a Fool, to put his Seal to that which would set aside all had been done;
or to that effect.

The next day the Defendants, by their Council, moved the Court of King's
Bench, That the Postea, or Record of Nisi Prius, upon which the Lord Grey's
Challenge had been allowed, and which was in the Custody of Mr. Ward, a Clerk
of the Crown-Office (who Prosecuted for the King) might be filed; To which, the
Judges then Sitting (viz.) Sir Thomas Jones, and Sir Francis Withens, answered,
That it had been moved several times before, but was denied: But upon opening
the Cause, they acknowledged the Motion to have been reasonable, if it had been
moved before the Trial; and that if it should be now granted, it would set
aside the Verdict. And then it was told them, That it had been moved before the
Trial; But yet the Court would order nothing therein.

Not long after, the Defendants Council moved the Lord Keeper North for a Writ
out of the Chancery, to be directed to the Chief Justice Saunders, to command
him to Seal the said Bill of Exceptions; which he refused to grant, although
such Writ is the Subjects Right, and is in the Register of Original Writs.

The Defendants being thus denied the benefit of the Law, were in Trinity Term
1683. for this pretended Riot Fined severally, as is underwritten, by Sir. Tho.
Jones, and Sir Francis Withens, then Judges of the King's Bench, were forced by
Imprisonment and otherwise to pay the same.

Marks, l. s. d. Sir Thomas Pilkington. 500 Slings by Bethel, Esquire 1000 666 13 4
Henry Cornish, Esquire 1000 666 13 4 Samuel Shute, Esquire 1000 666 13 4 Sir Thomas
Player, 500 333 6 8 Samuel Swynock, 500 333 6 8 John Deagle, 400 266 13 4
Francis Jenkes, 300 200 Richard Freeman, 300 200 John Jekyll, 200 133 6 8
Robert ^aye, 100 66 13 4 John Wickham, 100 66 13 4 Sum total, 4100

Besides what the several Defendants above-written have paid for their Fines,
they have been at very considerable expense in defense of themselves; and in
their Imprisonments, and have, to their great cost, this present Parliament,
prosecuted a Writ of Error before the House of Lords, by virtue whereof, their
Lordships have reversed the Judgment given against the Defendants, as
erroneous, and the said several Fines having been paid into the Exchequer, the
Defendants are informed, That the King is bound by the Laws to repay them upon
exhibiting their Petitions requisite in that behalf. Vide 34. H. 6.51: Brook
tit. Petition 3.


Now, forasmuch as the Proceedings against the Defendants were for the most
part illegal and arbitrary, and the Original Contrivence to subvert the Rights
of the City, and to insare the Defendants, was openly managed by Sir John
Moore, and Sir Dudley North, and their adherents, and the whole Intreague was
carried on by a Confederacy between them, the then Judges of the King's Bench,
and the late Lord Keeper, as plainly appears by what is before related,
designedly to subvert the Liberties of the City of London, and to oppress the
Defendants for doing their Duty; and forasmuch as the said Fines never came to
His present Majesty's use, and if His Majesty should pay the same, the Nation
would in the end be the sufferer, and not the particular persons who did the
wrong: It is humbly laid before this present Parliament, to consider the
manifest wrongs the Defendants have suffered by such illegal and ^^ju^^
Prosecution, and to make Them, their Executors, or Administrators, Restitution
of all their Damages, out of the Conspirators Estates.

LONDON. Printed in the Year, 1689.


