THE Case of the JEWS stated: OR The Jews Synagogue Opened. WITH Their
preparations in the morning before they go thither, and their doings at night
when they come home: Their practices in their Synagogues And some select
actings of theirs in ENGLAND, upon Record.

LONDON, Printed by ROBERT IBBITSON, 1656.

The Case of the Jews stated, OR, The Jews Synagogue opened.
THe Jews had near 500 Synagogues in Jerusalem, and many in all the Cities of
Judea; And from time to time as they are dispersed among the Gentiles labor to
build them Synagogues among them; The 48 Cities of the Levites first began
them, in which Jews called Archisynagoges were instead of Levites and Prophets.
In their Synagogues they dispute and preach sitting. The Elders sit it Chairs,
the meaner sort in seats, and the meanest of all on the floor upon mats. They
pray in their Synagogues standing, and sometimes sitting.

When they were in England (as Matthew Parris has recorded in 34 H. 3.) the
Jews used every year to steal a young Boy (the child of a Christian, and to
circumcise him, and then in their Synagogue sat in a solemn Assembly, choosing
one of themselves to be Pilat, who out of their Devilish malice to Christ and
Christians condemned the child, and crucified him to death; and this was
discovered at Norwich, where they circumcised a Christian child and called him
Jurnin, and condemned him to be crucified, it was discovered, for which four
Jews being convicted were drawn at horses tails, and hanged on a Gibbet, and 18
Jews were drawn and hanged for thus crucifying of one Hugh Lincoln. There were
banished 1605 11. in 18. Ed. 3. and their houses was given to the Master of the
Rolls. By the Statute they were to wear all above seven years old, pieces of
woollen cloth on their breasts to be known.

In the morning before they go to their Synagogue, the Wife is to waken her
Husband and the Parents their Children, who after thirteen years of age are
subject to their Laws. They are to awaken before day, that they may make their
morning prayer whilst the Sun is rising, and not later, for then they say is
the time of being heard, from Lam. 2. 19. They then frame to sadness for
Jerusalem, and pray for the rebuilding of that City. They say when they shed
tears in the night the Stars and Planets mourn with them, and if their enemies
decree any thing against them, those tears will blast it, from P^a. 56. 9. And
that if any rub his forehead with those tears it will blot out certain sins
there written, They say that in the beginning of the night all the Gates of
Heaven are shut, and that there are evil spirits then sent into the world which
hurt all they meet, but after midnight the Angels are commanded to open Heaven
again, and that the Cocks in the World hear that voice, at which they clap
their wings and crow, at which they use these words, Blessed art thou, O God,
Lord of the whole World, who have given understanding to the Cock.

They use filthy blasphemous words when they go out of their chamber to the
stool. They say they must not touch their bodies before they have washed their
hands in regard of the evil spirits which have rested in the night thereon, and
that if they should touch their eyes they should be blind, or if their ears,
they should be deaf, the nose dropping, the mouth stinking, the hands scabbed,
if not first washed, because their hands are venomous if not washed first,
first they pour water three times on the right hand, then three times on the
left, then wash them, and after the face, and mouth, and then they say, Blessed
be thou O God our God, King of all the world, who have commanded us to wash our
hands.

When they come to the Synagogue to their mattins, they endeavor cheerfulness,
They make clean their shoes at the door, and he that has Pantables must put
them off, and at their entering in, cast in every one a halfpenny at the least
into the treasury, and then bow themselves toward the Arc in which the book
of the Law is, using certain words out of the Scirpture, as in Number. 25. 5.
Psalm. 5. 7. and others, expressing a high esteem of the House of God. Then they
begin to pray out of their Common Prayer book, in which their prayers are in
Hebrew, in meeter, and after their first prayer they say 100 Benedictions
grounded on Deuteronomy. 10. 12. Now Israel what does God require of thee, they read
not Mahschoel but Meahschoel, he requires 100 which they have short, and twice
a day repeated.

1. For the washing of their hands. 2. For the creation of man. 3. For that
they are made full of holes, one of which if should be stopped they should die.
4. A confession of the Resurrection. 5. For understanding given to the Cock to
discern day and night asunder, and with his crowing to awake them. 6. That God
has made them Jews, or Israel^tes. 7* The Masters that they are not Servants,
The men that they are nor women, the women that God has made them according to
his will. 8: That God exalts the lowly. 9. That he makes the blind to see.
10. That he raises the crooked. 11. That he cloatheth the naked. 12. That he
raises them up that fall. 13. That he brings the captives out of prison. 14.
That stretches the world upon the waters 15. That prepares and orders the
goings of man. 16. That has prepared all things necessary for this life, 17*
That girdeth Israel with strength. 18. That crowns Israel with comeliness, 19.
That gives strength to the weary. 20. That takes sleep from the eyes, and
slumber from the eye lid^, etc.

Then they pray to be preserved against sins, evil spirits, and ^vil men; and
confessing their sins, they comfort themselves in the Covenant made to Abraham,
saying, We are thy people, and the children of thy Covenant, etc. O happy we,
how good is our portion, who every morning and evening may say, Hear Israel,
the Lord our Lord is one God; gather us that hope in thee from the ends of all
the earth, that all the inhabitants of the earth may know that thou art our
God. Our Father which art in Heaven be merciful unto us, etc.

Then after some other short prayers they go on to their Sacrifices, and they
repeat an history of Sacrifice, and a prayer of the use of the Law, and how
many ways it may be expounded. And then pray for the re-edifying of the Temple,
and rising with great joy and acclamation, they sing a prayer of praise in hope
thereof.

Then they read a long prayer, which they conclude with the last words of the
Prophet Obadiah, The Savior shall ascend into mount Sion to judge the mount of
Esau, and the Kingdom shall be the Lords; Which they spoke in hope of the
destruction of Christians, whom they call Edomites, and of their own
restitution.

And in some of their private writings, which it is hard for any Christian to
come to the sight of; They speak very blasphemously of Jesus Christ, and say
that the soul of Esau entered into the body of Christ, and that Christ and
Christians are no better then Esau.

Then they fall to singing again, and after that to prayer again turning their
heads to the four corners and winds of the world, because the letter Daleth
signifies four, in their repeating the Lord is One, and Echad containing in
numeral letters 245. whereunto they add three, God our Lord is true, in all
248. so many members in man's body, they make so many short prayers, saying a
prayer secures each. They use words for charming of evil spirits, and working
miracles. And they have another prayer which they call Schone Esre, that is
eighteen, consisting of 18 particulars by which they think all sin is pardoned,
of equal esteem as the Papists have the Popes Pardons, when they say it, one
foot must stand on the ground as fully as the other, from Ezekiel, 17. Their foot
was a right foot, and in it they use these words, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of
Hosts, at which they leap up three times as high as they can; and they say that
he that speaks a word whilst the chief Chanter of the Synagogue says this
prayer shall have burning coals given him to eat after his death; And these 18
parts they say are for the 18. bones in the back bone, at the saying whereof
they all bend it.

After this follows a Prayer against the Jews revolted to Christianity, against
all Christians, saying, These which are blotted out, shall have no more hope,
and all unbeleevers shall perish in the twinkling of an eye, and all thine
enemies which hate thee, O God, shall be destroyed, and the proud and
presumptuous Kingdom shall quickly be rooted out, broken, laid even with the
ground, and at last shall utterly perish, and thou shall make them presently in
our days obedient to us.

Then they pray for themselves, and for their Proselites, and rebuilding their
Temple, the coming of the Messiah, and restoration of their Kingdom, and
pray for peace among themselves, at which they go backward three paces, bow
themselves, bending their head first on the right hand, and then on the left,
that they may not turn their hinder part on the Ark, and so with a slow pace
they return out of their Synagogues.

The Good-wife against her husbands return home, sweeps the house, that nothing
may (as they say) disturb his holy cogitations, and lays him a book on the
table, either the Penteteuch of Moses, or a book of manners to read, which he
does for about an hours space.

About eleven a clock his wife has prepared his dinner, clean meats purely
dressed, there is clean water, in which the household first washes, then the
wife, and last of all the Goodman, and must not keep on a ring on their finger,
for fear some uncleanness remain under it, insomuch that Rabbin Akiba, having
but so much water as would serve either to wash his hands, or quench his
thirst, he washed with it, and dyed for want of more to drink: Then the master
of the house cuts a cut of the cleanest and best baked part of the bread, and
then setting it down lays his hands on it, gives thanks, and breaking that
off he has cut, dips it in some broth, or some thing on the table, and eats
it, and then takes the loaf, and cuts for the rest, and the like for wine, or
other drink, except water. Their bread they have in that honor, nothing must
be set upon it, and they say that a Spirit called Nabal, is deputed to observe
such as (through negligence) tread it under foot, and to bring them in to
poverty. They say that Elias, and every man's proper spirit attends at the
Table, to hear what is said if they talk of the Law; but otherwise an evil
Angel comes, and causes brawls and diseases. They have several blessings they
use, and when they have done, there must not be one crum left in their mouths.
They pray in the place where they have eaten, or else they shall lose the
benefit of burial.

About five a clock, their Clerk, or Scholae pulsator, knocks at their doors to
give them notice of evening prayer, they go to the Synagogue and there they
pray, and then the chief Chorester or chanter, sings a prayer, and they all
sing the prayer of eighteen parts used in the morning aforesaid, and coming out
of his Pulpit, he kneels down upon the steps before the Ark, and all the people
fall down with their faces on their left hand confessing their sins, and
praying for mercy and pardon, and conclude with prayer, and return home again.

In their time of pawsing between their Vespers and their N^cturns, if strife
be between any, and reconciliation cannot be made, then he which cannot
reconcile his neighbor goes to the Common Prayer Book, and shutting it,
knocks thereon with his hand, saying Anikel^^, I conclude the business, as if
he should say, I conclude praying, till mine adversary be reconciled to me,
until which thing be effected, they may not pray further, though for diverse
days together, when one party is stubborn. These prayers are much against
Christ and Christians, and for the coming of their expected Messi^s.

At supper they behave themselves as at dinner, going to bed they put off their
left shoe, before the right, and in their prayer Psalm. 4. 5. must be their last
words, Commune with your own (...) on your bed, and be still, and if they
cannot by and by sleep, it must be repeated over until they can, because they
say thereby their sleep shall prove good to them. They lie with their heads
toward the South, and their feet toward the North that they may be fruitful
(as they say) in male-children? And their chamber morals are so lascivious
written upon their walls, as is unfit for chaste ears, besides their base words
that they use against Christ, and against Christians.

1 Cor. 16. 22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus, let him be Anathema
Maranatha.
FINIS.

