THE CASE OF The Ladies Margaret, Catherine, and Elizabeth Mc Carty, Daughters
of Calaghan late Earl of Clancarty.
THe said Calaghan, Earl of Clancarty, gave his Council instructions to draw a
Settlement of his Estate, and therein to Charge the same with Four Thousand
Pounds Portion for each of his Daughters, but he suddenly dying intestate of an
Apoplexy, before the said Settlement could be got ready, his said Daughters,
who always were, and still are Protestants, were l^ft unprovided for.

By the said Earl's Death, his Estate of the yearly Value of 9000 l. descended
to his Son Donogh, now Earl of Clancarty, then under Age, who was so sensible
of what his Father designed for his said Sisters, that, to satisfy them, and
as a further Tie upon himself to provide for them, when he came of Age, he by
Deed charged his said Estate with 4000 l. Portion for each of them.

The said Estate being much encumbered, a great part thereof was extended, and
possessed by Creditors, after the Death of the said Earl, and the Countess of
Clancarty, the now Earl's Mother, kept out of her Dower, or Thirds, from the
time of his decease, which happened in the Year 1676, until the Year 1682, at
which time she had Judgment to recover a third part of the said Earl's Estate
for her Dower, and thereby also recovered 6280 l. for her Damages for the
detention of her said Dower for so long a time.

The said Countess, at the request of her Son, the now Earl of Clancarty, to
whom she was Guardian, paid several Debts, which were charged upon the said
Estate, and engaged to pay 2000 l. part of the Marriage-Portion of the Lady
Hellen, her Daughter, another Sister of the present Earl of Clancarty, left
also unprovided for by her Father, which Sum of 2000 l. and the Debt so paid,
and discharged as aforesaid, amount to 5784 l. 17 s. 8 d. as by the Report of
the Atturney-General in Ireland, and the Lords of the Treasury in England ready
to be produced, may appear.

Before the said Countess or Daughters could receive any of the said several
Sums or Portions, the said Earl's Estate was seized into their Majesty's Hands,
on account of the late Troubles.

The House of Lords in England, in the Year 1690, had such a consideration for
the Case of the said Countess, and her Daughters, that they made a Proviso for
charging the said Estate with the said Countess's Debts, and 4000 l. apiece to
her three Daughters, in a Bill, then depending for vesting the Forfeitures of
Ireland in his Majesty, for the use of the War, but the Parliament was
Prorogued before the said Bill received the Royal Assent.

The said Countess thereupon petitioned his Majesty in 1692, and an Order of
Reference was thereupon made to the Atturney-General of Ireland; and, on his
Report, a Reference to the Lords of the Treasury in England; who reported the
said Countess right to 6280 l. for detention of her Dower, and also to the said
5784 l. 17 s. 8 d. which so satisfied his Majesty of the Justice and Equity of
her Pretensions, that on the 23th Day of March, 1691/3. he was graciously
pleased to order the said Sums to be paid her out of the Rents and Profits of
the said forfeited Estate; which Order meeting with unusual and unexpected
Delays in Ireland, her late Majesty, of ever blessed Memory, gave the said
Countess a Letter, under her Royal Signet, or Sign Manual, bearing Date the
11th Day of July, 1693, to pass Patent, in order to receive the said several
Sums out of the said forfeited Estate; and likewise gave Assurances, that the
said Countess's three Daughters should each have the same Portion of 4000 l. as
was designed them, and as she gave to her eldest Daughter; but before the said
Countess, or her said Daughters could have any benefit of the said Grants, or
prevail to have the same pass the Seals, the whole Estate was granted to the
Lord Woodstock, who had better success in passing Patent, without any the least
provision for the said Countess or Daughters, or any notice taken of her said
Grants, or of several Caveatestentered against the said Lords passing Patent of
the said Estate.

The said Countess, having lived some Years in Misery, and being quite spent
and fatigued by her Solicitation about this Affair, and worried by Creditors,
who, upon the Credit of this Debt, advanced Money for the managing and carrying
on her said Business, and for the Support of her self and her Daughters; and
seeing by these Disappointments, all her Credit failing, and no way left her to
pay what she owed; or to keep her self or her said Daughters from the greatest
Distress and Want, she died, leaving her said Daughters in a most deplorable
Condition, without any the least Subsistence, and exposed to all the Calamities
that can attend Persons of their Age, Sex, and Circumstances.

Therefore the said Ladies, Margaret, Elizabeth, and Catherine, being all
Protestants, do humbly address themselves to the Honor and Justice of the
great and wise Council, the Parliament of England, for Relief in their most
deplorable Condition; especially having received Encouragements to hope for it
from their Majesty's, and the most noble House of Lords in favor of the
present Case, as it is here set forth, by granting them the like Proviso in the
present Bill, that the House of Lords in the Year 1690, ordered to be added to
the Bill, for vesting the forfeited Estates in his Majesty for the use of the
War; or otherwise, to give leave to bring in a Bill for charging their
Brother's Estate, with their Portions and Mother's just Debts or any other
Fund, in such a manner as to their great Wisdom shall seem meet.

And the Parties to this Case, have this farther to say for themselves, That
they are so many innocent Persons and miserably necessitous to the highest
Degree of Distress; to which may be added, the Consideration of their Sex and
Quality: In all which Regards, over and above the Equity of their Pretentions,
they hope to be found proper Objects of Christian Charity, Humanity, and Common
Justice.

THE CASE OF The Ladies Margaret, Catherine, and Elizabeth Mc Carty, Daughters
of Calaghan, late Earl of Clancarty.


