THE CASE OF THE PURCHASERS of some LANDS, belonging to the Corporation of
Malmesbury, in the County of Wilts, by Leases for 21 Years.
THE Borough is an Ancient Borough, and had several hundred Acres of Land
given the Burgesses and their Successors by King Athelstane, 7 or 8 hundred
years since, which were confirmed by several succeeding Kings of England.

That King Charles the 1st, in the 11th year of his Reign confirmed the said
Charter, etc. and granted them several other Privileges; the Borough at first
consisting only of free Burgesses, but of late years there is an Alderman, 12
Capital Burgesses, 24 Persons called Assistants, Land-holders and free
Burgesses.

That about the beginning of the Reign of King James the 1st, the Aldermen and
12 Capital Burgesses usurped to themselves 13 several enclosed Grounds, part of
the said Lands which caused great Differences, and Lawsuits between them and
the free Burgesses; but about the 6th year of the said King, it was agreed
amongst themselves, that the 13 Capital Burgesses should hold the said Grounds
as long as they continued Capital Burgesses, paying 10 l. per Annum to a
Free School, and 10 l. per Annum to an Almes-House, but were often interrupted
by the free Burgesses, for that the said Lands ought to have been held (as they
were given) in Common.

That 4 or 5 years since a Quo Warranto was brought against the Corporation,
and prosecuted to Judgment, and entered, and the Corporation and Lands seized.

That some short time after the late King James the 2d did by Charter, (amongst
other things) grant to the Borough the Lands aforesaid, and named therein an
Alderman and 12 other Capital Burgesses.

That presently after the Persons within the Corporation cut down the Hedges,
and levelled the Ditches of the 13 Grounds, and made it Common, and claimed it
in Common, and denied the new Capital Burgesses to hold it, as it was formerly
held by the old ones.

That afterward a Common Hall was called within the Borough, there being
present all the Magistrates, and the major part of the free Burgesses, for
settling the said Lands belonging to the said Borough, as also the said 13
Grounds and other Agreements, and Bylaws, etc. And that then all things were
settled and agreed on by all Persons then present, (Nemine Contradicente) which
were many more than the major part of the said Burgesses, and for that there
had been several Disputes in former times, and then concerning the said 13
Capital Burgesses holding the said 13 Grounds to themselves, which ought to
have been held in Common, it was agreed that the said Lands should be Leased
out to Tenants for any Terms, not exceeding 21 years to raise Money to pay the
Corporation's Debts, reserving 50 l. per Annum, (viz.) 10 l. per Annum to a
Free School, 10 l. per Annum to an Almes-House, as formerly, as also 5 l. per
Annum to a Bell-Man, 5 l. per Annum to the Steward, 15 l. 10 s. per Annum, an
Addition to the Alderman for his Table, etc. the remainder for a Town-Stock.

That the same was drawn into Writing, and Signed by the major part of the
Corporation, and by 7 or 8 of the Persons who call themselves the old
Burgesses, some of them receiving part of the Fines, there being not above 2 or
3 now living that did not consent with the Common Seal of the Borough affixed,
which said Agreement was decreed in Chancery, and (amongst orher things) is in
these words, (viz.) That the 13 Grounds called the Burgesses parts, and all
other Lands and Rents being part, or parcel of the said 13 Grounds, or
thereunto belonging, and all other Lands held in severalty by the late Capital
Burgesses, shall from time to time hereafter be Leased out by the Alderman for
the time being, the High Steward, or in his Absence his Deputy-Steward, and
Assistant therein named, and the 4 other Stewards of the 4 several Companies,
or the major part of them, the Alderman for the time being to have a casting
Voice, and always to be one for any term of Years, not exceeding 21 for such
Fines, as they shall agree, provided the whole Rent reserved for all the said
Lands to be Let, shall be 50 l. per Annum at the least, clear of all things.

That the Alderman, and the major part of the Persons appointed to make Leases,
did make Leases under the Common Seal of the Borough, to Tenants for valuable
Considerations, reserving the 50 l. per Annum, Rent as aforesaid, which Tenants
to their great Costs have improved the said Grounds, and some of them have
burnt, baked 4 of the said Grounds, and sowed Wheat on them at Michaelmas last,
now worth near 200 l.

It is intended on behalf of the old Burgesses, upon the Report of the
Committee of the Bill, for restoring Corporations, to move the House to alter
that Clause in the said Bill, that provides for all Lessees of Lands, etc. and
get a Clause inserted, to destroy the Tennants Leases, without satisfying the
Money paid by them, for Fines and Improvements, although the Leases were made
by the major part of the Corporation, as also by seven or eight of themselves
as aforesaid.

The Tenants hope that the Parliament will not insert any Clause to make void
their Leases, they being Purchasors on valuable Considerations, as also sowed
their Corn peaceably, being matter of Title, and for the Reasons aforesaid.

One W -- A -- tho one of the Lessors, and a Party to the Agreement and Decree,
is now Solicitor against the Tennants, and (as we are informed) has wrote a
Paper of the Case, with a great many voluntary Mistakes, and Misinformations.

The Tennants are willing to accept their Fines and Improvements.


