A TRVE COPY Of a bold and most peremptory LETTER, SENT To the Honorable
Earl of Salisbury, By A. B. C. etc. To mittigate his prosecuting of Recusants.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by B. ALSOP, dwelling in Grubstreet. 1641.

A true Copy of a Letter, etc*
MY LORD,
Whereas the late unapproveable, and most wicked design, for the destroying of
his Majesty, the Prince and Nobility, with many others of worth and quality
(attempted through the undertaking spirits of some more fyery and turbulent,
then zealous and dispasionat Catholics) has made the general state of our
Catholic cause so scandalous in the eye of such, whose corrupted Judgments are
not able to fan away and sever the fault of the Professor from the possession
it self; as that who now is found to be of that religion, is persuaded, at
least in mind, to allow (though God knows as much abhorring as any Puritan
whatsoever) the said former most inhumane, and barbarous project: And whereas
some of his M^jesties Council, but especially your Lordship, as being known to
be, as the Philosopher terms it, a primus motor, in such uncharitable
proceedings, are determined as it is feared, by taking advantage of so foul a
scandal, to root out all memory of Catholic religion, either by sudden
banishment, Massacre, imprisonment, or some such ^table ^^^ations, and
pressures; and p^r^^^s by decreeing in this next Parliament, some more cruel
and horrible laws against Catholics, then already are made.

In regard of these premises, there are some good men, who through their
earnest desire for continuing the Catholic religion, and for saving of many
souls, both of this present, and of all future posterity are resolved to
prevent so great a mischief, though with a full assurance aforehand of the
loss of their dearest lives; you are therefore hereby to be admonished, that
at this present there are five, which have severally undertaken your death, and
has vowed the performance thereof, by taking already the blessed Sacrament, if
you continue your daily plotting of so tragical Stratagems against Recusants.

It is so ordered, that no one of these five knows who the other four be,
for the better preventing the discovery of the rest, if so any one by
attempting and not performing, should be apprehended.

It is also already agreed, who shall first attempt it by shot, and so who in
order shall fellow. In accomplishing of it, there is expected no other then
assurance of death; yet it will willingly be embraced for the preventing of
those general calamities, which by this your transcendent Authority, and grace
with his Majesty* ^e threatened unto us all, and indeed the difficulties herein
are more easily to be digested, since two of the intended Attempters, are in
that weak state of body, that they cannot live above three or four months.
The other three are so distressed themselves and their friends, ^as that their
present griefs (for being only Recusants) be much dull all apprehension of
death? None to be blamed in the true censuring of matters, for the undertaking
hereof: For we protest before GOD, we know no other means left us in the
world, since it is manifest that you serve but as a match, to give fire unto
his Majesty (to whom the worst that we wish, is, that he may be as great a
Saint in Heaven, as he is a King on Earth) for intending all mischiefs against
the poor distressed Catholics. Thus giving your Lordship this charitable
admonition; the which may perhaps be necessary hereafter, for some others your
Inferiors, at least in grace and favor, if so they run on their former
inhumane and unchristian rage against us, J cease, putting you in mind, that
where once true and spiritual resolution is, there, notwithstanding all
dangers whatsoever, the weak may take sufficient revenge of the great.

Your Lordships well admonishing Friends, A. B. C. etc.

POSTSCRIPT.
IT may be your Lordship will take this, but as some forged Letter of some
Puritanes, thereby to incense you more against Recusants. But we protest upon
Our Salvation it is not so, neither can any thing in human likelihood prevent
the effecting thereof, but the change of your course toward Recusants.

FINIS.

