A Catalogue of the Petitions, ordered to be drawn up and presented to the
Honorable House at their next Session.
A Petition of the Brewers and Butchers, that the former may be incorporated
with the Vintners; and the latter with the Apothecaries. A Petition of the
Banbox-men and Trunk-makers, that the Athenian Mercury, and all Weekly Papers
of the like nature be continued. A Petition of 20000 Tradesmen, that if their
Wives offer to draw Bills more than once a Night upon them, they may be
empowered honorably to reject them. A Petition of the Quack-Doctors, that the
Constables may not disturb the industrious Night-walkers in the Strand,
Fleet Street, and Cheapside. A Petition of Doctor S-lm-n, and two more of the
Fraternity, that they may have the sole Benefit of a new Religion, by them
lately invented, and that no other Persons presume to interlope upon them. A
Petition of the Quakers, that their bare Word may be equivalent to Swearing;
and Nonsense to true Reasoning; and likewise that it may be lawful for them to
fornicate out of their own Tribe. A Petition of all the married Women in the
Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, that the
Dog Days be immediately repealed. A Petition of the moderate Divines, that the
30th. of Jan. and 29th. of May be discarded out of the Almanac, as being great
Eye sores to the Godly Party. A Petition of the Maids, that the Mosaical Signs
of Virginity, be declared void and unnecessary, and unfit to be required under
the Christian Dispensation. A Petition of the Ribbon-Weavers, that
Shoulder-Knots and Pantaloons of happy Memory be revived. A Petition of the
Booksellers, to declare, that Licensing of Books is Popish and Superstitious,
and destructive of the Liberty of the Subject. A Petition of the Inhabitants of
White-Fryars, that their Bounds be enlarged, that they may have room enough to
receive the broken Merchants and Tradesmen that daily flock in to them. A
Petition of the Poets for a speedy Restoration of Claret, and the utter
Banishment of little diminutive Pagan Bottles. A Petition of the Midwives and
Highway-men that Savin and Hemp be rooted out of the Commonwealth. A Petition
of the Glasiers and Tallow-Chandlers, that it may be lawful to break Windows on
Thanksgiving-days, where no Lights are set out. A Petition of Dr. Otes, that
every Evidence for the future shall be obliged to repair to him for a License.
A Petition of the Prisoners in Newgate, that their Confessions and dying
Speeches may not be Printed before they are Hanged. A Petition of Dr.
Partridge, that no Almanack-maker pretend to prophecy for the Government but
himself. A Petition of the Fiddlers, that kicking down Stairs, and broken Heads
be reckoned no Scandal. A Petition of the Players, that they may be allowed
Plurality of Wives, in order to be sure of a Maidenhead once in their Lives. A
second Petition of the Booksellers, that when a dull heavy Book lies upon their
Hands, it may be publicly burnt to promote the Sale of it. A Petition of Bully
D -- son, and the rest of his Brethren, that Swearing and Roaring be adjudged
as effectual a Sign of Valor, as Fighting. A Petition of several young
Gentlemen of the Inns of Court, that a Statue be erected to Dr. Wall, at the
public Charge. A Petition of the Northern Attorneys, for a speedy Conclusion
of the War, because at present the People cannot spare Money to go to Law. A
Petition of the Harlots, that Pluralities be denied to all married Women, of
what Degree or Quality soever. A Petition of the Coffee-Houses, that they may
be privileged in Fornication up Stairs, and for Treason and false news below.
A Petition of the Country Parsons, that, in Favor of them, the House will be
pleased to take off the additional Duty upon Tobacco. A Petition of the City
Clergymen's Daughters, that Increase and Multiply be made the Eleventh
Commandment. A Petition of the Knights of the Post, that all the Pillories in
the Kingdom be burnt on the next Thanksgiving-Day. A Petition of the Tradesmen
in an about London, to prohibit the Exportation of Leather, lest if the War
should continue a Year or two longer, we should be forced, like our Ancestors,
to join Leather in our own Defense. A Petition of the Drawers about the Temple
and Covent Garden, that they may be allowed to lie a Bed till Eleven. A
Petition of the Royal Society, that the Comb-makers, Mouse-Trap Men, and
Athenians, be suppressed, as Interlopers upon them. A Petition of the
Chimney-Sweepers, that they may have the scouring of all Ecclesiastical
Consciences every Spring and Fall. A Petition of the City, that none be
suffered to talk Treason, but such as are well-affected to the Commonwealth. A
Petition of the College of Physicians, that the Importation of Dutch Doctors be
prohibited, as prejudicial to the Manufacture of our own Universities. A
Petition of the Tailors, that Leave be given to bring in a long Bill to promote
new Fashions. A Petition of the Seamen, that the Parsons may not meddle with
Politics, but every one keep in his own Element. A Petition of the Barbers,
that they may be made Free of the Church, since the Divines have usurped upon
their Trade by turning Trimmers. A Petition of the Country Innkeepers, that
the Soldiers quartered in their Houses would be content to Tap their Hogsheads,
but not their Wives or Daughters. A Petition of the dissenting Divines, that
none shall be admitted into the Class, but Men of strong Lungs, and stronger
Backs. A Petition of the Anabaptists, that they may be empowered to erect a
public Dipping Pond at Lambeth Ferry. A Petition of the Painters, that they
may have leave to enter all the Conventicles in Town, and draw their respective
Pastors in their proper Colors. A Petition of the Wastcoateers of Wapping,
that it may be lawful for them to go sixteen Months with Child, in Cases of
Necessity. A Petition of the Printers, that all Distinctions of Bawdry,
Blasphemy and Treason be utterly abolished. A Petition of the Proctors of the
Commons to have Fornication encouraged, that they may have the sole punishing
of it afterward. A Petition of the Claret-drinkers, tha Red Noses shall
qualify People for all sorts of Preferment. A Petition of several Mayors and
Aldermen, that Money be adjudged to comprehend both Wit and Sense, and good
Breeding. A Petition of several Recorders in the Kingdom, that making of
Speeches be utterly abolished, unless Bulls be tolerated. A Petition of the
Ordinary of Newgate, that all sorts of breaking be declared sinful, but
especially Sabbath-breaking. A Petition of the Orphans, that the Monument be
hung with Mourning once a Year, and that at the Expense of the Chamber. A
Petition of the several Ladies living near Westminster, that all Deserters be
brought to condign Punishment. A Petition of the Athenians, that they may have
a Patent for their new Invention of making second hand Spira's. A Petition of
the Parish Clarks, that a Day be set apart to Celebrate the Pious Memory of
Hopkins and Sternhold, and that the City Poet draw up the Service for the Day.
And for your Worships then we'll pray,
For eke, for ever, and for ay.

FINIS.

