A MORE TRUE AND An exacter Relation Of the Battle of KEYNTON, Then any
formerly.

Written by T. C. One of the Chaplains in the Army, and sent to a friend of
his, a learned Divine in this City, and by him published for the satisfaction
of all such as are desirous to be informed in the truth.

Printed for Edward Blackmore, at the Angel in Paul's Churchyard. Novem. 26.
1642.

An Exacter RELATION Of the battle of KEYNTON, then any formerly.
Reverend brother,
I Know (as you writ to me) there are several and sundry relations of that
bloody battle near Kynton, some speaking after one manner, and some after
another, respecting their own particular oblig^tions and engagements more then
the truth, or to satisfy the world of the truth. And therefore according to
your desire I have sent you although a short yet an exact and a true relation
of that battle. Upon the twenty third of October a day dedicated to the honor
of Ignatius Lyola the father and founder of that cruel and cursed order of the
Jesuits, the Iesuited Papists, the last year Kindled that horrid and horrible
rebellion in Ireland, rist, robbing, burning, and murdering all the British
Protestants they could ceaze upon Affirming (as has been often deposed) that
like the sufferings were that day allotted and destinated to all the Protestants
in England, and that they did nothing but what they had commission to do from
England, under the great seal. And now this year upon the same day of that
month they have by their facinating Charms, clothed with the Specious
garments of maintaining the Protestant Religion, removed his Majesty, hinc
illae lachrymae, to engage himself in a bloody battle against the
Protestants, the true professors of the Gospel and their Religion, which began
on that day, being Sunday, (a goodly Sabbath days work) about two of the
clock, and lasted until dark night. A crueller battle was never fought in the
Christian world for the time.

The Kings Army had the advantage both of the ground and wind: and besides
those at Windsor, and Worcester, we wanted the assistance of ten Troops of
Horse, six Companies of Dragooners, four Regiments of Foot, eight Pieces of
Canon, with great store of Ammunition, which came not unto us till Sunday at
night, and Monday, lying the nights before at Stratford upon Aven, and in
several other parts thereabouts: which in all probability, and so it was
confessed amongst them, the Enemy had notice of by Sir Faithful Fortescue,
who broke faith, and treacherously fled the next day unto them.

Their Army was about twenty four thousand, Horse and Foot, and we had but
thirteen Regiments of Foot, thirty eight Troops of Horse, and about a thousand
Dragooners.

The Enemy came down Edgehill, where was fought a bloody battle in the
reign of Edward the fourth, and there they set in order their battle, in a
fair Plain at the foot of the Hill, leaving the Hill for a retyring place for
their Army, as indeed it was, and much befriended them.

Our Army was cast into three Brigades, the two wings being slanked with our
Horse, and placed upon a little round rising hill betwixt them and Keynton. In
the left wing were five Regiments under the several commands of the Lord
Wharton, the Lord Mandevill, Colonel Cholmley, Collonell Essex, and Collonell
Fairfax, who brought up the rear, our horse that flanked us were incountred by
Prince Roberts troops of Cavalliers as they wheeled about the hill to get to
our wagons, so that they fled disorderly upon our Foot in the left wing,
routing and making four Regiments of them to run away, to wit, my Lord
Whartons, my Lord Mandevils, Colonel Cholmleys, and Colonel Essexes Regiments:
some few Commanders retyring into the maine Body, Colonel Fairfax his Regiment
then being the only Regiment remaining of that wing, and most of his common
soldiers also took example by their fellows, trod out their footsteps, and
ran too.

And although their Colonel Sir William Fairfax, Lieutenant Colonel Moyneines,
Sergeant Major Pane, with Captain Willshire, Captain Bland, Captain Rogers,
Captain Laiton, and the rest of his Captains and chief Commanders did their
utmost endeavor to have stayed them, yet they could not stay above an hundred
of them, with whom Colonel Fairfax, his Lieutenant Colonel, Major, and the
Captains with their Officers marched very courageously with their Colors in
the face of the enemy to our Canons, and fetched them all off but one, and so
had done that also, had they had horses.

This Brigade then being thus shattered and routed, the first cause being more
the cowardice of our Horse, then the valor of the enemies. The Lord of Hosts
showed his power for our deliverance; for then Prince Robert, instead of
falling upon our right wing, fell to plundering our Wagons, killing our
Waggoners, and murdering of poor Country women and children: So that those
which came to be spectators of other men's tragedies, acted their own.

At which time, the several Regiments under the command of the Lord General,
the Lord Brooks, Lord Roberts, Colonel Hollis, and Sir John Meldrome, seconded
by the several Troops of Horse that flanked that Brigade, fell on resolutely,
and made way by dint of sword through the maine Body of the Kings Army, where
every Commander, especially the noble General, the Earl of Essex, showed the
part not only of a valiant General, but of a resolute and courageous
soldier, riding from place to place, and encouraging his Army on every side,
when bullets flew about his ears as thick as hail; so that in a short time the
Lord General of the Kings Army, the Lord Willouhby, the Lord Aubigny, Sir
Edward Varney the Standard Bearer, Colonel Lunsford, Colonel Vavasor, Colonel
Stradling, Colonel Rodney, Colonel John Munroe, with many other great
Commanders and resolute Soldiers, were either killed or taken prisoners, their
whole Regiments consisting of many valiant Souldies, most being Papists,
fighting for their Religion, which their Commanders told them was now at the
stake, were cut off, very few escaping to bring news to their Country of the
rest.

Which the Welsh and Northern men that should have made good this breach
perceiving, they all fled, without any command, showing very good footmanship,
and verifying the Proverb, that One pair of heels is worth two pair of
hands: And although His Majesty himself rode after them, persuading them not
to dishonor their Country, but to stand to it bravely; yet they would not so
much as look back, but said, they were come not to fight, but to convey His
Majesty to London, for which their Captains promised them the riches of that
City, and if he would go with them, they would make good their promise: so
that now all the Enemies Troops and Foot were dispersed, two Regiments only
excepted, and some of those Troops which had been plundering our Wagons with
Prince Robert, who returned through by-ways, and retired unto Edgehills.

Then our Army possessed themselves of the ground the enemies had at the first
to fight in, stood there all night, and drew back some of the Ordnance the
enemy had taken before, with some of theirs.

The next morning very early we drew up our men in order of battle, and
prepared for another onset: which they perceiving, flourished upon the hills
with some Troops of Horse, until they had gotten their Foot, Canon, and
Carriages away, and then they all went toward Banbury, miserably rifling and
pillaging the Countrry as they went, and we toward night retired to Warwick to
refresh our selves, the most of us having had neither meat nor lodging for two
days and two nights before.

Thus have you a true relation of that battle of Kynton, where were slain above
3000. and what ever may be said, yet the King lost four for one, for upon
Tuesday my self, with some friends and neighbors of Kynton and Welsborn,
viewed the dead then unburyed, and where there was one in our quarters, there
were four in the enemies. I pray God to send peace amongst us, that I may
never see the like again.

T. C.

FINIS.

