A DISCOURSE FOR A KING AND Parliament:

In four Sections.

Demonstrating I. The inconsistency of a Free State with the situation of this
Country, and constitution of the people. II. Mischiefs incident to the
continuance of their endeavors that act in order thereunto. III. The
advantages probably attending a composure with the King of Scots. IV. Resolves
to the Grand Objections that seem to obstruct it.


By a moderate and serious Pen.

Bono servire Principi optima libertas.

London, Printed for G. Bedell and T. Collins, and are to be sold at their shop
at the middle- Temple-gate in Fleetstreet. 1660.

To Sir A.H. and those spirits that pretend to Liberty in Democracy.
Gentlemen,
I Design Liberty; not the name, but the thing; I assert not that which some
Divines call Monarchy, but Kingship, as it relates to the Law of England, not
that of the Jews; not in order to the Greatness of a single person, but to the
happiness of the whole people; That Regal Politic Government, to whose
protection I am entitled by my birth, for the preservation of my freedom in
person and estate, and that, with more assurance than possibly can be secured
under the government of the many who often call that justice, and without
remedy, which in truth is Faction.

Next, I abhor bloodshed, and deem one party in all wars guilty of murder;
a crime which as it cries high for vengeance, so it cries loud for peaee, which
he only endeavors that that acts no injury; I recommend this to balance you
in the way to Peace, lest you ballot us into the field of blood; perhaps your
own as well as ours; for though you Vote at ease upon the hazard of our bodies,
yet possibly in time, the evil may happen upon the Artist. If but one of you I
convert, I have a full reward; for perhaps I may save a soul; however as the
text speaks, I shall hide a multitude of sins.

Yours in the way of Truth and Peace, W. C.

THE Introduction.
OUR affairs laboring under variety of factions, nothing seems more rational
to effect a due Composure, than the advice of the whole People; for that which
binds all, ought by all to be debated.

Now, though the Parliament upon Convention is not so regular as may admit of
no exception, yet since the whole people are not capable to be personally in
Counsel, and that with respect to our fundamentals this way of Election has the
repute to be the Representative of the Commons, and that with respect to the
present, it is not possible to have an Assembly nearer the foundation, and more
passable to give forth the sense of the people; Therefore as it were an high
insolence in any few to impose a Government upon the whole; so will it argue a
strange inquietude of spirit, if single persons shall not acquiesce in the free
major Vote of their judgments that shall be so assembled; for though in truth
the major Vote may be the worse, yet becomes it not a single person so to
judge; for thereof the consequence will be, that every man's single judgment
shall be the rule of his obedience, which needs must engage us as to confusion
upon the variety of judgments that will happen, so to war for the last
decision of the matters controverted, persons of such opinions being not
capable to be overruled by any other judicature.

Though therefore it becomes sober men to acquiesce in their determinations,
yet may it become all men that are concerned in the Result, to contribute their
assistance in the way; That things being at full discust, and laid open
according to truth, thereof they might be enabled to give a more sound
judgment. Upon this account, have I presumed to the public, without the least
reflection upon past miscarriages, to enquire considering the present state of
our affairs, What settlement may best conduce to our happiness in the future;
wherein I know not how I can design to my self any other interest than Peace,
for though I have happened to displease one party, yet I never actually obliged
the other, and do secure my self no lasting comfort upon earth but in the Union
of Both.

Now after a sad revolve I find my self confined in this sense. That,

SECT. I. That which we call a Free State, is inconsistent with the situation
of this Country, and constitution of the people.
I Design only to enforce, plain, sensible and modern arguments, as a word in
season, applicable to the present, and leave the notional to our book-men;
whose volumes calculated for all climates swell big against the Evils of the
Rule of Many or Democracy.

Mine shall be appropriate to this Island, which indeed is a large Continent,
abundantly populous, and governed by the influence of a sort of people that
live plentifully and at ease upon their rents, extracted from the toil of their
Tenants and servants; In Law-phrase they are instil'd the minor Nobility, in
English Gentry, each of whom within the bounds of his own estate acts the
Prince; he is purely absolute; his servants and laborers are in the nature of
his Vassals; his Tenants indeed are free, but in the nature of Subjects, whom
he orders in his Courts, draws supplies from by his Fines, and awes by his
power and Oaths of fealty to infinite submission. The more his Manors are, and
the more indulgent he behaves himself, like a good Prince, the larger is his
Territory, and the more awful his commands. A Neighbor more rich and potent,
gives check to his inferior Neighbor, and brings his petty Prince-ship into
awe; and perhaps he again is awed by a greater and more powerful in estate or
friends. But none of these with respect to his quality and estate will admit a
parity with his inferior Neighbors, much less his Tenant or Dependant.

Into this Rank do our Commanders, Citizens, and Burghers aspire to be
enrolled; so that no sooner by Arms, Office, or Trade, do they acquire a
competent stock, but forthwith for Land it is disposed; and then disowning the
Title of Soldiers, Citizens, or Burghers, they take to themselves the degree
and name of Gentlemen, with Arms not improper; for England within it self has
been so often shuffled from high to low, that scarce any Artificer but may find
his name in the Heralds book, though not his Pedigree, which ingenuity and
goodwill may easily supply: And thus being aequipt with a Title and Estate,
they set up sutably the dominion within their Territories, which none can
dispute, because they have no right to intermeddle with what whosoever has or
does within himself: For by Gentry, I intend not only such as are so in blood,
but so in quality; such as live easefully, and like Princes upon the labors of
the dependants.

Now that this sort of people have by influence and in effect the Command of
this Nation, at this instant appears evident, in this, That they sit at the
Helm in the Supreme Council; they command in chief at Sea and Land; they impose
Taxes, and levy it by Commissioners of the same quality: Out of this rank
felect we Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, and all that execute the authority of a
Judge; By the influence of which powers, they so order all elections to
Parliament or otherwise, that the whole Counties follow their respective
factions, and the Commonalty in the Votes are managed by them, as the horse by
his Rider.

So that as the Agrarian or interest of land is principally in this rank, so is
the consequence thereof, Dominion and Command, which imboldens them to such a
height of spirit, natural to our Gentry, as they are too apt to undervalue
persons of inferior quality, Burgesses, and Mechanics, with whom to
inter-marry by our old Law, it was a disparagement for a Ward; and this spirit
of generosity cannot be suppressed, it is so rivited in their nature, but by the
eradication of their persons, or at least, their qualities; to which barbarous
effect, I have known some Grandees have pleased to vent a sense.

For indeed the establishing of a Free State is otherwise desperate; and
therefore it was the course that the prevailing Mechanics amongst the Swisses,
were enforced to take: How else shall we be levelled to a parity, which is of
the very essence of a Free State? For as Titles and Honor are incident to a
Kingship; so equality in place, degree, and b^rth, are to Democracy; unless
where in case of Office, for the time only they are entitled to precedence.
Reduced must the Gentry be to the Condition of the Vulgar; Commons already are
they in Title, which is but a fallacy of the name, and deludes our Statists;
for indeed they are so only Representatively, being rather the Tribunes and
leaders of the peoples strength, and the governors of their purse, than purely
Commons. Nor will it suffice to obtain this parity, unless with it also we
establish our Supreme Power in a body corporate, compacted, and permanent; such
as is that of London, where possibly the Grandeur of that City, had it spirit
and design, might erect it self into a Free State, and might by that great
Magazin of treasure and men there imbodied, give Law to the whole people
scattered as they are in a large continent. Having first reduced some meet
Cities, Forts, and Castles, which being Garisoned from the Head Colony, will
awe the Countries, and order them into a vassalage competent to make up a
Free State: But we of the Gentry, shall neither have the honor of the name,
nor benefit of the thing. 'Twill be instiled the Commonwealth of London, not
of England; and our pay must be as they impose, and our liberty as they
vouchsafe it; only in this it will be the less agreeable, that we are subject
to our Inferiors. This Discourse, though it seems Drollery, yet has not bin
without its jealousy among the wise, when in time that great City shall be
compelled by our confusions to know its own strength, and by that its interest,
when necessity to preserve it self, will imbolden them to lay hands on others,
and so enforce Ord^r upon them that can give none unto themselves.

From this Embrio have issued those Commonwealths which are so famed in
notions; as those of Rome, Carthage, Athens, Lacedemon, Corinth, Thebes, etc.
Great Cities of that name, which have subdued their adjacent Territories, and
denominated the dominion, wherein only those of the freedom, Citizens and
Denizens had vote or power; The Gentlemen, as we of the Countyes, being purely
tributary to the Grand City; unless we transplant our selves, renounce our
Titles, and so by degrees advance into the honor of a Burgess, as we now do
exercise our junior issue. And such are at this day the famed Commonwealths of
Venice, the United Provinces, the Swisses, not to instance in those petty
States of Genoa, Rugasa, Geneva, etc. All Commonwealths, most denominated from
those principal Cities which give the Law to the adjacent Provinces. Those
indeed of the Hollanders and Swisses, though they derive not so directly their
Title from one City, yet are they in substance of the same composure, being
only an united Body of corporated Cities, combined in one for mutual defense
against invaders; but of an equal power to impose upon the adjacent
Territories, situate under the awe of each respective City, or Town-Garison.

It falls not within my memory that there ever was, or at this day is a
Free State in the world, that is managed by the Gentry inhabiting at large, or
by any people not combined within the Jurisdiction of their Walls, except the
Grisons, who are a scattered people, of a mean quality, having long since
disowned their Gentry, without walled Town or Garrison; It Is a small Territory,
possibly of extent to an inland County; Upon Emergencies, the whole people at a
set day meet in the open air, where the major vote, as we Knights of the
shire, cries up the Magistrates, and determines War. Their confusion makes them
easy for conquest, were their Country worth it, and not secured by the united
Cantons.

Now to apply the premises; Can we suppose the Gentry that are now in power,
will admit a parity, will level their degree and dominion to a proportion with
their Copyholder? Nay, will renounce the wearing of a Sword, and learn to make
one? will submit to become tributary to the Neighbor Colony? Then possibly may
we aspire from the state of Kingship to a free state in Clownship; or at best
from the free-giving of sudsidies to the Majesty of a Scepter, to the
forc'd-payment of excise to the High-mighty Burgher; Such as was that High and
mighty Butcher, who of late was Commissionated by the Swisses as one of the
Chiefs to be Godfather to the French Kings son.

But 'twill be said, as Plato fancyed his Community, and Sir Thomas Moor his
Utopia, so may we a Rotation, thereby to gather up a new Model of a
Commonwealth out of the scattered Gentry in the nature of a House of Commons.
Truly my friends, if you will try new experiments, I wish you had other
subjects to practice upon, than the Estates, and Lives, nay, the very Souls of
Christians: We have run the loss of those, and the hazard of these too long
upon the hopes of a Chimera in the brains of some. The word Liberty has
deluded us into patience, and patience since 48. has brought forth not less
payments, but more servitude.

We are obstructed, you will say, so that we are not permitted to foster up our
Babe to full perfection: And still are you like to be; for the wise foresee the
Evil of such a State, and contrive with as much design to prevent it, as the
unadvised to bring it on: Yet from 48. to 53. you had it from the Nurse, and
might in five years have set it upon its Feet, but that you found the sweet of
engrossing Power to your selves: No indeed, could it stand without you, which
might be evident from the high disgust and the great scorn you were reproach't
with, when it was dissolved; Not one bloody nose in the defense of that High
and Mighty State; Nor scarce a good thought since of any of the persons: For
your late twice advancement, I suppose, e're this you are sensible, that it was
only to serve a turn, as a thing fit to be made a property: Do'nt you believe
that it was desire of your Rule, but of a farther change, that inspirited the
people against the Army, when you possibly as next at hand, mounted the empty
Saddle, but you were not warm in the seat, before with a public leave you were
unhorst, witness the Bonfires that might have lighted you to the Lands end, if
you had dared to come among them.

Now, though I disown those irregular transactions, yet they strongly tie me in
this sense, that as this Government was originally founded in a single person,
so the Genius of the people still adheres to the same foundation. Examine we
the various revolutions that have happened, Britans, Romans, Saxons, Danes, and
Normans; or more nearly the changes in their descendents from the direct line
to the Collateral; or nearer, the times of insurrection, deposing Kings, Edward
and Richard both the seconds of the Name, and we shall find Kingship still in
fashion: Nay, that of King John is more notorious; for when the people had in a
sort dethroned that King, and sworn allegiance to Lewis of France, yet when
John dyed, the people not only expelled the forraigner, but having power in
their own hands, they Crowned his Son an infant, without power or adherents:
And not one syllable in all our Chronicles, of a design or endeavor to erect a
Free State; No not when Wat Tiler, or Jack Straw revell'd it with their
Clownes. Is our Genius changed? you will find it, No. Did you not observe it in
the last Protector, who in a single person bearing up but the shadow of
Kingship, was so seconded by a full Representative, that had he not bin
betrayed by his own pusillanimity, and the power of a corrupted Army, he had
bin sufficiently secured against the State Zelots.

It Is not the sense or interest of a few, that can long sway a Nation. If the
public spirit be averse, at the long run it will prevail. The more dispute
there is with that spirit, the more embittered it will be found; for whatever
we dream, even when the multitude have the power, the command is in a Few. The
active spirits lead the herd, and ingross the place, the profit, and the sway:
This in a generous mind begers disdain, and that faction; for when all are
equal, thousands think themselves as deserving Rule, as those that carry it. To
satisfy all, it is impossible; to please few, displeases the most. Our
transactions since 48, have made this as sensible, as we have made our selves
despicable. To conclude, The English Gentry have Spirits pure, naturally just,
and Generous; like fire aspiring as a Pyramide, from low to high, and it will
never rest, till it contracts it self unto a Unity at top: So God is One, or he
were not God, nor could he rule the world. He that likes not that president,
but delights in the Rule of many, let him begin a President in his family, and
he may there possibly have enough to do.

SECT. II. Mischiefs incident to our endeavors for a Free State.
THough we cannot fix a settlement of a State, yet possibly by Artifice and
Contrivance some may continue a Rotation in disorder: As Boys at Football, now
one, then another tripping up the heels, and carrying away the Ball: Some
perhaps that outrun their fellows, may hit the mark, and suck the sweet, till
being full-gorg'd, they grow Lazy; and some empty ones that are more active,
mount their Rooms. In the mean time, we their tributaries are attacht with
these mischiefs.

1. We shall constantly live under the affrights of an invasion from abroad;
for while any of that Royal Line survive, we may well judge that they contrive
a Restoration: And our Statesmen have bin so kind to Him, as not to give his
Home-party a full oblivion; but against true policy and president, do continue
them disabled, and so in discontent. Hence is it, that we must be always
jealous not assured of our next Neighbor, till an equal sufferance begets an
equal sense.

2. While we groan under this fear, it is of necessity that we continue a
considerable Force at Land and Sea; which lying idle, will corrupt as standing
water in a Pool, and endanger a new combustion, as they are blown up by their
present Master: However like our old Lord-Danes, they will be burdensome to
the Country by their Quartering, and consequently odious: Or otherwise to keep
the Soldiery in action, we must either affright them, upon the discovery of a
new-fain'd-plot, or engage them in a foreign War; To this are the united
Provinces enforced, to prevent Kingship in the Prince of Orange; though their
situation secures their Burgher ships much stronglier than can ours; for their
Dominion consists chiefly in strong Carisons, Fortified Towns, and those in a
small circuit; should one or more of them be surprised by a busy Army, the
rest will take the Alarm, and prevent their progress by the force of Walls and
Bulwarks, not to be mastered but by Seiges tedious, and more expensive, than
ten such Princes can advance: But in England an open continent, he that
Commands the field, Rules the purse; for London is too rich to have courage,
and will more readily submit to the will of the Commander, than to the modesty
of his Army.

3. While we have such fears, and such an Army, we must continue contribution,
besides those great Customs and Excise, which impoverish us, though not so
sensibly, yet more bitterly than the Tax; for the commodity being charged, the
price is raised, and the buyer even almost in every thing that he eats, drinks,
or wears, pays the account. I remember when Mr. Pym that grand Patriot, upon
necessity but mentioning the word Excise in the House of Commons, was by a
young spirit, and not without applause, called to the Bar. What then we
esteemed Poison, we take now as Physic; but in that Age it seemed impossible
that a freeborn Englishman could have swallowed it. 'Twas begot in the
Low Countries with their State which makes them Free; that is, in Purse, not in
Privilege: for no English King dared ever demand, what they are enforced to
pay. Now consider we what benevolences, Sequestrations, five and twentieth
parts, a Tax of fifty subsidies at once, Fines and Compositions, Sales of
Kings, Bishops, Deans and Chapters, and Delinquents Lands, the two parts of
Papists, nay a share of our very charities to the distressed, besides constant
contributions that have been levied: How has it all been devoured by the
Armies, whose belly indeed has no bottom! yet what Arrears to them do we owe?
what a Debt have we contracted? it is judged not less than Three Millions!
Lessen the Army we dare not; then must we supply it in proportion, or permit
free quarter which is worse; for the Soldier must live, and he cannot by the
air. Whence shall we acquire this vast Sum? not less certainly can our
constant charge be, than two millions by the year, besides the interest of the
great debt which swells daily; we have the ill luck that none will Rebel, that
we may have Lands to Sequester, none to fell; Customs sink, and so will the
Excise. All for the future (if the Army continue) must be extorted by
contribution from the starveling Countries. But I doubt, as there is little
Will to it, so there is less ability; Their patience has bin exercised to the
height; Take heed; Nescit plebs jejunatimere, as ambition has no bounds, so
necessity has no Bar.

4. Pay; How is it possible they should, if Trade fails; Our subsistence in the
Country, hangs sensibly on commerce in the City. Observe it in one commodity;
How can the Gentleman expect his Rent, when his Tenant cannot sell his Wool? If
wool be not sold, how can the poor (millions of poor) be set on work? If the
poor be not set on work, they must steal, or starve; If the Cloathyer can vent
no Cloth, how can he buy the Wool? If the Merchant have not a free and
well-ordered Trade, how can he buy cloth? The miscarriages of these times has
spoiled the Trade of our Cloth beyond the seas; so that unless we return into
order, and awe our Neighbors to a suitable correspondence, it is not
recoverable. For other trades how they sink, may be evident from the daily
ruptures that are spoken of; and more fully from the 2000. sail that we have
lost fince the Spanish War. Now, the commodities we have thence we take in upon
retaile from our Officious Neighbor, who knows handsomely to foment the
difference, and reap the advantage. Our gold walks beyond Sea more freely than
in England. Foreign Trade we pay for dear; Home-commodities we sell cheap.
It Is not possible but the wealth of England sinks in value considerably every
year: No Trade can be, till there be a settlement; No settlement, while we
dance every day to a new Whistle. There are ten models in proposal, and every
faction is with blood ready to avow his way the best. While we thus stagger, we
may shortly expect to be accosted with the same dilemna, that a poor labourer
put upon my Tenant the other day, from whose fold, week after week he had stolen
a sheep; he freely confessed the Theft, and told him, work he had none, nor could
get any, though he offered to labor at less value than he was wont; worth he
was no more than his earthen pot; steal he must; hang him he might, but he his
wife and five children would not starve, while they had hands to take.

5. Were it possible to keep down the spirit of the English, which has been so
embittered by the violent instruments of our Statists, what shall we think of
Ireland, who already Act in a sense altogether averse to our new model? Nay,
what of Scotland, a free people, no way in Vassalage to us, unless upon the
account of our late Conquest: Can we think those two Kingdoms will truckle
under this? Certainly, they wait but opportunity, and when it comes, 'twil cost
us dear: Their interest undoubtedly is Kingship, whereby they may possibly hope
to have an influence upon the sweets of our Court. While thus we are imbroyl'd
with fears and Wars to subdue our tributaries, our purses and blood must be at
the expense, and our enemies abroad will work their interests.

6. Was not the maintenance of our fundamental Laws, the pretense of our
quarrel? Found we not the spirit of the Nation rowz'd up upon the found of the
Trumpet? Popery, was it not decry'd? and Religion, Protestant Religion adjudg'd
to be in danger? were we not called up to the Battle upon the account of Zeal
with a Curse ye Meroz? Now if we truck on in the search for a Free State; as
for Religion, so much of it as we may call Protestant, must of necessity turn
to Wantonness; for our divisions are so great already, that we dare not
exasperate by advancing Discipline. Nay, indeed we cannot if we dared; for the
most active of our Statists (if they have any Religion) it is that of the
Sectary, which they own as the maine supporter of their Model, whose interest
it is, to give Licentiousness to all. As for Laws, those which we adored for
the excellency and antiquity, must of necessity be altered in our Freedoms of
person and estate, wherein true liberty is principally concerned: Thus, if we
have a free state in the way of a House of Commons always, or a Council in the
interval; that Sovereign Court will take power to impose Taxes, and to imprison
persons: Now by the Law of England no freeman could be taxed or impressed, but
by Act of Parliament solemnly and regularly past by the three estates, and he
entrusted the elected to consent only so far as by Common Council of the three
estates should be agreed: In passing whereof, the Commons were as the Tribunes
of the people, as their Bulwark against high payments and impressures demanded
by the Prince; To whose occasions they would not contribute, unless well
satisfied of the necessity and disbursement; which granted, they had the same
concernment therein with the whole people, that is, To pay, and to be impressed.
Now when the Commons are grown Sovereign, who shall we call upon to be our
Tribunes? for the same persons that have the power to raise, have in effect the
privilege to disburse. And how little will they value those small shares which
they pay in their Rents, when they shall assuredly receive large salaries by
their employments? For believe it, though every Statesman has not preferment,
yet the most considerable will be in pay, and those are leaders to the rest.
Upon this account it is, that while a Parliament sits, we shall be in constant
pay; for the leaders will strain for a design, rather than want a preferment;
And we the people may perhaps complain of the Reiterated burden; but to whom
shall we appeal? As for our persons, by our known Laws, we could not be
imprisoned, but by a regular proceeding in a course of justice, or a full Act
of Parliament. An arrest there ought to be, and thereupon a Bayl, unless the
cause appeared not baylable by the Warrant; when the accused had freedom to
make defense upon perusal of his charge; if injustice or malice appeared in
that prosecution, his reparation was ready and usual. Otherwise than thus,
could not a House of Commons originally proceed, unless possibly upon their own
members, which is disputable; but an impeachment must be drawn, and a trial had
before the Lords as a Court of Justice. Should the King, or the Council commit
an English man, it was upbraided as an Act of Tyranny. What becomes of this
eminent freedom under a freestate, when upon slight suggestions of a spightful
Neighbor that is in power, the Sergeant at Arms seizes us with his exorbitant
fees! No bayl, no Habeas Corpus, no regular way of justice to do us right. And
there possibly, after a twelvemonth, if we have good friends, and can humble
our selves to our potent Adversary, may we get discharged, but without amends
or knowing of our Crime: And this course must be continued upon Reason of
State. Lo thus while we cajol our selves with the name of Freedom, we lose the
thing, and become free only to be made slaves.

SECT. III. The happiness of a composure with the right Heir of the Crown.
INstance I might more, but these being plainly and sensibly mischievous, may
suffice. Enquire we now into the way of cure; And things certainly are reduced
to that ill temper, that it is far more easy to demonstrate what may be evil,
than what will be good; but comparing times with things, I doubt not to
evidence but that a closure with the way of Kingship is much rather to be
embraced as that which may be good, than that confusion, which certainly will
be evil; And dream we not of closing the difference by erecting a single person
of a new line; for that will lessen the party, in that it makes the quarrel
personal, and will the more disgust the spirits of this generous people, in
that they are subjected to their Equal, who to retain his usurpation, will be
enforced to accumulate those violences whereof we had sad experience under the
old Protector; otherwise he shall soon be made the object of our contempt, as
was his son with his easy and gentle way of acting; Nor will the afore-recited
mischiefs be at all prevented; for our fears will be the same, and consequently
our charge. It rests only that we close with the right Heir of the Crown upon
terms conducible to assurance; And yet not such as may so much abridge the
just rights of the Crown as to advance a licentiousness in the people; for with
sober men, who weigh the reason of things, a Negative in the Prince, is a most
secure preservative of Peace to the people; and the people have as much comfort
under the Protection of his just Prerogative, as they have benefit by their own
privileges; Nor will unreasonable terms that are imposed be farther continued
than they are enforced; only therefore securing against revenge, let the old
Laws be the standard between both, and those duly executed, will sufficiently,
and without entrenchment secure both; From such a closure probably will result
these advantages.

1. Peace ensues, and thence Plenty; No jealousy of a pretender to invade us
from abroad; Ireland, yea and Scotland will acquiesce by way of subordination
to the Crown; the Royal party must submit to the terms agreed; For if the Head
be satisfied, the body has neither power nor title to dispute it farther.

2. Parties reconciled, what necessity is there of a Land-Army? the Militias
without charge in every County being secured in hands of confidence, so that
such of the soldiery who make war their trad, may have leisure to be employed
at Sea, where needful it will be that we continue a considerable Fleet, as the
Walls of England; and to preserve that Sovereignty at Sea which is our ancient
right; the rest being paid their arrears, may cheerfully retire to their wives
and friends.

3. This horrid Tax, yea and the Excise may shortly cease; for I shall anon
evidence that a Revenew may be advanced without either of these, fully
competent to support the Court-expence, and the necessities of the Public;
only at present it will be needful that we impose one great Tax, suppose we a
twelvemonths contribution to be paid at once, therewith to pay the arrears of
the Army, and disband them honorably; These arrears must at last be paid, if
we intend justice to those that are in power to command it; nor can there be
any way but this closure to get them paid; otherwise, as their pay grows, so
will their arrears, and increase daily; better were it that at once we take a
strong purge, than live contributing till we consume beyond the cure of physic.

4. A Peace with foreign Princes is a certain consequent of this closure,
having a Prince so related in blood, nay of the highest extraction in the
Christian world, and he grown formidable in the conjunction of all interests;
for he rules a people that have been disciplined in war, which on both sides
have given such evidence of a courage, that will be the terror of the world,
were we drawn off from worrying our own bowels; were we all united in love, as
in subjection; which possibly by time and a discreet receding on each side may
be accomplished; as then we shall be awful, so shall we be courted to
alliances, which may be accepted, as may conduce to the interest of the Gospel:
From hence flows Trade, and thence wealth to an Island; that Commerce which we
hold now by retaile, and run with high hazards, may enrich us at the first
hand, and without danger; nay, possibly we may turn the balance, and our
greedy neighbor may take his turn in the lighter scale.

5. We may attain to a condition wherein we may dare to own Religion, suitable
to those of the Reformed party beyond the Seas; and thereby beget a confidence
in them of our reality and adherence to the interest of the true Protestant
Cause, when upon account of the Grandeur of our State, and our opportune
situation we may become the head of that Party to enlarge the Territories of
the Gospel, and awe in a Toleration in our ways of worship, where they are most
exploded; Let the Gospel have free passage, and it will make its own way; for I
disown the promotion of it by the Sword, as totally unchristian, and bequeath
it to the Turk.

6. This closure will in some sort clear the integrity of such as first engaged
in the war; what was in pretense, but the defense of Liberty and Religion,
which was afterward modeled into words by a Solemn League and Covenant, which
if any, was the Good Old Cause, wherein the Covenanters swore to persist, and
not to suffer themselves directy or indirectly, by whatsoever combination,
persuasion or terror, to be divided or withdrawn, whether to make defection to
the contrary party, or to give themselves to a detestable indifferency or
neutrality in the Cause which was then judged so much to concern the glory of
God, the good of the Kingdoms, and honor of the King, but that all the days
of their lives zealously and constantly they would continue therein against all
opposition, and promote the same according to their power against all lets and
impediments whatsoever; which Covenant they then declared to make in the
presence of Almighty God, the searcher of all hearts, with a true intent to
perform the same, as they should answer it at the great day when the secrets of
all hearts should be disclosed; which Covenant though possibly at first upon
account of taking it without the Kings consent, might not satisfy some, as to
the manner of imposing, yet since the matter of it may in substance be
approved, and that the now King of Scots has there freely engaged therein, and
may possibly consent to an Act to that effect; will it not seem high perjury,
and that we have juggled with the world and our own souls, if we acquiesce not
in the enjoyment thereof, which indeed comprehends all that reasonable men can
design; how shall we answer it to the great God, in whose presence it was so
solemnly entered with hands advanced? How scandalous is it to the Protestant
Cause? as if our Religion were only fit to be made a property to serve a turn;
nay, how glorious will it be to those brave supporters thereof, that maugre the
artifices of headstrong Statists, the Enthusiasmes of deluded Sectaries, the
violences of a tumultuous soldiery, they vindicate their first principles, and
abandoning the suggestions of a private interest, to intend the Public; That
the world might bear witness (for so they covenanted it should) with their own
consciences of their loyalty, and that they had no thoughts or intentions to
diminish his Majesty's just power and greatness.

SECT. IV. Resolves to the grand Objections that seem to obstruct it.
GRand Objections I expect to be thrown in against this closure; I shall offer
at some solutions, which possibly improved, may manifest that the difficulties
are not so considerable, as those that argue with a prejudice, pretend.

Purchasers of Bishops and Deans and Chapters lands are persons many and of
quality, and being in hazard to forgo their purchases, they will become
discontented, and charge the State with falsehood, upon whose credit they
disburst their moneys.

prefixed form by a Divine right? when the four grand pretenders, Papal,
Episcopal, Presbyterian and Independent shall reconcile the same texts, which
all of them quote to a contrary tenent, possibly the world may be satisfied to
close with that which is approved. In the mean time it becomes discreet Rulers
so to manage that interest, that there may be Order in the Church without
Confusion to the State.

Now as to us, if we inquire thoroughly, find we shall, that (whether it were
the Innovations of the Prelacy, or their scornful expressions of the Gentry, or
sharp prosecutions of some more popular of the Ministry, or their intrusions
upon the rights of the Common Law, that gave the occasion) The extirpation of
that Hierarchy had a strong influence in fomenting the first War, not therefore
improperly instil'd Bellum Episcopale. If this were so, and that the power is
gained by strange providence, even to a miracle without blood, into those hands
that first disputed it, that have engaged by Covenant to extirpate it, I cannot
but judge the restoration of the Hierarchy either in title or estate to be
desperate; much the rather since the King of Scots has so eminently bin drawn
to declare his sense that way, by engaging in that Covenant. And indeed since
by an Act with the Kings Fiat, they are disabled Votes in Parliament, the High
Commission, nay, all coercive power (to abrogate which Law, will be of huge
difficulty among the Commons) they have little left them but the Name, to
support which, so vast a Revenew is not expedient. And their persons, most of
them being now dead, and none succeeding to the estate, a Purchaser may enjoy
his Bargain with less reproach, than Delinquents Lands, where the Heir
disinherited, will lie always in the check.

Not that the Purchaser should only pamper himself by the miseries of the
times, and reap the full benefit of his fat b^rgain, but should contribute a
sum considerable for the securing of his Title. Thus, let him pay in to the
public use six years purchase of the full value, and then let his Title be
confirmed by a full Parliament. Intending this for Fee-simple, where there are
less interests, there may be a proportionable pay. The result of this will be;
A vast sum raised to the Public, without damage to the Purchaser; for in
substance he makes a new purchase: His Fee-estate with respect to the crazy
Title, is not valuable above 12. or 13. years purchase, and so it passes from
man to man. Now when by this new disbursement he has his Title secured, his
Fee-estate will be valuable 18. or 20. years purchase, and so to be sold from
man to man; so that what he pays in money, is repaid him in the value of his
estate. This or the like expedient, considering how low they paid at first,
what monyes they have raised since by Woods and perquisits; what sufferers we
have bin in general throughout the Nation; may satisfy with reason the most
greedy of those Purchasers. The unreasonable must be overruled; for the
private must be ballanc't by the public.

With this, that the Purchasers of Deans and Chapters Lands coming under the
Act only of one House, may be persuaded to advance a higher proportion, to
secure their Titles: And the monys by them paid, ought in justice to be
disburst for the advance of the Church in buying in Impropriations, being at
first designed for that end, to encourage learning. A lean maintenance will in
time produce a contemptible Ministry, even the meanest of the people, to the
infamy of our Church.

That if Kingship be restored, there must be a revenew suitable to the splendor
of the Court, and to support his great alliance, when a Free State occasions no
such expense; and the Kings revenew being now disposed, he will become a vast
burden to the State.

foot of the account we shall find Kingship a great ease to the public charge.
We allotted the old Protector no less than a constant Revenew of 1900000. l. to
support the Government; yet that sum at the years end cleared not the account:
Much more I aver is now collected year by year out of the bowels of the people;
and more we must, while we maintain an Army, or continue in fear, or engage in
foreign War, which our active spirits will be too too apt to imbroyle us in
from time to time, thereby some to feed ambition, others their purses. And such
a spirit we read of working in all Free-states, Ancient, and Modern.

Compare we it with the expenses of our old Courts; when the Kings Revenew in
Lands, Perquisits, and Customs, exceeded not 700000. l. a year, it adorned it
with a glorious Court, a noble aequipage for the honor of the Nation, and yet
paid off a considerable Fleet, which has not bin much improved by our vast
payments.

Sensible it is, that were the Crown Lands restored, and the Customs
moderately settled, though not so inhanced as they now are to the ruin of
Trade, thence might arise a sufficient Revenew to secure the Seas, and supply
the Court: With this, that upon Emergencies if a Free Parliament saw cause,
they might add a supply by the old way of Subsidy, or Contribution, if it seem
more equal; which being but once paid, and in a moderate proportion and assent
by a Free Parliament, and when Trade is free, and excise banished, would be
rather a sport, than a burden, in comparison of the monthly Tax.

Now for the Crown Lands, I can instance several Parliaments wherein they have
in re-assum'd, as not alienable, when a profuse Prince has bin misled by his
Court-Parasites, and finding his mistake, has given them up to the fury of the
people; for indeed those Lands are in the Kings hands by way of trust, wherein
his Subjects have a kind of interest; as well for safety, as for honor; which
may intimate the weakness of their Title who purchased the same from the
remainders only of the House of Commons. Yet for the sake of peace, why may
they not come to a discount? and being re-imburst their real purchasemoney,
with damages, discounting the mean profits, willingly yield up that broken
inheritance, wherein I and all true Englishmen may pretend some interest.
Something of the like nature may be offered for the recovery of those we call
Delinquents Lands. The late Treaty between France and Spain, gives a fair
president, where the contrary parties whose estates were Sequestered and sold,
were re-instated in the just condition as the Lands then were at the
promulgation of the peace, without any account for the mean profits.

These Crown Lands being thus reassumed, will supply the Court and those
dependances; and for their re-purchase, why may not the monyes raised from the
purchasers of Bishops Lands be employed that way; or part of it, which will
suffice? When the King wants more, let him be endeared to his people for a
supply; and that indeed was the good old way to redress our grievances, when we
bought it by our purses; and the bargain was no burden.

Religion will be in hazard upon a closure with the King; His Mother is of the
Romish party; He is now trained up amongst them; nor can he do less than
gratify the Popish with a toleration.

security of Religion; and for that part of it which is Protestant, this
closure seems the only way to secure it: But we are not to hearken to such as
cry up Religion, and design Faction; that cry out Zeal for the Lord of Hosts,
when they intend self-interest: To keep up a party, or an affected way, or to
be the ipse dixit of a Country; Religion has not at all prosper'd by undue
practices to advance it. It Is piety, meekness, patience, humility, and those
graces of the Spirit that convince and convert, when rigidness, censuring, and
the sword exasperate, and harden. But have we not a Parliament of Protestants,
and the Militia in their hands to secure their Religion? Has not Gods power or
truth evidence to secure it self?

Certainly, the education of this Prince among that party, is not of choice;
and shall our compulsion be termed his crime? How averse he has bin to the
documents of his Mother, fame has sufficiently made clear. Inquisitions there
have bin, and by him that was most concerned, and kept intelligence abundant,
as well into his Counsels, as his life; and never was he yet reproach't with
debauchery in Religion or converse. Nay, to a miracle, as if designed by God
for some great work, has he bin preserved in person, and kept incorrupt in
Opinion, against the sword on the one hand, and temptation on the other. A
change of his Religion, would doubtless have engaged him a powerful assistance
from the Romish interest; which hitherto has seemed rather to tire out his
constancy by sufferance, than to resent his misery. The Jesuit neither speaks,
nor acts indifferently as to his person; and you find not many of the Romish
way, that give him much applause, which argues a strong fear in them of not
much complacency in Him: It has bin their project, to crumble our Religion into
Sects; upon hopes, that men finding no steddiness in those sandy foundations
which are built on the giddiness of busy spirits, and false lights, may at
last fall off to their way of Popery, which seems more United upon account of
their severe discipline.

And now that God after so many years contrivance, should blow off on a sudden
their whole designs, and restore things by strange providence to their first
principles, and some likelihood of good Order in the Church, and peace in the
State, they seem confounded; and it is thought, will endeavor nothing more than
the confusion of the Prince, whose conjunction will secure it to posterity. For
well they know how he has bin lectured by his Royal Father, as well as tutoured
by experience; which may enable him as to be the wisest, so the most Religious
Prince. You may read it thus,

I do require and entreat you as your Father, and your King, that you never
suffer your heart to receive the least check against, or disaffection from the
true Religion established in the Church of England; I tell you, I have tried
it; and after much search and many disputes, have concluded it to be the best
in the world; not only in the community, Christian; but also in the special
notion as reformed; keeping the middle-way between the pomp of superstitious
Tyranny, and the meanness of fantastic Anarchie: Not but that some lines as in
very good figures may happily need some sweetning and polishing, which might
here have easily bin done by a safe and gentle hand, etc. To this sense spoke
he, when he had no more to speak. Now how in matters of consequence this King
has pursued elsewhere His Fathers documents, is sensible to him that reads and
observes: And here in this is as manifest as the Sun, and he that disputes it
has more prejudice than reason; and such singular Opinionists are not worth
that satisfaction. As for his Mother, she has had too much experience of the
English spirits, and their averseness to her way, as to engage her Son upon
that account to his ruin. If that way she cannot now manage Him, how can she,
nay, how dare she here? Nor indeed have her Relations in France, bin so
propitious to Him, as to endear Him to Her: Witness His expulsion thence.

the Royal Family and that party have bin so highly disobliged, that no Act of
Oblivion can secure the opposites against revenge: What refuge is there against
the anger of an enraged Prince, when he is once in power?

provoke, because we have begun? It Is a Rule indeed, That he that does wrong,
never forgives, but he that has wrong, may. The interest of revenge is
passionate, but the interest of profit arises from a passion that prevails
more. He Is foolish that anteposes rumor and empty passion, when it stands in
competition with his safety; and this Prince under the tutourage of affliction,
has bin educated in an Academy of Wisdom: He has eat hitherto as it were at
the Alms of Charity, having not a Title of assurance to the Bed, he sleeps on:
A course of living abominated by a Royal Spirit, were not Necessity a Commander
of all Laws: A Prince that has not personally bin disgusted as his father; not
knows he the face of many, that have bin instrumental to his hardships.

Now when a Prince from so low a depressure shall be advanced to the warmth of
Sovereignty, he will be so sensible of that great and sudden change, as to
judge such as have assisted in his restoration, have fully obliterated the
unkindness of their former oppositions; which perhaps too and not without
reason, may be attributed to the prevalency or the falsehood of some Grandees
now in the earth; or perhaps to, a mistake of the true state of things; for who
is he that is not subject unto Error? And if all mistakes should be corrected,
I know not what man might pass blameless. Much certainly of the mischiefs were
contrived and driven up by a secret under-working of men, whom God in mercy has
removed from being obstacles to our peace.

To speak home, Interest rules the whole world; and Princes as others, design
more the security of their own greatness, than a petty revenge that may hazard
it; especially upon a Quarrel of their Ancestorus, who being in Graves, can
make no address to move the passion. With us it is not, as in the case of
Amaziah, who slew those servants of his, that had slain his Father: There was
only a conspiracy of some few, amongst us there is engaged a grand Body of the
three Nations. Should the Act of Oblivion (for that I presume) be violated in
the example of one person, upon that account all concerned, would apprehend
themselves ready for the fetters; and what with fear, what with hate, such a
storm would hazard to be raised, as might shake foundations. And Majesty has
felt so much the fury of the people, that it will hardly give occasion to
encounter it again.

But for this, search we the experiences of the past Ages, and for presidents
we shall find two apt ones in the Histories of the two Grandfathers of the
present King, Henry the great of France was opposed in his just Title by the
Holy League; much the greater part of his Nobles were engaged to dethrone him:
The City Paris, Roan, and the chief Citadels conspired to his ruin; No less
than ten set Battles were fought against his person; Pasquils and reproaches
daily gaul'd him: Observe the issue; After a long contest, they were both so
wise, as to think a closure best: They consent to Crown him, to deliver that
high, puissant, and spirited Prince the power of the Militia: All subject
themselves by way of Allegiance, and he soders all by a full Act of indemnity
and Oblivion. Now being thus re-establish't, and in full Sovereignty, he was so
far from adventuring it upon a second hazard by any violation, that he employed
those very persons that were his main opposites in his Armies, in his Offices,
in his Councils: Nor do we read of one of those Leaguers, that ever suffered
affront or indignity by any reflection from that Prince: Nay, in his deep
wisdom he so indulged his Adversaries, that his own party began to Quarrel him
as unkind to them, whom notwithstanding he honorably protected, yet not so
eminently, as to raise jealousies.

Certainly, there is no remark in our Histories that so taints the memory of
our great Queen, as the death of the Queen of Scots, who flying Mutiny, came
hither as a distressed Princess, and was engaged Protection: But no sooner was
she in our custody, than she had restraints upon her, being denied the Royal
presence, which was so often promised her: Being thus against the Law of
Nations, neither protected, nor set free to seek relief elsewhere, she
conceived her self authorized by the Law of Nature to endeavor her escape; in
contrivance whereof she was discovered, called to judgment being a lawful
Princess, and no Subject, and by certain Lords prepared for that design, she
was in a private way condemned, and enforced to subject her Princely neck to
the bloody Headsman. This her Son then King of Scots, seems highly to resent,
menaces revenge, sends messages, makes vows, and all to prevent that fatal
st^ak, but to no effect. Observe the issue; Shortly Queen Elizabeth dies, and
those very Lords that Act^d personally in the M^thers Death, Court the Son to
the Crown, invest him in it, and he becomes established with all prerogatives
incident to the English S^epter, What? Acts he in the way of revenge? No; He
like a wise Prince feeling the warmth of so rich a climate, is so passionate to
establish his own greatness, that he not only forgets the injury of His Mother,
but manages his great affairs by the hands of those very persons that were
contrivers of it: Yet through her blood did he derive his Title. Nor do we
read of one of those Nobles or their progeny, that suffered diminution by any
resentment upon that account. If then those wise Princes that were verst in the
Art of Sovereignty, and invested with strong power, thought fit notwithstanding
to lay aside all animosities for the preserving their own Peace. What can we
imagine of a young innocent Prince, who never yet felt the power of
Sovereignty, who has bin trained up in succ^ssive sufferances, who comes in
singly, and as it were at the devotion of His Opponents. Is it possible that he
should so much oversee his own interest, as to endeavor a violation of
Oblivion; an Act that his most busy enemies would study to engage him in, to
color up a new Quarrel; an Act that would yield him in the issue at best, the
satisfaction of an empty and unprofitable passion, but by the miscarriage might
endanger Him from a Crown to nothing.

His wise Father that had bin beaten into the knowledge of the English spirit,
and foreseeing this Objection, Lectures his. Son thus, Let no passion (my Son)
betray you to any study of revenge upon those, whose own sin and folly will
sufficiently punish them in due time; but as soon as the forked arrow of
factious emulation is drawn out, use all Princely arts and clemency to heal the
wounds, that the smart of the cure may not equal the anguish of the hurt; Let
Oblivion be granted not only as an act of State Policy, but of Christian
charity and choice. It is all that I have left me, a power to forgive those
that have deprived me of all; and I thank God (writes the King) that I have a
heart to do it, and joy as much in this grace which God has given me, as in all
my former enjoyments, for to me it is a greater argument of Gods love, than my
pr^sperity; Be confident (continues he) that the most of all sides that have
done amiss, have done so not out of malice, but misinf^rmation, or
misapprehension of things; None will be more loyal to me or you, than those
subjects, who sensible of their errors, and our injuries will feel in their own
souls most vehement motives to repentance, and earnest desires to make some
reparations for their former defects: You may read more in the advice to his
Son, which truly I cannot transcribe without a high compassion and resentment;
The like said he at his last hour. But why doubt we? Is not the Militia in our
hands, the disposal of Commands and Offices? Is not the Council at our
recommendation? Who dares resist? nay, who can? If we shall admit a crime, and
so fear revenge, I doubt, Compounders and free Contributers, that have
strengthened the arm of the adversary, are in strict justice not altogether to
be excused; Certainly we have been so shaken upon all interests by the late
war, that nothing but apparent ruin can engage us to it again; And better is
it that all factions rest satisfied with what they have suffered, as the ^ate
of the times, than quarrelling upon old accounts to imbroyl our selves into a
new sufferance. He has a confidence much beyond mine, that either acting or
looking on in these transactions can acquit himself of all guilt; such a mask
has been cast over the face of things, such temptations, such force has
assaulted men during these dark contextures of affairs, that it is past man to
glide through all without a tincture of injustice; As it is beastly and
unchristian passionately to persevere in Error, so is it noble and Prince-like
to forgive where there is the acknowledgment of an Error: If we cannot trust
the nobleness of a Prince, nor the policy of government, nor the security of
Laws, what fence can we raise against a fear; shall we consume on, as incapable
of a cure?

Truth is, while we live with men we shall be subject to that, which is the
effect of their nature, Sin; nor is it possible to reap the more general fruit
of the best established policy, unless by compact we submit our selves to
some possible inconveniences; As men we can erect nothing perfect; fix we must
to that which seems most probable, and leave amendments to the experiences of
time; yet this I dare aver, that this Government by Magna Charta, and since,
has been so fortified with Laws as bulwarks to prevent the inundation of
Sovereignty: and that constitution is so regular and adequate to that design,
that as under the due execution thereof, the English man is born to the
greatest freedom of the Christian world, so no Prince ever attempted any
violation thereof, but at the long run, he suffered in that point of his
Prerogative, which let in the opportunity; Hence is it, that the rights of the
people have from age to age grown stronger against the Prince, and sometimes
have hurried his person to be a sacrifice, always his instruments; whereof few
in our Histories can we read, that contriving against the Law, have died in
peaece; If possibly one Prince, as King Harry by his high spirit sweeps all
before him, yet his Infant successor was enforced to make amends for his
violations; more easily may we dispute our rights with a single Prince, and his
trembling Agents, than a knot of Sovereigns that are backed with the sword.

Infinite hopes may we entertain that this Prince has been schooled to
understand his true interest; He has had glorious, though unhappy pesidents; He
truly is most potent that is so in his subjects, not over his subjects; that is
great in his people, not over his people; the one makes him contemned abroad,
and abhorred at home; the other makes him feared abroad, and beloved at home;
Foreign enemies can rejoice in nothing more than our self-combustions, while
we consume that glorious spirit in conquering our own bowels, which otherwise
employed, might be a terror to the world; Such exploits suit to the ancient
glory of the English; this self-murthering suites a temper that neither fears
God, nor loves man.

For Conclusion
It Is not possible so to acquit my self of every Objection, as to leave all men
satisfied, especially such as carry a Biasse of preferment, profit, or faction;
Men that have in design exorbitancies of power or wealth, will hardly with
arguments be reclaimed; and some have I known that have so long possessed their
heads with strong notions, that they are not capable to take in Reason against
them, and thereupon run on frantic in error till there be a Rotation in their
brains; such there are that with confidence so often have told a lie, that at
length themselves believe it to be truth; but with respect to the state of our
affairs, we are not in a posture to resent the interest or wilfulness of a
few, but the safety of the major part; let not the greediness or ambition of
some, hazard a destruction to all. It may suffice that the main obstructors are
the very persons that have most advanced themselves; If they retain double, to
what they were possessed of, it is much better, then with the generality, who
would rejoice in the quiet enjoyment of their own; where one has been improved
by the times, one hundred have been impoverished: For be it known, that such as
have been eminently active, and sweld in power and purchases are in number few
in comparison with the multitude, that have been either misled, driven on, or
not engaged; Nay I may aver, that even upon this quarrel the spirit of the
people has been so tired, that upon a just compute there is scarce one to one
hundred against a Closure.

Now then, Suppose we, all composition with the King decry'd; Suppose we him in
arms, bickt with a foreign force. Suppose in Ireland, Scotland: Nay, with us,
there are combustions upon that account. Suppose upon terms of power we are
awed to receive our Prince. Suppose the many for the sake of peace deliver up
the few as a sacrifice to the injured, and to ease the Public. What then? -- I
have done.
FINIS.

