A General Epistle TO ALL FRIENDS Who are Convinced of the TRUTH. With a Word
of Exhortation to Friends, To be diligent in keeping their Men's and Women's
Meetings, for the Service of Truth; With a Testimony to the same. Also, an
Invitation to all that come to our Meetings to hear the Truth declared, not to
rest in hearing, but to come into Obedience thereunto, that so their Souls may
be saved.

By Samuel Cater.

LONDON, Printed by Andrew Soul, and are sold at his Shop in Devonshire
New-buildings, near Bishops-Gate, 1680.

A General Epistle TO ALL FRIENDS WHO ARE Convinced of the Truth.
MY Dear and Well-beloved Friends every where, who are the Called and Chosen of
the Lord, to confess his Truth amongst men, and to bear his Name in
Righteousness in the midst of this Crooked and Perverse Generation, amongst
whom the Lord has planted us, who know not the Lord, neither are they
acquainted with the Operation of his Hand, neither can they perceive what the
Lord is now a doing, who has begun a great Work in the Earth, which none can
know whilst they hate the Light, and live in Darkness, and rebel against God's
good Spirit; from such the Vision is shut, and unto them the Book is sealed,
and the Sun is set, and Night and Darkness is upon them: But unto you that fear
the Name of the Lord, on you the Son of Righteousness is arisen, according to
the Promise, blessed be the Name of the Lord our God, by which you come to see
the Way of the Lord, which the Wayfaring man Travels to the Kingdom of God by,
which Light and holy Spirit of Truth, the Lord is revealing his secrets to them
that fear him, and making known the great Mystery of Life and Salvation to all
them that are turned unto him, and in their Hearts and Souls more desire the
increase of the Knowledge of the Lord, than any thing this World can or does
afford: And to obtain this their Desire, they are made freely willing to
forsake Father and Mother, Wife and Children, House and Land, and all that is
near and dear to them in this World, that they may obtain Peace with God,
through Jesus Christ, while in this World, and in the World to come, Life
Everlasting: Oh! blessed of the Lord are you, and shall you be forever, who
continue in this Mind, who see a shortness and an Emptiness in all things
without the Enjoyment of his Fullness, who feeds the Hungry Soul with Bread from
Heaven, and gives of the Water of Life to them that thirst for it, through
which the Lord refreshes the weary Soul, and strengthens the weak in their
Journey, who are Traveling Heaven-wards.

Oh! my dear Friends and Fellow-Travellers in this holy Way of the Lord, which
God, through the Riches of his abundant Grace and Goodness, has made known
unto our Hearts and Souls, unto you it is upon me, in the Name of the Lord, to
write to you all, in the tender Love of my God, and your God, whose powerful
and pure Springs of divine Virtue at this time overcomes my Heart, and
refreshes my Soul, by which my Heart is tendered before the Lord, and my Soul
refreshed in my Bonds, in him, and in his pure Life, which even at this time
moves upon my Heart, to write unto you in the tender Life and Love of our God,
in which I have cause to believe it will be received by all that are in the
same, in which I dearly salute you all, from the least stirrings of this pure
Life, to the greatest Growth therein; for in this Life and Love of God is our
Unity forever, which was before Death was, and shall be the Fortion of a
Remnant, when Death and Darkness shall be no more.

And now unto you, my Dear and Elder Brethren, who have kept your Habitations
in this pure Life, and grow up in it as Trees of Righteousness, whose Fruits
are holy and Leaves healing, and whose Life is in the pure Love of God, in
which you have been made serviceable unto the Nations, and a Blessing in the
Hand of the Lord, unto the People; for by you many have been turned unto the
Lord, and into the Right Way, that were traveling in a Wrong Way; and the Weak
and Feeble, by you have been strengthened in the Way of God, who has made you
as Pillars in his House, and Overseers over his Flock, who do it Freely of a
Willing Mind, for which you are worthy of double Honor for your Work's sake,
which is not the Honor of Men, by any Flattery or outward Applause, but the
Honor which comes from God alone, in the pure Order of Life, in Honor,
preferring you before, who are so in the Truth, who have been as Ensamples to
the rest; and your Admonitions and Counsels have been Grave, Sound and Weighty
unto the Younger in the Truth, and are of a good Savor and blessed Service to
all that keep their Habitations in the Truth, and retain the Savor of Life,
and bow to the Law of God, which is pure and Spiritual: But as for them that
have cast off their first Love, and have lost Charity, which is the Bond of
Peace, it is not to be heeded what they say, who are gone from the Simplicity
of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, into Craft and Subtilty, they are gone from the
Root; and although they may make a flourish for a time, yet a Withering will
come upon them, and they shall be made to know, that Gods Love is unto you that
have and do keep your Habitation in the Truth, and also must acknowledge it, if
ever they return unto him, from whom they have fallen.

And now, all dear Friends, Brethren and Sisters every where, who are turned to
the true Light of Jesus Christ, and believe therein, in it wait upon the Lord
continually, that by it you may always see your way, in which you ought to
walk, and feel God's Power to preserve you inoffensively before the Lord, and
that you may be Harmless toward all men; for in this pure Light, Wisdom's
Posts come to be known, whereby all are to wait for Counsel and Instruction,
that attend daily upon God, and come to receive the Wisdom (that is above the
Wisdom of the World) which is needful for every one to know; which Wisdom
causes the Face to shine, and the Hearts of them that receive it to rejoice in
the Lord, who is the Fountain from whence it comes, for by it the Lord directs
and guides in his own Way, that is Well-pleasing unto him, and in which our
Hearts and Souls receive and enjoy true Peace with God, which none can take
away from us, blessed be his holy Name: Also, in this the Lord prepares and
enables all that receive it, and depend thereupon, and are guided thereby, to
bear a faithful Testimony for the Lord in Times of Trials, Exercises and
Sufferings; for although the Lord suffers his Children to be tried through
manifold Trials and Exercises, which attend us for his Name and Truth's sake,
yet his Loving Kindness he will never withold from those that truly trust in
him. And this, dear Friends, the Lord has made us living Witnesses of, whereby
a Remnant can say, through a good and comfortable Experience of the Lords Mercy
and Goodness unto our Souls and Hearts, even as in days past, In all our
Afflictions he is Afflicted: And the Angel of his Presence saves us. And
therefore have we cause to love the Lord, who has heard our Cries; for by his
Arm he has gathered us, and by his Power he has and does preserve us; and in
his holy Light, which is the Way of Life and Salvation, the Lord is leading and
guiding of us unto his holy Hill and everlasting Rest, which is the Lot and
Portion that the Righteous in all all Ages desired and sought after, whom God
visited with the Day of his Mercy, in which their Souls rejoiced; as Christ
said of Abraham, He saw my Day, and was Glad: And how greatly did Zacharias,
Elizabeth and Mary rejoice and praise God, when he visited them? and Simeon and
Hannah, with many more, when the Lord visited them with the Day spring from on
high, they rejoiced in it, and spoke of it unto all that looked for Salvation,
which Day was Christ, coming and appearing unto them; for in him and by him are
all things received, that the Honest and Upright-hearted, that fear God, can
desire; for he is the Seed of the Promise, that bruises the Serpents Head, and
overcomes Death, and brings Life and Immortality to Light, in the Soul that
waits for it; for on him the Help is laid, who saves to the uttermost all that
believe and obey him; for in him all Fullness dwells.

And now, all Tenderhearted Friends, whom the Lord has visited your Souls, as
he did his Servants and Handmaids in days past, with the Day-pring from on
High, this is the word of Exhortation that lives upon my Heart unto you, Oh!
wait upon the Lord to see the Work of God, by Jesus Christ, wrought and made
known in all your Hearts, that what is not of him, you may see overcome by him,
and brought down by his Power into the Death, that so you may all, that are
convinced by the Truth, witness a dying unto Sin, and come to live unto
Righteousness through him; and having put off, as concerning your former
Conversations, the old Man, with his Deeds; and having parted with your own
Righteousness, which is the Pharisees Clothing, and put on the Righteousness of
Christ Jesus, which is the Saints Clothing, you are thereby prepared to show
forth the Praise of God, whilst you are here, and also shall thereby be
prepared to enter into his Glory, where your Souls shall rest with the Lord,
and partake of that Feast that he has prepared for all that deny themselves
and follow Christ, and forsake their own Wills and obey the Will of God; for
you are they that have the Wedding-Garments, and having Oil in your Lamps, by
which your Light shines before men, whereby God is glorified; for his Light
does not only shine in your Hearts, whereby it becomes your Guide, but it also
shines through you unto others, that are yet in Darkness; whereby Christ's words
come to be fulfilled, who said to them that believed in him, Ye are the Light
of the World and the Salt of the Earth; for all that receive his Light and
Grace into their Hearts, they are to Season the Earth by their Savoury Lives
and Upright Conversations, by which we do reach to the good in all, and judge
them that live in the Evil Conversation, whereby they shall be made in the Day
of Visitation to confess, That the Lord is with us of a Truth, who has called
us to bear witness thereunto, and to confess his Name before men, although for
it we do suffer, as the Servants of God did in days past, who have said, That
it is not given to us only to believe, but also to suffer: And the Apostle
says, Yea, and all that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer
Persecution; which we see is now fulfilled in a Remnant, who love the Lord
withal their Hearts; for there is many that profess Christ Jesus, that suffer
nothing for him; but those that leave the Glory of the World, and the
Sin-pleasing Pleasures of the Flesh, and follow Christ, they must and do suffer
under them that live in it; and them that leave the Teachings of Corrupt and
Carnal men, and wait to be taught of God, they must suffer; and they that bear
a faithful Testimony against Idolatry, and the Superstitious Ways and
Inventions that the Priests and People have invented, in their dark
Imaginations, who make void the Command of Christ, through their Traditions, as
their Forefathers, the Pharisees, did the Law of God, so do they now, the
Worship of God in Spirit and in Truth; and they that Worship God therein, they
must and do suffer by this Generation, as the People of God did under the
Scribes, Pharisees and Persecutors in days past, who persecuted Christ, and
called him, A Deceiver, and A Blasphemer; and who persecuted the Apostles,
calling them, Vain Babblers, and such as turned the World Vpside down, and drew
People from their Temples, and were not subject to their Law: Which is the Cry
of the Priests now, against those whom God has brought forth in a Testimony
against them; as the Upholders of Diana's Temple did, with all their
Crafts-men, who were in a Rage against the Apostles, and cried one unto
another, Sirs, You know that by this Craft we have our Living, and if we let
these men alone, all men will follow them, and then our Craft will come to
nothing; much like the way of the Proud, Covetous and Envious Priests.

Now, concerning the Servants and Messengers of the Lord, unto whom God has
made known his Light and his Truth, which was before they were, and shall be
when they shall be no more; for God is arisen, and is going on in his mighty
Power, and by the strength of his own Arm he will overturn all that stand in
the Way of his Truth, and that oppress his Seed, and offend his little Ones
that believe in his Name, for whose sake the Lord is arisen to plead the Cause
of his afflicted Ones; for by strength shall no man prevail: For because of
Oppression of the Poor, and the Sighing of the Needy, the Lord will arise for
Deliverance, and bring down the lofty City Babylon, and lay her Honor in the
Dust; and her Merchants shall mourn, and her Lovers shall lament and bewail
her, for the Misery that shall come upon her in the Day of the Lord determined:
Which Day is dawned, in the Light of which, a Remnant see the Vision is near to
be fulfilled, that was seen of Babylon's Torments and her Merchants Misery,
that shall come upon her, and them that Trade with her; in which Day the
Righteous shall rejoice in the Lord, who has saved and redeemed them out of
her.

And now, dear Friends, that are come out of Babylon, Sodom and Egypt, where
the Righteous suffer, all be mindful of that Arm that has brought you out, and
by which the Lord is leading you unto Everlasting Rest: There is great cause to
be watchful, and always to wait to feel the Lord's Power to preserve and keep
you: For all that came out of Egypt did not enter into the Land of Promise,
some fell short through Unbelief; and there was but four came out of Sodom, and
one of them looked back; and twelve followed Christ, and one of them betrayed
him; and how many has the Enemy betrayed in our Day, some in one thing, and
some in another, for want of Watchfulness unto the Truth, in which there is
Preservation for all that love it, and are led and guided by it; For all
Miscarriages and Dishonor that have been brought upon the worthy Name of the
Lord, that is concerned amongst us, and wrong done to any Man, by any that has
and do profess the Truth, and come amongst us, Truth is clear of it all, and is
not to be blamed, but they, in that they have not stood in the Counsel of it,
but have hearkened to the Serpent, as Eve did, and as Cain did, and Judas did,
and as all that forsake the Lord do, and that they know, who have in any
measure known the Work of God upon their Hearts, by the Truth; they know that
in that there is no Unrighteousness, but the Truth judges it all, and leads
People out of all Unrighteousness, that obey it: And therefore, blessed of the
Lord are they that obey the same, for they only do and shall enjoy the Comfort
of it, and have true Peace in it; as Christ says, He that does well comes to
the Light, and brings his Deeds to it; Whereby it appears that they are
wrought in God, in whom the true Peace is, that Man cannot take away; and in
which holy Light the true Teacher comes to be seen and known that cannot be
removed into a Corner, but our Eyes, that God has opened, see him near to
teach and guide us in the Way, that is well-pleasing in his sight; and great is
the Peace of all that obey him.

And all dear Brethren and Sisters, whom the Lord has Called and Chosen, in
your several places, to be a kind of first Fruits unto him, to bear forth his
Name in Righteousness, and show forth his Praise, and to be Instruments in his
Hand to strengthen the Weak, and to support the Feeble, and to refresh the
Bowels of the Poor, and to clothe the Naked, and to supply them that are in
want, according to their Necessity, and your Ability, which is a Service
acceptable to God, and is truly profitable unto Men, and is a Duty that Truth
requires for all to be diligent in, that have of the Things of this World; and
the Apostles commend them that were diligent in it, and laid it as a Charge
upon them, that were Rich in this World, not to be unmindful of their Duty in
that good Work, and which the Love of God constrains all the faithful to be
mindful of, now in this our day and time; for says Christ, The Poor you have
always with you. And now, that you may faithfully perform all those good
Services which the Lord requires of you, according to your Ability he has and
does give unto you, all be diligent to keep your Men's and Women's Meetings, that
are set up in the Power and Wisdom of God, and is accompanied with the same, as
there are many living Witnesses can, and do testify the same; even all that go
to these Meetings, and keep them in the Simplicity of their Hearts and Souls,
as hoping and believing they shall meet with that their Hearts and Souls
desire, which is the Presence of the Lord, and them he does not send empty
away, as is well known to you, that according to the Integrity of your Hearts,
he gives Wisdom and Counsel, whereby he fits both Men and Women, and prepares
them to perform what Service he has for them to do in the Meetings, in which
Meetings they have a good opportunity to clear their Consciences. And case your
minds one to another, when you have any thing lies upon you, and to stir up one
another to the Performance of your Duties in your several Places and Callings,
and to take notice of any that come amongst us, and do not answer Truth in
their Conversations, that they in the tender Life and Love of God may be dealt
withal, and all other things which concern our Testimony may, in the savor of
Life, be performed and carried on, and the Poor may be relieved; and thus
meeting in the Love of God, and being refreshed with the same in the
performance of your Duties and Services, return to your Father again in Peace.
And why any should be against either Men or Women, (for this, I know not) which
love the Prosperity of Sion. and desire the Peace of Jerusalem; but on the
contrary there is true cause to Rejoice, in that the Lord has brought both Man
and Woman into a true Capacity to serve him, and to be (...) one unto another
in his holy Truth, by which he has brought, and is bringing both Man and Woman
out of the Fall, into Christ that never fell, in whom Male and Female are all
one, in whom is the Blessing, and by whom all come to be restored again into
their Services, both Men and Women, and made helpful one unto another, not only
in the outward Creation and Concerns, but also in the labor of the Gospel and
management of Truth's concerns; in which Work and Service, let all be diligent
in the performance of it, as well Women as Men, all Eying your Head Christ
Jesus, from whom your Supply comes: And all be diligent in keeping your
Meetings, and let none be discouraged, because of any opposition you may meet
withal, from those that set themselves against Women's Meetings, because (they
say) they see no Service in them; that is no Rule for you to walk by, and to
neglect your Duties, because they see no Service in them; neither is it a
sufficient ground for them that say so to oppose them, for such ought to be
quiet, and wait upon God in the Simplicity of their Hearts, out of all
prejudice and wilfulness, to know the Mind of the Lord in this matter, seeing,
viz. that by the same Power of God, by which the Gospel has been preached,
Women's Meetings were gathered and settled; and whosoever slights them, or the
Service thereof, do and will come to loss thereby, for the Lord is with them,
who has made them a Blessing in his Hand: For the Testimony of the Lord's
requiring and owning of them plainly appears, in that his Power and Presence
has been, and is, from time to time manifest amongst his Servants and
Handmaids, when so met, as has been largely testified unto by many ancient
and faithful Servants of Christ, which is great encouragement to all that love
Truth and Righteousness, and that do desire the prosperity of the Truth and of
one another, therein to keep them, in the meek and quiet Spirit: and take heed
of striving with them that are in the opposition, lest you hurt your selves,
and thereby burden the tender Life in your selves, in which pure tender Life
you shall outlive all Opposition, and that will dye and wither; for all that
have not Nourishment from the Root, which is Christ, will dye of it self, which
we have seen from time to time.

And therefore, all dear Friends, go on and keep your Meetings in the Name and
Fear of the Lord, that you may still feel his Power and Presence amongst you,
and then it is no matter what any say against you; unto whose Power I commit
you all, who desires your Prosperity as my own, who can, and do testify, that
I have been truly refreshed with the Power and Presence of the Lord, both in
Men's and Women's Meetings, by, and in which Power, the Lord has laid a
necessity upon me to bear my Testimony, That they are set up in the Power and
Wisdom of God; and blessed are they that keep them in the same, and they that
oppose them, oppose the Work of God, and will come to loss by it.

S. C.

AND now, dear People, who come into our Meetings, from time to time, and hear
the Truth declared, and are convinced in your Judgments by it, and your
Understandings closes with it, and many times your Consciences are awakened by
the powerful preaching of the Word of Life, in which your Hearts are tendered,
and the Eye of your Understandings then being opened, you thereby see your
selves, and feel something of the Preciousness of the Truth declared; but for
want of bowing thereunto, withal your Hearts and Souls, and giving up to be led
and guided thereby, the Enemy prevails again, whose work it is to darken the
Mind and close the Eye, which God by his powerful Truth begun to open, whereby
you may come to see the Way to Rest, and then comes the Savor of the Virtue
which you felt whilst you were hearing the Truth, and whilst the Tenderness
remained upon you, to be lost; whereby the Apostles words come to be fulfilled;
Man hearing the Word and does it not, is like unto a man beholding his natural
Face in a Glass, and presently goes away, and forgets what manner of man he
was: so do many that hear the Truth forget or neglect to obey the same, without
which no true and lasting Comfort can be enjoyed.

Dear People, I do not write in this manner to accuse any of you, or because I
would have you leave coming to our Meetings, no; the Lord knows, but to clear
my Conscience, as a Friend to your Souls. I beseech you to lay hold of the
Scepter of Gods Mercy, while it is held forth unto you, and come away to the
Feast, while the Door is open. Oh! how have I seen, both in City and Country,
some that have come to our Meetings, in the time of Truth being declared, their
Minds bowed and their Hearts broken before the Lord, so that I have been ready
to conclude, That surely this Man or Woman must needs cleave to the Lord with
all their Hearts, and obey his Truth, which now they are so much affected with;
but it has too often proved otherwise, whereby Christ's words have been
fulfilled, who says, That after the Word is received with Joy, the Enemy comes
and takes the Word out of their Hearts; and some for the love of the World, and
some for fear of Persecution, the good Seed, that begun to put forth, comes to
be choked, and thereby they are made Unfruitful; But the Honest receive the
Seed, which is the Truth, into their Hearts, and give up the strength of their
desires unto it, they are made Fruitful unto God by it, and the Lord blesses
them in it, and gives them Peace of Conscience in this World, and Assurance of
Glory in the World to come, which is more precious and profitable, than all
that can be parted withal for his sake: Oh! that you therefore may come to be
found Doers of the Will of God, and not Hearers only, is the Desire of my Soul
for you all; for this is the Day of your Visitation, in which the Lord is
calling of you, and striving with you, to gather you unto himself; that so you
may come to be made pertakers of his Everlasting Riches that fades not away,
which is the Portion I desire for your all, and which is the Feast you have
been often invited unto, in the Name of the the Lord, by his Servants and
Messengers. Oh! come away, for the Lord has furnished his Table; and if you
make Excuses, and will not come unto him, by turning unto his pure Light and
Grace, which leads unto him, and obey the same, unto which you have been
directed by his Servants, the Lord will be Displeased, and you, through your
own Neglect, will be shut out; and a People the Lord will have, that shall
partake of his free Mercies.

So, dear People, prize your Time, whilst you have it, and whilst the Lord is
striving, and Christ is knocking by his Convincements, by his Light in your
Consciences, open unto him, that he may come in unto your Hearts, and that you
by his Power may be prepared and enabled to serve the Lord, whilst you are in
this World, that you may rest with all his Redeemed Ones, when Time shall be no
more here; then shall my Desire be answered in writing to you in this manner,
which is my true Desire for you all, who am

Your True Friend, Samuel Cater.
Elye Prison, where I am a Sufferer for my Obedience unto the Lord, under the
Corrupt Wills of men, because I cannot for Conscience sake disobey the Command
of Jesus Christ, nor join with the Priests in their Carnal and Dark Way of
Worship, the 6th Month, 1680.
THE END.

