A Catalogue of Jilts, Cracks, Prostitutes, Night-walkers, Whores, She-friends,
Kind Women, and others of the Linnen-lifting Tribe, who are to be seen every
Night in the Cloisters in Smithfield, from the hours of Eight to Eleven, during
the time of the FAIR, viz.
28. Aug. 1691
Price, l. s. d. 1. MRS. Mary H -- n, a tall, graceful, comely Woman, indebted
for two thirds of her beauty to Washes and the Patch-box; she mightily
frequents the Raffling-shops, very shy of allowing her Favors; but the present
of Silver Furniture for her Chamber may mollify her, which will cost you but
20 00 00 2. Mrs. Eliz. H -- n, her Sister, as well by Iniquity as by birth; the
very Ape of Female Quality, both as to her Dress and Carriage; she is very
indifferent as to matter of money, but a Supper of two Guineas may tempt her to
be kind. 02 03 00 3. Mrs. Eliz. B -- w, a very fine Woman, who has been a
Dealer in Cullies ever since she was fifteen; modest and pleasant enough, till
after the third bottle, but then Messalina her self was not half so impudent;
she has several prizes for her Ware, but her usual price is 01 01 06 4. Mrs. Di
-- P -- r, a very fair Woman, and loves none but those of her own Complexion,
has a sort of Sparks who buz about her, like Flies about a Honey-pot; whoever
engages her to a Glass or Wine must reckon himself fortunate if he comes off
for 03 04 06 5. Mrs. Dorothy R -- t, a tall comely Woman, a little red-faced,
by drinking too much Usquebagh when she lived near Essex-Street; she would be
thought, by her haughtiness, to be a Woman of condition, but those who know her
better, are sensible she will allow a Man her company for a bottle. 00 01 04 6.
Mrs. Sarah F -- r, a great two-handed Strapper, having no Charms either in
Person or Humor; yet will follow her old Trade, though she is kicked and bumpt
about almost every Night; if she snaps a Cully his Pocket must pay 00 05 00 7.
Posture Moll, a plump brown Woman, but so very well known, (that as Nicholas
Culpepper says of some Herbs and Plants,) she needs no description; the usual
price of her Raree-show is 00 02 06 8. Mrs. Y -- g, her Disciple or Deputy, who
studied the Mathematics under her, and has improved finely; her price is the
same with her Mistresses; but she will pick your Pocket if she can, and then it
may cost more than 00 02 06 9. Mrs. Mary L -- d, a constant frequenter of the
eighteen penny Gallery in the Playhouse; plump and jolly, if her impudence
don't dash you out of countenance; at first meeting her price is 5 s. but you
may persuade her to abate a shilling. 00 05 00 10. Mrs. Martha K -- g, a little
fat Woman, known last Winter by her Velvet Gown and Petticoat, which was (...)
Tyburn Degacy; she has a very particular way of inflaming a Reckoning, so that
you who thought to have come off for your 2 shillings may spend before you part
01 01 06 11. Mrs. Abigail T -- y, a tall slender Woman, a great frequenter of
Covent Garden Prayers, who makes her Devotion a Bawd to her Lust, her price is
00 10 00 12. Mrs. Susan C -- n, the errantest she Hypocrite living; all bawdry
with her is but Natural Philosophy; at her first coming into Company she
appears a Saint, but produce the Ready, and she tacks about; her usual rate is
00 07 06 13. Mrs. Bridget W -- ms, a pretty little black Woman, has not been
debauched above two years, not yet a Mistress of her profession; the usual
custom being to give her half a Crown, and then to Bully her of the Money again
00 02 06 14. Mrs. Dorothy E -- ds, a very fair Woman, who kept a Coffce-house
near Charing Cross, has a particular fancy for Soldiers, from the embroidered
Officer to the thredbare Red-coat Sentinel; her prizes are various, and
therefore it is left to the kind Cully's discretion. 00 00 00 15. Mrs. Katharine
D -- r, a Woman that loves a Vizor-mask to that degree of fondness, that she
lies in one every Nig^t; she may pass for a Woman of tolerable understanding
while she is so obscured; but the Disguise taken off, instead of inviting, she
frightens you from an Intreague. 00 00 00 16. Mrs. Sarah VV -- ks, a tall brown
Woman, newly come out of a Flux, she dresses as fine as Gause and painted
Callico can make her, if you mount the Guard, the price, with Saddle and
Furniture, is 00 10 00 17. Mrs. Peggy L -- ly, a sly infinuating Crack, who in
company always talks of her Husband at Sea; her whole Cargo, with Topsails and
Rigging, are hardly worth 10 shillings; but beware of her lower tire, for
several have to their sorrow found her a Fire-ship. 00 00 00 18. Mrs. M -- ws,
formerly a Plyer in Salisbury-Court, known by her Teeth jutting out before; her
good rigging makes her pass for a first-rate Crack; her demands are commonly a
Guinea, but those who have dealt in the Commodity know she will take 00 02 06
19. Mrs. Sarah H -- th, a very black Woman, who has several times attempted to
turn honest, but her itching flesh will not let her, and so is forced to continue
a Crack in her own defense; her demand is 00 02 06 20. Mrs. A -- ld, her
quondam Companion, with a Nose like a Bollonia Lapdog, she has been lately in
the Powdering-tub of Affliction; a good easy Girl, who scorns to ask for
money, but will not take it unkindly if you present her with a Crown for her
Company. 00 05 00 21. Mrs. VV -- by, formerly Miss to Col. S -- field in
Irelend, but reduced to that necessity, that she who formerly refused five
Guineas for the allowance of a private Favor, will now take up with any
ordinary Fellow for -- 00 01 00 22. Mrs. Eliz. (alias Betty) S -- ds, formerly
a Retailer of Oranges at the Playhouse; the very Quintessence of Leudness, who
brags shehas been tilted at by as many Lances, as there are Men in the
Confederate Army: her price is 5 s. and a Clap she gives into the bargain. 00
05 00

Cum multis aliis quae nunc prescribere longum est.

Licensed according to Order.

LONDON: Printed for R. W. near Smithfield, 1691.


