STRANGE NEWS From the NORTH.

CONTAINING A True and exact Relation of a great and terrible Earthquake in
Cumberland and Westmerland. With the miraculous Apparition of three glorious
Suns that appeared at once. And other wonderful Appearances that happened in
Yorkshire, of diverse bodies of armed men marching, and riding through every
Town for twelve miles compass about Malton, with the strange accidents that
befell the Cattle therabout through fright thereof, to the admiration of many
thousand beholders. Together with, the Charge against Charles Howard Esquire
High Sheriff of the County of Cumberland.

Verefied by several Gentlemen of known and approved credit.

TINMOUTH-CASTLE
depiction of Tynemouth Castle

LONDON, Printed by J. Clowes and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange and
without Cripplegate, June 11. 1650.

STRANGE NEVVES FROM THE NORTH.
SIR,
I Have often mentioned in my letters to you, the many and marvelous signs and
sights, which before and since these Wars, have been seen in these our
Northern parts, the Lord warning us as it were thereby, not only of our late
troubles, but of the continuance thereof; if by righteous judgments our
Governors do not appease his anger, I formerly related to you how shortly after
the Scots march into England in aid of our Parliament, it rained blood, and
covered the Church and Churchyard of Bewcastle in Cumberland, of three Suns
seen there the day before Edg-hill battle, and a little before Hambleton with
his Army came into England, two Armies were in Yorkshire, seen in the air
vissibly, discharging and shooting one against the other; and seemingly after a
long fight, the Army which rose out of the North, first vanished. This last
Winter in the North we have had very strange and fearful storms, with much
thunder and lightnings; But to admiration that of the 18. of January last was
most remarkable, in the night time the storm began very fearfully, Armies and
Armed Troops, (in every town for twelve miles compass about Molton in
Yorkshire) were heard to ride and march through the Towns; their Cattle and
beasts in these Towns, were so frighted with the storm, as most of them broke
out of their pastures, some breaking their necks and some their legs in this
madding fit, some run away four miles, some more, who when found and brought
home, were so wild and heated, as if they had been chased with a hundred
mastive Dogs; one Ox where he lay in a stake-yard lame, and not able to rise
without the help of man, in this storm broke out, and the next day was found
lying above a mile from the place he was in the night before, and was brought
home on a sledge; for a month after the the storm, the beasts thereabouts run
madding about, and would not be kept in their Pastures, people were so
astonished therewith, as for a long time they had little other discourse then
of the strangness of the storm. I see a Relation of three Suns, lately seen
about Manchester; but sure it is, that in the beginning of March last, there
were seen at one time in Cumberland and Westmerland, three glorious Suns, to
the admiration and great astonishment of many thousands of the beholders.

And further, upon the 11. of April last about 5. of the clock in the
afternoon, in the Counties of Cumberland and Westmerland, we had a general
Earthquake; the people were so frighted therewith, that they forsook their
houses, and some houses were so shaken, that the Chimnies fell down; Some may
doubt and question the verity of these things, be confident I have related
nothing but what I know to be true, and have had from men of known and approved
credit. These things I thought good to communicate to you, as I have done
before things of like nature; for news we have little in these parts, only
great fear of the Scots invading us again; I could wish our honorable
Parliament and Council of State, as they are very sensible of the ensuing
threatened troubles, and for prevention whereof, as they have increased their
forces: so they would be pleased, to make diligent inquiry of all in
Magistracy, how they stand affected to the Commonwealth under this present
Government, especially in these our bordering Counties, which will be a door to
let in, or keep out any enemy from Scotland. Here the honest party are much
cast down, our Justices of the Peace do countinance such Ministers as be
against the Engagement, and Mr. Baldwin the Lecturer of Penreth and other
Ministers there, have had sundry private meetings, and do work privately against
the subscribing the Engagement, if somewhat be not speedily done herein, all
our County will be against the Engagement. Our new Sheriff of Cumberland the
most powerful man of the County, we find he has been in Arms, both in the
first and second War; and now has for his Agent and Councellor, one Lawyer
Fallowfeild a professed Papist, and now said to be a Priest; and the other day
came from the Irish Rebels (as I hear) in Ireland. How in the last War our
Sheriff behaved himself, by the Charge and proof before the Commissioners for
Sequestrations in Cumberland against him will appear, a Copy thereof being come
into my hand I send you, desiring it may be published for public good. It were
good the Council of State would take notice of those, who recommend such
dangerous persons to so great offices of trust; by this means honest men are
still kept under, and till such be removed out of these places of trust, we are
never the more secure for all our great successes and victories; for our
enemies though they have lost their swords in battle, yet by regaining the
sword of authority, are in hopes to recover their former estate, and bring us
under them; in the mean time, by their ill Government they do disaffect the
people, and bring them in dislike of the present Government, and oppress the
honest party, and will be ready as formerly, to invite a foreign enemy, and at
home raise tumults and insurrections upon any opportunity; therefore I pray
improve your interest and credit, that such withus as have been in Arms against
the Parliament, may no longer continue in such great places and offices of
trust, and I shall as opportunity serves from time to time, let you know the
state of our County, in the mean time, I bid you farwell.

Penreth 30. May 1650. T. C.

The Charge against Charles Howard Esquir High Sheriff of the County of
Cumberland, Exhibited to the Commissioners for Sequestrations in Cumberland.
THat the said Mr. Howard, having a Commission to be a Col. for the King in the
last war, which he did confess was as large as any man had, did by virtue
therreof, send out his warrants to the several Constables of Gilsland for three
several musters; Requiring, all men above sixteen, and under threescore to
appear before him at Brampton, And the Constables to present their names upon
Thursday the 10. of August, 1648. and the fourteenth, and the sixteenth day of
the said month following at the several days, the said Mr. Howard came to the
abovesaid place, accompanied with many Soldiers in Arms, under his command, and
gave order for free-quarrer for his Soldiers; And that the Constables should
Leavy moneys to pay for the horses he took in every place.

Proof to this Article, Tho. Milburn. Tho. Bell. Anthony Hevyside.


Secondly, That the said Mr. Howard, took 10. horses in Hayton parish for the
said service, and proportionably in other parishes within Gilsland according to
the purvey. Tho. Bell abovesaid, Anthony Heviside.


Thirdly, That the said Mr. Howard, did declare openly at the said Musters,
that the men and Horse so levied, was for the Kings service; And that he was to
meet the Prince with his men at Barwick Satturday the 19. of August following.
Tho. Milburn. Tho. Bell.


Fourthly, The said Mr. Howard sent a Letter to ten Cavileers that had horse
and Arms, quartering upon Leonard Hodgson Constable of Hartleburn in
Northumberland, That if they would ride in his Troop to Barwick as Reformadoes,
they should have Command as places fell; and they should come to Francis Grames
of the Stone house in Gilsland, and there abouts they should have quarter till
they marched to Barwick. Proof to this Article Leonard Hodgson.


Fifthly, The said Mr. Howard, repared several times to the enemies Garrison at
Carlisle, and walked abroad with his Arms. Richard Hutton.


Sixthly, At two several Musters by warrant from the said Mr. Howard in the
first Article mentioned, the said Mr. Howard had made his speeches to the
Country, his Soldiers drew their swords and cried, a King a King. Thomas
Addison.


This Charge was presented to us, and the several witnesses names to every
Article, that will make good the same.

Tho. Craister. John Musgrave. John Priscoe. Thomas Laughorne.


FINIS.

