The Causes and Manner of Deposing a Popish King in Swedeland, Truly Described.
GVstavus Ericson King of Swedeland, having settled the Reformed Religion in
Swedeland, and Reigned Thirty Eight Years, left his Kingdom to his Son Erick,
who, for his Cruelty and III Government was Deposed, and his whole Line
Exhereditated, to make way for John Duke of Finland his Younger Brother.

John had a Son called Sigismond, who being secretly Bred up in the Romish
Religion by his Mother, who was of the Sagellonian Royal Family of Poland, was
in his Fathers time Elected King of Poland.

The said King John had also a Younger Brother, called Charles Duke of
Sudermania Nericia, etc. and a Younger Son of his own Name, called Duke of
Ostrogothia.

King John Dyed in the Year 1592, in the absence of King Sigismond his Eldest
Son: During which, Charles Duke of Sudermania his Uncle, at the desire of the
States, took upon him the Government: But sent to Invite his Nephew Sigismond,
to come and take Possession of his Native Kingdom as soon as might be:
Promising in the mean time to keep all quiet, and intimating, that he hoped his
Majesty when in Possession, would Maintain all in the True Religion and Divine
Worship, and Preserve the Laws of Swedeland.

At the end of the Year he arrived in Swedeland, having in his Company
Francesco Malespina the Pope's Legate, who hindered him long from consenting to
any Security, either for Religion or Property, but finding the Coronation would
be obstructed without that; he gave way, as having yet (as the Historian says)
one starting hole remaining, which was, that Faith was not to be kept toward
Heretics. In the mean time, he himself would have Crowned the King in the
Cathedral at Vpsal, but was opposed by the Archbishop of Vpsal, whose Right it
was, even if that Kingdom had been Popish.

The Coronation being over, which had been delayed above a Year, during which
time, several secret Attempts had been made upon Charles Duke of Sudermania to
make him away. King Sigismond contrary to his Coronation Oath, Erected a Popish
Church in the Capital City: Made a Great Man of his Religion Governor of the
Castle of Stockholme, in which the Records of the Chancery, and the Arms and
Ammunition of the Kingdom were kept, and in the Port were the best part of the
Royal Navy under Command of the Castle.

A certain Jesuit called Adam Steinhall, obtained the Arcentian Temple, and the
Queen's Island, with the Vastheman Monastery, which was presently filled with
Romish Priests.

Sigismond also by his Followers and Attendants, continually affronted the
Established Religion, and was sending into Poland, for a Body of Forces able to
subdue the Kingdom, upon which Discontents grew so high, that he hastily
withdrew thither himself.

He left Sweden in confusion, having only for Forms sake, writ to his Uncle
Charles to assume the Administration jointly with the Senate: But at the same
time, leaving others with greater Power both in Swedeland and Finland, as
appeared when he was gone.

Charles Duke of Sudermania, to avoid Discord and Confusion, called a
Convention at Sudertopia, which was opened with an Oath of Allegiance to King
Sigismond, and did likewise assert the Kingdoms Right, to have the Coronation
Oath performed, which having been violated in the tender point of Religion,
they redressed the Grievance, and suppressed the exercise of the Romish
Religion. Banishing all Priests and Preachers of the same, and the Ancient
Incumbents of the Vastheman Monastery were Restored.

Then they desired the Duke Charles to accept of the Administratian, for the
good of the Kingdom, which he did. Then began a Treaty between Sigismond and
the Convention, with Duke Charles at the head of it, which was by Sigismond
spun out and obstructed with much Artifice, at length the Convention made
several Decrees for security of Religion and Property, and entered into an
Association for the Defense of them, which they desired the King to confirm,
and gave six weeks time to all that Dissented, to submit, on pain of being
declared Enemies to the Public Peace.

They Invited him home, to return in a peaceable Manner, and settle the other
Affairs of his Native Kingdom, but instead (...) that, he Invaded them with an
Army of Eight Thousand Horse and Foot, and a hundred Sail, to which several
Sweeds joined themselves, whom he had gained with Money.

An Agreement was endeavored, and after much intercourse of Negotiation, both
Armies being near one another, it was consented to on both sides, that twelve
of the Nobility of each side, should meet and decide the whole Controversy.
But by the persuasion of the Jesuits, the Royal Army in the Night, conducted by
Weyerus, set upon the Ducal Camp; in which onset, several thousands were slain,
but at last the King and all his Army had been cut off, had they not called out
for Peace, which the Duke yet harkened to.

An Agreement followed, in which, the King demanded to be supplied with a Navy
to go to Stockholm, promising there to call an Assembly of the States, but he
no sooner had the Shipping, but he Sailed away for Calmar, in which place he
left a Garrison of Foreigners, and then continued his Voyage to Dantsick.

The King being gone, an Assembly of the States met at Stockholme, where they
Declared King Sigismond fallen from the Crown and Government, and were so
inclined to continue the Succession, that they offered to receive his Son
Prince Vladislaus, provided he might be sent home, bred up a Protestant, and
committed to the Guardianship of Duke Charles, but Sigismond refused it.

Afterward another Parliament met at Lincopia, and there they first did
expressly renounce King Sygismond and his Government, as also his Laws.

Then they acknowledged Duke Charles of Sudermania for their Lawful King, and
after him, settled the Crown upon his Son Gustavus Adolphus, and his Heirs Male.

Duke John concurred with the Parliament, and renounced his pretense to the
Crown, and was content to come in after the Line of Duke Charles.

The Daughter and Sister of Sigismond were also rejected.

Then followed the Coronation of King Charles, in the Year 1607. by the Name of
Charles the Ninth.

These were the Proceedings in Sweden, whereupon I shall only make these few
short Reflections.

I. That the Swedes were desirous to the last Degree, to preserve the
Succcession according to one part of the Laws of the Kingdom, provided that
might be done without overturning all the rest, they were wise enough to
preserve Laws, while Laws preserved the Nation, which is the true end of all
Laws, but no longer.

II. That King Sigismond according to the Spirit of his Religion, where ever it
is grown up to Bigottry, broke through his Oaths, and all Rules of Justice and
Morality, when they crossed the Insatiable Ambition of his Priests.

III. That though the Swedes, when they found that they could not keep their
King, his direct Heirs, their Religion and Liberties all together, resolved to
part with the former, but were forced to be very cautious, and endeavor to
gain time by Treaties, to unite themselves against Sigismond, who had Poland
and several Allies to back him, without which Considerations, the Prudence they
showed on this Affair, may assure us, they would not have suffered the
Government in so loose a Posture, so long as they did.

IV. That the Swedes knowing, that it is impossible on any occasion, that all
Men should be of the same Mind, wisely ordained, that the Minor part should
submit to the Major, or be declared Enemies to the Public Peace. And sure this
Example will be followed, where ever Reasonable and Disinteressed Men meet on
the like Occasions, for sure no Body can deny, but that it is better for any
Nation, that some Laws should be made and others broken, against the Opinion of
the Minor part, than that all Laws, Morality, and Good Nature, should give
place to passion, Injustice and Cruelty through their obstinancy.

Now may God Almighty open the Eyes of all Englishmen to see, and their Hearts
to Embrace this Truth.

London, Printed for R. Baldwin in the Old Baily, 1688.


