The Cavaliers Bible, OR A SQUADRON OF XXXVI.

Several RELIGIONS by them held and maintaied.

And the particulars or every of their Tenants collected, as also the
particulars of the several Regiments and Commanders Expressed.

The second Edition corrected and Enlarged.

depiction of some of the factions and sects associated with the Cavaliers in
Parliament

Aug. 7 Printed by JANE COE: according to Order, 1644.

XXXVI. Religions, Sects, Societies, and Factions, of the Cavaliers now in
arms against the Parliament.
I. CArdinals) Assume to themselves a Masculine power over the most royal
consciences even of Kings and Princes, and overtopping the Crown, dash the
Septar against that truth which dares to say so. Their Will is as rotten as
old, fitter for a munument in a ruined Tower, than a princes palace, yet being
of the Archbishop of Yorkes Regiment to remain in the Court they will beg to
be Vshers rather then to leave it: And those Cardinal alias Calde Dinates, were
ever Enemies to Reformation. Ezra 4.9.

II. The French Faction) Are a feminine society of superstious wantons, who to
advance the honor of their own Diana, hold it pure devotion to keep her
active, though by blood they would awake her that cannot live, when they Dig-by
the Altars of their ofen sacrificed Sucklings, they may behold a fit object to
stay their hands from such Goring of their own flesh, least pearsing to the
marrow it prove martall to the grand ladies their commanders, and this faction
of Zaraphath, that is, France did always strive to keep the people of God in
bondage. Obaliah ver. 20.

III. The Spanish Faction) Are a Newtroll Sect who regard neither God nor man,
Religion nor Law, King, nor people, The gold and the Jewels of a Crown are to
them no more valued than a stone Crucifixe, or the badg of a Spanish Pentioner,
Cottington of whose Regiment these are, has by many a fained Arand-dealt too
false with England, to deceive us of our best treasure, whilst we embrasing
Bristoll stones, hazard the loss of our best diadems. Of this Sect are the
Faction of S^ad, that is, Spain, who ever reioysed to tyrannize over the Church
of God. Obad. ver. 20.

IIII. Adamites? have all things common, and hold it a paradise to live so
because their discipline allows both Sects to Court naked, in which they bulsh
no more than Adam at his first Creation, Gen 2.5. This discipline a natine
Germine first learned in Holland and since being in England, taught it to the
Cavalrie of his Regiment.

V. Bishops) Are a doubtful brotherhood of Prelates, who Perse the sides of our
Saviors Members, and would from Peter-borow a succession to sit in Pilates
Judgment Hall, to pass the sentence against the Son of God, for whose sake
Peter suffered death, and these are of the Bishop of London-Derries Regiment.
These Bishlomites, alias Bishops, do still labor to keep us under the Bond-age
of their cruel slaverie.

VI. Jesuits) Like their Father Esau, rejoice to spill their brethrens blood,
for their greasy Cook to make sauses with, to relish their unsatiate pallets,
and where they reign in their Caps and Rochets starve the peoples souls, by
keeping from them that heavenly food, which by divine influence is only able
to make them live. Sir John Winter their Colonel would make us believe that
they are Jesuits of Ieshui, corrupting the Scriptures to make it speak of such
a family, Number. 26.44. In the last Translation only, but are rather of Ieush,
the wicked offspring of Esau.

VII. Malignants) Are a malicious brood of an old Majors Varlets, who take more
care to Cripse their own perewigs, then to make the Church Glorious. It may
seem strange that the Malignitie of the Planets should produce such effects by
Rupert their General, and yet we may read of such flowers even among the
Violets, which have buddeded in this famous City. These Melzerants, Malignants,
out of envy to Gods people, can willingly allow them nothing but bread and
water to sustain life, Dan. 1.16.

VIII. Priests) Are a sort of small Comets, whose luster is derived from other
Stars, drinking sack with Baccus under the influence of the moon and Venus,
without which their dull ingenuity cannot appear visible in any Horison. These
are of Overtons Regiment, the drunken Person, and though they wear the Golden
feathers of of Finches, and catter like Magpies, yet are no more to be valued
then the little Wren.

IX. Arminians) Srive to rob the Protestant Church of all her glory, Featly to
deck their own garden with popish flowers, which (notwithstanding) all that
Dupper their Colonel, and they can do, bears nothing but Fern and Gross
stubble, which they will fly to Armenia with, rather then let it be rooted put
and taken away. Esa. 31.15.

X. Italians) Are the professed Papists, who under Inchequeen, seek to crowde out
the Protestant Religion, that the Italian Sumpter, their Mother may Usher in:
and so Cosen us of our Religion, as Pocklington would have done of our Sabbath:
2 Chronicles. 24.7.

XI. Shelomethites) hold swearing but a complement; and blasphemy a badge of
Honor, and so Hasting their own ruin; Hurry their Liftenant General Wilmot
to destruction, which is always nigh at hand to take hold of the blasphemous
sons of Shelomith, Levit. 24.11.

XII. Chiliastes) Imagine Christ's Kingdom here on earth to estate them in all
kinds of delicate pleasures; which though not now, yet in time to come,
Greenevill and his Regiment hope to enjoy a thousand years. But this Icy path
is a deluge only frozen by the Hary mother of a Winter, which in passing over
will melt and swallow up the passengers into her bowels, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 39.

XIII. Clements) Are persuaded that after death they may repent, in the world
to come, and it is soon enough to seek Gods mercy, which makes the bloody
resolutions of Onele and his murdering Regiment, not to pass By-worne
conceived: and venture on as desperate attemps, as Luntsford himself, or the
bloody Lord Breton, Clem. Strom. l. 2.

XIV. Simon Maguses) Teach their Disciples, as Maurice does his Soldiers, not
only to adore their own picture, and wear it in their bosoms, but sacrifice
their strength for the honor of their Helenaes, who like Iermin Frowes, follow
the camp, as our Gallants do their Confessors, Eusebius. l. 2. c. 14.

XV. Achaians) Affirm, that wen the body dies the soul perishes, and both
shall be renewed again at the day of Judgment: which doctrine is some thing
like that which possesses the broken Citizens, under the Marquess which will
both meet in one center of a vast nothing: for that condition in which the soul
is stated (which being immortal, cannot die) shall be increased, but never
changed. Origin. com func. in chron. l. 6.

XVI. Minanders) Like Hary Iermin their Lord Lieutenant, Believe that the
World was created by Angels, and that their Patron, and divine Minander is able
to bless both their painting boxes at home, and their Arms in the camp, to
make the one to preserve their youth; and the other their life and by a
confection of their prurging ruberb: commpounded with Spanish Flies and Court
Junctos; they shall nevr be in fear of death, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 26.

XVII. Ebonites) Like Glenhams Northern ignoramusses: Deny the divinity of
Christ, and say, that he was only begotten between Joseph and Mary, and
therefore think it best to fill their Gorges with the worlds rarities, and
desperately submit their resolutions to the seeming excellency of that froth,
which may increase but never can remove their misery.

XVIII. Corinthusses) Like Baggot and his Liechfield Garrison, believe that the
Subjects of Christ's Kingdom should eat and drink and marry, and keep holy
days, and offer Sacrifices and live under the Prelates oath, etc. These road so
fast on Roan their Popish Nag, that by reason of a sudden stop, they swore
themselves into a protestation, and destroyed themselves with their own Canons,
and would yet destroy their own Church, to erect new Altars and Conclaves for
their own resting to play the secret Gluttons in Eusebius. l. 3. c. 18.

XIX. Nicholaitans) Live promiscuously, like beasts, no man having his own
proper wife, but using any women at their pleasure, these are not only
plunderers of men's estates, but Robbers of their very skins and bones, as the
Rapes by Colonel ^unsfords quarters committed, can testify.

XX. Marcions) Believe that there are two gods, one the Author of all good, the
other of all evil things, which Sect Palicarpus in his time called, the first
born of the Devil, and in these days some of Sir John Digbyes Regiment have
drunk healths to the Devil, and (as I am informed by M. Alum a Divine, which
was an ear witness: others have cast lots, when they have found their sores
mortal, for the disposing of places in Hell and have proceeded therein to
Election, Sympson c. p. 417.

XXI. Encratica) Have a great respect to observe the traditions of men, but
blaspheme Scriptures, as their predecessor did Paul's Ep. These will adore the
Book of Common prayer, and act their part of a play or profane Theater with
great devotirn, but as they did at Redding, and other places) threw the Bibles
into the fire and burn them to ashes. One of them when a report was made of a
defeat given by the Enemy to a partee of our forces in the North, one said in
my own hearing, Mosly by name (as I am justify upon oath) Where is your Jesus
to help you now? as if in believing the Scriptures, we had trusted in that Word
which cannot save us. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 18.

XXII. Valentinians) sometimes called Gnostici, at tribute every thing to the
Fates: as if there were so many masculine and feminine gods, as Davenant their
Commander and the Poets have fained. A branch of which heresy spreads in the
adoration of Patrick, S. Taffy, Valentine etc. By a Cross, a Leek, a Favor,
etc. August index heresies.

XXIII. Theodotians) Deny Christ to be God: of whom a fect of Welsh Cavalires
under Colonel Gerhard have learned to call upon the Virgin Mary to command her
Son to help them: and attribute more virtue to her milk then to his blood,
which they daily profane by bloody oaths and execrations: Symps. chapter p. 420.

XXIV. Samseis) Are a sort of Neuterals, under Major General Tillier, that are
Hurri-ed up and down with every blast of wind, that will use the bed for daily
devotions, the Parliament for Privilege; or the Court for Prerogative; England
for riches, or Holland for security, and swear and do any thing; cost it never
so Dear; to stand and remain in favor. Coment. func. in Chron.

XXV. Samosetence) under the Lord Hopton, Believe that it was only Christ's
valor and wisdom; which obtained him so great a report in the World: And
therefore hold it their chiefest wisdom to strive each to precede each others
in some valor, plots or projects: to beget an applause of those the fight for.
who by their Conjuring and Sophistry, have persuaded some to (incredible)
opinions of their own glory: Symps. c. p. 244.

XXVI. Manicheans) Do utterly reject the Old Testament, ascribing not sin to
the free will of man, and his voluntary defection from the estate of his first
creation: but to necessity, because man's body was made of the substance of the
Prince of darkness, which rocks the young Cavaliers of Colonel Gorings new
regiment, into a pleasing slumber of security in vice: Symps. c. p. 244.

XXVII. Apollinaries) Say that Christ in the dispensation of his Incarnation,
assumed the body only and not the soul of a man because his divinity supplied
the place of his soul: And one stream of such a fountain in another case runs
over all the Cavallies, under General Forth, who would traduce us to believe
that the body of the two Houses of Parliament have no other vital whereby to
live; then the Kings presence; denying that power by which his Majeste has put
an influence to every motion acted by that grand body; who enjoy both the
life of the Law; Prerogatice and Privilege: besides his Majesty's own Aact to
them above all former Parliaments: Ruffem. l. 2.20.

XXVIII. Donatists) under Montrosse, Believe that neither the Word of God, nor
any under the cope of Heaven; can make so perfect a Church, as their own
Discipline; as if it was impossible for Rome to err? Whose Ministers are as
vicious as profane heathen. And no calling in the World live in great
impiety, as M. Carpenter one of their own Converts has confessed since his
Recantation, Symp. c. p. 430

XXIX. Seleucians) Are of opinion that the Mass whereof God made the Elements
was Coeternall with him: and that Christ in his Ascension unclothed himself of
the flesh of man, and left it in the Globe of the Sun. Sir Kelemne Digd-by this
Gulf, and drained in some of this puddle to water his intellect; to transmould
Spencer beyond his stanzees. And I would have all such Students to wait for
pay, till they attain the Philosophers Stone; for what is any man the better to
study that which is only the shadow of another fancies: Symp. p. 431.

XXX. Pelagians) Do affirm that men naturally are able to fulfill the Law of
God, and that the posterity of Adam are sinners by imitation: and not by
propagation; and that the holy Fathers rather confessed their sins of humility
then of necessity: Were not the Cavalieres under Hasting, benumbed with this
dullness and sensuality; they would not dare to commit such horrible
wickedness: Aug. consil.

XXXI. Abelarders) As their patron Abelardes, taught that the holy spirit was
the soul of the World, and that he was not of the substance of the Father, so
his Successors at this day Smith the Marshall and his Catchpoles do no less
despite the spirit of God, making a jeering, and an object of laughter, at
every work and operation thereof, who not only making a mock of spiritual
prayer and dispensation of Gods Word, have greatly despised the Spirit of
Grace; but have beaten and misused Godly Ministers; bade them tell by the
spirit, who it was that struck them: Symps c. p. 440.

XXXII. Peterenins) Other ways called Gasarius, affirm, with Canterbury that
married people are not in the estate of grace; and cannot be saved. Indeed our
Metropolitan Prelates durst never marry; and there are not many only common men,
but great ones too amongst the Commanders, who though they be as great
Whoremasters as Suckling ever was, yet hold it a damnable sin to marry: Symps.
c. p. 441.

XXXIII. Patricellins) At Oxford under Sir Arthur Ashton, Think they have no
need of spiritual prayer, and fasting; hearing Gods Word, Reading and such
other works of piety, whereby increase of grace is obtained, and do therefore
hate, deride, and scorn, all those who endeavor to live godly: against whom
for this very cause they are now in arms against them: Symp. c. p. 441.

XXXIIII. Are Shipmoney Mongers, that hold it lawful for Princes to pole the
very Hides of their Subjects, and that Kings have a propriety in the peoples
Estates, to make use thereof at their pleasures, and of this Sect are the
Malignant Judges chief in the cause.

XXXV. And the Irish Rebels, which hold it lawful to cut the throat of, and
murder all the Protestants in England Scotland and Ireland, and that it is a
meritorious work so to do, and for that purpose rose in Ireland, and did there
begin under Oneal the chief of them, and have since for that purpose come into
and remain in England.

XXXVI. The last are a sort of she Cavalliers about the City, that Drink,
Roar, and Swear, as lustily as any, in the Camp, and outbrave a malignant
Report, or cause, against all truth, especially when their tongues have been
well whitled at the Tavarne or Alehouse.

WHy then should we (who lay claim to the true Protestant Religion) long to be
at peace with such as these; and sucmit to what discipline they will give us;
who mind Whoring, Sswearing, Idolatry, Drunkeunesse, blasphemy, and all
manner of vice, and prefer it before any thing that is truly good.

Tertul: lib. de spectac titl de theatro. Libero et veneri convenit, Duo ista
Daemonia conspirata et coniurata intersesunt. Bacchus and Venus agree and go
together These are two foul Fiends which conspire and are cojured together: for
the destruction of man kind.
FINIS.

