The Innocent Lord
Who but a Joseph could resist the dart
Of such a tempting beauty, wit, and art
And have noe fiery wound within his heart.
depiction of Joseph and Potiphar's wife

THE INNOCENT LORD; OR, THE DIVINE PROVIDENCE. BEING The incomparable History
OF JOSEPH. WRITTEN Originally in FRENCH, and illustrated by the unparalled
Pen of the Learned De CERIZIERS, Almoner to my Lord the Kings brother. AND Now
rendered into ENGLISH BY Sir WILLIAM LOWRE Knight.

London, Printed by S. G. for Charles Adams, and are to be sold at his shop at
the sign of the Talbot near S. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. 165^.

THE TRANSLATORS APOLOGY.
Gentlemen and Ladies,
YOu may judge me little Soldier, less Courtier, and least of all Lover, by the
order of my title in this Dedication. I must confess civility would oblige me
to prefer the fairer sex, but the History here displaies not the virtues of
an Innocent Lady, but of an Innocent Lord, not of a Genevieva, but a Joseph;
this I hope will excuse me; I cannot doubt of your judgments, and therefore
shall not need many words in the behalf of this work; the same favor you
afforded to my former translation, I presume cannot be wanting unto this, since
it has some advantages above that, which may justly challenge a pre-eminence;
the Author is the same, the frame and impression newer in the Original, the
History Canonical, the several passages as pleasant and as passionate, and the
Discourse as elegant, and as full of variety. A Romance well penned, may be
tolerated; an Authentic story as well rendered, should be cherished; but a
Divine Legend ought to be reverenced and adored, though in a simple dress,
especially when so magnificently set forth by so eminent and ingenious an
Artist as de Ceriziers; if it loses any thing of its luster, I must impute it
wholly to my unfortunate Version; yet pardon small faults (if you meet with
any) and let my modesty obtain this privilege, that you will read it over
advisedly, and then censure freely, and spare not

Your humble servant WILL. LOWER.

TO MY LADY, THE COUNTESS OF CHALAIS.
MADAM,
I Protest in the first place, that though I offer you this work, I seek not
either the effects of your benevolence, or the protection of your power,
because I feel my heart as clear from interest, as I know my soul exempt from
fear. I have had sufficient good fortune, not to find hitherto in the address
of my works, but the sole thing which I sought therein, which was the honor to
render my testimony public upon the esteem of some particular persons. Though
it seems that my present condition should excuse a more mixed intention, and the
change of life that I have made might give me thoughts less noble, I protest
yet once again, that I look not upon either your defense, or your benefits. I
give liberty to all the world to examine my writings, without pretending any
safeguard against the Academy; but I request you that without considering my
offering, you would deign to suffer the affection that consecrates it you. You
should not deny me this honor, since it is no longer free for me to obey you,
though you your self should have a will contrary to the inclinations which your
excellent merit gives me. Your generosity has prevented me with so many
favors, that it is impossible for me to retain that testimony of my
resentment. Notwithstanding without declaring my self more openly upon the
motives of so just a gratitude, permit me Madam, to say that one of your
bounties alone is capable to ravish from me all the heart that I have, and to
ravish it from me everlastingly. You have desired to know me in a conjuncture,
wherein many persons, whom I believed to have gained either by my services, or
by their promises, have feigned not to know me. You apprehended not that my
misfortune was contagious, nor that my misery might be troublesome to you: Your
courage extended it self unto me even in an estate, which rejects very often
the most generous courtesies. In which to speak the truth, you have done that
which belongs not but to the greatest souls, who never withdraw themselves from
an unfortunate party, provided that he be innocent. Though I should not love
that little virtue which you suppose in me, your judgment would solicit me to
be amorous of it; insomuch, Madam, that I have you the obligation not only to
believe me, but also to render me virtuous. Certainly if beauty be the glory of
bounty, (as Plato will have it) I judge by that laudable profusion, which you
have used in my behalf, that yours how perfect soever it be, is unfaithful,
since it shows not upon your visage all the treasure of your soul; and that
you are much better, then you appear fair. I hope from the mercy of God
(notwithstanding any cross that may come unto me from fortune) that he will
continue me the good motions, which his Grace inspires me; and that for the
favorable thoughts, which you have of them, he will give me the means to
publish to all the world the just cause that I have to be all my life,

MADAM, Your most humble, and most obedient servant De CERIZIERS.

TO THE READER.
READER,
I Pretend not to make thee a Preface greater then my Book; there needs but a
word or two to say unto thee, that this Patriarch is but one of the Infants of
my wit, and that thou ought to see the others, if thou cherishest the true
History. I promise thee not all those whom God promises to his servant
Abraham, thou would have then more cause to fear then to hope, because I
should be less obliging then troublesome. Expect all those whom thou desire,
since I am resolved to give thee as many of them as thou will receive: I will
not stop my design but where thou shall bound thy desire. Thou shall find a
style more extended then in my reflections; but thou will judge also that if
the Discourse requires sinew and point, the ingenuity and the words appertain
to the History. I husband thee my wit following the nature of the subjects
which I handle, deny me not neither thy attention, nor thy patience. I persuade
me that thou will not have the scruple of those, who give all the force and
goodness of their thoughts to the robe and profession of their Author; as if
the dew of Heaven falls not but upon the mountains, and the depth of the
valleys were deprived of that sweet influence. It would not be without
ingratitude, if I should deny that little capacity which I have, to the
Religion which has bred me; but it would be sottishness to believe that I
should have left there my reason, being obliged to come forth from thence. This
misfortune might be feared of a person, who should not have had piety for a
motive of his change; for my part, I expect recompense for it rather then
punishments. Those who know me, will judge, that I have not acted but by good
principles. One should judge unworthily of the courage of Joseph, to believe
that the persecution of his brothers, or the ambition of greatness* had
conducted him into Egypt. The only necessity to nourish his Father, whom the
Providence of God had rendered poor, obliged him to quit the land of Promise. I
adore that Providence, which has charged me with the same duty, and I conjure
it, if it be for my good, and its glory, to clear the truth thereof. I abandon
without trouble my fortune to a goodness, to which I refer willingly the
cares of my salvation: Saint Paul permits the wise to judge of all things, I
have no mind to limit their power: What severity soever they use in my behalf,
I respect their judgment without distrusting their justice. For those who have
not received the same Authority of the Apostle, and of their prudence, I as
little seek their approbation, as I fear their censure. Thanks unto God, all
those that judge are not of the Parliament; one may mock at their prate, if
they cannot defend it. As I despise generously the liberty of fools, who make
themselves arbiters of the most important affairs of the world, I reverence
with submission the examen of those that resemble thee. But if this short
Declaration renders me not worthy of thy esteem, and that thy curiosity cannot
be satisfied from my own testimony, address thee to the R. R. P. P. Jaquinot,
le Cazre, Saint Mary, Marquenat, Dagonel and Ricueil; I assure me that thou will understand from them that I have done without crime, what I think I ought
to do in conscience. I have received too much honor in their company to fly
it, I have lived innocently enough to abide there: my departure is the tyranny
of an indispensable necessity, and not the humor of a ridiculous inconstancy.
But if I have not found in Religion a succor which I seek in the world, assure
thy self that some other reason then my defects, has hindered the effect of the
most ardent of my desires. After the suffrage of these great men which I have
observed, because they have examined my change, I assure me that no body will
condemn it, but those who have neither the interests of Fathers or Mothers, nor
the sense of true children. My dear Reader, attend the rest of my Apology, from
that which remains of my life; the honor which I shall endeavor to conserve
me amongst good men, shall lay the foundation of all the praise that I pretend
from thy good will. I tell thee this, because I desire to keep me in thy
memory, protesting that I should be very sorry that my style should please
thee, if my conduct might displease thee.

JOSEPH, OR, THE DIVINE PROVIDENCE.
NEver saw Egypt a fairer day, then that which began the glory of Joseph: the
Heaven communicated new lights to illustrate the apparel of his triumph; and
the Earth seemed to paint her self to appear beauteous to the eyes of this new
God. The trumpets made so pleasing a noise, that all the houses became so many
Eccho's to repeat it. The tapestries were no more the ornament of the walls,
but the litter of the horses, which trampled upon indifferently both the purple
and the silk; it would be hard to find all the Mines of Gold, which shone in
the streets of that proud City; the pearls and diamonds passed for common
stones. What need I say that the Heroes and soldiers were clothed with cloth
of gold and cloth of silver, the beasts of charge and Elephants being covered
therewith, would not leave that advantage unto man; the Princes of the Court
were so glorious, and so proudly adorned, that without appearance of deceit,
they might have been taken for Kings. One would have thought that the Ladies
had borrowed other visages then their ordinary ones; all was changed, whilst
our slave led the heart of Pharaoh in triumph. This spectacle had nothing in it
of low, as no body had mean ecstasies. But perhaps the glory of so magnifick a
pomp rather wearies your eyes, then recreates them; and to consider longer
these marvels, would but augment your trouble. The Sun is always fair,
notwithstanding one has oftentimes more pleasure to see him rise on the top of
a mountain, then to admire him in his Meridian; because his first rays suffer
themselves to be looked upon, whereas it seems that that great excess of
light, with which he is gloriously encompassed, is but to hide him from our
eyes, or to punish our curiosity. Perhaps the Infancy of our Patriarch will
please you no less then his perfect age, and his first virtues then his full
perfection: and as there is an all-particular Providence that made him pass
from contempt unto glory, so I would fain make him appear miserable at first,
to the end that you may consider him with more pleasure in the happiness of
his fortune.

It was in the fourteenth year of Jacobs service, that Rachel was mother of
another child, then that of her servant Bilhah, and saw her sel^ paid for all
her prayers, wherewith she importuned Heaven. This childe-bed made her more
happy, though less fruitful then her sister, forasmuch as she possessed more
in this only son, then Leah had in all hers. If the benefits of Grace
surpassed not infinitely those of nature, it would be hard to judge which of
the two had been more liberal to him; and without doing wrong to the one or the
other, it might have been said that he had all the virtues of his father, and
the beauty of his mother. So many graces perfectionated his body, that all
which could have been wished him, was no more the object of a reasonable
desire. Oftentimes the neighbors would come unto the house of Laban, to see
only his visage, (which dissipated the blackest sorrows) and to carry unto
their house the contentment which they fonnd in his company.

That which most powerfully ravisheth hearts, has a luster more glorious then
that of the color, and is fixed to something more noble then the body. An
Ancient says, that beauty is the facility of the eyes, though to speak
properly, it is ordinarily but the ruin of souls, or at best but the
perfection of women. Our little Infant had other attractions, since he
possessed that beauty, which is not beloved, but of pure souls, and of him who
glories to be the Spouse of them: It is true, that his age seemed not yet to be
that of virtue; notwithstanding it appeared so visibly on his visage, and in
all his actions, that one might think it was a part of that spirit which
animated them, or if it were any thing separate, that it was rather born with
him, then gotten by the custom of practicing it: above all, there was seen so
rare a modesty in him, that all his companions could correct themselves by his
example, and regulate themselves by his conduct. It was she that opened, and
that shut his eyes; it was she that made him speak by civility, and be silent
by discretion: it was she that counted his paces, and that composed his
countenance: it was she that governed him so absolutely, that he never offended
the meanest of the servants, not so much as with one word spoken in contempt,
or escaped by precipitation; this good quality rendered him amiable unto men,
and his piety unto God. Never rose he, or went to bed, but he made his little
devotions, and though he could scarce pronounce the name of God, he adored the
Majesty of him. It was a pleasure which drew tears of joy from his father and
mother, to see him pray with so good a grace; and to speak truth, even those
who had no interest in his good inclinations, would be troubled not to please
him. Who could behold without ravishment, a child of five or six years to
adore God with an affection so instant and recollected, as if he had had no
imagination, or that his imagination had been determined to this only action?
To see him on his knees, his hands joined, his eyes half shut, one would have
thought that it was a statue of marble, if those lips had not given some motion
to his prayer, or an Angel, if he had not sighed sometimes. I speak not of the
reverence with which he honored his parents; the belief thereof is easy
through the sweetness that rendered him pleasing to all the world. One might
produce many proofs thereof, but it suffices me to assure that there was no
choler so kindled, nor rage so fierce that would not be changed in his
presence. Jacob knew it well; this good Patriarch vexed with sorrows, which
for twenty years had not suffered him to breath; besides, believing to have
bought two wives, and some sheep too dear, resolved to take his leave, since
that his father in law refused him. Behold then this holy man constrained to
cover himself with the same darkness that Thieves and Robbers hide themselves
under: he departed in the night with his Train, for fear the brightness of
the day might publish that which he would keep secret, (I leave that which
arrived during this flight to Laban, as not belonging to my subject; this man
which was to wrestle with God, feared the encounter of a brother, whom his
virtues had made an enemy to him. His former menaces, that fury, which rendered
him more savage then a Bear, the hair with which he was covered, gave him more
fear of his hate, then blood and nature assurance of his love.

Notwithstanding choosing rather to hazard once his life, then to lead it
always in so painful labors, he fixed himself to his first design, from which
all the considerations that he had, could not divert him. After having thought
of the means of his reconciliation, the cruelty of Esau seemed not unto him an
invincible passion. That thought which he approved most of all upon this
subject, was to divide his Train into two Bands, and to send them successively
to the encounter of his brother: but the secret of the Artifice was to put
Joseph and his mother in the last, to the end that their beauty mingled with
the sweetness of so pitiful a spectacle, might change the heart of this
barbarous man, if the massacre of those that preceded it, nor the consideration
of blood had not stopped his fury.

I know not what Magic an innocent beauty uses, but we see the effects as
admirable, as the causes thereof are secret and little known: how many times
have we seen Tyrants become Idolaters of those whom they persecuted, and take
the subject of their love, from whence they drew the motive of their hate? The
Tigers themselves, and the Panthers, have they not quitted their nature, to
take sweeter sentiments then is necessary to devour innocents? The Lions and
the Leopards have rendered them homage, humbling their cruelty before those whom
they thought to devour: they have adored their victime, and their prey; the
artifice of Jacob was not then evil, since he endeavored to take his brother
by that which gained the most savage beasts. Notwithstanding, God disposed
thereof otherwise, and because he would not divide with any one the
acknowledgement of that benefit, he would that he should owe all the obligation
thereof to his goodness. Esau becomes man, and receives him with caresses, who
expected naught from him but persecutions. It was at the sight of this happy
Canaan, that Jacob seemed to live another life then that which he led in
Mesopotomia; and though two great Rivers give it its name and fecundity, that
land notwithstanding appeared unto him more fair and more fertile then that
where appeared the first Paradise of man. The joy to have no more Esau, the
hope to embrace the good Isaak, gave so sweet sallies to his heart, that he
thought he should have need of some misfortune, to moderate his joy. Whilst
that they traveled toward Hebron, they perceived a little Town situated on
the browe of an Hill, which defended it from the North. Our Patriarch no sooner
saw it, but he commanded all his people to put themselves on their knees, which
he first did himself, to give them example of obedience. This command could not
be without reason, coming from so wise a man. Notwithstanding, Rahel took the
liberty to ask it him, which obliged him to tell them, that it was the place
where the Messiah should take birth, and begin that which God only could
finish. Alas, how difficult is it for prosperity to last long, and how hard to
find a happiness constant out of that residence which is to be eternal? Jacob
began to be no more miserable, when the most sensible of all his afflictions
arrived unto him, it was the death of his poor Rahel, who could not give life
to her Benoni without losing it her self. I leave the regrets and the tears,
which followed her death; but I cannot pass in silence an action that preceded
it, since it touched Joseph. His good mother seeing that her life would
henceforth advantage him nothing, desired that the last moments thereof should
be useful unto him: Having then caused him to come to her, she leaned upon his
bosom, and moistening his visage with her tears, she spoke unto him in this
manner.

My son, I cannot die without bidding you adieu, and wishing you a blessing,
which I beseech the will of Heaven to accomplish. I am in a condition, where
interest makes no body speak; therefore if I leave you any advice, I suppose
you will not believe that any consideration of mine comes to mingle therein.* I
have always as much loved your virtue and good inclinations, as your person;
it is therefore I desire you but so much life, as they shall last. It is not
the fear of your inconstancy, that makes me speak in this manner, but the
ardent desire which I have of your perfection. Make then your virtue to grow
with your age, and never think to have enough of those goods, whose abundance
can make no excess: Let the service of our great God be your principal
occupation; be never wanting to the respect which you owe to your good father;
and if you owe any thing unto her from whom you derive your birth, know, that I
transfer all the right thereof unto him, to the end to augment your respects
and your services. You have a great number of brothers, let love tie you more
unto them then nature, and let the honor which you bear them be a mark of
your good will. Never give their actions an ill interpretation, and if any one
of yours displease them, endeavor to amend it. Keep always your spirit
prepared for injuries which you may receive; perhaps this advice of mine is not
unseasonable: Having so perfect a resemblance with your father, I fear that you
should resemble him also in this. The affliction of the younger brothers is one
of the inheritances of your house; the son of Hagar could not endure the son of
Sarah; Esau persecuted your father in the belly of Rebecca; take heed that the
same happen not unto you; but if God permit it, think that your affliction
shall be rather a testimony of his love, then an effect of his hate. Adieu my
dear son, and retain the last words of your poor mother.

There is nothing more true then this opinion, which will that an innocent life
ends always with an happy death. Rahel had scarce ended the last word of those
which she left to her son, but she ceased to live, with so much constancy that
it was easy to judge, that the fairest face of the world, feared not that
which is esteemed the most ugly. But certainly if her courage showed the
contempt of her death, the tears of her friends witnessed enough how precious
her life was to them. The poor Joseph, who had received the soul of his mother
upon his lips, remained long time in a sound upon her body; and as their
embracements had straightly united them, one would have believed that death not
able neither to separate them, nor choose them, had not offended the mother
without hurting the son. O how happy had he been, if that death had dured more
then a quarter of an hour, since he must not live longer but to suffer, nor
suffer but to instruct himself from the experience of his meaner evils, how he
should prepare himself for the miseries of slavery. Let us not engage us in the
regrets of this desolate family; the silence of great griefs makes them better
comprehended, then the Discourse that one endeavors to make thereof; the
eloquence of a few sighs is stronger then that of many words. Jacob had never
so much trouble as to leave that which rested to him of his dear wife;
notwithstanding he must quit it, and receive for consolation the confidence to
be more aided by her intercession, then by her presence. And then being
perfectly submitted to the will of Heaven, he consented that it should enrich
it self with the most precious of his losses, and that it should increase its
felicities with his miseries. These considerations, and time having given some
comfort to his grief, he continued his way toward Hebron, where he was no
sooner arrived, but the good Isaak ran to meet him; (if to go so fast as one
can may be said to run) What pen is capable to describe the caresses, which
were sweet enough to leave no more bitterness in the heart of Jacob, and to
blot out the remembrance of 20. years travels?

All the children of this holy Patriarch participated of this encounter, but
Joseph took the greatest part thereof; there was not one of them that admired
not the Majesty of that Venerable old man, who had never been so, if the Angel
had permitted him to obey entirely, and if God had not loved him better for
offering, then for victime.

Some days being passed away in feasts and rejoycings, every one resumed the
cares of good Husbandry. Isaak was very glad to see that idleness never found
his nephews at leisure, and that their diligence received not such soft
temptations as those of sloth; but his joy was perfect, when he observed in
Joseph that courageous virtue, which had almost made him the Martyr of Abraham,
though Abraham should not be the Tyrant of Isaak; and to say true, it was a
thing very considerable to see with what attention this little innocent studied
the desires of his parents, and how careful he was to know their inclination.
Oftentimes his obedience prevented their command, for fear they might have the
trouble to speak, and he the blame to know their will without accomplishing
it. The difficulty rendered his obedience more ready, and if he found excuses,
it was to cover the imperfection of another, and not to flatter his negligence.

All those that saw him without envy, saw him with love. The father who had
long time dissembled his contentment, resolved to give him testimonies thereof,
and to make them appear with more luster, he caused a melley coat to be made
him, where the blue, the carnation, the white, and the other colors, were so
perfectly mingled, that every one could judge that art has those beauties
which surpass the natural. Infancy pleases it self more with that which
shines, then with that which profits. Our young man held yet of that age; so
ware he not this coat but with the sallies of an innocent joy, but too simple:
poor child, you know not that to cover you with this coat, was to charge you
with the hatred of your brethren, and that the love of your father should be
the chief cause of your misfortunes. This favor was so grievous to the eyes of
the other children of Jacob, that they could not long dissemble their
displeasure. Nothing was heard but plaints and murmures in their house; some of
them were bold enough to say, that he loved this minion like a Legitimate, and
his eldest like Bastards; it was not hard to foresee the evil consequence
which so many ill words promised. Isaak* blind as he was, saw it well, and to
bring some sweet remedy to this evil, he was of opinion that Joseph should
withdraw himself for some days from the presence of his brethren; this counsel
was thought good, and the means to execute it easy.

It was supposed that the children of Bilhah, and of Zilpah, would suffer
Josoph more willingly, then those of Leah, who knew too well the advantages of
their birth. Behold him then made a Shepherd as well as his brethren; the
innocence of this life gave him such perfect joys, that he would scarce change
his sheep-hook for a Kings Scepter: The sense of these delights made him
believe that he had not lived until then; and that to amuse him in his fathers
house, they had made him to see the pictures of that which he had before his
eyes in the fields. The Meadows produced him not more flowers then pleasures;
it was from thence that he took occasion to admire the rare perfections of God,
and to say unto him in the excesses of his devotion, Oh my God, how fair art
thou! since that a little Tract of thy incomparable beauty can make us to love
the Earth. How rich art thou! since thou drawest such precious treasures from
the dirt.

There was by this Meadow a Wood, where many Brooks seemed to take pleasure to
repose in the shade; at least their flight was so slow, that the eye could
scarce judge from whence they came; and whether the same roots which fixed the
poplars in this pleasant abode, did not retain them here also. Every day a
great number of Birds invited our Pastor to seek there the fresh; and very
often the heat of the midday constrained him to go thither, though the
sweetness of this Music had not allured him. This solitude pleased him
infinitely, because he had means to sigh there at his pleasure, and to send a
thousand times a day his heart into Heaven. I believe that he had taken root in
this Wood, if necessity had not sometimes diverted him thence, and if he had
not taken pleasure to wander upon the bank of that fountain, which was the
mother of so many rivulets, and the source of so many pleasures.

It was there that he purified his soul, not with the waters of the Fountain,
but rather with the tears of Devotion, which he mingled therein. After having
passed a part of the day to see the Trees and the Birds to swim in this water,
he remained the Evening upon its Banks to consider the Stars, which seemed to
descend from Heaven to bathe themselves there. But Joseph had nobler thoughts,
and though his discretion would conceal them carefully, the excess of his love
made it break forth without design. My God, (cried he) that I have not a soul
so disposed to receive the impression of thy holy graces, as this water
entertains the image of all the objects that present themselves there? And then
taking another cogitation, he said, Thou will then, Love of my soul, thou will
give me the foretastes of the Beatitude, which thou preparest for me in Heaven:
I march already upon the Stars, and I have under my feet that which shines over
my head; is it not to teach me the contempt, and the innocent hate of the
fairest things, to the end not to love but that, without which nothing is fair?
If it be thy design, it is my desire; if it be thy will, I consent thereunto,
and embrace it, so much the more willingly, as this inclination is conformable
to my duty. His thoughts were yet better then the words with which he
endeavored to express them.

Thirty days slid away in a life so full of delights, when an unlucky accident
came to interrupt the course thereof. Joseph having stayed one day too long in
the Sun, whose heats were then excessive, returned home with a violent Fever;
his brothers fearing, if more evil should happen, that their father would
suspect them of some malice, or at least would blame them of negligence, would
send him to Hebrou, the most conveniently that it was possible. If Jacob was
sick with this dear child, I must leave the judgment thereof to those who
have, and who love children: So it was that the good care which was used to
procure him health, put him soon out of danger, and his father out of
apprehension. The joy of this recovery was not long, forasmuch as Joseph having
discovered a crime, which must not have name in the History, since it has no
order in nature, his brothers kindled the more their hatred against his virtue:
To make him feel some effect thereof, they formed against him the most blackest
and sottish calumny that could be imagined. The good opinion which Jacob had of
Joseph, was an ill disposition to the success of their design. Notwithstanding
he must hear all that which rage would vomit forth of unjust against the virtue
of this Innocent. One told him that it was no marvel if this minion drew all
his good will to the prejudice of those that should divide it with him, since
it was an effect of his Magic, and not of his merit: that the familiarity
which he had with the Devils was not to be doubted, since his prudence had
taken so little care to cover it, that an whole Province could know it. For my
part, (said one of them) I have oftentimes seen him speak to the Moon, and make
the Trees change place: Another assured, that he surprised him in the Wood,
where he made an infinity of tears with a rod, with which he drew the souls
from Hell: A third swore that he had made him see upon the sursurface of the
water, and in the nails the images of all that which he desired. There was not
one of them that endeavored not to tell some fair lie, and to give evil
impressions of him whose virtue was odious unto them. But certainly their
malice and his innocence ruined the faith of this calumny, in augmenting rather
his glory, then furthering his contempt. Slander is very impudent, yet not
enough so as to look upon a face without shame, which it indevours to sully
without cause. Joseph was absent when his brothers represented him in such evil
colors; nothing rendered their malice more bold, then the pretext that they
took of his piety, and of the devotions which he practiced. Behold an accident
that seemed to aid their intention, and give some shadow of truth to that which
could not have the light thereof.

A few days after Jacob invited his children to his Table, to the end to find
the means to reconcile them in that common rejoycement; but he considered not
how far their hatred went, and that envy is not pacified, whilst she sees
prosperity, where she wishes nothing but misery.

After many discourses, some one having set forth that oftentimes sleep
represents us things, the event whereof is conformable to the Images that one
has had thereof. Joseph taking the word, began a discourse which ended not
with the approbation of all the company; for though it was innocent, it was not
pleasing.

My brethren, (said he) since the occasion presents it self, give me leave to
recount unto you two or three of my dreams, and be pleased to hear the pleasant
imaginations that I have had some days since; it seemed unto me one of those
nights, that we were in a great Plain, covered with the richest Harvest that
one could desire, and that each of us having bound a sheaf, yours encompassed
mine round about, and did reverence unto it. Never had I a more pleasing
illusion then this, because you would have said to see them, that they had
reason so to do, and that my sheaf was the Queen of all the others.

Some days after I had another dream, which puts me upon the hazard to be
thought foolish in my sleep; for me thought that the Sun, the Moon, and eleven
of the most glittering Stars fell from Heaven, and prostrated themselves before
me: their brightness seemed to be obscured in my presence, as if the glory of
my visage had had the power to do to all those lights, what the greatest of all
the Stars causes to be done to the lesser, with this difference,
notwithstanding that the Stars hide themselves for fear to court the Sun,
whereas the obscurement of their rays was an humble homage which they rendered
me. Whilst our young man related that which he had seen in his sleep, there
was not one of his brothers that hoped not but their calumny should be propped
with these dreams. It was all the fruit which they gathered from these sheaves,
and the only brightness which they drew from that Sun. But as Simeon made
reflection upon that which these dreams might signify, he cried out with a
voice that made sufficiently appear his evil heart. Perhaps we shall be your
servants; his furious looks made up the rest of his discourse. The poor father,
who saw his endeavor succeed contrary to his intention, and who penetrated
enough into the mysteries of those visions, judged it fit to dislike them in
appearance, to the end to content those, who held themselves offended therewith.

You may be ashamed, Joseph, to relate these fooleries with so much
complaisance, as if they were true Histories. Do you not blush to have an
imagination that makes the sheaves to go, and the Stars to dance? You should
have concealed, if you had been wise, a thing which cannot bring you but
confusion and envy; and then turning himself toward the others: you have no
reason to expound so ill the dreams of a child; do you not see that there is
no appearance to give the sense as you interpret them; if they were reasonable,
I should have the same interest as you. For if you are the Stars, I am your
Sun, and if I am a Sun, is not Rabel that Moon which eclipses my lights, since
she has lost all hers? But alas, her sorrowful death hinders her much to
increase, and to advance the glory of her miserable son. This sweet remembrance
drew so many tears from the eyes of Jacob, and mollified so his heart, that
compassion changed almost the hearts of his children, and made them forget
their murmr. Let us not busy our selves to describe the artifices which this
good father employed to settle peace in his house. When he spoke to his eldest,
he picked out his fairest words wherewith to sweeten their exasperation: On the
contrary, he composed himself with so much severity for the innocent Joseph,
that his brethren believed easily his disgrace. This policy having taken away
or diminished their envy, all went happily enough; but Jacob desiring that this
good correspondence might not be for a day, prayed his children to go to
Sichem, to the end to withdraw them from the occasions of contention. The
necessity of affairs was the pretense of this voyage, though this desire was
the true cause thereof. Some time after their departure, he judged it expedient
that Joseph should visit them, for fear that they should take suspicion of
their remove, and that they might not believe that this Favorite was only kept
at home with their Father to receive his Caresses with more safety. This
resolution being settled, he commanded him to choose fruits, and comfitures to
carry to his brethren. There is I know not what prudence in us that seems to
foresee, and advertise us of our ill fortunes: Joseph found no difficulty in
this obedience; notwithstanding he represented in his ordinary simplicity, that
the night passed, he believed to have seen seven or eight Wolves, which pursued
a Lamb, whose ruin had been certain had not a generous Lion undertaken its
defense and scattered them. This vision made the good Patriarch weigh the
design of sending his son to Sichem, notwithstanding the rescue of that Lion
assured him: and then he judged not fit to take all the dreams of a child for
mysteries. Beh^ld then our little Shepherd, who disposed himself to go toward
his brethren, and who bid adieu to those of the house: above all he embraced
his poor father so straightly, that he could scarce separate himself from him; he
received his blessing with such sweet tears, that the sense thereof passed even
to the heart of Jacob. Adieu, Joseph, adieu; since an all-particular Providence
conducts you. You cannot fail in your obedience, although you may much suffer:
Oh if your good father knew how many tears this Voyage will cost him; if he
knew how many evils hang over your head; if he knew that you are that Lamb
which you spoke unto him of; if he knew that your brothers were the Wolves,
which would tear you, without doubt he would not expose thus your life to their
fury.

Let us accompany our Pilgrim, and if it be possible, let us not go from him.
Sometimes he turned himself toward his fathers house: To see his countenance,
one would judge that he left it with regret, and that not able to go there, he
sent there his sighs. He approached notwithstanding to Sichem, and at the same
time to his death, and misfortunes. He withdrew himself from his father, and
with the same pace from his contentments. One might judge that he saw all this:
but he chose rather to be miserable then disobedient. At last he arrived at a
field where he thought to meet his brethren: but finding them not, he took a
way which led him into so fearful a solitude, that any one, as well as a young
man of sixteen years, would have been affrighted; a leaf trembled not without
making him tremble; every precipice was unto him a sepulcher. Fear persuaded
him easily, that the rocks raised not themselves, but to fall upon his head,
and that the deeps opened not themselves but to bury him. These apprehensions
will last as long as the Forest. As he engaged himself in another Labyrinth,
and wandered in a stubble field, he met with a man who demanded him, where goe's
Joseph? The astonishment to hear himself named by an unknown person, made him a
little pensive; notwithstanding he replied, that he sought his brothers, where
any one (that would do him the favor) should show him them. I cannot (answered
the stranger) show you precisely the place where they are; yet I have heard
them say, that they would go unto Dothan. After this answer, he took leave,
when this unknown said unto him, desire you nothing should be made known to
your father Jacob? I hope to see him again very speedily, replied Joseph; that
cannot be (answered the stranger) as he was careless on his way, Joseph
continued his, making reflection on the salutation, and last words of this man.
The curiosity to see him again, made him to return; but though he looked all
about very carefully, he saw no body, which gave him many diverse conjectures,
not able to discern the true from those that were not so. In this perplexity,
he perceived the Troop of his brothers, who reposed at the mouth of a Wood. As
he was near enough to be heard of them, he saluted them with all the civility
possible; Simeon who was the most cruel of his persecutors, rendered him no
other complement but this: Behold our trifler, behold that fair dreamer; well,
let us revenge us at this instant of all the injuries that he has done us, to
teach him how so many sottish and ridiculous imaginations have profited him.
Fear not to stain your hands in his blood; this action cannot be an homicide,
since it will be the just vengeance of so many crimes. His words having gained
his brothers, he advanced toward Joseph, he seized him by the hair, and giving
him kicks with his feet, he prepared himself to give him death. Our innocent
Victime trembled under the knife, and seeing that he could not secure his body,
he recommended his soul unto God. His eyes were glued unto Heaven, his hands
joined, and his heart so full of resignation, that it appeared on his visage,
and in his discourse.

My brothers, (said he) I refuse not to die, since you will have it so; I pray
you only to pardon me that which renders me unworthy of your mercies. It is
true, that if the sole intention can offend, I am not culpable, mine having
always been innocent. But that the sincerity of my intentions may not be
considered, I will be unworthy of your affection, since my actions have
displeased you. It is better to confess a crime, then to blame you of
injustice: I condemn my self, provided that that justify you. Strike, my
brother, strike; notwithstanding I conjure you, if I am criminal, that your
pardon, and my repentance may make me die innocent. Oh how a man, to whom
cruelty and massacre are passed into a nature, has trouble to receive the
sense of pity! Simeon who had done his apprentiship in Sichem, lifted up
already his arm to plunge death into the bosom of Joseph, when Reuben stopping
the blow, cried out, I must not live to see Joseph murdered, so evil an action
shall never have my consent: I would that wherein he has offended us, his
youth should excuse him, and his tears persuade us.

Whilst he said this, Joseph had opportunity to dis-engage himself of Simeon,
and to embrace the knees of Judah, whose heart capable enough of pity, grew
tender at these words. My brother, have compassion of the poor Jacob. These
four or five words were worth him no less then his life, forasmuch as Judah
was in consideration amongst his brothers, whose wills were already divided
upon the design of this murder. Nature had not only given him a supple and
agile body, she had also chosen him an excellent soul; and to the end that her
benefits should be entire, his tongue was capable to express neatly the
thoughts of his spirit. It was therewith that he served himself to change
wholly his brethren, and to make them to be Wolves no longer: behold his
Discourse.

How now (said he) shall it be said that the Nephews of Abraham should be
Parricides, and that the indiscretion of a child should make us the murderers
of a brother? A word ill spoken, an extravagant dream, should it give us a
resolution so enraged, and a will so criminal as to stain our hands in humane
blood? I will not excuse Joseph, for fear to make your design appear unjust:
but suppose that he had an intention to procure us evil as truly as we have
received it; Tell me, if it were an Arabian that had offended us, could we do
more then take away his life? If a wild beast had torn us, should we not be
revenged in cutting his throat? This here is not an Arabian, his sweetness
witnesses that he has other qualities; It is not a savage beast, nature has
given him those senses, which have nothing of savage in them. It is one of our
brothers, and though his actions have rendered him unworthy of that name, our
goodness should make him capable of our favors. And then can we put him to
death without shedding our proper blood, and strike him without receiving his
blows? If he be malicious, are we obliged to resemble him? Certainly I
understand not that his example should serve us for law, and though he had done
us outrage, the pardon of an injury is glorious, when the revenge thereof is
easy. But he has forgotten that which he was; let us think of that which we
ought to be. He has conspired against our life; let us punish him in
conserving his: He has taken our honor from us, with most unjust calumnies;
let us leave him live to amend. Lastly, though we should take from him that
which he can keep no longer but by our clemency, the world not knowing the
equity of this action, will condemn the design thereof. And who can give it a
good sense, having no obligation to presume of our innocence? Jacob, I am sure
that it shall not be you, yea, I am assured that you will not approve an action
wherein you are outraged. Me thinks I see this poor old man oppressed under the
resentment of this sorrowful news; me thinks I hear his sighs and sobs, with
which he accuses his misery. Has he not griefs enough, without we furnish him
some in so lamentable a subject? I conjure you, let us have pity of his evils;
and if we are loath to save Joseph's life for the love of himself, let us give it
him to conserve that of our father. Let no man say, that a concealed crime is
not much less then a known innocence, and that he that sins not before men,
cannot be judged thereof. Every one of us has a thousand witnesses, if he has
a conscience; the stings which follow a crime, do show that nothing can be done
without being discovered. But suppose that the Fields and Forests have neither
ears nor eyes to espy our actions: Suppose that our consciences could not
produce any testimony against us. If he who is called the God of vengeance, and
who will punish every sin with his hands, should demand account of this, what
could we answer? It is he that pierces the deeps; it is he that sees the most
secret thoughts: there is not darkness enough to cover an action from him, nor
cunning to disguise the malice thereof unto him. His eye discovers what is done
above the Firmament, observes all the actions of men upon the Earth; and though
the night vails them sometimes, she never buries them. Though we should go to
offend him unto the Center of the Earth, we should find there his Justice. And
though this death were equitable in being your selves the Judges, he will have
so just reason to punish you, as you will have none either to complain, or to
blame him. Let us refer the right to revenge us into the hands of him who
forbids it, and let us not stain ours in the blood of our brother. This
clemency will deliver us from the reproaches of our own conscience, Joseph from
death, and our good father from a long train of miseries, which would make him
either to die soon, or live long time in languishment.

Behold our little Innocent delivered from the hands of Simeon; but see an
accident, which put his life into new dangers. Levi great father of all the
Priests of the Law, willing, perhaps, to begin his sacrifices by an acceptable
Victime, remonstrates that it was a perilous design to give life to an enemy,
whose death one had balanced: That Joseph not believing himself guilty, would
never hold himself obliged; and that it was imprudence to have made him know a
will, which for his part could not have any effect, but an irreconcilable
hatred. As these reasons began to shake those who inclined to sweetness,
Reuben advanced a means to save him, though in appearance it seemed that it
would destroy him. The death of Joseph is most just, (said he) but I find the
fashion shameful: I cannot consent that we should be his executioners, let us
content us to be his Judges. There is a Cystern in this solitude, let us cast
him in there; it is better to famish him, then to foul our hands with so ill
blood as his. This resolution was approved, without considering if it was
judicious. The strongest but not the soundest party carried it: They drew this
poor Innocent into the desert, they took from him that Coat, which had been the
chief cause of his misfortune, they tumbled him into the Cystern. Each retired
himself to his affairs, Joseph remained plunged in the dirt of that infamous
retrait, and in the sadness of that cruel misfortune.

Well, my God, even hitherto thou have suffered malice to reign: Joseph has
been culpable, because no body has defended his innocence; is it not time to
make the Lightning of thy Thunders appear upon those offending heads, who have
meditated this outrage, and the sweetness of thy Providence upon him that
merits it? Thou have interest in his justification, since thou art the
Protector of the afflicted; if he had not been devout, he should not be
miserable. At least the pretense to accuse him had been wanting to his Tyrants,
if he had not had piety. Perhaps this unfortunate young man has not yet tasted
bitterness enough. Oh my God, if it please thee, cast thy eyes upon him, I
doubt not but thy heart which is nothing but love, but thy love which is
nothing but tenderness, will be touched with the sense of his misery, and with
the desire to ease him of it.

Truly it is much for an humane spirit to represent reasons unto God, to
persuade him: Do we not know yet that he pleases himself in the sufferings of
those, who receive them cheerfully? and that their plaints are his
contentments? Joseph had already suffered much; the envy of his brothers had
furnished him with malice enough to exercise the fair virtue of the afflicted.
The ill words which they gave him, their calumny and their cruelty, were
assaults rude enough to make him sigh. It was that which he did continually in
his fathers house; it was that which he renewed in the Cystern with such pitiful
accents that he must have had an heart more hard then marble that would not be
touched therewith: behold some of his plaints.

Alas! must I for being obedient be therefore miserable? and for witnessing my
respect incur thy indignation? My God, thou know that I was never guilty
of the sins of which they accuse me, and that if I have offended any one, it
has been either through ignorance or simplicity. It is true, that my father
sometimes expressed more affection to me then to my brothers; but must his
goodness make me suspected of malice, and the Caresses which he gave not but
to my Infancy, make more then the moity of my crimes? I do not say this to
accuse thy goodness, which cannot fail, nor to justify my innocence, which
cannot be perfect, if thou use all thy rigor. Though my virtue should be
without spot, thy only will would render my affliction lawful, and the fault of
my enemies pardonable. I die willingly in this prison, and will no longer draw
a languishing life, which is not pleasing to thee. Let hunger consume me, let
the serpents tear me, it shall make nothing against my desire, since nothing
arrives against thy Ordinance. Only (my God) I conjure thee to forget my
faults, and to have pity of the soul of that poor culpable wretch, who dies,
either to satisfy thy justice, or to obey thy holy and adorable will.

Whilst Joseph sighed, our Pastors who were gone to gather together their
Flocks and Herd, came all to the place where the rendezvous was appointed.
Reuben only was wanting; for he stepped aside into the wood to be able safely
to draw his brother out of the Cestern: His absence was not suspected of that
good intention, having himself given the counsel to cast him in there. As he
thought on the means of this deliverance, his brothers, who were on the
Highway, perceived afar off a Troop of Ismaelites, who seemed to advance
toward them. As soon as Judas understood that they were Merchants, it came
into his thought to prolong Joseph's life, since that he had not power to
warrant him from death. My brethren, (said he) the Image of that miserable
creature appears always before mine eyes; I believe if he dye in the estate
wherein we leave him, that the remembrance of his death will be henceforward a
sad phantasme that will trouble me night and day. Behold, a fair occasion not
only to punish, but also to profit by his malice. Let us sell him to these
Ismaelites, our revenge shall be more safe, since they withdraw themselves
ordinarily toward Egypt. This proposition pleased, and was generally received
of all the others, Judas accompanied with some of them ran to the Cestern. In
the moment that he arrived, our innocent Joseph entertained himself upon the
thoughts of the amorous Providence of God; as he saw in the bottom of the cave
some one, that seemed to approach unto him, he easily believed that it was
death; he knew notwithstanding that it was the shadow of Judas, who commanded
him to hold fast by a cord to be the more easily drawn forth. He obeyed upon
this belief, that they could not find a crueller death, then that which was
sure unto him in this pit. They led him on the way where the Ismaelites were
arrived, and treated already of this purchase. Having seen how he behaved
himself, his graceful carriage, and his beauty, gained so sensibly their
hearts, that a load of gold would not have displeased them for this
Merchandise; but those who knew not the merit of Joseph, cared not to set on
him so high a price. They left him for thirty pence, as S. Augustine assures
it; may be to the end that this figure should accord to the truth, and the
shadow represent perfectly its Sun. The Merchants could apprehend that this
young man was not robbed, since they gave him rather then sold him.
Notwithstanding the deceit being to their profit, they counted readily that
which they had desired of them. One of them observing their mirth, not to
appear either sots, or deceivers, said unto them, Sirs, It is simplicity to
deceive ones self, malice to deceive others. The bone-mine of this young man
might make us to be thought fools for selling him so cheap. To the end that you
have not this opinion of us, nor take a worse, I would fain advertise you of
his qualities. Know that you never saw one more gentle, but take heed that the
Magic, in which he excels, do not take him out of your hands. This advise made
them not repent to have hazarded the little which he cost them; notwithstanding
the belief that he was a Magician, gave them a little more care then they would
have taken of him otherwise. The poor Joseph fearing that there could not
arrive unto him a greater mischief, esteemed that of slavery sweet enough,
dissembling by the serenity of his countenance, the sadness of his heart.

Let us leave him with his Masters, and return we to Reuben, who perhaps lost
himself in the solitude where we left him. The Evening of this Journey began to
approach, and the shadows as it were to prepare the Earth for the darkness of
the night extended themselves deeply into the field, when the best of all the
brothers of Joseph came to the Cestern. He leaned on its banks, looking of all
sides, if he could see him whom he sought; but having perceived nothing, he
called Joseph: believing that he was deceived, he fixed his sight more
curiously upon all the places of this Cavern; and seeing no more there then at
first, he redoubled his voice, but Joseph answered not. It was then that Reuben
imagined the Serpents, and Vipers which were in great number thereabout, had
destroyed him. It would be hard to describe the plaints which he made upon this
belief, accusing sometimes the perfidiousnesse of his brothers, and now his own
wickedness. A thousand sighs issued from his mouth, and as many tears from his
eyes: if he should have remained long by this Cestern, there had needed no
other rain to fill it but that of his eyes. But (said he) thy regrets can
prevail nothing upon death; she is as deaf as blind: Let us not lose words
unprofitably, and since that my sins have caused this loss, let us show more
patience to suffer it, then we have expressed courage to hinder it. As he had
finished this word he put himself in endeavor to seek his brothers, whom he
found driving their Herds toward the Village: As far off as they could hear
him, he cried out, we have no brother more, Joseph is dead. These three words
made all the company stop, who seeing on Reubons countenance the marks of his
grief, took from him the error wherein he was, adding that necessity had
constrained them to make this traffic. To engage him in their fault, they gave
him three of those silver pieces, with which they had been paid. All the night
was passed in consulting on the means to cover their crime. The best expedient
on which they advised themselves, was to kill a Kid, and to dip Joseph's coat in
his blood, to the end to make Jacob believe, that some wild beast had devoured
him in the desert, protesting with horrible Oaths, that he who should say
otherwise, should not be recompensed for that piety but with death.

I assure me, my dear Reader, that you will have much trouble to see the poor
Jacob in this encounter without tears, whether they be yours or his; he was
sat before his door with the little Benjamin; when his children saw him, each
of them composed himself so perfectly unto sadness, that one would have
believed that they resented the true effects thereof. Simeon who was to make
this evil discourse, had not only disguised his visage, but his artifice was
passed even unto the heart, to draw thence the sighs of the Crocodile: He had
also meditated the simplest words that he could choose, to the end to make no
study nor policy appear in his speech. Being then come to this good Patriarch,
he cried out with an accent very pitiful: Oh my Father, we have no more
brother, Joseph is dead; and then drawing forth the Coat which he carried,
behold all that which a cruel beast has left us of him. Know you not the fair
robe of the most amiable of your children? This was here the last word of his
discourse, forasmuch as he had prepared so many sighs and tears, that the rest
thereof seemed to be smothered under their abundance. To represent perfectly
the first effect which this news wrought upon Jacob, it is necessary to lay a
statue of marble before your eyes. The blow being not expected, it did like a
Thunderbolt whose clap suspends all our powers, until we have made reflection
upon our own danger. This Image is lively enough for that first assault of
grief, but we must have other shapes to represent him, when he had a little
looked upon the subject of his affliction. This poor old man taking the
lamentable relics of his son, cried out, Joseph is dead, my son Joseph is no
more, and then considering the spots of blood in the Coat: Oh cruel monster, I
may well say, since so much sweetness could not persuade thee that cruelty it
self is thy proper nature. Perhaps I dream, and this is not the robe of my son,
yet it has the work thereof: It is the same, and where are you then Joseph? Oh
my dear Joseph, you are dead. But if you are no more, should I live, my life
being not but yours? I perceive by this rent of the side, that the wild beast
has planted his murtherous teeth in your innocent heart. Must thou then
inhumane monster, must thou attach the source of all my loves: Alas, Joseph is
no more.

Behold all that which our afflicted Patriarch said, making appear that his
grief was true, seeing it was not eloquent, and that he suffered many evils,
since he expressed them but very little. All the inhabitants of Hebron who
indevoured to comfort him, had no other answer but this, Joseph is dead, will
you have me live? no, no; keep your reasons for some other, who has less
cause to lament then I. I will that my tears accompany me even to my Tomb, and
if the dead could carry their passions thither, I would that the grief my be
immortal, and that it might make the moity of my soul. Adieu pleasures, adieu
Joseph, adieu only Joseph, since I bid adieu to all that which is sweet and
amiable in this life, in bidding you adieu. This was the only complement with
which he received his comforters; soon after, as if he were returned from a
long trance, he added: But it may be that my son has quitted his robe, and
that this beast has found it. Sottish reason! thou indeavourest to deceive
me; and whence comes this blood? and why this rage against an inanimate thing?
You would have believed seeing these good, and his evil intervals, that nature
restrained of grief, took breath, to the end to be more sensible of it
afterward. So it was that Zabulon not able to behold longer the displeasure of
his father, took a resolution to discover the secret to him, if the fear which
his brothers gave him of a cruel death, had not shut his mouth. This silence
was not a virtue, since to the treason against Joseph it added the hazard to
make Jacob dye. But since that our discourse can neither wipe away, nor
describe the tears of this desolate father, let us permit him that which the
most cruel Tyrants forbid not to the afflicted, and let us follow his miserable
son into Egypt.

When the Ishmaelites were arrived to the Fountain of Shilo, which is near unto
Bethlehem, our slave perceived a Pyramid erected upon a Tomb, which he knew to
be that of his mother. The desire to give a last kiss to the marble, which
covered her holy relics, made him take his course toward that place. The
Merchants who saw him stretched out upon that Tomb, had some suspicion that he
was a Necromancer, and that he spoke to the dead, according to the belief that
was given them of his Magic. Whilst they entertained themselves in this
thought, Joseph endeavored to discover his unto Rahel. Alas, my good mother
(said he) if you keep yet that pitiful and loving heart, which you had
formerly, will you not make it appear unto me at this present that I am laden
with these chains, with the most sensible misery, that could assault a strong
patience? I am assured that your virtue gives you a great power with the God of
Abraham; could you better employ it then to the relief of Innocents? I desire
not that my merit be the motive of your benefit, because that being so little,
I cannot expect from it so notable a succor: It shall be if it please you,
your goodness, which never found any thing difficult, provided, that it was
reasonable. I desire not that God would punish the sins of my brethren, I love
better their repentance then their death: I wish not that my life be prolonged,
a sweet death seems more desirable unto me then a languishing life. Behold then
the subject of all my devotions: Grant, my amiable mother, that this stone,
open it self, and permit me to dye in the same bosom, where I began to live.
This favor is great, if you measure it according to the esteem that I make
thereof: But then it is he whose birth wiped away the tears of seven years,
that demands it; it is he to whom you wished so many blessings, whereas you see
me charged with so many misfortunes; It is in a word your son Joseph: can you
refuse him this favor at less rate then to be no more mother?

As he pronounced these words, his eyes bathed the Tomb, and his sighs made his
masters understand sufficiently that he had more affliction in his heart, then
design of Magic in his action. Having drawn him notwithstanding from this
Sepulcher, where it seemed that love had tied him, they continued their way
toward Egypt; but it was not without thinking of his actions, and without
weighing all the words of our Captive. Above all some observed with much
astonishment, that this young man gathered up certain little stones by that
Tomb. The most judicious of these strangers seeing I know not what of
extraordinary upon the visage, and in the discourse of Joseph, believed
assuredly, that though he had the condition of a slave, he had not the birth of
one. This thought gave him the curiosity to demand of him, why he fixed himself
upon that Tomb, and who he was. The young man taking the liberty which they gave
him to speak, replied.

Sir, If I went away from you as soon as I perceived that Pyramid, I did it not
upon any apprehension not to obtain that favor from your courtesy, but the
remembrance of my dear mother preventing all my other thoughts, took from me
that of my duty, and carried me farther toward her then I had permission for.
Know then, that my Father passing some ten years since by Bethlehem, which you
see, my mother was surprised in this Land with the throws of childbearing, of
which a few days after she dyed. My Father who had always loved her, as she
deserved, would yet witness it after her death, erecting her this Pyramid,
where he graved the name of his dear wife, and that of all his childreu. The
young man ended his discourse, when his master commanded him to tell the place
of his birth, his name, and that of his parents: he did it with so good grace,
that it was sufficient to win the heart of an Arabian, and to deserve to be
freed of the chains with which he was laden.

One might here demand why these Ismaelites took no resolution to bring him
back to his Father. The question is not so easy, as it seems at first. For to
say that they believed not the discourse, which he had made them, the good
usage which he received from them, showed well that they held him not for an
Impostour. Was it that they knew not Jacob? This reason cannot be good, since
he was nephew to Ismael their Grandfather. Perhaps they apprehended the
vengeance of those who had sold him; what probability for that, since their
force was equal unto theirs? Shall we believe that the fair parts of Joseph
might make them hope a great profit by his sale? I confess that interest can
much upon a mercenary soul, but from whom could they hope more then from a
father, who loved perfectly; then from a father who knew well the merit of such
a son; then from a father, who almost lived no more, in that he supposed Joseph
was dead. Though we should have brought all the conjectures, we should not have
touched the true reason. I love better to reject the small appearances of my
reasoning, and have recourse to that Providence which governed all the fortunes
of our Joseph; Providence which sometimes takes pleasure to blind all the
wisdom of men, to the end to conduct her designs, by ways as amorous as they
are unknown. How many times have we seen the wise men of the world, and those
wits which we flatter with strength and intelligence, to loose discourse in the
events, whereas infancy could speak Learnedly? God pleases himself sometimes
to make us confess, that we have no light, but what he thinks fit to
communicate unto us. We need not wonder then if these Ishmaelites saw not the
advantages which the deliverance of Joseph would bring them, since God concealed
them to make his designs succeed. Whilst we divert us thus pleasingly, Joseph
changes Country, and becomes a stranger. Some have written that he was sold
twice before he entered into Egypt. That which has made them to err, was that
they were ignorant that the names of Ishmaelites, of Arabians, and of
Madianites, were not but one and the same people. Howsoever it was, without
engaging me in these difficulties, willing to unfold them, it is certain that
our Merchants steered right to the Royal Town, where they believed that fortune
would sooner attend them then any where else. Being arrived there, their first
care was not to admire the superb buildings of that famous City: Every one has
his thoughts, and his divertisements, those of the Merchants are to procure
themselves riches. The occupation of ours was to expose presently their
merchandises, and though the Master was troubled to resolve himself that Joseph
should be the richest piece thereof: Notwithstanding the desire of money
carried him for this bout, above the consideration of his pleasures. It is true
that he put so great a price upon him, as could buy a score of other slaves,
and which would have driven away all the world, if his merit had not been as
visible as his graceful behavior. One day these Ishmaelites being upon the
point to depart, a Lady of condition passed by their shop: As she perceived our
slave, she commanded her Coach to stop, and having considered him, an Eunuch
told the Merchants that they should not depart the Town till they had received
my Ladies Orders. It was not hard to obey a Lady of that quality; So the stay
was not long, for Potiphar sent them at the hour a Page to command them to
come to his house, and to bring with them that young Cananean, whom his wife
had entertained. The Kite flies not more swiftly to his prey, then these men of
money rendered themselves where they hoped to find theirs. They spoke without
delay of the price, which appeared not excessive, because they had no sooner
seen Joseph, but they blamed the Ishmaelites for not making the esteem of him
which they ought. His countenance showed well that he was not of the Village,
and his liberty which he had free amongst his Irons. Potiphar asked him, what
he could do? To which he answered with an incredible modesty, that he could
obey; this reply was so much more pleasing, as it was less expected. This Lord
who took pleasure to hear him, would engage him to other answers. What then,
cannot one command thee any thing so hard that is not impossible for thee? My
Lord, replied Joseph, obedience consists not in doing, but in willing, so that
if one commands any thing above our power, our weakness is rather seen then
our vice. If I command thee to adore our Gods, added Potiphar? That would be
impossible for me, replied our slave, since you have not any. Suppose that they
be not so as thou will, I can ordain thee to render the same honors that we do
to the Crocodiles. Then I would not obey, because my obedience would be a
crime, by reason of a duty more pressing then the obligation that I should have
to accomplish your will. Whilst Joseph gave these courageous answers, Potiphar
fixing too curiously his eyes upon a face of seventeen years, took a passion
for this slave, which is too filthy to be named, and without diminishing any
thing of the price, told forth an hundred Crowns of gold to his Masters. God
stayed not long to punish the rashness of a man that would profane a thing
which was consecrate to him. S. Jerome assures that concupiscence was so
quenched in this Lord, that not only he could not seek the forbidden pleasures,
but also he was not capable of the lawful. Perhaps the Scripture has taken
occasion from thence to call him Eunuch, which could not be before, since he
had a daughter ten years old.

This accident cooled the body of Potiphar, not his affection: On the contrary
it increased, insomuch that he took a perfect knowledge of his good qualities.
Virtue makes it self always to be cherished; so must it be granted that being
more fair in a fair body, she has charms more powerful, and attractions less
avoidable; Joseph's Master learned this truth from his experience; for having
continually this young man before his eyes, and not ignorant of his
perfections, by little and little he formed himself a necessity to love him,
and from that love a most perfect confidence. Amongst the good qualities with
which he rendered himself commendable, he had one that seemed not to be of his
age: It was a prudence so ordered, that one would think it old from an age. It
was she that rendered him happy in Potiphars house, inasmuch as he trusted him
with all the government of his house, and with the intendency of all his
affairs. This confidence was not dammageable, since Joseph was an Intelligence
that could neither be surprised in his conduct, nor corrupted in his manners.
Never suffered he himself to be vanquished with the desire of wealth, nor
wearied himself to practice it. The hand of an Angel was not more clean of
avarice then his; and though gold has I know not what of gluttonous, he could
not be catched therewith. He made the riches of his Master to profit, without
diminishing those of his neighbors. His debtors could say, that it was
advantageous to them to have such a Creditour. To see the wealth of Potiphar,
one would have said, that all the superfluity of Egypt flowed into his Palace,
and that this fair part of the world was not fruitful but for him. Judge now if
this servant was used like a slave; and if his Master had reproaches for him.
The other Domestics drew not the same satisfaction from Joseph, forasmuch as
his cares were a continual censure of their negligence. Sometimes they had
temerity enough to blame a virtue which they could not imitate; but Potiphar
was not disposed to their murmures, and the integrity of his economy made
their envy appear. Notwithstanding the assurance which he had thereof never
made him insolent: On the contrary persuading himself that he ought as well to
conserve the peace of that house as his own interests, he prevented the other
Officers with all sort of good offices. If he presented himself any benefit, it
fell by his address into other hands then his; making more reckoning of a
friend, then of a present. Never demanded Potiphar of him an account of his
companions deportments, that he had not good to say of them. This industry
gained him by little and little the most savage, and the most jealous.

A man that treats thus with his inferiors, fails not ordinarily of the
respect that he owes to his Lord: Joseph might say that he was rather adored,
then that he received honor thereby. His fortune might make him believe that
he was his Favorite, notwithstanding he never thought himself but his slave.
The affection which they bare him augmented his reverence, in stead of
lessening it.

I have said that Potiphar had a daughter, but I have not yet said that she was
so born unto good, and that all her inclinations were so innocent, that Joseph
not able to hate verue, cherished the visage thereof in his young Mistress.
The effects of this love were all chaste and all holy, as well as their cause.
As this Gentlewoman began to grow up, she began to be considered as the fairest
and richest match of Egypt. Her house was ordinarily filled with young Lords,
who came to make themselves slaves unto her, who would have no servants. Joseph
having known this inclination, and observed that the heart of Asseneth rejected
all that which her eyes attracted, indevoured to fortify her in that
resolution. When he met her aside, and that he could not be heard of her
Followers, he told her so many marvels of chastity, that she deliberated from
that time forward to remain always a Virgin. Observe this passage of Gods
Providence, who distasted this Maid with the love of all those that sought her,
to prepare her to an affection which you will presently admire.

But it seems that fortune was weary to oblige our Intendant, and that she
feared to acquire the name of constant, if she obliged him longer. And to speak
truth, I should love much better to be always miserable, then not to be happy,
but to resent more livelily my misfortune, and to creep in the dust, then to
see my self lifted up to fall into a precipice. There is no beast how fierce
soever he be, who becomes not gentle with us: Misfortunes seem to be of this
nature, since the most bitter render themselves sweet by their familiarity.
Poor Joseph how happy had you been in your misfortune, if they had left you to
the chain; the custom of suffering would have taken away the sense of your
pains, or at least it would have diminished the sharpness thereof.

Hitherto we have not spoken of the satisfaction which the wife of Potiphar had
from the services of Joseph: We have said that all those of the house loved him
perfectly, shall it be she alone that has no heart? Oh would to God that she
were all of Ice for him, her hate is more to be desired then her affection.
They assure that Love has no eyes, or if he have, he sees not a whit; this
cannot be said of those that love. For if the object of their passion be
present, it possesses not only their thought, but as if all their looks
belonged to it, it draws them so powerfully, that reason governs them no more.
And that which is to be admired, they are so clear-sighted, that they find in
that object the perfections that are not there. Every part is a miracle of
nature, and though oftentimes that very thing, from whence they derive their
love, is that which gives hatred unto others, it must be that all their
comparisons come from Heaven, and that the names which they give them be robbed
from the Angels, or from God. But retnrn we to her who must make the filthiest
part of this History, and which we would have left out if the Holy Ghost
himself marking all its particulars, seemed not willing to illustrate the glory
of Joseph by the shame of this infamous woman. It is not then but too true,
that he was loved of her, who owed all her heart to Potiphar, which she could
not divide without losing it altogether. I confess notwithstanding that her
first affection had taken birth from his fair qualities, and that she was in
the beginning honest; but degenerating afterward into a filthy passion, she
fixed her self less to the merit, then to him that possessed it. Behold as it
happens oftentimes, that Virtues engender Vices, and that the Sun produces
the shadows, which he must dissipate. Joseph perceived not so soon the malady
of his Mistress, forasmuch as he saw nothing amiable in his person, and that
he had too good opinion of Cyrene, to conceive an evil one of her. It is thus
that charity thinks of her neighbor, loving better to feign perfections in
him, then to consider his defects: she does that here which she would find All
the words of complaisance which she used, were taken for a simple acceptance
of service, and for a civility, which the Nobility never deny to the meanest
persons.

This woman perceiving the sense that Joseph gave to her flatteries, declared
her self all openly, not letting any occasion pass to witness to him her
love. She had no praises but for Joseph; all that which he did was approved,
his least words were mysteries, and though she needed not to feign much to find
him fair, her passion rendered him to her more amiable. If this evil had not
been gone so far, there might have been means to cure it, and to give some
excuse to a woman, who had no modesty. For to speak the truth, one must be
extremely cold not to be warmed by so fair a fire, and strong to make defense
against so charming an enemy. His beauty was a powerful attraction, even for
the souls that were not weak. The deformity of these Moors and Aethopians, who
were in the same house, serving him for umbrage, raised his luster the more.
What marvel was it then that a woman made like the Mistress of Joseph, should
suffer her self to be taken by so many enticements!

Our holy young man knew at last the evil gain that he had made; and as all was
contrived without his consent, and against his desire, he indevoured to bring
to it all the remedies that his wisdom judged necessary and profitable. The
presence of the object is the support and nourishment of that disease, which
they call Love; he was not ignorant of it, therefore withdrew he as much as he
could from this Lady. But if necessity obliged him to do any thing in her
presence, he restrained all the good grace of his action, for fear that it
might be a new motive to her tenderness. His artifices staid not there; for as
he knew that they remained without fruit, being angry with himself for the
fault of another, he punished it in his person. He fasted, wore the cilice, and
practiced other mortifications, to the end to take away the handsomeness from
his body, and the beauty from his visage, which seemed to prepare him this
persecution. He that kindles a fire, ought to quench it; when Love is unlawful,
his birth is shameful, his murder commendable: the Parricide is the true
father thereof; for who kills it, obliges it.

The more our Saint applied industries to dis-engage his Mistress, the more
his Mistress invented new plots to surprise him. All her actions carried
design; her looks were capable to bring impurity into a pure spirit, and to
make a savage to love. Her countenance was so smooth, that it could give
tenderness to the most austere virtue. Even her carriage, when it appeared
simple, was affected. I speak not of the sighs, with which she indevoured to
shake his constancy, nor of certain papers, which she made sometimes to fly
into his hands. I care not to trouble your chaste ears with the evil discourses
that she held forth unto him; but to the end that you may know the strength of
a great soul, I will give you part of his answer. The wise Physician draws
Antidotes from the most cruel poison; the good Christian instructions from the
most evil actions.

This unchaste Lady having one day declared unto him the passion that she had
for him, and indevoured to draw his consent to her shameful design, he said
unto her courageously. Madam, I should never have thought that a woman of your
quality should be of your humor, and that you could have filthy passions in a
condition, which obliges you to have none but noble. To speak seriously, I
believe that your proceeding is not but artifice, to understand if I am as
foolish, as I am young. I cannot imagine that a Lady, who is as it were in all
the eyes of the world, who conserves hitherto so clean a reputation, who has
kept a perfect fidelity to her husband, and who gives one of the fairest
examples unto Egypt, should receive the thoughts that one might condemn. Pardon
me, if I complain of the experience which you would make of my faith, and if I
tell you that I think not to have so ill husbanded the affairs of my Lord, that
I should be prodigal of his honor, which I know to be the most precious of all
his wealth. Grant notwithstanding that your passion be as true, as you command
me to believe it, I will not fear to tell you, that it shall always be more
easy for me to dye innocent, then to live unfaithful. Should not my head most
merit the Thunderbolt of any man's under Heaven, to betray a person, whose trust
obliges me to be a good man? What water would be pure enough to wash me of the
spot which so wicked, and criminal an ingratitude would cast upon my
reputation? My Master has commanded that every one obey me in his house, (she
only excepted, who must command me here, what appearance is there of
acknowledgement of so many benefits from the most sensible outrage, that he
could expect from his most cruel enemy? But though the consideration of my duty
would not take from me the liberty of so black a crime, and that your passion
would abandon you to the meanest of your servants, I have higher thoughts to
hinder me from being Traitor and Adulterer both together. If the God which I
adore, were like unto yours, who sees not but the hay of his cratch, the
assurance not to be perceived, would take from me the fear to be punished. But
alas! his eyes pierce into the deeps, and his justice cannot suffer the least
faults without punishment. Let us hide us to offend him, we shall do the same
as if we should shut our eyes, to hinder a Lynx from seeing us. Let us retire
into the solitudes to assure our sin: His hand will go along to take us, to
punish it. The night and darkness are not more cloudy, and obscure to him then
midday; nor the two ends of the world more distant from his Majesty, then the
Center of the Sun, where he has chosen his habitation. What impunity can one
hope in offending a God, who knows all things, and pardons nothing? Suffer me
then, Madam, to live innocent in your house, or if my life cannot be pleasing
to you being virtuous, give me leave to seek one, where I may be acceptable
being faithful.

If the passions would become sometimes tractable unto reason, this discourse
was wise enough to correct that of Cyrene; but these motions of the brutish
part of man would be no more the Tyrants of his soul, if they should obey
judgment; and the spirit would be absolute, if it had no longer Rebels in it is
Empire. Expect not then change in Joseph's Mistress, if it be not that these
sparks kindle into a coal. Love has this evil quality, that he stubbornly
disputes against the remedies, and increases like the flames by the agitation
of all that, which is contrary to it. The resistance of this generous Champion
was not capable to change so evil a design, nor to heal her, who took pleasure
to be sick; On the contrary, his modesty made her impudence to increase, and
his refusal augmented her importunities. As we see sometimes the water to
kindle the fire by a secret virtue, to which the Philosopher gives a name,
without knowing its nature. Yet considering that her lascivious glances were no
darts to vanquish the courage of Joseph, and that all the beauty which she
borrowed from the fucus, and from art, could not enter into that chaste heart,
nor slide it self into his soul, she had recourse to other charms then her own,
endeavoring to make her self beloved of an Angel, by the assistance of the
Devils, Egypt has always been the mother of Sorceries; and if the History
thereof may be believed, the Devil never found a Province, which had like
dispositions to his Impostures. This poor miserable of whom we speak, having
added to her former deceits great number of love-potions, and known that the
virtue of Joseph was a counter-poison to all her venom, resolved her self to
have recourse to a Sorceresse, who boasted to gain all hearts, upon whom she
should have design. Love, how extreme is thy violence, since thy motions carry
a soul even unto Hell! How deep is thy blindness, since thy obscurity
extinguishes in us the fairest lights of the Heaven!

Behold then the wife of Potiphar, who came into the house of the Witch, with
one sole Confident, and under an unknown habit. Vice has sometimes the
discretion to cover it self; but it pretends by this modesty to give it self
more liberty, not to hinder the scandal, or to punish its malice. As soon as
she saw this Proserpine, she said unto her, My good mother, you know already
the cause that brings me to you. The gods have not communicated unto you all
their knowledge, that you should not see my disaster: I come to her who holds
their power in her hand, and who has as well as they the will to succor the
miserable. Make me to resent the effects of your pity; and since you change
beasts more savage then that cruel one who makes me dye, give him a moity of
the flames that consume me, or commucate me the Ice that congealeth him. If the
acknowledgement of it can pay a benefit, you may be assured, that neither the
power nor the will shall be wanting to me in this occasion.

My daughter, (replied the Sorceresse) I know the cause of your coming, I know
the evil that torments you, and am not ignorant of the remedy, which shall cure
you. Have only a firm confidence that there is nothing impossible to the force
of my charms, and I will lose all my credit, if you lose not all your
inquietudes. Before three days be past you shall triumph on your Rebel; follow
me. Having ended her promises, she conducted her Victime into a Closet filled
with Skeletons of dead born infants, with skins of Serpents, with Images of
wax, with blood, and with an infinity of such like movables. After having
filled her spirit with illusions, she put a powder into her hand, which she
should use in making it also to be mingled in Joseph's meat. Moreover she gave
her a little piece of Virgin-parchment, marked with Characters written in
Rere-mouse-blood, to the end to sow it into some part of his clothes. Demand
not if these drugs cost dear, for nothing is chargeable to the person that
loves. Profuseness follows ordinarily Love, and poverty follows that this
traffic being finished, she, who was to receive the profit thereof, returned
secretly to her house, and made in few hours that which was ordained her. But
Hell is too weak to overthrow a party, which Heaven supporteth: Its artifices
could nothing against a simplicity, which the Providence of a God governs,
nor the flatteries of a woman, nor the drinks of an Apothecary, nor the
Characters of a Sorceresse, could corrupt Joseph. He remained firm in the midst
of his persecutions, his heart burned not but like the Seraphins, his spirit
remained clean from filthy thoughts, his imagination it self received not any
evil color. The love of his God made him to hate his Mistress; and because he
could not please him if he were not innocent, he indevoured to displease her,
in refusing to be culpable. So generous a constancy should cause confusion and
coldness in this Cyrene, and vanquish so many foul importunities; but a
passion never stops it self, but in the precipice, where it must fall. When
reason speaks unto it, she is not heard, because it has no ear: When prudence
shows it its duty, it despises it, because it has not the force to acquit it
self thereof. When one represents it its punishments, it mocketh thereat,
because it believes them not. It will not be healed, because it thinks not it
self to be sick.

Cyrene obstinately persevere no more, you cannot bend this young man: you will
lose him absolutely, if you endeavor longer to gain him: Commonly those that
will give love by force, cause nothing but aversion. This impudent pursued, and
as if she had ill ordered her artifices, she began them again. She returned to
her eyes, and to her carriages, she studied new gestures, and sought out
countenances more lascivious. Joseph guard your self, behold the last and most
dangerous of your combats; if you yield, your last victory is lost. Your
brothers are not your cruellest enemies, this persecution surpasses theirs in
malice; the more sweetness she has, the less assurance you ought to have; if
she flatters, she will destroy: if she speak pleasingly to you, she inforceth
her self to seduce. The praises of this woman are more to be feared then the
calumnies of Issachar, and her allurements more redoubtable then the hatred of
Simeon; because those ruin their love, whereas these pretend to corrupt your
virtue; because those endeavor only to put you into disgrace with Jacob, and
these desire to draw the anger of God upon you; because those have not put you
but into a Cestern, and this here has design to open Hell unto you. Lastly,
the worst effect of those could only separate your life from your body, and the
most deplorable misfortune of these is to separate your soul from God.

It is not unto Joseph that it is necessary to represent all these reasons, the
inclination that he has unto good fortifies him more then our discourses. Let
us consider this courageous young man, his virtue deserves to be regarded in
this encounter. Potiphar was to assist at the Feast of the great God Apis; to
render his devotion more glorious, he would that all his Family should
accompany him thither. Joseph who was not accustomed to adore the Calves, found
a pretext, which seemed to oblige him to stay at home. Cyrene who saw so fair
an occasion would not lose it, feigning then some indisposition; her husband,
who loved her tenderly, commanded her to keep her bed. Oh what a dangerous
beast is a subtle woman, and what means she has to dissemble when she goes
about it. Would you believe that Potiphars wife seemed to bring much resistance
to do a thing, which she desired with passion; she sighed so tenderly, that
one would have believed that she would dye of devotion, and that they should be
constrained to carry her to the Tomb, if they led her not to the Temple. She
must notwithstanding consent to the will of her husband, which she did more
through inclination, then duty, and keeping with her one only of her women, she
commanded the others to follow her daughter. As Potiphar was departed, and that
she imagined the solemnity was at the point, which might assure her, she
commanded her Gentlewoman to call the Intendant: This Confident, who was
instructed, went readily to his Chamber, and said unto him that my Lady would
speak with him. Poor Joseph, discover you not this plot? perceive you not this
gin? His innocence is not subtle enough to suspect evil intentions in a sick
person. He ran presently, and found his Mistress half out of her bed, who
entertained him with certain things, of which I desire you should not have the
thought. At last these words not able to persuade this generous heart, she
seized on his garment, and pressed him with kindnesses that seemed to force
him. Our young man, who knew well that the victory of this enemy consisted in
the flight, left his garment in the hands of this Infamous, and got to the
stairs. Cyrene not able to suffer this contempt, changed all her love into
hatred, and cried out with all her strength for help; being bereaved of the
shame which she should have, as well as of her clothes, she would cover her
self with the Cloak of an Innocent, who could not ward her. Oh how ingenious is
fortune when she will afflict any one!

As Joseph was on the midst of the stairs, he met his Master, who was returned
from the Temple upon some necessity. Potiphar seeing him without hat, all
troubled, and out of breath; on the other side hearing his wife cry outright,
that they should stop that Traitor, he conceived a violent suspicion against
his innocence. They seized him, and at the same time led him into his Mistress
chamber, who held yet his garment in her hands: As soon as she perceived her
husband, she said, in showing the spoils of that enemy, that she loved too
much: Truly, Sir, behold the fair fruits of the confidence which you have of
that slaves fidelity: It was not enough for him to be prodigal of your goods,
if he indevoured not to defile your bed, and to blast shamefully my reputation.
Scarce were you departed, but this Perfidious came to make to me a request, the
sole thought whereof fills me with confusion; but having not found that
facility in me which he imagined, he endeavored to draw by violence, what he
could not obtain with my consent. Behold the marks of his impudence, which you
must punish, if you will not have me dye. This word ended, Cyrene feigning that
grief overcame her, left her self to fall backward, with all the signs that
might be to deceive, and make a diffidency believed.

I leave you to think what rage jealousy kindled in the heart of Potiphar,
what cruelty this rage inspired him with, what revenge this choler meditated.
One death is not enough to punish an evil thought, which he never had; he would
have him to live an Age, if he had the means, to make him to dye every day.
What (said he) ungrateful Viper, is it thus that thou acknowledgest so many
benefits, which thou have never merited? May be that thou would punish me for
having put my favors into his hands that would ravish my glory? The effect of
this outrageous design, was it the affair, that kept thee at home, or the
pretense of that painted piety, which has so long deceived our simplicity? Oh
I will make thee to feel that a slave cannot do grosser faults, nor have
greater temerities, then to have a mind to be Master. Drag hence this Monster.

They led him away without resistance, choosing rather that his innocence
suffer, then to see Cyrene justly afflicted. They striped this chaste young man;
he permitted that they should take away his clothes, but not his shame: They
offended him with sharp words; he held his peace, but more through discretion,
then want of courage. They tore him with scourges of the whip, the blood
streamed down his body, and some tears from his eyes; but he kept all the
constancy in a great soul. They discovered his bones through the violence of
his dolours; he desired not to live, he feared only that death would not finish
the occasion of his merit. At last they put this poor innocent in a condition,
which would have given more compassion then love to his Mistress. That face
which possessed so many attractions, was all disfigured; his eyes which could
convey innocent flames into hearts, have not lights enough to see. That body
all made of Lillies, and which appeared rather snow then white, was no more but
a spectacle of horror for the wicked, and a subject of pity for the good.
Would to God that all those effeminates, whom the Cloth of Holland hurts,
that those wantons, who cannot sleep but upon the Velure, that those infamous
Ravens whom lust keeps always in breath, could see our Joseph in this pitiful
estate. I would say unto them, this young man whom you see is not tied to this
pillar, for being convicted of any shameful crime; but for not being able to
love any thing but virtue: Learn of him the resistance that we must bring to an
evil action, and how far forth our fidelity must go. Say not, that it is
impossible for you to suffer that which he endured, I do not believe that they
have persecuted you yet to the blood; and though they should, your delicacy
would not excuse you, since Joseph was not of the Village. His birth owes
nothing unto yours; his education had nothing of the Country; his blood was
subtle; his age invited him to the pleasures that destroy you. The fairest
temptations come to seek him; he had no need to corrupt the chastity of a Maid,
both by money, and by artifices: He could only but desire, and have, consent,
and enjoy; and yet O miracle of purity! he remained firm in an age where all
the world is shaken, inflexible in a condition, wherein the most part of men do
bend, and victorious in an occasion, where no body fights without difficulty,
and overcomes not without damage.

Strange thing, my dear Auditors, that Love should produce hatred. Truly if we
may judge of the consanguinity by the resemblance of the humors, we should
conclude that these two passions are enemies rather then allies; it is for all
that too true; that his fair Mother puts sometimes this ugly daughter into
nature. I confess that the birth thereof is monstrous, and appears but
seldom, it appears notwithstanding; and though that it be difficult to see
the reason thereof, it is easy to see the examples. Cyrene loved Joseph
tenderly, and now she persecutes him: I wonder not at that; that which
surpriseth me, is that her hate should spring from her love. The Trees thrust
not forth always the boughs, which are natural to them. The Animals bear
sometimes bastard-young, and which are strange. Without doubt this happens,
when the principle of these productions is mingled. But how though can hate be
born of love? Love produces but love, when it concurs with the esteem of its
object; but if it joins it self to its contempt, it conceives hatred. When we
believe they fly us, because they despise us, our passion revolts, and in stead
of being sweet, it is embittered. What marvel though the wife of Potiphar
persecute Joseph? In the first place she revengeth her love, which she sees
rejected; Secondly, she hides her impurity, which is discovered.
Voluptuousness not able to content this passion, which seeks but pleasure,
choler inspires her with rage, which cherishes nothing but blood. It is a
dangerous Monster, an heart that desires to be loved, and which one cannot
love. I apprehend but lamentable things for our slave, since he refuses to love
his Mistress.

Whilst I am diverted from my subject, I perceived not that they took Joseph
away; let us endeavor to find him again, and not lose one alone of his good
examples. But alas! I see him in a prison, where the light enters not, but when
the door is open; I see him laden with Irons: I see him amongst Thieves and
Robberss: I see him in the horrors of a cruel Captivity. He has carried
notwithstanding all his patience into this infamous retrait, all the virtues
would accompany him thither; and though the fatal spectacles of death, which he
had before his eyes, might shake a great courage, his showed in the serenity of
his countenance, that he had not learned to yield unto mean afflictions. His
cruel dolours could not make him to confess by one sole sigh that he suffered,
nor that his patience was assaulted: He spoke not, but through the praises
which he gave unto God. His discourses made nothing appear of an abated
courage; if he complained sometimes, it was only to say,

O my God! who thought thou had the secrets to change punishments into
pleasures; and make sweetness to be found in the bitterest gall? I begin to
blame my little experience, and to wish ill to the ignorances of my youth. When
the cruelty of my brothers made me a slave, I thought my fortune ruined; when
that blinded man began to look upon me favorably, with Potiphar, I praised my
good fortune; and I see now that that first accident was the first source of my
joys, and that happy beginning the fatal cause of my ruin. It is at this
present that I know the advantages of misfortune, and the dangers of
prosperity. My virtue appearing too fair, has been tempted by my brothers, and
cherish^d of my Mistress: Their hate has conserved me, her love has almost
destroyed me: O desirable chains, how I love you! Sweet Providence, how I adore
you with all my heart! I cherish you, precious chains, because you are that
which settles my salvation, because you are that which renders my virtues firm
and immovable. If you load my body, you adorn my soul. The torment which you
give me, shall not make me renounce the glory which you gain me. I adore thee,
amiable Providence of my God, forasmuch as thou have conducted me upon the
thorns without hurting me; for that thou have made me to tread upon the roses
without seducing me; and above all, I adore thee for that thou have brought me
here by those ways wholly desirable, since they put my little virtue in a place
where it may conserve it self, and not be destroyed. I confess that the
blessings which I taste, are not desired, but it is because they are not known:
For my part, whom thy goodness favors with this important knowledge, I
conceive so perfectly the merit thereof, that I beg no more of thee, O my
God, but that thou would continue me my pains and my affliction, to the end
to prolong my joys and my contentments. I will suffer all my life, provided
that it be with innocence, and that thou would receive some satisfaction from
my languishments.

Behold near the very discourse of Joseph, whilst he had cause to complain,
and it was put to the test, if virtue could be grieved: that of this
illustrious Captive being wholly courageous, employed it self rather to combat
the vices, which are found in prisons, then to deplore poorly his condition.
Who admires not that those persons who touch death almost, and who have always
the gibbets and punishments before their eyes, should make the place of the
impenitence the school of an evil life! Ordinarily the prison is not more
filled with ordure, then with vices, sin makes the most deplorable misery.
Impatience, murmurings, swearing, and blasphemies are taught here as a Science
proper to that estate. Joseph wanted no wit, but he had not any to retain that
lesson; On the contrary, taking the liberty which virtue should always have
even in Irons, and Chains, he corrected sweetly their evil life, making them to
apprehend that the Divine Justice would abandon them to the humane, if their
repentance appeased not its choler. It was by such like instructions, that he
changed these souls of dirt, and made reasonable creatures of those that were
not so.

The virtue of this new prisoner being profitable to the Jailer, he was soon
beloved of him: and though commonly this sort of people have souls of Iron, yet
Joseph's wrought upon him so, that he gained himself an opinion of his merit.
The Jailer visited him often, and took a singular pleasure in his conversation:
But behold what made up the good opinion which he had of him, and put him well
forward in credit; the Jailer being one day entered into the Chamber of our holy
Patriarch, Joseph perceived his sadness, and as he was gracious, he said unto
him: My Master, me thinks that you have not to day your pleasant humor? Truly
(replied the Jailer) I have no cause to be very well content, my poor wife
suffers such cruel pains since yesterday evening, that he must not be her
husband that can see her without pity: I fear that this childbed will be her
last, and that the throws which labor her, will thrust her into the grave. At
these words Joseph remembering himself of his mother, who dyed of such torments,
bestowed some tears on the affliction of his Master, and to contribute to his
comfort something more then compassion, he offered him certain black stones,
and said unto him. My Master, carry readily this succor to your wife, and I
promise you that she shall no sooner use it, but her pain shall be appeased.

The Jailer without disputing the quality of those stones, took them to carry
them to the sick, who had not scarce handled them, but she was happily brought
to bed of a son.

I observed the place where Joseph took these stones, but I have not told you
that God had given them in favor of Rah^l, the virtue to facilitate the
Couches of those, who were in travel with child, which many writers have
observed. Doubt not that this benefit acquired not the good will of the Jailer
to his prisoner, his wife her self would see her preserver, and thank him for
the assistance which she had received from his charity: From that time
forward it was an ordinary thing to see Joseph at his Masters Table, who had
such a confidence of his fidelity, that he trusted the other prisoners to his
conduct. Admire you not the goodness of our God, who delivers his servant
sweetly from misery; but attend yet a little, and you shall confess, that it
belongs but to his Providence to unwinde the Labyrinth of our misfortunes.
There was in this prison two Lords of Pharaohs house, the one was his chief
Baker, and the other his chief Butler, both of them fallen with his disgrace into
a prison. I know not for a truth, the cause of their misfortune; but if you
will believe the Rabbines, who please themselves with fables, we shall learn
from their dreams a fair instruction. Some of these Sages assure, that Pharaoh
being one day at Table, one served him up bread, wherein he found a little
grain of sand, and a Cup of wine, wherein there was a fly drowned. This Prince
extremely incensed against them, who should have care to foresee these
disorders, commanded that they should be thrown into the bottom of a Dungeon,
to repent themselves there at leisure of their negligence. I believe that this
is but an invention of their wit, yet we have here a perfect Image of the
inconstancy of Princes in their affection. It is too much that a Fly pass
before their eyes, to change them. The least fault provokes them; who is not
their Slave, is a Malefactor. If a Courtier be not always in humor to serve,
if he adore not all their thoughts, he is culpable enough to be punished; he
must flatter, or perish. They drive him from the house, and very often from the
world; at least a sudden anger pays a long servitude with death, or with
banishment.

To return to Joseph, it is certain that he brought a particular care to
acquit himself of the charge which was committed to him. He visited often these
poor wretches, endeavoring to render their condition better, and more
supportable by the sweetness of his usage.

There is I know not what pleasure to recount our miseries, and to put our
displeasures into the bosom of a friend: This comfort being easy, our
prisoners used it, entertaining one another with their fortunes, even sometimes
with their dreams.

As Joseph had found them one morning more sad then ordinary, he sat down by
them, and asked them what cause they had to be melancholy: Seigneur Joseph
(replied the Butler) I have for some time sweetened my evils as well as I could,
and suffered them with some patience. But since three or four days, as if my
evil would exulcerate, I feel new touches of dolor. The day puts but objects
of horror before mine eyes; the night forms me phantasmes of all her shadows,
and fills my soul with affright as well as the world with darkness. This very
night I had a dream, which gave as many fears as I gave it diverse
interpretations. It seemed unto me, that I saw a Vine stock that divided it
self into three branches, laden with very fair grapes, which I pressed into
the Kings Cup to present it him. I took an extreme pleasure to serve my Prince,
when a noise awaked me.

Sir, (replied Joseph) your dream need not to be longer, to be good: The
conjecture is so favorable, that I fear not to tell it you. The three
branches, which you have seen, denote that you shall be yet three days
unfortunate; after which, you shall enter again into the good graces of your
Prince, by the favor of his good graces into all your Honors. I cannot
deceive you longer then three days; if you find me a liar, count me a Villain;
but if the event prove true, I desire no other recompense of you, but that you
will speak a good word for me unto Pharaoh, and procure me my liberty. You
suppose to oblige herein a Slave, but you shall oblige the son of the chief of
the Hebrews.

This good Prophecy pleased so much the chief Baker, that he believed to have
as happily dreamed as his companion, and promised himself by the resemblance of
the visions, an event equal unto his. I thought (said he) that I carried this
night upon my head three baskets full of all sorts of baked meats, and of most
exquisite Viands. I know not what presage I may draw from an accident during
this occupation. Though these delicates were not for the birds, they eat up
notwithstanding all that which was exposed to them. Joseph, who desired not to
say but good words, expressed enough by his reservednesse, that this dream
promised no good unto him who had had it. Notwithstanding the importunity of
the Baker, constrained him at last to tell him, that he had seen his
misfortune, and that the King would cause him to be hanged within three days,
leaving his body on the Gibbet to serve for food to the Crows. If this
explication was believed or rejected, I cannot say; but I am certain that the
interpretation saw nothing that was not found true, and that the success
proved its experience.

We have a little to observe, that the dreams had showed to our slave some one
of his adventures, the encounter of those which we come to hear, was one of the
causes of his good fortune. It was hereby that the good fortune of Joseph
began, because that God willing to dispose Pharaoh to the greatness of his
faithful servant, he sent him two Visions, which busied all the wits of Egypt,
without giving content to the King.

One day this Prince keeping Court and open Table to his subjects, related unto
them what he had dreamed the precedent night; but as he found no body that
could give him the knowledge thereof, the Butler, whom prosperity had made to
forget the benefits of Joseph, bethought himself at last of him, and of his
experience. Without fearing the blame of so black an ingratitude, he said to
his King, Sir, in putting your Majesty in mind of my prison, I must
necessarily confess me criminal, since your justice cannot fail. This
consideration might oblige another, but me to conceal a good advice, for fear
to repeal the remembrance of an infamy; but I who am very glad to confess my
crime to publish your clemency, and who hold my conservation more assured in
your good will, then in virtue it self, am not careful to hide from you a
thing, which may be advantageous to your contentments. When I was in the
prison, from whence your goodness delivered me, I met there a young Hebrew,
who upon the discourse which I made him of one of my dreams, assured me of all
the events which I saw in my fortune. I think, if it please your Majesty to
send for him, that he will declare unto you the true sense of your dreams. The
King who desired passionately to be cleared upon this subject, commanded
presently that he should come forth out of prison. Our slave never thought
himself so much in a dream, as when he saw a great number of persons about him,
of whom some presented him rich habits, and others cut his hair, that he might
appear before the Prince with decency. When he was accoutred according as was
convenient, they conducted him toward Pharaoh.

As soon as the King perceived him, he judged by his countenance, that this man
was not made for a slave; and after having asked him many questions on his
birth, he said unto him, that one of his Courtiers had given him so good
testimonies of his knowledge, that he hoped satisfaction from thence. To this,
Joseph, who had put himself on his knees, answered, that his capacity was so
little considerable, that it would be to deceive himself, to expect great
succors from thence; but that he adored a God, who had too much goodness to
fail him at his need. The King approving this modesty, replied; Friend, I pray
thee not to excuse thee upon thy ignorance; and if thou know the truth,
think not that it shall be odious to me, if it be not pleasing. I will make
more account of thy freeness, then of all the disguises with which thou may
flatter me. I understand that thou can divine the future times by the
present; tell me then, I pray thee, what my dreams signify: Perhaps the common
brute has already acquainted thee with them, notwithstanding that the
circumstances may not change thy judgment, behold all the particularities
thereof. One night it was represented me, that I walked upon the bank of Nile,
from whence I saw come forth seven fat kine, who afterward went to feed in the
Marshes far distant from the bank of the River: And it seemed unto me, that I
had never seen fairer beasts then these; but whilst I considered them, I
perceived seven others very unlike unto them, for they were so lean that their
skin scarce covered their bones. Certainly if they had not had motion, I should
have taken them for Skeletons, so anatomis'd were they; their ribs were so
apparent, as if they had been naked. If hunger could appear to the eyes, and
that she could content her self to feed on sand, I should have thought to see
her under this figure. Whilst I admired the extreme meagernesse of those
beasts, they began to run toward the first with so much swiftness, as if rage
had provoked them. That which gave me most astonishment, was to see that almost
in a moment, they devoured these fat kine, without so much as one that escaped.
This is not yet the end of my visions, for at the same hour I saw grow up as
it were under my feet a stalk of Corn having seven ears rank and goodly, but as
if they were to run the same fortune that the beasts of my first dream did; I
saw seven others so blasted and withered, that they dried up the others so
quickly, that one would have almost believed that their presence made them
dissolve or vanish, rather then perish.

As the King had ended the recital of his dreams, Joseph, who was very
attentive to this discourse, took the word, and said unto him: Sir, since it
pleases your Majesty to permit a poor slave to speak in your presence, and
that you desire to hear the truth, although it should not be advantageous unto
you, I will tell you freely, that your two dreams have not but one and the same
sense, and that God is willing to confirm you by this double vision in a belief
which I will give you. Your Majesty is not ignorant that the fertility of Egypt
comes not but from the overflowing of the River that waters it, and that his
waters diffuse not themselves so much to cover her with her flood, as with
riches. Moreover, you know that the height of his inundation is the measure of
her abundance, and of her want, from whence in my opinion is sprung that common
saying of your people, that six cubits of flood mark but her miseries, and that
fifteen or sixteen show the delights thereof. This being so, I hold for
assured, that the seven first kine signify seven years of unparalled plenty.
And on the contrary, that the others represent the sterility that is to follow
them. Two circumstances make me this interpretation reasonable enough: The
first is, that your Majesty has seen these beasts come forth out of the same
place, from whence proceeds your abundance, and that they scattered them very
far into the Country. From whence we may gather that the River will effuse it
self very far into the plain, to carry thither the fertility. Those ^ther seven
lean kine, being not far from the bank of Nile, show that his inundation shall
not extend it self farther, and consequently all the rest of the Land shall
remain barren; in such sort that these last years shall consume the abundance
of the former. I will not be thought true, but by the event of my presage,
notwithstanding if your Majesty would take a very profitable counsel, I could
wish that you would appoint a man, who should have the Intendency of your
Granaries, and the power to build new throughout all the Towns of your Empire.
And there (if I may be believed herein) let him lay up the fifth part of the
grain, which shall be superfluous in the former years, to supply the want of
the following years.

It cannot be said with how much applause this advice was received of Pharaoh,
if it be not that the honors and benefits which he did him were not
sufficient testimonies. Having then praised his prudence, he gave him his
Signet, and then taking off a great Chain of gold from his neck, he put it upon
Joseph's. He commanded likewise that there should be brought him a garment of
silk, and his second best Chariot prepared for him, ordaining all Egypt to have
him in the same veneration that they had his own person, who pretended no more
love from his subjects, then he desired thereof unto Joseph. Behold then our
slave, Viceroy of the most flourishing Provinces of Africa, and acknowledged
preserver of the people of the East. Behold, how all the Court of Pharaoh
conducted him through the Town, raised upon a Chariot of triumph. The Heralds
cried, that every one should bow the knee before him; no body failed to render
him this honor, for the will of the Prince, and the natural graces of Joseph,
constrained them to this homage.

What can these petty spirits say now, who cannot but murmr, and who blame
all the conducts of God, which they cannot comprehend? Will they complain that
he leaves his friends to suffer, seeing he abases them not, but to exalt them?
Heretofore they had pity of Joseph, who is it that bears him not envy now? They
fled his miseries, who desires not his honors? The Hebrews persecuted him,
all Egypt honors him: His brothers took from him his Robe, Pharaoh gives him
the Royal Mantle; Potiphar puts manicles on his hands and neck, Pharaoh adorns
him with a Chain of Gold: He offers him a Scepter for that Sheephook which he
handled. We have seen him in a Cestern, and in the darkness of a prison; at
this hour the Marble and Porphyrie is not matter rich enough to build him
Palaces. Oh Providence of my God! How much better is it to follow thee amongst
the thorns and briars, since thou leadest to felicity, then the favor of men,
since that conducts only to the Abysmes.

Whilst Joseph triumphed in the Palaces, and Streets of Memphis, Potiphar, who
knew nothing yet of his fortune, met him in the glory of this pomp, which made
him adored of the Egyptians. If ever a Malefactor charged with many enormous
crimes, was surprised with the presence of his Judges, it was but an Image of
his astonishment; but the admiration was not the only passion of his soul, for
the memory of what was passed gave him some pressing fears; he remembered that
he had firmly persecuted him, who could then punish him. The sweetness of
Joseph seemed to give him all kind of assurance; but the crime whereof he had
suspected him, appeared unto him so black, that he could not hope for pardon. I
leave you to judge if the diversity of these thoughts did put irresolution into
his design. Having notwithstanding slipped himself out of the press into his
house, he related the prosperities, and the power of Joseph to Cyrene, who
conceived the same fears that her husband did. It was at this time that the
apprehension of death was stronger then that of infamy; for this poor woman
considering rather in Joseph a pitiful Savior, then a rigorous Judge, had more
confidence of his goodness, then fear of his justice. Upon this resolution
sudden enough, but for all that judicious, she cast her self at her husbands
feet, confessed unto him the artifices which had made Joseph guilty, and
besought him to pardon a fault, which she would never have done, if she had
not seen the most amiable of all men. Besides that, she would wash away this
stain with her blood, and offer her self to the vengeance of the Viceroy for
to free him thereof.

Potiphar was much astonished to hear the practices of his wife,
notwithstanding her regrets pacified him, and the abundance of her tears
drowned all the remains of choler, which might yet be in a body already cold
with age. Jealousy, which sees but the present, represents not the passed with
the same colors as formerly in the heat of his first amors. The honesty which
he had always observed in Cyrene, persuaded him easily, that though she had
been constrained to love Joseph, she would never have been so much as solicited
to look upon another. Behold him then resolved to go to the Viceroy of Egypt,
and by the confession of his error, to implore his mercy. But who can believe
the Caresses which Joseph made to his old Master, and to his wife, when he saw
them at his knees, to find there the pardon of their fault, or to submit their
life to the rigor of his justice? Fear had painted the image of death upon
their visage, and so tied their tongue, that all what they could say, was to
confess themselves criminals. Then our Patriarch exercising the first effect
of his power upon the resentment of his injuries, raised them, and by the
abundance of his tears, witnessed to them, that he had nothing but love, and
tenderness in his heart.

My friends, (said he unto them) I conjure you to forget what is passed, and to
expect as much of my affection for the future, as if I were your son. I am
obliged thereunto both by duty, and by inclination. It is to you that I owe my
prosperities; it is with you that I will divide them: Perhaps if I had not been
miserable, I should not be now happy. If a storm should drive me unto the Port,
I should bless it, and I should love him that would cure me, would he empoison
me. You have failed, the one through too much zeal, the other through too much
love: These two persecutors are too amiable for me to disoblige: I pardon that
excess to the weakness of our nature. I choose rather to believe that my
misfortunes were arrived me from the Providence of God, then from the malice of
men. For my part, who am the subject of all these inconstancies of fortune, so
far am I from keeping any resentment against you, that I desire henceforward to
have no better friends then my first Masters. The truth of my words shall be
known by the effects upon all occasions wherein you shall employ me.

Joseph no sooner finished his discourse, but he began his liberalities,
offering to Potiphar a Chain of Gold, and to his wife a Rose of Diamonds; his
daughter was not forgotten, for he sent her by one of his Gentlemen, two rich
Pendants for her ears, which equalled not for all that the price of his
affection. Since this first sight he never ceased to oblige them, as if he had
design to do them as much good, as he had received evil from them.

A little while after this interview, death surprised Cyrene, as if she had not
stayed but to see her Innocent, to take away her life. After her decease,
Potiphar was capable of the chief dignity of Egypt; he was possessour thereof,
since he was furnished therewith at the recommendation of the Viceroy.
Heliopolis rendered the same honors to the God Mnenis, as Memphis did to the God
Apis; and to speak the truth, there is no more reason to honor the beasts in
one place then in another. It was then the dignity of the high Priest, which
Potiphar exercised in that Town of the Sun; and though Joseph would rather have
seen the Calves at the shambles, then upon the Altars, he judged it fitter to
put this superstition into the hands of his Master, then to charge another
therewith, because he knew him more capable to deride it. The care which he had
to ruin the Idols, justified the care which he took in appearance to establish
them. It was a truce which he made with the gods of Egypt, and not a peace that
he concluded; he gave himself leisure to think of their destruction with safety.

Let us leave this high Priest departed with all his family, to go exercise his
charge, and let us stay to consider the conduct of our Intendant. I know that
Philon represents us him as the example of a faithful Minister, and that a
great Cardinal makes him the Idea of his Monarch; but I can say that he had
something more then the qualities which are necessary to the one and the other,
since he wanted not any perfection that might complete a man. He needed not to
seek the model of a wise Favorite out of himself; the perfect Courtier was in
his person. He possessed the heart of his Master, but he managed it not but to
bring it to do good to all the world; so that his hands were but the public
Conduits of his Princes favors. He could take every one in his humor, he
would buy those that would not give themselves: The most rude and savage
spirits found sweetness in his, and if the enormity of the crimes required
some rigor from him, it was but with regret that he was just, loving better to
correct vice by the repentance then by the despair of the guilty. All Egypt was
no more but a great family, of which he was the father, procuring with an
incredible care that abundance and delights might be there without luxury. This
design succeeded to him so well, that they must go more then an hundred miles,
to find one miserable or one vicious. For as felicity was established in this
happy Country, the good manners met here also: all the moral virtues reigned
there, excepting those which cannot exercise themselves but in misfortune, or
which suppose imperfections and defects in their objects. Never did policy
arrive more perfectly to her end, which is to make as many happy as she has
subjects, then at that time, having the wisdom of Joseph for soul and
Intelligence. Pharaoh tasted this good fortune; for he was loved of his people,
he was feared of his enemies. The strangers could not give more solid
foundation to their repose, then to gain them the good will of Joseph.

But it is time to admire one of the miracles of the world, and to consider
these prodigious Pyramids, which hide whole Provinces with their shadow. I am
not ignorant that there are some Writers, who assure us, that these proud
Obelisques were the monuments of the Kings of Egypt, and that these excellent
works were made but to cover magnificently dust and ashes. I know well also,
that there are other some, who make our Joseph the Author of them, and that
they should be the public Granaries, which he caused to be built in every
Town, principally at Memphis, and about Babylon.

Whilst that more then an hundred thousand hands were employed about these
buildings, there was but the head of Joseph that labored, to see if the
exe^ution answered to the design, and if the work were as perfect as the Idea,
he took leave of the King, and visited all Egypt. It was during this course
that he knew Heaven took care to marry him, and that God would not that
virginity should be longer one of his virtues. It will not be from our purpose
to observe the Providence of him, who disposed thus the will of our Patriarch.

I have said, that Potiphar had a daughter endowed with a rare and ravishing
beauty, and whose incomparable perfections invited a great number of Lords to
her suit; but though she gave love to all the world, she took it not from any
person. I know not whether she esteemed the bravest of the kingdom unworthy of
her alliance, or if naturally she could not love a man. At least, might one
judge that there was contempt or inclination in the care which she took to fly
their encounter? Since the time that her father was retired to Heliopolis, she
devoted her self to the service of Diana, and promised her that she would only
then cease to be a Virgin, when she should cease to be the great goodesse of
the Forests. This vow was immutable in her opinion, because she knew not that
the false idols were mortal things. Howsoever it was, this poor maid served
this false Divinity with more Religion, then many persons serve the true God,
who has recompenses to make himself beloved, and punishments to make himself
feared. The only pleasure that she sought; she found in solitude: Never did she
desire of the Theaters, nor of the Comedies made her go forth: the dances and
balls, and those other divertisements of the Maids, were not a temptation
strong enough for her: Her shadow was her most ordinary companion; but if
sometimes she released her self of this great severity, seven young Gentlewomen
of her age and humor passed the time with her. All their employment derived it
self from Books, or a Garden which was seen from the windows of their abode.
Art never rendered a place more pleasant then that, where all the delights of
Asseneth were enclosed.

I would fain describe this fair desert, since this great Lady took pains to
improve it. The ground of the Platform looked upon the rising Sun, which looked
upon it again with so much complaisance, that one would have said his rays had
nothing to do in Egypt, but to paint its flowers, and to ripen its fruits. This
fair Star made not gold here, but he infused no less favorable influences,
then those which are necessary for its conception.

There was in the midst of the Garden a Fountain, whose waters being received
into a Conduit of white Marble, imparted themselves through little gilded Pipes
unto all the partitions, as if nature provided against the danger that the Sun
might blast the flowers in beholding them too long. The Earth feeling it self
touched by Virgin-hands, became not therefore barren, if it were not in the
midst of the Alleys, where it bore nothing but sand. You would have said, that
she reserved her humor to form the Violets, the Lillies and the Roses for her
Mistress, and that all her occupation was to obey her. The herbs came where
she desired, and their complaisance was so perfect, that they seemed to fear to
be fruitful against her mind. The Trees were content to bow without
resistance, constraint being unnecessary to hold their branches, because they
were naturally so supple, that art labored not to accommodate them. To see the
bushes form themselves into all kind of animals, the Juniper, to shape it self
into Bears, and the other Plants to take the figure of Birds, you would have
believed that this fair Magician had changed the Beasts into Trees, or that the
Trees were transformed into Beasts. It was she who had fashioned a Chasse of
Rosemary, and of Lavander so naturally, that you would have sworn these dogs
would be gone, if their roots had not stayed them better then their leases. Of
the other side the Hares stretched themselves so ardently to the course, that
they seemed to apprehend their taking. It was she, who had mingled the windings
of a Labyrinth with so much artifice, that the most direct would have gone a
great way in a very little space, and run a whole Country in a Garden-plot. It
was she, who during the most cruel rigours of the Winter, conserved a little
Summer to ripen the Oranges, and the Citrons, even when they began to corrupt
in other places. From this Garden, which was but for delights, one descended
into a Green, where of one side was nothing to be seen but dwarfs, and of the
other but giants. The last seemed to raise themselves above the other Trees,
and to present their branches to the heat of the Sun, to the end to cook the
first fruits for their Mistress. The first changed themselves almost all into
fruits, witnessing despite that they were too little to render her great
services. But all the beauty of the flowers was but a weak ray of those which
they endeavored to paint in their leaves; and the fecundity of the Trees showed
alone that a Virgin is not barren when she will.

Behold the exercise which employed the daughter of Potiphar, when he
understood that the Viceroy came to descend to his Palace, to take there his
lodging. Doubt not but this news was pleasing to him, since he held his fortune
from his liberalities, and hoped the increase thereof from his magnificence;
for he had no sooner received it, but he went forth to meet this dear guest,
whom he entertained with those caresses and respects, that can better be
conceived then expressed. This was no more that slave, whom they would tear in
pieces: This is no more that perfidious servant, whom he had caused to be cast
into the bottom of a Dungeon* Joseph being arrived at the Palace of Potiphar,
that fair Nymph of whom I have spoken, came to salute him. I leave the
ceremonies of this Interview to another Writer, only I cannot conceal that this
man, who had so little flesh, and who looked upon women as if he had been all
spirit, could not see her without loving her. But surely the flame that warmed
him, burnt him not; his thoughts were pure, as his flame was innocent. There is
no need to be a Divine, to conjecture the correspondence which he found in the
inclination of Asseneth: This stubborn beauty who could not love but the
flowers, and who sought no other conversation but that of the Trees,
acknowledged that Joseph was too fair not to be loved. Notwithstanding her
affection was so well ordered, that it never exceeded modesty; so had she not
to defend her self from an Innocent, but rather to receive the chaste vows of an
Hero. It is true, that thinking her self obliged to Diana, she endeavored
wisely to quench the first sparks, for fear to engage her self in a suit which
she judged impossible. This was the beginning of the fair amors of our holy
young man, who knowing that God would have it that Asseneth should be his wife;
and on the other side his inclination finding it self conformable to the will
of God, resolved to speak of her marriage to the high Priest. As he walked one
afternoon with him, taking him by the hand, he held him forth this discourse.
My dear Master, (it was the name that he gave him for the most part) perhaps
you will think it strange, I tell you that I have a design to seek your
daughter, and perhaps will reply, that you cannot suffer one of your slaves
should desire to be your son in law. Notwithstanding if you will consider my
present condition, without thinking of that which is passed, I believe you will
not find much presumption in my desire, and I may hope for approbation in your
spirit. It is true, that a fortune made up in haste, as mine, is not ordinarily
assured, and that we see as many disgraced as favored. So that it is not upon
this consideration that I ask your consent; I have better reasons to make you
accept of my suit, without owing any thing unto favor. I am descended from a
family, which will be no shame unto yours. My birth merited a better fortune
then those Irons, which by disaster, or rather by the Providence of God, I met
with in your house. And to speak unto you more clearly, I am an Hebrew, son of
that great Jacob, whose merit is respected of all Palestine. My Ancestors are
illustrious enough to communicate me some glory with the blood which I derive
from them: I speak nothing to you of my person, fearing to diminish the esteem
of that which comes unto me from those famous persons. At these words Potiphar
was seized with so sensible a joy, that he could not command himself a longer
attention; taking then the word, which he had snatched, taken away from Joseph,
he cried out aloud. And what Sir, think you me insensible in this point, that
there should need reasons to persuade me to my happiness, and my Daughters? I
look not upon your present fortune, nor the glory of your Ancestors. I not only
consent, but I desire with all my heart the honor of your alliance. Your
virtue is worth more then your fortune. Your merit weighs more in my spirit,
then that of your Fathers; laying aside all that which is out of you, I desire
simply nothing but you. I cherish a thousand times more your perfections, then
your treasures, and the ornaments of your soul, then those of your body. God is
my witness, that if I had been bold enough to desire great things, that I
should not have had courage enough to look upon the good which you present me.
Asseneth is too happy, in that you have vouchsafed to abase your eyes on her,
all her race will publish for ever your goodness, and I, my good fortune. From
this time forward I desire that you be master of my fortune, that you dispose
of my estate, and that my Daughter resign a half of her heart unto you, having
no other will but yours. Notwithstanuing Sir, I would not that you should doubt
of my sincerity, if any vain superstition should obstinate her to reject her
good. The spirit of women being not sometimes capable of reason, is so neither
of change, though one may say, that their sex makes the greatest part of the
Worlds inconstancy. Their imagination is sometimes an eternal Law, and their
resolution a decree, which has the same necessities with destiny. I fear that
Aseneth may be a little opinionate upon a certain promise, which obliges her
(says she) to live always a Virgin, if she believe me, this scruple shall not
exercise much her spirit; for besides that, the chief law of Children is to
obey their Parents, by right of nature; I will make her free of that
obligation, by the power which I hold to conserve, or release that of our Gods.

This good Father knew not that his Daughters will had already consented to the
alliance of Joseph; for as soon as she saw him, she found her affection
engaged. So many charms appeared not without making this precious Conquest:
there are clandestine marriages of the heart as well as of the body, and often
times it happens, that without considering a person with attention, one loves
by destiny. That visage which was but one and twenty years old, presented an
object too ravishing to this young Lady, not to ravish all her soul, so many
attractions gave her rather a necessity then an inclination to the love of his
person. Yet must she make the shows and difficulties, which are ordinary in
these encounters, where the women endeavor only to hide their desire, and not
to extinguish it. When her Father spoke unto her of this suit, an honest blush
covered her cheeks, and as he pressed her to give consent thereunto, her
plaints witnessed that it was but with regret that she obeyed Potiphar. Poor
girl, how confounded would you be, if your tears instead of dissembling you
should betray you? why would you that one should force from your mouth what you
give so willingly from the bottom of your heart? it is ordinary with this sex
to teach even the eyes to lie, and to give Hypocrisy to the simplest
countenances.

Our Viceroy knew too well these little policies, to be put off with that
affected coldness: on the contrary, as he found her one day a part, after
having praised her modesty, he declared unto her, without any artisice the
purity of his intentions, and leaving all the foolish complements of love unto
those, who have nothing better, he assured her, that her alliance was in truth
the most ardent of his desires, but yet that he knew so well to moderate his
affection, that she should not be constrained to render him any complaysance to
the prejudice of the reverence of her Religion, and therefore if she were loath
to quitt hers, that he would endeavor to change his love into respect. But I
cannot persuade my self (added he) that the fear to displease a statue of
brass, or one of insensible wood, should obliege you to the contempt of my
affection. Your Gods have nothing good but their matter, and if the Artificer
who created them, had made them of dirt, their Majesty would be as adorable, as
their stuff would be precious. It is true, that I cannot well deceive my self
in the opinion of your belief, and that such a wit as yours should suffer it
self to be surprised in the worship of those Divinities, who have filled Heaven
with nothing but thefts and adulteries. I speak not of Venus, whose impurities
are adored, nor of your Apis, who cannot render his Oracles without bellowing,
since he is an Ox. That Diana whom you serve, is she not an inconstant in the
Heaven, a courser in the Woods, and a fury in hell? I would not believe that
you should think the onyons and leeks which are eaten by the hoggs, nor the
Crocodiles which devour men, should be Gods, since the impuissance of the
first cannot conserve themselves, nor the cruelty of the other do good. Is it
not true, Madam, that you have long condemned these false Divinities, without
having yet happiness enough to acknowledge the true. Behold the time wherein
you may be devout without Idolatry, and adore God, without offending him; it is
principally that which I seek, assuring you that I desire not so much to be
your Husband, as to give you our great God for bridegroom.

Asseneth having thanked Joseph for the zeal which he witnessed to have of her
salvation, received the offers of service which he made her; and to prove unto
him that his Religion pleased her as much as his alliance, she made a sacrifice
to the true God of all the Idols which she adored.

If I were in a humor to write of visions; Vincent de Beauvais would show you
one in his mirror, where you might admire the providence of God in the
instruction of his Elect; let those who desire it, seek it; for my part, I have
too many assured truths, to hazard my self in publishing dreams. Never was
Potiphar more content then to understand the success of his guest, who had
gained a soul unto God, when it was thought he endeavored only to gain a body
to his passion. If he would have answered his desire, this marriage which was to
be concluded, should have been consummate; but Joseph judged prud^ntly, that it
ought not to be done without the consent of the King. Being then returned to
Memphis, he besought him to approve his suit. Pharaoh who desired but to tie
Joseph to his State, liked this design, and to hasten the execution thereof, he
dispatched a Courtier to Heliopolis, who carried order to Potiphar and his
Daughter, to render themselves readily to the Court. I will not stop at the
entertainment which the King gave them, nor likewise at all the magnificences
which hoeoured this nuptial. Every one may sufficiently imagine, that they
were not mean, seeing a puissant Monark was at the cost, his favorite the
subject thereof. And then I remember, that srom the entrance of this History, I
never proposed to my self to speak of the greatness of Joseph; but in as much
as it declares this truth, that God leaves us not to suffer, but for our
glory. This feast being made for the whole Court, Joseph and his wife continued
the contentments thereof as long as they lived. They lived happy, in that they
were content; nothing troubled them, because they knew to accommodate all
things to their fortune. This continual prosperity charmed not so the Viceroy,
that he thought not of his Masters affairs, leaving him the care to do his own.
His house was the source, from whence flowed the public felicity; but whilst
Egypt possessed all the delights of the earth, the rest of the earth became a
great solitude, and they began to acknowledge that Joseph had prophesied. The
Famine ran over all the neighbor Provinces, presenting it self already upon
the frontiers of this happy Empire. At last notwithstanding any resistance that
her reserver made, he could defend no longer then seven years this Nation, his
wisdom must yield to that providence, that will make it desolate. The famine
entered therein, to continue her spoils without sparing the most considerable
fortunes. After having consumed the Corn, she devoured the whole fields,
constraining the people of this Country to sell that which they possessed, to
live. In so much, that in few years Pharaoh saw himself Monark of a great
Kingdom, and proprietory Lord of that which he possessed before but by homage.

Let us leave Egypt a little, and pass we into Canaan, as being a long time
since we departed thence. Perhaps we shall find a corner in Jacobs house, to
secure us from that cruel who kills without triking, and who besieges not
those whom she will take but inwardly. I fear she has some intelligence in
this Family, at least I see not there that good cheer as formerly. Every one
fearing the future, becomes good husband of the things, whereof he had been
prodigal. And the magnisicence that produced it self outwardly, was then a
virtue secret and interior. Our holy Patriark willing to prevent death, and
cure an evil which could not yet make it self felt but by the apprehension of
falling under it, commanded his Children to dispose themselves to a voyage into
Egypt. Each of them consented to do by obedience, what he should have been
obliged to do shortly through necessity. But where go these ten offenders? if
they seek their Judge, Joseph is in Egypt: if they will die, famine is not more
redoubtable then death. Oh sweet providence of God, how equitable art thou to
refer unto Joseph the revenge, or the pardon of his injuries! and to make those
proud heads bow before thy faithful Servant. The Savior of Egypt was in the
Palace, when a Page advertized him that certain strangers defired to do him
reverence. As he was of a humor to obliege all the world, he entered without
long stay into a Hall, where he found the Children of Jabob? who put themselves
presently upon their knees to adore him. Their visage and their language made
them known without difficulty; but if they were known, they could not take a
happy Prince for a miserable Brother. Our Cananeans having declared the
necessity, which brought them thither, Joseph considering them as if he had
observed something of suspicion in them, asked them from whence they were: to
which answering with much fear, they replied, that they came from Canaan. The
Viceroy making himself other then he was, said unto them as a man in cholar.
Without doubt you are spies, that come to understand the state of the Kingdom,
to serve your selves upon our weakness, and the necessity, whereunto you
believe the famine has reduced us; but your design shall turn only to your
ruin, and then making sign to his Guard^, he commanded that they should put
the traitors in prison. Judah who saw himself as soon seized on, as they had
command to seize on him, would defend himself, but with the submission of a low
reverence, which was waited on with this discourse.

My Lord, I cannot persuade my self, that a man full of equity should cunclude
that a suspicion renders us criminalls: being just as you are, we hope to
appear innocent as we are. If you can take us in a lie, we will confess the
treason, of which we are accused, and we consent to suffer the punishment which
it shall please your Excellence to ordain us. We fear not your torments,
because we know your justice; we are of Chananee, Sons of one Father, who
lives at home with our youngest Brother. We had another Brother, but misfortune
having made him fall into the paws of a savage beast, has ravished him from
us. Necessity has constrained us to seek wherewith to live, in this Country,
where all things abound by your wisdom. Behold all the artifice of our design;
if you discover any other secret, we are in your power. Truly you had (replied
the ViceRoy) true reason to believe me very simple, should I esteem you
innocent upon your own deposition: where shall one find the guilty, if it be
enough to deny the crimes? and who shall be innocent (replied Judas) if to
accuse be sufficient to convict. There needs not so many words (answered
Joseph) the effects will witness better the truth of what you say, then all
your Protestations. One of you shall return unto Canaan, and bring hither your
youngest Brother, whom you assure lives there: if he come, I will believe you
without crime: if you fail to bring him, I swear by the safety of my Prince,
you are spies. As Joseph had spoken this with a tone of voice somewhat moved,
he commanded that they should be cast into prison, where they should remain
three days; but as he had a heart all full of tenderness, he had not courage
enough to keep them there longer; choosing rather that his sweetness should
punish them lightly, then to permit his justice to treat them according to all
the right that it had to be severe. And then the fear which he had that Jacob
might need something in the mean time, made him resolve to send them away.
Having caused them to come forth out of prison, he spoke to them in this manner.

Though you see me habited like an Idolater, I am not, thanks unto God, of
their opinion; I know the Gods of Egypt, but I love the God of Canaan: the fear
of those never gave me liberty to offend this. Since you make profession to
honor him, I will witness unto you the fear that I have to offend him, I
promise that you may all return home to your Father, excepting him; (pointing
unto Simeon in saying these words) he shall serve as caution for your return;
behold the only means to make me believe that you are true. O God how an
affliction fitly sent has power to bring men unto reason! those who could not
repent themselves of their cruelty in three and twenty years of prosperity,
began to open their eyes, and to acknowledge that their present misery was a
punishment of their passed fault. It is reasonably (cried out Reuben) that we
suffer at this time justly what we have formerly made our Brother suffer
without justice. I told you often, that his blood would make us blush, and that
Heaven would not pardon us a sin which nature forbad us: if you had had then
pity of Joseph, God would have had some now of our affliction; but it is no
time now to be wise, Heaven is not satisfied always with repentance, it will
sometimes that the punishment follow the crime. All that we can do to suffer
profitably, is to suffer with patience, and without murmr. Reuben would have
said more, because he thought not to be understood by him, who spoke not to
them but by an interpreter; but Joseph not able to see their tears without
mourning, retired himself a little from their presence, to give that liberty to
his eyes. In the mean time he caused their sacks to be filled with the best
wheat of his Granaries, and sent them away, keeping him whom he had designed,
and causing him to be laden with Irons in the fight of his Brothers, to the
end, that the fear of his death might obliege them to bring him Benjamin.

Some one may curiously demand why Joseph witnessed more severity unto Simeon,
then to his other Brothers? the response is not difficult, since it was
reasonable that the most criminal should be the most punished, and that he who
had said these words (behold our dreamer) should digest at leisure the malice
thereof. We must not think nevertheless, that his prison was accompanied with
its ordinary incommodities. Since Simeon could assure with truth, that he had
never been more happy, then when he was to be miserable.

Let us follow a little our Pilgrims, and take up their entertainment; all
their discourses were of Joseph's death, admiring that the justice of God made
use of the famine to discover and punish their sin. As they were arrived at the
first Inn, and that Zabulon had opened his sack to provender their Asses, he
was very much astonished to see in the mouth thereof, the same pieces of gold
which he had given for the price of this wheat. His Brothers surprised with
like astonishment as he, began to fear that there might be deceit in this
liberality, and that the Kings Servants had put this money into their sacks, to
render them guilty. Notwithstanding their consolation was in their innocence,
and all their confidence in God, who without doubt would not permit that the
malice of another should be punished in their Persons. Putting themselves then
into the hands of him, who lets no body fall, they continued their way with so
much diligence, that they arrived in Hebron before they were expected. Jacob
was extremely glad to see them in full health; notwithstanding when he
perceived that Simeon was not with them, fear seized this poor old man with so
much excess, that there was nothing but his silence that could express it. But
if the absence of Simeon made him fear, one might say that the design to
conduct Benjamin into Egypt would make him die. What (cried out this good
Patriark) will you bury me alive, and take from me a good which nature gives me
almost against my desire? suffer me to live, may be you intend to see me
languish the rest of my days! I have one only Son that consolates the loss
of Joseph, and of his poor Mother, and must I loose him! Oh my God, how happy
had my condition been to have had no Children, or to have had some more
fortunate! I had had then but my misfortunes to bewail, whereas now I see me
obliged to take the best part of those that afflict them. Joseph has satisfied
the cruel hunger of a savage Beast, and his Brother, to appease ours, must be
exposed to the desire of a Barbarian, who, perchance, will take pleasure to
torment me in the person of Benjamin. What know I if he obliged not all my
Children to present themselves to him, to invelop them under one and the same
ruin, and to extinguish the name of Israel upon the earth? Reuben seeing the
sorrowful plants of his Father, replied to him, my dear Father, the subject
which you take to afflict you, seems not to me just enough to abandon you in
this manner, since it is only supported the vain apprehensions which your
affection forms you. This Viceroy whom you represent as a tyrant, has nothing
savage in his nature: his courtesy would be capable to take from you all your
fears, if you knew it. And then what likelihood, that he whom Egypt adores as
their Savior, should take pleasure to destroy eleven wretches, whose death can
give him no assurance, nor their life suspicion: for my part, I would rather
hope the effects of his goodness, then go to prevent the evils which perhaps
will never come unto us from his rigor. Have we not already a testimony of his
generosity, in that he has sent us back with his benefits, and our money?

Alas, how weak is your discourse (replied Jacob) that which you call benefit,
is that which I name an Artifice. Are you so young, that you know not that it
is ordinary with traitors to flatter, when they will hurt; and to give fair
words, when they have evil thoughts. If you had observed curiously the customs
of Egypt, you would have seen that they load the victimes with flowers, and
that the Crown which adorns them, is the presage of the death which threatens
them. Speak no more to me of your design, if you desire that I live. What then
my Father (said Reuben) would you rather expose ten of your Children to a
certain death then to tempt a hazard, which may happily succeed? Simeon is
engaged upon our faith; we will never suffer that the subject of his confidence
be the cause of his ruin: if the peril be evident, we desire that it be
common. Benjamin who had heard this discourse, besought his Father to permit
him to render that proof of his love to his Brothers. That if he should die
with them, he should have this consolation, to have had Children so straightly
united in affection, that death which divides all, could not have power to
separate them. Every one liked this thought, and praised his resolution; there
was none but Jacob, who witnessed by his tears, and his sighs, that he
consented not thereunto but with constr^int. Reuben who suffered not without
pain the sorrow of his Father, and who resented all his griefs, protested to
him, that in case any evil should happen unto Benjamin, he would give him leave
to slay his two Sons. Judas made almost the same protestation that his eldest
did, adding that he would render himself pledge for him life for life. After
this long contestation, as they emptyed the sacks for the second voyage, every
one was astonished to find there his money, but there was not one who gave not
the glory of this benefit to the liberality of the Viceroy, to the end, that
Jacob might conceive good hopes by this universal applause. Behold th^n this
good Patriark, who embraced his Children with so much tenderness and tears, as
if he had been condemned to see them no more. Above all, taking leave of
Benjamin, one would have thought that he said adieu to all his contentments;
notwithstanding the displeasure of this departure, hindered him not to think
upon the necessities of this voyage, and to command his Sons whatsoever
prudence could give them of good advice.

My Children (said he to them) if my life be yet considerable to you, I conjure
you to have care of yours; since the same accidents which touch you, pass even
to my heart; endeavor to avoid them with discretion. Trust not so much to the
sweetness of that Prince, whose goodness you praise unto me, that you should
not fear to provoke him. The affection of the great ones of the earth is so
delicate, that very often there needs but a touch to break it. The words that
we say unto them should be of silk to please; which is found true in all
persons of condition; but principally in regard of those whom fortune has
elevated. They fear so much contempt, that they seek adoration, as if their
greatness appears not, but by the oppression of the lesser. Let your demands
be humble, and your answers modest. Whatsoever shall become of your life, make
no use of a lie, to make you appear true; because this monster is known always
by some place, and though he presents a pleasing visage, his lower parts are
deformed: how fair soever a Devil be when he shows himself, he has always the
tail or foot of a Beast. But though that virtue may steed you more with this
Prince then any other thing, fail not to offer him of my part this little of
our best mirrhe, of our Theriack, and of all that which you shall judge to be
rare in Egypt. Presents dispose the hearts of those whom we desire favors; if
we fear their anger, they tie their hands, and stop the evil effects of their
power. I am of opinion, that you should take twice as much money as is
necessary for your employment: you know not whether they did not tempt your
fidelity, when they put into your sacks the same pieces of gold which you
brought. Rendering them freely, it will be a testimony of your honesty, and
perhaps an effect of justice. Behold my dear Children, the last words of your
poor Father, if your prudence conduct not this voyage with so much discretion,
that the good success may prolong my pilgrimage upon earth.

After this long discourse, and many tears shed of one part and the other, all
the Brothers took their way toward Egypt, where they arrived after much pains.
When they entered into the Palace, Joseph was by chance at a window, from
whence he perceived them. As he knew Benjamin amongst the rest, he commanded
the Steward of the house to get the dinner ready, because he would eat with
them. In the mean time, he conducted our Pilgrims into a great Hall: but having
conceived some fear before they entered, they declared unto him, that they had
brought the money which they had found in opening their sacks: Upon which the
Steward having assured them, to make their joy complete, he brought them
Simeon. I leave the caress^s of this interview, and the Complements which were
made reciprocally. The feast being ready, Joseph appeared and received their
presents with much testimony of good will. As he had entertained them, he asked
them if their Father lived yet, and if that young man was their youngest
Brother; Judas having answered yes, that good Prince fixing his eyes upon
Benjamin, felt himself pressed to the heart so tenderly, that he retired into
his Cabinet to hide there his tears. After the course of them was stopped, he
came to them again to wash. They had laid a Table for the Viceroy, and for
his Wife, who knew all the mystery. Another for the strangers, and the third
for some Egyptian Lords, who could not see their gods, to be eaten without
indignation. This ceremony was accompanied with two circumstances, which gave
much matter of thought to our Cananeans. The first was, as St. Ephraim reports,
that Joseph striking with a Rod upon his Cup, commanded that Reuben should take
the chief place, according to the right of seniority; and then striking eleven
times, he named the others, and caused them to be seated according to the order
of their birth. If this first accident surprised the spirit of the strangers,
the second merited no less admiration. After that all the meat was served,
Joseph sent by an Esquire a plate of his service to each of his Brothers, and
when it came to Benjamins turn, he caused him to carry him five. This
proceeding gave astonishment to them all, notwithstanding no body darred to
demand the cause thereof. This good cheer made them forget the design of their
voyage, but the Viceroy had given order that their sacks should be filled. The
next day, being up betimes in the morning, they took leave of their benefactor
with words, which witnessed enough, that they were not ungrateful. As they were
a quarter of a mile from the Town, Benjamin who traveled last, heard a noise
like the trampling of horses, of which he had not almost advertized his
Brothers, but they saw a little after ten or twelve Horsemen, who with swords in
their hands came upon them in full careere: the confusion of their cry gave
them as much fear, as the shining of their semiters; notwithstanding their
innocence assured them in some manner, until that the Captain cried unto them
to stay.

To understand their fear, it was requisite to see their visage, where it was
painted, and to consider how one sole word rendered them immovable. Truly
Sirs, said the Steward of the house, behold such an acknowledgement as I never
heard; to steal the goods of another, after having received from him all kind
of courtesies, is to pay benefits in a new fashion! were you not content to
carry away the sort of Egypt, but you must steal the Cup of my Lord? these
words surprised so their spirits, that no body could answer except Benjamin,
who replied unto them with a modesty which marked enough his virtue. What
probability is there that we should be culpable of this crime, after having
brought back again from the furthermost parts of Canaan, the money which we
might have kept without suspicion and without fear. His Brothers taking the
word, cried out with thousand Protestations of their innocence, that they
consented that he who had done this robbery, should be condemned to death. They
took them at their words, and presently made search for the offender, visiting
the sacks in order, even till they had opened Benjamins sack, where the Cup and
silver Voider was found. It were necessary to see a malefactor when his
witnesses have convicted him, so that he can speak no more for himself, to
comprehend the apprehension of Jacobs Children. Benjamin seemed to be the most
culpable, and the Egyptians made show to desire none but him: yet his Brothers
followed him, rather to revile him with injuries, then to serve him in this
occasion. One blamed his artifice, another taking his outrages farther off,
reproached him that he held this vice of his race, and that he might well take
away the Cup of their benefactor, since his Mother had likewise stolen away the
Gods of her Father; and that the ambition of Joseph would have ravished the
right of the legitimates. From words they would have come to blows, if the
Steward had not said unto them, that the judgment of that affair appertained
not unto them.

Who can express their confusion, when the presence of Joseph constrained them
to abase their fight? never were they more ashamed, and never seemed Joseph
more offended. As soon as he saw them, he said unto them with an accent full of
sharpness: is it thus then that you acknowledge the benefits, wherewith you
are obliged unto me? knew you no honester means to requite me? since it is not
in your power to be good, you should address your selves to some other then to
him, who better then any man of the world knows the secret thoughts of men:
have I not sufficiently made appear unto you, that I am not ignorant in the art
of divination? Judas taking the word replied to him modestly, It wonld be to
add impudence to our misfortune, if we should pretend to excuse him:
notwithstanding, though we be more unfortunate then culpable, we consent all to
our condemnation. Your favors had too much obliged us to serve you: let us die
since we have done the contrary: that shall be, if it please your Highness the
punishment of your slaves. The Viceroy interrupting his discourse, and faining
to put himself in choler, said unto him. What have you observed any thing in
me, from whence you might judge me capable of injustice? I know as well to make
the difference of the Innocents, as to punish the offenders. Return all into
your Country, and let him, who is convicted of this disorder remain my slave.
It is not reasonable to ordain a general punishment to a particular fault; why
should you undergo the pain of a theft which you have not so much as known?
Judas who apprehended death less then this sentence, approaching Joseph with
much humility, represented to him that his poor Father living not but with the
soul of this young man, he would die as soon as he should believe him dead.
That he was engaged to bring him back again unto Canaan; at last he concluded
with these ardent words. It is by the tears of this feeble old man, that I
conjure you to permit the return of Benjamin. But if your justice will make an
example to the wicked, I offer my self willingly to suffer the punishment of
his sin, loving better to lead a miserable life in Irons, then to see my
Father languish the remainder of his days. At the same time Benjamin cast
himself at his feet, and showed himself more eloquent with his eyes then with
his mouth, because he shed more tears then he uttered words.

But is not this dissimulation enough, will he jest longer? no, Joseph could no
more, his eyes were full of tears, and his heart with sighs. This good Prince
not longer able to command his joy, made sign with his hand to his people to
depart, and then breaking out into sighs, which love and grief hindered to be
intelligible, he said unto them the best that he could. I am your Brother
Joseph, does our Father live yet? as soon as he returned to the liberty of
speech, his Brothers lost it, for fear sent back into their spirit, all that
which their wit had invented to the ruin of their preserver. Joseph perceived
it, and to dissipate their apprehension, he used the sweetest and most gracious
words that his goodness could pronounce. Fear not my Brothers, I am Joseph, yes
my Brothers, I am that Joseph whom you sold to the Ismaelites. Perhaps you are
troubled, or afraid to believe it; you might have cause for it, if prosperity
could change me, and your conduct accuse you. I am your Brother, and you are
the Authors of my good fortune* It is the providence of God, that has
conducted me into Egypt for your comfort, since you have been the cause of my
glory, my power shall not be the motive of your fear. I have wherewith to
requite you; without you I had never been the Master of Egypt. I rather look
upon the design of Heaven, then the intention of your malice; fix your thoughts
rather on my love then on your hate: consider less my arm then my heart. I am
Joseph your Brother. But lest there should arrive any inconvenience to our good
Father, return speedily to him, and assure him that his Son lives, and that
he lives for the consolation and succor of all his. As he had ended, this
amiable Brother cast himself on Benjamins neck, mingling his tears with his,
which he did to all the others, kissing them with much love and tenderness. All
this passed not so secretly, but the Court and Pharaoh had knowledge thereof.
The King extremely joyful to have a new means to oblige his Minister, commanded
that those strangers should be brought to his Palace, where they were treated
magnificently. Nothing was spared to render them fitly unto Jacob, which they
had order to carry to him, to the end, to receive the honors which his age and
quality merited.

Who can conceive the thoughts of that good Patriark, when his Children assured
him, that his much beloved Joseph lived, and besides that he reigned in Egypt.
Surely the Scripture says, that it happened unto him, as unto those who have
fair dreams. During their sleep, they imagine that they are Kings, that they
possess Mountains of gold, that all the delights of the world come to cherish
them; and in the morning they see their Castles, their Scepters and their
Crowns vanish with the shadows of the night, leaving them only the pleasure to
have been sweetly deceived. This comparison expresses not ill the cogitations
of this reverend old man, who could not take the true History of his dear Son
but for a fair dream, and a pleasing illusion. But who cannot but accuse Joseph
of hardness, to have so long time lived in delights, without thinking on the
misfortunes of his poor Father? who condemns his Conduct, blames the providence
of God, who would hide the greatness of this Patriark, to make it shine forth
with more glory. May be he permits also that the little wisdom of men
intervene in this affair, to the end, to purify the merit of the one and the
other, by a patience of three and twenty years.

Whilst we permit our spirit to sound the counsels of heaven, Jacob arrived at
Thebes, which began to be the Town of the Heroes, since it lodged so great a
man, scarce was he entered therein, but he commanded Judas to go to the Court,
to advertise Joseph of his coming. It was no sooner signified unto him, but he
departed, and came to Goshen with all his Family. The inability to express the
joy which Jacob received from the life and fortune of his Son, dispenses me
to speak of their first interview. Their ecstasy was so sweet, that it
ravisheth me my self, and permits me not the liberty to admire it. I cannot
notwithstanding but wonder that this passion, which has oftentimes killed
those whom grief could not overcome, had not destroyed an old man, who was more
feeble, and loved more then many others, who have witnessed their extreme
content by their sudden death. Sometimes this good Father was seen hanging on
the neck of Joseph, now he embraced his Daughter in Law: and then as if the
caresses and kindnesses were all to the Children, he kissed amorously Ephraim,
and Manasses. The affection of the one and the other being in some fashion
satisfied, Joseph thought it fit to visit Pharaoh, before his Parents should
present themselves at the Court. As he separated himself from them, he
counseled them, if the King should offer them any abode, to choose no other but
Goshen. Two Reasons made this advice to be approved, the one, because it was
the richest Country of the Kingdom: the second, that they should be withdrawn
from the Court, where prosperities being always envied, theirs should not be
without jealousy: besides, that the Egyptians had in horror that kind of
life, of which Jacob and his Children made profession. This Counsel approved,
the Viceroy returning to Memphis, gave Jacob leisure to taste his good
fortune, and to admire the sweet providence of God, who is pleased to do
miracles, to comfort his faithful Servants.

Pharaoh having understood that the Father of his favorite, was at Goshen,
commanded that they should haste his voyage: being in his presence, this Prince
who was full of goodness, gave him all the entertainment with which he supposed
to be able to oblige him. Above all the honor which he rendered him, and the
respect which he showed him was remarkable: never entered he into his Chamber,
but he went to receive him at the door, and if he stayed there any time, his
seat and that of his Majesty had nothing that could separate them. To speak
truth, this civility showed much good inclination in the disposition of
Pharaoh: notwithstanding we must confess, that he did not get all the honor
which was due to this reverend old man. The day that Jacob was to depart to
retire himself unto Rameses, a City in the Land of Goshen, the King admiring
the vigor of this body, which had already suffered the winters of more then an
age, and endured the vexations of a thousand incommodities, asked him what age
he was, to which this good Patriark answered, that it was a hundred and thirty
years since ^e saw the world; but that his age was not almost but the infancy
of his Ancestors: upon this answer he took leave of the King, with the
acknowledgements which so many courtesies required. Pharaoh who knew as
perfectly the sanctity of Jacob, as he respected his merit, would not let him
depart from him before he had received his benediction, making more account of
the good wishes of this wise old man, then of all the favors that he had done
him.

Joseph having conducted Jacob into Goshen, gave his Master much admiration,
when he asked him what color he would have his sheep; because that his Father
who had the care of them, knew a secret to cloth them in his livery. If this
proposition surprised Pharaoh, the experience which he had thereof should give
no less astonishment. It was then in the innocence of the Country, and amongst
the Lambs that Jacob lived seventeen years, the most contented and happy life
that could be desired; but at last God would recompense so many travels, the
merit whereof he already possessed: having made him understand his will, he
soon gave advertisement thereof unto Joseph, who hasted unto Goshen with all
his Family. It is not my design to touch all the circumstances of this death,
but to report only that which concerns the glory of Egypts preserver. Two days
before he rendered his soul, he called his dear Son, and after having
recommended to him his other Children, he declared to him, that God would for
the glory of his name, that he should be the chief of two Tribes, in the person
of his Children, and that to render them worthy of this favor, he desired to
bless them. Joseph having made them to come, and placed Manasses at the right
hand of his Father, and Ephraim at the left, according to the order of their
birth, our good old man crossing his arms, changed his right hand upon the
youngest, and laid his left hand upon the eldest. Joseph was astonished at this
change, until that Jacob had made him understand a mystery, of which the
secret imports, that all our benedictions should come unto us from the Cross.

It would be very hard to express the resentment which all Egypt had of this
death. The King commanded that they should mourn for him threescore and ten
days, during which, even the Ladies of the Court were seen to neglect their
hair, and instead of charms and fucus to cover their faces with dirt. The
Persians burn not the dead, because they fear to do injury to that god which
they adore, to feed him with flesh. For a contrary reason the Egyptians embalm
theirs, thinking it would be to profane the bodies, to cause them to be
devoured of that Element, which they take for a wild beast. The body of Jacob
was buried according to the custom of Egypt, and then he was transported into
Hebron, by the express commandment which he left in dying. ^hese funeral
honors were rendered to Jacob; but in consideration of his Son, whom in
having merit enough for all his, gained them the love and reverence of a whole
Nation.

I would understand now of these petty men, who know nothing but what they
feel, and who deny a providence, because they cannot touch it with their hand,
if God despises those whom he afflicts, and if our traverses or crosses be a
proof of his hate. It is true, they can show a Joseph obedient, and hated in
his Fathers house; patient and despised in persecutions; faithful and envied in
his servitude; chaste and suspected in his temptation; innocent and afflicted in
a prison. But we should not so fix our eyes upon his misery, that we should not
raise them to admire his glory, if it be not that we cannot endure the splendour
thereof, or that his greatness has too much elevation to be perceived. Who
would ever have thought that God would have conducted Joseph into a Palace,
when his Brothers cast him into a Cestern? who could persuade himself, that he
would have put the Scepter into his hand, when he tied them with chains of
Iron? it belongs but to an infinite power to do such marvells, and to save
men when we believe them lost. It is something from a shepherd to see himself
favorite of a great Monark; it is no small matter to be the delight of a
people; it is much to be the savorite of the one and of the other; but this is
not yet the height of the glory of our innocent Patriark, his name marks out
but augmentation, his fortune but greatness, his words are received like the
Oracles, his actions reverenced like holy things; his inclination does the will
of another; and the obedience which they render to the Laws, is not more exact
then that which they bring to his orders. Virtue is courageous, a recompense
which is not infinite, seems not reasonable to her; a God can pay her merit,
provided that he give himself, nothing but him cannot content her. Joseph
possessed the favor of four Monarks, was Regent, and saver of Egypt, and Tutor
of Amasis, the one of her most amiable Kings. His Father honored him, his
Brothers adored him as their Master, and whole Nations acknowledged him for the
greatest miracle of wisdom of his age. I know no body so delicate to refuse to
suffer thirty years to reign fourscore. Notwithstanding as I have said, the
virtue of Joseph had not been recompensed, if God had not made him Monark of an
Empire, where many Kings would be vassals. There was but heaven, which had
treasures worthy of him.

I could enlarge my self in many things which arrived to Joseph fince his
Fathers death, even to his own; but what can one imagine more then a perfect
felicity, which accompanied him even to the hundred and twelfth year of his
life? I have not docility enough to tie me to the relations of Helinandus, nor
complacence to believe the quarrel of Benjamin, and of Pharaoh's son, without
seeking for fables, we have truths enough, the authority which may come to our
Patriarch from a lie, renders him not more illustrious.

But it is time to speak of his death, to come to the highest point of his
glory. This great, this happy, this wise, this holy Prince, having passed
beyond an Age, went to live in eternity, it was notwithstanding after he had
commanded his Nation to transport his bones into Palestine. Perhaps by a
particular Providence of Heaven, to the end that he might be of the golden
number of those who should partake the Resurrection of the Savior. May be also
for the fear which he had, that those, who made Gods of their chalk, and of
their calves, might come to adore him, of whom they held so many benefits. He
who would make Moses the God of Pharaoh, suffered that the Egyptians naturally
carried unto Idolatry, should acknowledge after his death a Divinity which
they had honored during his life.

It is the opinion of many knowing men, that Joseph was no sooner dead, but the
Egyptians (notwithstanding any resistance which the Israelites made) took his
body all embalmed, and cast it into the Nile, to be adored there with the
other Gods, under the name of Serapis. The picture of this God seems to favor
this opinion, because they represent him under the visage of a young man, who
carried a measure of corn and bread on his head. This conjecture is yet aided
by the figure of the Ox, under which Serapis was also acknowledged, which Moses
seems to insinuate, when in Deuteronomy he compares Joseph to an Ox. The
Etymology is not contrary to this sense, whether we derive this word Serapis
from Sar, which signifies Prince, from whence we have made our French Sire; and
from Apis, which signifies an Ox, as if one should say the Prince of Oxen: Or
that we make it to come with Firmicus, from Sara, and from Aseph, or Apis,
which is the same by the smoothness of a figure, which the Greeks name
Metathesis. In this sense Serapis implies no other thing, but the Prince of the
children of Sara, an honor which is due to Joseph, since he is the first of
the Hebrews, who has born the illustrious name of Prince.

It would be easy to produce many other conjectures, notwithstanding without
stopping at the things which our incomparable Joseph has not desired, I will
touch one very considerable to his glory. The Egyptians having forgotten the
benefits of him who had saved them, lost likewise the respect which they owed
to his Nation; from this contempt arise an hatred of their name; this hate
kindled so cruel an envy against their persons, that it was a great part of
their Religion to persecute them. Moses not able to suffer these outrages,
resolved upon a flight; but he must have the bones of Joseph. What means, since
they had been cast into the current of Nile, to consecrate the waters thereof.
The Rabbines, who please themselves with Fables, make here a sheep to speak, to
instruct a Prophet. It seems unto me more reasonable to receive that which
others assure, and to say that Moses knew the place of the River, where those
precious Relics were, having written the great Name in a plate of gold, which
floated upon the water, until it rested it self upon the holy body.

Now, my Reader, think you that affliction and calumny can hurt innocence; and
that one should avoid the tempests which lead happily to the Port? From what
favor can one expect more prosperities then hatred and envy have procured to
our Patriarch, since the possession of a Kingdom was but the least part of his
recompense. O how much are you to be wished, sweet misfortunes, who prick us
not but to awake us; how powerfully you attract my desire, precious calumnies,
who cast no shadows on our reputation, but to make it break forth
resplendently. But rather holy Providence of my God, how amiable art thou,
since it is thee who changest these afflictions into joys, and these calumnies
into a solid and unlimited glory.

Tell me, my dear Reader, is it not true, that it is impossible for thee to
read the History of our Joseph, but thou shall suffer, and thou shall triumph?
It is in his person that innocence sighs with so good a grace, that to see him,
and not to suffer with him, to suffer with him without tasting a secret joy,
are two of those things which we judge impossible. I know not if it be virtue
or nature in me; but I never remember to have contemplated the conduct of that
fortunate wretch, that my heart was not mollified, and all my senses made
conformable unto his. His brothers persecuted me in his person; I descended
with him into the Cestern, to combat there the fear and horror of the Vipers.
I went into Egypt in his company, and without being exposed to the temptation
of his Mistress, I put my self willingly to his chain, suffering with pleasure
the incommodities of a prison, where he found pains without trouble, and gall
without bitterness. I confess that following the pomp and magnificence of his
triumph, my admiration was greatest, but that my joy was less, then when I
lamented with him under the Irons, and in the chains.

I expect the same feelings from all those who shall read this work, since I
suppose so much good nature, and more virtue in them then I have my self. No
body can fix his eyes here without drawing advantage thence, provided that they
read with attention, it shall not be without profit. I dare even to promise my
self, that the curious, who seek nothing but divertisement, shall be here
happily deceived, and that the truth of the History shall have more force to
persuade them, then the fiction of a Romance, artifice to deceive them. Behold
the principal fruits that one may gather from hence; there is not one person in
this action, who instructs us not, either with his words, or with his example.

The Fathers shall learn from Jacob to divide their heart with so much equality
to their children, that their love cause no domestic war in their Family. I
know well, that it is hard to keep strictly this justice, and that the
resemblance, and sympathy of humor have powerful charms to surprise the
parents. The beasts themselves, who cannot observe the attractions of nature,
leave themselves to go after their conduct. They say that the Partridge has
most tenderness for that of her chickens, who touches immediately her heart
whilst she sits upon them, as if the approach of that source of love gave right
to this preference; and though the features of the face, nor the qualities of
the temper should not make this inclination in the fathers and in the mothers,
there are other reasons that solicit them sometimes to give themselves
unequally to their children. For the most part the youngest have great
advantages upon the eldest, whether they proceed from the interest of the
cause, or derive from that of the effect. One may love them with preference,
because the infirmity of their age requires succor and care, which would be
unnecessary and unseemly in behalf of the strong: we support not but what is
delicate, and leans. This natural sweetness which renders them supple to the
will of their parents, is no weak motive of their affection. Those who dispute
their services with them, make their power to be doubted; those who render them
without constraint, show it, and confirm it. Moreover, if it be true, that
fathers live in their children, have they not some reason to cherish more the
youngest, who promise them advantage thereof, both because they have a longer
file of years before them, and because they have more condescendencies to the
cares of their old age.

I speak not of innocence and virtue, since it is certain that they should draw
the heart and affection of the parents wheresoever they are. But
notwithstanding any justice that he has to prefer the youngest before the
eldest, or these before the others, a father should fly the exterior and
apparent testimonies of his esteem, forasmuch as he may provoke many, willing
to favor one alone. The marks of the affection which they gave them, are the
Butts where envy discharges her self, and the spurs to hatred, which persecute
them. Perhaps Joseph had been cherished of his brothers, if he had not bin
better habited then they; at least, we may understand that the robe with which
he was gratified, was the chief cause of the jealousy that sold him. Love
then, Parents, love, but love equally, or if you cannot, love secretly, and in
silenee, that your affection be as hidden as its principle.

Jacob had great motives to cherish his Joseph; he was the Image of Rahel his
dear wife, he was that of all the virtues, which appeared with so much luster
in his visage, that one might know them in his person; and yet so many just
motives of his love, could not justify him, nor all his prudence moderate his
passion.

In the brothers of Joseph we have the example, and the figure of those
monsters who cannot see a good quality in those whom the birth, or society of
life should render commendable, without an envious eye, or being crased with
jealousy. One must be a fool to merit their good will, or at least he must not
be more able then they, to avoid their hate. They will sell their own blood,
provided they may remove a virtue that incommodates them. But certainly it
happens always, that they repent themselves of their cruelty, and if there be
not found a Monarch to raise up Joseph, there is a God who punishes them, and
protects him. For my part, I confess, notwithstanding any trouble we sustain
in suffering strokes from an hand which should defend us, that I should love
better to act in such like encounter, the part of a Martyr, then the office of
a Tyrant or Executioner, for in the end rage confounds, and patience crowns.

But what instruction may not one derive from the misfortunes, and from the
prosperities of Joseph? First, my Reader, learn from him, that it is important
to hide that Sun and those Lights, which show you, I would say that you should
not publish the merit which you have. Lay not forth your selves the fruit of
your sheaves, because that your brethren may believe, that there is as much
vanity in this testimony, which you render you, as there is freeness and
simplicity in discovering your selves. Have a care to do well, and leave that
of praising you unto others; you shall lose nothing of your price; you have God
for caution of that which men owe you. If it happens that Heaven put you into
credit, abuse it not; Consider your fortune as a proof of your virtue, and as a
means that is presented to you to exercise it; if you have power, make it known
by your good deeds, and not by your revenges. I confess that there is some
sweetness to resent ones self of an injury, but there is glory and merit to
pardon it. Resemble not those gods of the Ancients, unto whom they gave
incense, for fear they should raise storms. It is a fatal power, that to hurt
men; there are none but the Devils that can derive glory from thence.
Contemplate our Patriarch in Pharaohs throne, behold his traitors and his
murderers at his feet; he had the thunder in his hand, he made use thereof but
to make them afraid, yet seemed he to repent himself of that. Imitate those
tears which mollified him upon the abasement and humiliation of those who had
not spared his blood. I doubt not but you have in the beginnings of this
exercise, some repugnance to practice it; but I dare assure, that the endeavor
which you shall make, will produce you the sweetness of a joy which will
ravish you. He who revengeth himself, surmounts not commonly but the cowardly;
he who contradicts his sense, triumphs always like an honest man. Oh how
sweet and glorious is it to have the thunderbolts in hand, and to make use but
of the thunder!

But since we are almost continually to suffer in this life, let us consider
our Patriarch in all his misfortunes, and his example will tell us that which
we ought to do in like encounters. Happens it that your brothers persecute
you, look upon him in his sobbing under the knife of an inhumane, who pardoned
him not, but to abandon him to the beasts more savage, then an evil brother, if
yet there be any such. He fell from their hands into the bottom of a Ditch, he
made thereof a Pulpit, from whence he sent a thousand sighs unto Heaven, to
solicit there the pardon of his executioners. I assure you, my dear Reader,
that he carried his pains with so much conformity, that God took pleasure
therein, and that this pleasure obliged him to stir him up new troubles. You
will judge when he comes forth of his Sepulcher, that he shall rise again to
the hope of a life less incommodious then his; a few paces from thence, he
found chains, which served notwithstanding but to hold him more strongly to the
will of his Creator. He passed into Egypt, they cast him headlong into a
prison; did this hinder him to adore him who brought him thither? So far was he
from it, that he seemed to see him and to hear him, as he had raised him above
the Empyraeum. He suffered with patience, and attended without despair,
resolved to die, if God would have it so, or to live, if he so ordained it.
That which deceives men, is, that they know not, or feign not to know, that
suffering serves as an infallible means unto Heaven to pull us from the earth.
It is that secret which we ought to make the solid foundation of our comfort,
in all the accidents that encounter us. Who can complain of his miseries, if he
look upon them as the favors of a goodness, who regards but the advantage of
those whom he seems to afflict?

This Providence which holds the principal part of this illustrious Comedy,
furnishes us with fair reflections against our murmurers. For lastly, my
Reader, if we will call to mind that there never arriveth unto us any thing
which is not known to that wisdom who has no less power and goodness to
turn aside our misfortunes, then light to foresee them, should we be so
unreasonable as to accuse him of severitie? There is this notable difference of
the love of God, and that of men, that this latter cannot be produced but in
the communication of benefits, whereas the former has not a more evident
testimony of its tenderness, then the cruelty that it exercises. It is not
for us to do evil, with intention to draw good from thence, because we have not
the skill to make our malice succeed with so much good fortune. There is none
but God who knows this artifice, and who ought to serve himself therewith: he
does it ordinarily both to separate us from the creatures, and to unite us to
him. Keep we firm in this principle. God knows the means to save me, when he
seems to destroy me; let him dispose of my life, and of my fortune, as it shall
please him, I can never murmr, because I can never doubt of his power and of
his wisdom, much less of his goodness.

Suppose we notwithstanding that this high Majesty has not that industry to
change the things so contrary, and that it would not conduct us unto happiness
through misery, nor unto glory through infamy. We must remember that God is the
Sovereign of his creature, and therefore it is subject unto all the uses that
it shall please him. An Artificer has much right to ruin the work of his
hand; he can if he will burn the house which he has built, confound the image
which he has drawn, break the pot which he has molded, and generally destroy
all that which he has made, by this only reason, that he is the master
thereof, and the workman. Let us examine the rights of our God, and we shall
find that our nullity cannot exceed his power. He has not only given us the
exterior and the figure, which bounds and which limits all the industry of
other masters, but also his hand passes even to the bottom of our being, and
makes the most interior of our substance. What law have we to oblige him to
our conservation? What service have we rendered to him to constrain him to choose
us the fortunes and conditions that please us? The least of our crimes may
require from his justice all the rigor of his power; but the greatest of our
homages cannot merit the least of his favors. Why then would we force him to
do us good, since we are always culpable, and he is never debtor? Truly his
power should be very much limited, if he could not serve himself of us, but as
we should think fit. The Master of all nature, he should become the slave of
all men, since there is not one of them content with his fortune, nor modest in
his ambitions. Whatsoever God makes of us, let us acquiesce in his Providence:
he is just, if he ordain us punishment; he is magnifick, if he does us good.

Let us look upon Joseph in the chains, and under the irons of a rude
captivity, he retains there a countenance so cont^nt, as if he were upon the
Arch of the Firmament; the Angels are not more resigned to the glory which they
possess, then this innocent young man was to the miseries which he suffered.
In which, not to dissemble, his virtue surpassed theirs much, since there must
be courage to bear evil, whereas it is sufficient to love for to consent to his
good. What marvel is it that a Seraphim is not distasted with God amidst the
torrent of eternal delights! What miracle, that a poor creature is not troubled
in the bitternesses of a cruel fortune! it would not be much if the just
dispute not glory but with the blessed spirits, it seems even that he carries
it above his God; that high Majesty boasts himself for being descended into the
prisons into the company of that holy Patriarch, and not to have abandoned him
in his chains. Truly his condescence proves his goodness, it exposes
nevertheless nothing of his interest; his pity may comfort our misery, but it
cannot feel it; and though it should be true, that God were sensible of evil
(which we cannot think) he would have always many assistances and succors,
which are needful to our nature. He is puissant, we are weak; he is strong, we
are infirm; he is invariable, we are inconstant; lastly, he is God, and we are
creatures. His power props him, our weakness shakes us; his force retains him,
our infirmity thrusts us off, his immutability stays him, our inconstancy
overthrows us. It is then more glory to suffer as man, then to compassionate as
God, and it is more to Joseph who consumed himself in affliction, then to his
amiable Master who beheld him. Let us confess that it is a great and noble
motive to fortify us in our pains, to know that we have a God, who despises
not our miseries, and who keeps to our chain. Seneca assures, that his Jupiter
sees nothing but the flat in parallel to the suffering of a good man, yea, but
he remains in the Heaven, and participates not of his griefs but by the sight.
He whom we adore, descends unto the Earth, and enters into our prisons, not to
be there spectatour of our combats, but to serve us for second. It is an
illustrious duel, that of God and man, against impatience and fortune; who
would be so cowardly to fly, when he should triumph? I come again
notwithstanding to that which is sweet in our History; he who tries us by
afflictions, sustains us by hope; he never thrusts men into the lists, but he
has the buckler on his arm to defend him, and the laurels in his hand to crown
him. My dear Reader, if thou fightest, look well about thee; and I assure thee,
that thou shall see her who observes thy fidelity, and who prepares thy reward;
if thou demandest who it is, I answer, it is the Divine Providence.

FINIS.

