THE CASE OF ROBERT CECILL, Esquire UPON The BILL for the Limiting the Power of his
Brother JAMES EARL of SALISBVRY to Cut of the Jntaile of his ESTATE.
THAT upon his Father's Marriage with the Lady Margaret Manors, his
Grandfather, William Earl of Salisbury, by Lease, and Release, did settle
several Castles, Lordships, Manors, Tenements, and Hereditaments, to the value
of about 8000 l. per Annum, (after some particular Estates since spent,) to the
use of the first, and all, and every other Son and Sons of the said Father, on
the Body of the said Lady Margaret begotten, and their Heirs Males
successively, in Tail Male, with several Remainders over.

That his Father had Issue by the said Lady Margaret, James now Earl of
Salisbury, himself, and three other Sons, inheritable to the said Estate
successively.

That the Present Earl in the time of the late King James II. (notwithstanding
his being descended of a Protestant Family) became a Papist, and Zealously
engaged in the Popish Interest; and having no Issue did then Suffer a Common
Recovery of Lands to the Value of 40000 l. of the said Estate, and thereby
barred the Remainder thereof; and the said Earl, persisting in his Zeal to that
party, does intend to suffer a Common Recovery of the Residue of the said
Estate; whereby the said Robert Cecill who is a Protestant, and Zealous for the
present Government will be barred of the Remainder, and my Lord empowered to
settle it upon some Person of his own Religion.

The Design of the said Bill is therefore to prevent the destroying of the
Remainder of the said Estate, and restrain the present Earl from Voluntary
Waste, allowing him Liberty to provide for younger Children if he should have
any; and to make a Jointure to any Wife that he should marry, andall other
necessary Priveledges and Provisions for the Support and Improvement of the
Estate, and to preserve the Right of the younger Children of the late Earl, or
any Creditors of the said Earl, or Legatees of his Will,

The Particulars of the present Earl of Salisbury's Estate, as it now stands,
upon the several Settlements.
l. s. d. My Lord has Fee Simple Lands, which descended from his Father, per
Annum 1611 00 00 Lands of which he has suffered a Common Recovery, and are now
Fee Simple, are per Annum 1377 00 00 The Reversion in Fee, after the death of a
Great Aunt, per Annum 350 00 00 The Reversion of the Ninety Years Trust, for
the payment of his Father's Debts, Legacies, and younger Children's Portions,
being per Annum 2700 l. may be valued at 5000 00 00 Part of the Estate of which
my Lord has suffered a Common Recovery, is the New Exchange, which are small
Rents upon Leases for Years; the Fines of which, when they were last renewed,
came to 14000 l. Most of these Leases will expire in Eighteen Years, and all in
Twenty. The present Encumbrances upon these Estates are, by Mortgage 10000 00
00 Debts upon simple Contract, as my Lord's Agent has alleged 7000 00 00
Notwithstanding which, my Lord will have a Fee Simple Estate, to dispose of as
he pleases, to the value of above 60000 00 00 My Lord's present Revenue in Fee
Simple Lands in Possession is, per Annum, 2988 00 00 The Entailed Estate in
Possession is, per Annum, 2000 00 00 My Lady's Estate in Possession is, per
Annum 2000 00 00 In all, per Annum, 6988 00 00

The Reversions my Lord is entitled to.
The Ten Years Trust for payment of Portions and Annuities; of which, Seven
Years and an half are expired 3500 00 00 His Great Aunt's Jointure 350 00 00
His Share of my Lady Salisbury's Mother's Jointure 1000 00 00 Which, in less
than Three Years time, will be a certain Revenue of 10488 00 00 Besides the
Expectation of the Jointures. Of which, the Remainder that Mr Cecill hopes to
preserve, is, per Annum, but 5500 00 00 And if he should be Earl of Salisbury,
will come to him thus encumbered. Annuities granted by his Father per Annum 950
00 00 Hatfield-House, Gardens, and Parks, which are accounted 1000 l. per
Annum, do not bring in more Profit, than what will keep them in Repair. The
present Lady Salisbury, or any other Wife, will have a Jointure per Annum 1500
00 00 The Revenue which will remain to Mr. Cecill, after these Deductions, will
be 2100 00 00 Which, if my Lord has younger Children, he has power to charge
with 5000 l. Portion to each.

If it be objected, That the late Lord Salisbury left great Debts, and that the
present Lord is disabled by this Bill to pay them.

It is answered, That my Lord is not in the least concernedin the payment of
his Fathers Debts, there being two Trustees created by the late Lord for the
discharge of them which are confirmed by this Bill.


