ANOTHER WORD TO PURPOSE Against The Long Parliament REVIVED.

By C. C. of Grays- Inn Esquire;

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring, at the George in Fleet Street, 1660.

Anno 17 Caroli Regis.
An Act to prevent Inconveniences which may happen by the untimely Adjourning,
Proroguing, or Dissolving of this present Parliament.
WHereas great Sums of Money must of necessity be speedily advanced and
provided for relief of His MAJESTY'S Army and People in the Northern parts of
this Realm; and for preventing the imminent danger this Kingdom is in and for
supply of other His Majesty's present and urgent occasions, which cannot be so
timely effected as is requisite, without Credit for raising the said Moneys;
which Credit cannot be obtained until such obstacles be first removed, as are
occasioned by fears, jealousies, and apprehensions of diverse of His Majesty's
Loyal Subjects, that this present Parliament may be Adjourned, Prorogued, or
Dissolved before Justice shall be duly executed upon Delinquents, Public
grievances redressed, a firm Peace between the two Nations of England and
Scotland concluded, and before sufficient pro^ision be made for the repayment
of the said Moneys so to be raised. All which the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled having duly considered, do therefore humbly beseech Your
Most Excellent Majesty that it may be Declared and Enacted,

And be it Declared and Enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord, with the assent
of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, that this present Parliament now assembled shall not be
dissolved, unless it be by Act of Parliament to be passed for that purpose: Nor
shall be at any time or times, duriug the continuance thereof, Prorogued, or
Adjourned, unless it be by Act of Parliament, to be likewise passed for that
purpose: And that the House of Peers shall not at any time or times during this
present Parliament* be Adjourned, unless it be by themselves, or by their own
Order: And in like manner, that the House of Commons shall not at any time or
times, during this present Parliament, be Adjourned, unless it be by
themselves, or by their own Order: And that all and every thing and things
whatsoever, done, or to be done, for the Adjouruing Proroguing, or Dissolving
of this present Parliament, contrary to this Act, shall be utterly void and of
none effect.

ANOTHER WORD TO PURPOSE Against The Long Parliament REVIVED.
THat it is easy to Conjure up Spirits, but hard to Conjure them down again,
we find it true; yet who would not have thought, that the very Name of King
Charles the Second had been such a Charm as would have confounded the most
Malevolent-spirit that ever traced English ground? yet so it is, That there is
not only some dark Spirits which haunt corners, yet remaining with us; but in
the face of the world here has (with brazen brow) appeared amongst us the most
unexpectedly Pernicious, Damnable and Treasonable Find that Hell has to send
forth, whose Errand is to Move for the Resurrection of the Long Parliament;
which is in truth, That the Unparalleled Tragedy of the last 18. years mi^^t be
Acted over again; Such a Tragedy, in comparison of which, that of Massenello in
Naples; that of John of Leyden and Knipperdoling in Germany; that reported by
Machiavel in Florence, are but like the story of Tom Thumb, compared with St.
George and the Dragon.

Corruption is infectious; and least this seditious Pamphlet should taint any
ignorant or disaffected persons, I thought good to accept the bold challenge
of the Author, to demonst^ate his seditious spirit, and to answer his
invincible Arguments according to Law, which by other Arguments I did before in
my Parthian Dart, which I suppose came not to his hands.

The main foundation he builds upon, is the pretended Act made in 1640. for the
Continuance of the Parliament without dissolution, but by an Act for the
purpose, which is his high and mighty Bulwark, whereby he fortifies himself
against all opposition; but I shall soon cast down all his works with few words.

And in the first place, I do declare my opinion to be, That that Act was void
in its Creation, so that the King was not obliged by it; but might immediately
by virtue of his prerogative have broken up that Parliament, notwithstanding
that Act: And this I hold upon these two Grounds. 1. In respect of the King. 2.
In respect of the two Houses.

1. In respect of the King; and for that I lay down this for Law, That the King
by consenting to an Act (tendered him for that purpose) cannot grant away and
sever from his Crown the inherent Privileges and prerogatives which (ab
antiquo) have been and continue to that time attending and annexed to his
Crown; as his power of commanding his subjects for public good, cannot be
restrained neither in Th^si nor Hypothesi, but that the King by his Royal and
inseparable prerogative may dispense with such restriction; for upon
commandment of the King, and obedience of the subject, does his Government
consist.

It is provided by the Statute of 23. H. 6. Cap. 8. That all Patents made to
Sheriffs for yea^s, life, or in Fee, etc. are void, notwithstanding any clause
of non obstante, etc. and the Patentee is thereby disabled to take the office;
yet adjudged by all the Judges of England, in the Exchequer Chamber, 2 H. 7.
66. That the King was not bound by that Statute.

Also the King may pardon Murder, and Treason, etc. with non obstante, vid. the
Act 13 R. ^. Parli. 2. cap. 1.

So the Statute of 4 H. 4. cap. 13. That no Welchman be Justice, etc. in Wales,
binds not the King.

So the Act of H. 3. de tallagio non concedendo, (vid, Rastal, tit. Purveyance)
which would bar the King wholly of Purveyance, is void, and binds not the King.

So the Statute of 8 R. 2. cap. 2. and 33. H. 6. That none shall be Justice of
Assize in his own County, binds not the King, as is obvious by every days
experience: and many more like these.

And the reasons of all these Cases, are, because the King has not power to
assent to any Act, which shall endeavor to eradicate any of the Native
precious Flowers of his Crown; and this holds not only in things Civil, but
Ecclesiastical too, as appears by the resolution of the two chief Justices, and
other the Judges at a Committee before the Lords in Parliament, Anno 8 Jacobi,
where it was holden and declared by them all, That Canons made in a Convocation
and confirmed by the Royal assent, could not be put in execution, if they were
against the Kings prerogative.

King John in the 13th year of his timorous Reign, sent Ambassadors to
Admiralius Murmelinus, Math. Paris. p. 9. 233.
great Emperor of Turkey, to offer to be of his Religion, and to make his
Kingdom Tributary to him; but that Heroic Infidel great Prince, as a thing
unworthy of a King, to deny his Religion, and betray his Kingdom, utterly
refused to accept. But this pusilanimous Prince of ours, by the threats and
persuasions of Pandulphus the Popes Commissary, the next year (Cum conmuni
Concilio Baronum) surrend^ed his Kingdoms of England and Ireland to Pope
Innocent the III. and that he would hold his Crown from thenceforth as Fcodary
to the Pope, paying for both his Kingdoms 1000 Marks per annum; which 1000
Ma^ks with the arrearages was demanded by the Pope of wise King Edw. the 3d in
the 4th year of his Reign, who called a Parliament thereupon, whose resolution
was, That the King could not do it without the consent of the Commons, as
appears Rot. Parl. 40. E. 3. Numb. 8. an Act not yet Printed. And though it was
then resolved, that it could not be done without the consent of the Commons,
which was to defeat the Kings Grant with the greatest color; yet it did not
imply, that he might do it with the consent of the Commons; for in Rot.
Parliamenti, 42. E. 3. numb. 7. upon further debate, It was declared by the
Lords and Commons in full Parliament, That they could not assent to any thing
in Parliament that tended to the dish^rison of the King and his Crown,
whereunto they were sworn; which late president I bring to prove the second
respect before mentioned of the two Houses.

So then it follows, that this Act, this Idol, which has been so much
worshipped, and which was the occasion of all our miseries, was void as to the
Kings Royal assent, and also as to the assent of the two Houses, provided I
make it appear, that ealling and dissolving of Parliaments is such a flower of
the Crown as cannot be severed.

And for this I must acquaint you with the Antiquty of Parliaments, and the
manner of them; I find many conceits of their antiquity, and many strains and
conj^ctural inferences from dubious and incetain History of the antiquity of
the Commons House: but according to the clearest and most allowed course of
story, I affirm thus; That Parliaments are of very ancient standing before the
conquest, but not such Parliaments as we have now; for those consisted only of
the King and his Nobles, and not all the Nobles neither, but such as the King
was pleased to call; and so it continued till the Reign of H. 1. in the 16th
year of whose Reign was the first sitting of the Commons in Parliament, which
was occasioned thus; H. the first was an Englishman, and therefore feared the
revolt of the Normans from him, (for they favored his Brother Robert Duke of
Normandy) and he understanding that his own Countrymen had a kindness and
affection for him, called the chief of them to his great Council, and did by
that means settle himself sure in his Throne, (which I take for a good rule for
other Kings).

Yet this manner of assembling was not always continued since that time; for
sometimes the chief of the Nobility were only Called, and they at the end of
the Parliament imparted to the other Barons, and their Country, what was done
in Parliament: afterward King John ordained that all Barons of England should
come in proper person to Parliament, being summoned, 20 Knights Fees, after 20
l. a Fee, going to the value of an entire County, and fifteen Knights Fe^s,
making an entire Baron, by which they sat. But King Hen, 3d after he had
smarted by the tumultuation of the Barons, their multitudes bringing confusion,
ordained, that those Earls and Barons only to whom he directed his Writs,
should come to Parliament, and none else. Afterward his Son Edw. 1. (who
indeed may be called the Founder of our civil Estate) called such of the Barons
as he pleased, and omitted the rest, and appointed the Knights and Burgesses to
be Elected (which is the first time that I read of Election for before that,
when the Commons were called, it was only such of the chief of them as the
King pleased) And as it was settled in Edward the First's time, it continued
till Edward the Third (there being then in use a Writ, de Admitten do fide
dignos ad colloquium) and so downwards, of the special Grace and Favor of
wise, pious and Indulgent Kings, it has continued to this day.

By this appears the extent of prerogative which attended our Kings in former
days, in relation to Parliaments; and although latter times have by favor and
indulg^nce won upon it; yet it cannot be doubted, but it is still, as it is at
this day, a Flower of the Crown to Call Parliaments, and consequently to
Dissolve Parliaments, which also is allowed by our Pamphleter, fol. 7. for, Quo
aliquid constituitur dissolvitur; and my Lord Cook in several places affirms,
That it is against Natural Equity to oppose that Rule, That that which
Constitutes should not Dissolve; and no man will deny but an Act of Parliament
against Natural Equity is void; and hear what Justice Dodderidge, (that learned
man) says in his Treatise of Parliaments, That the King, jure Regio, as a
Flower of his Crown, has the Absolute power of Calling and Dissolving of
Parliaments as often as he pleases, which never yet was opposed.

Then it will follow upon the Reasons before mentioned, That the King with the
consent of the two Houses cannot grant it away; then if he grant it away it
remained in him after the signing of that Act; so that That Act was not binding
to him; and by this all our Pamphleters Arguments are set a side.

And the rather a^e we to make the best and favourablest construction in this
case, because the signing of that Act was against his Royal Inclination, being
indeed compelled (as it were) thereto by the violent, heady, inconsiderate and
rash pressures of those turbulent spirits, which have so lately infested our
Land, and ungracioussy disturbed the Religious peace thereof.

But admitting that Act should be in its Creation obligatory, yet it is to be
considered, First, How far it is binding: Secondly, How long it is binding.


As to the first, The Law is clear, That an Act of Parliament may at its
Creation bind generally, but by reason of some unexpected consequents and
future Events, which inevitably or imminently import danger to the public, it
may become of no force; and this may be in the Case of common persons; as the
Statutes of Marlbridge and Gloucester, etc. against Tenants committing waste in
Houses or Lands generally; yet in case of a fire in the neighbors house, it is
justifiable to pull down the house next; and in case of wars against the Kings
enemies, it is lawful to make Bulwarks upon the Lands; and many more Cases may
be to this purpose; Then a fortiori, in the case of the King, who is bound to
preserve the Public, and in whose safety, and in the just maintenance of whose
Royal Native prerogative is lodged the entire Concern of the Commonwealth; and
this is sadly demonstrated to us by his late Majesty's waving the execution of
this undoubted part of his Royal Prerogative for which I now labor, whereby we
have sorely felt, and dearly undergone these unmatchable miseries, wherewith
these three Kingdoms have been so long and tediously exercised; which is
Argument enough to satisfy any reasonable and sober mind against the
unreasonableness of it, and to persuade them in their conscience, That such an
unheard of President should not innovate so much upon prerogative, as to bind
up the Kings Hands (which should defend and preserve himself and his people)
and to make him stand still while his Loyal Subjects are Murdered before his
face, his own Throat cut before his Palace, and the most horrid confusions that
ever was heard of, brought upon a Land (before that time) the most flourishing
that ever was seen; and all this fell out upon supposition of that Act being in
force, which the King might have waved; for in the case of Ship Money, though
it was the better opinion that the King could not raise moneys but by
Parliament generally; yet in case of apparent danger to the Kingdom, it was
agreed by all the Judges of England that he might: But then admitting it
binding in its Creation; the second thing is its duration, how long it binds;
and for that, its clear it can bind him no longer then he lives; For that thus,

The intent of the Lawmakers is to be observed in the exposition of the Laws.
Now we know full well, that the makers of that Act never thought of the Kings
death (especially his Murder) at the time of the making of that Act; but that
which was the moving cause of that Act from the Houses, was the remembrance of
the Kings breaking up of several Parliaments before, whereby some of the
Members were prevented to vent their malicious and cruel designs upon some of
the Kings loyal Favorites (whom for their preferment they emulated) as before
on Buckingham, and after upon incomparable Strafford, by the Vanes, Father and
Son, and this was under the notion of bringing Delinquents to punishment.
Others indeed, more sober, might have an eye to substantial grievances to be
redressed, and therefore desired that the King would not dissolve them till
they were redressed.

But good reason for the Kings actions therein; for he was advised, of two
Evils to choose the least; rather to dissolve twenty Parliaments, and leave
some, particular Delinquents unpunished, some particular grievances
unredressed, then by preserving one Parliament or more, to dissolve the
foundations of the Kingdom. He was advised of the Jesuits plot which had been
so long upon the Anvil against him, which made him loath to consent to this
fatal act, which rendered him supposedly obnoxious to the fatal Axe; so that
though he was compelled in prudence to himself, and policy to his Kingdoms, to
break up those Parliaments, yet the profanum vulgus, the ruder people, and
heady Commons, would not understand it right, but endeavored to bind him up as
sure as they could, and that was by this Act, which is the chief design
signified in the preamble of that Act. What is mentioned beside in the same
preamble, is of no weight, for his Majesty's Army there spoken of ceased to be
his by their rebellion; his Majesty's urgent occasions there mentioned, were
never intended to be satisfied; and as for the credit of raising money, surely
an Act of Parliament might have raised money without borrowing, or giving their
security, every one being thereby security for himself, as well as by engaging
of their Public Faith; and that Act would have continued not only after
dissolution, but after the Kings death, without the help of this specious Act,
and that might have been made in as short a time as this; so that the necessity
of that Act, which our Author mentions, is like that of Don van Dosme, who told
the Workmen of a necessity of removing the Chimney, because the fire burnt his
shinns. And as to the Conclusion of the Preamble, that it might not be
dissolved before sufficient provision was raised for repayment of the money
borrowed; if this should give a determination, sure it were at an end before
now, there having been moneys enough to do that, raised by that desperate piece
of Sacrilege, the Sale of Crown and Church Lands, Customs, Excise, and
abominable Taxes.

But further to the Act it self. There is another rule, Ad ea quae frequentius
accidunt jura adaptantur; Laws are made for relief of Common and obvious
Grievances, and to prevent the most probable and frequent accidents; such was,
then, that of breaking up Parliaments before mentioned. And it cannot be
intended, that an Act of Parliament should provide against a thing at such
distance, should be introductory of a new Law, should confound prerogative,
destroy the King, and undo the people; and all this by dubious and implicit
words, by a strange and novel construction, the effects and consequents whereof
are so incomparably dangerous and fatal to the Kingdom, as has been before
shown and seen.

Lastly, admitting further, That the Kings death was intended by that Act; yet
was the Act void as to that, and that upon this account.

If an impossibility be Enacted; or if a thing which is possible at the time of
the making of the Act, become impossible by the act of God, the Act ceases to
be of force as to that.

And therefore as to the first, If they had Enacted, That at the time of the
making of the same Act, there was no King in England, that had been void,
because impossible to be true, that that should be an Act, and that the King
should not be at that time King, whereas his being at that time King made that
an Act.

As to the other, is our case; admitting it possible that the Kings hands might
be bound up, yet the hands of the Law cannot be bound up; for the operation of
Law upon the death of the King makes that impossible, which before was supposed
possible; and therefore I am of opinion, with clearness, that if the Act had
been, That the Lords and Commons should be a Parliament, to make Acts after the
Kings death, that it had been void and nonsense; for they might as well have
Enacted, that Paul's Steeple should be Charing Cross; for its impossible that an
Act should be without the Kings Royal assent, and his consent cannot be after
his death; and there is no Clause that pretends to oblige his Successor to
confirm or consent, which our Pamphleter would have our King to do voluntarily,
and therefore tells out of my Lord Cooks 3d (which should be his 4th)
Institutes, That the King sits in Parliament in his Politic Capacity, and in
that capacity never dies; which is all true, for he never dies as to
succession, to avoid an Interregnum, etc. But as to continuances of Writs and
Commissions, etc. which by his death are determined, he dies.

The King sits in the Court called the Kings Bench, in his Politic Capacity;
yet by his death, not only the Judges Commissions in that Court, but all
proceedings there were originally determined, else had the Parliament in 1 Edw.
6. cap. 7. little to do to make an Act to salve discontinuances of process by
the device of the death of the King; but I never heard of an Act to salve the
determination of Writs and Commissions, or to oblige a succeding King to
confirm a Parliament called by his Predecessor; so that though perhaps he might
confirm them, and then consent to an Act of Dissolution; yet our Gracious
Sovereign knows them too well to call them together again, much less to confirm
them; and then there is no need of an Act of Dissolution, they being dissolved
of course for want of a King to own them.

As to what out Author mentions that the coming in of the Secluded Members, and
their making a pretended Act for Dissolution, employed their opinion that the
Parliament had before a being: It is far otherwise, as the chief of them, Mr.
Prynne, before declared; but it was in those furious days, to pacify, and to
give some seeming satisfaction to such impertinent and unsettled Noddies as our
Author, who otherwise might have made some disturbance, and occasioned some
prejudice to the good that was then intended, and since accomplished.

And whereas this bold fellow would p^rswade that the old Members might be
recalled, what is it but to remove Newgate to Westminster; that the King should
clap R^bels on the back, and encourage Treason, that he should not only
commend his Fathers Murder, and the destruction of the Church and State, but to
give them a Knife to kill Him too, and to make an end of all; Such a seditious
piece of Nonsensical vilany was never broached before. But whilst I am harsh
to the Long Parliament, I intend the Rump only, and not the Secluded Members,
some of whom Our Sovereign is pleased to own in this Parliament and elsewhere;
but for the other, I think they are well disposed of, being fitter for a
Dungeon then a Parliament House: And so I leave them.

This Impudent Pamphleter is not only content to endeavor to vindicate and
revive evil, but would oppose and destroy the apparent good of this Nation, and
would Affront (under the Notion of [Illegal]) this happy Parliament, that has
renowned It self in restoring our King to us, and us to our selves:

And this he endeavors First, As to the Lords. Secondly, As to the Commons.

As to the Lords. First, They are not of age. Secondly, They are not called by
Writs

As to the Commons First, They are not called by ancient Writs. Secondly, They
wanted the Kings presence at their Meeting.

And all this is said by Sir Edward Coke, in his fourth Institutes requisite to
a Parliament rightly constitued

As to the Lords,

I agree they ought to be of full age to sit in Parliament, and so I presume
they are that sit; I never heard otherwise by the Author or others.

Secondly, My Lord Coke says that Dukes, etc. and Barons, etc. ought to have a
Writ of Summons, Ex debito justitiae; his meaning is, That they ought not to be
prohibited, but ought of common Justice to sit; but this denies not but that
they may sit without Writ, if the King please: And therefore take this
difference, where a Writ is necessary and of substance, and where it is a thing
of course only; as if one be created Baron for life, Intail, or in Fee, etc. by
Letters Patents, he is presently a Peer of the Realm before he sits in
Parliament, and his Writ is a thing of Course, and may be sued out at any time
afte the sitting, as well as before. But where one holds per Baroniam only,
whereby he is a Lord by Tenure, he must have a Writ, and must sit also by
virtue of that Writ before he be a Peer, and there his Writ is substance, and a
sine qua non, etc. This diversity was resolved in Parliament in King James's
time in the case of the Lord Abergaveny, and is reported by my Lord Coke under
his own hand; it is now in Print in a book called his Twelfth Report, fol. 70.
by which the rest of the Books of my Lord Coke, viz. his First, Second and
Fourth Institutes, which are not so clear, may be the better understood as to
this Point.

Now then if these Lords be so by Patent, their Writ is not of substance, but
supplied by confirmation; if by Tenure, and have no Writs, it is more then I
hear affirmed by any; however it belongs to the rest of that House to inquire
of these things.

As to the Commons.

First, I agree they ought to have Writs of Election; the policy of that is to
avoid the peoples meeting and assembling together without the License of the
King.

I agree also, that the Writs ought to be in the ancient Forms, that is to
avoid the Kings single alteration of things anciently attending Parliaments,
without the consent of the people. Now as to the first, this meeting of the
people was with the Kings Consent and License, witness Sir George Booths
Contest, by the Kings Order, for the same; so that there is no prejudice to the
King on that side.

As to the Form of the Writ, it was by consent of all, and so no prejudice or
innovation upon the people on the other side; then it follows, Consensus tollit
Errorem; if all parties concerned agree, who is to find fault?

Further, a Parliament made up in substance according to the Laws of the Land,
is a good Parliament, though it may be defective in the complement of
circumstances, witness the Parliament holden at Coventry, 6 H. 4. An. 1404. to
the calling of which Parliament Writs went out; in which Writs was contained
that no Lawyer should be chosen, which made the Writs victious, to abridge the
people in their liberty to elect; yet there were some Acts made at the
Parliament which continued in force, which proves that Circumstances (which are
of right to be observed) are not fatal to Parliament proceedings, though
omitted. And under this head also comes that of the Kings personal or
representative presence in the being of a Parliament.

But further, without doubt the Kings consent to the Act for that purpose, has
made all whole, and has made that Parliament from the beginning of their first
meeting, though till that time they were not a legal Parliament, such Energy
and strong relation has oftentimes the Acts of a King: like this case; Lords
and Commons make an Ordinance, which naturaily can continue but during their
sitting; then the King dissolves them, the Ordinance thereby is become of no
force; yet if after the dissolution of the Parliament the King grants his Royal
assent, its now become revived and an Act; such an influence has the Royal
assent upon Parliament-proceedings, and according to this its adjudged in 29
Edw. 3. 4. b and 39 Edw. 3. 7. This I take to be a stronger case, that the Act
of the King should revive that which was dead; that it should make good that
which was absolutely void, and that in point of substance; then that it should
confirm that which was but voidable at most, and that in a point of
circumstance only.

Besides, the legality of a Parliament is not to be disputed by subjects, if
the King assents to it; its to be tried only by it self, or a succeeding
Parliament; and therefore in 33 Hen. 6. 17. An Act mentioning it self made by
the consent of the King and the Commons (omitting the Lords) was holden by
Fortescue chief Justice for the present, to be a good Act; for, (says he) we
will be advised before we go about to Null an Act of Parliament; but its best
to refer it to the next Parliament.

Besides, if we consider what great things a Parliament can do, with the Kings
assent, (provided it extend not to prerogative and such substantials) we cannot
doubt of the legality of this; and whereas its said that the forms of Writs
etc. cannot be altered but by Parliament; this Parliament has salved that and
all other Circumstantial, defects by the Act of Confirmation; which if
otherwise, ought not to be questioned but in Parliament, their doings there
being to us, Phoebi or acula, vera and fixa.

I shall conclude with a Case cited by my Lord Cook in his 4th Institutes, (a
Book our Author is acquainted with) but I wonder he missed it: He tells there
of a Parliament man, who for writing in dishonor of the Parliament, was
committed to the Tower for six months, and fined 500 Marks.

Now if a Parliament man (who has more liberty allowed then such whifflers as
our Author) was fined so much for writing in dishonor, only; what shall be
done with this seditious Desperado, that writes in destruction of the
Parliament? but sub judice lis est.


