CERTAIN MODEST OBSERVATIONS AND CONSIDERATIONS of the true Protestants of the
Church of ENGLAND. For their right choice of Church Governors, and Church
Ceremonies, together with the Church Liturgy, according to the word of God.

Presented in all humility to the high and Honorable houses of PARLIAMENT to
be voted and enacted, and to maintain against all opposers.

With the good means to expedite the same.

Leaving the Authors Judgment to your Wisdoms best Considerations.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN THOMAS. 1641.

Certain modest Observations and Considerations of the true Protestants Right,
in the just choice of the Church Governors, Church Ceremonies, and Church
Liturgy, according to the Word, for the Honorable Houses of Parliament to
vote, enact, and maintain against all oppositions: The Authors best Judgment
left to their wise Considerations.
MOst Noble and Wise Senators of this famous and well hoped Parliament, J have
stood long musing (upon the excellent Reports of your grave proceedings
concerning the Church of England) whether to forbear or to present my plain
and Rigid lines, knowing that many has writ and printed to your views diverse
Books, some judicial, and some Phanaticall. And seeing the necessity of some
solid truth to be performed and judged of speedily without delay for the glory
of God and good of this Church and State, for settled Right and Government to be
held in this our Nation, which might not savor of Customs, which oft-times
prevails and proves a Tyrant, and well by some so called, where it is
maintained from undue and unjust beginnings and proceedings, as in our Lord
Bishops too plainly has appeared, amongst whom to have Lord Archbishops to be
Overseers of Overseers is the most seeming groundless without reason and
Religion: Groundless, because high Priests to the Jews, Christ and the
Apostles over the Church Ministry is no true president for them to ground
Archbishops by, for in the Gospel it ceased, and Christ Jesus was the high
Priest, yea and the only Archbishop of our Souls, by that Government he has
prescribed unto Bishops of his Church, his Apostles after him, which to plead
custom for higher Government, is an abuse to Christ, and if there be any
substitute to Christ to take place of Archbishops, it must be he whom is the
Defender of the Faith of Christ, our King and his high Council to be
Arch-Overseers, for it is too plain that such will oversee the Errors of their
Brother Bishops, nay more bring them to errors too, I shall not need to repeat
them, This Parliament has found examples too many.

The Second Consideration, is to beat back the fears of the learned and wise,
that think this Change is a Novelty of as great consequence as the late
Innovations of our Church by the Bishops: Let this satisfy if they fear God
as I verily think some that spoke it does, and will take satisfaction, this
change and Novelty is no further then to Renovate the old Truth of Gods
revealed word to his people: The other is an addition, and so draws in a curse
to add or diminash, and sure these Honorable Houses have taken notice of the
Protestants Testimony, and redressed their Innovations in some part, and there
are many more grows upon us, if not prevented betimes, so many Sectaries
laboring with Petitions to these Honorable Houses to support their own
opinions which would turn to a great confusion, if this High Court of
Parliament should not speedily Rectify as well against the Papists and their
Priests which are indeed the true accounted Puritanes, worthy of that
scornful Nickname in the world, and far more exceeding the Sect of the
Brownists so called: But they with others of multitude named to the number of
29. or 30. several Sexes and Schisms (besides Atheists) whom I fear are too
many amongst us, which could wish every Sectary might have liberty to use their
own consciences and opinions, as if there were no Rule of conscience: I need
not name them, all take upon them no less then the Sword of the Spirit to
defend their errors, but it is of the evil Spirit the Prince of darkness,
because indeed their several ground work to persuade them is like the Devils
Logique, that used Scripture to our Savior Christ though falsely: But him he
could not deceive, no more J hope shall they to us Protestants, whose truth is
Christ, and we protesting for Christ are the more truly to be accounted
Christians of Christ if we stand to make choice, and to enact and maintain the
true sincerity of Protestants Religion in Preaching, Prayers, and Ceremonies.

The third Consideration, I have partly known and considered your Honorable
actions and good Resolutions crossed and hindered by strong hand both for the
good intended to the Church and Commonwealth, by their evil intentions to
intercept you if they can: And it is from that potent power of malice the
Prince of darkness aforesaid, that sowes his tares among your Wheat, that
endeavors to cross all good intentions by preventions of which J need not
tell you his further manner of power, in so great a troubled Government both in
Church and Commonwealth, as the like has not bin seen or heard of in this
state, these hundred of years; and therefore, you must first seek to vanquish
him and all your foes, and factious heads must be made higher by a pole then
their bodies, for how can the Sheepfold be quiet, while yet amongst them there
be some Woolves, you have a great work and a great many to rule and wrestle
with, so fight that you may conquer too, and cut off those that raise tumults
and errors, for if they get a head the Kingdom is divided, Separations are the
wound of a Crown whereby neglected it will bleed to death (J fear by it some
quarrels and divisions) at last: You have begun well, why stick ye upon
Aristippus or Diotrephes, who loves to have the pre-eminence, and works
Kings unto it, I fear to make more such, as then will prove as bad to him and
us, as the Vine-plants did of good Noah's own planting, if the Protestants
Council, which is your selves do not order the planting of it: An example
appears in the Archbishops, etc. The last Deputy of Ireland, etc. that is fled
away, and some no doubt at home that hopes of a Kings power to quit them,
de^e^vers of the King and others.

The 4. Consideration, For which causes as your greatest danger amongst all
Heresies and Schisms amongst us, this greatly marvailed that they the Papists
are not chiefly parted from Britains Court, and elsewhere in this Kingdom,
not yet fully Banished nor disarmed, for it is my poor opinion, which I
conceive under favor nor groundless to establish Christ in his Throne, and
his truth to be advanced in the Protestant Religion, Religion, is first the
chief evil to avoid them that are open enemies to Protestants, and yet under
the name of Christians too, and Jesuits of Jesus, that so counterfeit the name
and practice contrary to Jesus and Christ, whom only taking and making away
them with a more stricter addition to all their favorites, more then our Laws,
have yet truly executed, you would then seek and settle the good of this
Protestant Church, the brightness of the Renovation and settling of the true
Govrenors and Government of the Church by your Renovation settled of the true
Governors and Government, by which means all Sects, Schisms, and opinions,
with their Abettors will vanish of themselves away by the Sunshine light of
the Protestants Church and truth, or be brought home from their sepetated
opinions, some of which profess one truth with us in Doctrine though not in
their departure and separation: For now as it stands undecided and not done,
to settle the right way by your honored Acts, Atheists hold themselves good
Christians, thinking the best way to be Newters, and all Sectaries lives in
hope, so as the Land is polluted with their infecting and seducing simple
people: And therefore after removing the Adversaries, the Papists, it is the
chief care as at first, your Honorable purposes in all your excellent caused
Orations and Speeches there, to have begun and settled the house of God; which
by dumb Dogs, wicked Ministers, etc. to abolish clean, in which it is well
known, you have labored in greatly, if it were effected without opposition.

The 5. Consideration. Jf there be any opposition against the good meaning, you
voting of this your good purposes, It is in them that are either Malevolent to
the State of Protestancy, and such are not fit to be allowed vote at all, or
such that are ignorant wise, and have not perused the unlawfulness of ill
custom by Antiquity from right ways, and them rather to be disputed withal
by forcible arguments, but J should humbly refer them only to one Book
among others concerning the danger of Limited Prelacy, not well answerable;
and yet answered by some slightly in the Prelates behalf under the color and
title of a modest Advertisement, and in a calm examination so called, as if
the first did arise from some storm, which J perceive not at all, but as a
good gale of wind to sale by, and the Answere^ seems to becalme the voyage of
Grace, and would cause it to lie at his Anchor to hinder the true ways
proceeding, already honorably and Religiously intended to arrive at the Port
of Truth. As this Parliament has partly voted already: So as if his title of
calmnesse may signify weakness, his whose answer lays it open upon him, for
sure it is better to have a ^^e-growing storm to increase the groundwork to
goodness, then to have a dry Calm to hinder it; for under his Calm seems
but a Cavil, as from his Reasons may be well seen. It were too large here for
to discuss them all to so wise a Senate, showing in him merely a natural
politic brain to find out fair Reasons in a foul understanding. As for
instance in our accustomed Discipline to defend the Answers by way of Cueres.

1. Whether it is so bad as men living under it are not capable of Salvation, a
stout Argument, when as they may be capable without it, and that Salvation may
be under the Government of Turks and Papists, although not by it, and so in
other places: And why should Episcopal Martyrs be allowed a ground to make
good that which is bad of it self in their Discipline of truth pretended no^
erroneous, and yet no doubt those Martyrs may be saved too, for standing to the
true Faith against Heresy.

2. By way of ^uaere says, if any desire a better Discipline instead, are they
all agreed what they shall be from Scripture, or by evidence of necessary
consequence of Logical differences: Wherein if Divines must chop Logic for
maintenance of truth directed by the Scriptures already, as if that were not
plain without Logic Rules: We shall make the Scripture like a nose of Wax, as
Logic can do, and Papists uphold.

3. And his third and ^ast Reason by ^uare. Whether the new Discipline be a
plain Commandment or forbidden in the old, I admit of neither of both: It is
sufficient Answer, That the examples of a true Discipline desired is appointed
by the Apostles directions in the Church in their times, where the truth and
true Church was known, it is sale for us to ^unta^e and follow as near as we
can, as a precept and ^ule to us, because they were especially directed by the
Spirit of God, and so by inference a certain Rule and Example for the
Protestant Church so near to follow, and on the contrary side the old
Discipline being contrary to the Apostles and Churches practice therein in
their time is a forbidding in way of Truth, though otherwise seeming to the
Prelates never so good, and I partly know ye have given order concerning the
Examination of the Litturgy, Apocrip^^, and singing Psalms, to amend by
Learned and wise Divines, as to your great commendation it may with other
things be spoken: But the said three Reasons so calmely put with the rest of
the Book we may calmely reject, is but indeed a Calm C^vill not fit in common
reason, much less for so wise and honorable a Senate, since it is to no
purpose but to uphold the Prelates, and their Discipline and Government, which
made their voyage from old ill customs and examples, from bad Presidents and
places corrupt, and brought it into England in the Nonage of our Church.

1 And if it be a Puritanicall pack as the Archbishop and other Bishops do
conceive it, to maintain the unlawfulness of Pluralities and non-residency.

2 By Unpreaching Prelates and Ministers.

3 Sole Ordination, and Election, Excommunication, etc.

4 To abate the Clergies pomp, Ambition, Lordlinesse, and Riches.

5 The mis-imploying the Temporalities of the Church.

6 To restrain the Clergy from meddling with temporal Offices and affairs.

7 To abhor the ill use of the Oath Ex Officio.

8 The Reformation of the Litargie, all offensive, which by diverse men have
been complained of by Books in print, and by way of Petition for remedy and
most especially in a noble defense of Church Prayers, Objected by Seperatists:
Which the Scots used not, nor reformed Churches, a most Learned Lord of the
Upper house of Peers, had solidly and wisely opened the truth for some
separation for ill use of the same, as disagreeing to the work of Gods holy
Spirit, which settling our Church in the foresaid grievances it will open the
way as I said to bring the Seperatists and others in obedience with us.

And if for these matters of Reformation aforesaid, men dare think or count
you Puritanes, let not these Honorable Houses and Grave Senators therein
think it no harm so to be so accounted by loose libertines, for your wise
endeavors to vote and enact these things to be done, for thereby you shall be
purer then they, and find that beatitude: Blessed are the pure in heart, for
these your Votes and Acts must be done from your heart, and then it brings you
to see God by the purest of all men Christ Jesus, yea you shall see Christ
clearly in his Throne of Majesty, which they and other Sectaries have
endeavored to put out, yea also you shall see Christ by such Acts and Votes
performed therein, as in his word most lively.

And lastly by the true Concord and agreement of both Honorable Houses
effecting this work, you shall see Heaven opened to you hereafter for your
souls comfort and honor on Eternity.

The 6. and last Consideration concluding all is, I herefore humbly to move the
House of Peers and Commons to stick close to Christ as by confessing and
professing him (so by redressing) before men, Christ will then profess you his
friends before his Father in Heaven (there is your reward above) get it by
Petition of right too from the King, as you have done for the Common Law, and
this will be an extraordinary common good to the Protestants faith, hope, and
love, as all your Christian minds J doubt not are settled therein to strengthen
your selves noble Senators against all oppositions, that you may stand fast in
the Liberties wherewith Christ has made you free too, if you should doubt the
Royalty of his Majesty's will by him expressed to this Parliament, and since
from Scotland as is supposed that he will keep the Government of Queen
Elizabeth and his Royal Father good patterns for those times, that then was
used for want of better helps, they were like the good King David's that
Religiously meant well, but Solomon his Son must build the Temple, and he is
a good Prince that will be like his good Progenitors, but he is a better Prince
that will amend and be a more clearer way, when it makes more for the glory of
God, the honor and comfort of the King and to his people peace and godliness,
so shall our King be like Solomon, not only to imitate the worth of Queen
Elizabeth and King James in their Religions, but far more edify and build
the Temple of Jerusalem, a new, much decayed in England, and every true
Protestant is committed the Temple of the Holy Ghost, for assuredly as
Protestants were many in Queen Elizabeth and King James times, so by this
Reformation there will be many more and better in our King Salomons time, J
mean King Charles.

Some think his Majesty being in Scotland would not write such a Letter there
concerning his will about Church Government and Discipline of England, because
what is allowed good there, is from the same truth good here, and to have the
like were but a true Piety and Vn^ty for the Church to the peace of both King
and Kingdoms, but then since to turn this Letter into a book tituled King
Charles his Speech in Scotland concerning the same by no authority known for
that there is used irrefragrant terms, as if the King should conceive if Lord
Bishops were put down, as the Protestants seem to desire it, that then the
Tryeniall Parliament next may thrust out the Lords also, which is a bitter
disposition to breed d^scord between the two houses, at least a terror to
their new proceedings, for it is well known our Parliaments cannot stand good
without the Peers, though without Lord Bishops they may.

And as J showed before, Queen Elizabeth and King James did not alter those
things they then might and which now we may, for Q. Elizabeth came to the
Crown a Virgin Queen persecuted before, and in time of persecution they found
Bishops more zealous and willing helps to establish her Reign in
Church Government; as for truth she best could have against Popery, and were
very frequent in preaching both in Court, City, and Country in these times,
and a true Lover of their Protestant Brethren the Ministers, and King James
following after her to the Crown in that settled Government and Governors wherein
for her time she was famous over the world, and finding the people of England
more gentle and passive then the Scots who were more active and practive to
work their own ends in evil before, as they were counted Rebels of the
North, and thereby a Scot was an odious name in England as King James knew, as
also sometimes too busy upon Kings consciences, who yet after his Reign here
in England, procured them to entertain some Lord Bishops in Scotland he was a
King of exceeding great wisdom and knowledge to dispute and discern (as ever
at his Table here in England Bishops attending him) he was schooling them in
Arguments and Conferences did thereby keep them in awe of truth, and favored
no lying or flattery, but showed himself like good King David in the 101 Psalm.
To rule both his house and them in sincerity, and so refused for Reasons
aforesaid to make any alterations in his time according to the Scots Government.

Now could King Charles do as he did since his Marriage with our gracious
Queen, and did the Bishops no worse since, by too much inclining to
Arminianisme and Popery, and leaning too much on their side as appears diverse
ways, but especially by the Innovations of Government, which was not in Queen
Elizabeth or King James time (who withstood them both) J should conceive a
Reformation of evils in our now Lord Bishops might be rather then a deformation
of them qu^te in this state, which is not possible to be so long as Popery has
such a power and hand (in England unexecuted Lord Bishops first arising from
them, and having never had any warrant from Gods word, is now more safer to
Reform then to keep up and so to look forward, them backward to amend that
which is amiss both for Gods glory and the Kingdoms good, and so let the
Protestants by this their Honorable Council of Parliament have the true
choice both of Governors and government, and settle the Lyturgie according to
sincere truth and examples. So shall our King be accounted as glorious as wise
Solomon for renewing and rebuilding of the decayed Temples of the holy Ghost,
as he does of St. Paul's Church a material Temple and so both renewes together.

Therefore it shall be no doubt by your grave Senators Wisdoms still to
persuade our King, that ye must book forward not backward in Regal
government, and you are both for the King and his Subjects in the ploughing
season, and it may seem a hard work and task to go forward to Christ
without looking back, yet Kings as other men must set their wills, apt and
imitate that Doctrine and Discipline which is nearest to our Father and Savior
in Heaven; Worldly policy must bend to this plough least looking back we be
turned like Lots wife into a pillar of unsavory Salt.

Thus much for your encouragement to hope well in our King when you have done
your best to plough rightly, that at last you may say with St. Paul, We have
fought a great fight, and sought to finish the Parliaments true course, and for
to keep the Protestants most Christian faith for which the Crown of England
for building up these broken walls of Jerusalem, and the glorious Crown of
Heaven shall honor you highly: Therefore noble Senators slack no time nor
suffer opposition of your wisdoms votes, unto speedy Acts by all good means
for settling of the peace of our Jerusalem, the King and his people, and stop
the mouths of those which say; That English men are more passive then active,
all then will have cause to pray and praise you, and God in you, and other
Nations and Christian Reformed Churches that listens after your proceedings
extol you duly, and then it will follow in the next degree of your Temporal
Reformation by ploughing up of the Briars and Thorns, when Gods Temples has
found his blessing, their hearts and hands will follow you for the good of the
^ommon-wealth, Let England pray therefore for true Concord between these two
famous houses of Parliament, that without separation and division you may be
like Jonathan and David, and then it is not to be feared that your wisdoms
and gracious heart of our King Charles as the head of Englands Protestants
body, will be ready to fulfill all your just votes and desires, as the same
body has yielded for the King their head, such Nutrimentall supplies not of
English Milk and honey, compared like the Land of Canaan which flew above his
other Nation for his comfort and pleasure, but with such gold and silver money
weakening themselves for his honors credit to all Nations from free hearts and
loving Subjects, and so J cannot better and these Considerations, then to
desire God to preserve you all, and in all your proceedings, from your enemies,
and that this Kingdom may be kept from Civil dissentions by your blessed
labors and Counsels.

FINIS.

