A Caveat to those that shall resolve, whether right or wrong, to destroy J.L.
July 16: 1653
AS Touching J. L. I shall not engage in a Question or Dispute, whether he has
trangressed any true Law, and consequently for such transgression he ought to
dye as a Malefactor?

But the matter that is insisted upon is, That Right and Justice may be
admin^stred, whether he transgressed or not.

The enormity of Arbitrary judgment is sufficiently known and felt by many,
and it is such an evil in Governments; that I have that candid opinion of any
man that enjoys the natural faculties that God endowed him with, that he cannot
in any way side with it, or in reason produce any arguments for its support:
But rather the light of nature and reason resident in all men, will enforce
them to declare, that Arbitrary judgment is not fit or expedient to be
exercised among Heathens more especially amongst Common Christians, more
especially amongst those Christians who pretend, and would have the world to
know, that they have tasted and known in-dwellings of the Spirit of God; and do
also will the world to know, that their whole aim is, to advance the Lord Jesus
and his Gospel in the earth, against all opposers: and more especially since
those Christians have in their Land a known Law, a standing Rule to walk by.

The effects of this deadly poison (Arbitrary Judgment) has been drunk deeply
by many, who no doubt can declare largely the evil existence and effects
thereof.

The benefit and virtue of Laws have been known in all ages experimentally; and
what need of a Law, if it shall not be executed? but instead thereof, Arbitrary
Judgment take place? Did God give a Law to the Israelites, to walk at their
will? Did ever Israel flourish better, then when they kept the Law, and
inclined thereto? I doubt not but sacred Writ declares the contrary. If
judgment in Rulers should be Arbitrary, what means those Laws established in
all Countries of the world? I shall not be so prolix, as to discourse further
of the benefit of a Law, when I am confident a man of judgment and reason will
not deny it, but freely declare for it

As for Arbitrary Judgment, what stinketh more in the nostrils of most men
then it? nay Englishmen, I think have had so much thereof, that they desire to
be freed from it in Gods good time; What was the reason that the King in his
time was so much cried against, that Monarchy it self after his death, was for
ever extirpate out of this Nation? was it not, because that it was affirmed,
that Monarchy and Arbitrary Judgment are inseparable? What was the reason that
the late Parliament were such a grief unto this Nation, that they should (as no
doubt but many did) rejoice at their dissolution? was it not because Justice
and judgment was not executed according to the Law, and that they were like
Kings (Arbitrary to do what seemed good in their own eyes? Did not their
Arbitrary proceedings cause very many men to complain, like slaves in Egypt?
and did not their dealings cause their dissol^tion as a reward therefore?

True it is, the people of this Nation have been long under Arbitrary
Governors, and although they have good Laws in their own Land, yet have little
benefit thereof: Alas poor people how long have ye wished and expected that
your Laws might be executed in purity amongst you? how many precious men have
spent, some their wits, some their purses and estates, some their blood, some
their limbs, some their lives, and hazarded all for the preservation of our
laws: how long did ye expect after the Kings death, a Reformation of your Laws,
and restoring of your Liberty: and that upon the hopes ye had of the men in
power, who gave ye good cause to expect it from them? how many times have ye
been apt positively to conclude (now shall it go well with us, and that God
will do great things for his people) and had ye not reason so to do, seeing ye
had so many fair Protestations and Declarations for the same? Well, seeing ye
are not yet arrived to the fruit of your hopes, and seeing (like Tautalus) ye
have Laws, but must nolens volens submit to Arbitrary proceedings (which is
better then to resist -- melius est pati) lift up your hands with your eyes unto
the heavens earnestly, -- praying that God would hear your cry, and in his good
time answer your desires.

But since, through the goodness of God, this Nation is in hopes (still) of
good toward it; and the rather, for that their Rulers profess the knowledge of
the Lord, and to walk like Christians, I am imboldened to lay this one thing
before them, that since John L. is in their custody, and in their power, by a
word they may destroy him: in the name and fear of the Lord, I put it to them,
whether they intend not to destroy him right or wrong, and will not give him
that liberty, for his defense, as the Law, Equity and Consci-will allow: Oh,
pity will it be for men professing godliness, who have the Law of God to walk
by (if none else) to be Arbitrary in the shedding blood for their own sinister
ends.

It has been a practice (its true) to hang first and judge afterward, but what
reason or Christianity it is let all men judge: God forbid that he who has
once known God should consent to the sheding of blood, unless lawfully
condemned; I beseech them to take into their serious consideration, the words
of the Jews, who cried crucify him, and let his blood be on us and our
Children. Oh, what impression might that take upon their hearts, if they did
but consider the hand of God toward that Nation unto this day. If they should
out of a malicious intent put J. L. to death unlawfully, and conclude whether
right or wrong he shall dye; I do not prophecy but let them take heed, that
the blood of J. L. will stick in their consciences and be like a worm to gnaw
continually: It is my earnest desire of God that all Christians may endeavor
the peace of a good conscience, wherewith they may appear before God in comfort.

I desire them to consider, that if John L. be put to death by their authority
and procurement, it must be either by law or without law.

If they give him trial, lay an accusation against him, and charge him wherein
he has justly offended, and if by the law of God and men he is found guilty,
and must dye for it, then may they keep the peace of their conscience, and then
he is justifiably put to death, no man can gainsay it, for it was according to
the law: but if any shall premeditate his death, and to destroy him whether
right or wrong, let them look to it, God is a just judge, and he repayeth
vengeance; it being his prerogative alone, and not left to man to revenge
himself.

But it may be objected that J. L. is such a man that an age produces not the
like, he is never well but when fishing in troubled waters; he is a busy body
meddling with other men's matters; picking holes where he can find them, and it
is pity but that he should suffer.

Answer, I said before that I shall not side with J. L. in any error; all men
have their failings, and perhaps he may have some too; but what then, shall he
be cut off and destroyed wright or wrong, God forbid; what was the law made
for, was it not to punish offenders when they broke the law? Does not the law
prescribe punishments for the offense? If J. L. has offendded the Law, let him
be tried by the Law, and not by Arbitrary Judgment.

Since we profess our selves to be Christians, let us but look on other men,
what they have done in the like causes; let us but observe the words of
Nicodemus in John 7.51. does our Law judge any man before it hear him, and know
what he has done? By which words of his, one may soon conclude, that no man
was put to death by their law before the party accused was produced, and his
fact made known and tried according to their law: do not we pretend to be men
that have had more of the saving light of the Gospel then ever they had? and to
profess the true Christian Religion in power and efficacy? And shall they
forbear to destroy a man till he is condemned by the Law? And shall we condemn
a man without law? And if by law, it is a question, whether upon trial it will
hold to be a true law, or whethe-that law was grounded in any reason equity or
conscir ence; but only the arbitrary wills and pleasures of the makers
thereof; and if it be so found that that Law by which he stands liable, appear
to be grounded on nothing else but arbitrary will, and of set malice to destroy
him one way or other; What assurance has any man of his life or estate? What
benefit have we of our Laws?

Although that law be made against him out of malice, and if he be ensnared and
endangered, by reason thereof (although he might have lost his life anothe way
by continuing in his banishment, and so escaped the danger of this Law? why
shall he now upon his return desiring to live peaceably in his own Country, and
to inhabit with his wife and children, shall he now die? does he not declare
with Paul, that if he has done any thing worthy of death, he refuses not to
die, and to lay down his life in satisfaction of such Law he transgressed.

Is it not more reason he should be spared alive, being of necessity driven to
do what he has done, in returning into his own native Country? Had he not
Samaritans for his example? who said if they went into the Host of the
Assirians they could but die. Was it not his case? he could but die in his
banishment; as no doubt but his death was intended, as himself declares. And he
knew he could but die if he did return, by reason of that Act made against him.
Now he had more reason for his returning home, then his abiding there. What
might induce his stay there? was it perpetual fear of death? or want of those
things fitting for his being and lively hood? or the deprivement of his
friends? Might not another in his case be induced rather to do as he has done
then otherwise? considering that he hoped he should find mercy at the hands of
those in power, and that they would put on bowels of compassion to consider his
condition. And was not this hope furthered upon the consideration that those
that made that Act were plucked up by the root as useless instruments: corrupt
ones rather. And would he, or any one else think that those that plucked them
up for their corruption, will be so corrupt themselves as to put him to death
by their corrupt Laws?

And to kill a man when he comes and seeks for mercy, Is it otherwise then to
kill a man when he is down? What Example can any man produce to put him to
death in this kind? Is David's sparing the life of Saul twice, when he had an
opportunity to flay him, and had or might pretend reason so to do because Saul
sought his life; which I could never hear that John Lilburn was so eager after
the blood of any of his persecutors. May that be any example to take away his
life, or show him mercy? I leave them to judge? Or whether David (having reason
to put Absalom to death for murdering of his brother Ammon, and by reason
ther^f ^xiled himself) showing mercy to Absalom in forgiving his offense, and
calling him from exile; whether or no that be not a good example to show mercy
to John Lilburn in his condition? whose case as (under favor) I suppose, is
not so criminal. Wherefore I shall once more make known my desire, That
Arbitrary Judgment may not take place; but that Justice and righteous
Judgment might be executed, preferring mercy before cruelty.

And this I believe, That if they extend any mercy to John Lilburn, not only
he, but many others will return them thanks therefore, and ever remain sensible
thereof: but if they shall absolutely resolve to put him to death, and to have
the Law speak according to their minds, and by that means make the Law a cloak
for their shedding of blood without any just cause in reason, equity, or
conscience. It Is true, they may do it; but if they do, then let them beware and
consider that Abels blood cry^d from the ground Uriah's blood cost David
repentance. And these frequent Scriptures forbid the shedding of innocent
blood, and the heavy and grievous punishments that have attended murderers; and
that God may one day make inquisition for blood at their hands. I could wish
that they would put on Joseph's resolution: How can I do this wickedness and sin
against God? Unto all such as shall complot his death absolutely, I say unto
them again, Beware that the Lord does not render them according to their
deserts.

And as for John Lilburn, if he die by the Law, then may all men be satisfied
in his death: but if strength shall destroy him, as Joan did Abner, then may I
use those words of David, 2 Samuel 3.33, 34. Dyed Abner as a fool dies? Thine
hands were not bound, nor thy feet tied in Fetters of Brass; but as a man
falls before wicked men, so did thou fall.

FINIS.

