CERTAIN DESIRES FOR The settlement and improving of Ministers Means. IN TWO
LETTERS: THE FIRST, Resolving how Ministers means should be raised, whether by
Tithes, the Peoples benevolencie, or a certain set Stypend from the Public.
THE SECOND, Showing how Ministers means might be leavied, and gathered without
any trouble or charge to them, equally distributed to their and the Peoples
content, and much improved without any wrong or injustice done to any.

Published for the common good.

LONDON, Printed for G. E. 1646.

THE FIRST LETTER, HOW Ministers means should be raised; whether by Tithes,
the Peoples benevolencie, or a certain set stipend from the Public.
SIR,
ACcording to your desire, I sent you my thoughts, concerning the maintenance
of Ministers; a nice and an odious point in these times, and subject to many
exceptions, and yet a necessary point to be discussed, for the satisfaction of
many Christians, who are so distracted about it, partly by the tenderness of
their Consciences, and partly by the diversity of Opinions, that they do not
know which way to embrace or to follow. I will tell you my mind plainly and
fully, without any partiality, or by-respect, and the Lord direct you to choose
the best way.

There are diverse opinions now a days amongst the Learned, and the ignorant
about it, how and in what manner the Ministers of the Gospel should be
maintained in the Church of God. Not to speak of those, which would have
Ministers to serve frcely, and take no stipend at a l, but rather work with
their own hands, like other mechanical Callings, and that as they say in
imitation of the Apostle, Act. 20.34. 1 Cor. 4.12. Which Opinion as it is
contrary to Matthew. 10.10. 1 Cor. 9.11. -- 14. Gal. 6.6. and the practice of the
Apostle himself, 2 Co. 1.11. 9 Philip. 4.15. -- 18. So it is generally
contemned and condemned.

It is best therefore to consider, what those say, which do allow Ministers a
competency of means for their subsisting. Some of them would have them enjoy
the Tithes still, being not only appointed for the Ministry of the Old
Testament by God himself, but also if not commanded in, yet not contrary to the
doctrine of the Gospel in the New Testament. Others would have them depend and
live upon the Gratuitie and Benevolency of the people, who would be willing to
provide for the necessity of their Ministers, and that liberally. if they were
left to their own will and discretion. The third sort does remit the care of
providing for Ministers to the Magistracy, who should allow a certain yearly
Pension in money to the Minister; from the Public, by this means to free them
from all cares and troubles of the world?

Now if you ask, whether any, or which of these three Opinions do show us the
most convenient and nearest Gospell-way for the Ministers maintenance, I must
consesse, that it is to hard a matter for me to determine. All three Opinions,
as they have their several conveniences, so they are not without their
several inconveniences, which give me leave particularly to consider.

The first Opinion.
First, it has the plain Word of God for it under the Law, Number; 18.21. which
being compared with Levit. 27.30. seem to imply, that Tithes being absolutely
the Lords Portion, they were given to him by the Leviticall Ministers, not as
Leviticall, but as Ministers, and so being derived, as it were, from them by
entayle to Euangelical Ministers, are now due to them, not as Evangelicall, but
as the Ministers of God.

Secondly, Christ himself seems to approve of it in the Gospel, Matthew. 23.23.
where he reproves the Scribes and Pharisees not for paying the Tithes, but for
doing no more.

Thirdly, the Apostle seems in the Heb. 7.4. -- 10. to build the strongest
foundation of his Doctrine, That the Priesthood of Christ, being after the
order of Melchinedecke, was more excellent then the Leviticall Priesthood, upon
this ground because Melchizedeck took Tithes, even of Abraham himself, and
consequently of Levy in the loins of Abraham, whose Posterity should receive
Tithes. Now whether this superexcellency of Mclchizedeck may be said to be in
his Antitype Jesus Christ, if Christ neither takes, nor has right to take
Tithes in the Gospel, is hard to decide.

Fourthly, besides the Apostles intimation of paying to the Ministers something
of every good thing or blessing they enjoy, Gal. 6.6. Nay the Apostles
inserence, 1 Cor. 9.14. as if the Ministers of the Gospel should have their
allowance by an express Ordinance of God It is ordained as the Leviticall
Priests had under the Law: Now we know of no other Ordinance of God concerning
Ministers maintenance, then that of Tithes.

Fifthly, the practice of Christian Churches, before, under, and after the reign
of Constantine the Great.

Sixthly, the conveniencie of such a payment both in regard of proportion and
easiness, the people (...) seeling any charge in it.

Seventhly, the williugnesse of most men to pay Tithes by reason of an old
custom, which is to them, altera natura.

Fightly, and not to make them jure divine, the ancient Laws of the Kingdom,
and the renewed Ordinances of Parliament do plead of the lawfulness of them.

But on the other side it may be excepted against it: 1 That the payment of
Tithes being a mere Mosaical Ordinance, was abrogated with the Levitical
Priesthood, Heb. 7.12. 2 That in the New Testament we find not so much as a
word of it. 3 That Christ and the Apostles neither took, nor commanded, nor
demanded them. 4 That other means are prescribed in the Cospel, for the
maintenance of Ministers, as the second Opinion will prove. 5 That in the first
200. years after Christ, there was no mention of it in Christian Churches. 6
That paying of Tithes came not into the Church, till Antichrist began to
stir, and aiter many Superstitions, were brought in by him. 7 That the State
confirmed the payment of Tithes in the beginning of Reformation out of mere
necessity, as they suffered and connived to diverse other Superstitions, because
they durst not offend the people too much, and knew not, how else to raise
means for the Ministry, which now we may do. 8 That the gathering of Tithes
does hinder Ministers in their study and labors, and makes them too worldly,
and too proud, that many times they are liker Farmers or Grasiers, then
Ministers of the Gospel. 9 That it is contrary to the practice of the best
Reformed Churches. 10 That it is offensive to many tender Consciences, who
would rather pay more then less, if they were not forced to such a kind of
payment, and were left to their liberty: Nay, that many godly Ministers groan
under it, as a burden, and would fain be rid of it, etc.


The second Opinion.
First alleges the Gospel for it, where we have diverse examples, that the
people did provide for their Ministers freely, according to their own
discretion, without having any certain set stipend, much less Tithes paid to
them, 2 Cor. 11.9. Phil. 4.18. Secondly, Christ himself received such supplies,
Luke 8.3. Thirdly in all commands for the provision of Ministers no certain
kind or sum of dues is expressed, but left to the conscience and ability of the
people, 1 Cor. 9.11. -- 14. Gal. 6.6 Now the Gospel-way is the best way, and in
such duties we ought to conform rather to the Apostolical, then judaical
practice. Fourthly, it is a part of our Christian liberty not to be brought
under the bondage of any man, but to do, freely, what we do, Gal. 5.1. Fifthly,
the people will be more willing to do rather above their ability than under,
if they were left to their liberty, some in conscience, some for their credit,
some in love to their Ministers, especially if they may profit under them.
Sixthly, Minister will find more comfort in such freewill ofterings and
contributions, then in all their forced tithes, and set stipends and wages.
Seventhly, it will breed more love amongst Minister and People. Eighthly, it
will make Ministers more painful and careful to approve themselves to their
people. Ninthly it will teach Ministers in all conditions to be content and to
know how to be abased, and how to abound, Phil. 4.11. Tenthly, it will free
them from many cares and troubles of the world. And what shall we here desire
more then food and raiment? 1 Timothy 6.8.

But on the other side it may be said, 1 That we have no example nor command in
the whole New Testament, that the maintaining of Ministers was ever left merely
to the discretion of the people; but rather that in the primitive Churches, the
people did and by reason of the Churches condition, were bound to pay more,
then the tithes: in so much, that many sold their whole estates, for the
sustenance of Ministers and poor. Acts 4.34.37 Which now a days such men
would be loath to do, that are so unwilling to pay the tenth part, not of
their whole estate, but only of their yearly increases to the Ministers of the
word. 2. That in the beginning of the Gospel, before Churches were settled and
consirmed under Christian Magistrate, there could no certain portion to be set
out for the Ministers maintenance, which yet was done as soon as under
Christian Magistrates the Churches were established. 3 That the place of
Scriptures alleges speak of the duty in general, that we ought to provide
for Ministers, not of the means or manner of performance, whether it should be
left Arbytary to the peoples discretion, or be ordered by superiors. Nay that
those places employ rather a certain set proportion, then an arbytrary
contribution as it was shown above. 4 That is no more a breach of our Christian
liberty, to pay a certain portion to the Ministry, then to pay certain set
taxes, subsidies and customs to the Magistrates, which yet the Apostle
teaches they have right unto, Romans 13.7. 5 That the covetousness and
worldliness of men now a days is so great, that Ministers should have little
enough to live upon with their Families, if they should be forced to depend
upon the gratuity and discretion of the people, as in some places of late it
did appear, to the great prejudice of Ministers, and the greater shame of the
people. 6 That it would be very uncomfortable and disgraceful to the Ministers
of God, to depend wholly upon, and to be beholding unto every particular member
of his Congregation, be he never so mean or so bad for every bit of meat he
puts into his mouth, though never so little; which were rather to live of the
Gospellors, then of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.14. 7 That Ministers may find much
more comfort in the allowance of God, or the Magistrates, then in the
self-willing contribution of the People. 8 That it would make Ministers cowards
in the Lords Work, and fearful to offend the People, and rather prone to
flatter and please them in their Doctrine, least they should deny them their
gratuity, or sparingly contribute to them. 9 That it would rather increase
their care to the world, not knowing what recompense they shall receive, then
free and ease there of it. 10 That it would teach Ministers to know, how to
want, or to be abased but hardly how to abound. For their People would take an
order with it, who thinks always their Ministers have too much. 11. That the
same Apostle who will have us content with food and raiment, 1 Timothy 6.8. will
likewise have us provide for our Families or else, that we deny the Faith, and
are worse then Insidels, 1 Timothy 5.8. 12 That the chief ground of this opinion
seems to be either envy or covetousness, and that the abettors of it are
either loath, that their Ministers should live comfortably with a sufficient
competency, or unwilling to part with their dear Mammon for the Gospels sake.

The third Opinion.
As it is not contrary to Law and Gospel, so it is grounded upon Reason and
Equity; And 1 that as the Lord himself has assigned in the Old Testament
expressly, and in the New Testament implicitly, what kind and measure of reward
his Ministers shall have: So it is the duty of Magistrates, to see Ministers
duly recompensed for their pains, and not deprived of their portion. 2 That
Godly Magistrates have at all times by virtue of their power, both under the
Law and Gospel taken care, that such a set Portion was delivered to the
Ministers: Thus Moses took care, Deuteronomy. 14.22. Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 31.4. -- 6.
Nehemiah 10.35, 37. And under the Gospel, as soon as there was any Christian
Magistrate, from Constantine the Great, they took care for the Ministry, and
tithes were confirmed, though already paid before even in Origens time, about
200. years after Christ. 3 Nay more, that Godly Magistrates gave order,
whatsoever dues were allowed to the Ministry, to be brought into certain
treasuries, and delivered to certain Commissioners, by whom they were
afterward proportionably distributed, so that Ministers were freed from the
trouble of gathering their tithes themselves, as we read 2 Chronicles. 31. from v.
11. to v. 17. Neh. 12.44. and 13.12.13. 4 That God himself expressly commands
this course, Mal. 3.10, bring all the tithes into the Storehouse. 5 That the
Apostles in want of Christian Magistrates performed the same duty, Act. 4.34,
37. Where all the contributions were laid to the Apostles feet, to be
distributed proportionably as well to Ministers, as the poor. 6 That this is a
part of the distributife Justice, to be executed by the Magistrates, to see,
that these which are good, may have praise, Romans 13.3. which is most necessary
in the behalf of those that labor for our greatest good, even the good of our
souls; and consequently, that such as do most good that way, or have most
need of help, might receive most proportionably those things that are fit for
them, which cannot be done, if every Minister takes all the tithes of his own
People, where many times unworthy ones have too much, and the worthiest to
little. 7 That by this means the great inequality of Ministers means may be
remedied, and a better proportion set out and observed, least some should have
all, and others nothing. 8 That Ministers by this means will truly be freed
from all worldly cares and troubles, and have more liberty to wait on the
Ministry of the word, not unlike the motion of the Apostles, Act. 6.2.4. 9
That the revenues of the Church may by this means be increased, and the people
by authority constrained to pay fully and truly that which often they withold
from the Ministers, who dare not be so exact and strict in their own right,
least they should seem to be exacting and covetous, as commonly they are
slandered, when they will not let their people have all things at their own
prise. 10 That Ministers being public persons, should have their means from
the Public, without being beholding immediately to particular persons, from
whom they can can hardly get their dues without loss or strife, or discontent.
11 That this is the justest way of providing for Ministers to receive their
means proportionably to the time they have served, if once a Quarter they
should be paid; Whereas now it seems to be most unjust, that if a Minister
has served all the Year long, and should dye before the Harvest, or before the
Corn be tythed, he loses that whole Years prosit, and his Successor inneth
one Years profit, before he has served one month, and many times one Week. 12
That this is the practice of most reformed Churches, and found to be the most
convenient way for Minister and People. 13 That many godly Ministers and
Christians in this Kingdom groan and long after it, and would thank God for ir
if it might be brought to pass. 14. That this would be a means to reconcile
the two other Opinions, and make us all of one mind and judgment, as we should
be of one heart and affection.

But it may be objected, 1. That it is out of the civil Magistrates Sphere to
meddle with Church-Affaires, and that we must live by the Gospel, not the
Civil Law. 2. That it may be prejudicious to the Church, if Civil Magistrates
should have power to dispose of Church-mens lands, that upon pretense of
inevitable Necessities they may alienate all or part of them, and employ it in
secular affairs, and bring the Ministry to want and poverty. 3 That there may
be great partiality in the allowance of Ministers, and the assignation of set
stipends, to certain persons and places, according as they have friends in
high places. 4 That under Officers and Collectors may be unfaithful, and
deceive the Ministry in the gatheeing of their means, or paying of them. 5
That great sums of money must necessarily be taken from the Churches means, for
the wages of such collectors or treasurers, which will impair the Ministers
competency. 6 That it will be as great, nay a greater trouble to Ministers, to
get their pension from those collectors, or civil Officers then from the
People. 7 That the people would be more unwilling to pay their dues to those
civil Officers, then to Ministers? some out of Conscience, who are loath to
pay tithes to Impropriators, because they think they have no right to them;
some out of Covetousness, because then they will be more narrowly looked unto,
and will not have such opportunity and power to deceive these collectors, as
they did their Ministers. 8 That Ministers will be long detayned in their
payment, if the collectors are negligent, and have not made their money of
their commodities they receive, or if they are froward, and will not pay
Ministers at the times appointed. 9 That it is far more convenient for
Ministers, to have their several commodities in kind for the present use of
their Families, then to have their pension in money, and to buy every bit they
eat, many times at a dear rate. 10 That Ministers will be deprived of a great
deal of recreation and refreshment, when they have nothing to do in the field,
and are locked up as prisoners in their studies, which will much annoy their
health.

Thus you have the conveniences and inconveniences of these several Opinions,
represented to you, as near as may be, Your next question, I know, now will be,
which of these three Opinions I think the best and most convenient for the
Ministers of the Gospel. I confess the matter is not only difficult, but
odious, and which way soever I choose, I shall encurre the censure, if not the
ill will of some, which are of a contrasy opinion. But this we must look for in
all not only indisterent, but the best things, especialy in this age, where
there are commonly tot sententiae quot capita. And to tell you my mind freely,
though I will condemn none of the other Opinions, yet I do now incline to the
third Opinion, which does seem to observe a Me, dium, and goes a middle way
between the other two extremes, and may be a means to reconcile them both in
time. I will trouble you with no more reasons, then were alleged above. And
concerning the objections against it, they seem to me of no such force and
consequence, as to make me stagger, or chang my mind.

For 1. suppose the civil Magistrate have nothing to do properly with mere
Church affairs, in points of faith and doctrine, but only to be
Custosveritatis, and the defender of the faith established, according to the
word of God in the Churches of Christ: yet the care to provide for the
Ministers maintenances safety belongs to them, as a duty of their civil power,
as it was proved above. We do live by the Gospel, that is not (as they seem
to infer) by those means, which the Church think good to assign to the
Ministers for their subsisting: as popish priests preteud right to the tithes;
by virtue of the Churches, or the Popes authority: but by those means, which
by public authority of the civil Magistrates, or with their consent by the
liberality of the people is assigned to the Ministry for the preaching of the
Gospel. 2. The fear of having the Churches allowance diverted to secular uses,
is groundless because such order must and will be taken by Act of Parliament
that the Receivers or Treasurer of Ecclesiastical revenues, which are to be
established for the payment of Ministers, may be secured from all such secular
encroachments and invasions, and obliged by death to employ those Church
revenues only for the use appointed, notwithstanding all commands or orders
from any power whatsoever. And this we know duly practiced and observed in
diverse Reformed Churches and Dominions beyond the sea, wherein the greatest
necessities of the Sat, the Church revenues were not touched unless the Sat
did perhaps borrow a part of the overplus of Church revenues, that was left
over and above the full payment of all Ministers, which yet was faithfully
repayed with the first commodity. And If we fear, the Parliament might repeal
such Laws and Acts, or for the present connive to the breach of them, then we
may as well fear, the parliament might repeal the Act for paying of Tithes,
and in time of extremity enjoy all or part of them to public uses: as the
Popenow and then dispenses with Kings and Princes, to sease upon the tithes,
revenues, nay the very movables of the Church for secular use. But we have no
cause to fear such violence in the high Court of Parliament, which is more
tender of the preservation of Gods Ministers, and has many oother ways to
provide for sufficiency of means in the greatest extremity, as we have
experience of in these present distractions. 3. Neither have we any just cause
to fear partiality in the asignation of stipends and means, which shall be
regulated according to the quality of persons and places, by such as are
faithful in the land, and entrnsted with greater matters: especially because
all Ministers shall have a sufficient competencie, though some more then
others, in regard of their deservednesse and employments. And is there a
greater parliallity now, when my Lord, or Sir, such a one does bestow a living
of 2 3, hunnred a year, upon his younger brother, or kinsinan, or one that
married his poor kinswoman, or his Ladies chambermaid, though that Minister be
never so ignorant or profane, and wany times does agree for a sum of money
besides to be paid him out of the yearly means: when a well deserving man can
hardly get a living to live upon; where is like to be more partiality; 4. Under
officers and collectors must be warily chosen and often called to account, that
they may not have much time to deceive and if found guilty severly punished In
terrorem, that others may take warning and be faithful. Neither can they
deceive much, because it is geuerally known, what the livings are worth, and
what can be made of them: and the people will be careful enough to watch and
betray them, if unfaithful, because generally they hate such kind of men. And
Ministers themselves must trust the people many times with their tithes, and
take what they give, or their Bailiffe and servants, who are often more
unfaithful, then such men can be. 5. the pay or wages of such collectors will
not mount to very much, and scarce be felt as shall be shown in due time: sure
not so much by far, as Ministers charges do amount unto for the inning of their
tithes, and manuring their glebe, whereas by this means they shall be freed
from all, and have their means coming in without charge or trouble. 6.
Ministers shall not be troubled to beg their stipend from those collectors, but
shall have it sent or delivered them by the Committee for Ecclesiastical
revenues, residing in every County, without fail, at the times appointed. of
which order I will inform you hereafter God willing. And this we know very
orderly and carefully executed and performed in diverse Countries beyond the
Seas, though now by reason of the newness and strangeness of it seem
difficult, if not impossible to us in these parts. 7 It is uncertain, whether
the people will pay their dues more unwillingly to the Collectors, then to the
Ministers, it may be some will, though some will not. But whether willing or
unwilling to pay their dues to the civil Magistrates, because they know there
is no resisting against them, they must do it at the last whether they will or
not. But whether willing or not wiling it matters not, if it be enacted in
Parliament, a necessity is llaid upon them to do it. 8 Neither will Ministers
be longer detayned in the payment of their stipends, then now they are, where
they must stay sometimes six months, sometimes longer, from Harvest to Easter,
from one Harvest to another, before they can have their competency to any
purpose: Whereas then they shall have their portion paid them every Quarter day
and truly. 9 There is no commodity without a discommodity, yet both being
compared together in this case, the commodities of a set stipend duly paid, and
coming in without charge or trouble are far greater then the incommodities.
Suppose Ministers cannot have every thing in kind, as Lambs, Wool, Pigs,
Eggs, Fruits, and such kind of small tithes, yet it will be no great loss to
them. For Ministers did for the most part sell their Lambs and Wool, and made
no use of it in kind: and as for the rest of small tithes, Pigs, Fruits, Eggs,
and such trifles may easily be had every where at a small prize, the loss
whereof in kind cannot countervalue the great commodity, which they shall enjoy
by a certain stipend. Notwithstanding, they shall have some wheat, corn, hay,
wood, and the like provision in kind, if it please them to serve their
necessities. 10 As it is fit, Ministers should have some recreations to refresh
their spirits after meditations and labors; so it is very unfit, Ministers
should make the world their recreation, as if no relaxation could be had for
them, but to plough and to sow, to buy and to sell, and to play the Farmers and
Grafiers. There are other more fitter recreations for the body in honest
exercises, gardenings, etc. which shall be allowed them for their refreshment.

And thus I have briefly answered, and as I hope, satisfactorily to such
objections, as are or may be made against the third Opinion. I leave all to
your charitable construction and consideration, having only upon your
importunity opened to you my private opinion, which I trust will in no ways be
prejudicious, neither to the desire of the Ministry, nor the determination of
the State. By the next, if possible, I will endeavovr to open some way, how
Ministers means may be gathered without their trouble, equally distributed,
and the Church Revenues augmented. In the mean while I commend you to the Lord,
and rest

Yours.

FINIS.

