CERTAIN CONSIDERATIONS: BEING The LEGITIMATE ISSUE OF A True ENGLISH Heart:
Presented to the Freeholders, and to the Free Men of the several Corporations
in this NATION; To Regulate their ELECTIONS OF MEMBERS to Serve in the next
PARLIAMENT, To be holden the 25. of April, 1660.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1660. March. 26.

Certain Considerations, being the Legitimate Issue of a true English heart;
Presented to the Freeholders, and to the Freemen of the several Corporations
in this Nation, to regulate their Elections of Members to serve in the next
PARLIAMENT, to be holden the 25. of April, 1660.
TAcitus makes it the bane of the Ancient Britains, Quod in Commune non
Consulunt, That is, they had no Common-Councels, by which that great Statist
meant either, Parliaments, or something equivalent to them: And certainly
Parliaments are the best Physic of a sick State, but when the Physic shall
become the disease, and by Factions, Interest, Atheism, and the Consequents of
that (Sacrilege and contempt of that just Authority) shall make the Nation
sick of its own Remedy, and turn blessings themselves into curses, the wound
both of Church and State, will grow so wide, that none butan Almighty hand can
close them.

And thus has this poor distracted Nation (been near 20 years) sick of their
Physicians, and now lies almost at the last gasp, with bleeding hearts, and
watery eyes; we cannot but remember, (for it is a Misery to remember how happy
we were) that the last late King Charles, (the best of Princes, the Peoples
Martyr, and his Martyrdom the Astonishment and Earthquake of all Princes in
the world) in the 16 year of his Reign did summon a Parliament, to be holden at
Westminster, on the 2. of November in the same year; to consult with the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and other great men of the Kingdom, concerning the
difficult, and urgent Affairs of the King and State, and of the defense of the
Kingdom and Church of England, (then glorious to the envy of some other
States, and the Admiration of all.) To this Parliament (according to the
summons) came the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, of the several Counties,
Cities and Buroughs, elected by the virtue of the said Writ, according to the
Custom of England, ever since the 9. year of Henry the 3. And this was the
first time that the Commons were admitted Members of Parliament, and to fit in
a distinct House by themselves; but let this Truth never be forgotten, that
they sat then but in the Nature of a Grand Jury, to present the grievances and
desires of the people, and on their behalf to consent to such Laws as should
be there ordained: but that House of Commons taking advantage either by the
weakness, or necessities of their succeeding Kings, grew as we have seen to
such an exorbitancie of Power, till at last they gave Law to their Masters, and
made the King himself but a Royal Homager.

But to proceed, the Parliament consisting (as it ought) of Lords and Commons,
met accordingly in their respective Houses, and (according to custom) did
severally take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, whereby they swore, (O
remember this all ye that did swear) [To bear true Faith to the Kings Majesty,
his Heirs, and Successors, and to defend him and them, against all attempts and
conspiracies against them, their Persons, Crown and Dignity, and they did swear
that they did abhor that damnable doctrine, (and a damnable one it is) That
Princes might be murdered and deposed, this they swore:] But did they keep
this Oath when they made their Iniquity to triumph, and erected the Scaffold,
the sad and unexpected Scean of the late Kings Death, upon the very Margin of
his Throne, and made him go out of the world at his own Door? Poor Cateline,
whose modest Crimes made Tully eloquent enough to make his Crimes greater by
his Eloquence; but here Cicero himself would have been bankrupt, and amasement
become the best Rhetoric.

The Parliament thus met the King in a Speech, declares his willing and ready
concurrence to cure all the grievances of his People, and to enact such Laws as
should tend in order to it: And because the Court of Star Chamber, High
Commission, and Council Table, were great eye-sores to some men, (who liked no
power which might control their disregard of Laws and just Authority,) His
Majesty graciously consented to abolish the two first, and to regulate the
last; And more then this, divested himself of all Power, giving away the
Militia both by Sea and Land, to those who wanted his Power to destroy him, and
secure their crimes? Tonnage and Poundage were laid at the feet and pleasure of
the Parliament, and Monopolists and other Delinquents left to Justice, and the
grant of a Triennial Parliament was made the Monument of the Kings Goodness,
and the means to the peoples perpetual felicity: And might we not stop here,
and say, Happy are the people that be in such a case! The people had (now)
nothing to ask, nor the King to give, that reason could require; but this could
not satisfy men, who scorned the Throne, and were resolved that their Ambition
should trample upon the very Goodness of their King: And therefore now Religion
and Reformation (The usual Masque of Rebellion) must be the Engine to earch the
people, whose power they wanted to oppress their King: and the public Faith
must be pawned to raise Money to gratify our (Dear Scottish Brethren) who must
needs be sent for, and an Army of 20000. invi^ed to force the people to a New
Religion, (for the Old was condemned, without the Liberty of speaking for it
self. But the most of this Design was but in projection as yet: such an Embrio
could not be produced, without the grant of a perpetual Parliament, which (by
the Kings Necessities) they soon wrested from him. Now was the Oath of
Allegiance forgot, and the King affronted with all the effects of hold
defiance, and the six Members accused of Treason by their Prince, and in due
course of Law impeached in the House of Peers protected, and the King traduced
with the breach of their privileges, and yet till then, never any Member
claimed privilege for Felony or Treason: Of which last, had those Gentlemen
been free, the world could not have given them so much Honor, as would have
grown to them by their Trial. The Innocent never dread the Tribunal, the guilty
only fear; Yet the Members justify themselves, but it is with the numbers of
the people, and by force and affronts about the Royal Palace, endanger the
King to their fury, who now divested of of all Power, (but that of an
unconquered Patience) makes an Honorable flight to Windsore, to give his
afflictions breath, and to consider the safety of his Royal Consort and hopeful
Children: The Queen leaves the Land, because she could not be safe in it; and
the King, (as far as he had any Land) accompanies her. The King finding the
South so tempestuous seeks a Calm in the North; but that the Storm may meet him
there too Sir John Hotham, the Fatal Father of as Fatal a Son, is sent with
500. Soldiers to keep Hull for them who there denied the King a peaceable
Entrance into his own Town: And now a Vote passes to raise 10000. men upon
pretense to defend the Parliament against the King, who was so far from having
a Camp, that his numbers scarcely exceeded a Court, nor was there about him any
Militiarie appearance as yet: and the Complexion of his Message of the 20. of
January, 1641. Courting them to peace, with the offers of more Acts of Grace
then could modestly be expected from the most indulgent Prince) is a sufficient
Demonstration, how little he delighted in his peoples blood, or his own
revenge: But this Message, (though the King often pressed for an Answer of it)
had none, but what a Battle fought against his very Person at Edgehill, spoke
in the Language of the Cannon, (for by that time their contempt and speedy
marching toward him, had summond him, to receive such persons as would hazard
their Lives and Fortunes for their Princes preservation.

Now was the whole Kingdom in a jealous trepidation, A war was begun, and the
City of London doubtful of the Effects of such sad and unnatural Hostility,
Petition for Peace, but (with others of the same Inclination and Address) were
opposed by the Soldiery (encouraged for that purpose) and beaten and wounded,
and trodden under the feet of the Horse-Troups, where (in the Palace yard)
some seeking peace lost their lives.

And as the Kings Messages of Peace (so often repeated) were ever slighted, so
his Messengers for Peace were used, and one carried to London blind-folded
through their quarters was thence imprisoned, and after many weeks confinement
at last, returned without the least word of answer; They blinded his eyes who
came for the Nations Peace, because they saw not the things which belonged to
their own. For Colbrook, and Oxford, and Uxbridge, are witnesses of the Kings
endeavor for Peace, and how unsuccessful all his Treaties were, which could
never procure so much as a Cessation of Arms. And after all this, he offered
his Sacred Person among them, (an attempt o^ no small hazard, yet discovering
abundantly how much he thirsted after his peoples Happiness) that so his
Treaties of Peace might be more prosperous, but could not be admitted, with how
little Variation might we say, He would have come to his own, but they would
not receive him.

But next, let the pretended Causes of the War be considered, and they (as
their Declaration of August 1642. told us) was first to defend the true
Protestant Religion; and this they defended, by pursuing, and at last
destroying them who were the Defenders of it: The Pillars of the Church, the
reverend Bishops, and most of the reverend Divines of the Nation (for the
defense of Religion) were-suppressed, and their Freeholds (for so were their
Benefices) ravished from them, they, their Wives and Children turned out of
doors, to seek their Meat in desolate places; and to their Places were
preferred some of Jeroboam's bleating Calves, to bellow out their Cause among
the People, who had not absolutely (as yet) shook hands with Loyalty: And now a
race of dumb Asses are raised up, to forbid the p^etended Madness of the
Prophets, and an inundation of Sectaries suffered to rush in and overwhelm the
Religion these good States men pretended to defend; and the greatest Atheists
made the Darlings of the Times, whilst the Children of this our Israel, who
durst sacrifice to their God (according to the Discipline and Doctrine of the
Church of England) were punished and imprisoned: And to defend Religion the
better, the Birthday of our Savior (to gratify their Brethren the Jews) was
profaned, and the Observation thereof made a Crime.

Secondly, they declared to defend the Kings person, whilst their Pulpits and
their Presses (and that without control) spoke noth^ng but Treason and
Rebell^on: They defended him with Volleys of undistinguishing Shot, Pikes and
Canon; and when forc^d from place to place, seeking security, and finding none,
he had thought to make the Scots his refuge, this rock dash^d him in pieces,
and they (the Scots) his own Natural Subjects) sold him to the Parliament, who
(more generously wicked than the Jews) gave 1000000 l. for him; a great price,
yet less than he was worth; but that vast sum was made the price of Blood,
and a Counterfeit high Court (I cannot say of Justice, though they called it
so) Arraigned, Condemned, and Murdered their King, not without the prefaces of
many grand indignities, and spitting in his face: His erected Statua which
honored the Exchange, thrown down, and an Infamous Inscription (calling him
Tyr^n^) for they persecuted him after his Death) became the Monument of their
Insolence and Rebellion; and when they had killed the Heir, they seized on his
Inheritance, selling and sharing his Estate among them.

And thirdly, let it be considered, how well the Privileges of Parliament (so
much declared for) were defended) when by the help of their Janissaries, they
secluded a hundred of their own Members at a time, and imprisoned above forty
more, for no other known Crime, but that they were weary of their own Crimes,
and through horror of Conscience thought not fit to oppress their King any
more: And that these men's Ambition might reign alone, the House of Peers (the
undoubted Birthright of the Nobility) was dissolved by a Vote, and no
footsteps of Nobility were to be found in Parliament, but that the Earl of
Salisbury (to honor the Peers House and his own) in great humility availed his
goodness (defying as much the checks of his Blew Garter, as those of his
Conscience) was preferred into a Burgess.

And fourthly, let it be considered, how well the liberty and rights of the
Subject have been defended by these grand Declarers for their Defense, and that
will appear by their enforced Loans, Contributions, Parting Men's Estates,
taking the fifth and twentieth part, and by that dishonorable way of Excise;
and for the better enjoyment of the Subjects Libetties, laying them in prison,
and forbidding the Benefit of a Habeas Corpus: And have not the Laws been
trampled under foot, and Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, made the
sport and scorn of Cromwell's Ambition, who must be made Protector, that so the
Guilty might not want protection, nor the Innocent to be oppressed? And here
let it be considered, Whether the Kings Proclamation of the 24. of October,
1642. were not Prophetical, when he told them, their War was to take away his
Life, to Destroy his Posterity, to Change the Religion, to suppress the Laws,
and to make the People Miserable by an Arbitrary power? And are there not (as
Mr. Prynn's Memento tells us) above one hundred Declarations, Remonstrances,
Petitions, and Ordinances of their own, to witness their Perjuries and
Hypocrisies?

And let it be considered, Whether the Solemn League and Covenant (that holy
Engine of Division) will not, as Mr. Prynne speaks, stare in their faces, and
engage God and the three Kingdoms against them if they should proceed (as since
they have done) to Destroy the King, and Disinherit his Posterity?

Oh! Consider then, whether these men be ever to be trusted with Power, or to
sit within those Walls again? Meddle not with them that have been given to such
Changes as have Crumbled the Nation into so many Parties and Factions: Are they
not guilty of the greatest Perjuries, of the greatest Murder (since that of
our Savior) that ever astonished the world: Wherefore was it that the Earl of
Essex, before his Death declined them? Wherefore was it that the Lord Fairfax,
the Earl of Manchester, Sir William Waller, Mr. Hollis, Sir George Booth, Coll.
Popham, and many others of great note, quitted their Stations, and by that,
testified enough, how much they abominated these Impicties in their fellow
Members, And yet how ready were these men (in the late little pretended
Parliament called the RUMP) to make the Nation drink deeper of their Tyranny,
had not his Excellency the present Lord General clipped the wings of their Pride
and Ambition, by over ballancing them with a return of the formerly oppressed
and secluded Members? And though they be now dissolved (though against their
wills) yet being most unwearied, and Industrious persuers of their former evil
designs, they are earnestly at work in all Counties, using all means, (in which
their friends and Partisans, the Anabaptists, Quakers, and other Sectaries are
the instruments) to procure themselves to be elected again to serve in the next
Parliament. And should you (Dear Brethren) be swayed to such elections (after
such a miserable experience the Nation has had of them) you would make the
last error worse then the first, and by such elections (Justifying what they
have done) you would give them the opportunity to make your selves more
miserable; and then they had your own consent, to justify your undoing.

Consider how much the Church and State flourished before these Men rooted up
the foundations of both; Consider how long the Nation has groaned under their
oppressions: Consider how they would perpetuate their Usurpation and our
Thraldom, by endeavoring to entail their power upon their Posterities, that so
within a generation or two, Tyrany might be natural to them, and slavery to us:
Consider whether these Men have made the Nation rich, or themselves? Consider
whether these Sacrilegious Men, who have got the Revenews of the Church into
their hands, are ever likely to advance Religion, or that those who have used
their Prince so ill, can love the people? Consider that there is but one way
under heaven to make the Nation happy, and that the guilt of these Men is so
great, that they had rather drown the Nation in its own blood, and make your
lives the Bulworks to preserve their own, then consent to it, for great Guilt
is ever suspicious, and hardly made to believe it is pardoned, though it be so:
And now the spare is broken by their dissolution, let not your own hands weave
nets to entangle you, but by your Elections show you are willing to be
redeemed, should you put these Men in power again, your now bleeding Religion
would give up the ghost, your Laws (those great distinguishers betwixt right
and wrong) would hang at the point of their swords, your Estates would be no
more, then they would spare you from those Multiplied Necessities which their
Ambition and guilt will still Create; Consider that in the Elections, you do
Consign over all these (and whatsoever is dear unto you) to the trust of those
you do elect, Trust not those who have so often deceived you, and believe it, it
concerns you next to the Eternal State of your Souls, to make a prudent
Election; And do not suffer your selves to be cheared into an opinion of a Free
Parliament, when you have no such thing; And consider that these Men took care
before they dissolved, to shuffle in such restrictions and Qualifications, as
should almost shut out all Men from being Elected but themselves; And consider,
that these Men had no power to impose such Qualifications upon you, and you
will be but too forward to Seal to your own Mischiefs, if you observe them; And
consider besides, that the hatred of these Men to the KING, lives still (though
he be dead) in their hatred to those, who (out of Conscience of their duty)
hazzarded themselves in defense of his just Cause; For those Qualifications
tell us, that not only no person who has been in Arms for the KING shall be
elected, but that their Sons shall not be Capeable of being elected, and yet
some of those Sons were not eight years old, and possibly some unborn: These
great pretenders to Religion, love not to immitate God, in showing Mercy unto
thousands, but yet can visit the Iniquity of the fathers upon the Children, and
perhaps (if ever they have power again) to more then the third and fourth
Generation: by which they have broke all the engagements of honor, as they
have done those of Allegiance: for by the Articles of Oxford (at the surrender
thereof) and by the Articles of other Garrisons it was agreed that all
Comprised in those Articles, should enjoy all the privileges and Immunities of
other subjects; and yet a lawful Election may prefer their Innocent Sons to a
forfeiture of a 1000 l. for daring to serve their Country: No Civil war (not
that of the Barons) did ever yet abridge the people of their Electing
Liberties, but this Act was Contrived, that under the pretense of a Free
Parliament, they might be free only to choose them, who have already offended
the Nostrils of God and Man; and for that ill savor, as well as for that they
were but the remaining part of a Parliament, they have been called the Rump:
but let the people take heed, for should these Rumpers appear in Parliament
again, like Sampson's Foxes they would turn tail to tail, and between every two
tails you shall be sure to have such a fire brand, as would kindle new
Combustions, they having no way of safety but the Nations general danger.

All this considered, dearest Country men, stand fixed to assert your
Freedoms, you cannot be out-numbred, and should not (therefore) be
out-vallor'd, and I hope you will not be outvapored: By the self denying
Ordinance of the third of April, 1645 never to be repealed (though never yet
observed by those who made it) it was ordained that no officer whether
Military or Civil, should be a Member of Parliament, for the sword will Create
occasions to exercise it self, for by that Craft they get their living: And let
not the Importment of Barebones Petition be forgot (which was so authenticated
by the Speakers sollemn thanks) and that Petition moved the abjuration of King
James his line by Act of Parliament, and that a Motion for a Single Person, as
also the Motion to revoke that Law (when enacted) should be High Treason, and
the thanks of the House so affectionately bestowed upon Barebone, shows what
privileges they would leave to succeeding Parliaments, when the Laws of this
must be unalterable, of this did I say, I must recant that, for they were none,
the KINGS death, the several Interruptions, the Change of Government with
several intermediate Parliaments makes them none: And yet they have taken upon
them to issue Writs in the Name of the (Invisible Keepers of the Liberties of
England) summoning a new Parliament, which notwithstanding by the prudence of
the Electors in the fit choice of persons) may heal all those wounds of which
the Nation has so long Complained: And they cannot manifest that prudence
better then in steering the Elections by these rules;

First, that they choose no purchaser of any of the Lands of the late KING, nor
of the Bishops, Deans, and Chapters, nor of any Lands (pretendedly) forfeited
for delinquency.

Secondly, That they choose none who have gained Offices, or made any Advantage
by the late troubles.

Thirdly, That they choose none who have been or are, Commanders in the former
or present Armies.

Fourthly, That they choose no person who has been, or is, a Commissioner for
Excise, Monthly Taxes, or any other burdens of the people.

And lastly, That waving all Consideration of the new pretended Qualifications
(as English Men) they steer by the Laws, which (in short) direct the Electors
thus: That the Knights to be chosen shall be notable Knights of the same Shire,
Stat. 7. Hen. 4. ca. 15. Stat. 11. Hen. 4. ca. 1. Stat. 1. Hen. 5. ca. 1. Stat.
8. Hen. 6. ca. 7. Stat. 10. Hen. 6. ca. 2. Stat. 23. Hen. 6. ca. 14.
or else some notable Esquire, or Gentlemen born, of the same County, and that
no Yeoman or Person inferior shall be chosen: And that the Electors, and
Knights elected must be such as were resident in the County, for which they
serve, on the day of the date of the Writs, and that Citizens and Burgesses be
resident in, and free of the Cities and Buroughs, for which they serve, And
the punishment of a Sheriff making a false return, or of a Mayor, or Bailiff so
offending, would be Considered also, and may be found in the Statutes cited in
the Margin. And now (Dear Country Men) you have (as I may say) Life and Death
before you, Good and Evil, Happiness and Mifery, choose Life, and Good, and
Happiness: Make the Children yet unborn, to praise God for you, Let your
Management of this Election be the Monument of your love to your Country: Make
up your breaches, Redeem the Captived Nation, by such a choice, as may heal all
our Distempers, and help those to right, who, (so long have suffered wrong,
that there being no leading into Captivity, and no Complaining in our Streets,
we may once more make our boast of God, and say, Happy are the People that be
in such a Case, yea, blessed are the People, that have the Lord for their God.

Printed for public good, with hearty desire it may be read before, (or at)
all Elections.


