CERTAIN CONSIDERATIONS AND CAUTIONS Agreed upon by the Ministers of London,
Westminster, and within the Lines of Communication, June 19. 1646.

According to which they resolve to put the Presbyteriall Government in
execution, upon the Ordinances of PARLIAMENT heretofore published.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Ralph Smith at the sign of the Bible in
Cornhill. 1646.

Certain Considerations and Cautions agreed upon by the Ministers of London,
Westminster, and within the Lines of Communication, June 19. 1646. according to
which they resolve to put the Presbyteriall Government in execution, upon the
Ordinances of PARLIAMENT heretofore published.
WE Ministers of Christ, residing within the Cities of London and Westminster,
and Lines of Communication, having seen and read an Order of the Honorable
House of COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, bearing date June 9. 1646. Requiring
and Injoyning all the Ministers of the Province of London forthwith to put in
execution the Ordinances concerning Church Government, Hold it requisite humbly
and faithfully as in the sight of God to show our judgments and resolutions
about this weighty matter, for the clearing of our Integrities, and preserving
our Consciences void of offense both toward God and toward man.

We have seriously pondered the present state of things; and find our selves,
whether we act as is required, or act not, to be in a very great straight. On
the one hand, Prelacy, being justly pulled down, and the Church miserably
groaning under Disorder and Confusion, many things cry aloud upon us in our
places to put Church Government into actual execution; The Glory of God, the
edification of his Church, the Duty of our Function, the Engagement of our
solemn Covenant with God, the command of the Civil Magistrate (which so far as
we can with a good Conscience, we are resolved and hold it our Duty to obey,)
and the present unspeakable miseries of the Church by woeful Divisions,
Blasphemies, Heresies, abominable looseness, Libertinisme, and Atheism, and
the spiritual Ruin of many Congregations through false Teachers, or want of
faithful Pastors for lack of Ordination. On the other hand, upon consideration
of all the Ordinances of PARLIAMENT about Church Government, we find many
necessary things not yet established, and some things wherein our Consciences
are not so fully satisfied: And therefore in our beginning to act, we cannot
but foresee, how likely we are to be sinisterly interpreted by many, who are
prone to misconstrue all our actions of this nature. We thereupon hold it
necessary to express upon what Grounds we may proceed, to act upon the
Ordinances already established by Authority.

Although we conceive the power of Church censures, and in particular the
keeping off Ignorant and Scandalous persons from the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, to be in Church Officers by the Will and Apointment of Jesus Christ,
and from him they receive their Office and Authority: Yet we acknowledge, it
belongs to the Magistrate to have his Conscience satisfied in the truth of that
Government of the Church which he will set up by his Authority, from whom the
Church Officers do receive Authority of the public exercise of their Offices
in his Dominions. And in case the Magistrate be not so fully informed, as to
set up a right and perfect Rule in every particular, the Church officers may
yet act under that Rule; Provided, that they do not subscribe to, or otherwise
acknowledge that Rule to be entire and right in all points.

And therefore for these particular Ordinances, although we humbly conceive
that they do not hold forth a complete Rule, nor are in all points satisfactory
to our Consciences: Yet because we find many things established in them,
agreeable to the Word of God (for which we desire heartily to bless God; and
to be thankful to the Honorable Houses,) Provision being made for inabling the
Elderships by their Authority, to keep away from the Lords Supper all Ignorant
persons, and many Scandalous persons, with a Declaration of their Resolution,
that all Notorious and Scandalous Offenders shall be kept from the Sacrament,
and that there shall be a further addition to the Scandalous offenses formerly
enumerated; We conceive it is our duty to begin to act in reference to Church
Government by Congregationall, Classical, Provincial, and National
Assemblies; Resolving by the Grace of God to walk in all things according to the
Rule of the Word, and according to these Ordinances so far as we conceive them
correspondent to it; and to be accountable to the Magistrate whenever he shall
call us thereunto; Hoping so to carry our selves, as not only to enjoy his
concurrence with us on al occasions; but also that he will supply what is
lacking to make the Government entire, and likewise make alterations in all
things that shall appear to be amiss. And in thus doing, we trust we shall not
greive the spirits of the truly godly either at home or abroad; nor give any
just occasion to them that are contrary minded, to blame our proceedings.

FINIS.

