Certain QVERIES Upon The Dissolving of the Late PARLIAMENT: LIKEWISE, Upon the
present Proceedings of the ARMY; AND On the many Adresses to them, by the
Militia-Officers of the City, and others (as they say) the godly People: and
pretends to our Good Old Cause, In Order to preserve our Rights and Liberties
both Civil and Riligious.

London, Printed in the year, 1659,

Queries upon the Disolving of the late Parliament, likewise on the Proceedings
of the Army; and the many Adresses to them, by the Malitia Officers of the
City, and others, as they pretend, the godly People, for the Good old Cause, in
order to preserve our Rights and Liberties both Civil and Religous.
I. Seeing there are but two Reasons (as I opine) which may Patronize our
proceeding to, and in the late War: one derived from Aristotle, (...) the other
from Renter qui j^ss^s habere Consiliarios, jussus, ^isdem ne obtemperet haud
examinet. Whether ever was it so excellently stated by any of our Advocates,
and by our Mulifarious Abetters so universa^ly understood, as might, or did
truly entitle us to begin and prosecute the same, carrying in its forehead the
irrefragable evidence of a good Old CAUSE.

II. When upon supposal of our setting aside of all such as appear to have
followed the cause, from Faction and Interest: Whether could we ever have found
a considerable party to encounter the Cavaliers, and so to have begun and
continued this bloody Contention?

III. When upon these Innovations in matters Ecclesiastical, and some i^legal
impositions in things Political, we gained so great advantage against the late
King. Whether was not the truth of our good Old Cause (so far as it touched the
Interest of all, and of the State) for the genuine purity of a regular
Reformation, and not for the gross deformity of any disorderly alteration at
all.

IV. Seeing that the late King, in thate laborate Monument which he has left,
protests so fai^ly against all obstinacy of Will, preocupation of opinion, or
prejudice of Spirit, as to the altering or settling of any thing upon free and
sober Debate, so solemnly appealing, not to the world only, but (as I remember)
to GOD's all-seeing eye: then if we be not captivated into some vicious passion
against all generous candor and Ingenuity. Whether can any justly and truly
(or without robbing God of his Glory) deny? viz. that we might have had the
Reformation abovesaid, in such a perfection for Religion (just liberty for all
irregular erronists being reserved) as the Church of Christ never saw, since
Christianity gained Authority, with the Law; yea and such exactness of Policy,
as Aristotle cannot parallel. But for the sottish, ignorance, sensual error, or
self particular interest of such, who alone (like Mr. Rainsborough the Admiral)
had and would have conference with him when ever they coveted the same, though
(for ought appears) they understood not, either what to reply, or with what
to press him, according to any principles, either of Law, Reason, or Religion.

V. Seeing it has often appeared upon any small essay to wards an amendment,
how easily the Army has put a stop to all proceedings, and a period to all
expectations by some one or other trick of untimely Dissolution. In case this
error be attributed to the Officers, then how can or dare these Military
Statesman offer any such affront as exclusion, and not tremble at that odious
imputation which branded those Stigmati^al Satellites of the December viri? (...).
i.e. as if they scorned us and our Liberty in the eager lust of their own
licentiousness.

VI. Seeing that the omitting of that advantage by the self-overweaning
ignorance of some, and the loss of that opportunity by the Sacrilegious avarice
(perchance) of others, has made many to abandon themselves through despair,
unto some superficial appearances, and shallow brained fancies, which have no
settled foundation, nor evertend to any consistence. Whether is not this the
spring of that posion which has so horribly overspread our body Politic,
appeating in all disorders of action and opinion, and the very root of all
those temerations Edicts, which have armed ignorance, weakness, and envious
partiality against all sufficiency knowledge, and virtuous Integrity.

VII. I having lately heard the Narrative by a certain Trooper then under the
Cornets Command, how Joyce attached the late King without any legal Commission,
and now considering that all of us have seen, and many of us have selt the
horror and mischief of those succeeding exorbitancies as to Law, Equity,
Justice, Religion, and Morality. Do inquire, whether all the wise and honest
(of what ever party or Interest, ought not to be jealous of, and opposite unto
all such Acts of will and power, as run without any certain rule of Law,
Reason, or Religion.

VIII. Seeing that the house of Parliament, are said to have Voted many things
in order to our wealth and security being in the nature and after the manner,
or according to the condition of a copulative axiom, that either all should be
allowed, or nothing stand. Whether does not such a dissolution as this, turn us
into the Chaos or Anarchy of universal unsetledness, as to Order, Justice, and
all Politic Government.

Q. 9. Seeing none have less promoted, or secured our Rights and Liberties,
then these of late, who have most deeply pretended thereunto (so gaining a
kind of Mastery over us, by the mysterious malignity of their engaging for us,
as was once fully insinuated to the Agitators and Soldiery in 1647.

Q. 10. Which we have sufficiently experimented ever since without any taking
notice of those taunts and reproaches, wherewith our new Saints have upbraided
one another. How can we (except charity ought to cozen and befool our Judgment
and conscience) give any credit to these curious pretenders unto the protecting
of our Rights, etc. Without once thinking them as Briars and Thorns, which may
boast of bearing Corn and Grape to bear rule over better Trees, though we find
nothing but the Darnel of damage and disturbance from or amongst them.

Q. 11. Seeing there are but two superlative gross errors in the Act of
Government generally considered, as the Anteutopian will instruct you from
Aristotle himself, viz. (...). i.e. as I Opine, when any Statizing Medicors
misunderstand, both what is a perfect or sound constitution of the body
Politic, as also what particulars are by discussion to be culled out, as
necessary to the scope and end of a right formed constitution. And that all one
Statizing Mechanics, yea and Military Statesmen, have most pitiously stumbled
on both these to the danger of splitting our Body Politic in all their
Attempts, whether toward alteration or establishment.

Q. 10. How can we commit this our weather beaten Bark (so tossed with winds,
waves, and Pilots to so many and different Designs) to the conduct of ignorant
Cunners in hopes ever to arrive at any Port of Peace, or Political Composure?
Or may we not so well commit our Vissel to such conceited Sots as Edw.
Burronghs with his Antichristian Companions, the Quacking Impostures.

Q. 11. Seeing that the Supreme Master of the Science Political (as the
abov^said Artist will inform you) does positively aver: (...). viz. that such
People are only capable of being cast into a commodious Form of Policy, who are
of a refined understanding, apt to comply with any Legislative sufficiency,
rather then of a mere feral animosity.

Q. 12. How can the Wise, and Honest ever brook that beastly dis^rder of their
Power and Authority to teach, and control; who being over full of stomach,
have neither patience nor Spirit to understand and learn, or endure that those
should sway and appoint, whom God, Nature, and Education has directed to serve
and obey?

Q. 13. Seeing that this very Soldiery, or some of them, have not only in June
14. 1647 professed to engage for the just Rights and Liberties of our Country;
but also as appears by some fifth Monarchians (seeming very simple and well
meaning men in 1656, or 1657) not as a mercinary Army to serve the Arbitrary
power of a State, but to maintain the power of the people in Parliaments
against all Arbitrary Power, and all Parties and Interests whatsoever? How can
you then after such a dissolution ever look any honest man in the face? Of
answer one of your own Advertisers, who has styled you (upon the like
supposal) the veriest Traitors and Rebels that ever breathed in English air.

Q. 14. Seeing that some of you, and it may be, some of the chiefest Animators
to this Attempt (of excluding the Members, or raising them being set) have
appealed unto God, as Judge of the integrity of your hearts, bent to the
security of the public Interest, and not to the advancement of themselves, or
of any particular party or Interest?

Q. 15. How can you answer any rational Christian, or Impartial honest man, who
shall once seriously question the Good of your aim, the uprightness of your
End, and the justice of your action?

Q. 16. Seeing that there is an a trocious imputation, put upon us by the
transmarine edition of one Gulielmi de ursino his Vindiciae Regis Caroli contra
parracidas Anglos, etc. (as I remember, having no manner of Book with me now,
besides the Intelligencer and another Pamphlet.) How can you upon this
occurrence, avoid that charge which was also implicitly pressed upon you, in a
Petition to the late Protector, viz. of your not seeming only, but appearing
absolute (as they aver) Homicides and Parracides instead of Deliverers and
Preservers, or do you so far slight all sound hearted Patriots, as to expose
us (when ever occasion calls beyond the Seas) to the utmost insoltation of
Cavaliers and Royalists, as it were by the silence and patience of a
self-convincing guiltiness?

Q. 17. Seeing that the turning of Judgment into Gall and Wormwood in Courts
of Law and equity, besides the constant exercise of an Arbitrary power in some
continued and most illegal Commi^tees has much more appeared, and also
increased (as many honest men aver) then ever did any the like oppressions
under the late King.

Q. 18. How can we otherwise conceit of your suggested fears (be they true or
false) then as of so many Shaw Fools, to skare us out of all our Legal
Interests, and true understanding, the better to support you and your Accomplices
in all your advantages, how examinable soever, as to merit or legality.

Q. 19. Though it be a pious inclination to attribute all events unto God, yet
to say unto what end they are so ordered, is little short of an overweaning
arrogance or presumption. And for that Papists make prosperity in enterprises,
a mark of the true Church, mauger all Christian evidence to the contrary: So
that the very Baptists (whose interest in God was most especially, they say,
acknowledged by the late G nerall, as advancing that Victory at Dunb^r) may be
easily shown the inanity of any such Argument; the Scripture evidencing all
along no greater assurance of unhappiness, then to prosper in our own ways,
when we are any whit out of his. Then except some of you can clear and
satisfy, what is here by way of inquisition insisted upon before any free,
moderate, and impartial judgments.

Q. 20. How can or dare you allege Gods miraculous providence and inscrutrable
dispenfation, as sufficiently patronizing any pastion or interest, which
appears yours, really distinct from, if not inconsistent with that which is
undoubtedly public, and by all upright and understanding men engaged for?

Q. 21. Seeing it is very hard to find any free, impartial, and moderate Judge,
ought we not then strictly to examine. 1. What their parts and education are or
were? Secondly, How and why they have suffered either persecution or
oppression; Whether as parties of a Faction and aspiring to an Interest,
exceeding their ability and education, or merely for truth and integrity. 3.
What may be their aim and utmost appetition? How fuitable to their aforesaid
breeding and sufficiency: And so to admit of them as they shall appear free
from ignorance, envy, pride, interest and partiality.

Q. 22. Seeing that Wars are from wicked Lusts, and tend to the heightening of
the same, which declares their inconfistence (except in case of necessities)
with any spiritual conscience, Jam. 4.4.5. 1 Cor. 3.

Q. 23. Whether does not your exciting of us by intimating the cruelty of
others intention. plainly evince the like worldly Spirit, whetted by interest
and infidelity, as if all apparent difference between the seed of the women and
Serpent were extinguished?

FINIS.

