Certain Certificates serving to vindicate M. Sam. Eaton's righteousness and
innocence, in receiving two sums of money, about which he has been lately very
maliciously traduced by some unworthy persons.
WHereas a Report has passed from hand to hand in several places, importing M.
Eatons detaining in his hand the sum of twenty six pound, or twenty eight
pound, which was intended for the poor by Col. Venables, when yet he had other
moneys given to him by the said Colonel, by which he might know, that no part
of the above mentioned money was intended for him: We the Elders of the Church
unto which M. Eaton relates, think our selves obliged to testify, That we have
diligently searched into this matter, and have found it to be a gross lie,
forged and fomented against him by persons of a distempered spirit, who have
born a grudge against him for attempting to heal their souls. For first, the
sum was but twenty four pound, sent over from Ireland, in 1651. by order of the
foresaid Colonel, to the Deacons dispose. Secondly, M. Eaton received but 20
pound of this 24 pound. Thirdly, He took it not, but it was allotted to him,
and ordered for him to receive by the Deacons: And they had also special
direction given unto them in a Letter written in the Colonel his name, by M.
Tailor, that they should very fully distribute to M. Eaton: and the sending of
other moneys over to him, by the said Colonel, to cut him off from having any
part in this, was a mere forged business, there was no such thing, as the
Colonel himself confesses. The Letter that clears M. Eaton and the Deacons, is
extant, through the goodness of God, though it might have been lost in such
length of time, and the Colonel does own it, as written by his direction. The
persons that devised, and first reported these monstrous untruths, by a strange
hand of God, have been divided among themselves, one casting it upon another,
and endeavoring to clear themselves with high appeals to heaven; and since two
of them have been for that, and other miscarriages, cast out of the Church, and
a third person is under a solemn admonition. This we thought good to declare
both for the clearing of M. Eaton, and that all Calumniators might fear and
tremble, when they behold the righteous proceedings of God. This is testified by

October 11. 1657. William Barrit. Thomas Partington. William Linnie. William
Thomson.


WE whose names are hereunder written, being the Deacons of the Church that
meets in Stopport School-house, having understood how maliciously M. Eaton has
been slandered, for taking 20l which appertained not to him, but was intended
(as was said) by Colonel Venables (who sent it from Ireland) to the poor: do
think our selves obliged to clear him from such an odious aspersion, and to
testify, that M. Eaton did not take this 20l into his hands (as he has been
falsely charged to have done) but as it was ordered and appointed him by all, or
the most of us, who have the power of dispose of all such moneys as are given
to the Churches use, by any member of it. And we do also certify, that the
whole sum that was sent, was 24l, and that we had special direction given to us
how to dispose of it, in a Letter written by M. Tailor, in Col. Venables his
name, which bears date Jan. 26. 1651. which Letter is yet extant, in words to
this effect, That the Deacons should very fully distribute to M. Eaton, if the
necessities of private Brethren were not exceeding pressing. Whereupon we
ordered, that M. Eaton should have 20l, and that 4l should be given to the
poor. And we also signify, that there was not in this any special favor
showed to M. Eaton, but that this distribution was made according to such rules
of proportion as we had formerly gone by, our Teaching Officer at that time
having not any other maintenance (to our knowledge) but what came through our
hands: and for further confirmation of the truth of this our testimony, we do
hereunto subscribe our names.

October. 11. 1657. Edw. Tipping. Tho. Newton. Joh. Wharmbie. Jam. Johnson.


I Do hereby cerifie, that I did desire M. Timothy Tailor, to return 24l for me
to the Church of Duckenfield, now meeting in Stopport, and that (I being very
busy, and wanting time) he would write for me about the same; he advised, that
if the want of private members were not very pressing, M. Eaton might be very
fully considered: to which I consented, and willed him to write what he thought
fit, and I should approve of it, which he accordingly did; for the substance of
the Letter, the date, and other circumstances, I must refer to the Letter,
which I now remember not. I do further certify, that I received a Letter from
M. Eaton, concerning his Receipt of the above 24, or part of it, which gave me
satisfaction, and I returned an answer to it, but remember not the contents.

Dated Sept. 26. 1657. R. Venables.

WHereas M. Eaton has been scandalously aspersed for getting 10l into his
hands, by his (or his Agents for him) pleading want, which was intended for the
poor, I think it necessary to certify, that M. Eaton received nothing but what
I (being one of the Deacons of the Church to which he relates) did put into his
hands: nor yet any thing but what was intended for him by Col. Venables, as his
words to me did import. For thus it was, in Sept. 1656. Col. Venables brought
10l to Stopport, and put it into my hands; whereupon I told him, it came
seasonably, as to M. Eaton, because he had lately borrowed money; and his
answer was, he was glad that it came so opportunely for him: by which words,
and he declaring no other use for which he intended it, I conceived that his
mind was, that M. Eaton should have it: and it was no mistake in me, for he
has since testified so much under his hand. And whereas it is charged
maliciously by some, that he (or his Agents for him) pleaded want, and did
thereby get such moneys to himself, I do hereby assert, that I spoke not one
word of want, but only said that he had lately borrowed money, which was a
truth. Nor did M. Eaton wish me to speak such words: nor did he know that I
spoke any such words till I told him: neither did he know that Col. Venables
had any intent of leaving any money in mine, or any other man's hand, nor did
Col. Venables make any mention at all of the poor: by all which it does appear
how falsely M. Eaton has been charged, and bow basely abused. This is testified
by me under my hand.

Tho. Newton.

BEing informed that some scandalous aspersion has been cast upon M. Eaton, as
a robber of the poor, for making use of 10l, left by me in the hands of Thomas
Newton, one of the Deacons: At the time I delivered it him, I said that I gave
it to the Churches dispose: and he telling me that it came opportunely, for he
knew M. Eaton had borrowed money: I replied, I was glad it came so seasonably
for him, intending M. Eaton in my thoughts; and however others may report the
matter, I did intend the money for him. Only hearing that he had taken it up
upon the account of a journey to London, I was unsatisfied therein, in regard I
purposed an other requital for his love. This is testified by

Chest. Sept. 26. 1657. R. Venables.

An Answer to the aforesaid Certificates, pretending to clear M. Eaton from two
sums of money, sent, and given by Col. Venables, to the Church called
Duckenfield-Church.
OUr desires are not to cast aspersions upon the persons of others, but to
clear the truth and our selves, from those aspersions of lying, forging,
fomenting calumniators, etc. endeavored to be cast upon us by the aforesaid
Certificates; for our resolves were, to sit down in silence, as to Printing,
had we not by the said Certificates been constrained thereunto; yet we are
assured, that some of the persons whose names are thereunto subscribed, and in
particular, Colonel Venables, were ignorant of Printing thereof, until they
came to public view: We shall therefore in the first place show the ground
and rise of the whole matter, which was as follows.

At the Assizes held at Chester, October. 6. 1656. we lying at Ralph Hall's
house, who (and his wife) are members of M. Eatons Church, his wife gave us a
relation of something that troubled her, about 40 shillings given them by Col.
Venables, which M. Eaton said was but lent them to be repaid by the Church, and
that the greatest burden of it must lie upon him; which relation, at the
request and importunity of William Barret (one of the Elders, whose hand is at
the aforesaid Certificate, to whom she also told it) we gave in in writing
under our hands to the Church, being produced by the aforesaid William Barret,
as witnesses of what we heard, according as we have herein hereafter declared.

Unto which relation so given unto us, I John Bruckshaw replied, As you are a
Sister, and Ralph a Brother, and I know nothing against you, I dare not but
believe you, yet this I must say, the thing is so odious, and looks with such
a black face, that I must think, that unless a man were out of his senses, he
should not so say, witness my hand,

John Bruckshawe, and Robert Ridgway.

FOr answer to the Certificates, we say, first, none of the persons you intend
in your Certificates, did ever mention twenty eight pounds, then who are the
liars? Is it not as great a mistake in you to put twenty eight pounds for
twenty six, as Joyce Hall to put twenty six for twenty four. Secondly we ask,
whether it be a gross lie, forged by persons of distempered spirits, to
testify what we were informed by Joyce Hall, and that when we were requested
thereunto by William Barret, which we did give in under our hands, being called
thereunto as witnesses, and not as a positive charge against M. Eaton; and your
selves have said, Two Affirmatives, will carry it against five hundred
Negatives; then why not our two Affirmatives against her Negative? And William
Barret aforesaid, told George Downs, one of your Members, that Joyce Hall
cleared us; and Katharine Ashton, another of your members likewise says, Joyce
Hall confessed so much as to clear us: And is it not more like to forgery, to
put another man's name to a Letter or Writing, without his consent or knowledge,
as some of you did by John Dan, as himself openly declared.

But M. Eaton confessed, that the twenty four pounds were sent unto the Church,
and not to him, and that he writ to Col. Venables, that his contributions were
small; which procured the Letter from Colonel Venables you mention; We query
then, if Colonel Venables changed his mind, First, Who was the Author?
Secondly, What ground had he for such a change? Thirdly, What he had to do with
that he had before given? Read Act. 5.4. And if not so sent at first, why did
M. Eaton say so? Where lies the untruth?

But M. Eaton said further, if he might not take it upon that account, he might
upon this, viz. Because Mris Venables, the Colonels first wife, whilst she
lived, gave half a Crown a day, which upon computation, would amount to twenty
pounds since she died. But how justly he might so take it, let others judge;
who if they will take the pains M. Eaton did, may know how long Colonel
Venables paid for a dead wife.

And if Colonel Venables did not send other moneys to cut him off from having
any share or part of the twenty pounds, he presented him in a more gentile way
with Furrs of a good value in England, which were seen by some persons (that
will attest it) at Harden.

And whereas the Elders say they are bound to clear M. Eaton, we ask William
Barret, whether M. Eaton has cleared himself, by bringing the money back to
the Church, and confessing how evilly he has carried it; yea so, as it might
be known so far as the money was known of.

For William Barret told us, and some others, being asked what would be done
about the money? That he (viz. M. Eaton) would never be cleared, until he had
done so; for he had been with Colonel Venables, who told him, That he sent the
money to the Church; and William Barret further said, That all the world should
not make him a pennyworth of Eaton, and if he were out of the Society, he
would not come in again, if he might have his hat full of gold and silver to
come in again: and this he spoke at two several times, and yet his name is at
the Certificate. Now if M. Eaton have not cleared himself as aforesaid, who
comes nearest to lying, forging, and malicious slandering?

You say the money was sent to the Deacons dispose; but Colonel Venables says
in his Certificate, he sent it to the Church: but if it was sent to the
Deacons, why were they not acquainted with it.

You say, he took it not, but it was ordered for him by the Deacons. Your so
often mentioning Deacons, comes nearer to lying and forgery, which you would
charge upon us; for none of the Deacons (we believe) knew of it, but Thomas
Newton, who acted more for M. Eaton, then he did for the Church; as appears by
the Elders Certificate, who say, M. Eaton had but twenty pounds of the twenty
four pounds: For, when the money came in debate about November 1656. all the
Deacons (except Thomas Newton) said, they never heard, or knew of the money:
Let the Deacons speak themselves one by one, and not in so dark expressions, as
by us, or some of us; when was this money ordered to M. Eaton? Was it in 1651.
and was any of you privy to it but Thomas Newton? You formerly denied it, and
said, sure Lawrence Owen gave it unto him: but why was this word (But) put in?
To make the Reader think twenty pounds was too little for M. Eaton, and four
pounds too much for the poor; or, to manifest your simplicity, slavery, or want
of charity; and if four pounds was reserved for the poor, three pounds of that
was put into M. Eatons hands, as both he, and Thomas Newton confessed, but is
not yet known what poor had it, nor what became of the other twenty shillings.

Again you say, it was by special direction in a Letter from M. Tailor in
Colonel Venables name: But none of the Deacons knew of the Letter, except
Thomas Newton, before M. Eaton had the twenty pounds; for they knew not of the
money, how could they then know of the Letter? M. Eatons keeping the Letter in
his own custody both from them and the Church, imports, that M. Eaton knew, M.
Taylor's directions were not, that he should have twenty pounds, and the poor
but four; or, that the Church would not be so uncharitable, as to make so
unequal a division; which, though we do not call it Church-robbing, yet, was it
not a covetous interposing betwixt the poor and the money? M. Taylor's
directions had been answered, if M. Eaton had had the better half, considering
how many persons were to be relieved out of it; for how many of your members
then were, and are poor, and in debt, we leave them to judge that know them;
whose conditions should have been first considered, by M. Taylor's direction:
by which Colonel Venables charity appeared, who intended not the money should
have been so divided. If the power of disposing be in the Deacons, sure it was
according to Scripture, and then the poor should have had it: for where find
you, that the Deacons should take care of the Church Officers?

But you are not ashamed to say, that no special favor was showed to M. Eaton
in the division, because it was according to the same rules of proportion you
had formerly gone by; and that he had no other maintenance, to your knowledge,
but what came through your hands. To which we answer, The more common an evil
is, the worse it is; and yet you say, that was your common rule, to make so
unequal divisions betwixt M. Eaton and the poor. But did none of you know, or
did not Thomas Newton know, that M. Eaton had, and has an estate with his
wife, worth forty pounds per annum, or thereabouts, and that after the end of
the first Wars, he had forty pounds per annum from Sequestrations, and that he
has bought Lands in Ireland to a good value, and either Lands or Rents in
Cheshire, worth thirty four pounds per annum, or thereabouts; and that he had
forty pounds, or fifty pounds, as Chaplain to Chester Garrison, about 1651. Or
did these, or any of these, come through your hands; if so, your sin was the
greater, to give him twenty pounds, and the poor but four, if they had it: And
if he kept these, or any of these secret from you, and pleaded necessity, was
it not to keep you to your unequal division, to give him five times so much as
to all the poor of the Church? And why do you so, since he has no children to
maintain, nor kept any house since he was your Pastor, which is about twelve
years? But the nature of covetousness is, that much would have more: which more
appears, for that he has now also an allowance from the State of an hundred
pounds per annum; and we query, whether when he went to wait upon the Lord
Protector, then Lord General in Scotland, he had not an allowance from the said
Lord General, or else a levy upon the Church to defray his charge; yea, we
query, whether he had not both: for we believe the Lord General was so Noble,
he would not let him serve him for nothing.

If the Letter from M. Tailor be extant, why did you not print it? for, if M.
Eaton and Thomas Newton ever be cleared, it is that must do it, and not your
piecemeal collections, under which, wit and words may make a truth seem a lie,
and a lie seem a truth; and who knows your Author, knows he is both full of wit
and words, to extenuate or aggravate to his own advantage, his greatest
temptation in public, being credit; and in private, profit: which meeting
together, are like the sons of Zerviah, too hard for a David, without the help
of an heavenly power, which M. Tailor conceived to be amongst you, as by his
charitable caution appears, of fully distributing to M. Eaton, if the
necessities of private brethren were not exceeding pressing. And if it be the
goodness of God that the Letter is extant, why was it not discovered before the
money came in question, which though it was sent in 1651. was never known to
the Church, as we could ever hear of, until 1656. and that it should now be
discovered, is so remarkable, that it bespeaks it self to be the just hand of
God, that others may fear and tremble, and beware of covetous underdealing;
for, truth seeks no corners: But no cause of fear and trembling unto us, as you
falsely apply it, unless for your, and his unrighteous dealings. And the
aforesaid William Barret says yet, that he did not know of the money, and at
that time there was no Elder but he and M. Eaton.

Whereas you say we have since been divided amongst our selves, with high
appeals to heaven; it is an untruth, for we were never divided: As for Joyce
Hall that told us, we leave to answer for her self, who spoke truth in the
main; and if it had been a mistake in her, its no ground for you to boast in
another infirmity, except free your selves; it is true, we did appeal to
heaven, and so we can yet do, that what we testified, was truth; for we
testified nothing but what Joyce Hall told us, and did not assert that the
report was truth, being forewarned by William Barret aforesaid, that M. Eaton
did not so much matter the business of the money, so he could entrap us; and if
it was so heinous in Joyce Hall to contradict her self, what was it for M.
Eaton to contradict himself twice in one thing, with high appeals to heaven;
and afterward, when witnesses were ready to have proved the thing, then, and
not before to confess the truth: Is not this matter of trembling?

You say, two of us have since, for that, and other miscarriages, been cast out
of the Church. Why do you add this, but to cast a vail before the eyes of the
Reader, to make him think, that your abuse of so great an Ordinance, will clear
your innocence. What you charged us with, given since under your hands, makes
us not the subjects of Excommunication, as we shall show in their time and
place; but it seems that this discovery of the money was the main thing; for
which, and also for other miscarriages of yours, we had rather be out then in:
Your casting us out, was but to cast an odium upon us for justly leaving you,
and to cover some nakedness of your own you apprehended would appear to your
shame, so that when M. Eaton is cleared, we shall so certify with you, but not
till then; and not till then, nor then, we proved Calumniators. But is not
William Barret (aforesaid) rather a Calumniator, who certifies thus now, and
yet since October. 6. 1656. came to us, and desired us to appear in discovery of
this money, and promised to second us therein, and wished us to stay a while
before we broke off, that he might go out with us, time would not be so long.

Your spirit of discerning, that told you we had a grudge against M. Eaton, was
a spirit of falsehood, for we had none against him; and how can you say it was
for endeavoring to heal our souls, when one of us had answered your one and
twenty sifting Articles to your satisfaction, and you never laid any thing to
either of our charge, nor admonished us, until one of us had admonished you,
and admonished not the other till the money was questioned, and then, for no
error in doctrine, nor scandal in conversation; but because he would not tell
you, whether he told them who you call unjustly your professed enemies, of the
money, and would not (as you said) be satisfied about the money.

The righteous proceedings of God will be more clearly beheld, if he enable you
to give glory to him, by certifying the truth of what you know of your own
knowledge, and not what you were taught by another; for by the rigor and
equivocation of the Style, the Author may easily be discerned.

For Colonel Venables Certificate about the twenty four pounds, we shall say
nothing against it, but that it may be true, and yet M. Eaton never the more
cleared thereby: for the necessities of private Brethren should have been first
considered, before M. Eaton had any part of it, which both the Letter and
Certificate do testify.

We shall leave it to the judgment of the impartial reader, to whom the
charges of lying, forging, fomenting, calumniating, and malicious slandering,
endeavored by the Certificates to be cast upon us, does of right belong.

John Bruckshaw. Robert Ridgway.


Now I Thomas Werral answer.
FOR Thomas Newtons certificate about the ten pounds, I conceive it belongs
unto me, because the words therein recited, I understand were mine, because
given forth by themselves, in answer to my paper they took from me by violence,
viz. That he pleaded want, or his Agents for him, thereby getting that money
which was at first intended for the poor, and their loins might have blessed
God for General Venables.

For Answer.
1. Its clear from your own certificate, that you was the instrument to get M.
Eaton the money, though he might not bid you, nor know of it, until you gave it
him, so that his not employing you, makes you a voluntary Agent, which is so
much worse on your part.

2. Secondly, Though you used not the word want, yet that it came seasonably,
because he had borrowed money, is of a stronger import then the word want: for
many will rather want, then borrow to buy Land or Rents, which he did about
that time: and yet this was your argument to get him that money, which was
given to the Churches dispose, as Colonel Venables certifies himself, and M.
Eaton himself in a letter to Mris Venables confessed it was want that caused
him to take it.

3. Thirdly, You might as well have told him the reasons of his borrowing
money, if you had been faithful in your office, viz. to buy Land or Rents, and
then the Colonel would not have so said, as himself confesses.

4. Fourthly, Whether you speak truth or no, in saying he declared no other use
for which he intended it, I shall leave it to Colonel Venables himself, who
says he told you, he desired Ralph Hall might have forty shillings out of it,
and that you should acquaint the Church with it; which had you done, and given
Ralph Hall the forty shillings, had more beseemed a Deacon, whose work is, to
care for the poor, as Acts 6. shows, though it would not have quit you from
being an instrument on M. Eatons behalf, to interpose betwixt the poor and the
money, though he has reported he is eight hundred pounds better, then in the
beginning of these troublesome times.

5. Fifthly, Why did you not give Ralph Hall the forty shillings, and why does
not M. Eaton give it him, seeing he knows now it was the Colonels mind, and not
he to have it all? as M. Eaton has confessed himself, and gave Ralph Hall ten
shillings, and writ to Colonel Venables, that he would give him the other
thirty shillings; and yet afterward writ by William Barret to the Colonel,
that if he would have Ralph Hall to have the thirty shillings, he must pay it
himself, for he would not, and to this day it is not paid.

For Colonel Venables Certificate, he has already declared himself to the
truth of his Wives Letter: That he first intended the ten pounds for the
Church, and not for M. Eaton, when he brought it to Thomas Newton, and that it
was Thomas Newton's telling him that it came opportunely, because M. Eaton had
borrowed money, which moved him to change his mind, and say, he was glad it
came so opportunely; but says, he did not know that he had borrowed money to
buy Land, or Rents; and further says, that at the same time he did not intend
the whole ten pounds for M. Eaton, but bade Thomas Newton acquaint the Church
with it, and desired that Ralph Hall might have forty shillings out of it; and
M. Eaton himself in a Letter to Colonel Venables, confesses he understood him
so, and that he had given Ralph Hall ten shillings, and would send the Colonel
thirty more, to make it up forty, to give Ralph Hall; and the reason that he
gave the Certificate, was, because M. Eaton had so promised, as aforesaid;
which if M. Eaton had accordingly performed, he had done Ralph Hall no wrong;
and if Colonel Venables gave this Certificate, not mentioning the whole of the
business (as since he has done) nor did declare the whole business at some
other times when he was asked it, it does not therefore clear M. Eaton, that M.
Venables (viz. the Colonel) committed an error of love, to cover M. Eaton's
shame; but shows his ingratitude in making such returns to Col. Venables as
since he has done.

Thomas Werrall.

Postscript.
THese things considered, we hope will wipe off the aspersions, endeavored by
the Certificates to be cast upon us. And whereas you say, We were for this, and
other miscarriages, cast out: we say, for this, and other miscarriages of
yours, we had (as your selves know, and have confessed) broken off from you,
and that not rashly, but upon due consideration, after we had waited long in
the use of that means the Scripture prescribes unto us, to have reclaimed you
both by our selves, and Officers of two other Churches; but when you persisted
in your unrighteous actings, and would be your own Judges, that were the guilty
persons, we were constrained to break off from you, lest we should partake of
your sins: where then was your power to cast us out, who were none of you? Yea,
where was your power to cast out any, until you had cleared your selves? So
that you did but add to your former evils, by abusing an Ordinance of Jesus
Christ. You your selves withdrew from the Presbyterians for disorderly walking,
whom you own to be true Churches, and yet never admonished them before;
therefore our withdrawing from you, was more regular; and they have a better
ground to excommunicate you, then you had to excommunicate us.

Therefore we leave it to your, and others consideration, whether you ought not
rather to have passed your sentence upon him that has so carried himself as
aforesaid, according to express Scripture, for 1 Timothy 6.10. The love of money
is the root of all evil: and verse. 5. Supposing Gain is Godliness; from such
withdraw thy self. Col: 3.5. Covetousness is Idolatry: and covetousness and
greediness of filthy Lucre, makes persons unfit for Office in the Church, Tit.
1.7. 1 Timothy 3.3.8. and whether is not the getter and receiver both alike? and
Paul 1 Cor. 5.11. commands, not to keep company, no, not to eat with one
accounted a brother, and covetous.

The reasons why you so dealt with us, and your proceedings therein, together
with our answers thereunto, we shall in due time make known, if constrained
thereunto, as we have been unto this. May 14. 1658.

The reasons why we delayed our answers so long, was, because they did not name
us in the certificate, so that we could but go upon conjectures, that we were
the persons intended; but seeing both M. Eaton, and others have openly
declared, that we were the very persons therein intended, we hold our selves
bound, for clearing up of the truth, and our own vindication, to return the
aforesaid answers under our hands.

FINIS.

