CERTAIN LETTERS EVIDENCING THE KINGS STEDFASTNESS IN THE Protestant Religion:
SENT From the Princess of Turenne, and the Ministers of Charenton, to some
Persons of Quality in LONDON.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Newcomb for Gabriel Bedell, and Thomas Collins, and
are to be sold at their Shop at the Middle Temple gate in Fleetstreet. 1660.

To the READER.
SUch has been the unwearied malice of the enemies of our peace, that when by
open force they could no longer rationally hope to hinder a settlement on the
sure foundations of Righteousness and Justice, They have made lies their
refuge; and labored to poison the affections of the good people of England,
whose eyes the Lord has now opened to see what is most conducing to their
peace. For though it has pleased God by a series of wonderful and gracious
providence to break the several yokes of Tyranny under which the Nation
groaned, though by the courage and wisdom of the Noble Lord General Monck, the
fears of good men are secured from any further violences, and their hopes
raised to enjoy their ancient liberties by free Parliaments, yet those
Fanatique spirits cease not to undermine our hopes, and to endeavor to involve
us into new confusions: It is a lasting settlement which they fear, and
therefore they bend their malice against Him whom the body of the People look
upon as the Cornerstone (under God) of that settlement. His Wisdom, His
Moderation, and His other eminent Virtues are so universally known at home and
abroad, they are so improved in the school of affliction, which has procured
him so many eyewitnesses of those graces, even persons of the greatest quality
beyond Sea (who otherwise should only have known them by fame.) That his
enemies had no hope to prevail by lessening him as to those endowments. But
having driven him from the places where the reformed Religion is openly
professed, they have basely slandered him of late, as if he had left the
Profession of that Faith of which he was born to be the Defender. This has
engaged many very considerable persons beyond the Sea to bear witness to the
Truth, and to vindicate so clear and unquestionable an innocence from that
false and base calumny. Diverse Letters have been written, four are here
presented to public view: The first is from the Princess of Turenne, Wife to
one of the greatest Captains that Europe has seen in this Age, who for the
eminent services done to the Crown of France, is of late justly advanced to be
Marshal-General of that kingdom, and continues constant in the reformed
Religion. The Letter it self speaks sufficiently both the Wisdom and Piety of
that Princess, she is the Grandchild of the famous Duke and Marshall de la
Force, whose Family has always continued zealously Protestants, and her
testimony is above exception, for she speaks from her own particular
knowledge. The Original is in the hands of a Noble Lady her Cousin Germane here
in London, to whom it was written, and has been seen by many.

The other Letters are from three Ministers of the reformed Church at Charenton
near Paris, men so famous for their learned Writings, that their names make
them sufficiently known: all of them are certainly most impartial witnesses,
they cannot be presumed to be biased by any private interest, they are not
born his Subjects whose innocence they defend: It is only for the Truth that
they engage, and for the concerns of the reformed Religion, being deeply
sensible how much its Honor and Safety depends on the present transactions
here, which they so fully express, that the Reader shall be no longer detained
from the following Letters.

UNE LETTRE DE S. A. MADAME De TURENNE, A Mademoiselle De CASTELNAVT, A LONDRES.
SI vous n'estee accoustumee de long temps, ma chere Cousine, a supporter and a
pardonner ma paresse, je serors en peine du jugement que vous faites de mon
silence, and de ce que j'ay tant differe a repondre a la derniere lettre que
j'ay receve de vous, Mats si vostre facilite me met a couvert des reproaches que
vous auries droit de me fair, elle ne me garentit pas de ceux que je me dois
fair a moy mesme lors que je neglige de vous donner les marquis qui sont en ma
puissance, de la tendresse que jay pour vous; Il est vray que j'aurois plus
d'empressement a vous en donner des prevues essentielles and utiles que je n'en
ay a vous en fair voir ces foibles asseurances: and je vous assure, ma chere
Cousine, que les occasions m'en seront tousiours fort cheres, and que je les
embrasseray de bon coeur toutes les fois que je le pourray, Jay pourtant a vous
fair une plainte de vous mesme, que vous m'avez encore escrit a vec ceremony,
and que vous n'avez pas voulu suiure cette metode icy qui est beaucoup plus
libre and plus commode, and sans mentir c'est ce qui a encore un peu aid a ma
paresse car je suis si discoutumee d'escrire en form and sur tout aux gens que
j'ayme cordialement, qui je ne scay come^t m'y prendre et je craignois qu'ily
ait trop d'in civilite apres tous les complime^ts qui vous me faites d'en user
avec tant de liberte. En fin pourtant jay creu Mademoiselle ma chere Cousine,
que cela ne seroit pas capable de vous fair subsonner que je manquasse a
joindre a l'affection qui j'ay pour vous, tous les sentemens d'honneur and de
consideration qui vous sont deu, and a quoy je suis plus particulierement
obligee qu'une autre et par la proximite and par quantite d'autres raisons.
Etsi pourquoy je me suis fermee a continuer den user de cette sort dans la
resolution de vous vainere and de vous obliger d'en fair de mesme autrement
javoue que je prendrois ce refus pour un certain compliment qui marqueroit plus
de civilite que d'amitie, and pour une espece de renoncement au commerce je
veux done atendre de vous chere Cousine, une Lettre fort tender and peu
ceremonieuse and je vous les demand de cette sort and de recevoir celle cy de
la mesme affection qu'elle vous est ecrite. Il me tarde fort que nous ayons la
satisfaction de vous revoir en ce pays cy, vous au es bien veu desja des
revolutions en celuy ou vous estes, and quelque desir que je souhaite de tout
mon coeur que vous y puissies encore voir celle que l'estat present des
affairs nous done lieu de pouvoir bien tossed esperer, and que tous les gens de
bien desirent avec une extreme passion, qui est le retour du Roy dans son
premier eclat and sa premiere authorite jay tousiours souhaite avec grande
passion le retablissement de ce Prince par diverses considerations and par le
desir qu'il me semble que chacun doit avoir que les chooses se fasent dans la
justice, and par l'horreur du crime commis sur la person du Roy son pere qui
a depuis attire de si terribles jugemens sur ces nations, and vne li effroyable
confusion parmy les Eglises que Dieu y auoit recueillies and quil y auoit fait
fleurir avec tant d'eclat et de purete, qu'on ne peut s'empescher de pleurer
sur leurs ruins aussi a mereme^t qu' Edras, Nehemie, and Daniel sur celles de
Jerusalem, jusqu' a ce quil ait pleu au Seigneur de nous ex aucer and de les
retablir, j'avoue que je ne crois point que ce peche se puisse expier, ny cet
interdit estre oste du milieu d'eux que par le retablissement de leur legitime
and Souerain Seigneur and en luy renda^t la puissance qu'il a receue de Dieu
and qui depuis long temps on usurp sur luy, le mesme qui nous ordonne de
render a Dieu ce qui appartient a Dieu, nous comma^de aussi de render a Cezar
ce qui appartient a Cezar, de sort que je crois que celuy qui voudroit le
contenter dun de ces deux devoirs, and separer ainsy les chooses qui Dieu a
conjointes, ne satisferoit a aucun, and un service ainsy es-tropie seroit bien
moins acceptable par mi les Christiens, que nestoit une offrande mutilee parmi
les Juifs. Ces considerations me font souhaiter avec grande passion que Dieu
inspire ces nations a fair leur devoir, mais javoue que je redouble mes voeux
and mon ardeur lors qui j'oy dire que ceux qui gouvernent a present ne sont
plus tous ces Sectaires, mais des gens de nostre profession. Ils ont eu le
malheur d'estre calomnies par le; adversaires comme accomplices de la mort de
leur Souverain, and cette infame acusation semble avoir noircy tous leurs
freres; love soit le Dieu de misericorde qui leur present une si belle
occasion de s'en lauer and d'en ofter la reproach d'une si saint profession
qu'est la nostre, de que nous nous sommes tous jours va^tes qu' elle auoit cet
auantage par dessus toutes les autres d'apprendre mieux qu' aucun ce que
l'ondoit aux Souverains and de ne permettre sous aucun pretexte qu'on se
dispensant du serment de fidelite qu' on leur auroit priest, j'ay une tell
impatience d'apprendre qu' on l'ait retablie en honneur de ce cost la par une
action si just and si belle, que je ne vous puis dire avec combien d'affection
je le demanday a Dieu le jour du jusne que nous celebrasmes le semain de Pasque
a Charenton: and combien je luy demand tous les jours, and je crois quil n'y a
guere de gens qui s'affectionent a la Paix de Jerusalem qui ne luy facent cette
priere, and je vois tous ceux de nostre profession en ce Royaune out plus ce
desir que jamais, soit que Dieu leur inspire ce mouvement dans le temps qu'il
veut fair son oeuvre de l'en prier plus instament, comme il se plaist souuent
a fair rencontrer les voeux de ses enfans avec les decrets de sa providence,
soit que l'on ait mieux remarque depuis quelque temps des effets de la piete du
Roy d' Angleterre qui fait que l'on sinteresse plus sensiblement a ce qui le
touch. Pour moy j'avoue que j'en fus tres satisfaite quand j'eu l'honeur de
luy fair la reverance la derniere fois qu'il a pass en ce pais, l ayant ouy
parler auce tant de tes moignages de piete j'en fus tres edifiee, Il voulut
aussi donner cette marque de sa communion avec nos Eglises d'aller au presche a
la Rochel and Rouen en passant, and sil eust sejourne icy nons eussions eu
l'honeur de le voir a Charenton, il ne se peut rien ajouster a la regularite
qu'a ce Prince a assister tous les jours aux exercices de piete qui se font
ches luy soir and matin; en fin je love Dieu de ce que lon void sur luy des
marquis de l'Election de Diu and j'espere qui'l se servira de luy pour retablir
ce que nous avous veu autre fois auec tant de plaisir en ses Etats, and que ses
Sujets auront lieu de benir le Seigneur de leur auoir mis au coeur de render a
leur Roy sa couronne, mais aussi belle qu'il l'eut jamais, and sans la vouloir
flestrir and gaster en la luy mettant sur la test. Je pry Dieu de tout mon
coeur qu'il leur en face la grace, and je l'ay si fort au coeur qui je me
laisse aller a vous en fair une longue lettre qui a delair d'un petit volume,
mais cest qui je crois, chere cousine, que comme vous estes sur les lieux, il
est du devoir de contribuer tous jours autant que l'on peut a donner cette
pensee a ceux qui ne l'auroient pas, and que chacun doit avoir l'ambition
dapporter sa petite pierre a cet excellent ouvrage. Comme je souhaite fort que
ceux a qui je m'interesse s'employe^t aux chooses bonnes je serois rauye que
Madame vostre belle soeur and vous peussies contribuer quelque chose a cecy,
obliges moy je vous supply de I'asseurer de mon service tres humble and de me
croire tout a vous

Ox. Caumont.
Cemardy 6. Avril 1660.
A LETTER from the PRINCESS of TURENNE To a Noble Lady her Cousin German, Madam
de Castelnaut; at LONDON.
My Dear Cousin,
IF you had not been for a long time accustomed to bear with, and to pardon my
laziness, I should be in pain for the judgment you might make of my silence,
and that I have delayed so long to answer the last Letter I received from you:
But if your goodness protects me from the reproaches which you have reason to
charge me with, it does not secure me from those which I ought to lay to my own
charge, when I neglect to give you such testimonies as I am able of the
tenderness I have for you. It is true that I shall be more earnest to give you
real and useful proofs of it, then I am to let you see these weak assurances;
and you may be confident, my dear Cousin, that I shall ever cherish such
opportunities, and embrace them with all my heart as often as I am able. Yet I
must complain of you to your self, because you have again written to me with
ceremony, and did not follow this method which is more frank and more
convenient; and truly this was the thing which did contribute to my lasiness;
for I am so unacquainted with formal writing, especially to those I love so
heartily, that I know not how to set my self to it, and I was afraid that it
would be too uncivil to use such freedom after all those complements you gave
me; Yet at last, Madam my dear Cousin, I thought this should not make you
suspect that I could fail to join to that affection I have for you, all those
resentments of honor and respect which are due to you, and to which I am more
particularly obleiged then another, both by nearness in blood, and by many
other reasons: therefore I am fixed to continue in this way in the resolution
to overcome you, and to oblige you to do so too; otherwise, I do declare, that
I shall take a refusal for such a complement as witnesses more civility then
friendship, and for a kind of renouncing of this commerce. I will therefore,
Dear Cousin, expect a very kind Letter with little Ceremony, such a one I do
desire, and that you would receive this with the same affection wherewith I do
write it. I long much for the satisfaction to see you again in this Country,
you have already seen many revolutions in that where you are; and whatever my
longing be for your return, I do avow it, That I wish with all my heart you may
yet see there that change, which the present condition of affairs gives us
reason to hope very shortly, and which all good men desire with an extreme
passion: that is, The KINGS return into his former Luster and Authority. I
have ever wished with great passion the re-establishement of that Prince for
diverse reasons, both for the desire which I think every one ought to have, that
things be done according to Justice, and for the horror of the crime committed
upon the person of the King his father, which has since drawn down such
terrible judgments on those nations, and so fearful confusions in those
Churches, which God had gathered there, and which he had made flourish with so
much luster and purity, that one cannot forbear to weep over their ruin as
bitterly as Ezra, Nehemiah, and Daniel did over that of Jerusalem, until it
may please the Lord to hear us and settle the^. I profess I cannot believe that
that sin can be expiat, nor the interdit removed from among them, but by the
re-establishme^t of their lawful and Sovereign Lord, and by the rendering to
him, that power which he received from God, and which for so long a time has
been usurped over him. The same who commands to give God the things which are
Gods, commands us also to render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's: So that
I believe that he who would content himself with one of these two duties, and
so separate the things which God has joined, should satisfy weither, and that
so lame a service should be less acceptable among Christians then a lame
offering was among the Jews. These considerations make me wish with great
passion that God would inspire those Nations to do their duty; but I do avow
it, that I double my prayers and my zeal when I hear that the present
Governors are no more those sectaries, but men of our profession. They have
had the misfortune to be slandered by the adversaries, as accessarie to the
death of their Sovereign, and that infamous accusation seems to have blackt all
their brethren. Blessed be the God of mercy who presents to them so fair an
occasion to clear themselves, and to remove that reproach from so holy a
profession as ours is, which we have ever bragged to have this advantage above
all others, in that it did teach us better then any other that which we owe to
Sovereigns, and did not permit that men should under any pretext whatsoever
dispense themselves of the Oath of Fidelity which they have taken. I have so
great an impatiencie to hear that they have there so reestablisht it by so just
and so lovely an action, that I cannot tell you with how much affection I
begged it of God on the Fast day which we kept at Charenton last Easter week,
and how earnestly I do beg it every day: And I believe there be few lovers of
the Peace of Jerusalem who make not the same prayer; and I see that all those
of our profession in this kingdom are more earnest in this then ever: Whether
it be that God inspires this motion to pray more earnestly in a time when he
will do his work (as he is often pleased to make the prayers of his children
meet with the decrees of his providence) or whether they have taken more notice
of late of the effects of the Piety of the KING of England, which makes them
interess themselves more sensibly in his concerns. For my own part I profess
it, that I was exceedingly satisfied when I had the honor to pay my respects
to him the last time he past through this Country, having heard him speak with
so great testimonies of piety, that I was extremely edified. He was also
pleased to give this mark of his communion with our Churches as to go to Sermon
at Rochell and at Rouen in his passage; and if he had stayed here, we had had
the honor to have seen him at Charenton. There can nothing be added to the
regularity which this Prince keeps in assisting daily at those exercises of
Piety which are kept morning and evening in his family: In a word I bless God
because the marks of God's Election are seen in Him: and I hope God will use
his service for reestablishing what we have before seen with so much pleasure
in his Dominions, and that his Subjects will have cause to bless the Lord for
putting it into their hearts, to render to their King His Crown, and as fair as
ever he had it, and without spoiling or defacing it in setting it on his head;
I pray God with all my heart that he may give them this Grace, and I do so lay
it to heart, that I take the liberty to write you a long Letter of it, which
looks like a little volume. But it is, dear Cousin, because I believe that as
you are on the place, it is a point of duty to contribute always what one can
to infuse these thoughts in such as have them not, and that every one ought to
be ambitious to bring their little stone toward that excellent work. As I do
desire very much that those in whom I am concerned may employ themselves toward
what is excellent, I shall be very glad that my Lady your Sister in Law, and
you might contribute somewhat to this; Obliege me by assuring her of my most
humble service, and by believing me altogether

Yours Ox Caumont
Tuesday 6. of April New style 1660.
UNE LETTRE De Monsieur DAILLE a Monsieur LE ROY.
Monsieur,
UN de mes a mis m'ayant pry depuis peu de luy fair venir un exemplaire de la
grand Bible de Londres, je me suis souvenu que vous nous offrites IN hyver
pass, a Monsieur Duret et a moy, de nous en fair avoir une pour cinquante
escus; de sort que j' ay creu que je ne pouvois mieux m'adresser qu'avous,
dans cette rencontre, afin de servir mon amy, and jespere que vous ne me
refuseres pas la grace que je vous demand de me fair scavoir, si vous estes
encore en pouvoir de nous tenir promise and de m'envoyer ce liver au pris que
vous nous aves dit: Au rest je ne puis m'empescher de me rejouir icy avec vous
des heureuses nouvelles qui nous vienent du lieu ouvous estes, and qui nous
aprenent que les desirs de tous les peuples y semblent rapeller, d'une commune
voix, leur Roy naturel and legitime. Outre que la genorosite and I'equite mesme
nous obligent a souhaiter que ce Prince rentre dans son Royaume and dans son
Patrimoine, don't il a este injustement depouille, nous le devons encore desirer
pour I'honneur de nostre Religion, qui nous doit estre plus cher que tout autre
interest. Car lors que nos adversaires la voulurent charger autrefois du blasme
de la mort du feu Roy d'Angleterre, vous saves que nous seumes fort bien nous
deffendre de ce reproach, en le rejetta^t tout entier sur les Sectaires, qui en
effect estoient seules coupables de cet horrible crime: Mais aujourd'huy nous
ne sommes plus dans les mesmes terms, puisque les chooses ont change de face,
le Sectairisme ayant perdu son credit, ou du moins estant dechu de la puissance
Souveraine, qui estoit en ses mains, and au contaire le parti Presbyterien, qui
est le nostre, estant celuy qui gouverne presentement en Angleterre: De maniere
que s'il laisse echaper la belle occasion que Dieu semble luy ouvrir, de
retablir S. M. Britanique dans ses Estats, and le fair remonter sur le trosne
de ses Ancestres, il est tout clair qu'il n'y aura plus lieu de s'excuser sur
les Sectaires, ny de laver nostre saint Religion, de cette tache, don't, par la
grace de Dieu, elle s'est tousjours conservee pure and net jusques a present:
Je scay bien que l'on fact courir de mauvais bruits de la Religion de ce
Prince, and je ne doubt point qu'il n'y ait des gens a Londres aussi bien qu'a
Paris, qui taschent de persuader au monde, qu'il a quitte nostre Communion pour
embrasser celle de Rome. Mais qui pourroit croire une chose qui est si
contraire a toute vray semblance? Il ne nous paroist rien de cela, au
contraire, nous scavons que quoique ce Prince ait este oblige par l'Estat de sa
condition present, a viure quelque fois dans des lieur ou l'exercice de nostre
Religion n'est pas permis, neantmoins il a tousjours eu aupres de sa person,
ses Chapelains, qui ne sont rien moins que Papists, and qui par tout ont fact
reglement en sa presence, les prieres and les autres parties du service divin.
De plus tout Paris and toute la terre a seu, la colere and la just indignation
qu'il tesmoigna lors qu'il aprit les efforts qu'on avoit employes, quoy
qu'inutilement pour fair revolter le Duc de Gloucester; and si d'un cost ce
jeune Prince fit alors admirer sa Piete and sa Constance, par la firm
resistance qu'il oposa dans une age si tender, a une si violante and si
dangereuse persecution, aussi d'autre part ce qu'il se retira aupres du Roy son
friar, and qu'il y chercha un asyle a sa Religion, est une marque bien
certain, que le Roy n'avoit pas quitte cette Religion, puis que si cela eusi
este, le Duc de Gloucester au lieu d'un Protecteur eusi trouve en luy un ennemy,
and la perte de sa conscience ou il en cherchoit la seurete, and ou il la
rencontra en effet. On objecte a cela que durant tout le temps que S. M.
Britanique a pass a la Cour de France, elle ne s'est jamais trouvee dans les
assemblees religieuses de ceux de nostre communion, and qu' enter autres, elle
n'est pas venue une seule fois a Charenton, aux jours de nos exercices. Mais
quoy que cela puisse peut estre sembler d'abord etrange a ceux qui n'en scavent
pas la raison, neantmoins comme nous en sommes mieux informez que person,
nous pouvons luy render tesmoignage, que la Religion n'en a point este cause,
and qu'il n'en a este empesche que par des considerations de Politic et de
Prudence, qui sont, peut estre, particulieres a nostre Eglise; et pour preuve
de cela, c'est que quand le Roy d' Angleterre a este horse de Paris, il n'a
point fait difficulte d'aller au presche dans les Temples de nos freres, comme
par exemple a Caen, and en quelques autres villes. Et en Holande tout de mesme,
il a este ouir diverses fois les predications du celebre M. Morus, qui est a
present nostre Colleague.

Ainsy, Monsieur, il est plus clair que le jour, que tout ce que l'on a dit
jusqu'icy de son changement de Religion, est vne pure calomnie, semee par
l'artifice de ses ennemis, pour le decrier dans l'esprit de ses Sujets, et pour
aliener de luy leurs affections and leur bonne volonte, and enfin pour rompre
l'effet des justes voeux, qu'ils forment aujourdhuy pour son heureux retour en
Angleterre.

Dieu vueille les exaucer, par sa justice toute puissante, and comme c'est luy
qui a inspire ces bons desseins dans le coeur de son peuple, and qui semble
disposer toutes chooses a leur accomplissement, qu'il luy plaise benir la suite
de cet ouvrage, and le fair reussir a sa glory and a celle de son oint, and
sur tout a l'edification de son Eglise; je l'en pry de toute mon ame, and vous
recomande particulierement a sa grace, comme estant.

Monsieur Votre tres humble serviteur, DAILLE.
A PARIS 7 Avril 1660.
A LETTER Of Monsieur DAILLE to Monsieur LE ROY.
SIR,
ONe of my Friends having desired me a little while since, to send him a Copy
of the great Bible Printed at London, I remembered, that the last Winter you
proposed to send one to Monsieur Duret, and myself, for fifty Crowns; so that I
believed, that in this occasion I could not make an Address to any with more
convenience then to you, that my friend might be provided; and I hope you will
grant me the favor which I request of you, to inform me, Whether you can at
present perform your promise, and send me this Book for the price which you
formerly expressed. Moreover, I cannot but rejoice with you for the happy news
which is conveyed to us from the place where you are; whereby we are informed,
that the Universal desire of the people, seems with a common voice to recall
their Natural and Lawful King. Besides that generosity and equity its self
obliges us to wish, that this Prince may return into his own Kingdom and
Inheritance, of which he has been unjustly deprived; we ought also to desire
it for the honor of our Religion, which should be more dear to us, then any
other interest: For when our Adversaries formerly would charge the blame of the
death of the late King of England on our Religion, you know we could very well
guard our selves from this reproach, by casting it entirely upon the Sectaries,
who indeed were only guilty of that horrible crime. But at present we do not
stand upon the same terms, since there is such a chance of affairs; the
Sectarians having lost their credit, or at least being fallen from that sovereign
Power which they had graspt; and on the contrary the Presbyterian party which
is ours, now governing in England: So that if they let slip the fair
opportunity which God seems to open to them for the reestablishing of the King
of Great Britain in his Dominion, and to re-advance him to the Throne of his
Ancestors, it is most apparent there will be no further ground to excuse
themselves upon the Sectaries, nor to wash our holy Religion from that spot,
from which, by the Grace of God it has always bin preserved pure and clean to
this present. I well know there are dispersed evil rumors concerning the
Religion of this Prince, and I doubt not, but there are some persons at London,
as well as at Paris, who endeavor to persuade the World, That he has forsaken
our Communion, to embrace that of Rome: But who can believe a thing that is so
contrary to all probability? there is nothing of this appears to us: On the
contrary we well know, That although this Prince has been constrained by the
circumstances of his present condition, to reside sometimes in places where the
Exercise of our Religion is not permitted, yet he has always had his Chaplains
near to him, who are nothing less then Papists, and who every where have
regularly in his presence prayed, and performed the other parts of Divine
Service. Moreover, all Paris, and all the World, has known the anger and the
just indignation which he expressed, when he understood the endeavors which have
been used (though ineffectively) for the Apostasy of the Duke of Gloucester: And
if this young Prince rendered his Piety and Constancy admirable, by that firm
resistance which he opposed in so tender an age, to such a violent and
dangerous persecution; so also in that he retired to the King his Brother, and
there sought for a Sanctuary to his Religion, it is a very certain argument,
that the King had not quitted that Religion; for if this had been true, the
Duke of Gloucester had found him an enemy, instead of a Protector, and had
suffered the loss of his Conscience, where he had sought its security, and
where he really found it. It is objected against this, that during the whole
space of time which the King of Great Britain past in the Court of France, he
never came to our religious assemblies, and that amongst others, he never came
to Charenton in the days of our worship. But although this may at first view
appear strange to those who know not the reason of it; nevertheless, as we are
better informed of this then any one, we can testify that Religion was not the
cause of it, and that he abstained from coming upon politic and prudential
considerations, which may be peculiar to our Church: And the proof of this
appears in that when the King of England has been out of Paris, he has
willingly gone to Sermon in the Churches of our Brethren; as for instance, in
Caen, and some other Towns; and in Holland also, he has several times heard
the Sermons of the famous Monsieur More, who at present is our Colleague.

Thus, Sir, it is more clear then the day, That whatsoever has been reported
till this time of the change of his Religion, is a mere calumny, scattered by
the artifice of his enemies; for to vilify him in the judgment of his
Subjects, and to alienate their affections and good will from him; and finally
to render fruitless the just prayers which they make at present for his happy
return into England.

God grant their accomplishment by his Almighty Justice, and as it is he who
has inspired these good designs into the hearts of his people, and who seems
to dispose all things for the effecting them. May it please him to bless what
remains of this work, and to succeed it for his glory, and the honor of his
Anointed; but especially for the edification of his Church. For this, I pray to
him with all my Soul, and recommend you particularly to his Grace, being,

SIR, Your most humble ServantDAILLE.
PARIS, 7 April. 1660.
VIRO CELEBERRIMO, ET PASTORI INTEGERRIMO Richardo Baxtero, Raimondus Gacheus
Eccles. Ref. Paris. Pastor. S. P. D.
ACcedo ad te, vir clarissime, and frater in Christo observantissime, neque de
fa^cie, neque de fama notus, accedo ^amen confidenter, quia te opti^me novi,
and de tua pietate mihi ^lane persuasum est. Legi nem^^e relegi, miratus sum
docta ^^la parva fateor, si ^^olem spectes, sed Deus bone! ^^uam pretiosa, quam
vero Christianismi succo penitus ^mbuta, quibus Britanniam tu^m beasti, and
quibus non omni^o Gallia nostra caruit. Quis ^utem vel unius paginae seria
^^ctione non protinus intelligat, te spiritus Dei aflatum sensisse, te
infoelicibus hisce temporibus oportune suscitatum, qui grassantem impietatem
forti pectore, armis invictis aggrediaris and compescas Nihil unquam, sancte
profiteor, nihil nec a veteribus Ecclesiae patribus, ut vulgo vocant, nec ab
ultimi seculi doctoribus profectum vidi, and elucubratum, quod pari successu
pietatem autoris spiret, simulque pietatem lectoris accendat: quae de vita
aeterna, de peccatorum conversione, de justificatione, (in qua si nonnihil a
via trita deflectas, facis tamen quantum assequi potui, non sine ratione, non
sine Scriptura) de Poedobaptismo, de con scientiae tranquillitate, etc. in
lucem emisisti, testantur luculentissime, and quae tua sit eruditio, and quis
tuus pietatis affectus. In talis, and tanti viri sinum, quis animi mei
sollitas, and anxias cogitationes vetet effundere, and quae men's agitat super
luctuosum Reip. vestrae and incertum statum declarare? Certe non ego sum (...)
and potissimum in rerum vestrarum conditionem adeo non de^onui insensus, ut
nefas duxerim, ^vel de illis curiosius disputare. Dicam amplius, de Britannia
^non potui, non been sperare, in ^ea enim and fui, and permaneo sententia.
plures sibi Deum in Anglia servasse electos, plures pietati deditos, quam in
ull^ totius Christianitatis regno vel olim floruerint, vel nunc comparare
possint. De salute vestra de^perent and fratres timidi, and hosts tumidi,
quaerant in incredulitate sua, Quis dabit e Zion salutare Israel? Providebit
Deus non december illic, non mill justi, sed integrae piorum Myriades. Audiam ego
quid loquatur Dom. Deus, quoniam loquetur pacem in plebem suam. Verum
quandoquidem summus ille mu^di arbiter, qui nullo mediorum interventu, potest
and tenebras dispellere, and Iucem revocare, non vult tamen (ut plurimu^)
immediate virtutem suam exerere; debemus, vir reverende, studia nostra,
consilia omnia confer ad salutem Britanniae firmiter stabiliendam. Nutabit,
opinor, in perpetuum illius status, donec ad unius Imperium res tota redeat. Ut
varii gentium mores, varia ingenia, ita variae apudillos administrandae R eip.
rations; non eadem omnibus est men's. Ille populus Democratiam elegit, non
assuetus, non assuefaciendus Monarchiae; iste Monarchiam praetulerit,
nobilitatis splendore captus, and plebis insaniam exosus. Anglia vestra ab
innumeris pene seculis Reges coluit, neque aliam novi in toto urbe antiquiorem
Monarchiam: Idem Sol lucet hodiernis Britannis, eosdem influuntillis affectus
hodie, quos olim aeris temperies, Astrorum aspectus, soli qualitas; Quis speret
igitur vel Democratiam vel Aristocratiam facile obtinere posse in ea regione,
in qua unius Imperiu^ tam altas radices egit? Mutavit tamen Anglia, inquiet
aliquis, and mutavit consensu, ut videbatur, unanimi regiminis formam, quis
neget commode fieri posse, quod iam factum est commode. Duplex mihi suppetit
responsio. Primo, quaeram vicissim, utrum Britaniae foeliciter prorsus evenerit
illa mutatio, profecto si tributa, and vectigalia computentur, ea non duplicata
solum, sed in immensum fere aucta. si religionis statum perpendas, quae
haereseon colluvies! Quis Renteros, Quakeros, etc. sub R'ege noverat? Secundo,
Foelix fuerit Britannia, at certe sub unius Imperio; quid nomen morer?
Protector fuit ille unus, non Rex, assentior, unus tamen, nec artis dominandi
ignarus, and qui, in solvendis R eip. vestrae publicis conventibus, non minorem
se rege praestitit; nec ab illius obitu, aut saltem post filium ejus ejectum
quievit Anglia; continuae vicissitudines; quem heri venerabamur, execramur
hodie; and cui modo fidelitatis jusjurandum dedimus, eum mox diris devovemus.
Siccine semper fluctuabit nobilissima illa Insularum Regina? neque ulla
advolabit Alcion, quae mare vestrum tranquillet? Equidem vereor) ut pacem
unquam exploratam habeatis, vel contra domesticos tumultus, vel contra hostium
externorum molimina, donec solium Avitum recipiat tandem Ille, tot Regum Nepos,
qui certe hereditario jure Regis Britanniae titulum passim obtinuit, ut ut rem
titulo designatam nondum possideat. Novi quae fuerit illi conflata invidia; de
illius nimirum in vera religione constantia dubitant nonnulli, sive ex animo
sive simulate, Permagni autem interest Ecclesiae, eum qui reliquis praeesse
debet, pietate etiam reliquos antecellere. Non dicam, quod dici sane potest,
nostrum non esse in religionem Principis inquirere: qualiscunque ille fuerit,
si potestatem alioqui legitimam obtineat, si jus regnandi ad illum pertineat,
caetera committenda sunt divinae povidentiae, regi vero in rebus civilibus
praestandum obsequium. Pontifici Romamano lubeat, Reges e solio de^urbare, nisi
ad illius nutum res religionis componant, nobis non licet esse tam superbis.
Quae Dei sunt Deo, quae Coesaris sunt Coesari reddimus. Sed jam hoc totum
omitto, etenim quod rei caput est, Princeps ille in vera religione natus, rite
institutus ab ejus publica professione nunquam destitit, ne in eis quidem locis
in quibus inde aliquid detrimenti capturus videbatur, nec coetibus nostris
sacris Rothomagi and Rugallae dedignatus est interesse; Caeterum pietatis
opinionem habet apud suos. Nunquam (fateor) Ecclesiamnostram praesentia sua
decoravit, dum Lutetiae sedem suam collocaverat, quod profecto nos male habuit;
verum quia Presbyteranorum, quos vocant, causa ad nos videbatur pertinere, qui
Presbyterani sumus, and quia defuncti Regis mors Presbyteranis ascribebatur,
alienum a nobis animum non potuit non habere, usque dum rerum eventus certiorem
illum fecerint, non a Fratribus nostris, sed ab Anabaptistis ut plurimum, aut
saltem ab Independentibus illius inaugurationi praecipua inferri impedimenta,
quos etiam calamitosum Parentis fatum promovisse antea, plane perspectum
habuit. Utinam facti istius invidia, qua tandiu Ecclesiae nostrae conflagrarunt
tandem aliquando, and a nobis, and a Fratribus Britannis prorsus amoveatur,
quod nescio an unqua^ futurum sit, nisi rebus compositis Filius sceptrum
Parentis gerat, a Presbyteranorum manibus non violenter extortum, sed amice ac
liberaliter oblatum. Age igitur, Vir Dei, belli imminentis calamitates
praeverte, consilia Pacis Tuque Fratresque tui similes inite, and date
Britannis. Aspirabit divina providentia, conatibus vestris benedicet, vobisque
utetur veluti sacris instrumentis, ad foelicitatem Patriae vestrae
restituendam. Verum haec satis superque. Miraris etenim quod te adeo
familiariter compellam, quae tamen me causa impulerit, dixi initio. Nempe tua
Pietate, tua Charitate fretus, quae omnia meliorem in partem interpretabitur.
Porro benedicat Deus studiis tuis, laboribus tuis, Ecclesiae tuae, and toti
vestrae, imo nostrae, Britanniae, quae Flos est and Gloria Regnorum in quibus
Deus pure colitur.

Lutetiae Paris. Non. April. An. 1660.
RAIMOND GACHES Pastor of the Reformed Church of Paris, to the most Famous man
and most Upright Pastor, RICHARD BAXTER, Wishes all Health.
THough I am neither by face nor fame known unto you, (most worthy Sir, and
most reverend brother in Christ) yet I address my self to you with confidence,
because I know you very well, and am fully assured of your Piety. I have read
again and again, not without admiration, those learned volumes (little indeed
if we respect the bulk, but exceeding precious, and througbly dyed with the
truest tinctures of Christianity) wherewith you have blessed your own Country,
and with which France has not been altogether unacquainted. Who can seriously
read, though but one leaf of them, and not perceive how you felt the breathing
so God's spirit, and were seasonably raised up for these unhappy times, as one
who may with stout courage and invincible arms undertake and curb outrageous
ungodliness. I solemnly profess, I never saw any thing studied, and come from
those, commonly called The Ancient Fathers of the Church or from the Doctors of
the latter times, which does with equal success breath forth the Authors, and
also kindle the Readers devotion^ Those things which you have al^ ready put out
concerning Everlasting Rest, A Call to the Unconverted, justification (in which
i^ you leave the beaten rode a little you do it, as far as I can understand not
without reason and Scripture) Infant Baptism, Peace of Conscience, etc. do
witness most clealy both what your learning is, and what your love of Religion.
Wh^ then may forbid me to pour forth my careful and doubtful thoughts into the
bosom of such and so great a man, and to declare what runs in my mind
concerning the sad and fickle state of your Common wealth? Truly I am no pryer
into other men's matters; and especially as to yours, I have been so far from
angerly thundering [Virulent Declaiming] against them, that I have thought it an
unspeakable fault to dispute curiously of them. I will say more, I could not
but hope well of Britain, for I was, and am still of this opinion, that God
has reserved to himself in England more Elect, and more godly men, then ever
either flourished of old, or can be shown now in any Realm of Christendom. Let
both fearful brethren and furious enemies, judge your safety desperate, and
ask in their unbelief, Who will give salvation to Israel out of Zion? God will
provide; there are not ten, not a thousand just men, but entire Millions of
godly men. I will hear what the Lord God will say, for he will speak peace to
his people. But because the most high Ruler of the world (who can indeed
without the intervening of means, both scatter the darkness, and call back the
Light, yet nevertheless) wills not (for the most part) to put forth his power
immediately; we ought (Reverend Sir) to lay together our Studies, and all
Counsels to establish firmly the safety of Britain: I suppose its condition
will be perpetually tottering, until the Government return into one man's hands
(Monarchy) As the customs of Nations are various, and their dispositions
various, so their manners of Governing public affairs are various; they are
not of the same mind. One people chooses a popular Government; and neither is,
nor can be accustomed to be ruled by one man: Another people, being taken with
the splendour of Nobility, and hating the madness of the Commonalty, prefers
Monarchy. Your Country of England has been a lover of Kings for almost
innumerable ages; neither do I know any Monarchy in the world more ancient. The
same Sun shines upon the present English men; the aspects of the stars, the
quality of the soil has the same influence upon their affections now as
formerly: Who then can hope that either a Democracy or Aristocracy, will easily
prevail in that Country wherein Monarchy has taken such deep rooting? But
England (may some man say) has already changed the form of Government, and
that (as it seemed) with common consent; who then can deny that may be
commodiously done, which has been done commodiously? I have a double answer
hereto. First, I will in like manner query, whether that change proved very
happy for England? Truly, if Taxes and Imposts be to be counted; they are not
only doubled, but increased beyond almost all measure. If the State of religion
be to be considered, what a common-sewer of Heresies is there! Who ever heard
of Ranters, Quakers, etc. under the King? Secondly, Suppose Britain has been
happy since the change, yet it was under the Government of One: What matter's
the name? this one was a Protector, not a King, I grant; but he was one, and
such a one, as was neither unskilful in the art of ruling, nor behaved himself
inferior to a King in dissolving Parliaments; and from his death, or at least
from the casting out of his Son, England never was quiet; changes were
continual: whom yesterday we reverenced, to day we loath; whom we swore fealty
to but now, him soon after we damn with curses. Shall that most noble Queen of
Islands always be so tossed upon the waves? and shall no Halcyon fly thither
which may calm your seas? Truly, I fear, you will never have peace ascertained
either against tumults at home, or the attempts of Enemies abroad, till he, who
is the Grandson of so many Kings, at length be restored to his Grandfathers
Throne; he has every where by right of inheritance the title of King of
Britain, though he yet possess not the thing designed by the Title. I know what
Odium has been cast upon him; some, whether really or counterfeitly, are
dissatisfied in his constancy to the true religion; and allege, that it
concerns the Church very much, that he who is to rule others, should excel
them in godliness. I will not answer (which truly may be said) that it belongs
not to us to enquire into the Princes religion; Be he what he will, (if his
power be otherwise lawful, and the right of reigning belongs unto him)
Obedience in civil matters must be performed to the King, and other matters
must be committed unto Divine Providence. Let the Bishop of Rome lust to justle
Kings out of the Throne unless they order affairs of religion according to his
Beck; We may not be so proud. We give unto God the things that are Gods, and to
Caesar the things that are Caesar's. But I pass over all this; for (which is the
thing chiefly to be considered) this Prince being born, and duly educated in
the true Religion, never departed from the public profession of it; no, not
even in those places in which he was likly to suffer loss thereby; neither did
he disdain to be present at our religious assembly at Roan and Rochel; moreover
be has the estimation of godly use among those that are about him. I confess
he never graced our Church with his presence while he was seated at Paris;
which truly grieved us: but because the Case of those called Presbyterians
seemed to concern us who are Presbyterians; and because the Kings death was
ascribed to the Presbyterians; he could not but be strange to us, until the
event of things certified him that his instalment was principally hindered not
by our brethren, but by the Anabaptists for the most part, or at least the
Independents: whom also he certainly understood to have before promoted his
Fathers sad death. I wish the Odium of that fact, wherewith our Churches have
so long been loaded, might now at length be removed both from us, and our
English brethren: which I know not how it can ever be, unless matters may be so
composed as the Son may bear his Fathers Scepter, not violently wrested out
of the Presbyterians hands but friendly and freely proffered. Go on Reverend
Sir; prevent the calanities of imminent war; do you and the brethren like you
embrace peaceable counsels, and give the like to your Countrymen. Divine
providence will favor and bless your endeavors, and will use you as sacred
instruments for restoring happiness to your Country. Butenough and too much of
this, for you may wonder that I speak so familiarly to you; but I mentioned in
the beginning what cause moved me thereto, viz. relying on your piety and
charity, which will take all in good part. Further, God bless your Studies,
your labors, your Church, and all your, nay our England, which is the Flower
and Glory of all the Kingdoms wherein God is truly worshipped.

Paris Apr. 2. 1660.
De PARIS ce 3. Auril 1660.
Monsuur and tres-honore Friar,
IL n'est rien arrive en nos jours de plus etonnant que les Revolutions d'
Angleterre, d' Ecosse, and d Irlande. Apres la mort tragique du feu Roy, l'on
faisoit esperer l'etablissement d'une Republique qui seroit la merveille and
l'admiration du Monde. Maisles diverse changemens quisont arrives de tems en
tems, and les confusions qui sont a craindre, font croire a plusieurs que Dieu
veut ramener les chooses a leur Principe, and mettre ces trois Couronnes unies
ensemble, sur la tested un seul Monarque. Ce qui nous rejouit and nous console
est, qu'il semble que pour fair ce glorieux ouvrage, Dieu se veuille servir de
ceus avec lesquels nous auons une communion plus etroite de doctrine and de
discipline. Car nous apprenons que ceus que l'on apelle Presbyteriens, ont
aujourduy le plus de pouvoir, and que ce sont eus qui tie^nent le timon de
l'Etat. Cette Illustre Assemblee qui vouloit conserver a son Roy sa vie and sa
Royaute, etoit sans doubt bien eloignee de vouloir priver ses enfans du du
droit qui leur est aquis par une Succession continuee en leur Maison Royale
depuis plusieurs siecles. Il court icy un bruit que ce qui pourroit empescher
le Roy d'a present d'estre rapelle a l heritage de ses Peers est l'opinion que
l'on a qu'il est Catholic Romain, and la crainte qu'avec le tems, il ne ruin
la Religion qui fleurit dans les trois Royaumes. Mais Monsieur, vous savez que
nous avons toujours deteste la doctrine des Papes and de leurs supposts qui
enseignent que les Princes qu'ils apellent Heretics, sont inhabiles a
succeder aus Couronnes, and que s'ils sont en possession du Royaume, ils
doivent estre deposez. Outre cela, je ne say pas sur quoy l'on fond que ce
Prince est Catholic Romain, veu qu'il n'en fait point la profession, et au
contraire qu'il a refuse tous les avantages and toutes les assistances qui luy
ont ete ofertes a cette condition. La charity n'est point soubconneuse; Et si
elle nous defend de soub^ccedil;onner legerement des particuliers, comment
pourroit elle approuver que l'on soup^ccedil;onne des Persons si sacrees.
l'Experience a assez fait voir combien souvent de tells soup^ccedil;ons, and
meme les plus violence, sont mal fondez. Nos Histoires ont fait voir un exemple
bien convaincant. Car la Ligue ne fonda jamais sa rebellion contre le Roy Henry
3. que sur ce qu'il etoit Heretic and fauteur d' Heretics; Et par la on
vouloit fair croire qu'l n'avoit nulle affection a la Religion Roman, and
que sous main il favorisoit la notre. Cependant nous n'avons point eu de plus
puissant ennemy; et chacun sait qu'il a vecu and qu'il est mort en la Communion
de Rome; and qu'il y a fait paroistre autant de zele qu'aucun de ses
Predecesseuss; Mais sans passer la Mer, vous aves au milieu de vous un exemple
sans repartie. Carquels soup^ccedil;ons n'a on point eude la Religion du feu
Roy de la grande Bretagne? Cependant a l'heure que la dissimulation n'a plus de
lieu, and qu'il n'avoit plus rien a esperer ni a craindre de la part des
hommes, il a fait paroitre son Zele a la vraye Religion; et meme cette douceur
and cette patience admirable avec laquelle il a sousert le dernier suplice de
la main de ses propres sujets, a bien fait voir que l Esprit de Dieu regnoit en
son coeur. Il est vray que je ne vous puis rien dire de mon chef de la Religion
du Prince don't il s'agit, parce que pour des considerations politiques il ne
nous a point fait I honneur de venir en nos Stes Assemblees a Charenton, qui
est le seul lieu ou nons pouvons en corpse temoigner nos respects aus Princes
etrangers de notre Communion. Pour ce qui est de moy en particulier, je suis
trop peu de chose pour entreprendre de visiter un si grand Prince; Et c'est
aussy la raison pour laquelle je n'ay point eu l'honneur de voir MR le Duc d
Yorc. Mais comme j'apris il y deja quelques annees, que MR le Duc de Gloucester
avoit fait paroitre sa suffisance a confondre les faus Docteurs qui le
vouloyent seduire, and qu'il avoit eu assez de courage and de generosite pour
resister a la Reyne sa Mere et a ceux qui ce vouloyent placer en la maison des
Jesuits. Je creus, veu sa grande jeunesse, que je me pouvois donner l'ho^neur
de le voir sans que cela peut etre tire a consequence; and je m'aquittay
d'autant plus volo^tiers de ce devoir, que je s^ccedil;eus que non seulement il
l'auroit agreeable, mais qu'il le desiroit. le ne vous s^ccedil;aurois exprimer
combien je sus satisfait de ce jeune Prince. Car outre la facon obligeante de
laquelle il me receut, il me donna diverse temoignages de sa piete and de son
zele. Il me souvient, qu'il me dit entr'autres chooses, que le feu Roy son Pere,
peu avaunt sa mort, luy avoit recommande ces trois chooses, De ne changer iamais
de Religion, d'obeir a son Friar aine, qui seroit son Roy, comme il eust fait
aluy meme si Dieu l'eust conserve au Monde, and d'obeir a la Reyne sa Mere en
toutes chooses, except en ce qui regard la Religion. A quoyil ajoutoit, qu'en
perseverant en la Religion il s'aquitoit de son devoir envers Dieu, and
conservoit le repos de sa conscience; mais qu'avec cela il obeissoit aux
dernieres volontes du feu Royson Pere and executoit les ordres du Roy son
Friar, qui le rapelloit pres de sa person pour le tirer de la tentation. Ce
discourse qu'il fit de fort bonne grace, me confirma dans la creance que j'avois
de la Religion du Roy defunt, and me fit voir ce que je devois croire
charitablement de celle du Roy son Fitz. Mais outre cela, il a en sa Maison and
enter ses domestiques des gentils-hommes de notre Religion and de mes anciens
amiss, qui m'ont assure a diverses fois de la piete de ce Prince, and de sa
fermete en la profession qu'il fait. Il est vray qu'il y a des Anglois, qui
sans y penser, luy ont fait grand tort Car sur de faux prejugez, ils se sont
abstenus de notre communion; E par la ils ont fait naitre des soup^ccedil;ons,
comme si leur Roy and toute sa Cour avoyent leur inclination au Papisme. Mais
les plus sages n'en ont pas use de la sort. Car sachant que la creance de
notre Eglise and celle de l'Eglise Anglicane est une meme creance, il's n'ont
fait nulle difficulte de se trouver en nos Assemblees; Et meme le premier
Chapelain du Roy de la grand' Bretagne, nomme le Docteur Cousin, y a souvent
assiste avec beacoup de devotion. Pour reuenir a mon discourse Dieu met
aujourduy enter les mains de Messieurs vos Presbyteriens, qui ont la souveraine
direction, l'honneur and la reputation de nos Eglises. Car si sans aucune
intervention des Puissances etrangeres, ils rappellent ce Prince and le font
asseoir sur son trone, ils acquierent pour eux and pour leur posterite une
gloire immortelle; Et ils ferment a jamais la bouche a ceux qui nous accusent
faussement d'estre ennemis de la Royaute; and font voir que cest a tort que
l'on nous a impute cette maxim, Point d'Euesque, point de Roy. Pour ce qui est
de ma person, Je vous confess, que comme j'ay pleure amerement la mort
sanglante du feu Roy, aussy ce me sera une joye extreme de voir le
retablissement du Roy son Fills, pourveu que cela se puisse fair avec des
conditions qui n'effacent point le luster and l'eclat de la Majeste Royale, and
qui soyent a la glory de Dieu and au bien and au repos des trois Royaumes.
C'est dequoy je pry Dieu de bon coeur, and pour vous MR qu'ilvous conserve and
vous benisse de ses plus saints benedictions. J'ay creu que vous ne trouveries
pas mauvais que je vous ouvre mon coeur, et que je vous decouvre mes pensees
sur un sujet de si grande importance, puis que je suis.

MONSIEUR, Votre tres humble friar and tres-affectionne Serviteur, DRELINCOURT,
Pasteur d'Eglise de PARIS.

A Monsieur Monsieur Stoop f. M. D. S. E. A Londres.
PARIS April the 3d. 1660.
Sr My honored Brother,
Nothing has happened more strange in our days, then the revolutions of
England, Scotland, and Ireland. After the tragical death of the late King,
hopes were given that a Commonwealth might be established, that should become
the wonder and admiration of the whole world. But the several changes that
have happened since, from time to time, and the confusions that are to be
feared, cause many to believe, that God will reduce affairs to their first
state, and set the three Crowns united, upon the head of one Monarch. That
which in this does most rejoice and comfort us: is, that it seems for the doing
of this glorious work, God will use the Service of those with whom we have more
strict Communion in doctrine and discipline. For we understand, that such as
are called Presbiterians, are now possessed of the greatest Power, and sit at
the Helm of State. That illustrious Assembly which would have preserved to
their King his life, and his Royalty was without doubt very far from
designing to rob his Children of that right which is conveyed to them by a
continued succession in their Royal Family for many ages. A report is here,
that the thing from being recalled to the Inheritance of his Fathers, is, the
Opinion conceived by some, of his being turned to the Roman Catholic
Profession, and the fear that in time he might ruin the Religion now
flourishing in those three Kingdoms. But Sir, you know that we have ever
detested the doctrine of Popes and their Instruments, who teach that all
Princes, called by them Heretics, are incapable of succession of Crowns, and
if in possession, to be turned out. And more then this, I see not any ground
there is for calling this Prince a Roman Catholic, he making no profession of
it; but on the contrary has rejected all the advantages and all the aides
offered to him upon that condition. Charity is not jealous, and if it forbid us
to suspect on slight grounds private persons, how can it approve jealousies
upon Persons so sacred? Experience has taught us how little reason has in the
end appeared, for the like, and even the greatest apprehensions of that kind,
our History does furnish us with a convincing example. The League never
pretended other cause for their rebellion against King Henry the Third, but for
his being an Heretic, and a maintamer of Heretics. And thence was inferred,
that he was no ways affected to the Roman, and a Favourer of our Religion. In
the mean time, we never had a more potent Enemy; and to all men's knowledge he
lived and dyed in the Communion of Rome, and therein showed as much zeal as any
of his Predecessors. But not pass the Seas, you have in the midst of you an
instance against all contradiction: For what jealousies have not been raised
against the Religion of the late King of Great Britain, and yet at the hour
when there was no place for dissembling, as being void of fears and hopes from
man, he made his zeal to the true Religion appear, and even that sweetness and
that admirable patience with which he suffered death by the hands of his own
Subjects, has made it very visible that the Spirit of God reigned in his
heart. True it is that from my self, I am not able to relate any thing touching
the Religion of that Prince: Because for reasons of State, we had not the
honor of his presence in our Assemblies of Charenton, the only place where in
a formal body we are able to witness the respect we bear to stranger Princes
in communion with us. And as to my self, I am not considerable enough to have
made a visit to so great a Prince, which was also the reason why I had not the
honor to see the Duke of York: But two year since being informd, how the Duke
of Gloucester, had manifested his ability to confound the false Doctors that had
undertaken to seduce him, and that he had courage and generosity enough to
resist those who would have placed him in the College of the Jesuits: I
thought considering how very young he was, that I might have the honor to give
him a visit, without apprehending any disadvantage. And I performed it the
work freely because: I knew that not only he would accept it, but did also
desire it. I cannot express how much I was satisfied with that young Prince.
For besides the obliging manner wherewith he received, and he gave me several
proofs of his zeal and piety. I remember that among other discourses, he told
me, how the late King his Father, a little before his death, had charged him
with three things.? Never to change his Religion, to obey his elder Brother,
who was to be his King, in the same manner as he would have obeyed himself if
God had spared his life. And to continue obedient to the Queen his Mother, in
all: but what related to Religion. To which he added, that in persevering in
his Religion, he did not only do his duty toward God, and preserve the peace
of his conscience; but also perform the last will of the King his Father, and
follow the order of the King his Brother, who had sent for him, to free him of
future temptations. This discourse which he delivered with a very good grace,
confirmed me in the belief I had of the late Kings Religion, and made me see
what I ought in charity to believe of the King his Son. But over and above
there be in his family among his domestics, some gentlemen of our Religion,
and my ancient friends, who at several times have given me assurances of the
piety of this Prince, and his stability in the profession he makes. True it is
English men have unadvisedly done him great wrong; for upon false prejudices
they have stayed from Communion with us, and so have raised jealousies, as if
their King and all his Court, were inclined to Popery: But the more discreet
behave themselves otherwise, for knowing that the belief of our Church, and
that of that Church of England is the same they willingly came to our Churches
and even Dr Cousin the King of Great Britain's Chapplain has joined with us
with great devotion. To return to my discourse, God intrusts at this day your
Presbyterians; the Gentlemen now in power with the honor and reputation of our
Churches: For if without the intervening of any foraigne power, they recall
this Prince and seat him in his Throne, they acquire to them selves, and to
their posterity an immortal glory, and stop their mouths for ever: who charge
us falsely as enemies of Royalty, and make appear, that the Maxim, of no Bishop
no King is injuriously imputed to us. For my part I confess, that as I have
deplored with bitter tears the bloody death of the late King: So shall it be
to me an exceeding joy, to behold the reestablishment of the King his Son: if
performed with circumstances not lessening the splendour of Royal Majesty: And
which may be to the glory of God, and the good and rest of the three Kingdoms.
It Is for this that I will offer up my hearty prayers to God: and for you Sir,
that he will preserve and bless you. I have persuaded my self, that you would
not take it ill that I open my heart to you, and discover my thoughts upon a
subject of such moment: since I am.

SIR, Your Most humble, and Most affectionate Brother and Servant, DRELINCOURT,
Minister of the Church of PARIS.

A Monsieur Monsieur Stroupe f. M. D. S. E. A Londres.
FINIS.

