CERTAIN CONSIDERATIONS TO DIS-SWADE MEN FROM FVRTHER GATHERING OF CHVRCHES in
this present juncture of Time.

Subscribed by diverse Divines of the Assembly, hereafter mentioned.

Imprimatur pro Radulpho Smith.

December. 23. 1643. John White.



Tudor rose Scottish thistle French fleur-de-lis depiction of Irish harp

LONDON, Printed for Ralph Smith at the sign of the Bible in Cornhill near
the Exchange. Dec: 28

CERTAIN CONSIDERATIONS TO Dissuade men from further gathering of Churches in
this present juncture of time.
ALthough we do not deem our selves worthy at all to heal any of the bleeding
wounds in this distressed Kingdom, Yet when we consider, that beside the
raging of the sword devouring us every where, our miseries are increased by the
several ways of Brethren, and that many of those we dearly love in the Lord,
are at this time entering themselves into Church-societies; we could not but in
our tender love to the public good, and also out of Christian prudence,
present unto their serious thoughts these considerations.

First, That although it be the duty of all the servants of Christ, to keep
themselves always pure from corruption in Religion, and to endeavor in an
orderly way, the Reformation of it; Yet is it an undoubted Maxim, that it
belongs to Christian Magistrates in an especial manner to be authorizers of,
and Ministers of the Gospel to be Leaders in, such Reformation.

2 That while they are doing this work, it is the duty of all people to pray
for them, encourage them, join with them, and wait upon them.

3. That at this time God has inclined the hearts of the Honorable Houses of
Parliament to engage themselves herein, and they have called an Assembly of
Divines to assist them; and required them to make the Word their only rule,
and to endeavor the nearest conformity to the best reformed Churches: at which
work they now are, and through Gods mercy have made some comfortable beginning
according to that rule.

4. That now all the power of Satan and Antichrist is combining by all possible
means to destroy the Parliament, and to cause this work of God to cease;
Nothing can be more destructive to the friends of the cause of Religion, then
to be divided amongst themselves; a thing which the enemies desire and
endeavor to breed and foment by all possible means.

5. That it is not to be doubted, but the counsels of the Assembly of
Divines, and the care of the Parliament will be, not only to reform and set
up Religion throughout the Nation, but will concur to preserve whatever shall
appear to be the rights of particular Congregations, according to the Word;
and to bear with such whose Consciences cannot in all things conform to the
public Rule, so far as the word of God would have them borne withal.

6. That therefore all Ministers and people be earnestly entreated to forbear
for a convenient time the joining of themselves into Church-societies of any
kind whatsoever, until they see whether the right Rule will not be commended
to them in this orderly way.

7. And the rather because that although the hand of God be heavy upon us in
other respects, yet through his goodness those yoakes are broken which we
hitherto groaned under in regard of corruption in Religion, we enjoying more
liberty to serve God according to his word, then at any time in England since
the beginning of the Reformation.

8. That while men are in expectation that a way according to their consciences
may be approved or allowed of by the Magistrates, it is unfit and will be
uncomfortable, before hand to provoke by setting up their own.

9. And lastly, that if after all their waiting, the right rule should not be
delivered unto them, and they then called to suffer (which we hope will never
be) for doing what shall appear to be their duty, they shall have the more
peace with God, and their consciences, while they shall witness with them that
to prevent occasions of divisions they abstained not only from what was
sinful, but even from what was by them judged to be lawful whilst
unseasonable.

William Twisse. Tho. Goodwin. John White. Oliver Bowls. Stephen Marshall.
Phillip Nigh. Charles Herle. Anthony Tuchney. Jo. Arrowsmith. William Bridge.
Thomas Young. William Carter. Herbert Palmer. Sidrach Simpson. William
Greenhill. Jer. Burroughes. Richard Heyricke. Joseph Carrill. Thomas Hill.
Thomas Wilson. Jer. Whitakers.


FINIS.

