A True and Exact RELATION OF THE STRANGE FINDING OUT OF MOSES his TOMB, In a
Valley near unto Mount NEBO in PALESTINA.

With diverse remarkable occurrences that happened thereupon, and the several
judgments of many learned men concerning the same.

Communicated by a person of quality residing at Constantinople, to a person of
Honor here in England, and by him permitted to be published, for the
satisfaction of the Ingenious.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Richard Lowndes, at the White Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1657.

THE STATIONER TO THE READER.
SOme flying rumors relating to the subject matter of this ensuing discourse
may possibly have come to thy ears; for the thing was not done in a corner.
But there has not any perfect narration of it been published, so far as I can
learn, in any language. Besides, the quality of the persons from whom I have
received it, the particular circumstances of places and persons add very much
credit to it, so that it would be absurd to doubt of the truth of it amongst a
cloud of witnesses. Thou will find such smoothness of language joined with
such solidity of judgment in these few pages, that I am confident thou will
not repent either of thy cost in buying, or thy pains in reading them.

Farewell.
A Relation from Constantinople, how the Sepulcher of Moses was lately found
out at Mount Nebo, and what was done thereupon.
IN October 1655. certain Maronite Christians keeping herds of Goats upon
Mount Nebo, otherwise called the Mountain Abarim, they often observed diverse of
their Goats to stray from them, and not to return in two or three days; and
when they did return, they would as often go astray again, and carry other
Goats with them: they also observed that the hair of these straying Goats did
yield a most odoriferous scent; wherewith they were so highly taken, as they
resolved diligently to search their goings out, thereby to learn the true cause
thereof. Whereupon some of them on a day, following these erring goats, they
brought them to a stupendous precipice, in the bottom whereof lay a most
delicious valley, but of small circumference, which some of these Goatherds had
seen before, but never could find any means of entrance thereinto, so steep and
unaccessible were the enclosing mountains. But at that instant, whether it were
by any earthquake lately happening, very usual in those countries; or by the
decay of the mountains themselves; the rocks on each side had made such
shootings into the opening of the valley, as not only the Goats (one of the
best climbing creatures) but even the Goatherds themselves used to such
difficult untrodden paths, found a descent into this almost bottomless valley.
Here they refreshed themselves with the verdure of the grass, the sweetness of
the springs, and with such course fare as they carried with them in their
scrips. About noon when the Sun ceased to be a comforter, they retired
themselves under the shadow of a rock, thinking their Goats would have born
them company; and wondering what should become of them, toward evening they
espied them coming one by one out of the cleft of a rock, which it seemed to
them, had been also shaken by an earthquake: for on the top of it they saw huge
massy trees overturned, which by their long growth had so fixed their roots in
the clefts of the rock, as with their weighty fall, they tore up much of the
foundation whereon they grew. Coming to this cave, and first putting in their
heads, there issued forth the most odoriferous favor that could possibly be
imagined, and putting in their staves to feel the bottom of it, they found it
of no great depth, their staves likewise participating of the perfumes.
Hereupon they adventured to enter, and first groping about with their hands and
with their staves in this dark place, and after recovering their eyesight, by
the light which entered at the passage which gave them admittance, they found
the cave to be of a circular figure, and not above twelve foot the diameter.
The floor, the sides, and the hollow roof, seemed to be more than the work of
nature, and yet nothing appeared therein to be the work of man. At their first
coming in, hastily crossing over this dark place, they stumbled upon something
which lay thwart the middle, and causing their fellows to stand out of the
light, they discovered a material which seemed to be a Tombstone, and that it
lay upon an other which appeared to be hollow, thicker than the uppermost, but
of the same figure every way, and curiously joined or mortised one into the
other, without any mortar or ciment. It was nine foot in length, and two foot
from the ground, being three foot broad, and all plain, saving that at that
part which seemed to be the head of it, they felt two knobs, which bunched out
in the fashion of horns, and there were letters engraven thereupon, which for
want of light, but chiefly of learning, they could not read.

Having satisfied themselves herewith sufficiently, they returned back to their
fellows, who much longed for their coming, and acquainted them with the whole
circumstance of their success, wherewith they were infinitely pleased,
especially with the most delicious scent of their apparel. And thinking it a
business of more value than to be kept secret, they agreed that one of those
who had been an eyewitness of the premises, should acquaint therewith
Mataxat, the Patriarch of the Maronites, whose residence is in a valley of
Mount Libanus, called [Kanobeen Kadischa Mir-jam] or the Monastery of S. Mary,
who being thoroughly informed of what had happened, and admiring the sweet scent
which came from the poor men's garments, otherwise sordid and nasty, he
conceived this to be the monument of some person more than humane, and
therefore had a longing desire to have gone thither himself; but his great age
and the difficulty of the way obstructing his resolution, he gave the charge
thereof unto two Priests, who were his Chaplains, men in learning and
understanding (especially one of them named Aben-useph, or father Joseph)
sufficiently qualified. Who coming to the place by conduct of the Goat-herds,
found every thing exactly true, as they had caused it to be related to the
Patriarch. And moreover taking lights with them into the cave, they found those
knobs which the Goat-herds spoke of, and which stood as it were upon the head
of the Monument, to be the similitude of two horns, not much unlike those of a
Bull. But that which satisfied their curiosity even to astonishment, was, that
seriously viewing the Inscription, which was in the Hebrew character, and
Hebrew language, they found it to be in effect [MOSES THE SERVANT OF GOD] with
these joyful tidings carrying with them the transcript of the Inscription,
they returned to the Patriarch; who seeing this Inscription, and hearing the
relation, was ravished therewith above measure. But the odoriferous scent which
proceeded from their garments (which gave a sweeter favorthan all the spices of
India, or gumms of Arabia could do) made these persons almost venerable in the
opinion of men of all Religions, whereof there is store in the Turks dominions.
Who hereupon, with amazement, began to take notice of this miraculous
Invention, far exceeding in their judgment that of the Holy Cross, and some of
every sort of them, having first viewed the place, did earnestly endeavor how
they might convert it most to their own profit.

And in the first place the Maronites, as the first inventers, petitioned Morat
the Bashaw of Damascus, under whose jurisdiction it lies, that they might have
the keeping of this holy place. But they being poor, although they had justice
on their sides, yet being not able to bribe, the Christians the Greek and
Armenian Churches stepped in and offered great present sums and yearly salaries
to Morat Bashaw for the keeping of it; especially the latter exceeded, who
engaged morever to build a Monastery there, which they would fortify as a
Castle, to secure themselves and Pilgrims from the assaults of the wild Arabs,
who do grievously infest all those quarters. The Friars Minors of the order of
S. Francis, who reside at Jerusalem, for the entertainment of the Western
Pilgrims, offered very largely, that they might have it, and that by the means
of the French Ambassador residing at Constantinople. But the Jews (who are
very rich, and generally customers and treasurers to the Grand Signior in most
of his dominions) struck in with the Mufty and Vizier Bashaw, offering great
sums of money for the possession of this Sepulcher, alleging, that of right
it belonged unto them, Moses being their Lawgiver and countryman, whose laws
the Christians did unworthily pervert, abstaining from marriage, being eaters
of swines flesh, and the most detestable Idolaters in the world. That it would
add much unto the Grand Signiors honor, and might be an addition unto his
title, that he was Lord of the three famous Sepulchers of the three famous
Prophets, viz. of the Prophet Mahomet at Medina, of Jesus Christ at Jerusalem,
and lastly of Moses at Mount Nebo. That they did concur with the Musselmans,
not only holding Marriage honorable, but own plurality of Wives and
Concubines to be necessary; that they did besides abstain from swines flesh,
and were so far from worshipping of any Image, as they held it not lawful to
make any at all. These reasons of the Jews, but chiefly their large bribes did
so prevail, as in all probability they were likely to carry it. When suddenly
and unlooked for the French Jesuits (who have their College at Constantinople)
interposed, first by taking off the Grecian and Armenian Christians, by telling
them how displeasing this would be to Almighty God, who upon design had hid and
buried the body of Moses in such a secret place, to the end that the Jews
should never find his Sepulcher, lest otherwise they might commit Idolatry
thereto, and worship it. That this Sepulcher being thus found out in this last
and worst age of the world, wherein Idolatry rages, in despite of Gods
Commandments, who has more often and more bitterly expressed his detestation
thereof, than against any other sin whatsoever, wherefore they meekly advised
them to desist in their suite, offering to take off the Latin Church from
persisting in their petitions, for the Guardianship of the Sepulcher, as also
the Maronites, beseeching them with tears that they would not resist the will
of God, nor be the means of disclosing his secrets. Hereto they answered, that
they thought themselves as fit to keep the Sepulcher as any other whatsoever;
but if the other Christians would desist, and that the Jews might be taken
off, they would acquiesce. The credit of the Jesuits took off the Latin
Church, and the Maronites being poor, and now in a sort members of the Roman or
Latin Church, gave over their suit. The Jews were easily denied their request,
not only because the Turks do detestably hate them, but moreover the Jesuits
had cunningly intimated to the Vizier Bashaw, how dangerous it might prove to
that State, to suffer the Jews (who pretend right to the holy Land by
inheritance, and look every day for a call to be restored to their ancient
patrimony) to have any command therein: and the fortifying of that place
against the insolences of the Arabs, without which they could not live in
safety, and the multitude of Jews, who would come to visit the Sepulcher,
would very much encourage them to act something not convenient for the Othoman
Empire to permit: but their best argument was good round bribes which they gave
him. So in conclusion, Morat Bashaw of Damasco had express order brought him
by a Chiaus, from the Port of the Grand Signior, to see that the cave of the
Sepulcher should be stopped up, and that none upon pain of death should approach
within certain miles thereof. In pursuance of which order, Morat Bashaw
commanded forthwith the Sanzjacks of Jerusalem and of Saphetta, being the
nearest Sanzjackries which confine upon the place, to see it performed with
diligence, who in obedience to the Firman sent by the Grand Signior, did
execute it accordingly.

How the Jesuits practiced to steal away the body of MOSES, and to carry it
into France, and how they were prevented.
IF the Jesuits had been as great enemies to Idolatry, and as careful to
observe the will of God, as they pretended, it had been a greater miracle than
the discovering of this Sepulcher: but their aim was quite contrary; for no
sooner was the nine days wonder over, and the business began to be hushed, but
they began to put that in practice, which was from the beginning their
determination; which in effect was to steal away the body of Moses, and
shipping it for France, to place it in their College of le Fleche, whereby
they propounded to themselves the gaining of infinite reputation in holiness,
besides the accumulation of wealth by indulgences. To effect this (by the means
of the French Ambassador, now wholly Jesuited) letters were directed to the
French Consuls residing at S. John de Acre, and at Rama in the Holy Land, whose
chief trading there is for Cottons, and who being placed and displaced by the
Ambassador, were close and diligent in executing of his commands; which
letters were to this effect, That they should diligently inquire amongst the
Emirs and Shecks of the Arabs (who are petty Princes in those parts, and who in
despite of the Grand Signior possess most part of that country) if for a good
reward in Dutch Dollers any of them would undertake to assist the Jesuits in
conveying of the body either to Acre or to Joppa, and there to put it aboard a
French vessel, which should attend them to that purpose, where they should
deliver the body with one hand, and receive their moneys with the other. To
this the Consuls answered, that upon making a trial hereof, they found the
Arabs averse hereunto, not only for fear of too much provoking the Turk
against them, but because of the high esteem they have of Moses, whom they call
in their language [Moo^a Carym Alla] that is, Moses the righteous of God, yet
the Consuls did assure them that there were another sort of people inhabiting
those now wild parts; the remainder of those Frenchmen brought in by Godfrey of
Bulloigne, who are called Druses, and who have ever since defended themselves
in the Mountains against the Turks and Saracens. But they have now lost their
Christian Religion, and yet are not good Mahometans neither; retaining the
eating of Swines flesh, which makes them odious to the Turks, who thereupon
call them Rafties, that is, Infidels, yet they wear a white Turbant, and
neither fearing God, nor obeying man, they conceived them fit for any
detestable villainy. To these they had imparted the business, and were assured
to get a considerable number of them, for a good sum of Dollers, part to be
paid in hand, the rest when they had finished their work. The Jesuits conceived
their business as half done when they heard these tidings. And thereupon with
diverse French Gentlemen and Merchants, who desired to participate of the
honor, they imbarqued at Constantinople in a French vessel bound for S. John
de Acre, formerly called Ptolomais, pretending tovisit the holy Sepulcher, and
the renouned places for sanctity in and near Jerusalem. The wind favored them
so much, as they overshot their Port, and forced them to Joppa, much nearer
their Rendezvous than Acre, it being not above forty Italian miles from
Jerusalem. At Rama, now called Ramula, they were kindly received by the French
Consul, who gave them great assurance of the Druses, and brought them on their
way toward Jerusalem, where they were lodged in the Convent of Franciscans.
They came thither about Mid-lent, as they designed, having time enough betwixt
that and Palm Sunday, to work the Father Guardian, and the other Friars to be
assistant to their design, and to compact with the Druses both for their
reward, and for the time and place of their meeting. For it is to be observed,
that the Tuesday after Palm Sunday, the Father Guardian with many of his Friars
and all Pilgrims that will go, make a journey to wash themselves in Jordan,
carrying Soldiers with them for their convoy; and this is once every year and
no oftener, unless upon very extraordinary occasion. The business being broken
to the Father Guardian, called Padre Gregorio, an Italian by Nation, as were
most of the Convent, he did no ways approve of the business, alleging many
reasons against it, but principally that their Convent at Jerusalem would
thereby be dissolved, and all the Western Christians for ever debarred from
worshipping or visiting the holy Sepulcher hereafter. Some thought it was
partly out of envy, that the Jesuits should enjoy so great a treasure, who are
an order that these Franciscans do not greatly reverence. Howsoever he agreed
to hold his accustomed journey, and to keep secret their plot, the Jesuits
assuring him, that the Druses should not touch a hair of his head, nor of any
his Convent. Now the plot was thus laid, That the Jesuits under color of
carrying victuals and provisions for their journey to Jordan, in which they
always lie out some nights, being to visit other places in their return,
secretly carried a coffin, fine linen, and other things, wherein to wrap the
body, and good mules for themselves and companions in the plot to ride upon,
which they meant should serve them in their flight to the seaside, where the
vessel which brought them being a Polacre of Marcelles attended their design,
under color of taking in Cottons. And lest Joppa should prove no safe port for
their retreat, they ordered the Patron or Master of the Polacre, to take them
in some few miles to the Northward thereof, at the Castle of Pilgrims, a
desolate port at this time, and therefore the fitter for their purpose. They
had likewise ordered the Druses to meet them well armed and horsed near to
Jerico, the most confining place to Jordan they knew of; which they so
punctually performed, as the pilgrims were no sooner arrived on the bank of
Jordan, and ready to ship themselves to enter the river, but these Druses fell
upon them with great outcries in the Arabic tongue, the better to delude the
Turkish Soldiers, who commonly are yearly assaulted by the wild Arabs, in that
very place, and these Druses differing little from the Arabs in habit and
feature, the Soldiers took them to be no other, never suspecting the plot, but
looked only to defend themselves, while in the mean time the Druses seized
upon the Jesuits and their company, their mules, baggage, and whatsoever they
had, not touching the Father Guardian, nor any of his Convent, two only
excepted, namely, Friar Ciprian and Friar Juniper, who being lay-brethren,
Frenchmen, and of the plot, they took with them, leaving the Pilgrims half
stripped of their clothes. And being advantaged by the benefit of the night
which then approached, they forded Jordan (which is easy to do in most places
without a miracle, being a River not navigable any where) and by midnight they
arrived at the cave of the Sepulcher, being at the foot of Mount Nebo, the top
whereof being called Pisgath, which is over against Jerice, from whence God
showed unto Moses all the Land of Promise.

The Jesuits conceived, that before the Pilgrims and father Guardian could
return to Jerusalem, to give notice of what had passed, which could not be till
the night following, and that the Sanziack not knowing who had committed this
insolency, nor much caring, it being but upon a company of Gowers or
misbelievers, as they call Christians, they made no doubt, but that they might
be shipped out of their reach, before they could be met with; wherefore letting
their Mules and horses of the Druses to graze upon the fragrant herbs of that
little valley, they betook themselves to pluck down the entrance into the
Sepulcher which was easier to be pulled down, then to be made up. But see how
their Ship did sink, even in the entrance of the harbor. For the Jesuits had
brought with them from Constantinople an old Janizarie called Ibrahim, who had
served them many years faithfully; without the company of one of which there is
no travailing in Turkey. This man they had sounded a far off, to try if they
could make him of their plot. But he not willing in his old age to leave his
Country, religion, wife and children, they desisted. This and daily the words
which he heard from the mouths of those French Gentlemen and Merchants who
being in the plot, were too lavish of their tongues before him, who by reason
of his long conversation amongst the French, understood more of their language,
then they were aware of. This with other matters of the like nature, made him
strongly to suspect the design. And thereupon acquainted the Sanziack of
Jerusalem therewith, faining himself also ill at ease, to the end he might not
be invited to that journey. The Sanziack perceiving that Ibrahim was not able
to make it out, and yet doubting the worst, being of a more subtle brain then
Turks ordinarily are (he being in truth a Renegado Christian, a notable knave,
and a Scottish-man borne; his right name being Sand Murrey, but upon his
circumcision he called himself Ram-Dam) he gave notice of his fears to Nazuffe
the Sanziack of Saphetta, who was also a Renegado of Hungary, and as cunning a
knave as himself: advising him, that he should give notice hereof to certain
troops of Spahees who lay grasing of their horses on the other side of Jordane
until they recevied orders from Morat, Bashaw of Damasco, to go against the
son of Ipsheer Bashaw, the rebel Bashaw of Aleppo. The Captain of these
Spahees called Jaffer-Aga, a good soludier, and the cunningest knave of all
three, forthwith possessed himself by his scouts, of all the foords over Jordan,
lying between the lake of Genazaret and the Dead sea. And having got notice of
the Jesuits passage (though unknown to them) he leisurely followed with three
hundred Spahees well armed with lances, swords, shields, bows, arrows, and
pistols, being besides incomparably mounted upon Arabian horses, knowing the
passages of the country, and most assured that they could not escape him.

In the mean time the Jesuits with the help of their company, had labored so
effectually in the opening of the cave, as even tired and dropping with sweat
they faintingly entered; being instantly revived and strengthened again by the
odoriferous sent which they found therein, being far above all the perfumes,
that ever any of them had before sented, finding the cave and monument to be
every way answerable to the report. They began with strong wedges and leavers,
(which they brought purposely with them) to attempt the lifting up of the upper
stone. Wherein Friar Juniper and Friar Ciprian more acquainted with such
labor, then with saying of Mass, or preaching, wrought with great effect.
Inso much as having tried both ends, and one of the sides to no purpose, they
putting their strength to the other side, it opened so easily, as if it had
been done by its own accord. The reason of this they found after to be, that
the coffin, the cover and the hinges which fastened them together, were all of
one entire stone, unseparated from the rock which made the cave, without any
supplement whatsoever. Then the Jesuits and their company, as men pleased and
over-joyed, not only with the more than Aromatic perfumes which issued out of
it, but also with the desire of seeing so sacred a spectacle, falling upon
their knees with great devotion, with all the eyes and light they had, began to
pry and spy into this sacred monument. But after they had looked it over and
over ten times for failing, and put in their hands to search more nearly the
bottom, they found in it just nothing; nay it was as clear as if it had been
swept, washed, and rubbed, not an hour before their coming. The Jesuits and
their company being much in their dumps for the loss of their labor, their
money, their time, and indeed their reputation, began to think of a way, since
they could not carry the body, which was not to be found, yet how they might
convey the tomb into France, and so into their College. But when they had
considered that it was not only fixed to the natural rock, or rather of one
individual substance with it, and that besides they had brought no engine
capable to carry over Jordan and the mountains of Judea so weighty a burden,
they thought of breaking it in pieces, and of conveying it peece-meale that
way. Whilst they were thus contriving of their business, they heard from
without a hideous noise of horses and arms, intermixed with the voices of men,
reiterating often these words [Alla-hemderlo] which is as much in the Turkish
language, as the Lord be praised, which was the Spahees acclamations, when they
found they had so happily surprised their prey. Hereat the Jesuits (as they had
reason) conceived great fear, so did all their company; and friar Juniper, for
all his name and the odoriferousnesse of the place, was not yet so sweet as he
should be. In the midst of their fears two bold Spahees entered the cave, with
their lances in the one hand, and bright Semiters in the other, with the
butt-end of their lances they beat them all out of the cave, and as they issued
out, they were stripped by the other Spahees to the very skin every man, being
soundly beaten besides, and so brought to Joffer-Aga the Captain. In the mean
time the Druses (having first lost their horses, and themselves not able to
escape) submitted to mercy, and so being all bound two and two together, with
their arms behind them, they were sent under conduct toward Saphetta, which is
near the lake of Genezaret, as well because that way lay the Spahees quarters,
as for that it being near to Damasco, they might the better receive orders from
Morat Bashaw how to dispose of them. In the mean time, Jaffer-Aga, with two
only entering the cave, with great reverence worshipped at the Sepulcher,
thanking Almighty God that he had made him an instrument (though most unworthy)
to serve him. And having closed again the Sepulcher, by softly letting the lid
or cover of it to fall into the place where it seemed to be joynted, and
causing diverse great stones to be rolled against the entrance of the cave, he
with the remainder of his horse followed his company. By noon the next day he
overtook them, having gotten as far as Jordan, where giving to every one of the
prisoners a loaf of bread, he bad them drink of the river until it was dry.
And so departing to his tents with the greater number of his Spahees, carrying
with him all the spoils of the Jesuits, he commanded the rest to convey them
carefully unto the Sanzjacks of Saphetta; which they speedily put in execution:
the case in less than 24. hours being much altered with the Jesuits, who the
evening before did ride trumphantly over Jordan upon their mules, bravely
guarded by their Druses; now they and their^ guards in bonds were forced to
wade the flood, which yet passed not much their middle. And so they washed
themselves per force in Jordan, which yet Friar Juniper had no more than need
of.

The conclusion of all was for the present, that Morat Bashaw ordered the
prisoners to be sent to the gallyes at Tripoly, in which as slaves at the oar
they were to be conveyed to Constantinople, there to receive such further
punishment as the Grand Signior should appoint. The two Sanzjaks, Ram-dam of
Jerusalem, and Zanzuffe of Saphetta, the first was preferred sub-Bashaw of Noha
at the mouth of the red sea; the second, sub-Bashaw of Sues, at the bottom
thereof; they never trusting a Christian Renegado in any part of Europe.
Ibrahim the Janizary was sent for to Constantinople, to be recompensed. And
Joffer-Aga Captain of the Spahees, advanced in military preferment, with
promise to be made a Bashaw.

How the Jesuits were used at Constantinople, and of the great question that
did arise there by men of all Religions, what was become of the body of Moses.
WHen news came of these transactions to the port of the Grand Signior, the
Jesuits were much condemned by all sorts of Religions. But the Jews took
occasion hereupon to invey bitterly against the Christians above all measure,
affirming they were the most treacherous thieves that ever lived in the world.
Having whilst the Soldiers slept stolen out of the Sepulcher the body of
Christ, and thereby made the second error worse then the first. That Alonso de
Albuquerque Viceroy of Goa, had a design to have defaced the Sepulcher of
Mahomet at Medina Talnabi, and to have thrown his body into the red Sea, but
was prevented by death. The like design had Ferdinando the Great, Duke of
Tuscanie, to have forced the Sepulcher of Christ from Jerusalem, and to have
placed it in his Chapel of Saint Lorenzo at Florence; but he dyed ere he could
effect it. And now this late plot of the Jesuits in attempting to steal away
the body of Moses, howsoever miraculously prevented, yet it argued the
Christians to be a people, not fit to be admitted into the Turkish Empire. The
vulgar being much incensed by these and the like clamours, the French
Ambassador was necessitated to obscure himself for diverse days in the house
of the Emperors Ambassador. The French Consul of Rama shipped himself in the
Bolane, appointed to attend the design, and sailed to Marselles his Native
country. The Padre Guardiano at Jerusalem and his convent were in great trouble
by Ram-dam the Sanzjacke, until Ibrahim the Ianizarie had cleared them by the
oath of a Muselman, that they had no hand in the business. The Druses were
condemned to the Galleys for 120. years. The Gentlemen and Merchants for great
sums of money, obtained so much favor as to be perpetually banished the
Turks dominions. The Jesuits were sent to the seven Towers, there to be put to
some cruel death, their college to be rased, and their order never to return
into Turkey again.

The great question then was amongst the learned of all Religions at
Constantinople, what was become of the body of Moses. Some Dry-vines said it
was there where it pleased God, which satisfied the question as little as if
they had said nothing. Some Arabs Philosophers said it was evapored in fumo;
but the Greeks argued out of Aristotle, that it was impossible in nature to
reduce the whole earthy part of any man's body to nothing; nay they went so
far, as though they acknowledged that God had created all things of nothing,
yet whether he could reduce all things to nothing again, they humbly submitted
to better judgments. They holding that as Creation was a work of perfection,
so destruction a work of imperfection, whereof the Deity was not capable. The
Jews laughed at this dispute, and demonstrated out of Rabbi David Kimche, and
out of Rabbi Solomon Ben Jack, that some thousands of years ago, the Angels
who were placed Guardians of Moses Sepulcher, were furiously assaulted by a
Devil named Asmandeus and his wicked Angels, insomuch as Moses body was taken
from that place, and carried God knows whither; whereupon being asked by the
Christians, which side got the victory? they answered they could not tell. And
being farther demanded, why then did they labor so much to be Guardians of the
place where his body was supposed to lie? they answered, for the same reasons
which moved the Christians to be Guardians of the Sepulcher of Christ, wherein
it was against their faith to believe that his body had at the present any
residence. Against this the Christians of the Latin Church alleged the nineth
verse of St. Jude's Ep. whose words are [ Yet Michael the Angel, when
contending with the Devil, he disputed with the Devil about the body of Moses,
durst not bring against him a railing accusation, but said, the Lord rebuke
thee.] Out of which and the twelfth of the Revelation, verse the seventh, [And
there was wars in heaven, Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon,
and the Dragon fought and his Angels, and prevailed not.] They did conclude,
that the Devil did not carry away the body of Moses, but that the Angels of God
had still the tuition thereof, yet where, they did not know. But the Grecian,
Armenian, Coptie, Abissine, Jacobin, Georgian, Maronite and Nestorian
Christians did wholly oppose this Allegation, with whom joined many Lutherans
residing at Constantinople, denying the Epistle of St. Jude to be Canonical,
but more especially venting their spleenes against the Revelation of S. John,
saying that it was none of his, full of obscurity, void of reason, and the
title forged; that the Author of it was Cerinthus the Heretic; and neither of
them were allowed to be Canonical, until the Council of Carthage, which was
wholly subservient to the Papacy three or four hundred years after Christ;
being both of them before that time not only disputed against, but wholly
gainsaid. These differences did no ways clear, but rather obscure the
question, in as much as the Mufty to try all parties, desired to know the
opinions of the Protestant Divines. viz. the Dutch, and the English. But the
Dutch, whether to save charges, or that they though it needless, and perhaps
dangerous, maintained no Divines amongst them; the English excused themselves
as a point they had not at all studied, nor ever found in their books, and
therefore referred themselves to the Assembly of Divines in England.

The question rested not so, for Nazuffe coming to Constantinople to be
invested in his new government of Sues, brought with him a book written by one
Jeconius Ben-Gad, a learned Rabbi, dwelling at Saphetta, which is an University
of the Jews, wherein he did maintain, that this Tomb was not the Tomb of
Moses, who delivered Israel; but of another Moses very famous for his piety,
who lived according to the Jews computation, many hundred years after him. To
make good his assertion, he maintained it to be most unbeseeming the wisdom of
God to hide the body of Moses, and yet to write his name upon his Sepulcher;
besides, the Inscription being witten in Hebrew characters, argued it to be of
a far later date: for it is well known to the learned, that the Jews,
Samaritans, and Canaanites, had anciently no other Character but the Phoenician
until the Jews used the Hebrew Character, which was invented by Esdras after
the Captivity. And for the late miraculous opening of an entrance into this
valley, no formerly known, that proceeded from the ignorance of the Goat-herds,
and the Maronite Patriarch, who being Christians do little understand the
Topography of the Land of Promise. But the learned Jews know this to be an
ancient valley, called formerly Hamagiddo, of far greater extent than at this
present, and that not four hundred years past, it was almost wholly devoured
by an Earthquake. That there was no body found in the Sepulcher, was no wonder,
seeing the Christians upon their conquest of the Holy Land by Godfrey of
Bulloigne, left no Tomb or Monument of the dead unsearched for treasure,
commonly making havoc and Sacrilege of the dead bones, leaving empty
Sepulchers. That they had attempted the breaking up of David's Tomb, upon great
confidence of finding therein an inestimable treasure; but were miraculously
prevented by fire which issued out of it. Nay, their unsatiated covetousness
was such, as they would not have spared the holy Sepulcher (as they call it) of
their Savior Christ, had they not conceived, that by reason of his poverty
there could nothing of value be buried with him; for the strange fastening of
the upper stone to the nether, as has formerly been expressed, it will
appear to be no miracle, when it shall be remembered how usual it was
anciently amongst the Jews so to do, and the Sepulchers of the Kings of Judea,
yet remaining near Jerusalem to this day testify as much. As for the
odoriferousness of the place, it will be no wonder, when the sweet smelling
Gummes and Aromatic Spices of wonderful price, wherewith anciently they did
intombe their dead, shall be called to mind. Neither could it in the last
place savor of any thing but of infinite impiety, to conceive that the arm of
the great God of Israel should in these last times be so weakened, as he could
not defend the body of his servant from an Earthquake, or keep from vulgar eyes
his unscrutable secrets. This book, though written (after the Jewish manner)
with much bitterness against the Christians, did give exceeding satisfaction.
So it is thought this business has received its full period.

FINIS.

