The Case of Sr John Champante, Knight Respond.
TO THE APPEAL of Sir Robert Dashwood, Knight and Baronet, Sir Samuel Dashwood
Knight. John Perry and Edward Noel, surviving Executors of George Dashwood, Esquire
Deceased Appellants.
4 Aug. 1671.
RICHARD Earl of Ranelagh, and Eight others (whereof George Dashwood the
Appellant's Testator was one) by Indenture under the Great Seal of England,
contracted and became Undertakers with King Charles the Second to receive the
whole Revenue of Ireland, and to pay the whole Charge of that Kingdom contained
in the Civil and Military Lists for five Years, ending the 26th of December,
1675; and had two Years time afterward for Collecting the Arrears, and making
good the Payments grown due within the five Years.

23 Sept. 71.
A Commission under the Great Seal of England, issued to the said Undertakers,
and in their absence in Ireland, to others therein by them named to be their
Representatives; wherein Mr. Edward Roberts was named by the said George
Dashwood, to be his Representative, and to act on his behalf.

8 Nov.71.
In Virtue of which Commission the now Respondent was duly constituted
Deputy-Receiver-General, Vice-Treasurer, and Treasurer at War, who entered into
Bonds of 10000 l. penalty, for the execution of the said Places and Performance
of his said Trust, which he all along faithfully performed.

But the said Revenue proving defective, or at least not coming in fast enough
to answer the Ends and Uses of the said Undertaking; and the Undertakers being
pressed to make payments according to their Contract, the said Undertakers and
their Representatives, or so many of them as were requisite in that behalf, to
comply therewith, did by several Orders and Letters importune and direct the
Respondent to Advance and Lend, and to procure from others what Money he could,
upon the credit, and toward the support of the Undertaking, and Undertakers,
under promise of being repaid and indempnified, and for which there was to be
an allowance of 10 per Cent. (the usual Interest in Ireland) besides Gratuity
and Commission-Money: Many, if not all of which Letters and Orders were signed
by George Dashwood, or the said Roberts his Representative.

Pursuant whereunto, in order to support and preserve the Credit of the said
Undertakers and Undertaking, the Respondent did lend and advance great Sums of
his own, and by direction of the Undertakers in England, did become bound to
Sir John James, and others, residing in England, then unknown to the
Respondent, for great Sums of Money which were procured by the Undertakers; all
which Money so lent and procured by the Respondent, were duly applied to the
Uses of the Undertaking, and the Undertakers for so much were discharged
against the King upon their Contract.

Two several Accounts, the one ending Christmas 72, the other at Christmas 73,
between the Undertakers and the Respondent, touching the Undertaking, were made
up, stated, and examined by the said Roberts, and others employed by the
Undertakers for that purpose, and duly signed and passed, upon the foot of
which last Account there was a balance of 5622 l. due to the Respondent, which
together with the other Moneys afterward lent, and secured by the Respondent
for the Use and Credit of the Undertakers and Undertaking (besides what the
Undertaking produced) did amount to above 24000 l. principal Money (besides
Interest, Commission-Money, and Gratuity).

To obtain satisfaction wherein, and to have his Accounts settled, the
Respondent used great Importunities with the Undertakers, who all along owned
the great service and kindness he had done them, by crediting them and the
Undertaking so far, and promised to give Directions for stating and settling
Accounts, and to take effectual care for his payment and satisfaction. And in
order thereunto about June 1677, Sir James Hayes one of the Undertakers went
into Ireland; and he with John Stepny, Esquire another Undertaker, and John Hayes
Brother of Sir James, and interessed in the Undertaking, having sufficient
power, as they pretended, and as the Respondent believes, from all the
Undertakers, to settle and conclude the Affairs of the Undertaking (they being
the only persons then acting therein), in August 77, empowered the said Roberts
by an Instrument under their hands, to make up, state, and certify the
Respondent's Accounts, from the 25. of December. 73, to the 24th of June 77. In
pursuance whereof the said Mr. Roberts, (who was the same person employed and
relied upon by the Undertakers to make up the former Accounts) with the
assistance of the Secretary of the Undertaking, and two of their Clerks, spent
several Months in stating the Respondent's Accounts, and comparing them with
the Vouchers, which justified the said Accounts in all things; and after the
strictest scrutiny imaginable, two distinct Accounts were made and closed in
the same method as the two former Accounts; the one commencing the 25th of
December. 73. and ending 25 December. 74, and the other going on from thence to 24
June 77, upon the foot of which last Account there remained a Balance for
principal Money, (not reckoning Interest, Commission-Money, nor Gratuity), the
Sum of 36454 l. 8 s. 8 d: And thereupon all the Respondent's Vouchers were
delivered up, and Abstracts thereof, and of the Accounts were delivered to the
Undertakers, or their Representatives.

12295 l.
But the Sum of 12295 l. (which the Respondent had received from Sir John James'
Agent as borrowed Money, and as such had given Bond, and became liable for the
same, by the direction of the Undertakers) not appearing at the time of making
up the said Accounts, but afterward to be Money due to the Undertaking, the
said Edward Roberts thought it proper to enter a Memorandum thereof in the
Accounts, which caused a change and transcribing of some of the leaves, but no
alteration of any Sum, Article, Figure, or other thing in the said Accounts,
save the entry of the said Memorandum, which reduced the balance to 24159 l. 8
s. 8 d as is fully in proof in the Cause, and has been cleared to the
satisfaction of the Courts of Exchequer, both in England and Ireland, at the
respective Hearings of the cause, notwithstanding any seeming Reflections upon
the Respond^nt concerning the same. It being evident, that the Respondent had
not, nor could have any Advantage if the said Memorandum had not been incert^d,
for (...) obliged to pay the 12295 l. as above; and when it was ^^^^^vered to
be paid in England, and so not to be allowed again to the said Sir John James
in Ireland, he had his Security delivered up, which made the matter equal to
this Respondent.

Nov. 1678.
The Respondent (notwithstanding many promises) not being able to get the Money
due to him, was forced to exhibit his Bill for that purpose, in the Exchequer
in Ireland, against the said Undertakers and their Representatives, some of
which being brought to hearing, and the Bill against others taken pro Confesso,
a Decree was made for the now Respondent's recovering the said 24159 l. 8 s. 8
d., against the then Desendants, with his Costs (no mention being made of
Interest, Commission-Money, or Gratuity, but that left to be recovered
afterward). But the Earl of Ranelagh exhibiting a Cross-bill against the now
Respondent, procured a Re-hearing of the Cause, which being had, and taking up
six several days, in June 1684. The said Court of Exchequer approved the
Authority given to Roberts, and the Accounts by him made, the Undertakers and
their Representatives having free access to all the now Respondent's Books, and
to all the Offices of Cheque in that Kingdom, and having in their Custody the
Respondent's Vouchers delivered up, with several other particular Accounts of
his daily Receipts and Payments, the said Court upon full and mature
deliberation of the whole matter, was pleased to affirm the former Decree, as
well against the said Earl, as other the Defendents, for paying to the
Respondent the said 24159 l. 8. s. 8. d..

May 1685.
That Decree proving in a great measure ineffectual in Ireland, in regard the
Appellant's Testator, (upon whose credit and ability the Respondent mainly
depended in his whole proceedings) and some other of the Undertakers having no
Estates nor Effects there, but living in England, the now Respondent was forced
to exhibit his English Bill in the Exchequer in England, in Easter-Term 1685,
against the surviving Undertakers, and the Executors and Administrators of
those deceased, for obtaining what was due to him; being at that time about
56000 l. for Principal, Interest, Commission-Money, and Gratuity (and no part
thereof since paid). The Defendants to the said Bill (whereof the now
Appellants were some) used so great delay, that it was four years before the
Cause could be brought to an hearing. And for further delay a Cross bill was
exhibited by the now Appellants, and other the Defendants in the same Term, the
Respondents Cause stood for hearing, with design to put off the hearing of the
Respondent's Cause; however it came to hearing in Easter-Term 1689. And then,
and in Trinity-Term following, it took up eight days; and the Court did decree
the two first Accounts made up by the said Mr. Roberts to be final and
conclusive. And as to the two last Accounts, made up till Midsummer 1677, the
Court considering the impossibility the Respondent lay under, by reason of the
length of time, and the present state of Ireland, and delivery up of his
Vouchers to come to a new Account for the same, did not think fit to adjudge
them conclusive, nor to reject or disallow of the same as stated and closed
Accounts; but in case the Defendants had any material Objections to offer
against the particulars thereof, it was referred to the two Auditors of the
Imprests to inspect and examine the same; and also whether the same were made
up and stated in the method of the two former Accounts, and wherein they did
agree or differ from the same; and decreed the Respondent to be examined upon
Interrogatories, and the Auditors to resort to the Court for Directions, in,
case of difficulty.

That some of the Defendants pretending they could show Reasons why they should
be exempted out of the said Decree, from going to an account before the said
Auditors, there was a Clause in the said Decree, viz. That such of the
Defendants as sought to be exempted from accounting, should bring their Case to
the Barons to consider of; whereupon (amongst others) the now Appellant's,
whose Testator lived till the year 1682, brought in their Case, pretending
their Testator in May, 1674, assigned his Interest in the Undertaking to the
said Sir James Hayes, and pretended that the Respondent had notice thereof; and
that therefore they ought not to be accountable from that time, or at least
longer than Christmas 1675, when the time of the Undertaking ended.

Upon hearing of which, and upon full debate of the matter, the Appellants not
having proved any Notice, (though they had opportunities for that purpose) the
Court did (as is humbly conceived was just) declare their Opinion, and so
ordered that the Appellants should be included in the whole Account, they
having not filed any Interrogatories pursuant to the Decretal Order, though the
Respondent all along offered himself to be examined.

Against which said Orders the said Appellants have appealed to the most
Honorable House of Lords, under pretense as if the Court of Exchequer refused
to hear their Witnesses, viva voce, to prove Notice to the Respondents of their
Testators Assignmment. When as in truth none such were ever produced, and it
was in issue in the Cause, and Roberts, Dashwoods Representative examined upon
Interrogatories, as to Notice of the Assignment, and all opportunities offered
for such proof, if it could have been made out, but it was and is evident that
none was; and Mr. Dashwood wrote several Letters, which were proved by several
Witnesses, and his Representative acted in Ireland as concerned in the
Undertaking, after the time of the pretended Assignment, and during the two
Years after the Undertaking ended, which by their Indenture with His Majesty,
they had to collect their Arrears in, and to make good the Payments grown due
within the five years.

As to passing the Orders complained of, they were done in usual method, and
the Appellants had time and opportunity to incert what of the Answers they
pleased, the draught of the Decretal Order being left with their Clerk in Court
and Soliciter, a Month before it was entered.

And as to the incerting the pretended Allegations of Council into the last
Orders, they being mere Suggestions, and no Memorial taken of them by the
Register, the Order was drawn up without them, as is conceived was both just
and usual. Wherefore, and for that the Appellant's pretenses are some of them
vain and groundless, others utterly untrue, and all of them made only for
delay, to keep the Respondent from recovering so great a Sum of Money justly
due to him, his being kept out of which for above twelve Years last past, has
reduced him and his Family to great straits, and all further delays will tend
to his utter and inevitable Ruin.

It is therefore most humbly prayed, that the Appeal may be dismissed, and the
Respondent left to proceed and Prosecute upon the said Orders; and Decrees.


