A Tender Salutation: OR, LOVING EPISTLE To such, who have a breathing in the
innocent life of my Friends, with whom I walked in the outward observances.
ALSO For my Relations (after the flesh) with all others professing God, and
that have any breathings after the Truth in the inward parts. WHEREIN Something
is declared in the power and light of God, concerning the sure Foundation, and
the House of God, with the inward Glory, Government, Clothing, Feeding,
Non-superiority, and Safety, that is in Gods habitation. WITH A word to the
Weak to establish them, that they faint not at the appearances of outward
Trouble for their Consciences. -- Whereunto is Annexed A Further discovery of
God to my Soul, concerning the spiritual Temple, Tabernacle and Ark of Gods
Testimony, being the Truth, Life, and Substance of the Temple, Tabernacle and
Ark of the Testimony under the Legal day. -- To be read in the light, which
discovers the things that be of God. -- By Jacob Chandler.

That which we have seen and heard (and felt) declare we unto you, that you
might have fellowship with us: and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and
with the Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 1.3. -- If our earthly house of this
Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a house not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. Printed in the Year, M.DC.LXIV.

To all those that love the Lord Jesus in Power and Spirit, of my Friends, with
whom I walked in the outward form: As well my professing Relations (after the
flesh) with all else unto whom these presents shall come, that have any
breathings after the precious Truth and life of God, Grace, Mercy and Peace be
multiplied; the everlasting love, life and truth of God dwell richly in you,
etc.
DEar Friends, it has been often upon me to write unto you of the things
appertaining to the Kingdom of God in Spirit and Truth: But my flesh, with the
reasoning part, withstood upon some considerations that now I Will forbear: But
now after much striving of the Lord God of Power, by his Spirit in my Soul, I
am overcome with the overcomings of the love of God to write unto you: And this
I find springing up in me, to exhort you in tender bowels of love to look at
the power, light, life and truth of God within, in every one of ye in
particular; for Friends, its not the outward profession that will stand you in
stead in the day of Trial, and in the day when all Secrets shall be made
manifest, nor approve you to God, without the power and truth of God within:
And therefore Friends in the bowels of tender compassions (let the evil minded
think never so otherwise) I am moved (as before said) to exhort you to look to
your standing, that you turn inward, and see what foundation you are built on;
for Friends, that which is not built on a good foundation, will come to
nothing, if the foundation be rotten and corrupt, you know whatsoever is built
thereon suffers loss: Therefore let every soul take heed how he build thereon,
for every man's works must be tried. Now if you build on the truth and power of
God, you build on a sure foundation; but if you build on some other foundation,
viz. some outward observation of external performances, outward gifts, parts,
humane wisdom, or the sayings of men, though they may be good men, etc. Be it
known unto you that its a false foundation, its deceivable, and the whole
building will fall, great and lamentable will be the fall thereof: There is but
one foundation for every poor soul that would be saved to build on, and another
foundation can no man lay, than that which is already laid; and that is Jesus
Christ, the power of God, the wisdom and truth of God: This is that ground and
pillar of truth, that saves to the utmost all that come unto it, and build on
it: Therefore Friends mind whether you have built on this foundation; whether
the truth, power and Spirit of God be the thing that you mind, the foundation
that you build on.

How to come to the foundation, and build thereon; and how to know in the light
of God, when the soul has built on the sure foundation.
THere must be a digging deep to build on this foundation, its not so easy as
many Professors think of; thou must dig down into thy innermost parts, into the
secrets of thy soul deep, yea, very deep into humility must thou sink and
resign up freely, and must be content to be nothing in thy will, wisdom,
understanding, etc. Oh soul, before thou can find the foundation, the Rock to
build on, and in the deep thou may find it; for it is hid from the carnal wise
man, by all his wisdom he cannot search it out, and all his notional knowledge
(though he may speak much of the foundation) is too short to fathom it.

And now Friends, if you are built on this foundation, this Rock, then you are
immovable, and cannot be shaken away from the confidence that you have
springing up from hence; and you are sure and steadfast, and you walk in the
pure fear of the Lord; and you are of tender bowels, and full of compassion to
all the Lords little ones; and you are of a meek spirit, and lowly in heart;
and you are of tender compassion to all the Creation of God; you are weak with
the weak, and bear a dear sympathy with the afflicted precious sons and
daughters of Sion (let them be under what name and notion soever) if thou see
they are built on the power, life and truth of God, by which they breath after
the everlasting well-springs of life, the fountain of eternal love; thou have a
principle in thee, if thou art upon the sure foundation, that is stirred up
with an endearednesse to such a breathing soul after the pure life of God; for
my Friends, if we have built on a good foundation, then it is certain we have a
good building; if we have a good Root, we have a good Tree; and if a good Tree,
there must be good fruit: Now Friends, by this you may come to know whether you
are built upon the power, life, and truth of God, or what foundation you are
built on. Let me lay it farther before you.

NOW if we have a good foundation, we have a good building, a good house, and
there is good order and government in this house, and good diet, good meat and
drink, and choice clothing, and blessed safety, and no Lordly or Majestic
superiority over one another in this house or family, that is built on the
power and life of God, with other good things.

Now that soul that has built upon Christ the truth, and power of God, has a
good building, a good house, and its none other but the house of God, the
Temple of God, and God has said I Will dwell with you, and walk in you, and be
your God etc. And this every Saint is in particular, the habitation of God
through the Spirit; this house is erected by the finger and power of Jehovah
Tzebaot, the Lord of Host.

The inward pure Government and shining glory, and requirings in the house or
habitation of God in the Spirit.
AND farther Friends, this house of God has good government, for its the Lord
Jesus that rules and governs in this house, and no other has right to govern
but himself, for its his own, and has bought it, and purchased it, not with
corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with incorruptible, even with his
own precious blood. Friends, when Christ is born in the soul of any, whether
Jew or Gentile, bond or free, the government is put upon his shoulder, and to
that end is this Son given, and the Child born, viz. that the government may be
upon his shoulder, that he might rule and govern, and reign in the soul, in his
own house, and he will reign in righreousnesse, and governs with pure Laws of
light and freedom, not with Laws of darkness and bondage: The pure and
everlasting God lays not hard service upon his children and servants, he
imposes no heavy task upon his family, but what is in the pure freedom of the
Spirit; his requirings are according to the growth of his children and
servants, were it not, there would be disorder instead of order; but no, no, my
Friends, there is nothing but pure order in the house of God. The everblessed
God rules, governs, and orders all in pure love, pure light, pure fear (taught
by himself, and not by the precepts of men) pure righteousness, pure truth,
and all inward: Now to see a Saint walk, and acting without, from these pure
Laws of God within, oh what a great shine and glory does it cast upon all it
does! oh then! if so great a shine without, how great is that glory within? it
being all glorious! it being that more excellent glory! it being the
brightness of the Fathers glory. Oh Friends, my soul admires this glory!

Friends, sink down from all your selfnesse and somethingnesse, and come into
this most excellent glory, and lie with my soul still from self-acting before
this glorious God, that this glory may pass besore us, i. e. that it might
more and more manifest its self unto us, that we may come to be transformed
from glory to glory by the pure Spirit of the living God: Now Friends, to see
an house in such an order, under such a government, is to see it in a comely
order, to see it all fait, and to have no spot in it.

Of the heavenly bread and waters of life that is provided, eat and drank of,
in the family and house of God, in the Spirit of the living God.
THere is not only Rule in this house, but there is plentiful spiritual
provision made for the whole family of God, and duly administered by the hand of
living power and virtue, whereby it gives living spiritual nourishment for
growth, to increase with the increase of God; the eternal pure God gives it the
bread of life, and the waters of life to eat of, and to drink of, and the soul
being in a living state, eats and drinks thereof, and is refreshed, and cries
out evermore, Father give me of this bread of life, and these waters of life.
Oh my soul, though the e^ternal grace of God have an internal, or inward cast
hereof, and it cries and breaths in the pure fear and Spirit of God after more;
and I find its not that I might eat and drink hereof alone, but that all might
come in the fear of the living God to eat and drink hereof also with my soul,
that we might rejoice together in the Spirit, and that we might sing a Hymn and
spiritual Song, singing and making melody in out hearts to the living and pure
fountain of life, giving pure and spiritual thanks always to God, in the name,
i. e. power and Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Oh Friends, every soul that is surely fixed on this foundation of God, which
always stands sure, have a measure of this heavenly food, viz. of this bread
of life, and waters of life, dealt forth unto him according to his growth and
appetite that his soul has: Now we ought, and its our duty to be thankful
with, or for such a measure that we have, and to eat and drink to the glory of
God. Friends, if it hold true in the outward, much more for the inward: But
Friends, enlarge your appetite, open your mouth wide, and the Lord will fill
it. Labor for a greater hunger and thirst after this true bread and water of
life, and you shall be filled, satisfied, and refreshed. Oh Friends, thirst
not, hunger not so much after the outward observance, which is a spending your
money for that which is not bread, and your labor for that which satisfies
not, and your strength and time for that which perishes: But labor to feed
more of this true bread that comes down from God out of heaven, the which
whosoever eats of is blessed; and to drink of those waters that runs by the
Throne of God, whose streams make glad the heart of the City, the habitation,
the house of God; here Friends, does my soul come to experience what is meant
by eating of the fruit of the Tree of life that John declared of, Rev. 11.7.

And here I come to understand, know, feel, and to eat of the hidden Manna,
that is spoke of in Rev. 11.17. its Manna that is hid from the wise and prudent
of this world, but revealed to them that fear, and love the pure God in Spirit
and truth, and such eats thereof to their souls nourishing and refreshing.

Here my soul comes truly to eat of the flesh, and to drink of the blood of the
Lord Jesus, and so comes to have life in it, for this is meat (or nourishment)
indeed, and this is drink, (or refreshment) indeed: I may eat long enough of
the elementary things, before my soul is nourished and refreshed in the eternal
life; but if my soul eats and drinks of this spiritual food, then my soul comes
to have life and refreshment, as my soul knows right well through the Spirit.
Now in eating and drinking of the true bread, and water of life, we come to
have communion with the body, and with the blood of Christ; for this communion
is in the Spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is of God, and not of
men; for men are carnal, and this is spiritual: But this I know will seem
strange to a formal person, but let it, its true and faithful; yea, and our
communion as Saints is in the Spirit, in eating this spiritual bread and wine
of the Kingdom of God, and not in the outward visible elementary things; in the
pure Spirit, is our pure communion; and our living communion in, and by the
living Spirit.

Here I come to know what it is to eat of the Supper of the Lord, amd to drink
of the new Wine in the Fathers Kingdom. Now Friends I am not a judging of any
of you, neither a dissuading you (though the evil mind in some, may think I do
insinuate to draw) from the use of the Elements, but do as the Lord shall
direct you, and as you see him going before you in all you do, and moving you
after, and leave nothing undone that you are really persuaded in your
Consciences to be your duty, lest you get a wound to your soul, and the Lord
should say, Who has required this of you? etc. But know from the Lord God,
your life lies not here, viz. in these outward observations, though never so
strictly observed, but in God; and the communion of Saints lies not here, but
in Spirit, truth and power, and therefore be not fierce against your Brethren
that are not of your mind or persuasion in the outward observation.

Friends, turn in, and stand still from your own ways, and commune with your
hearts, and make enquiry, Do I eat of this bread of life, and drink of those
pure springs of refreshment? Does the Lord lead me into his green and fresh
pastures, and make me to lie down, and repose my soul in eternal kindness: And
do I receive my refreshing from the pure, and clear crystal fountain of living
waters? Or do I take up in the outward observances, and less mind this inward
feeding, this inward drinking of the bread and waters of life? Oh Friends, this
thing is to be well minded and weighed, in the truth and equity of God.

Now there be many a poor soul more a minding the outward observances, than the
inward virtue and power of the living God; as it was in days of old, so it is
now, one cries in this observation, Lo, here is Christ, and others in that
observation, Lo, there is Christ, etc. Every persuasion cries up their own, and
says, Come amongst us, Christ is here, in the observing of this order, and
others in that order, and so are divided amongst themselves, and are in
confusion, in Babylon, and knows not where Christ is; but what says the
Scripture, Believe them not, go not forth after them. Now Friends, Christ is
nigh thee in thy heart, as Paul did witness, The righteousness that is of
fatth, says on this wise, Who shall ascond to heaven, to fetch Christ down? or
who shall descend, to fetch Christ up; but what says it, Christ is nigh then
in thy heart, Romans 10.6, 7, 8.

Therefore Friends look not so much at the outward observation for Christ, if
that be it, thou art in good earnest desirous to have, as to a looking in for
Christ, for Christ, as before said, is within, he is nigh in thy heart. Christ
is the pearl of price, that great treasure, that is hid in the field of every
man's heart, and therefore Friends stand still, from thy own words, works,
thoughts, and carnal reasonings of the fleshly wise part, and hearken to the
voice of Christ in thy own particular, which cannot be heard, but in a still,
quiet state of the soul, freely resigned up to God, to be no more any thing in
it self, but that God might be all in all, and above all to its soul: And as to
the outward (which man, flesh and carnal wisdom make such a stir about) they
walk in as they have freedom, and seeing the Lord going before them in it; and
if any thing outward be done otherwise, its but fleshly labor, which profits
not.

Oh but how many poor hearts is there that thinks God cannot be enjoyed truly,
and have communion with truly, but it must be enjoyed and had in such a way, in
such a form, which I know is the language of men in different forms, ways, or
persuasions, every one binding as it were, and limiting the holy God to their
persuasion, but Friends, the Lord is free to work where he please, and when he
please, and on whom he please; and this I have heard some say, but will not
stand unto it, but bind up the Lord in his workings (as much as they can) and
calls all into question, that the soul injoyes of God, if it come not in at
their door (though it do come in at the door of the sheepfold) as I have had
experience of, and do know of what I speak (and much more than this also.)

But Friends, the Kingdom of heaven manifests its self not in this, or that
observation, but in righteousness, in power, Spirit and truth (and this will
be owned by many in words, but denied in works, and so manifest that they are
in Babylon, in confusion) its he in what Narion soever, whether Jew or Gentile,
bond or free, one or the other, that fears the Lord, and works righteousness,
and that has all his works within wrought in and by God within, is excepted of
him; its not he that observes observations without, but he that stands in the
power, Spirit, and truth of God within that is accepted, its not thus much
outward observance, but this inward obedience.

That soul that is convinced of this, is near the Kingdom, near the possession;
now stand but still from acting in thy will, and sink down into God, and settle
upon the foundation, and resign up all to the Lord, and stand to his order, and
cleave to truth with a purpose of heart, and a little while ( viz. the Lords
time) he that shall come, will come, and bring thee into the Kingdom, into the
possession wherein thou shale enjoy all as before said, and much more
abundantly than I can speak of; for I have but a stammering tongue in these
matters, yet what the eternal God has freely given to me to experience; and to
spring up in me freely declare I unto you my dear Friends all unto whom this is
writ, that you might all eat hereof, and drink hereof, i. e. of that which this
points unto, and so come to a higher growth in the birth of God, though I may
be traduced, calumniated, and persecuted one way or other, either in secret
smilings or open reproaches by some or other; for I see in the light of God,
and through the revelation of the Spirit, that the evil thing in some cannot
bear, that the power, life, and truth of God should clearly shine (though in
words they may speak otherwise) that they might go undiscovered, but may seek
to destroy this holy Child Jesus, the birth of God, the shinings forth of the
light of God, by putting upon it some false gloss, as delusion, false light,
heresy, blasphemy, etc. as they did by Christ himself, and the servants of
God in days past, and so opposing of the seed of God, and so as Pharaoh, will
labor to deal subtly, that it spread no further; but I shall leave it, and
my self to the Lord, and wait on him, as being given up to his will, not
fearing what man can do or say, knowing that I am a discharging my duty and
conscience herein.

Of the inward adorning, and beautifying of Gods House.
FUrther Friends, the Lord my God will cloth you all with rich and soft
clothing, for all his Family is arrayed with soft Raiment: Oh every one that
will be a Daughter of this King (Jehovah Tzebaot) the Lord of Host shall be
all glorious within, and shall be brought into the Palace of the King, and the
King shall greatly delight in her beauty, for he is the Lord her God, and she
must worship him, and that in Spirit and in truth: I say, my Friends, God shall
cloth, and has in a measure clothed all his children with soft and fine
Raiment: Are not they that wear soft Raiment in Kings houses? yea, (my Friends)
they are. Now, this soft Raiment I declare of, is the inward righteousness of
the Lord Jesus, which is the righteousness of all Gods Saints; this is the
clothing of our house from heaven that every Saint groans for, according to
the measure of working; here is the putting on the Lord Jesus in Spirit, power
and truth; and this is that righteousness that justifies the soul to God, and
is made acceptable to God, and to the Lamb. Friends, this Raiment I say is soft
Raiment, its meek, still and quiet, it is all in the Spirit, which Raiment, in
the sight of God, is of great price, of great value, of great esteem. Oh
Friends! There be many that have a covering, but not of my Spirit, says the
Lord. They have, I say, a covering, something in imitation of this I declare
of; but its too narrow then that the soul can wrap its self in it, so that its
nakedness is seen by a spiritual discerning: And therefore Friends all take
heed, lest you cover with such a covering, insomuch that your shame appears. I
know there are some such abroad, but they must stand or fall to their own
Master, for every man's works must be tried, and that by fire, viz. the fire of
the pure living God, and if his works have not been wrought in God, and sprung
up from the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets (whose foundation was
Christ Jesus, the chief Corner stone that bore up all their building, and from
which they restified that their works was wrought in God, and had it not) it
must suffer loss.

Some think to shrowed themselves under such a form, and such a form, and such
an observation outwardly; but its not the form, or observation outwardly, that
can hide any poor soul from the wrath of God, and of the Lamb, the which every
soul is exposed to, let them be shrouded where they will; its nothing but this
covering, to wit, the inward righteousness of God, and Christ investing the
soul, that hides from the wrath of the Lamb. This soft Raiment I declare unto
you, is that Raiment with which the Bride, the Lambs wife makes her self ready
withal, and is so dressed therewith as a Bride is for her husband, in the
choice embraces of everlasting kindness; and this Raiment every foul must have
on to come to the Marriage-supper withal, else its an unwelcome guest; though
such as have it not on them, may present themselves amongst the sons and
daughters of God, yet when the searcher of hearts, the everlasting God, shall
make inquisition, then they shall be discovered to be but intruders, and though
they held the form, they did not hold the head, by which all the members by
joints and bands are knit together, etc. And though they had the semblance, the
vizard, the show of holiness, yet they denied the power, the inward life of
purity and righteousness, and built on their form. The Lord says to such,
what have thou to do to take my Name into thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be
reformed; for he that names the Name of the Lord, must depart from iniquity;
in vain is it that thou namest the Name of the Lord, in vain is the multitude
of thy services, the Lord will say, and does now say, Who has required this at
your hands? in vain is your solemn Assemblies, your Sabbaths, your Fastings,
Thanksgivings, Preaching, Praying, Supper, Baptism, Alms, Conference, with a
multitude more, they are all an abomination to the Lord in the outward
observation, because thou have not on this wedding garment, this inward pure
righteousness of the Lamb; and therefore they are an abomination, oh soul,
because performed, and externally carried on, out of the life, acted and
carried on by the same spirit that thou sinnest with; sure! this is a loathing
to the pure, holy God of life, who rejoices in truth in the inward parts from
whence all without must spring; and not to take up an imitation from the
Apostles practice, and to do such works as thou gatherest from the Scriptures
(the writings of those holy men) out of that life that moved them to it, and
many things else, which, oh soul! thou art ready to despise; but do thou wait
upon the Lord for the more clearer breaking in of his light, and movings of his
life, in thy own soul, and abide in his counsel, and abide his reproof, in thy
soul, and be still, look not forth, but mind thy watch within, least the enemy
of thy soul get an advantage against thee, and cleave to his power which thou
shall feel spring up (whereby thou shall be able to overcome sin, hell, death,
wrath, self condemnation, the world, and all evil, and thou shall mount up in
the life of God, and here shall thou be cleathed with his right ousnesse, and
hear his voice, and obey his Commandments in thy own particular, whose Commands
are not grievous [to the Spirit] but joyous, so thou shall have the light of
life in thy own heart, as the Apostles and servants of God had before the
Apostasy, which was by them spoke of, 2 Thessalonians. 2. the which came upon the
world in some few years after the Apostles, but now in these latter days the
light is dawned, and the Lord has visited some with his tender mercies; the
dayspring from on high has visited some, and God is a renewing of that
defaced image that Adam had in innocercy, and that the Apostles had, by which
they acted, and was led and guided into the ways of purity and righteousness,
doing what they did without, as they had a command from this innocent life in
themselves, with singleness of heart, and great joy, blessing, praising,
magnifying the Lord God of power and purity; and this is that life that my soul
in a measure feels, and has communion with.

And my soul breaths to the everlasting pure life, that thou may have the
same holy, pure, and innocent life, that the Apostles and Servants of God had,
and now some in a measure have, in which life thou shall learn what is the
living sense of the Scriptures, and Writings of holy men, and of those
Ordinances that the Apostles in their days was by the life commanded to do, the
which thou may also do, or forbear, as the same life commands thee; though
this the carnal and fleshly reason cannot bear, but I may not speak to please
that, the Lord God everlasting destroy, cut up, and consume carnal wisdom,
fleshly reason, and fleshly will, by thy Almighty power, that they might never
more hinder and deface thy pure, holy, glorious Image, and breakings forth of
thy innocent breath, and of the pure and holy openings of thy indeared and
tender love unto it.

And Friends, in this life you shall be clothed with this pure, fine white
linen, John declared of, which is clean and white, the which the Bride, the
Lambs wife, is to bedeck her self with for the Marriage with the Lamb; and
therefore if any soul-pretends a Marriage with the Lamb, and have not this fine
white linen, which is the righteousness of the Saints, he or them shall be
dealt severely with; he shall be taken by the Lord, and bound, cast out, and
his portion appointed with the Hypocrite, where shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth for ever: Such shall be for ever banished from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power, to be punished with everlasting
destruction, because they obeyed not the Lord, who commanded them to put on
this garment, this righteousness, which is the Lord Jesus in Spirit and truth;
and because they obeyed not, therefore sudden destruction shall overtake them.

Therefore Friends all, be exhorted in the pure fear and dread of the Almighty
God, to turn [in] and make inquiry into this pure, spotless, matchless, fine
white-linnen, which is the righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, and of the
Saints; and you may come to know it by its effects, for as it has been already
declared, that it is soft Raiment, so it is, it is soft, gentle, and quiet where
it is, and it fills the soul with peace, passing the carnal understanding; the
work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness,
quietness and assurance for ever: And this habitation of God where this soft
clothing is to be felt, is a peaceable habitation, there is sure dwellings,
and quiet resting places. And Friends, this ornament beautifies the soul in the
sight of God, because its the comeliness of God, the beauty of God that is
upon it; this soul worships God in the beauties of holiness, in the Spirit of
power upon the Mountain of righteousness.

And Friends, this garment does not make the soul proud, but humbles; though
its glorious apparel, yet it does not puff up, but lays the soul low, it
sinks the soul deep into humility, and brings the soul into a free resignation
to God: This soul thinks not scorn to hear the voice of the Lord out of the
mouth of a Babe and Suckling, but is content, yea, joys in the Spirit of the
Lord, to see the life move in a despised instrument by the world and carnal
wisdom.

But those that have covered, but not of the Spirit of the Lord, not of this
righteousness, of this pure garment, they are proud, despisers of them that
are good, fierce and cruel to the Saints, betrayers of the Saints, and of one
another, as their self-interest lies, yet build upon a form of godliness, but
denying the power thereof, and will own little in reality, but what is in their
form and way. Friends, be still, and consider these things, and examine your
hearts, Know you not that this is set. And further Friends, I find from this
inward adorning and beautifying my soul to God, and to the Lamb, a garment of
praise spring up in me, which leads me forth in the pure fear of the Lord, to
praise, magnify, and adore the pure living God; and here I come to experience
and to feel, what it is to sing a Hymn, or spiritual Song unto the Lord God of
life, and unto the Lamb that sits upon the Throne, singing praise and
hallelujah to the Lord God Omnipotent, because he has taken to himself his
great Rule and Reign, singing with grace in my heart, which heretofore I had
heard the sound of (and many other things) the which now my soul feels the
living virtue, power and spirit of: Oh Friends! labor to feel the living power
of this, and of these things in your own souls, and then we shall rejoice
together, and sing the Song of the Lamb, which none can sing, but those that
are redeemed from the earth. i. e. from the earthly will, wisdom and practice;
for the carnal part has nothing to do herein, but the Spirit only.

The precious Laws of Government in Gods House, and the choice Anointings and
Teachings by the Spirit.
AND further Friends, the house, the habitation of God through the Spirit (that
I declare of) has precious Laws of Government and Rule in it, which before was
hinted at, I am made willing in the power of God to speak a little further of
it: The Laws of Gods house are spiritual, as the house is in the Spirit; so are
the Laws, its called the Law of the Spirit of life, and this same Law ruled and
governed in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.2. and so in a measure in all the sons and
daughters of God. This is the Law of the new Covenant, that Law that comes from
God out of Sion; this Law is not in the letter, but in the Spirit; the letter
is (...) the Law is within: As God said, I Will put my Laws in your mind, and
write them in your hearts, and they shall not teach every man his neighbor,
saying, Know the Lord for all (in whose heart this Law shall be made manifest)
shall know me from the least, to the greatest. Every one in particular as they
come to have the seed of God, the Lamb of God, the life of God to rise in them,
they come to experience and feel this Law in the Spirit and life, teaching,
directing, counselling, and guiding into all truth, and as every particular
comes to obey, they come to have peace with God, they shall be all taught of
the Lord, and great shall be their peace. This peace passes all understanding,
and its such peace that none can speak but the eternal God, nor can give but
himself, who is the God of peace, God blessed for ever. And therefore Friends,
every one of you turn in, and look for the Law in your hearts, in your minds,
to be guided by it; and as you come to see it, and to be taught by it, obey it,
and give up your minds to be guided by it, which will guide from sin, Iniquity
and transgression; from the world, the pride of it, the fashions of it, the
lust of it, and it will guide you into righteousness, into life and peace with
the eternal God. Friends, think not this manner of speech strange and
contemptible, I know, in the spiritual knowing part, whereof I do affirm, and
have had an inward feeling abundantly whereof I declare. Spend not all your
precious time in the Law of the letter, written on paper with pen and ink,
without the Law in the Spirit, written in your hearts by the Spirit of the
living God. Oh Friends! what if you should never so much study the letter,
search the letter, improve in the notions of the letter, etc. If you are for
all this strangers to that Spirit that gave forth the letter at first, and unto
which the letter points and directs to, that your life may not stand in a
seeming outward conformity to the letter without, but that your life may stand
and abide in the Spirit within: This is that Law of [life] that is in the
habitation of God, that is pure and perfect converting the soul. inlightning
the understanding, whereby we may come to know him that is true, even Christ
Jesus, the true God and eternal life. Friends, this Law that every particular
soul (that is become Gods house) is guided by, is not that Law from Mount
Sinai, but from Mount Sion: Not from Mount Horeb, on which Moses received the
Law of the Ten Commandments, and writ it on Tables of stone, but the Law of the
Spirit of the living God, written upon the Tables of our hearts; neither is it
that Law written by pen and ink without, but that written by the Spirit of the
living God within, and that must needs be a living Law, that a living Spirit
writes.

FRiends, look in for this living Law of the Spirit of life, for every one of
ye have a measure thereof in your selves, now see that you be guided by it, and
take not up in the outward thing, but press through, and come to the Spirit
and life, that your standing (in this day) may be sure and unshaken, by all the
powers of the evil One; that your joy may so abound, springing from the true
foundation, as that persecution, tribulation, imprisonment, banishment, nor
death it self, may be able to take that Crown from you, nor in the least may
amaze, amuse, or distract you from pure joy of the Lord, and from the obeying
of the pure movings of the life in your souls.

My soul knows something of the inward feeling of this joy, but its
unspeakable, yet glorious; and as my soul comes to obey the inward teachings of
the pure eternal God, so I come to experience, to feel the flowing in, and
shedding abroad of this blessed peace of God in my heart; that Prisons,
Banishment, Tribulation and Disiresse is even a light thing, through the
abundance of love that my soul has to God (which is freely given unto me)
because then I can believe that my defense is the munition of Rocks, and that
my bread shall be given me, and that my waters shall be sure.

Oh Friends! do ye all with my soul stand in the counsel of the everlasting
God, and resign up freely to the Lord, body, soul, spirit, mind, and all things
else, for he is faithful and able, yea, will keep that which is committed and
resigned up freely unto himself, who is El-shaddai the strong and mighty God,
and none shall be able to pull that out of his hands that is freely given and
resigned to him according to his requiring. You have been often a speaking
after this manner, but come to the life, to the truth, and stand in the power
of it, the which you will never be able to do, unless every one in particular
abide in the counsel of the Lord, and hearken to his voice, and hear his living
Word which is nigh, viz. in the heart of every particular, which teaches every
one to deny himself, viz. his self-will, self-wisdom, self-righteousnesse and
understanding, and all that is self; to be debased, laid low, thrown to the
dust, and become nothing, and what God would have him; of a rich man, rich in
notions, in gifts, parts, and outward services out of the life (as Paul before
be was converted) to become poor in spirit; of a strong man, to be made weak;
of a proud man, to become humble, than a little child may lead him; of a
notional one, to be made ignorant, etc. That now every particular may be made
new again, a living Temple and habitation of God to dwell in, and to reach them
out of his Law as they are able to receive it from him; and as you come to be
taught of the Lord, and to obey his teachings which are pure, so you shall come
to be the blessed of the Lord, and the Word of the Lord shall dwell richly in
you, and you shall become strong in the power and Spirit of the Lord; the
brother of low degree shall be exalted, as he abides in the anointings, and the
ignorant that has let go his knowledge in the knowing comprehension, shall be
enlightened; and as he waits upon the Lord, and hearkens to his teachings
within, by the Law of the Spirit of life writ by the Spirit of the living God
in his heart, he (I say) shall come to a good understanding in the mysteries of
the Kingdom of God, and shall know the doctrine that is of God, for who teaches
to profit like him? Though others that feeds upon the Tree of knowledge, and
comprehends much in the knowing part, shall slight it, and call it strange
doctrine, delusion, heresy, etc. But why is it? because they feed not on the
Tree of life, but on the Tree of knowledge, which apart and separate from the
Tree of life, is death, destruction, and poison to the soul.

No Lordly and Majestical Superiority in Gods house.
AGain, There is no Superiority in the Family of God, the children of God are
all equal, there is none allowed by the Father to be one above the other, to
rule it, and Lord it over his Brothers Conscience, as we see in the world by
men that would fain be reputed something, as to the matters of holiness and
fear of the Lord, when its not the fear of the Lord that puts them on to assume
and arrogate to themselves a power over their Brothers Conscience, but its the
flesh, the Devil, and carnal wisdom that puts them upon it: Too much of this
spirit was in the Disciples of old, but Christ rebuked them for it. The true
children in the Family of God they serve one another, not usurp over one
another; its true God may and does, discover his secrets and mysteries of the
Kingdom, more to some, than to others of his children; not that they should
lift up themselves, above their Fellow-brethren, but that they should submit to
the Brother of low degree, and strengthen the weak hands, and feeble knees, and
consolate the discomforted, with the overflowings of that Cup of blessing that
God has filled to him.

But, ah, how does proud man! that has got into the form of godliness, Lord it
over them that he dreams are under him, and so demonstrate they have an
Antichristian spirit. Oh Friends! there is a quiet, peaceable, loving carriage
in the children of God one toward the other, according to the anointing
received; there is love not only in, word, but in deed, there is a sweet
condescending according to the requirings of God one to the other, a holy
bearing and forbearing in this Family; there is not a shoving with the shoulder,
and a pushing one at the other, for that is of the flesh, but a submitting the
shoulder to bear each others burden they lay out for each others good, of what
the eternal God has laid into their hearts, and all this according to his
working in them, who works freely, that all might be strengthened and comforted;
so that here is not among the children of God Superiority one over another, but
all equally alike the children of God, and Brethren one of another.

And certain I am, that according to the measure of Gods indwelling in the pure
light of life in the soul, so, the haughtiness of man is crucified, and laid
low; for haughtiness and lordlinesse of spirit is from the flesh and beneath:
But as the soul receives of the Spirit of light and life, and obeyes its
teachings and drawings, it shall find it drawing him from this spirit of
haughtiness and lordlinesse, into a humble and low frame, that it can
(standing in the power of such drawings) condescend to wash his Brethrens feet,
as Christ did, and become in the power of this so little and low, that a little
Child may lead him (to wit) Christ the Babe of righteousness, the holy One of
God; for Friends, the more the soul is anointed with the consecrating oil, i.
e. the Spirit of God, the more humble that soul is, and willing to instruct his
poor and weak Brother, what God has done for his soul in order for his weak
Brothers perseverance in the truth; such a soul under the anointing of God, is
far from a Lordly and Majestical spirit: This is that which God destroys in
the day of his power, and glorious appearings of his life in a soul; In that
day the lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the hanghtinesse of men shall
be bowed down, and the Lord alone shall be exaleed.

AND now my dear Friends, Turn in, and see what you can experience in your own
particulars, that your rejoicing may be in your selves, and not in another; and
think not this strange, that you are pressed through such a weak instrument as
I am, to turn in, and to see if these things are wrought by the eternal Spirit,
and that you have your teachings from the Spirit within.

Consider Friends, the soul that is to be saved is within, and Christ the light
is within; he says, I am meek and low in heart: And Christ in you the hope of
glory: And know you not that Christ is in you, etc. And the Law of the Spirit
of life, by which every particular is taught (though every particular does not
learn) holiness, righteousness, and the true fear of the Lord, etc. is said
to be within: I Will put my Law in your minds, and write it in your hearts, etc.
And God himself is within, as the Apostle declaved, I will dwell in you, and
walk in you, and you shall be my people, and I will be your God. Now if all
this is within, then turn in and examine your selves, what of the teachings,
what of the life, of the power and Spirit; what of the flowings forth of the
living virtues of the eternal Fountain of righteousness do I feel spring up in
me, that I, and thou, oh soul, may rejoice in our own portion, and not in
another, and each of us come to sit down under our own Vine in particular, and
eat of the sweet fruit hereof, none making afraid, says my soul: This Vine to
be Christ, and the Father to be the Husbandman, that we may rejoice together as
the children of one Father, all drinking into that one Rock, and baptized into
one Spirit, and bound up together in the bundle of one life; and that our
union, and communion, may stand in the life, Spirit and power, and not in forms
and outward observances, says my soul.

A brief discovery of the entrance into this house and habitation of God.
AND Friends, There is no entering into this house of God but by great travel
and pains; Thou must travel out of Egypt through the loathsome Wilderneste, to
enter into Canaan; Thou must, oh soul, experience the bond of thy iniquities to
be broken; Thou must know a day of trouble, of misery, a day of burning, before
thou can advance this Church that is in God; I say, Thou must know the
terrors of the Lord, as my soul has known by reason of sin; a day of shaking
the foundations of the earth, and making it to tremble; a feeling the Arrows of
the Almighty God stick in thy soul, and great disquietnesse within thy borders,
because sin is in thy Tabernacle, thou must feel his indignation, as my soul
has (according to thy measure) and it is good to bear it, because of sin,
until he raise thee up, and comfort thy soul, as sin is purged out.

Wait upon the Lord, and suffer the wrath of God to be revealed from heaven
against thy unrighteousness, and in due time thou shall feel a power-springing
up from that light which first discovered to thee thy sin, whereby thou shall
have sin cast out, but not all at once, but as thou waitest here, and obevest,
so thou shall feel thy sin, and thy old nature, and all self destroyed and
crucified, so thou shall experience a crucifying with Christ, that thou may
live with him a pure, innocent and spotless life; and as thy sin and old
nature, etc. is destroyed, and dies, so shall Christ the light of life live in
thee, and so as thou obeyest this light of life which is risen to destroy thy
death, thou shall come to live in the pure life, and have it in your selves,
and so, as he who is this light of life, to wit, Christ Jesus, lives in you,
you shall live also in him, and so come to experience what it is to dwell in
the house of God, and to be a member of the true Church that is in God, and to
experience all, and much more, as already declared.

And now Friends, unto the Lord I commit you and give up to be taught, governed
and guided by his pure Law of righteou snesse, the Law of the Spirit of life,
which is the Law written in the heart, which Law is pure, and consents not to
sin, but reproves it, and manifests it, and holds out a power to mortify it,
the which every soul that waits on the Lord, and stands in his counsel, shall
feel spring up, to cast out the son of the bondwoman, for it shall not be heir
with the son of the freewoman, i. e. with Christ, the life, and seed of God.

And that you might be clothed with the garment of light and salvation, and
with zeal and holy courage for the Lord, as with a Cloak; and that you might
come to praise and adore the living God of endless life; and that you might be
fed upon the Mountain of Gods holiness with the Feast that God has prepared, a
Feast of fat things, of Wines well refined; and that he might destroy by the
appearance of his life, the vail that is upon you, that you might come forth
from darkness, and walk more in the light of life.

A word to the Weak, to establish and direct them, that they faint not, at the
sight of the outward Adversary in their Meetings.
AND Friends, There is a desire risen in me, that every one of you in
particular, may come so to be established on that sure foundation, the
everlasting Rock of Ages, that you may not be so soon shaken away (many of you)
from the confidence that you seem to have for God and Truth, as you are
persuaded: I speak not this to reproach you, but in the power of God to
establish you: Friends, your (...) going forth out of the power of God, into
the flesh, is it that makes you faint in the day of adversity, and in the face
of your enemy.

Therefore Friends, if you would be valiant for the truth, mind the life of God
in your souls, reside and dwell in it, and give up all unto it; fix your mind
steady upon it, and stay thereon; and as thou comes to this (O soul) thou shall
be kept in peace and quiet, off from the trouble and disquiet that the flesh
raises up; for God will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is staid upon him.

Friends, it ill becomes those that fears the Lord, to be of such a fearful,
frightful spirit, as I have observed there is sometimes in your Meetings,
though it be but of suspicion of an invasion by the enemy without: Friends, the
desire in my soul is, that you would mind the life, the spirit in you, and be
still and quiet in the patience of the life and Lamb of God, according to the
measure in you; and as you mind this, and dwell in this, your fears and terrors
of the flesh will abate, and your courage advance; for the life of the pure God
crucifies the flesh, which leads to death.

The Spirit of God is a Spirit of love, and of a sound mind, it casts out such
fear, and it is not a Spirit of slavish fear, so that (my Friends) if you be
the sons and daughters of God, why then you are led by the Spirit, and not by
the flesh, which is fearful, sinful, etc. And if you have the Spirit, and live
in the Spirit, why then it has mortified the deeds of the flesh, which are
evil, etc. See Romans 8.5. to the 17. verse. They which are after the flesh, do
mind the things of the flesh; and they that are after the Spirit, the things of
the Spirit. Slavish fear and cowardice for truth is of the flesh, and to be
fleshly and carnally minded is death to the soul; but to be spiritually minded
is life.

Oh Friends, it has been a trouble to my spirit sometimes to see the
distraction, perturbation and trouble that many have entered into in their
Meetings at a shallow, etc. Oh Friends, labor to crucify this old man with his
fleshly meanbers and branches that springs forth into the visible life, and
what you have in the invisible life, watch to have it strengthened, and live in
the measure you have attained of this invisible or inward life in your own
particulars.

And if any further of the coming in of the visible enemy be into your Meetings
(in the discharging what you are persuaded to be your duty) which is too
probable and likely;) be still and quiet in your selves, sweetly composed, with
your mind fixed upon God, enjoying communion in the life and Spirit of God,
according to your particular measure, keeping steady in the beholdings of the
life, and be in the serious pursuit of it, and do not suffer your thoughts and
your minds to straggle in the least, no not for a moment, though the enemy
provoke you; be diligent in the watch, that the enemy of your soul, the
invisible enemy break not in to overthrow your peace and communion with God,
and destroy your pursuit in the life, and so your peace being lost, your watch
down, and the enemy broke in, then you enter into the flesh in the troubles,
fears, tempests and disquiets which the life is freed from, etc. and so will be
ready to say any thing, do any thing, so that you might be acquitted of the
enemy without, and released of a Prison and banishment for thy body, which
affrights many poor hearts, who considers not the Prison, the banishment, and
darkness and trouble that their souls is in, in the want of the light, life,
Spirit, peace and communion with God.

Oh Friends, I say unto you all watch! watch the life, and go not from upon any
terms; be surely built on the sure foundation, and you shall be able to say in
the same life (according to thy measure) as David, I am fixed, I am fixed, O
God I am fixed: O happy state! here is the only safety.

And now unto the Lord (once more) I commit you, that every one of you may so
come to be established on that sure foundation the everlasting Rock of Ages,
and build so upon the power and life of God, that Prisons, Fines, Persecutions,
the gates of hell, even death it self may not prevail against you, non affright
you. Amen.

Some further discovery of Gods house or habitation through the Spirit; And,
according to my measure, declaring of the spiritual Temple or Tabernacle, and
Ark of the Testimony; the Truth, Life and Substance of the Temple or
Tabernacle, and Ark of the Testimony under the Legal dispensation, to be read
in the light, which manifesls the things that are of God.
FRiends, The house and habitation of God, is called the Temple or Tabernacle
of God where God dwells, walks, moves, etc. and this was showed by the Temple
under the Law, in which Temple or Tabernacle, God was graciously present with
his people in that day, but now dwells no longer in Temples made with hands,
but in his people and children, who are the Temple and hat itation of God
through the Spirit. Though, my Friends, some do imagine, that the Legal Temple
or Tabernacle is a figure holding forth to us the outward Ordinances, viz.
Preaching, Praying, Supper, Water, Baptism, etc. And some calls this a new
Iemple state (and it is to be feared there do abide, and look no further (or
very little) higher than just to draw from it the outward observation) but God
has revealed it otherwise to me, and a necessity is laid upon me, being called
to it, not to deny it. In order to your understanding of this, Consider,

I. That in the Legal Temple was the Ark of the Testament, and this was the Ark
of his presence. Now this Ark figured forth the Lord Jesus in the Spirit, which
dwells in his people (or particularly in a Saint) this is the Ark of the New
Testament, Isa. 42.6. Mal. 3.1.
which also is called the New Covenant. That Ark was Legal, this is a
Gospel-Ark; that was an outward Ark, this an inward Ark; that was an Ark in a
form, this an Ark in the power; that was in a Type and shadow, this is in truth
and in substance; Deuteronomy. 10.30.
that was wrought by man's hands, this is wrought by the finger and Spirit of
God: I say, that Legal Ark was a Type, Hebr 9.3, 4. Exodus 23.33.
and Christ Jesus the Ark of the New Covenant, is the Antitype of the Tipe; the
residence of the Legal Ark was in the Temple or Tabernacle, not in the outward
Court or Sanctuary, but within the Curtain or Vail, called the Holy of Holies
by Gods appointment, so is the Gospel-Ark, the Ark of the New Covenant, its in
the holy place, its within the Vail, Col. 1.27.
its not in the outward Court of profession, or Sanctuary of observation, but
within; Christ in you the hopes of glory: And know you not that Christ is in
you, except you be reprobates? 2 Cor. 13.5.

II. In this Legal Ark (whose place of residence (as before said) was in the
Temple, Deuteronomy. 10.4, 5.
and in the holy of holies in the Temple) there was put the two Tables of
stone, whereon was the Law of the Ten Words, or Ten Commandments by which the
Jews in their day was to walk; what does this figure forth unto us, Romans 8.2.
but the Law of the Spirit of life which was in Christ Jesus, the Ark of Gods
presence, which Law is always in the Ark for believers to walk by, as God
said, This is my Son, hear him. And Friends, its he only that teaches the will
of God perfectly and profitably; for none teaches to profit like him. Hebr.
8.10. Jet 31.33. 2 Cor. 3 3.
I will write my Law in your hearts and put it into your inward parts, said the
Lord. Its not now, as under the Legal dispensation, a written Law without on
Tables of stone, or by pen and ink, but upon the Tables of our hearts, by the
Spirit of the living God; and this Law of the Spirit of life, is read and known
by all that comes to know it in the Lord Jesus Christ, the light, the Ark, the
Covenant, and Gospel of God.

III. In the Legal Ark there was Aarons Rod put, which budded in the Ark, etc.
what does this figure forth? Ans. Heb. 9.4. Gal. 5.22. John 15.8. John 3.21.
Isa. 26.12. Ezekiel. 37.1, etc.
The Spirit of God, which buds, blossoms, and brings forth fruit to the praise
and glory of the pure God, which pure Spirit is in Christ Jesus the Ark of God,
without which none can bring forth fruit, except they abide in it, and that in
them, working the works of God in them, and for them; for without this Aarons
Rod, viz. the Spirit of God, what dry sticks, dry bones are we? bringing forth
no fruit to God, nor good to our Neighbor; so that to me Aarons Rod does
figure forth the pure Spirit of life, Col. 1.27, 29.
and the budding is that fruit that is brought forth, where it is by its
operation and working, and this is in the Ark, in Christ Jesus, who dwells in
the Temple that is made without hands, Acts 17.24. Chap. 7.48.

IV. In the Ark of the Legal Temple there was a golden pot of Manna put, etc.
Now what also does this figure forth? I shall declare as God has enlightened me
in it, and given my soul to taste hereof, which is the sweet fruit, and divine
manifestations of his precious love to the soul in and through the Spirit, its
the precious fruit of the Kingdom of light, the true bread that comes down
from heaven, John 6.51.
the which the soul that eats thereof shall never dye; and no soul comes to eat
of this Manna but as he overcomes, Rev. 1 ^7.
and he that overcomes shall eat of this hidden Manna, i. e. shall eat of the
peaceable fruits, and have the divine manifestations, and sweet refreshings of
the eternal Spirit of truth. It was laid up in the golden pot; now gold is the
purestand finest of all metals; 1 Timothy 3.9.
so this Manna I speak of, is put into a clean Vessel, into a pure and holy
heart; and the more any soul comes to be clean, pure and holy, the more they
come to enjoy and see God; For the pure in heart shall see God; Mat. 3.8. Heb.
11.14.
and without holiness none shall see God: But I say, as they come to be holy
and pure, so they shall see God; and the more the soul comes to see God, the
more is that soul transformed into the likeness of God; now the more any soul
sees God, and is like God, the more does that soul eat of this hidden Manna, i.
e. this soul feels a spting of life, peace, comfort, 2 Cor 3.18.
joy in the Holy Ghost spring up in him, wherein the soul comes to be
strengthened, fixed and established in God, and his soul feeds on this and is
refreshed; and this is the Manna, the meat he eats that the world knows not of,
and which a carnal flesh (in all its outward show) cannot feel nor see, John
4.32.
for its spiritually seen and felt. Blessed is he that knows and feels the
living virtue and spring of it.

V. Upon the Legal Ark there was the Mercy-seat, etc. what does this show?
Answ. It figures forth unto us, that the tender mercies of God is seated on
Jesus Christ; for God in himself is unknowable, unutterable, unexpressable,
unconceivable, as having nothing to do with his creatures, or his creatures
with him; but as he has introduced himself into them through his Son, and so
the eternal God comes to be known, seen, felt and heard, as he has, and does
make forth himself through his Son by his Spirit; so that all knowledge, and
mercy of God comes in upon the revelation of the Son, as Christ said, John
1.18. Mat. 11.27.
None have seen God at any time save the Son, and unto whom the Son shall
reveal him: Neither can we see God in the divine manifestation and discovery in
the Spirit of his eternal goodness, righteousness and truth, except the Son
does reveal him; so that in this brief hint it may be seen, if the light of God
does inlighten according to the measure of it, that its on the Ark of the
testimony of God (to wit) Christ Jesus, that mercy is seated; for this is the
way of all mercy to the whole Creation. Friends, I give you but a hint of these
things, though sometimes I see much of these things in the deep.

VI. Upon the Legal Ark was two Cherubims, covering their faces with their
wings because of his presence: Now as God manifests his living, pure presence,
the flesh is hid, and does disappear; and that soul is led by the Spirit, and
walks after the Spirit, and not after the flesh. Romans 8.1, 14.
Oh when the Lord God in his eternal Spirit of light, and holy brightness
appears, according to the measure of its manifestation, what a trembling is
there in the flesh by reason of his presence and glorious brightness that is
shining in them, Mat 17.5, 6, 7, 8.
that is seen and felt in the light and life of God. Oh what a covering, hiding
and vailing of the flesh is there, as not being able to look upon, or behold
such brightness of his glory. Friends, these things are true and faithful.

VII. The everlasting God did promise to meet with his people (in the Legal
day) and to commune with them upon the Mercy-seat, etc. Oh Friends? God in old
times did speak, Heb. 1.1, 2.
commune, and meet with his people in diverse manners, and at sundry times; but
now in these last days he has, and does speak, meet and commune with his
people in, and by his Son, Mark 9.7.
who says, This is my Son, hear him: And its he that has the mind and message
of the Father, and shows it his true Disciples: He speaks not of himself, but
what he hears and receives of the Father that he declares; John 3.32. John
10.30. 1 John 2.23.
and here it is that the soul meets, and communes with the Father, because he
has the Son; for the Father and the Son are one; and he that has the Son,
has the Father also; and he that has the Father, has the Son also.

Now as any soul comes to hear the voice of the Son of God in themselves
particularly and comes to obey the voice of the Son of God in themselves, which
obedience is life, comes to meet with the Father in the tender embraces of
divine love, seated in his tender mercies; but if the soul rebels, and
disobeyes his heavenly voice, Isa. 63.10.
and vexes his holy Spirit, then the soul comes not to partake of this heavenly
blessing (to wit) of this heavenly communication, and glorious making forth of
the eternal presence of the everlasting God; but, I say, if the soul hears, and
obeyes the voice of the Son of God, as he obeys [so] he comes to have life; and
because he lives, whose voice it is they obey, they shall live also; for, said
Christ, Because I live, ye shall live also, John 14 19.
whose voice is in the soul, calling to be pure, as God is pure; holy, as God
is holy; and so to live in all manner of holy conversation in the streamings
forth of the life within, 1 Pet. 1.15.
whose voice calls for a love to all righteousness, and to a hatred and
forsaking of all iniquity though never so secret, whose voice is for inward
cleansing, inward purifying: As be ye pure and clean that bear the Vessels of
the Lord. Now if we would be Vessels holding the treasures of heaven in us, 2
Cor. 4.7.
if we would be Temples of the Holy Ghost, houses and habitations of God
through the Spirit, we must be pure, clean and holy; for Friends, Holiness
becomes the house of the Lord for ever. Now this the voice of Christ the Son of
God calls for in us, Isal. 93.5.
and as every soul comes to obey the voice of the Son in the Spirit of power,
he comes to meet and commune with the eternal God in his everlasting mercies.

Thus Friends, ye have a brief description of what God has showed unto me
though more sometimes by the light of God I see in a great deep, for the which
there is a desire in me, to be found waiting on the everlasting light, till he
is pleased to bring it forth, and duly manifest it.

Now how by Temple, Tabernacle, Ark, can be meant or understood outward
Ordinances, as at the beginning was spoke of; and for such that are come to
this state herein mentioned, and have no freedom to subscribe to, and walk in,
I know not; but I have a testimony in my soul, that the substance comprehends
and includes all the shadows and signs (and signs are not for them that
believe, but for them that believe not) so that if my soul enjoyes the
substance, and lives in the possession (according to the measure) the which I
have an inward testimony of, let who will question it (the which some has done)
then I have the end of all the shadows and signs; Col. 2.16, 17.
for they all end in Christ, who is the truth, substance (of all) light, life,
power, Gospel, Covenant, Word, Supper, Baptism, Rest, etc. so that in him my
soul reposes and finds rest, and in his light can dilcern betwixt the shadow
and the substance, the form and the power, the letter and the Spirit; not
slighting that without, yet esteeming more of that within; and walk in that
without, as I find freedom within, and so my soul enjoyes peace, Isa. 32.17.
for its peace God calls unto; and the effect of righteousness is peace, and
that is righteous that God works; so unto what the righteous God works freedom
to, therein let us obey; herein none shall be oppressed, and his Conscience
Lorded over, but walk in the freedom and liberty wherewith Christ does make
free; only Brethren, use not your liberty for an occasion to the flesh, the
which if you do pretend to liberty in Christ and walk carnally, you demonstrate
that you know not this liberty and freedom by Christ, but are in bondage to
this day.

Judge not rashly, least you be judged; for with what rash judgment ye judge
of, the same shall you be judged withal.

Wherefore holy Brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the
Apostle, and High Priest of our profession Christ Jesus.

Who was faithful to him that appointed him, as also Moses was faithful in all
his house.

For this man was counted worthy of more glory than Moses, and Moses was
faithful in all his house as a servant, for a testimony of those things which
were to be spoken after. But Christ as a Son over his own house, whose house
are we, if we hold fast the considence, and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto
the end.

Wherefore as the Holy Ghost says, To day if you will hear his voice, harden
not your hearts, etc.

So I swear in my wrath that they shall not enter into my rest.

Because I was grieved with that generation, and said, They do always err in
their hearts, and they have not known my ways.

Wherefore Brethren, Take heed, least there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief in departing from the living God, Hebr. 3.1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 10 11, 12.

Now unto (...) him who is able to keep you from falling, I commit you, and the
peace of God that passes all understanding fill you, and God everlasting make
you perfect, strengthen, establish, settle you, working in you
that-which-is-well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory for ever, and for ever. Amen.

Near the end of the 4th. Month, in the Year, 1664. Your Brother, That waits to
see the redemption of the pure seed of God in you all; and its enlargement over
all the Earth. J. C.

THE END.

