A NARRATIVE PLAINEY SHOWING, That the Priests of England are as truly
Antichrist (who got up since the days of the Apostles) as the Pope and His
Clergy: Denying Christ to be both a King, a Priest, and a Prophet; With a
serious warning to the PARLIAMENT not to uphold and maintain them by a Law,
under any pretense whatsoever: As also a warning to all People, that (upon
peril of their immortal souls) they be no longer deluded and bewitched by their
Sorceries; But that they come to Christ the true Light, which will lead them
out of the paths of sin, into the way of peace.

By one who (through mercy from the Lord) has escaped the snares of sin and
deceit, and bin brought (through Judgment) into His pure fear, known by the
Name of John Chandler.

LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1659.

A Narrative, plainly showing, that the Priests of England are as truly
Antichrist (who got up since the days of the Apostles) as the Pope and his
Clergy, etc.
GIve ear Oh all ye Priests of England, for this word is to you, to show (by
the true light which has enlightened me) that ye are Antichrist, and that the
Spirit of spiritual Whoredom and Fornication is in and upon you, as truly as
in and upon the Pope and his Clergy, so called: For ye deny Christ the Son of
God to be both a King, Priest, and Prophet, both by your words and actions; and
what does he or they more? First, Ye deny Christ to be a Priest, who, by the
eternal Spirit, has offered up himself once for all, to put an end to all
carnal Covenants, National Churches, Ministry, and Maintenance, and to perfect
for ever them that are sanctified. Now ye uphold by Doctrine and practice the
Covenant with the seed after the flesh, as it was with the Jew outward of old;
of which, Circumcision in the flesh was a sign, which were both but figures of
the Jew inward, who was to be circumcised without hands by the circumcision of
Christ in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh: Ye uphold this (I say)
by sprinkling of Infants under the former pretense, which ye apply to them as a
Seal of the said Covenant, so accounting them as Christians and Members of your
Church, which is according to generation, and not according to regeneration,
which thing alone gives persons a right to be Members of Christ's Church, which
is his body: so the matter of your Church is the World, and not the Saints. And
as for a National Church: before Christ, the true light, was manifested in that
body which died at Jerusalem, there was but one in the whole World, to wit, in
the Land of Judea, which was a figurative State; to hold forth, that the Saints
of Christ, in his day, (wherever they were gathered out of the World) were a
royal Nation and peculiar people unto him, as Peter calls them: and after
Christ's departure, when the Apostles and Saints had received power from on
high, they went forth in that power, and by their Ministry gathered the Seed of
God out of several Nations, Cities, and Places, who were the Churches of
Christ; but ye, in stead hereof, have raised by your carnal Covenant with the
carnal Seed, many National. Churches (as ye call them), and ye neither tremble
nor are ashamed to father them upon Christ, who is a pure, holy, and spiritual
head, and must have no other body. But these are seen in the light to be but so
many Cities of the Nations, which John in his Revelation mentions, which, he
says, fell, when great Babylon came into remembrance before God, to give her
the Cup of the Wine of the fierceness of his wrath. As for a National
Ministry, or Ministry settled all over the Nation, which are your selves, it is
suitable to a National State, to wit, a certain peculiar Tribe, known by
distinct Garments, and appropriating the exposition and opening of the
Scriptures to the people, to themselves; as the Priests, the Tribe of Levi
were, and did under the Law, before Christ, by God's command; which first
Priesthood there was a necessity of disanulling (says the Apostle), by reason
of its faultiness, imperfection, and unprofitableness; wherefore Christ (whose
Father's Law to do, was within his (...) heart) came and offered up himself
once for all, and so put an end to that first Priesthood, which ye most
wickedly and ungodlily still endeavor to hold up, together with its
maintenance, Tithes, or the Tenth of the increase, (which ceased with the first
Priesthood) most wickedly and unjustly forcing the same from People by a Law
of Man, and punishing the refusers, whereas the Jewish Priesthood had it by
the Law of God; Neither give or allow ye one penny out of it to the
Fatherless, Widow, or Stranger: So that, are ye not rightly called Priests?
Surely ye need not snuff at it* for Ministers of Christ ye can in no wise be
called who thus, so visibly, withstand his everlasting Priesthood. Ye are also
seen to deny the Faith of and on Christ the everlasting High Priest, though ye
will acknowledge his person in words, (for how else should ye be Antichrist and
the false Prophet?) who entering himself once for all into the holy of holies,
does give forth living virtue to all his Members, who wait in his light, to
feel his pure life, whereby they are purged and purified thoroughly from sin,
by the living Faith and Hope which enters within the Vail, and all your vailes
and coverings, and so are perfected for ever; for Christ's work is perfect and
everlasting: But ye cry out, Blasphemy, Blasphemy, To say that Christ
thoroughly freeth or purges any Man or Woman from Sin, while they live here,
but in part only, so denying the efficacy of Christ's blood which is his life,
which cleanses those who sincerely confess their sins, from all sin, so
making them perfect, as pertaining to the conscience; which I testify none can
ever be, while any sin is standing, which, while so, will certainly raise up
guilt and condemnation there, through God's pure witness showing the evil:
wherefore, since ye (being out of the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ) cannot
witness Victory over sin and transgression, ye enter not into the true,
spiritual, and eternal rest, prepared for the people of God; but maintain and
uphold a natural day, to wit, every first day of the week, as for an outward
Sabbath or Rest, which ye are not ashamed to call the Christian Sabbath or
Rest: Is this day the true Christian's rest? or have they peace with God all
the week, and all their days, and for ever, standing in his everlasting
Covenant, which is to give them Rest from their labors and sore bondage? But
the Sabbath day which we sanctify, not speaking our own words, or thinking our
own thoughts on his Holy day, which is one continual day, known to him, and his
people that stand in obedience, ye Priest's know not, and how then should ye
declare it to others; but your Sabbath which is a natural day, we see to be but
your Market Day, wherein ye vent your wares for money and not the true
Christian's Rest. Thus do ye plainly deny (Oh ye Priests) Christ Jesus the Son
of God, to be the only High Priest. And that he should be a King to reign
alone in righteousness, ye cannot endure; (yet will ye call Him in your
Pulpits, King Jesus, Judas like, giving him a Hail-Master:) For whereas the
Lord God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, has set this his King upon his
holy Hill of Zion, in this his day, to rule and govern in the hearts of his
People, in righteousness and peace; ye endeavor what ye can to pull him down
out of his Throne, and set up the Laws of man in his place: For ye have been
endeavoring for diverse years, and we well know it is your principle still, to
force all people in the Nation (be they never so tender conscienced, or never
so sensible of God's power working in their hearts a loathing of your dead
traditions, and idol and carnal Worship, and drawing their minds to worship him
in Spirit and truth) to submit to the same, and bow to the King of Babel's
Image, upon pain of great punishment; yea at this day do ye so ride the Beast
or tyrannical Magistracy, that ye have diverse Laws of theirs against the
Saints, thereby to constrain them (if ye could) to yield to your covetous,
proud, and wicked Wills, and restrain them from opposing or troubling of you in
your evil ways and deceit; when as the Saints who are the Lambs followers, are
constrained by their King (Christ the Power of God) to cross and stand living
Witnesses against you in all your false, wicked, and deceitful practices,
whereby ye seek, for honor and profits sake, to keep His Rule and Authority
from rising in the hearts of men; but He must and shall Reign, till He has put
all His enemies (within and without) under his feet, and made every one bow to
his name, which is his power: turning the Beast and false (...) Prophet or
Whore that is carried by him, into the lake of fire: for do ye think that the
Lord God is not very jealous for His holy Name, (who will be the only
Lawgiver of his People) when as Men-shall by Laws made in their own wills, go
about to force them to do that which his pure and holy Law in their hearts, and
Word, which is like fire in their bones, contradicts? Is not this for the
Beast to make direct War with the Lamb, and is it not so in this Nation? but
the Lamb, and the Saints by his blood, the word of their testimony, and loving
not their lives unto death, but patiently suffering, shall have the Victory;
and then, woe be to all the Rebellious and proud of the Earth, says the Lord of
Hosts; for a great War is begun, neither will the Lamb lay down his two edged
sword proceeding out of his mouth which is his word, but in righteousness will
Judge and make War, so long as there is but one Nation throughout the World
that withstandeth his living Truth: and we know him nearer than so; that in us
he will not suffer one high imagination or evil thought to exalt it self
unrevenged. Wherefore repent of your opposition against the Lord and his
Christ, lest ye be slain before his face; and cease to infuse falsely into the
Magistrates head, that he is the keeper of both Tables, thereby still to
animate him, to make Laws about Religion and the Worship of God: For it is a
lie every way; for he that can keep both Tables in his own particular, loves
the Lord God with all his heart, and his neighbor as himself; which I am sure
they do not, for they have diverse Idols which their hearts run after, as Pride,
Riches, and Honor, etc. which draw their hearts from God, neither do they to
their neighbor as they would be done by, being hard hearted, implacable,
unmerciful, etc. nor much less can the Magistrate cause both Tables to be kept
by others: For can he by his outward sword make men love the Lord God with all
their hearts, and their neighbor as themselves, or can he only restrain men
from doing outward wrong and violence, and constrain them outwardly to do
justice? which is far from keeping of both Tables of the righteous Law, as the
Saints that are turned to the true light which makes manifest, right well know,
Ye deny (Oh ye Priests) Christ the Son of God to be a Prophet also, by setting
up your own manifold Doctrines, Inventions and Traditions, instead of His pure
Teachings; who being the true light that lightens every man that comes into
the World, is given by the Father of lights, to be a Covenant of light to the
Nations: that whosoever of the Nations that believes in that which makes
manifest his evil deeds, and comes sincerely to the light to have all evil
discovered, judged down, and destroyed; might find and feel the light of life
quickening him up to God, and giving him power and dominion over sin and
transgression, whereby (that which let being taken out of the way) peace and
reconciliation with the Lord God of Heaven and Earth he might come to witness:
Thus is Christ the Prophet raised up by Gods power, whom every one is to hear,
lest he be cut off; but ye Priests not only not believe in this light your
selves, but give cautions to your people how they receive it, calling it a
natural and insufficient light to lead to God, or save the soul, that so ye may
in the room thereof, usher in the Scriptures (which were but words given forth
from the light) as the only rule and guide: whereby ye get much money by
repeating them to the People in a form or method; for ye know, as People come
to know and follow the true teacher which is the holy anointing, or true light
within them; they will be taken off from your dead words and teachings, and so
will no longer put into your mouths, giving their money for that which is not
Bread; for ye are convinced in your own consciences that ye minister not to the
People by the pure gift of God, or Spirit's Baptism, by which the Apostles and
Saints of Old ministered, who before they would stir or open their mouths,
waited for the Fathers promise, even the Spirit of Truth: And therefore to
Salve up the matter, have ye most falsely and corruptly distinguished between
extraordinary and ordinary Ministers of the Church: the Apostles who had
prophecy, Miracles, and Revelation, ye say, were extraordinary Ministers:
which gifts ceasing, ordinary Ministers God teaches by, to wit, Pastors and
Teachers, who come to be fitted thereto by ordinary means; as Languages,
Book-Learning, Study, Industry, etc. Oh ye blind guides! know ye not that the
gift of a Pastor or Teacher in Christ's Church, was the effect of the Baptism
of the Spirit, as well as the gift of an Apostle; Prophecy, Revelation,
Miracles, or any other? and dare you to assume the name of Pastors or Teachers,
and yet deny the Power whereby such formerly ministered, which was the Power
from on High? Is not this right-Antichrist to assume the Office, and out of the
Power and Life whereby it should be administered? Nay, denying any such thing to
be now, as Revelation, or the gift of discerning of Spirits, etc. without which
none in the Apostles days could be Pastors or Teachers: So ye deny the true
Prophet, whose reaching is in all Ages one and the same to His; only in the
Apostasy from His Light and Truth, He has bin withdrawn; but now is come to
Teach and to Instruct His People again; that with the Light they may see,
discern, and comprehend all false Prophets; who for many years have filled the
World with decait and error, and by the same Light may see Him who is
invisible, and the glory that was with Him before the World was: So seeing the
true Original of all, which is eternal Power and Wisdom: Riches, Glory, and
Honor everlasting. And because ye Priests and blind guides are swerved from
the light of Christ, which should be the only Counselor and Director,
therefore ye in your ordinary gifts, (as they are called,) which is but carnal
wisdowe, presume even to sit in the Temple of God, as God, to wit, by your
several Synods and Councils, which ye (if ye could) would have according to
your own minds: who undertake to set forth Canons, or Rules, and Directories
and Faiths, for the Worship of God, and to excommunicate, and receive in; and
to judge of Truth and Error; and to use the Magistrate to enjoin by punishment
the observance thereof: although Christ the true Prophet has directed his
People in a new and living way; whose teachings and directions these Priests
either wholly deny, or think insufficient, or else they would never presume to
set forth Canons, Directories, etc. for the people of God to walk by. Thus are
ye discovered to be complete Antichrist; nor want ye any thing of the Pope and
his Clergy, in essential matters, for all your pretended Reformation, only in
some superstitions, ^esse material, ye differ: If ye shall say, Ye are wronged,
in that the Pope takes on him to forgive sins, as Christ's Vicar, which is a
high presumption, which ye are not guilty of; I say, you are guilty of the same
thing in your corrupted Judgments, and would soon make it appear by practice,
were ye not by God's providence restrained; for the Pope's forgiveness of sins
is no more than a declaration outwardly of what he thinks God does confirm in
heaven, by virtue of his Office or Chair, as Peter's Successor; and ye in your
several Synods and Presbyteries, appropriate the power of excommunication, or
binding and loosing, to your selves, by virtue (as ye think) of Faith and
Office; and wherein lies the difference betwixt you, save in this, That the
Pope's presumption is Monarchical, or done by one man, and yours (as I may
say), Aristocratical, or done by diverse, whom ye count the chief of the Church;
and what difference is there between one to be called Christ's Vicar, and out
of his life; and ye to call yourselves his Ministers, Pastors, and Elders, and
be out of it also: And as for Merits or Justification by works, which ye count
a damnable Doctrine among the Papists, which ye say ye utterly deny: See the
small difference betwixt them and you herein; for ye both, looking upon a Christ
without, after the flesh, but denying the true light within, they think Christ
died and suffered, etc. to make their works meritorious; and ye say, your works
are accepted for his death and sufferings, and Intercession's sake; though
neither of you (being not come to true (...) light in your selves, which leads
to the life, which is the blood, in which all works should be done and
performed) can, in truth, sense, and feeling, witness acceptance, one no more
than the other; so that ye, praying, singing and preaching in your
Steeple Houses, fasting, or doing any other work in your own Wills, ye must of
necessity look for an acceptance of them for the deed done, if ye will have
any, as well as the Papists, seeing ye know not a living Christ in you, in
which they must be accepted. As for Images, which the Papists worship: ye make
your selves, and services, Images for the people to worship: as also the Laws
of men, which ye say are to be obeyed in the things of God, which is a more
mysterious and dangerous Idolatry, because not so grossly and plainly appearing,
and therefore not so easily to be avoided: also ye call the Steeple-house or
Tower-house, a Church, which is gross and sottish I dolatry. And whereas
perhaps ye will say, the Pope sells Pardons and, Indulgences for money, as he
did when Luther fell off from him; Can ye make me believe that the same thing
(in effect) would not appear among you Priests, if your Government were
established, who now make gain the chief Motive of your preaching, and take
money for sprinkling Infants, Marriages, Burials, Funeral Sermons, etc. Would
there not be partiality and respect of persons among you, in admitting people
to your communion, and in your proceedings in casting our and receiving into
your Church? Have no such things appeared in Scotland among their Presbyteries?
or in New- England at any time? or among you? Did not the Pastor or Teacher of
Boston in New- England, not long ago, when the Eldership (so called) would have
excommunicated the Keeper of Bridewel for his most cruel and inhumane usage of
one of our friends, (through malice and enmity to the Seed of God) hinder their
proceedings against him? and do not malice and enmity proceed from the same
Root, as Covetousness, Respect of Persons, and the Love of money do? Nay, did
not the Apostate Greek Church, for 1200 years age, call one of their Synods or
Councels, to wit, the Council of Ephesus, Robbing, or a Council of Robbers? and
are not all these Synods, whether Oeconomical, National, Provincial, Classical,
or Paroc^ial, in one and the same ground? and have they not proceeded from one
and the same Root, as others before them have done, and what then can be
expected but the same fruit?

Wherefore, Oh ye Parliament of England, open your eyes and see what a
Gospel Ministry ye do at present, and think ye ought to, maintain, as are the
Priests: and consider that in so doing, ye are but the Beast spoken of by John
in his Revelation, which carried the Whore, and so are enemies to Christ's
Kingdom. Know ye assvredly, That whilst ye do this, the hand of the Lord is
against you, and the Lamb will never cease making War with you by his Saints,
his Followers, and that by the Word of his Mouth ye shall be slain: and if ye
will not withdraw your power from supporting, and by Laws upholding these false
Prophets, and their Maintenance; (for denying of which, and diverse other
things, the Saints have greatly suffered, and are still liable thereunto); that
both ye and they shall go down into the Pit together, for the Mouth of the Lord
has spoken it: whose anger is hot in this his day, against all
unrighteousness of men, wherewith the earth has been long corrupted and
burdened; who has looked down from heaven in pity, and at length visited his
captivated Seed, and woe be to the Oppressor which in the day of the Lord's
deliverance would still hold it in the chains of Babylonish captivity.
Therefore choose you whether ye will now leave a good savor behind you, or a
stink in the nostrils of God and his People; whether ye will be accounted those
that undo every yoke, and let the oppressed go free, or Magistrates that bear
not the Sword in vain, but such as are a terror to evil doers, (of whom the
Priests are the chief) and a praise to them that do well: or whether ye will,
by the Saints who do and shall walk in the light of the Lamb, be esteemed the
Beast which pusheth at the Saints and innocent Ones, which (says John) opened
his mouth in Blasphemy against God to blaspheme his Name, and his Tabernacle
and those that dwell in heaven, miscalling the truth, calling them Sectaries,
Heretics, Seducers, Enthusiasts, Troublers of Israel, etc. Know this Oh thou
Parliament! and all future parliaments, that while the false Prophet^ in this
or these three Nations, are upheld of you by a Law, or any kind of
set-maintenance whatsoever that the Seed and Saints of God must needs suffer:
and if so, How can a Blessing, and not a Curse, from the Lord God of heaven and
earth, be expected? For this is the Lord's promise, to his Church in the last
days, The Nation that will not serve thee shall perish, yea, (says God) those
Nations shall be utterly wasted: Wherefore, since it is hard for you (though
great and lofty) to kick against the pricks; and for ye Pot-sheards of the
earth to strive against your Maker; and since the Lord God Almighty has
decreed the utter ruin of the Whore, that has bewitched all Nations from his
pure life by her Sorceries and Iuchantments, and since the Priests are seen by
the light of Christ, to be such Sorcerers, and the generality of these three
Nations to be thus bewitched; I advise you in the love of the Lord (O ye of the
Parliament, and all other that are called Magistrates, to break off your sins
by repentance in your own particulars, to wit, your Pride, Covetousness, love
of Money, the Honor and Glory of this wicked World, respect of Persons, giving
and receiving Honor one of another, Courting one another, etc. which hinders
you from believing in the true light, which will show you, and reprove you for
all these things, and more, if ye hearken to it, and in humility and lowliness
of mind, do seek the honor that comes from God only; which is his gracious
acquittance and acceptance of all the penitent, who turn unto him, with their
whole hearts, stamping his Image and Mark upon them, and by his eternal Spirit
witnessing in their consciences that they are his, and shall receive an eternal
Inheritance as Coheires with Christ; this is honor enough, and will blast all
the fading Honor and Glory of the World as a flowr: And Oh ye Magistrates and
Rulers! till ye come to witness somewhat of this in your own particulars, I
cannot expect that ye should act aright and thoroughly for God: Now there is a
Prophecy in John's Revelation, that the Kings of the Earth shall bring their
Honor and Glory into the Holy City, new Jerusalem, that comes down from God
out of Heaven; As any of you shall do so, ye will truly and freely give all
Honor to the Lord, and expect none but what He gives you: then would none of
you dare to make any Law against the Saints or the Truth; but on the contrary:
Or to maintain the false Prophet, but would leave him to himself, to stand upon
his own Legs; but into this (O ye Rulers of the Earth) ye are not yet come, but
are at present seeking your own Honor, Profit and Interests, and being out of
Gods living Power, run to State Policy, to make that your refuge, and a cover
for your present actings; saying, if we should not maintain and uphold a
National Mini^tery, we should not be like any nation; and the Nation it self
would be so incensed and divided, that the destruction thereof would be feared;
also how should so many Ministers with their Families live? Now ye Magistra^es
and Rulers, consider in the fear of God, where ye are that thus reason: where
were the Jews when they forsook and stood not in the counsel of the Lord, but
would be as other Nations: And shall the Antichristian State in the several
Nations (think ye) uphold it self always by the Nations taking example by each
other, so as to prevent the intended purpose of the Lord God in the Whore of
Babylons destruction? Assure your selves that this block will not hinder
Antichrists Kingdom in this Nation one moment the longer from falling, than
the Lord God has determined. Then, as for the fear of so greatly incensing and
dividing the Nation, know ye not, that those who stand simply and singly in the
counsel of the Lord faithfully to do his will, shall be carried through all
opposition and danger? does any thing weaken and deject the hearts and spirits
of men but sin? I find nothing so to do; while the Jews of old, kept out of
transgression against the Lord, the promise was, one should chase ten, and ten
put a thousand to flight; So ye, if ye knew the will of God, and had sincere
hearts to do it, need not fear what man could do: yea, I affirm A blessing
should be in your right hand, and upon the Nation, so as it should be preserved
in peace and plenty; for this is the Lords promise, Psalm. 77. that as his way
is known upon Earth, and his saving health unto all Nations, the People shall
praise the name of the Lord, and be glad and sing for joy; because the Lord
shall Judge and Govern he Nations Righteously upon the Earth; then (says the
Spirit) shall the Earth yield her increase, and God even our own God shall
bless us; God shall bless us, and all the ends of the Earth shall fear him.
And is not this a beggarly and slavish thing (though bearing the show of
charity and pity) to let the fear of an outward livelihood, of some, to be a
hinderance of doing the will of God, who gives life and breath and all things.
Has not Christ said, and do not the Priests acknowledge and Preach as much;
that men should first seek the Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof,
and all other things shall be added? Now if the Priests State and Kingdom be
discovered by the light, to be a Kingdom of darkness, for which cause they
ought not to be upheld and maintained by the Magistrate; Let them first of all
repent and be humble, and come to the Light which leads the way into Gods
Kingdom, which stands in Peace, Righteousness, Purity, Holiness, and Joy in
the Holy Spirit; so waiting and seeking for this Kingdom, in the light, out of
their own Wills and Wisdoms, and the Lord by his providence will surely provide
for them and theirs: for there is enough in the Creation for every one with
contentment. And love is with the Saints, who know allought to be fed and
nourished in an honest, upright and just, but not in an unjust way: and
therefore can they not pay them (in the way they are in) one six pence
willingly, though 'twere to the loss of all. Besides, Oh ye Rulers! does the
Lord God say any where that Babylon should be a whit the more spared for
Merchants Wives and Childrens sakes? What is a worldly Interest to the glory of
God, and the Salvation of Souls? Wherefore lay ye aside, I advise you, these
and all such slavish objections: for they will not justify or excuse your
actings before the Throne of God, or answer to that of God in your consciences,
which calls for Justice, Righteousness, Holiness and Equity. And ye people
of the Nation, consider, that it is not a leight thing that ye are deceived,
deluded, and captivated by the Priests and salse Prophets, so as to believe
lies: for, says the Apostle, the man of sin should come with all
deceive-ablenesse of unrighteousness in them that perish, who because they
received not the love of the Truth, that they might be saved, therefore God
gave them up to strong delusions to believe lies: that they all might be
damned, who believe not the Truth, but have pleasure in unrighteousness: Mark
People, the man of sin, the Spirit of error which works in the Mystery of
iniquity, deceives with all unrighteousness, and those who have pleasure in
that unrighteousness; but love not the truth, are suffered to beieve lies that
they all may be damned: Oh lamentable! Little do people think what Coals of
Indignation they heap upon their own heads, that hate the light that reproves
their evil deeds and deceit, and yet call themselves Christians, that plead for
the Priests, the Beast, and the Whore, and Idol-worships, and sin as long as
they live: hating, revising, deriding, and persecuting the Saints who stand as
Witnesses with Christ the Light against all these things. Heat also what John
says Revelations 13. (which Book is a Prophecy of these times) says he, All
that dwell upon the Earth shall worship the Beast, whose names are not written
in the Book of Life, of the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World (if any
man has an ear to hear let him hear:) where by he shows) that its a thing of
great concernment for people to consider who they worship, fear, obey and
serve, whether God, or Man, and his Laws and Will, lest they are for ever
excluded from, and never enjoy a part in eternal life. But perhaps, people, ye
will say, what is it to worship the Beast or his Image or likeness; For we
scarce know what thou meanest?

To worship the Beast or his Image, is to do whatsoever the false Antichristian
Powers of the Earth shall command you to do and obey in the faith and service
of God; so as ^f they command what Religion people should profess, what manner
or form of worship they shall use in their Steeple Houses, what they shall do
against the Saints and Servants of the Lord, etc. they are ready (like Issachar
who bowed down his back to the burden) to observe the same, not minding or
considering what the light of Christ in their consciences tells them, or leads
them unto, and whether it be pleasing or displeasing in the sight of God; so
that if the Magistrate will have them keep a Fast, they keep it, or a natural
day for a Sabbath, they will observe it; or to hear Praying in their
Steeple Houses first, then Reading, then singing of a Psalm, then Praying
again, then Preaching in the Priest's dead form, then Praying again, and then a
Blessing (so called) on the People: they readily do and hear all, and so in
other things, though out of the life of God in which all Sacrifices should be
offered up; and not moved thereto by the Spirit of God. Or if the Magistrate
command any of them to hale the Saints to prison, or otherwise punish them,
they will do it, saying, In all such things, we are commanded by the higher
Powers, and therefore we must obey: This, People, I declare, is to obey Man,
rather than God; yea, grievous Idolatry, for the Lord says in every one of
you, Thou shall have no other Gods but me: now what a man serves and obeys,
that is his god; so the Lord all this while is forgotten, who is the higher
Power; and man, an empty and nothing-Creature obeyed, which must needs kindle
his holy anger against all such Idolaters, for he has said, His glory will He
not give to another, nor His praise to any graven Image; now, People, that is
not only an Image, which is made of Wood or Stone, but whatever created thing
any sets up in his heart to serve or obey, besides, or more than his Creator:
These sayings are true and faithful. Therefore fear and tremble all people
before the Mighty God, who made the Heavens and the Earth, and all that is
therein; who gives man his being upon the Earth, and time and means to come out
of his fallen and cursed estate by disobedience, which means, is by his Son
Christ the second Adam, who is made a quickening Spirit to all that receive Him,
who is the true Light that enlighteneth every man that comes into the World,
whereby they may see their evil thoughts, words, ways, and works, and have
Power, by believing in the light, to overcome the evil with good, that so, the
evil being forsaken, and the good cleaved unto, they (by the power and beauty
thereof) may be transformed into the pure Image of God, which was lost by the
Fall, whereby the whole Creation has bin brought out of order: that so peace
and reconciliation with their Creator, they may come to feel in themselves,
which is a most happy and blessed condition; for this I bear my Testimony unto,
before all Nations upon the Earth, that they can never come to enjoy peace with
the Living pure Lord God of Life, in whose favor is Life; any further than
they come out of sin and transgression, and feel their hearts purged and
cleansed from the filth thereof; for the Lord is pure and holy, who can behold
no iniquity without reproof, wherever he finds it: So that its but in vain for
any one to talk or think of justification by a Christ without, and not to feel
his living virtue, purifying their souls by his good spirit within them, but
denying it there; for none but the pure in heart ever did, or ever shall see
the face of the pure God. Wherefore, ye people of England, let not the Priests
deceive you any longer with their too ^^row coverings, and with the pillows
they have so long sewed under your arm-holes, for lucresake, whereby ye have
been lulled asleep in a wicked security, thinking your selves good Christians
if ye have but kept your Church, as ye call it (which to the Peoples
understanding has bin no more but a Steeple-house, which is like the Papists)
and had an outward conformity of Religion, though out of the power of
godliness, living in all manner of sin and licentiousness; for now is the
Lord risen to awaken the Earth, having put life into his witnesses again, who
cannot but Prophecy, and testify against the World, that their deeds are
evil, though they suffer unto death therefore, as some of the Lords servants
have (within this few years) done: that so the Lords purpose in raising them
up, may be accomplished; which is to gather his precious seed which shall
inherit the promise of life, and to lay the wicked and disobedient under
eternal condemnation; for the Gospel of the Kingdom is like a Net cast into the
Sea, which having gathered and drawn to shore both the good and the bad, the
good are received into Vessels, and the bad are cast away: So righteous Abel
and his offering is accepted, but Cain, the wicked one, envious and murderer,
is rejected, and is but a Vagabond, though he build a City; for the day of the
Lord burns, and shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do
wickedly shall be stubble: and the day comes that shall burn them up, that it
shall leave them neither Root nor Branch; but unto those that fear the name of
the Lord, shall the Sun of Righteousness arise with healing in his wings, and
they shall go forth and grow up as Calves in the Stall, and they shall tread
down the wicked, for they shall be as ashes under the soles of their feet, as
already they appear to be.

FINIS.

