CHAOS.
ANte mare and terras -- as the wanton Poet sings, rudis erat molis quem dixere
Chaos. It might be well wished the sober heads of these times could use the
Poets words, erat ante: but as if Fortunes Wheel were turned upside down, we
may seem to be in the first condition of things again, ubi mollia pugnant dur
is. The Tail commands the Head, and all things are out of course; insomuch as a
Solon was never any where more needful. And the childrens burdens are grown so
great, as if a Moses appear not in time, it may be feared deliverance will come
too late. After Nebuchadnezzar knew that the most high bears rule, his Kingdom
was restored. England no doubt wishes their Rulers had learned the same lesson;
and if they have, that the practice thereof may appear in public: for though
the Sword seems satiated with blood, yet the Elements threaten Vengeance if we
return not: And though for Rulers offenses the People suffer, yet they seldom
escape Scot-free. It were to be wished, examples hereof were not so obvious in
this Generation as they have been. Oh that Englands Rulers may see the work of
the day! that Pride, Tyranny and Oppression may receive their reward: which,
whilst men accused of greatest crimes sit as Judges in their own cause, cannot
be expected; nor whilst any of those who have voices in making Laws, shall be
admitted the Sanctuary of a Prison, to shelter themselves from the penalty
thereof, can be hoped for. O horrenda and impudica rabies! And that the People
follow their Guides, is sadly witnessed by this days Verdict of a
Devonshire-Jury at the Upper Bench Bar, who (in despite of the Judges honest,
honorable and wary Advertisements) betrayed the Innocent to the Fury of her
over-potent Adversary, and set the guilty free; whereby they have used their
utmost endeavors to prostitute their maids, daughters and wives to the lustful
abusion of the wicked at their wills.

It were happy if every day spoke not the same or worse language, so much
resembling that of Babel or Sodom, as nothing ever appeared so like the Poets
old Chaos as this present Age. These few particulars, amongst the innumerary
numbers of Babylons brats daily dispersed to the abusion of all that has any
resemblance of Goodness, compels that hand which never intended any such thing,
to command the Press, which now has liberty beyond measure, to measure even
Immensity it self; not purposing to accuse any for robbing the Public, to
erect a Private interest; nor for pretended relieving the Public, to strain
the strings of their Inventions, to contrive new Impositions; nor yet for
pretended Frugality to the Commonwealth, to destroy thousands of the Commons,
by denying justice, thereby cherishing all villainy and wickedness in the
highest measure.

But when the Public Faith of a Nation turns Bankrupt, who shall be accused?
the Borrowers, or the Lenders? Sure if the Borrowers had not promised fair, the
Lenders had not been. O unhappie hand, that ever drew Sword to countenance such
things, as the Paper blushes to bear the news of! Yet O happy age, that
affordest Hands to effect what Heads cannot do! Yea, O happy people, who live
in such an Age where God commands the meanest of things to be means of
Deliverance! Surely he has Mercies yet in store for such a people, if
embraced: if not, let Moses and the Prophets declare the issue; or rather, the
Savior of the worlds weeping over Jerusalem, admonish, to beware of what that
rebellious City shortly after suffered.

And if any shall say these Lines fell from Rabshakeh's Pen; let them consider,
their origin, their birth and growth, is from Chaos. But the Poets word ante
gives hopes, that as his ante was the forerunner of better composures, where
was mare, coelum and terras; so this present time elapsing, this Generation may
hope to see mare and terras in their proper places, and coelum supervolutans,
illuminans, and recreans. For never had Nation a Magistracy better schooled
and discipled, nor did ever Magistrate govern a people so generally capable of
the best Rule of Government, as this is. But if, with Miles the Frier's man in
the Fable, we flout and abuse this coy Mistress TIME, and improve not the
advantage and opportunity thereof, she will be gone, and then repentance may
come too late.

Now that Chaos-like, out of which Order was produced, matter may be
administered for the framing of such a structure of Laws and Regiment, or at
least some Instruments brought to search for some Foundation, or to discover
some Quarries or other materials fit for so great a Fabric, which is not to be
expected to be done all at once, and all in one day, by any one private hand,
nor yet from all the heads of our Governors at present, whose cares for speedy
remedy to prevent imminent dangers; takes away much of their time from these
other contrivances. And though no one piece of what shall here be offered,
shall be found fit stuff to build withal, yet may other more dextrous Artists
be hereby invited to furnish the proper materials for the very work it self.

Chaos never traveled; or if she did, it was when she was in the womb of
Nothing. So she brings no customs from other Countries, nor Laws from other
Lands: only as the birth is produced in its proper dimensions, not respecting
any other feature or proportion in the whole frame of Nature, who lest any part
or member thereof should steal another right, has framed all creatures,
Animate, and Inanimate (if such a conjecture may be imagined) in a convenient
disparity each to other: yet so, as there is still an harmonious parity in the
whole. So Chaos neither doats upon her neighbour-customs more then is
convenable, nor is she affected with strange novelties fetched from far
Countries, so ardently as to surfeit thereon: she is neither bewitched with the
beauty and riches of the Grand Seignior's Seraglio, neither is she enamoured
with the Cantonian formalities. All the Mitres in the Conclave of Rome, cannot
invite her to fetch her Laws from Italy; nor all the Decency and Liberty of
Amsterdam furnish her with more then some miss-shapen pieces, which she
purposes to polish for her own purpose. She purposes not to pry too deep into
the Spaniards Sunburned Inquisition, nor yet roave too far in the frigid Zone
of the Tartarian Territories; but out of her own store, Chaos-like, is her
furniture; only the deck and dress may seem to be sometimes borrowed from one,
sometimes from another. Yet unless she be new built, so as to suit with the
temper of her own climate, she will be unserviceable, and her fruit abortive.

Chaos considering that in six days a Creation of excellent beauty and
proportion, suiting to the magnitude thereof, in number, weight and measure,
was by an all-powerful hand produced, has propounded to her self fix days work
for perfecting of her intended Creation. ( Creation she calls it, because she
finding all the Rafters of her old Building rotten, and the Mortices and Tenons
full of rubbish, all the Pins either broken or pulled from their places, all
the Beams battered and bruised, and indeed the whole Fabric ready to fall
about her ears.) As Light was the first thing in the Creation, and so properly
called the work of the first day; so for her first days work she propounds for
the Balancing of Interests, and reducing each piece to its proper place, (the
praecognita being first allowed of, viz. a time prefixed (as already in great
wisdom the present Rulers have done) for the Parliaments fitting; within which
time if they be idle, their work will be left undone; and what will be their
Reward, if so?) So as if any one piece seem to be wrested out of its place, the
weight and frame of the whole prevents it.

It is proponed, that one Common Interest be erected, whereof each member shall
share, as well in receiving protection from, as giving contribution to; and to
be so incorporated, as no variant opinion, either in Religion or Policy, shall
be able to weaken the whole: (but if any shall endeavor it, it shall by
weakening and destroying it self; add still to the whole.

And as a light to the ensuing Intendment, Chaos propounds, That in this Island
of Great Britain (heretofore consisting of many, but of late days of three
distinct Principalities; heretofore divided into many, but now either all
speaking, or all understanding one and the same language, and also incorporated
into one Commonwealth) be one Law, and one Registery, dispersed into the
several parts thereof; and so disposed, as each part shall be subservient to
other, and each communicative to other, and all to the whole; not purposing to
deprive the Head of his due respect, neither the Body, or any member thereof,
of their proper dues, according to each ones particular propriety and
proportion, without destruction or diminution of any Right, Franchise or
Privilege due to any Lord of Manor, or other Proprietor whatsoever, or
detraction from the just freedom of any Englishman: wherein is proposed to the
Magistrate, Honor and respect; to the Lawyer, Profit; to the People, enjoyment
of Magna Charta; and to the Republike, the enjoyment of all. The distribution
whereof, Chaos propounds to be, National, Provincial, Sub-Provincial, and
Parochial; each Registry to have his Court and Officers. To which Courts and
Registeries all matters of Civil concernment shall be reduced: and this to be
erected within eight months, so that the present Magistracy may have the
honor to lay the foundation thereof, and to reap the benefit also, when others
shall come in their places, to ease their shoulders of the burden of
Government, which none or few in the Nation are or can be enabled to go through
so dexterously as they now are, who are at present entrusted therewith. In the
interval of which time, Chaos propounds (as that light may appear to be the
fruit of this first days work) that all Suits in Law or Equity may be
determined within six Months; and to that end, that sufficient time be allotted
to the Judges Itinerant in the several Circuits, for hearing and determining of
all matters which shall be brought before them: and that within one month after
the Circuit, another Term be kept in Westminster, where all further Issues may
be joined; and another Circuit a month after that, for finishing the whole
business as to matter of Law.

And for all Actions depending in Equity, let Judges in Chancery sit de die in
diem, and cause speedy examinations of all things needful to be made, and bring
all to hearing in Michaelmas Term next, or shortly after, upon pain of great
Fines to be imposed upon the Judge or Judges who shall be remiss herein, and
absolute loss of the Cause to the Clyent, whether Plaintiff or Defendant, that
shall endeavor further delays; and let Judges enough be appointed for that
purpose at the Commonwealths charge. The like course to be used by all
Committees; and that no new Suits be in the Interim commenced: That public
notice hereof be given to the whole Nation, at or before the next Assizes; and
this to suffice for the first days work: only to show what is intended for
further light to the whole Creation, which is to receive Life and Perfection in
the following days, within in the time allotted, is promised Rules for the five
days work to come, viz. For the

2. Rules for Registers, which shall but be one to all proposers, but
distributed into its several parts.

3. For the Law and Jurisdiction of each several Registerial Court.

4. For future Elections and Transactions of Parliament.

5. For Assesments, Customs, Excise, and Provision for the Poor. And

6. For Trade and Husbandry; under which the Militia shall be comprehended, as
also Provision made for the Ministry and Schools of Learning, as the perfection
of the work: upon each of which, if this be approved of by Authority, and a
Fiat put to the first days work, already proposed, a several Discourse is
intended for each succeding days work, in their proper times, by

CHAOS.
June 21. 1659.
FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for Livewel Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-head-Alley. 1659.


