Several Particulars of the highest Concern to the Kingdom of SCOTLAND, Offered
to Consideration, in Order to the Enriching the same; Without interfering with,
or meanly depending on foreign Nations, more than is usual in all other
Countries.
By a Friend to the Proposal made by D. H. Chamberlen anno 1693, for
Establishing a Land Credit in SCOTLAND.
1. THAT there is great want of Money in this Kingdom, which ought to quicken
their Industry. 2. That there is no want of Land or Hands, as appears by the
Lands Uncultivated or Unimproved, and by the numbers of the Idle and the Poor.
3. That few of those already Employed, are well; or fully, Employed. 4. That a
swift Circulation of a small Sum equals a slow of a Greater. 5. That all Money
hoarded, benefits a Nation no more, than when growing in the Mines. 6. That,
notwithstanding there is neither Land nor Hands wanting in Scotland, yet it is
impossible, it should have a Flourishing Trade without a great Stock of Money
or good Credit. For no Country ever enjoyed a great Trade without Plenty of one
of them; Nor no Country ever failled of a great Trade, that abounded in either.
7. That Credit is a Faith or Belief, of which in Trade there are two Sorts,
Real and Imaginary: The first is founded by Judgment, on certain knowledge of
a sufficient Security: The last in Opinion, on a Supposition of a like
Security, without a Possibility of having any Certainty: The last is a Strong
Faith, and the first is a Reasonable one. 8. That even Imaginary Credit does at
present serve the Ends and Uses of Money in all the Trading Countries of Europe,
at least as well, and in some Respects better, that Gold and Silver Money. How
much better then will a Real Credit? 9. That a Paun is always a better Security
for Credit, than either Honor, Reputation, or even the public Faith: And that
of all Pauns Land is esteemed the most Valueable and Secure on Earth, and the
best Fund or Security for a Credit. 10. That is always the best Fund and
Security for Credit, which can within the limited time Discharge it with
greatest Certainty, and is the least subject to Imbazlement, Deceit, Removal,
or Deficiency during the said time. 11. That Credit does not pass, as some
imagine, because they can draw out their Money at Pleasure: For, if Good, there
can never be such Occasion, nor is it therefore any where practiced: But
because it is at least believed, there is a safe and sufficient Security for it.
12. Scotland abounds not in Money, nor is it probable it will in many Years,
unless CALEDONIA be worth the keeping, and likely to be kept by them: But this
Kingdom may in few Months be Master of some Millions in the best Credit of the
World, equal in Use and Value to the best Money, if not Superior. 13. That
private Persons Estates in Land, tho in England and Ireland, because they are
Islands, but more especially in this Nation, because it has also a Register,
is such an undoubted Security for Credit, which can neither be Deficient,
Imbazled, nor Removed, may be always Increasing in Strength and Value, and is
less subject to Violence, while the World lasts, than any other Land or
Security yet known. 14. That the Scots Parliament has as full Power, as any
other Legislature, to make such Money or Credit current, as they find
Convenient and Safe for Traders to deal with. 15. That to make such Credit here
current, there needs not the Consent of any other Nation, the mere Authority of
this Parliament being sufficient. 16. That such good Credit made Current by Act
of Parliament, does actually become Real Money, and in Use, Value, and
Security, equals the best Silver Money; And will immediately be the same
Advantage to this Nation in every Particular, as if the like Value in Gold or
Silver Money were actually imported. 17. That no Objection can ly against the
raising a good Land Credit in this Nation, which lys not as strong against the
Importation of so much Gold and Silver. 18. That, when all are obliged by Act
of Parliament, to receive this Credit currently in Payment, it is impossible
for any to suffer the least Loss by so doing; Wherefore all ought so to take
it, and then Scotland can never after want Trade or Riches, and scarce can ever
be so happy before. 19. That, when the Wise of this Nation shall be convinced
of the Utile and Possibile of this Proposal, they will by their Example soon
lead their Commonality into a Conformity and Imitation. 20. That no Credit can
miscarry, which is to be answered by Land, Labor or Commodity, and scarce any
can be safe, which must be only answered with Metal in Money. 21. That, when
Credit upon Land or Goods supplies the defects of Metallin Money, there can
never be a stop upon Trade to the end of the World, except by Violence: But,
when Gold or Silver can only serve, it is impossible for Trade to be extended
beyond the Nations Stock of Money, what ever it is. 22. That it is an excellency
in Credit, that it is local and peculiar to a Nation, and what all Wise
Statesmen have hitherto constantly endeavored, tho without Success: Yet, if
thought necessary, it may be easily made current abroad. 23. That Nation can
never avoid Ruin, which provides not Commoditys at Home, sufficient to
Purchase all such Foreign Wares, as are intended for Home Consumption, and to
answer all Foraign Expense; But when it can export more, it may grow Rich in
Gold, Silver and Jewels, and not before. 24. That Nation, which practices most
Justice and Generosity, and is least given to Idleness, will soon have the
advantage in Riches and Power above all other Nations. 25. That the uses of
Riches always increase faster, than Riches in Money can: for there never was
yet any Country, so Rich in Money wherein the greatest part of the Inhabitants
had not occasion, or could not have Employed much more. 26. That, since Land
does every where at all times command Money in Specie, it is full as reasonable,
it should command the like value in any other Commodity, all others being
something inferior to, because now answered by Money. 27. That, if Land were
capable to be conveniently and actually divided, and subdivided into small
parcels, as Gold and Silver are, it is more than probable it would have been
long since made use of for Money: Now by this Proposal it is virtually rendered
capable of serving all the End and Uses of Money, being endued, which all the
Specific and essential Propertys of Money. 28. That Land Credit has this
peculiar property, that there can never be too much nor too little of it:
Neither more nor less, than will at any time be wanted. 29. That Scotland is,
it may be, 20 Millions the worse for want of the Benefit of the said Proposal,
since first made, and must be still yearly at an immense loss till granted and
established.
The Preliminary Positions being allowed; The Proposal follows, which is,
THat there may be advanced, under the Direction, and Comptroll of
Commissioners of Parliament, Bills of Credit, made current by Act of
Parliament, to the value of 100 Years, and of two Thirds of the Annual rent
upon such private Persons Estates, as shall be voluntarly engaged for 150
Years, as a sufficient Fund, to make good the said Bills, which are annually to
be destroyed in proportion to the Rents Contracted for to be yearly Paid into
an Office, for this purpose to be erected.

Which may be thus Explained.
A Gentleman engadgeth 150 lib. per annum, for 150 years, to pay 100 lib. per
annum, in Bills of Credit, for 100 years, which amounts to 10000 lib. In
Consideration of this Rentcharge, there must be provided the value of 10000
lib. in Bills of Credit, to be distributed as follows.

4000 lib. Of the said Credit, to the Proprietors of the said Lands, 3000 lib.
Of the like to a Joint Stock, for a Recompense to Posterity, a Strength to the
Security, and the overplus Profit to the Proprietors only. 2000 lib. To support
of the Office, upon the firm Establishment of which the Prosperity of the whole
depends. 1000 lib. At the Disposal of the Proprietors for public Uses, 10000
lib. And thus in proportion for Larger or Smaller Estates.
The Reasons of this Proposal.
1. THE Commissioners appointed by Parliament, are to Oversee and take Care,
that there shall be neither Neglect nor Fraud committed in the Management of
the Office: that no more Bills be made, then there shall be Rent of Land
engaged to Discharge: and that the Bills shall be exactly cancelled ^o the
value of the Rent annually Paid: and that Provision be made sufficient to
discharge all Sallaries, and contingent Expense relating to this Office. And
for all this the said Commissioners are to be acountable to the Parliament. 2.
The Bills are to be made current, because that will make them actually real
Money in Use and Value equal to Gold and Silver Money. 3. The engaging a third
part of Rent more, and a third part in time longer, is to Strengthen the
Security against all cross Accidents, but not to prejudice the Proprietor, for
he can but pay 10000 lib. in 100 Years. 4. The advancing 100 Years, and no more
nor less, is because that Number makes the design complete: less then 40 years
cannot well invite a wise and generous Propietor, less then 30 to the Stock
cannot well Recompense Posterity, for the encumbrance charged on the Estate by
the present Proprietor; Besides, it is an additional Strength to the Land
Security. Less then 20 cannot well support this Office, and provide against all
Accidents and Contingencies; And its fit, there should be 10 left, above what
is Appropriated, to be at the Propriators disposal so public Use, more than
100 years would Augment the difficulty in scrupulousr Persons imaginations. 5.
The Credit of 100 years Secured by 150 years, is as Good and Safe, as of two
years Secured by three. 6. The advancing of 100 years, gives so much a greater
Intrinsic value to the Nation of Scotland, as it exceeds any less number of
years, that may be proposed. 7. There is no Objection can be made against 100
years, which lies not as strong against 7 years or fewer. 8. The Bills are
always to be cancelled, (or at least, not to be sent again out of the Office,
without a new Fund) when ever they are paid in for Rent: Because, so much of
the Fund being thereby lessened, they must otherwise hereafter prove a loss
upon the Nation, for want of a Fund to make them good. 9. There is liberty
enough in the nature of this Undertaking, for any circumstantial Variation
which is prudential, and may seem good to the greatest number of the
Proprietors. 10. There can be no loss to any that receives this Credit in Trade
and Dealing, because there is above double the Value Secured in Land-Rents,
together with the Joint Stock, and both Appropriated to Buy them up at their
full value within the Term: Beside^, the Parliaments Authority to oblige all
Persons to take them in the mean time at the same Value.
A few Considerations subsequent to the Proposal made by Dr. Hugh Chamberlane.
In the Proposal there are these particular Advantages.

1. THere can be no considerable Hazard or Loss in the Attempt and Experiment,
scarce of a Shilling for a thousand Pound Sterling. 2. There can be no loss to
any by the currency of these Bills during the whole Term, nor afterward. 3.
The Proposer can reap no Benefit by the same, unless the Nation gains a much
greater.
All prudent Government considers what Profit will redound to their Country by
any new Proposal, without envying the Advantage to the Proposer, be it what it
will.

1. Nothing will be Rejected or Condemned by a Wise Nation, till well
considered: And nothing can be well Considered, till fully Heard and Examined,
together with the Answers to every Objection. 2. Nothing will be neglected by
the Wise, because Objections may be raised against it, till the Inconveniences
appear to exceed the Benefits thereof. 3. If the Parliament should please to
pass an Act for Establishing the foresaid Proposal, de been esse, no other
Consequence could happen: But either that this Kingdom might enjoy the full
Benefit of the same: Or, That the English and other Strangers will buy all the
Lands in Scotland, that will be sold, at Thirty Years Purchase ready Money: Or
Lastly, Which is the worst that can be, it will sink of it self without the
help of any Proviso in the Act to that Purpose, or without any loss to the
Nation. 4. Good Things wants no Precedent: And bad things are not mended by
having one. 5. Scotland has Eyes and Understand of their own, and can best
Judge what is fit for themselves, without an Implicit Imitation of other
Nations.
Many Things are practiced in England, which Scotland does not think fit to
imitate, as Bishops, etc. And somethings are done in Scotland, of which there
is no Precedent in England, as a Register vigorously opposed by the Lawyers and
some Statesmen. England does not always know their own Good, nor foresees how
Poverty is at present stealing in upon them.

These Considerations are at the Command of several Judicious Noblemen and
Gentlemen, committed to the Press, and submitted to the Judgment and Candor of
this Nation. And all Ingenuous Persons who have yet any Doubt or Objection to
make, are hereby kindly entreated to send them to the Printer hereof, in some
short time, that so the Answers may be published and well considered before the
next Session of Parliament.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1700.


