THE CHARGE AND Articles of High Treason EXHIBITED AGAINST The Earl of Derby,
At a Council of War in the City of CHESTER, WITH His Trial and Examination; his
Speech at the Council Table, and his Declaration and Propositions touching the
surrender of the Isle of Man.

ALSO, The Parliaments Resolution concerning Major Genesis Massey: And the
Examination and Confession of Mr. Sandwitch, the King of Scots Trumpeter, who
was taken at Hallifax in Yorkshire, on Wednesday last. With his Narrative and
Declaration touching his Master. Showing the manner how he escaped from
Hallifax disguised.

London, Printed for George Horton, 1651.

THE Charge and Articles OF HIGH TREASON AGAINST The Earl of Derby, with the
Trial, examination, and Confession, on Tuesday and Wednesday, before a
Court-Marshal at Chester.
UPon the 16th of this instant month, by an extraordinary Messenger from
Chester it is advertized, That the Earl of Derby was brought before the
Court-Marshal, consisting of Col. Duckenfield and 15 Commission-Officers, where
the Judge Advocate brought in, and read the Charge against him, consisting of
High Treason, viz.

1. That he had in a most traitorous and hostile manner, been aiding, abetting,
and assisting to Charles Stuart (Son to the late Tyrant.)

2. That he had held correspondency and confederacy with the said Charles
Stuart, and his accomplices; and to the utmost of his power, endeavored the
subversion and extirpating of this present Government; as also the violating
and abolishing the Law and Discipline, so happily by them established.

3. That he had traitorously endeavored to involve this NATION in another
bloody and intestine War, by issuing forth and sending Warrants in Laucashire,
and summoning in the people to a Randevouz.

4. That he had most traitorously appeared in the head of a party, both in
Cheshire, Lancashire, and other places within this Nation, and granted
Commissions, signed C. R [being a signal used by the grand enemy of this
Common-wealth] to diverse Gentlemen, Papists, and others, for the raising of
forces against the Parliament, etc. The Judge Advocate having read the Charge,
his Lordship made a short Speech in answer thereunto, to wit, That he had not
acted in the least, contrary to the Commands of his Master the King; but what
he had done, was in order and obedience to the power and Instructions from him
received.

After which Col. Duckenfield and the rest of the Council, proceeded to
examination, and stated the matters of fact, consisting of High Treason; which
caused his Lordship to look very pensively, and moved him so far, that he would
fain do something which might be considered, and himself in it; and withal,
declares a good inclination to deliver up the Isle of Man, to the present
power; only here lies a scruple, That he is afraid it will be imputed as a very
ignoble and dishonorable thing, to surrender up his Children and Lady in it.
But after some time spent in this business, the Council referred the further
proceedings in his Trial until another time.

The matters of fact exhibited against him, are of a very high nature, and its
probable may draw a severe sentence upon him: diverse other persous of quality
there are which were engaged also in this treasonable design, who are likewise
to be brought to the Bar of Justice: Therefore I conceive it requisite, to
present to the freeborn people of this Nation: certain Rules and Proposals,
showing the happiness and joy that will redound to all those at the hour of
death that walk steadfastly in the ways of Holiness; and the misery and
torments that will befall on the contrary, to those that are opposers, and kick
against the Ordinances thereof. An evident demenstration whereof follows.

A seasonable Declaration and Remonstrane to the People.
THat when a Child of God dies, though his death be never so unnatural and
violent, yet it is nothing else but a falling asleep. Or, the death of a Child
of God, though stoned to death, though burnt to ashes, though it be never so
violent and unnatural, is nothing else but a falling asleep, When he had said
this, he fell asleep;

Somnus est mortis imago, Sleep is the image of death. There are many notable
resemblauces betwixt sleep and death, some of which I shall speak unto at this
time.

First, Sleep is common to all men, there is no man can live without sleep. So
it is true of death, death is common to all, it is appointed for all men once
to die: And therefore David said, He was to go the way of all flesh, Statum est
omnibus semel mori, Omnibus est calcanda semel lethi via, All men must sleep
the sleep of death, or else be changed, which is a metaphorical death.

2. As sleep arises from the vapors that ascend from the stomach to the head,
and tie the senses, and hinder their operations; so death came into the world
by Adams eating the forbidden fruit, and by the poysonful vapor of sin, that
brought death upon him, and all his posterity. By one man sin entered into the
world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all have
sinned, Romans 5.12. Had Adam never sinned, Adam should never have died: But in
Illo die, said God. In that day thou eatest the forbidden fruit thou shall die
the death, Sin brings omnimodam mortem, all kinds of death; it brings death
temporal, death spiritual, and death eternal.

3. As a man when he goes to sleep puts off his Clothes, and goes naked into
bed: so it is with us when we come to die; we came naked into the world, and we
must go naked out of the world; as we brought nothing with us into the world,
so we must carry nothing with us out of the world: and therefore death in
Scripture is called nothing else but an uncloathing of our selves, 2 Cor. 5.4.
Death to a Child of God is nothing else but the putting off his Clothes.

Beloved, when we come to die we shall be stripped naked of three things.

1 We shall be stripped naked of all our worldly honor, riches and greatness.

2 We shall be stripped naked of our Bodies: And

3 Which is above all, we shall be stripped naked of our sins, and that is the
happiness of a Child of God, he shall put off not only his mortal body, but the
body of sin.

4 In the fourth place observe, as no man knows the time when he falls
asleep, a man falls asleep before he is aware: so no man can tell the certain
time when he must die: There is nothing so certain as that we must die, nothing
so uncertain as the time when we shall die: Death comes suddenly, even as sleep
comes upon a man before he is aware:

5 Observe, as Children and Infants, because they do not know the benefit of
sleep, are very loath to go to sleep; many times the Mother is fain to whip the
Child to bed, even so it is with most of Gods people, because they do not study
the benefit of death:

6 Observe, as when a man is fast asleep, he is free from cares and troubles;
let it thunder, (as it thundered not long since, as you know) yet a man that is
fast asleep, while he is asleep, he hears it not; let the house be on fire,
while the man is asleep, he sees it not, neither is he troubled at it: So when
a Child of God sleeps the sleep of death, he does not feel, nor is he sensible
of any of the calamities, or sad providence of God upon the earth:

7 When a man goes to sleep, he goes to sleep but for a certain time, in the
morning he awakes out of sleep. So it is with the sleep of death; and therefore
death is called a sleep, because we must all awake in the morning of the
Resurrection:

8 Sleep is a great refreshing to those that are weary and sick, and when the
sick man awakes, he is more lively and cheerful then he was when he fell
asleep; and therefore sleep is called Medicus laberum, redintegrasio virium,
recreator corporum, The great Physician of the sick body, the redintegration of
man's spirits, the reviver of the weary body: And so it is with death, when Gods
people awake out of the sleep of death, they shall be made active for God, then
ever they were before; when you lie down in the grave, you lie down with mortal
bodies; It is sown a mortal body, but it shall rise up an immortal body; it is
sown in dishonor, but it shall rise up in honor; it is sown a natural body,
but it shall rise up a spiritual body:

9 As in the morning when we arise out of our beds, we then put on our Clothes:
So in the morning of the Resurrection, we shall put on a glorious body, like to
the glorious body of Jesus Christ, we shall put on Stolam immortalitatis, the
Garment of immortality:

10 As no man when he lays him down to sleep, knows the direct time when he
shall awake, so no man can tell when the resurrection shall be: They do but
cousen you, who say, that the general Resurrection shall be such or such a
year; for, as no man can know the minute when he shall awake out of his natural
sleep, no more can any man know when we shall arise from the sleep of death.

11 It is a very easy thing to awake a man out of sleep, it is but jogging of
him and you will quickly awake him.

1. As when a man arises in the morning, though he has slept mary hours; nay,
suppose he could sleep 20 years together, yet notwithstanding, when he awakes,
these 20 years will seem to be but as one hour unto him: So it will be at the
day of judgment, all those that are in their graves, when they awake it will
be tanquam somnus unius horae, but as the sleep of an hour unto them.

Lastly, and most especially, as sleep seizes only upon the body, and the
outward senses, but does not seize upon the soul, the soul of man is many
times most busy, when the man is asleep; And God has heretofore revealed most
glorious things to his Children in dreams, when they have been sleep; God
appeared unto Abraham and many others in dreams, the body sleeps, but the soul
awakes a So it is with the sleep of death, the body, that dies, but the soul
does not die.

If ever you would sleep an happy sleep in death, then labor to work hard for
Heaven while you live. On how delightful is sleep to a weary man? When a man
has taken pains all the day, as the Traveller that has traveled all the day,
or the Plough man that has been at work all the day, how quietly, how soundly
does he sleep in the night? O Beloved! If ever you would sleep an happy sleep
at death then labor to work out your salvation with fear and trembling, and
give all diligence to make your Calling and Election sure. The more you labor
for Heaven, the better, the sweeter will your sleep be when you come to die.
And remember this, That as much sleeping in the day time, will hinder a man's
sleep at night: So you that idle away the time of your providing for heaven in
this your day, you that sleep away the minute upon which eternity does depend,
you will take a sad sleep when deach seizes upon you. Sin is such a sleep as
brings the sleep of death: Sin brings the first death, and sin brings the
second death, all miseries whatsoever are the Daughters of sin.

If you would sleep an happy sleep, and have an happy awakening at the
Resurrection, then take heed of the sleep of sin, Awake thou that sleep,
arise from the dead, and Jesus Christ shall give thee life.

By Letters from York shire on Saturday night last it is advertised, that
diverse of the Gentry and Officers that escaped from the late fight at Worcester
with Charles Stuart, were apprehended on the 17th instant in Hallifax: and
amongst the rest Mr. William Sanditch the King of Scots Trumpeter, who upon
examination confessed, That his Master, with the Duke of Buckingham,
Scout-master Gen: Hind, the great Robber, and six more, made an escape about 3
of the clock in the morning, and being asked in what habit he used to attire
himself in this his forlorn Pilgrimage: He answered, That he changed his
Apparel every other day; sometimes riding in a gray suit, sometimes in black,
and sometimes in Buff: Then Col: Lassels asked him how he could procure all
these, He replied, by the means of Scoutmaster Hind, who not only did this,
but also procured fresh Horse every day, as occasion required: And the
Trumpeter further declared, That his Master had disguised his hair, and had cut
off his black Lock: The Colonel replied. A fair Omen for his head: But after
some time spent in examination of him and others, they were all committed to
safe custody, till the further pleasure of the Parliament be known therein.

Major Genesis Massey is ordered by the Parliament of England, to be tried by a
Council of War at London; but as yet he remains at Leicester in a very weak
condition:

The Earl of Cleaveland and the Lord Lauderdale now prisoners in the Tower of
London, its probable will be tried by a High Court of Justice: As they passed
along Cornhill in their Coaches with a Guard of Horse, the Earl of Lauderdales
Coach made a stand near the Conduit, where a Carman gave his Lordship a visit,
saying, O my Lord, you are welcome to London, I protest off goes your head, as
round as a Hoop: But his Lordship put off this fatal Complement only with a
laughter, and so they passed along to the Tower:

FINIS.

