THE Chancellors Examination and Preparation FOR A TRIAL.
As the long Imprisonment of George Lord Jefferys late High Chancellor of
England, has given him ample leisure for a full and serious Confideration of
his state, his Examination of his fatal Circumstances and Preparation for his
Trial, with all other necessary and due Reflections, previous as well to the
Appearance not only before so great a Tribunal here, but also a greater and
more terrible one to come, have induced him to this timely provision of his
List Will and Testament.

In the Name of AMBITION, the only God of our own setting up and worshipping,
together with Cruelty, Treachery, Perjury, Pride, Insolence etc. his
ever-adored Angels and Archangels, clovenfooted, or otherwise, Amen.

I George, sometimes Lord, but always Jeffrys, being in entire bodily Health,
(my once great Heart at present dwindled to the Diminutive Dimensions of a
French Bean, only excepted) and in sound and perfect Memory of High
Commissions, Quo Warranto's, Regulations, Dispensations, Pillorizations,
Flaugations, Gibbetations, Barbarity, Butchery, Tyranny, together with the
Bonds and Ties of Right, Justice, Equity, Law, and Gospel; as also those of
Liberty, Property, Magna Charta, etc. not only at diverse and sundry, but at
all times by me Religiously broken; and being reminded by a Halter before me,
and my Sins behind me, do make my last Will and Testament in manner and form
following.

Imprimis, Because it has always been the modish Departure of Great Men and
Greater Sinners, to leave some Legacy to pious Uses, I give and bequeath 1000
l. toward the building of a Shrine and a Chapel to St. Coleman, for the
particular Devotion of a late very great English Zealot, for whose Glory I
farther order my Executors to bear half charges in inserting and registring the
sacred Papers and Memoirs of the said Saint, in those Divine Legends The Lives
of the Saints, by the Hand of his reverend and no less industrious Successor
Father Peter's; that so the never-dying Renown of the long-swore meritorious
(though unfortunate) Vengeance against the Northern Heresy, (in which
once-hopeful Vineyard I have been no small Labourer) may be transmitted to
posterity by so pious a Recorder.

Item. As a Legacy to her late Consort-Majesty of Creat Britain, my sometimes
Royal Patroness, I do bequeath 3000 Crowns to Holy Mother Church, to purchase
through his Holiness, and the good Lady of Loretto's Intercession, the same
Benediction to the French Waters of Spaw, they once vouchsafed to the English
ones of Bath, to give her Majesty the Conception of a Duke of York to her
Prince of Wales; humbly with my dying breath requesting, for the future
silencing of Malice and confutation of Infidelity, that her said Majesty would
in due prudence graciously please to select out for her next Labor, but half
as able Witnesses and reeking Spectators of her Delivery as my self, there
being in her late case no person in the World a more experimentally substantial
Evidence of a Male Child born of the body of a Queen, at full growth at 8
months; when it is so notoriously known, that my own first Female Child (...) my
Wifes was at the like full growth born at 5 mo^^

Item, In tenderness and hearty good will to m^ sometimes-Friends and Allies on
the other side, the Herring-pond, I think sit (as a small Mite to the great
Cause) to order my Executors out of my late Son-in law's Estate, saved by my
own Chancery Decree from the Salisbury Creditors, as much Money to be remitted
over to the true and trusty Tyrconnel, as will purchase new Liveries of the
best Irish Frieze, completely to rig a whole Regiment of his new rais'^
Leagues; as also the like quantity for the riggin^ of another Regiment of
French Dragoons, now sending over to his Excellencies succor; his Gallic^
Majesty having long since ordered the Edict of Nant and all other the
parliamentary Heretic Records of France to (...) given 'em gratis, to make 'em
Tailors measure or, in imitation of the English Magna Charta, some time since
designed for the same use.

But above all, to take Care for my own Decent Funeral, lest my Executors, to
Save the charges of Christian burial, should drop me under Ground, as slovenly
as my, old great Master, at Westminsier, I think fit to order the Rites and
Ceremonies of my Obsequies, as follows:

Imprimis, I desire that my Funeral Anthems be all set to the Tune of old Lilli
burlero, that never to be forgotten Irish Shiboleth, in Commemoration not only
of 200000 Heretics, that formerly Danced off to the said Musical Notes, but
also of the second part to the same tune, lately designing, setting, and
composing by a Great Master of mine, and my self. The said Anthem to be Sung by
a train of seven or eight hundred Orphans of my own making in the West; who in
their native Rags (a Livery likewise of my own Donation) as a Dress fittest
for the sad Cavalcade, will (I am assured) be no way wanting in their readiest
and ablest Melody, suitable to the occasion.

Item, I order 200 Jacobusses to be laid out in Myrrh Frankincense, and other
necessary Persumes, to be burnt at my Funeral, to sweeten, if possible, some
little stink, I may probably leave behind me.

Item, I order an Ell and half of fine Cambrick to be cut out into
Handkerchers, for drying up all the wet Eyes at my Funeral, together with half
a pint of burnt Claret, for all the Mourners in the Kingdom.

Item, for the more Decent Interrment of my Remains, I Will and Require, for
the Re-cementing of my unhappy politic Head to my Shoulders again, (provided
always I have the honor of the Axe, as it is much questioned) that a present of
a Diamond Ring be made to Madam Labadie, for the use of the same Needle, and a
Skean of the same Thread, once used on a very important occasion, for the
Quilting of a certain notable Cushion of Famous Memory.

To conclude. For avvoyding all Chancery Suits about the Disposal of my
aforesaid Legacies, that the Contents of this my Last Will may be made public,
I order my Executors to take care that This may be Printed.

Printed for W. Cademan, 1689.


