Some Useful REFLECTIONS UPON A PAMPHLET Called a Brief ACCOUNT Of the intended
BANK of ENGLAND, WHERE UNTO Is annexed a short Description of Docter
Chamberlens's BANK.

The Second Edition with Additions.

LONDON, Printed by T. S. and Sold by Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall, 1694.

Some useful REFLECTIONS UPON A PAMPHLET Called a Brief ACCOUNT Of the intended
BANK of ENGLAND.
THis Pamphlet contains many incoherences, bold Assertions without proofs,
Objections not Trivial without Answers, several Contradictions, Falsities, and
Impertinences, with ingrammatical Expressions, all wrapped up in an
unintelligible Style, many of which, not being much to the main Scope, and
Purpose, I shall forbear taking notice of, because I would neither trouble my
Reader, nor my self to so little purpose, but intend to pick out, as well as I
can, what he means by it, which in short I take to be an endeavor (tho faintly
done) to recommend his Bank, and to blast the Reputation of some Persons, and
better Proposals of the same Nature. I say faintly done, because he does the
first so aukwardly, and the last so imperfectly, or rather not at all; for he
says enough in the Book to justify every part of the proposal (if he means
that of Credit for a Fishery) and to vindicate the Reputation of the Author,
from the very calumnies he would therein asperse him with; how well therefore
he has performed his mighty undertaking, will appear to the world by the
sequel.

Ex ungue Leonem. The first Paragraph, p. 1. is sufficient to discourage a Man
from looking further into the Book, it is so Nonsensical: But yet he therein
confesses Banks to be useful; that Interest is at Present high, and ought to
be low for the Benefit of Trade, which he would imply may be remedied by his
Bank, and that some things else, besides Gold and Silver, can answer the uses
and do the Office of money; p. 22. and 15. and then he asserts without proving,
that the want of public Funds is the cause of high Interest, and of the loss
of many Millions, to the discouragement and obstruction of Trade, and that no
tolerable reason can be given, either in Notion or Practice for the high
Interest, considering the Riches and Trade of England, unless it be the want of
public Funds: This I take to be the sum and meaning of all his heap of Words
in the first Paragraph.

Upon which I will endeavor to make some useful Remarks; as first, That good
Banks are certainly very Beneficial to Trade; but bad Banks (such as are under
no sufficient check, and that can give no Security equal to the great trust
reposed in them, and the hazards they are subject to, that can do very much
mischief by one false step, of which they may make many, and are in diverse
respects dangerous and prejudicial) can be never prudently countenanced by any
Nation; tho one, provided against all these, and the like inconveniences, ought
by a wise People to be encouraged without the least delay.

His Second Concession concerning Low Interest is very true; but a little lower
he says, No Reason can be given for it, and then I am sure, he does not
understand it, and therefore is not likely to find out a true Remedy. He ought
to prove here, that his Bank can and will lower Interest, and not falsely
suppose, the want of public Funds is the cause of it, for they are not wanted;
the Crown Revenue, the Church Lands, the Poors Rate, and abundance more are
public Funds, nor is there any want of private Funds for such purposes, but
it is the want of Authority from the Government, to apply them to these uses,
and the want of satisfactory Securities, which makes Money and Credit scarce
with respect to the many occasions requiring them, and so keeps up the value of
Interest. Nor was it the want of public Funds, but of sound Credit and
Security occasioned the loss of so many Millions, which loss, being amongst our
selves, made the Nation never the worse, tho particular Persons were.

He mentions unnecessary Credit, which can never have a being; I suppose he
therefore means an unsafe Credit, but wanted words to express it.

In his last Concession I am glad to find, that something else besides Gold and
Silver will answer the uses of Money p. 2.5.15; which I suppose dropped unawares
from his Pen, for I am sure if something else can; then the Lumbard-Bank was no
such strange thing, and the Land Credit for the Fishery must needs be better
than any thing else he can find, nay, even so much better than the idol Gold
and Silver, as Land Security is better than Personal, or Goods pledged; and
this is no private Opinion, for where ever Gold and Silver has a value, Land
has a greater: It Is so even in Holland, where they know very well both how to
esteem and use Money. Thus much upon his first Paragraph.

His Second Paragraph mends his First but very little. There he says Banks and
Funds have been discoursed and expected for many Years, but hindered from
settlement by refined Politicians, because England was no Commonwealth;
insomuch as it became matter of Derision to plead for them, and was like to
deprive us of this present happy Production.

This Paragraph, p. 2. is very true, Banks have not wanted both Pleaders and
Writers in their Behalf, and none has acted therein, both in Season and out of
Season, more than Dr. Chamberlyn, not without his Suffering much from the
Witticisms of some of the then modish Ridiculers, who now give themselves the
lie by becoming such mighty advocates for this Bank at present; Turpe est
Doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum. Such Politicians as would not allow of Banks
here (because it is no Commonwealth) mistook the English Constitution very
much, for, till the time of King Charles the Second, no body was ashamed to
call it a Commonwealth; but yet notwithstanding I do for diverse Reasons think
any Bank is better here than Money Banks. But such as are for founding Banks
originally upon a Revenue or Goods, must rob the Doctor of the fruits of his
Labor, Charge, and Invention, if they do not consider him accordingly.

This Third Paragraph, p. 2: is very Pleasant, tho not in the least better
Penned, the Substance of which is, that some mercurial Heads had contrived a
Bank, not only secured from the Prince, but from all Mankind besides; and then
he gives an instance of a Lumbard-Bank, and asserts the crying down Gold and
Silver by some, and that better reasons must be given to bring People out of
their old way, who will not else leave it, unless they should be wheedled or
enticed; he proceeds falsely to assert, that it is pretended, Denomination gives
value to Money, and that by anticipating Ages inestimable value was to be
imagined from years to come, and this to be crammed down the Throats of s ch as
would not believe a Lumbard to be a Bank; and that this wanted an Act of
Parliament; and thus the genius of some English Men seems very different; this
is the Sense; but, that I may not be thought to impose any thing for Truth,
which is not, the Reader is referred to the original Text, to excuse me from
the Drudgery of repeating so much stuff.

I am sure, whatever Mercurial Heads there may be, my Author is free from that
Scandal, unless he has been in Cornelius's Tub: He has so little Fancy, that he
can scarce repeat things truly, as said or writ before him; he verifies the
saying, ex quovis ligno non fit Mercurius. The objection of violence from a
Prince, may not be so very strange, for, though our Present Prince be clear
from the Suspicion of any thing like it, yet may not Princes arise of different
Sentiments that may again shut up the Exchequer? Or may not Courtiers prevail
upon the easiness of some Princes, to commit what they may afterward repent
of? And therefore if it can be so established as to be free from any such
Danger, why should we leave it subject to such a Temptation? He then proceeds
with his usual confidence falsely to assert, and says, the proposed Bank, I
believe he means still the Fishery, is so far from the Princes's Seizure, that
none else can reach their Right out of it.

To this I must reply, that the Land-Bank including a Fishery was so securely
and justly contrived, that no Man whatsoever could want their due, or be a
loser by it, which is more than can be promised by his; for, if the whole
1200000 l. should be called for in Specie, can they always pay it in Specie? If
so, then their Bank is but a Plot to pick 8 per cent. out of the People for the
Money advanced, without any other advantage either to the People or the
Traders. But if it is to keep an Account of 1200000 l. as I find farther in the
Book, and to circulate the whole with 300000 l. what is there more than
imagination for the Rest? unless he will answer, there are other effects in
Lands or Goods, and then he is compelled to justify his Bank by Dr.
Chamberlyn's Methods, and with less security; and if it is reasonable in his,
it is a wonder it should have no credit in the Doctor's. He then says, the
first design of this sort was to turn a Lumbard into a Bank; admit it, if it
can be done, what is the hurt? But still he shows his Ignorance both of
Lumbards and Banks, for a Lumbard is only to lend small Sums upon Pawns to
support the Poor; a Bank is to pass Credit upon a Pledge, whether Money or
Goods, as Hamburgh does for the accommodation of the Rich. Now the Office, he
means, was never called a Lumbard by the Undertakers, because they knew better,
but a Bank or Office of Credit, where such Credit was past, as the Goods, with
respect to their Duration and Market-price could well bear, and this is still
but what my Author and his Companions plead for themselves? If they intend as
they say, page 14. to have but 2 or 300000 l. to circulate 1200000 l. the rest
then must be secured either by something or nothing; if by something, it must
be Goods or Land, and then it is either the Doctor's Office of Credit or
Land-bank; if by nothing, their Creditors have a fine time of it. He goes on
and tells the People, they are a Company of Children and Fools without
Understanding, and are to be wheedled and enticed to their own good, and that
there is no hopes of bringing them to it by rational conviction, which is but a
course Complement; then he runs forward so fiercely against Sense and Truth,
like the Parson in his Pulpit against Satan and Antichrist, whom the Clock
could not stop, that no Reason, Demonstration or Conviction can stop this
powerful Author, who after his usual Fashion says, That the promoters of the
Lumbard Bank did cry down the use of Gold and Silver, and affirm, that Stamp
and Denomination gave Money the Value. I dare challenge him to show one line to
this purpose; if there were one line, it must be lapsus pennae, for there are
above 20 places, in all the Papers Printed first and last by them, maintain the
contrary. Now if this Author is detected of so many untruths in the beginning
of his Book, what credit can be given to the rest? For it was always expressed,
that Stamp and Denomination only marks and names the value, but gives none; and
that Trade can be managed by good Credit as well as with Gold and Silver, and
that the chief use of Gold and Silver would be then for Sums under Five Pound,
as an inferior Species of Money to Credit, to prevent Scores and
Book-Accounts, and whoever looks narrowly into the Nature and Property of
Money, of Gold and Silver, will find many things besides may be made as useful
for Money, and in some places more useful than Gold and Silver, as he
confesses, p. 25. and 15. to run Counter to Mankind, if it were true, as he
says we do, is neither strange nor ill; for did not Philosophy and Anatomy, nay
even Christianity it self at first run Counter to Mankind, and of late Years,
and here at Home, was not Excise and Banks counter to our English? Humors? And
many other things I could Name, and yet did they not grow, or are they not
coming into Use and Credit? May it not therefore be possible for some to see
before the rest of Mankind? He comes next to a hard Word, Anticipating Ages: I
would fain know how Ages are Anticipated more by a term of a Hundred Years,
than by a perpetuity, as in the late Act, and whether if the Money be not paid
at the 11 Years End, the Bank cannot go on another 11 Years upon the same
Security, and so from time to time, till above 100 years shall be past, and
whether Men do not daily make Purchaces for ever? But that which I suppose the
Immercurial Head means, (if he could speak) is that he cannot conceive, how an
Estate can answer a Hundred Years Revenue, when it will sell but for 20. I
would fain ask him whether the Purchaser does not expect in process of Time, to
draw many years more than a Hundred Years Revenue to himself and his Heirs? And
whether the reason, why Men give commonly in England but 20 Years Purchase, is
not, because it answers the interest of 5 per cent. which the Purchaser
expects, when he lays out his Money, which he takes to be secured by the Land,
as his Interest is by the Rent, and, if Interest were lower, would not the
purchase of Land cost more Years; and, if higher, fewer Years? so that it is
not, because Land is worth no more than 20 Years, that it sells for no more;
but because Men will not part with their Money for Land for much less than
'twill yield at Interest, so that if Men must part with their Land for Money,
they must pay the price of Money, and if Men want no Money, or could not
purchase again for less, no wise Man would part with his Land for above a
Hundred Years Purchase. He is angry, that it was proposed in the Land-Bank to
have the Credit imposed in Payment; his anger might have been just, if he had
lived in any Country where there were no Manner of Impositions: What does he
think (besides the Lights, Poors Rate, all Taxes, and many more) of imposing
the Tunnage for his Bank, and a sort of imposing his very Bank on the People?
If nothing ought to be imposed, What becomes of his Bank? If something may,
What, and for what Reason? Is it not answered for the Public Good, tho there
were a particular loss? Why may not the Tickets of Credit in the Land-Bank be
then imposed, when it can be easily proved? Never was there any thing so much
for the Public Good without the least present or future Hurt or Damage to any,
and therefore 'twas not so wonderful that for so great a good an Act of
Parliament should be endeavored for; but why should that be more criminal in
the Doctor than in my Author? has not his Bank wanted an Act of Parliament? And
it is well, if it will serve his turn, and be sufficient without a supplement to
support the Credit of all, my Author and his Companions here confess and imply,
they will put upon it. It Is very true, there are different genius's amongst our
Countrymen, some that will not understand, and some that cannot; some Mercurial
heads, and some Block heads; but notwithstanding, there has nothing been
hitherto writ upon the Land-Bank, that cannot be made in an Hours time very
intelligible, to a very in different understanding.

In the Fourth Paragraph, p. 3. there is little deserves Notice, but that he
severely chides the House of Commons, for finding no better ways to supply the
Government, than with double and treble Interest, and that he is sensible, good
things as this Bank, may be thought scandalous at one time, which may be judged
honorable at another; and that the evil consequence of high Interest was, to
draw the Money out of Trade and improvement. But he does not consider, that
this would have been but a short-lived Mischief, if the Money had still
remained in the Nation; nor does he show, how his Bank will remedy this.

His Fifth Paragraph, p. 4. mentions an intended remedy to the said Evil, which
I think would hardly have proved so, and then he seems to allow the possibility
of uniting a Bank and Lumbard together, and that a good part of the effects of
the Nation might thereby have been made serviceable to Trade and Business, p.
2.15. and would of course have lowered Interest; how this could have been
without passing Credit upon the effects I cannot tell, and if it does, how it
differs from the Doctor's, passes my shallow understanding. He falls here upon
Currency, and explains it below to be coercion, which he says would turn any
ones Stomach; does the Lights in the Winter to 12 at Night turn any Man's
Stomach? And many other impositions? Why should this? But I would fain ask this
Question, Is it the Wife or the Fools takes Bills of Credit upon the Exchange
for Money, or both? The Wise I think first, and the Fools follow.

What hurt can there be then for the Parliament to impose, what wise Men
voluntarily choose; if any can suffer by such an imposition, I conjure him to
show how? Forcing of a Good upon the Subject by a lawful Authority is the Duty
as well as Interest of the Government, and none but Fools and Knaves can be
sick of such a Force, who are daily ready to swallow a greater, if they can
find an exemption or private advantage, tho the whole Nation rues for it.

The Sixth Paragraph, p. 5. Insinuates, Wheedle and Cheat to be the best means
to prevail upon the English weak understandings, and allows, that things may be
very good, tho not yet understood; methinks this might have stopped his career of
censuring, till he was sure he had been in the right; and then he proceeds,
that the Government who ought to understand it, because 'twas supposed so good,
could not; whence I conclude, things may sometimes be very good, tho the
Government may not at first apprehend them so; he ends this Paragraph with a
Flattery to his Bank, but gives no Reason for it.

The Seventh Paragraph, p. 6. ends with this pleasant Expression, that it was
found convenient to put it to a hazard, and to expose so much of the Nature of
the thing and its Constitution as was needful, to have it espoused in
Parliament. I thought there was a Snake in the Grass, there is something more,
than was fit to acquaint the House with, all the rest of this Paragraph is an
impertinent discourse.

This Eighth Paragraph, p. 7. talks of Hobgoblins, and tells us, they begat
objections, which are never like to be Answered, and I believe he is much in
the right of it, unless it be by practice, which I confess answers objections
much sooner, and more convincingly than discourse can, but I am afraid these
objections will be hardly well removed by the practice of his Bank.

The Ninth Paragraph, p. 7. brings on the first Objection, which possibly may
not prove true, but I am sure the reason given for it is true, the moneyed Men
are timorous and complying, and therefore very well deserves his answer.

The Tenth Paragraph, p. 8. brings up the Second Objection, which is also true,
for the Banks under Monarchy of Lions, and Florence, as I take it, could not
continue, tho those of Amsterdam and Hamburgh under Republics still flourish,
and 'twould be a service also to the public to answer this Objection well.

The Eleventh Paragraph, p. 8. makes in the third Objection some discovery of
their intentions to pass Credit upon Land, and if so, it may raise the value of
it, and that were no great hurt if it did; but wherein then does this differ
from the Doctor's, but as minus and majus, the less and the greater?

The Twelfth, p. 9. Names the Fourth Objection, which is contrary to the Third,
that all Money will run into Trade and abate the value of Land, but they do not
consider, that purchasing is Trading, and let it run where it will, if it runs
not out of the Nation and but fast enough, both Trade and Land will partake of
the benefit; but I would fain have my Author answer these Objections in defense
of his Bank, he must either grant the Objections, and submit, or deny them, and
then he may possibly incur some other Hazard, incidit in Scyllam qui vult
vitare Charybdin. I cannot see how and where he proves this Bank to be the best
security in Europe, or any thing better than the Bankers; it may probably be
worse than theirs.

Methinks he comes but shamefully off in the Thirteenth Paragraph, p. 9. in
giving no reply to the Objections, which tho they were not very material, and
might be easily answered, yet if any person made them, 'twas but civil to give
them an answer.

The First of his Premises in the Fourteenth Paragraph, p. 9. no Person versed
in Trade will deny.

The 2d. of the Premises in the Fifteenth Paragraph, p. 10. is not well
expressed and his conclusion is very false; for tho every thing besides Gold
and Silver is measured, and the value named by money, yet it is valuable in its
self, for its Use and Service to our Necessity or Pleasure; for else, how can
they be Valuable where there is no Money, a hungry Man values Bread, tho there
were no Money in the Country; and also in a Siege, tho there is Money, and
prefers it above Money, and will give a great deal of Money at such a time for
a little piece of Bread. And now, to instruct my Merchant a little in the
Nature of Values; he must consider, that every thing in this World has a Value
according to its use, for Pleasure or Necessity, and that Value is either
intrinsic, according to the Charge, Hazard and Pains it costs to bring it to
the Market or Consumer; or extrinsick, according to the pl^nty of the Commodity
and the paucity of Chapmen to Buy. For further satisfaction see a Paper called,
Considerations upon the vote of the House of Commons, Friday the 24th. of
February, for hindering the exportation of Gold and Silver, Printed by Salisbury
Bookseller next St. Dunstan's Church in the West, 1693.

The Third of the Premises in the Sixteenth Paragraph, p. 10. if true, must
altogether condemn the Fund of this Bank; for the Parliamentary Fund is an
Annual Revenue of 100000 l. with but 2 or 300000 l. cash for 1200000 l. Credit;
now what else supports the 900000 l. Credit of the 1200000 l. but the Revenue?
therefore it is not founded on the Species of Gold and Silver, and must by the
Authors own words be impracticable, and can never subsist. And tho his said
Assertion is false, the Doctor's Land-bank can very well subsist, and can add
Credit as an other Species, which no doubt will be chosen by the wise trading
part of Mankind, as very useful and safe.

The Seventeenth Paragraph, p. 10. persuades us that he has told us, what a
Bank ought to be, but I cannot find where, unless he means in the 13 Paragraph,
p. 9. where indeed he promises it, but does not perform it; and if he gives no
better account of this designed Bank, I fear we shall never comprehend it, but
I find he begins and tells us first it consists of a Revenue. I wonder he
should put this upon us, when all along he tells us, the World will never be
content without ready Species; I fear he intends to Banter us; truly by the
many Contradictions his whole Treatise looks a little like one.

Then Secondly, He tells us it consists of the profits and improvements made by
the Credit of the Bank; this seems hazardous, for how can the Credit yield
Profit without there be no Species brought in to answer it, which he then
affirms can never be good; and if there is Species, how can it be profitable,
unless the Species is ventured abroad again, and then it is not at home to
answer, and possibly may sometimes come short Home, where will then be the
Profit? He brags here that this Corporation will exceed all others of this kind
in the Trading World; let it therefore be considered how? first the Fund is 8
per cent. for their Money, if they Borrow none, but if they have no other
gains, that will never be considerable or iniviting. And if they should Borrow
the whole Sum at 8 per cent. then they can hope for no Benefit, but by the
profits, unless they should borrow it cheaper, and then all that they save of
the 8 per cent. is their own; what that will be none can yet guess. But they
may have farther Hopes, that is, they will receive 8 per cent. for the whole Sum,
and never pay down in Money above 250000 l. hoping to make the rest pass by
Bills, and if either a peevish or necessitous Person for Money, which may be
one in Twenty, demands the Money, they resolve to give it him: This is
plausible, but if these Bills should circulate abroad 20 times a Year as they
may do and more, and that one in every twenty, either wants or will have his
Money in Specie, then must they keep the whole Sum in Specie ready, or refuse
paying their Bills, which will hinder all the second profit upon the first
Head: For, tho they should never pay it into the Chequer in Specie, yet they
are not sure but it may by the many Circulations be required within the Year.
Now let the Second Head be examined, how profit will come in that way? The
Annuity is already fully charged with the Moneys paid the King; there remains
then but two ways of profit besides, first, to receive a running cash at 4 per
cent. which is a certain charge and trouble; but it may be hoped that this
running cash will circulate treble the Sum, and if the Bank is so reasonable as
to take but 6 per cent. they will so get 18 per cent. and pay but 4; but then
the Fund of two parts of this treble Sum is imaginary, and that I am sure is
worse than the Land-bank. The second way is to receive a current Cash, and
issue no more Bills than Cash received; but then the profit must arise, by
laying out in Bargains, or lending at Interest parts of this running Cash, and,
if this or any part of it fails, I am apt to believe it will sink the profit if
no more; so that both these ways are uncertain and hazardous, the Fund of the
Credit abroad not being fixed at home, but traveling for Gain and may miscarry;
so that the Security he boasts to be the best in Europe is but bad: For,
suppose they have three Millions running Cash brought into the Bank, and two
Millions of it is disposed abroad upon Goods and Securities, which is is no
more than all Banks and Bankers do with as much care; and, suppose a casualty
should happen to the Goods, or a false Title to the Land, will there not be
part of the Security wanting? Therefore this Security is no better than others,
and if the Security were never so great, may not the Trust be greater, where
then will the Fund be for the Remainder? You tell us the Company makes fair
promises, and will be Honest and Faithful, but if they will not, how shall they
be compelled?

The Eighteenth Paragraph, p. 12. tells us, the Foundation of this Bank is on a
Revenue which cannot fail, tho the Government were changed, because it is
settled by Parliament, and that for many Reasons, it will become the Best and
Highest property in England, in consideration of the Money paid to the King for
the service of the Government. That property has been over sacred here, more
than elsewhere in Christendom, notwithstanding all our Revolutions, and that
nothing but a Conquest which ruins all, can affect this Foundation: May not the
Economy of the Treasury be changed by a Prince, and Officers put in not named
in the Act, nor yet known to Parliament? what becomes then of the Act?

Methinks, when we have seen Exchequers shut up, and King Charles the 2d's will
about the Excise, and many other Acts of Parliament eluded and evaded, if not
openly infringed, we should not be over confident, that a public Revenue
cannot fail: But for once we will suppose it good, yet I cannot find it the
best and highest Property in England, and should be glad to see the many
Reasons for it he mentions. Nor has Property been always so sacred here, but
that our former Kings have often invaded it; how many Persons have suffered
both in Life and Estate under color of Law? and Property is no safer, where it
can be wrongfully seized under color of Law, than by the Arbitrary will of a
Prince; and we can well remember, when the Law has followed the will of
Princes. What was the forcing away Charters and Privileges, but a violation of
property? Privileges being as much properties as Possessions, and under the
same Grants and Settlements of Charter by King or Parliament. So that it does
not appear, that property is much more sacred in England, than elsewhere in
Christendom, and that nothing but a Conquest can ruin this Fund; but then how
much better would the Land-bank be, which is so far from being a Conquerors
interest to hurt, that it is his true and plain Interest to support, by all the
Arts and Power he has.

In his Eighteenth Paragraph, p. 12. he talks of showing how this Bank will
benefit Trade, and then falls upon our Politicians, that distinguish betwixt
the interest of Land and, Trade, as they have done betwixt that of the King and
People, and that whenever they meet with a Position too heavy for their dull
Apprehensions, they confound it so, that no body else shall understand it; and
then, after shifting off, as his usual manner is, what he cannot explain, he
comes to this conclusion, That Land and Trade ought to be in one Interest.

Though this Paragraph has not much to the purpose of a Bank, vet it is fit it
should not be wholly passed over with Silence; for, as he says, the true
Interest of Land and Trade, and of a King and his People, are really the same:
but notwithstanding there are Persons in England believe the contrary; for
Trade ill managed may be prejudicial to the Landed Man, though beneficial to the
Merchant: but well managed is the G^ory of the Landed Man, though it brought but
little Profit to the Merchant; and so the Interest of the Great Mogul or great
Turk and their Subjects: And the Interest of the Court of France and the
Country of France is managed to very different ends, tho in all those Countries
the true Interest of both is the same. This Piece the Author has published as a
Specimen to prove, that some Persons can confound Matters, they do not
understand, so as none else may. For it is not without great difficulty that the
meaning of what he Writes, can be discovered.

In the 20th Paragraph he begins the Benefits of his Bank, and stumbles in the
first Period; for Interest is not the Price but the Rent of Money. The Price of
every thing is the full value in something else: the Rent is only part of the
Profits for the Use of it. He goes on, and says, If Interest is low, it may be
a great benefit to Trade; but he gives no assurance that his Bank will lower
Interest. He is like the Citizen called before the Chamberlain by his
Apprentice, for not allowing him sufficient Food, who had a mind to put the Boy
out of Countenance, and asked him, Whether Capon and Pig were good Meat? To
which the Boy replied, Yes, if he could get them: Why, replied the Master, Is
not the Cupboard open? Yes, answers the Boy, but there is nothing in it. So my
Author tells us the fine Consequences of low Interest; but does not promise his
Bank can or will furnish Money or Credit at low Interest. Then follows a frank
Declaration, That 900000 l. has no Fund, and therefore it is like new Money
added to the Stock of the Nation; I grant, it is a new Stock of unsound Credit
added, and may pass, till questioned: but it has no other Foundation, than the
Reputation of the Corporation; which since the failure of several Corporations
not far from London, is no longer thought infallible: Now Dr. Chamberlyn
proposed no Credit to pass without a Fund of Land of at least double the Value.
Amongst some of the Conveniences of a Bank, he reckons Safety from Fire,
Thieves, and other Disasters, which Gold and Silver is subject to. Therefore
it is not Gold, nor Goods, nor good Credit, but an aerie Credit; which, as he
says before, concerning Dr. Chamberlyn's Banks being not only out of the reach
of the Prince, but of the People; is so Safe from Fire and Thieves, that no
body else can find, this nothing being only an imaginary Credit, like the
Tropic and Aequinoctial imaginary Lines. He again mistakes; it is not the Banks
of Holland and Genoua lowers Interest, but the Plenty of Money and Credit; for
a Bank without Plenty of Money (real, or supposed, and then there is no Fund)
cannot alone lower Interest. All which foresaid benefits, he tells us, will
make it the highest Interest both of Government and People, to preserve and
maintain it, which may be believed when he makes it plain; that these benefits
must necessarily attend this Bank, which it is feared he can hardly do.

The next Paragraph, p. 14. he stuffs with a great many fine Promises, but
gives no satisfaction, how they can be obtained, whether by the Bank, or
otherwise, in this 21. Paragraph, V. p. 2.5. he again confesses, other things
besides Gold and Silver can answer the End, and command the Use of Money; then
certainly Dr. Chamberlyn's Bank must be practicable, and if it be, it must be
abundantly more profitable.

Amongst some of the benefits he tells us, the Landed Men will be delivered
from the Oppressions of the few Moneyed Men; If this were true, 'twere well,
but it is more likely, that this Bank will lessen the number of Monied Men,
though it may possibly greaten the Estates of the remainder by engrossing the
whole Trade of Oppression.

It Is not easy to understand his meaning in the 22th. Paragraph, p. 15. nor is
there much in it, besides two senseless Assertions without Proof.

In his 23th. Paragraph, p. 16. he takes notice of the unusual Opposition this
Bank met with, when the Chimera's of Survivorship, the Fund for Lives and
Lottery succeeded so easily. Dr. Chamberlyn's Bank did indeed meet with
unreasonable Opposition, this did nothing near so much; the Doctor's having
before so well prepared the way: but it is rather wonderful this Bank met no
more, for it may ruin the Nation, when the Chimera for Lives, and Lottery,
though they deserve the Character he gives, cannot do so much Mischief. Toward
the ending of this Paragraph, he tells us of three sorts of People who opposed
it; he might have added a fourth and a fifth, and not have been mistaken; as
such as were not willing, these Men should Plough with Dr. Chamberlyn's Heifer,
and reap the Fruit of the Sweat of his Brows; and such as were jealous for the
Nation's Security, for it cannot be denied; but that they can wrong the Nation,
whatever hopes there may be, they will not, A sixth may not be wanting, of such
as are Owners of Lands Mortgaged. He says very right, That most things of this
Nature will be easier understood by Practice, that by Debates; but it is a
question, whether the Practice of his Bank will dispel all these Fears, and
verify all his good Promises.

In the last Paragraph, p. 17. he concludes it neither new nor strange, that it
should be the fate of good and generous things to be reproached, and, that we
may not doubt of the Truth of this Assertion, he is pleased to justify it by
his Practice in this Book, where he maliciously, falsely, and ignorantly treats
Dr. Chamberlyn's Bank, which is not inferior to any thing discovered from the
beginning of the World, except Religion and Morality, and all this in order
only to recommend his own Bank; which Bank may truly be feared will wheedle the
Nation out of their ready Money, for want of being well secured, and soon teach
them by woeful experience to know, what it is to want it.

To sum up the whole, either they have Money ready in Specie to answer all
their Credit abroad, or not: if they keep always as much Money by them as will
answer the whole Credit abroad; then the Nation has no manner of Advantage by
the Bank, it is only passing so much Credit for so much Money. Besides, so much
ready Money may be seized, orthey may withdraw with it. If they do not keep
Money, they either have nothing to answer their Credit, and then it is
imaginary, or they have other Goods, and then it is not Money, as they would
have the World believe, and this imaginary Fund, or Fund of Goods may serve
till a Fright or Exigence, from the danger of which we cannot be, during the
Wars, delivered. But since they allow something else to be a Fund, why not
Land, which is better than all other Goods to answer Credit, and as it may be
ordered, better than Money it self. But what cannot a Man do! that takes a
Liberty to speak and write what he pleases, without regard, whether it be true
or false; he pursues the Saying, Calumniare audacter and aliquid haerebit:
truly, no Man would have given himself the trouble to trace him thus all along,
had it not been to forewarn the Nation of the great Mischiefs may follow this
Bank, in case there shall not be a very good Provision made to avoid them, of
which no footsteps are yet visible. And also to caution them from receiving a
groundless prejudice against the Land-Bank proposed by Dr. Chamberlyn, against
which there can lie no Objection, but what the passing this Bank by Act has
fully answered and removed; besides, that it will bring the Nation infinitely
more benefit without hazard than this can pretend to. Such of the
inconveniences of this as may affect the Creditors and Subscribers, is thought
fit to be here added: As first, The Dealers with, or Creditors of this Bank are
liable to the same, or greater hazards and losses than they were subject to
with the Bankers, by the Mis-management, Misfortune, or Dishonesty of the
Managers, of whose Wisdom and Integrity they have no greater assurance than
they had of the Bankers: so, that for the bare convenience of a public
Book-keeper and Cash-keeper, they venture the ruin of their Fortunes. Besides
the Clause for transferring Shares may give the Traders with this Bank great
trouble to Sue every Member of this Bank-Corporation for every small Sum, and
leaves them also under great-uncertainty and dissatisfaction, when, where, or
who to deal with or sue, when there shall be occasion; for, the Members (they
may like to Day, and for whose sakes they trust the Banks) may sell out to
Morrow, and others succeed, of whom they may have no such good opinion, nor it
may be deserve any. If indeed all, that have ever been Members of this
Bank-Corporation, shall, as they seem to be by the Act, still remain subject to
answer all Debts, that may ever happen, or at least, that were contracted
during their being Members; It may be the safer for the Creditors, but of so
great hazard to the Members, that none but unthinking Men will venture on it:
Therefore,

Secondly, This Act is very severe against the Subscribers or Members of this
Bank, if not always Managers, or live not beyond Sea, or are not above the
Power of the Law, or cannot evade it; See fol. 349. where they are not only
exposed to Suits, but every Creditor is under a Necessity, either to lose his
Debt, or to Sue every individual Member separately, as often as the Credit shall
come in dispute, by reason of any public Fright or Calamity, or of any mistake
or unfaithfulness of the Managers, or of any other like Reality or Jealousy:
And even their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, are not exempted from this
Danger; and it is a great Question, Whether they, their Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, who have sold off their Shares, can be discharged from this
trouble. Nor can the Members who are not in the Government of the Bank, have
any better Security against the Evil and Imprudent Conduct of the Managers,
than the Orphans of the City, and those of the East India and African Companies
had. Neither the Parliamentary Fund, nor their own Estates can be sufficient,
though never so great, where the Trust is yet greater; for, why may not a Man
worth 100000 l. withdraw with 200000 l. as well as a Man worth 10000 l. run
away with 20000 l.? the Temptation is greater, and so will the loss to the
Members be also: Whatever is above their own Stock, may be as well trusted with
an Honest Man worth Nothing, as in the Hands of one worth 100000 l. and better
than in the Hands of a Knave worth twice as much. Besides, what can hinder the
Managers from many indirect Advantages, to the Prejudice of the rest of the
Members, when after all they can escape, not only without Loss, but with much
Profit to themselves, what has been may be. The Parliamentary Fund seems to be
made here by the Managers only a Decoy to ensnare Persons to bring in more
Money, than it can answer; for it can never really secure above what is charged
upon it by the Act; so no Man can be safe, if he ventures any farther. Again,
If the Bank should thrive, it is reasonable to suppose, that Money will be as
well lodged with them, as formerly with the Bankers; and, if then Three
Millions, more or less, should be brought into this Bank for which Bills are
given, as the Bankers did, of which less than One Million will very well serve
as a running Cash to circulate all the rest, may not then the Managers, having
so great a Trust, and Power reposed in their hands by the Nation, the Charter,
and their own Members, Mismanage or withdraw beyond Sea with Two Millions or
more of the said Treasure, especially if many Foreigners are concerned in it,
leaving their Fellow Members little or nothing, besides cause to repent their
Credulity and ill luck, which has subjected them to so many vexatious Suits as
they cannot avoid.

Thirdly, That, notwithstanding the Prohibition against Trading, it is
impossible to prevent the Managers, if they have a mind to it, from Engrossing
what Commodities they please, and from raising and sinking the Value of
Auctions in all Companies, and practicing all the Mischiefs of Monopoly, and
governing and ruining Trade, as they please, under fictitious Names, and by
furnishing Money or Credit underhand, where they find their Advantage. And
lastly, Is it impossible for this Bank to be ruined by a Quo Warranto, when
Reason of State may seem to require it?

These Remarks were taken notice of by a Well-willer to the English Nation,
only to put them in Mind how necessary it is to provide against all these
inconveniences, before it is too late: And, if such as are nearly concerned,
cannot among themselves contrive expedients, it is their true Interest to
enquire after such as may. It being only, as it is, fit to encourage the Trade
of Stock-jobbing, there being no check upon the Managers, but their Interest,
which by several is variously understood, and but few understand it rightly.
And it is apparent the Gentlemen who promote this Bank, have mistaken theirs in
the first step; there can therefore be little hopes, they will find it in their
Progress.

An easy Method to enrich the People by raising so many Millions of Money as
the Parliament please without Taxes, Borrowing, or dreining the Subjects Purses
like the Million Lottery and Tunnage Acts, or clogging the King's Revenue. Or
the Contents of a Bill demonstrating Dr. Chamberlyn's Proposal to be both
profitable and practicable, as 'twas reported by a Committee and Published in
Mondays Votes the 5th. of Feb. 1693. Written during the last Session of
Parliament, by a Well-wisher to the King and Country.
WHereas the use of Banks has always proved very beneficial to a Trading
Country, and the only Obstacle which has hitherto hindered their settlement in
England, has been the jealousy of Traders unwilling to hazard their Treasures
in a Bank or Repository, that is under the power of any Sovereign Prince. And,

Whereas it is well known, that Bank-Credit, and Bills of Exchange performs the
Office of Money, and makes Payments with better Satisfaction than Money, paying
Debts, and Discharging Mortgages as well, as if the full Sums of Money had been
counted out; for it eases the trouble of telling, and takes away the fear of
receiving bad and counterfeit Coin; and especially,

Whereas there have been so many and great Taxes drawn from the Nation, and
much ready Money exported to pay the Armies abroad, and no returns made, nor
any new Coined for the People to exchange for Goods, and pay their Debts, which
has occasioned a multitude of differences and inconveniences to the decay and
lessening of Trade, which even the King himself is pleased to Observe to the
Parliament in his Speech; so that it is at present impossible to set up and
carry on a Royal Fishery or other great and public Undertaking, which would be
of great Advantage to the promoting of Trade, multiplying of Seamen, and
increase of Shipping, all absolutely necessary both for our Defense and
Support. And lastly,

Whereas there is now invented an Excellent way to erect here in England a Bank
upon Land Security, not in the least subject to the foresaid hazards under a
Monarchy, and yet more Effectually answering all the ends, uses and advantages
of Banks, than it is possible for any Money Bank, in as much as Land is a Safer
Security than Money, and smaller sums are more Generally necessary than
greater; and the delivery of Tickets, Bills, or Tallies, more convenient than
transferring credit in a Bank-Book. It is humbly Proposed, that for remedy of
all the foresaid inconveniences, supplying the great scarcity of Money,
promoting Trade, employing the Poor, easing the Subject of some Taxes, paying
public and private Debts, establishing a Royal Fishery, and encouraging Landed
Men to subscribe to a Bank or Fund for the a foresaid purposes, It may be
Enacted,

That a Bank of Credit upon a Fund of Land, shall be kept in or near London,
under the Control of 8 Commissioners, or Trustees to be nominated by
Parliament, besides the Chancellor or keeper of the Great Seal, Master of the
Rolls, all the Judges, and 2 Commissioners named by the City of London,
together with Dr. -- appointed also Master Workman, and, if Sub-Commissioners
shall be thought necessary for dispatch at first, that the City and Merchants
shall propose a double Number, and the Commissioners Elect out of them. -- That
all Commissioners shall hereafter be Elected by Parliament, during their
Sessions, and in the intervals by the Majority of their Survivors; and all
inferior Officers by Majority of the Commissioners. Every Commissioner to have
the Yearly Salary of a 1000 l. and Sub-Commissioners, if necessary, 500 l. per
annum.

That the Estates of such persons, not exceeding 20000 l. per annum, as have
already subscribed toward this fund, shall, if they will, stand part thereof,
according to their Respective Subscriptions, and any other person that has an
estate of 150 l. per annum, and for term of above 150. Years (and so for lesser
estates Proportionably) may Subscribe the same for Payment of 100 l. per annum
for 100 Years, until the sum of 200000 l. a Year in the whole, shall be
completed, or more if the Parliament please.

That upon every Estate in Land, paying the said Yearly Rent of 100 l. Dr -- by
order of 5 or more of the said Commissioners, shall issue out tickets to the
value of 10000 l. and no more, whereof 4000 l. shall be paid to the
subscribers, and 2000. l. to some public joint stock, as the Fishery or what
else the Parliament shall direct, fit to employ the Poor at work; but the
profit shall be to the use of the Subscriber (which may at least bring him in
120 l. a Year at 6 per cent, and that is 20. more than his Annuity of 100 l.
rent, the Merchants say it will bring in above 20 l. per cent,) and 2000 l.
shall be to the use of the war and the overpluss 2000 l. to Remain with, who is
therewith to defray the charge of fabricating the tickets so as not to be
counterfieted, to pay all the Commissioners salaries, Officers and servants
wages, and discharge all manner of expenses and rewards; which in the whole
will Require a vast sum.

That the tickets so issued out shall be current in all payments, as the coin
of the Realm, and none can then possibly loose by them, and therefore its fit
all should be obliged to Receive them, being to be paid a way at the same value
as they are Received; and that Counterfieting shall be punished according as
the Parliament shall direct.

That the said tickets are only to pass in the Respective County or precinct
they belong to, so that, when there is occasion to pay an 100 l. or more in
Devonshire, upon delivering the value in tickets to an Office in London, there
shall for 2 s. per cent. be the like value of 100. l. Paid in tickets in
Devonshire, and so likewise, if paid in an Office there, the same shall be
received in Yorkshire or any other County in England, which convenience of
returns is exceedingly wanted in this Nation.

That the said yearly Rent of 100 l. shall be paid in the said Tickets only,
whereby at the End of the Term they will all be paid in; which said Tickets
shall as soon as paid, be canceled by the said Commissioners and Master, who
shall be obliged every Sessions of Parliament to render just Accounts thereof.

That there shall be at first a printed Account of all the Tickets issued
forth, with their Numbers, and also from time to time of all that are canceled,
to prevent Counterfeiting and Imposing false Tickets on the People; and for
further security, there are several pieces broke off from each Ticket, and kept
in several Offices in every County, for to match and compare with them like
unto Tallies.

Here the Act Ends.
Note, That the Tickets of Credit belonging to this Bank are better secured
than the Credit of the Dutch, or any other Bank, which in a great measure is
founded on a Presumptive or Imaginary Fund, and therefore the proposed Tickets
ought in all respects to be current; for certainly they will be generally more
useful, safe, and easy; because brought to so small Sums as 5 l. whereas the
Dutch Bank-Sums and Chequer Tallies are seldom less than for 50 l. or 60 l.
Sterling.

That the 2000 l. Stock of each 100 l. a year Estate, is not only put into a
Joint Stock for the sake of Trade; but also to strengthen the Bank-Security, in
case any of the said Estates settled for a Fund, should at any time after be
recovered by a Dormant Title, that so the Recoverer may have the same Share, or
2000 l. paid him for his Satisfaction to make good the Encumbrance of the
Bank-Settlement upon his Estate, which can admit of no Alteration before the
said term of Years shall be expired, lest the Credit of this Bank should
thereby be weakened or suspected.

To Subscribe less than 200000 l. per annum for this Fund, will scarce afford
sufficient to support the necessary Charges, which must be very great, and
ought not to be grutched; for that they arise only out of the Profits and
Improvements by which the Nation as well as the Subscribers will reap great
Advantages, without damage to any; and that if 200000 l. be Subscribed, there
will be about 2000 Subscribers at 100 l. per annum each, and none should
Subscribe for more; but, if smaller Sums be admitted it will be made more
general, and the number much greater, as well as the Trouble and Charge to the
Bank.

That all the Members of Parliament may, if they please, enjoy the same
Advantage of Subscribing with others.

Furthermore, This Bank, when established by Parliament, will bring all the
Blessings, Benefits, and Advantages that 20 Millions of Money can do to a
Nation exceedingly wanting it to perform all those things which are before
mentioned; but most especially to employ the Poor, and maintain a Vigorous War
with France; and all this by Landed Men's settling their Estates to make these
Tickets full of equal Value with Gold and Silver Money.

And for want of this Bank, which would so plentifully supply the present great
want of Money, how many poor Persons do now heavily groan under the Misery of
their Poverty, and are ready to starve; there being scarce half Money enough in
Specie left to pay off the Mortgages now on foot, whence some merciless
Creditors take the Advantage to foreclose the Equity of Redemption, to the
Ruin of the Mortgagers: much less is there to Trade withal, or to pay off the
great multitude of other Debts; all which does much lower the Price of Land.

Now, when a Nation is thus engaged in an expensive War, prudent Governments
usually provide against Domestic Wants or Misfortunes, that as the Peoples
Purses are drained by Taxes, which are exported without returning; so they
supply that want by some other Method whereby the People are better enabled to
Support the War without Ruin to themselves and Families; and therefore the
King takes particular Notice of it in his Speech, and offers it by way of
Advice to the Parliament's Consideration, as Printed in the Votes of the 4th.
of November 1692. P. 4. in these words:

I am very sensible how heavy this Charge is upon my People, and it extremely
afflicts me that it is not possible to be avoided without exposing our selves to
inevitable Ruin and Destruction.

The Inconvenience of sending out of the Kingdom great Sums of Money for the
Payment of the Troops Abroad, is indeed very Considerable, and I so much wish
it could be remedied; that if you can suggest to me any Methods for the support
of them, which may lessen this Inconvenience, I shall be ready to receive them
with all Satisfaction Imaginable.

Now, To sum up all; this Proposal offers to Supply the Nation without
Borrowing, or the help of a Gold or Silver Mine, the many Millions Melted and
Exported as aforesaid (to the great detriment of the Nation) by Brass Tickets
of 5 l. value and upwards, to supply the Peoples Occasions to exchange for
Goods; which Tickets made current by Act of Parliament, will he more certain
and valuable than Bankers Bills daily used in Payments, and as good as our best
Money, but much better than Clipped and Counterfeit, (by which the Nation will be
losers at last) for that the Subscribers do, in consideration of 40 Years
Purchase in hand, and 20 Years Purchase in Stock to manage the Fishery for
their Encouragement, Mortgage and Engage their Estates to buy off Yearly 200000
l. of these Tickets, till all are fully paid in and cancelled by the said
Commissioners, and none left to the Prejudice of the Subjects, as was the Brass
Money of Ireland, for want of such a Fund. And when it shall appear that the
Subscribers, who have paid away all their Tickets, must notwithstanding buy
them up again, to make the Payments in them of their Annual Rent of 100 l. per
annum to the Commissioners; and that farther to prevent all Suspicion of Fraud,
the great Ministers of State, and principal Men in the Kingdom, are made
Commissioners, and accountable to the Parliament: All fear of Loss by them will
be totally removed, and the World satisfied, that there can be no Deceit.

Here follows the most usual and weighty Objections that have been made, with
their Answers.
Object. THat this will not raise Money enough for present Necessities, nor
time enough to serve the Occasions of the Government.

Answ. That as soon as Titles can be perused and approved by Counselors, many
of whom will be for dispatch employed at the same time, to inspect such Estates
as are already Subscribed, there are Monied Men who for 10 l or 14 l. per cent.
or less, will advance what shall be necessary, till the Tickets are made, which
will be in -- and neither Mr. Neal's Project, nor the Million Fund can furnish
the King in less time.

Object. That these Tickets will not pass in Foreign Payments.

Answ. It Is no matter; for we want a sort of Money that may be always kept to
make our Payments at Home, because our Mili'd-money is exported by the
Merchants, and to pay the Army, and we have none left but scandalous Clipped
Money, which Knavish Clippers impose on the Government for good.

2. There will be no need of an Act to prevent the Exportation of Money: or at
worst we may make the same shift as at present, to export the little remaining
Money, and then 'twill be better to have these Tickets than nothing.

3. But, if necessary, these Tickets may be made as Current abroad as Gold or
Silver.

Object. That an 100 Years is too long for these Tickets of Credit to pass.

Answ. The Parliament have granted a Perpet^ity in the Tunnage Act, which is
much longer, and Annuities on the King's Revenue for 99 years; if three Lives
do so long live, and that is but one year less, and if the use of these Tickets
may be thought convenient to be dispensed withal for two or three years for a
present shift or necessity, why not for 100 years, since the same Security is
continued to the end of the Term to make them always valuable.

Object. That the Parliament may be unwilling to impose these Tickets on the
People.

Answ. None needs to be offended at such an Imposition, unless the People did
suffer loss by it, as the Irish did by the Brass money K. James imposed on
them, which had no Fund to make them good: and as Knaves impose Clipped and false
Coin on us, (which the Nation will at last lose by) for the Subscribers must
yearly buy, at the full value, 200000 l. worth, till none of these Tickets are
left: but it is a very grievous imposition of Want and Necessity on the People
to give away yearly so much of their Money to pay the Army beyond Sea, and let
them have no new Money coined, nor any Species of Money to exchange for Goods
and pay Debts; at this rate, if the War continue, we shall have no Money left
at last; besides the most reasonable pretense for imposing Laws and Taxes is
the Public good, and if this be such, it ought to be imposed, for that it is
much better to impose Money or an Equivalent into the Purse, than taking it out
as all Taxes do.

Object. That the Commissioners may give out more Tickets of Credit, than there
are Estates settled to buy off, and then the Bank will be ruined or broke, and
the People will lose by them at last.

Answ. That not only the account of the Tickets in Print will hinder their so
doing, but they are to be accountable to the Parliament for the same; neither
is it like a Monied Bank where the Subscribers in an humor, or through fear,
may draw out all their Money to the ruin of the Bank, as the Condition the
Bankering Goldsmiths were in, when their Creditors drew out all their Money at
the shutting up of the Exchequer.

Object. That the King by this Method may be furnished at any time without a
Parliament, or may seize on the Bank, as King Charles did on the Money in the
Exchequer, to the Ruin of many Hundred.

Answ. Not in the least, for the Tickets will be all disposed of to the
Subscribers, and to the great Charges of the Undertaking, except four Millions,
if the Parliament please, to give to the King in the room of another Tax raised
a worse way, but more cannot be raised this way without new Acts of Parliament.
Besides, what Money is given the King is paid into the Exchequer, which is
under his own Command; but this Bank will be kept in an Office distinct from
that, so that the King can no more seize it, than the Money in the Turkey or
East India Company; neither will there be any for him to seize, for the Stock
is laid out in Lands, Wares, and Conveniences for Trade, Land being the Fund
here, and Money not, nor Credit.

Object. That a Change of Government will make Void these Tickets.

Answ. That will be nothing near so likely as that the Lottery and Million Acts
may then be made Void, and yet the People plentifully ventures upon them. But,
if the French or Great Turk should come, they may exact heavy Taxes and
Confiscate all Estates, but never alter the Contracts of the private Estates
appropriated to give value to these Tickets, because they, as well as the
Nation will lose infinitely by so doing.

Object When we have so much as 20 Millions of Brass Money, we shall have no
Gold nor Silver left amongst us, What then will become of that?

Answ. The Brass Tickets will best serve for great Sums, and can no more
destroy, lessen, or thrust out Gold and Silver Money, than Bills, Bonds,
Tallies, or Goldsmith's Notes do; for do Guineas, or 5 l. Pieces of Gold lessen
the Silver? no certainly, for you must keep that to go to Market withal, to
spend on the Road, and to pay the poor Man's Wages. So that the Gold and Silver
will not only stay, but much more will be brought to it.

Object. That there is Gold and Silver enough, so that there is no need of this
Project.

Answ. Why then does the King complain of the Exportation as aforesaid? and why
do not the People make their Payments as they use to do? and why has the
Parliament so often had the increase of Money and Bullion under their
Consideration if unnecessary?

Object. That if this Bank be settled, there will be then so much Money in the
Land, that Usurers, who have 10 or 20000 l. and live only on the Interest
thereof, will make but little Pro^it of their Money, because none will have
that pressi^g occasion to borrow, or else will be more easily supplied; for
which Reason the Parliament has refused to lessen Interest, l^st the King
should not be supplied; for none will b^ing in their Money without great
Advantage: And why should Landed M^n have the Benefit of this Bank, and not
Usurers and others, or why should some landed Men have it, and not all?

Answ. If you think it will be so hard with rich Usurers, and that therefore
all Care and Respect ought to be had that they should not be losers, Pray what
shall the Mortg^gers do that cannot raise Money only to transfer their
Mortgage, or those multitude of poor Debtors, who have nothing to pay or to
live on: Such as thus Object, and such there are, do never visit the Poor to
see their Necessities, or hear their Complaints, nor know that they give as
dear for a stinking piece of Meat, as a sweet one; nor consider that they are
more numerous, at least above an hundred to one of the Monied Men, or of such
as are out of Debt. Now the design of this, is to supply as well those who Want
as the Rich, that all may be so happy as to pay ready Money, especially since
the Rich will not part with their Money under great Security, and 5 l. at
least, if not 6 l. per cent. which is the principal Reason our Trade decays, we
grow poor, and the Dutch rich, whose Interest always is one half less than it
is in England, which next to their Bank is the reason of their thriving so well
this last 50 Years; and there is no way to outdo them like lessening our
Interest below theirs as this Proposal will, and then we may under-sell them,
which will occasion a greater Trade, and export our Native Commodities to the
raising of our Rents as well as they are of late Years, much beyond what they
were 100 Years ago, when our Trade was not half so much, and the Usurers will
lay out their Money in Land and Leases, which will advance the price of Land,
and make the Rents more certain. Now by virtue of this Bank, neither King nor
People would be so straightened, or pay so dear Interest for Money; there being no
reason why the Country Gentleman should give 6 l. per cent. to the Usurer for
Money, or to the Merchant for Goods, when his Land will bring in hardly 3 l. or
why he should pay 2 l. or 3 l. per cent. more for all the Goods he buys, as
Silks, Spice, etc. than the Merchant gives for his Wool, Corn, or Cattle. If
the Rent of Land do not always exceed the Interest of Money, the Usurer will
eat up the Gent. and Farmer's Estates, as is daily seen; and it is the Land pays
the greatest Taxes, and is the principal Support of the Government in War time.
Therefore the Landlords ought above all others, as Lords of the Soil, to have
the benefit of Subscribing: Neither can all Landed Men be admitted for the same
Reason that all Merchants cannot be in the East India Company, and all Princes
are not Kings; there is good Fortune in the Case: but yet all will be much the
better for those that do Subscribe, as the whole Nation for the few Importers
of Bullion.

It was never heard that any Nation had too much Money, because the Trade and
Occasions likewise increase with the Money, and will do so long as the World
still affords something to be desired: but the Scarcity of Money makes the
Trade very little; and though in Poor Countries, as Scotland, a Gentleman of a
1000 l. a Year, may live there as plentifully as one of 5000 l. in England; yet
if they should both Travel into any Foreign Country, the English Gentleman will
far outdo the Scot: So in case of Foreign Wars, what can Scotland contribute
in Comparison to England?

Object. That if a Peace be made this Summer, the Trade will be free and Money
plenty; and then there will be no need of this Brass Money, which no body will
care to hoard up.

Answ. Tho a Peace were now made, yet that will not presently bring in 10 or 20
Millions of Money into England, but we must wait three or four Years at least
for the Fruits and Effects of that Peace, before the People will regain Money
enough by Trade to pay their Debts, and what Creditor will have Patience for so
long time? since at present they Prosecute so violently, as if they would tear
the Hearts out of the Bodies of their Debtors for Money: There will be
therefore as much need of this Act, as a Gentleman, who has a 1000 l. a Year
left him, that is charged with a Debt of 10000 l. does want such a Sum to clear
it: Besides, we shall want it to carry on a Fishery, and to help the Poor, and
if you will hoard them above 90 Years together, yet then the Subscribers must
give you Sterling for it to the value.

Object. If these Tickets are cancelled every Year, we shall want Money at last
as well as now.

Answ. The Fishing-Trade well regulated, will every Year bring in more than
their value in Gold and Silver; and the design of this is to pass only till
more Bullion be brought in; or the same Method may be repeated again.

Object. That this Act will make us too happy, flourishing and Powerful for all
our Neighbors in that it will supply us at once with as much Wealth as the
Dutch have been these many Years a raising by their Bank.

Answ. I hope that this Objection shall not be thought a sufficient Reason why
it shall not pass; for that it will certainly keep out, and ruin the French
King.

Object. When all is said, this Nation will never endure Brass Money, which
has no intrinsic Value like Silver: It will be such a Disgrace to us,
especially since the Parliament has set up another sort of a Bank already of
good and lawful Money; and therefore this may never pass.

Ans^. There may be more of Humor than Reason in this Objection; for, if you
could say it is a Cheat, and Men would lose by it in the End; or it is Nonsense
and show wherein it is so, you would quickly do it, and for that Reason reject
it; but if by this Project the People will be enabled to increase in Trade,
continue great Taxes, and the King enabled to build 3 or 400 defensible Ships
more than any of his Neighbors; and every body both abroad and at home
satisfied for their Goods; where, or how can any disgrace arise to the Nation
or any Man therein? And who shall say to our Fleets, What do ye? It is the
Land-Security that makes the Brass of Value as it does a Mortgage, which is but
a Skin of Parchment. As for the intrinsic Value of Money, there is none in
Proportion, for this Reason, because so much Clipped and Counterfeited; though by
the Law it is neither to be Clipped, Broke, Expoted or Melted into Vessels, but so
to be kept in that form it is made, to pass in exchange for Goods for all Men's
convenient Use and Satisfaction; and since it is not so, the Goods we purchase
with that Money, is of far more intrinsic Value; besides that it feeds and
clothes us, and answers all our Necessities, which Money cannot do, being of
no other use than to exchange for Cloths Victuals and other necessarys; and why
may not a Brass Ticket perform this Office, being so secured by Land, as well
as Gold or Silver? The Invention of Brass Tickets, is only for that they will
endure longer and better than Paper Bills or Parchment, and can no more
disgrace the Nation by using them, than it does a Goldsmith to use his Paper
Bills, which gives him better Credit with all Men: Rather we shall gain much
more Wealth and Power, which of consequence will certainly give us much greater
Reputation and Honor, as the Venetians and Hamburghers have got by their Bank
Bills; so that Disgrace and Contempt is the effect of Poverty and Weakness only.

Now if these Objectors could find out a better way speedily to enable both
King and People to pay their Debts, and discharge all their Encumbrances, build
so many more defensive Ships, and maintain the Poor above that wretched manner
the Parishes now do, such an Act would be greatly for the Honor of the Nation;
if not, why then were they not better to make use of this?

As to the Bank the Parliament has proposed in the Tunnage Act, allowing that
People bring in Money enough to perfect it a Bank, can 1200000 l. which is but
about a 5th. part of the Annual Charges of the present War, be to the Nation in
general so great an Advantage as this Proposal? and will it enable the King and
Debtors to discharge their Encumbrances, build so many more Ship, carry on a
grand Fishery, lower Interest, relieve the Poor, raise Taxes, fill the Nation
with Money, make them Flourish and be Easy, and carry on a Vigorous War with
France? Are they under Limitations, and accountable to Parliaments, like unto
this Method; and in raising of this 1200000 l. how many People will be
straightened and prosecuted for it! for one Scrivener alone has called in 40000
l. by his Client's order, where now shall the Mortgagers raise Money to pay in
this Sum, since all Monied Men for the sake of the great Interest and Advantage
proposed in the said Act, do put in their Money to this Bank, and how shall
these Debtors prevent the foreclosing of the Equity of Redemption? Thus, by
contriving Acts of this nature to serve one Purpose, they mightily prejudice
and incommode a great Multitude of other Subjects, perhaps to the ruin of
several of them, and none of these can make use of such a Privilege as the
Members of Parliament may, to stop or hinder Prosecutions, or punish Men for
arresting them.

As to all other rational Objections, the Dr. is, I do not doubt, ready to
Answer; and therefore it is humbly hoped, that on farther Consideration, this
may be thought fit to Pass the Parliament.

FINIS.

