THE Most Humble Remonstrances PRESENTED
To the Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the HOUSE of
COMMONS, in Parliament Assembled.
1. COncerning the Proofs, whereby the French Gentlemen Commissioners,
appointed for the Distribution of the Charity bestowed upon the Poor French
Protestants that are come for Refuge into England; may be convinced, that in
their Hands, there are still remaining great Sums of Money, arising from the
said Charity, and a Revenue more than sufficient for all the Poor Refuges
Maintenance.

2. Concerning the Means, whereby all the aforesaid great Sums of Money may be
discovered, and the aforesaid French Gentlemen Commissioners compelled to give
an exact account of them, which compelling (if it please God) shall be, as a
triumphing Sword Cutting, with one Blow, the Gordian Knot of the said French
Commissioners.

3. Concerning the Motives, that may induce the aforesaid Honorable House of
Commons to use the aforesaid means; which Motives are the Concerns of the King
and State in general, and in particular of all the Poor amongst the said
Refuges.

By John Chabbert Minister and Refuge.

You the Honorable House of Commons are entreated by the aforesaid John
Chabbert, to approve, that he may now declare to your Honors, the love he has
and ever had for Justice and Truth; and on the contrary, how he abhors
Injustice, Cheating Tricks, and Lies: But in a particular manner, how much he
longs for the advantage and prosperity of the King, State, and Church of
England, not only for the Publick's, but also for the Private's sake; as he
longs also for the satisfaction of the English Poor, as well as of them which
are amongst the Refuges; and that in making bold humbly to show, by
particulars, all the Contents of the three Heads contained in the Title of his
Undertaking.

To keep the order set in the said Title; the aforesaid John Chabbert beginning
with the aforesaid Proofs humbly shows,

1. That the aforesaid French Commissioners have received great Sums of Money,
upon three several Letters Patrents heretofore granted by Royal Authority, for
the aforesaid Poor Refuges sake; especially upon the first and second Letters
Pattents, the first granted in the Year 1686. and the second granted in the
Year 1688. That after that the said two Letters Pattents were effectually
published, and the Tenor of the same declared unto the Nation, in all and every
Church and Chapel in the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, etc. The whole
Nation was touched with so deep a sense and tender Commiseration of the
Calamities and woeful Sufferings of the said Poor Refuges, in the cause of their
Religion, and of the urgent necessity, which so many of them were lying under,
that, not only, all the Nobility, Gentry, and every Rich Man, of whatever
Degree and Character soever he was; But even the greatest part of all the
Tradesmen and Servants, as every body knows, did so generously and cheerfully
contribute, by their extraordinary and large Charities, to the subsistence of
the said (...) amongst the Refuges; and that from those generous, free, and
large Charitable Contributions, which have been made for the relief of the said
poor Refuges, it must needs be inferred, that great Sums of Money were then
Collected.

2. That the aforesaid French Commissioners and the Ministers, and
Churchwardens, or Elders, as they call them, of the French Church in the
Savoy, or of the Waloon Church in the City of London, have received great Sums
of Money, from the large Charities of particular Collections, often bestowed,
by a great many Charitable Persons, upon the aforesaid Poor Refuges behalf,
from the beginning of the Year 1685. to this very day of the Year 1696. Since
that time a great number of Poor Refuges have been seen in England.

3. That the aforesaid French Commissioners, Ministers, and Churchwardens of
the aforesaid two Churches, very often, and at least, during the space of Ten
Years, have received great Sums of Money, arising from a great many Legacies,
the most part of them made by some English pious Persons, and some of them by
some French, to be distributed in a very short time, after their Decease to the
said Poor Refuges: But that it is to be feared, the said French Commissioners,
have distributed nothing of the most part of the said Legacies, or at least,
but the use, or interest of some of them, to the said Poor Refuges; so that,
when this third Proof, as well as the second before is duly reflected upon; it
plainly appears by the said two Proofs, that they must needs have in their own,
or others Hands a great Fund of Money for the (...) support of the poor Refuges.

4. That the aforesaid French Commissioners, by their own Confession, and as
every body knows, have received, during the space of many Years (...) Twelve
Thousand Pounds per annum, bestowed liberally, cheerfully and charitably, by
His excellent Majesty our gracious King William, upon the said Poor Refuges, to
relieve them in their urgent necessities, and comfort them in their troubles.
That it is most certain, that upon the said Royal Bounty, the said French
Commissioners, during the space of the many Years aforesaid, were able to
supply all the wants of the said Poor Refuges, if they had very well managed
the said Twelve Thousand Pounds per Annum, or if they had not kept back some of
them, or put them into Bankers Hands, or employed some of them in Trading and
Traffic.

5. That the aforesaid French Commissioners were publicly Accused, by some of
the said French Refuges, Poor Gentlemen, Ministers and others, for having
embezzelled, or mis-imployed a considerable Sum of the aforesaid Twelve
Thousand Pounds Per Annum: And that the said French Commissioners have done
their utmost endeavors to secure themselves from the said Accusation, or
rather, that their Accusers should be silent, and desist from their Accusation;
And for all that, the said French Commissioners have let neither the Public,
nor their Accusers know their Innocence, in all its Circumstances; and in
keeping the Formalities of Justice, although they were bound so to do for the
securing of their own Reputation.

6. That the aforesaid French Commissioners, have received some considerable
Sums of Money, by the way of many Subscriptions and private Collections, made
in the City of London and its Suburbs, for the aforesaid French Refuges Poor,
yet for all that, it does not appear, that, at least, the greatest part of the
aforesaid French Refuges Poor, was the more relieved, by the said French
Commissioners, than they were before the said Subscriptions and private
Collections.

7. That the aforesaid French Commissioners, doubtless, have received, and do
still receive, a great many private Charities of particular Persons, for the
maintenance of many Charity-houses, which Charity-houses imperceptibly and
cunningly have been set up, by the same Commissioners in the Suburbs of the
aforesaid City of London, many Years ago, upon four accounts.

1. To procure, as many Charities as could be possible, and to move all the
charitable Persons, who live in the said City of London, and other Cities and
Towns of this Kingdom, to put into their hands, all the Charities they had
designed for all the Poor amongst the Refuges, which are ashamed to beg, and
which were never partakers of the said Charities, bestowed upon the said
Charity-houses, although they may be in great want.

2. To have a Lawful Cause, at least, in appearance, to beg either themselves,
or move their Friends and Creatures so to do, every where, and of every Person,
whosoever they believed to be the most favorable to their Charity-houses.

3. To have a pretense, continually to declare openly, as they have done
already, that they had received but very few private Charities for the support
of their Charityhouses, and that they were obliged sometimes, to turn out many
of the said Poor Refuges from the said Charityhouses, and to deprive many more
of the Soup or Broth distributed therein, or to maintain them both with a Fund
designed for paying of the Pensions to the French Poor Gentlemen, Ministers,
and other Persons of what Age soever, and of both Sexes; the Pensions, of some
of which said Persons, the said French Commissioners lessened upon several
occasions; although the said French Commissioners were persuaded, that before
they had lessened the said Pensions of the said Poor Gentlemen, Ministers, and
other Refuges, the said Pensions were not sufficient for their maintenance. And
besides, although the said French Commissioners were persuaded, that the said
Poor Gentlemen, Ministers, and other Refuges, cannot live by any other means.

4. To cast a mist before the whole English Nation's Eyes, and to hide from the
Public, the said most considerable Fund, they have in their Hands, arising
from the aforesaid very large Charities, they have received for the said French
Refuges Poor's support, and for no other use whatsoever.

8. That the aforesaid French Commissioners have saved very much of the
aforesaid large Charities, they have received, by the aforesaid several ways:
And that the said French Commissioners, Ministers, and Churchwardens of the
French Church in the Savoy, and Walloon-Church in the City of London, have
saved very much of the aforesaid great Sums of Money, by six ways, well known,
to the greatest part of the French Refuges.

1. In keeping some of the said French Refuges, lying then under a great
necessity, from the least Relief, which the tender hearted, and generous
English Nation had afforded to them, as well as to the rest of the Refuges, who
were then, or are still relieved, by which means some of the said French
Commissioners, as themselves, together with all the Refuges know very well,
were very near receiving an affront from some of those said necessitous
Refuges, yet kept notwithstanding from the said Relief. Moreover, by this means
a great many of the same Refuges, Poor and Helpless Creatures, were dispersed
all over England, and went a Begging up and down the said Kingdom.

2. In giving once for all to some others of the said Refuges a little Money,
nay, and to some of the same more than to others, not according to every one's
Desert or Necessities, but according to their own Will and Pleasure, against
all Equity and Reason.

3. In giving to the smallest Number of the said Poor Refuges a little Pension,
and that sometimes only, for a little while, to those who have no Friends
amongst them, or a powerful Protector who has the Right to Command them: As
for example, a Yearly Pension of Seven Pounds, allowed to the Ministers then
under Fifty years of Age, during the space, at least, of one Year and a half,
is an evident Proof of the said little Pension, as well 56 l. 18 s. that every
one of the said Ministers have received of the Royal Charity for their own and
their Families Subsistence, during the space of Nine years, as may be seen in a
printed Paper delivered unto the King's Majesty, the last (...) January, by all
the poor Ministers Refuges.

4. In paying the Pension, as usually they have paid it to the aforesaid Poor
Refuges; sometimes Five, sometimes Six, Seven, Eight, Nine; nay and sometimes
even Ten Months, after the Time appointed for the Payment of the said Pention,
instead of paying it Quarterly, and even before hand; as it was in their Power
so to do, having ever had, since their Commission a sufficient Fund for that
purpose, whatever Asseverations they have made, to make the Public, and the
said Poor Refuges believe the contrary. And the said French Commissioners, in
paying Quarterly the said Pension, would have saved the said Refuges from being
so Poor, and a great many Troubles and Tears.

5. In utterly debarring the said Poor Refuges from their own Pension, during
the space of about Two Years, unjustly pretending, they had no Fund at all to
pay it them; wherefore, many of the said helpless Refuges, have contracted many
Debts that they cannot pay off, without an Extraordinary Relief.

6. By the Decease of a great many of the said Poor Refuges, of all Ages
whatsoever, of both Sexes, and of all Characters: That by these Six Ways and
Means, the said French Commissioners undoubtedly have saved very much of the
said very large Charitys they have received for the said French Refuges
Support. But nevertheless, the said first Five Ways are Unlawful, and against
the Rules of the Holy Gospel; seeing by the said Five Ways, a great many Poor
Refuges, have been brought to Poverty, to Hunger, and to Diverse Temptations,
and many of them have sunk under them, as may easily be proved, by a great many
Eyewitnesses; and that the said French Commissioners themselves, every where
have Published, and often Declared to the Supreme Powers, that the said
Refugees have lain under great Poverty and Sufferings; the said French
Commissioners, making a show of being troubled at the said Poor Refuges
Calamities.

9. That the aforesaid French Commissioners, have very much increased the said
Sums, arising from the very large Charitys aforementioned, and they have
increased the said Sums, either by all their following ways or by others, such
as these are.

1. Either in putting a good part of the said Sums into a Bankers Hands, since
the beginning of their Commission, till this time.

2. Or in employing another part of the said Sums, in Trading, making the best
of it by Sea and Land; either in this, or in Foreign Country's.

3. Or in erecting some Manufactures, to help off with another part of the said
Sums, coming from the aforesaid very large Charity's, bestowed upon the said
Poor Refuges; or in employing it in some sort of Commodities, that are the most
a la mode, and do take the best.

10. That Mr. Daillon a French Minister Refuge, now one of the best Friends,
that the said French Commissioners may have, cannot deny; but that formerly, he
undertook to oblige the same Gentlemen, French Commissioners, to give an
Account of all the Sums of Money, or a part of them, arising from the Large
General and Particular Charity's, upon all the Poor amongst the Refuges; which
said Sums, came all into the Hands of the said French Commissioners, from the
beginning of the Year 1696. Seeing that Undertaking was known by the Public. I
mean, by the most part of the French Refuges. And that the said Mr. Daillon,
undoubtedly, has not forgotten; that on July the 10th, 1696. He Writ a Letter
against the French Commissioners, to the Meeting of French Ministers sitting
then, in the French Church, at Hungerford-Market, against the said French
Commissioners; by which said Letter, he plainly showed, that the said Erench
Commissioners, were making the best of the Money, accruing from the Charity's,
bestowed to the said Poor, amongst the Refuges; either by putting it out into
the Goldsmiths, or Bankers Hands; or in Trading with it by Sea; and that only
for themselves. And that the same Commissioners did pay, by the said Money,
accruing from the said Charity's, all their own Servants, their Sallary, etc.
Again, that the said Mr. Daillon, durst not make Oath, that he has not said
and done, what is aforementioned. Now if he had so bad a Conscience, he would
be Convicted of Perjury, by many Eyewitnesses, who particularly knew his
Undertaking, against the French Commissioners; and who heard the Contents of
the said Letter, when it was Read before the said French Ministers met
together; in whose Meeting, was President, Mr. Betoule, an Ancient Minister,
amongst the Refuges, one of the best Friends of the said French Commissioners,
who kept the said Letter, and who is now dead.

11. That the aforesaid French Commissioners, would not part with their
Commission, and leave the Sole Care of the said Refuges Poor's Maintenance, to
the City of London, or to the Clergy of the said City, who would have taken the
said Care upon themselves. That it is a Convincing Proof, that the said French
Commissioners feared thereby, that the great Sums of Money, they have in their
Hands, should be discovered, and in such a Case, they feared the losing
forever, the Administration of the said great Sums, and withal, the hope of
being the Owners of them probably, not remembering, that the aforesaid Sums,
coming from Bountiful Charity's, bestowed upon the said Resuges Poor, are a
Devoted and Holy Thing, committed to their Trust; and that they in Conscience,
are bound to give a strict Account of it, to God and Man, both in this World,
and in the World to come, whatsoever they may think, say, or do about it.

12. That, as soon, as the French Commissioners, shall be Commanded by You the
Honorable House of Commons; either openly to Confess, that they have in their
own Hands, the said great Sums, or to show the contrary, by the Justifying
Papers, Writings, and Deeds, etc. If the said French Commissioners, do not
perform, whatever they are commanded. Moreover, if by the said Papers,
Writings, and Deeds, etc. It does not appear clearly, that the said French
Commissioners, have distributed, (not to the Rich French Refuges) but only to
the Poor, all the said Sums, accruing from all the aforesaid Charity's and
Legacies. Moreover, if instead of justifying themselves thereby, the said
French Commissioners, rather make this Objection: That they could not give an
exact Account of the said Sums, seeing that a great many Refuges, of both
Sexes, cannot Write, and besides, they have not set down all the Relieved
Refuges Names. It must be inferred from thence; that the said French
Commissioners, Ministers, and Churchwardens, of the aforesaid two Churches,
have not acted Faithfully, and Righteously, but that they acted against their
own Conscience, to Desraud the said Poor Refuges, of the greatest part of the
said Charity's, and to deceive the Lords Commissioners; by whom, all their said
Accounts were to be Examined. And that therefore, it is certain, they have
still in their Hands, the aforesaid great Sums, whereof they must be forced,
to give a particular and exact Account.

13. That if it may please You, the Honorable House of Commons, to examine all
the Proofs, given before, there is no doubt, but it will be plainly seen, that
there must needs be remaining in the said French Commissioners Hands, a very
considerable Fund, accruing from the said General and Particular large
Charity's, often bestowed. That there is left a very considerable Fund,
accruing from the good Husbandry, and from the said great Sums of Money,
whereof the said French Commissioners have made use. Again, if it may please
You, the Honorable House so Commons, after Your Honors have examined, all the
said Evidences, to proceed against the said French Commissioners, and against
the Ministers and Churchwardens of the aforesaid two Churches, to force them
to confess, either that they have the said Fund in their own Hands, or that
they have put it into other Men's Hands, or to Convict them of the same, by
other more easy and demonstrative, better and shorter Ways and Means, if such
ones may be found. The aforesaid John Chabbert, shall make bold still, Humbly
to show Your Honors, all these following Means, which he believes the most
proper for his Project. He therefore shows,

1. That if it may please You, the Honorable House of Commons, to take notice
of all the aforesaid Sums of Money, arising from the said Charity's, bestowed
upon the said Poor Refuges, which said Sums, and Charitys, are come to the
said French Commissioners Hands, or to the said Ministers and Churchwardens of
the aforesaid two Churches Hands, from the beginning of the Year 1681. to this
very Day of this Month of the Year, 1696. And again, if it may please You, the
Honorable House of Commons, to order the said French Commissioners, Ministers,
and Church Wardens, etc. Presently to prepare themselves to give an exact
Account, by Particulars, of all the said Sums, come to their Hands, from the
beginning of the said Year, 1685. to this very day of the said Year, 1696. The
said French Commissioners, will not dare to Disobey Your Honors Command. This
first Means, therefore, must needs be put into Practice. That the Public, and
the said Poor Refuges may hope, that the said French Commissioners, Ministers,
and Churchwardens of the said to Churches, will be infallibly convinced, that
they have in their own Hands, or in those of their Friends, a great Fund, and
more than sufficient, to maintain the said Poor Refuges.

2. That, if it may please You, the Honorable House of Commons, to choose such
a Number of English Gentlemen, as Your Honors shall please, such as shall be,
all of an Exemplary Goodness, and Piety, Gentlemen, who love Justice, and
suffer not themselves to be corrupted with Bribes, Gentlemen, who are mindful
of the Public Concerns, and of those of the Poor's. And if it may please Your
Honers, to appoint for Commissioners, such deserving Gentlemen, to examine the
Accounts, that must be given, by Particulars, and the Acquittances, Catalogues,
and other Papers, that must be brought to them, by the said French
Commissioners, Ministers, and Churchwardens of the said two Churches.
Undoubtedly, this second means will be very useful, to find out the aforesaid
great Fund, accruing from the aforesaid large Charitty's bestowed for the said
Poor Refuges Maintenance.

3. That, if it may please You, the Honorable House of Commons; to Order Mr.
Daillon, Mr. G^mmarc, Mr. Baron, and Mr. Forent French Ministers Refuges, to
appear in their own Persons, before the aforesaid Honorable Commissioners; and
order the said four Ministers Refuges, to deliver to them, their Memories and
other Papers, they have, making mention of all, or of some part of the Sums of
Money, accruing from the aforesaid Charity's, and whereby it plainly, or but
darkly appears, that the said French Commissioenrs, Ministers, and Church
Wardens of the said two Churches, have Maliciously, and Unrighteously managed,
the said great Sums of Money, and alienated some of them, or at least,
deprived the said Poor Resuges, of them. And again, if it may please Your
Honors, to make the said Poor Ministers Refuges, Swear, and Declare by word of
Mouth, before the said Honorable Commissioners, whatever they know of the said
great Sums of Money, accruing from the aforesaid Charities and Legacies, and
whatever may be fit and proper any way to Convict the said French
Commissioners, and the said Ministers and Churchwardens of the said two
Churches of having in their Hands the aforesaid great Fund, arising from the
said Charities and Legacies.

4. That, if it may please you, The Honorable House of Commons, to oblige the
same French Commissioners, Ministers, and Churchwardens of the said two
Churches, to give up their Accounts, and presently to produce, before the
aforesaid Honorable Commissioners, all the Acquittances, all the Catalogues,
and other Papers, wherein are written the Names of all the aforesaid Poor
Refuges, who received any thing of the said great Sums, put into the Hands of
the said French Commissioners, Ministers and Churchwardens, to be distributed
to all the said Poor amongst the Refuges, from the beginning of the Year 1685
to this very Day 26 of this Month no 6 of this Year 1696. It will plainly
appear by this fourth means, that the said French Commissioners, etc. have
still in their Hands a great Fund, and more than sufficient, for the support of
the Poor amongst the Refuges.

5. That, if it may please you, the Honorable House of Commons, not to give
Ear to any kind of Reason, whereby the aforesaid French Commissioners,
Ministers and Churchwardens of the said two Churches, either can, nor dare
pretend to dispense themselves from giving an Account of the aforesaid great
Sums; But rather, if it may please your Honors to shut your Ears to any that
can, or may, be spoken in the said French Commissioners, Ministers, etc.
behalf, till the same have given in, and justified all their Accounts before
the aforesaid Honorable Commissioner. It Is certain, that by this fifth means,
the said French Commissioners, Ministers and Churchwardens of the said two
Churches will be put to a nonplus, and forced to confess, that they have a
very considerable Fund, accruing from the aforesaid great Sums, and large
Charities and Legacies, in spite of the best endeavors they have used, to make
all the supreme Powers of this Kingdom, together with the Public, believe,
that they never had a Fund, that, at least, would be sufficient for the said
Poor Refuges maintenance, as it can be proved, by the troublesome Petitions
oftentimes presented to the said supreme Powers, by the said French
Commissioners.

6. That, if it may please you, the Honorable House of Commons, after the
aforesaid French Commissioners, Ministers and Churchwardens of the said two
Churches Accounts had been given up, and the aforesaid Acquittances, the
aforesaid Catalogue, and other Papers, wherein the Names of all the Poor
Relieved Refuges are written down, examined by the aforesaid Honorable
Commissioners: If, I say, it may please your Honors, to Summon in, to appear
before the said Honorable Commissioners, all the said French Refuges, whose
Name, or Hand may be seen in the said Acquittances, Catalogues, and other
Papers; that the said Honorable Commissioners may take notice, if it be true,
that all the said Poor Refuges, have been so much, and so often relieved, and
after that manner as is said by the said French Commissioners, and the said
Ministers and Churchwardens of the said two Churches: It will appear by this
sixth means, that there is still a great Fund remaining in the said French
Commissioners Hands, and in the Hands of such; who are favorers of their Party.

7. That, if it may please you, the Honorable House of Commons to make the
same French Commissioners, Ministers and Churchwardens of the aforesaid two
Churches, Swear to every thing they shall say as true, for their Justification,
or for denying all the aforesaid Fund, or a part of it; And to make them Swear
besides, to all the circumstances of every thing, that they had said, and will
say. That the said French Commissioners, Ministers, etc. seeing they are
followed so close, by this seventh means, without doubt, will confess, that
they have still in their own Hands, or in the Hands of others, at least, a good
part of the said Fund, fearing to be declared perjured and utterly ruined in
their Reputation, if they should be Convicted of perjury, as might befall them,
if they had so bad a Conscience, whatsoever mental Refervations they may use.

8. That, if it may please you, the Honorable House of Commons, First to
command to seize unawares, not only, all the aforesaid Acquittances, Catalogues
and other Papers, but even all the Contracts and other Papers, wherein all the
aforesaid great Sums of Money, or a part thereof may be mentioned; which said
Acquittances, Catalogues, Contracts and other Papers, may be found, either in
the Consistorial Chambers, or other places of the aforesaid two Churches; or in
each House, Chamber, Closet, or other places of the said French Commissioners,
Ministers and Churchwardens of the said two Churches, especially in the
Houses, Chambers, Closets, and other places belonging to Sir John Chardin, Mr.
Lecoc, Mr. Blancard, Mr. La Sale Monginot, Mr. Renu Both, Mr. Frontin, Mr.
Louvigny, Mr. Dugas, Mr. Braguier Secretary, Mr. Satur, Brocas, Lamote,
Primerose, and Piosett, which said Gentlemen were all formerly, or still are,
the chief of the said French Commissioners, or some of the greatest favorers
of their Party: In all probability, by this eighth means, the aforesaid great
Fund will be more easily discovered, in Case the said Gentlemen have not been
forewarned of it, as they have been of several things contained in these humble
Remonstrances.

6. That, if it may please you, the Honorable House of Commons, to Command Mr.
Canche, formerly Sir John Chardin's Secretary; Mr. Gallissard now Mr.
Blancard's Secretary, and all other the said former French Commissioners, or
present Secretaries, to appear in Person before the aforesaid Honorable
Commissioners, and and being put to their Oath declare whatever they may know
about all the Sums of Money that are in the French Commissioners Hands, and
belong to the said Poor Refuges, that they know off: There is no doubt but the
aforesaid Discovery of the aforesaid great Fund, will be made very speedily by
this ninth means.

10. That, if it may please you, the Honorable House of Commons, to order all
the Bankers and Merchants, both English and French, which are in the City of
London, or in the Suburbs thereof, and in all other Trading Towns of this
Kingdom, to reveal before the aforesaid Honorable Commissioners, all the Sums
of Money given to them, or others, that they know off, by the said French
Commissioners, or by the said Ministers and Churchwardens of the said two
Churches, or by their Agents: This tenth means certainly will produce a
wonderful good Effect, in Relation to the aforesaid Discovery of the aforesaid
Fund.

11. That, if it may please you, the Honorable House of Commons, to publish,
that every Person or Persons who will Discover and Reveal any Sums, either
great or small of the aforesaid Fund, arising from the aforesaid Charities and
Legacies, bestowed upon the aforesaid Poor amongst the Refuges, and put into
the said French Commissioners Hands, etc. shall Receive such a Sum of Money as
your Honors shall please to allot to such a Person, or Persons, for his or for
their Discovery and Revealing of such a Sum of the aforesaid Fund: This
eleventh means will be one of the most Effectual ones, whereby the said great
Fund will be found out.

12. That, if it may please you, the Honorable House of Commons, to Reward
every Person or Persons, who through his or their great Care, and strict
search, shall have discovered, and evidently, proved that that said French
Commissioners, Ministers and Churchwardens of the said two Churches, have upon
the said great Fund settled in the aforesaid City of London, or in some other
Towns of this Kingdom, any Manufactures, or given some part of the said Fund to
any Shopkeepers to make the best of it, or made any other use of it: This
twelfth means also seems a very fit expedient to make appear that the said
French Commissioners, and the said Ministers and Churchwardens of the said two
Churches, have still the said great Fund in their own Hands, or in the Hands of
other Men.

13. That, if it may please you, the Honorable House of Commons, to Force the
said French Commissioners, Ministers and Churchwardens of the said two
Churches, presently to give, to the aforesaid Honorable Commissioners, an
exact Catalogue of all the French Refuges who have received something of the
said Charities; which said Refuges went from England, or are Dead, or employed
in the said England; precisely telling when the said Poor Refuges went from
England, or when they Dyed, or where employed in the said Kingdom, or at least,
telling how long it is since the said Poor Refuges were not Relieved at all:
You, the Honorable House of Commons, by this thirteenth means will be sure,
that the said French Commissioners, etc. have not always well discharged their
Duty, nor their Commission; And besides, they have in their Hands a
considerable Fund, coming from the aforesaid Charities, bestowed upon the Poor
French Refuges.

14. That, if it may please you, the Honorable House of Commons, to Order some
French Refuges that came from several parts of France, of whatever Degree and
Character they may be, presently to appear before the aforesaid Honorable
Commissioners, and heartily Declare that they Know, or do not Know, all the
aforesaid French Refuges, to whom the said French Commissioners, Ministers and
Churchwardens of the said two Churches, say they have given something of the
aforesaid Charities: To Order again, all the said French Refuges that came from
several parts of France, of whatever Degree and Character, freely to Declare,
they Know, or do not Know the said Poor Refuges, to whom the said French
Commissioners, pretend to be sure, they have given some Relief, are gone out of
England, or are Dead, or have been employed in the said Kingdom, at the same
time told by the said French Commissioners, Ministers and Churchwardens of the
said two Churches: And to Order moreover, that the said French Refuges, who
came from several parts of France, of whatever Degree and character they may
be, to make with all speed, a more strict inquiry about the said Poor Refuges,
departed out of England, or Dead, or employed in the said Kingdom; and about
what time when they departed from England, and when they Dyed, or where
employed in the said Kingdom: And to make also a strict inquiry about the said
Fund, and all things that concerns it: And to Order them to make a true
Relation of all those premises, to the aforesaid Honorable Commissioners: This
fourteenth means will be a Touchstone to try Truth, or Untruth, that has
been, or shall be told, by the said French Commissioners, Ministers and
Churchwardens in their Answer, and will show, as all other means
beforementioned may do, a great Fund, come from the aforesaid Charities, into
the Hands of the said French Commissioners, Ministers and Churchwardens of the
said two Churches.

15. That, if it may please you, the Honorable House of Commons, to let the
Public understand, it is a very material Thing, that every Person or Persons,
of what Degree or Character soever, he or they may be, who bestowed any private
Charities, and paid any Legacies to the said French Commissioners, or to the
said Ministers and Churchwardens of the said two Churches should declare, some
ways or other, what Sums of Money their said private Charities and Legacies
did amount to, when and to whom the same were bestowed and paid: That this
fifteenth means wonderfully will Force the said French Commissioners,
Ministers, etc. to give an account of a good part of the aforesaid great Sums;
And to convince even the same French Commissioners, Ministers and
Churchwardens, etc. to have in their Hands a greater Fund than is necessary
for the aforesaid Poor Refuges Maintenance.

16. That if it may please You the Honorable House of Commons, to know, who
are the Tellers of all the Sums, gathered upon the aforesaid three Briefs, and
received by the aforesaid French Commissioners, and to command, the said
Tellers of the said Sums of Money, to declare and show by all necessary
circumstances, how many Sums they have told, and when, and to whom of the said
French Commissioners, they have told the said Sums. Again, if it may please
You the Honorable House of Commons, to understand more particularly, all the
Sums of Money, gathered upon the said three Briefs, and call the chief
Receivers to an account for the same. That this sixteenth means, will
wonderfully serve for the discovery of the aforesaid Fund, and will sorce the
said French Commissioners, to give a more strict account of it.

17. That, if it may please You the Honorable House of Commons, to order all
the aforesaid French Commissioners, to give up an exact account of the Fifteen
Thousand Pounds lately granted by your Honors, to the aforesaid Poor, which
are amongst the Refuges, forthwith to deliver to the aforesaid Honorable
Commissioners, all the Catalogues of Ministers, Gentlemen, Burgesses, and other
Poor, which are amongst the French Refuges, to whom the said Fifteen Thousand
Pounds, have been, or shall be distributed. And to order, at the same time, all
the said Poor amongst the Refuges, who shall be, or can be in this City, or its
Suburbs, to appear in Person, every one, according to his Quality and
Character, before the Honorable Commissioners, and all those, of the same
Refuges who shall be in the Country presently to write a Letter, to the same
Honorable Commissioners: That by that means, it may clearly appear, whither
the said Catalogues are exact, or no. Again to order every one, in particular,
of the said Poor amongst the Refuges, to declare, to the said Honorable
Commissioners, the number of the Persons of his Family, his employments, or the
way he has to maintain himself and his Family, his Rents, or his Wants, his
Age, his Infirmities, and those of his Family. And to order, that all in
general, should declare, upon their Conscience and charitably, what they know,
concerning the Sums of Money, or Revenues, what concerning the Poverty and
Wants of others which are, or should be more or less relieved; That by that way
it may clearly appear, whether the said French Commissioners, (the most cunning
men, amongst the Refuges) have wronged some of the Poor Refuges, or no, in some
thing, or other. And moreover, if the said French Commissioners are found
guilty of any wrong, to order, that all of them, appear, before your Honors,
together with all those, who had been wronged; That the same French
Commissioners may be convinced for ever, before your Honors, that they have
acted unrighteously. That you the Honorable House of Commons wonderfully will
perceive, by this seventeenth means, whether, upon this occasion, the said
French Commissioners, have rather followed the maxims of the World, than the
Evangelical Rules; and whether they have not acted, according to the King's
Will, and your Honors intent, or no.

18. That, if it may please you, the Honorable House of Commons, to use all
the foregoing means, or some others like those, or some others better than
those, and to second them with all your Honors power; it will certainly come
to pass, that all the said Poor amongst the Refuges, will be in a way of living
contentedly, all their lifetime, and by their Demands and Petitions, will
trouble no more the Supreme Powers of this Kingdom, neither the Nation,
publicly, nor privately: So that the said John Chabbert, hoping he may see in
a short time, the said Poor Refuges, in a better condition, and the said
Supreme Powers, the Church and the Kingdom of England, will reap many
advantages from the better condition, wherein the said Poor amongst the
Refuges, will be, God willing; He shall make bold still, to propose to your
Honors, these following Motives, and humbly shows.

1. That the Discovery of the aforesaid Fund, concerns very much the King, upon
three several Accounts; 1. Upon His Sacred Person, 2. Upon His Revenues, 3.
Upon His Armies.

1. Upon the King's Sacred Person, who by the said Discovery of the said Fund,
happily, and for ever, will be delivered from a great many troublesome
Petitions, that oftentimes may be presented to His Majesty, by the said French
Commissioners, under Color of a great Poverty of a great many French Refuges,
as was done heretofore, which Poverty, without doubt, the said French
Commissioners, very Maliciously, Barbarously, Covetously and Proudly
occasioned, and do still occasion. And again, the King's Sacred Person, by the
said Discovery of the said Fund, hereafter will be free from the Care, that His
Majesty has taken, so Tenderly and Piously to Relieve the Poor which were, and
still are, amongst the French Refuges in their urgent necessities, for which
Poor the French Commissioners were continually a Begging; But to whom after
they received the said Relief from His Majesty, and from this generous Nation,
publicly and privately, the said French Commissioners have given but a very
small matter, in comparison of the aforesaid great Sums, come to their Hands,
causing them to live in Poverty, to have always a need to Beg for the said
Poor amongst the Refuges, and by that unlawful way, increase the aforesaid Fund
(I do not know for what;) And all those shall be proved, by the Discovery of
the said Fund.

2. Upon the Account of the King's Revenues, some whereof, bestowed upon the
said Poor amongst the Refuges, during the space of many Years, will be
hereafter spared for ever, by means of the said Discovery, of the said Fund,
fit to maintain all the said Poor, all their Life time.

3. Upon the Account of the King's Armies, whereinto, by the means of the said
Discovery, of the said Fund, many French Gentlemen, both young, or, at least,
Stout, and not being past bearing Arms, to whom, without doubt, the said French
Commissioners, have formerly allowed, and do still allow, very good yearly
Pensions, as clearly will be seen by means of the said Discovery, of the said
Fund, will be foreced to choose to go into the Armies, if a good part of their
said Pensions, as it must be taken away from them, which said part of the said
Pensions, in all appearance, causes the said young and stout French Gentlemen
Refuges to forbear taking up Arms, by that means, the young and stout French
Gentlemen Refuges, not only do not serve the King nor the State at all; But
even are burdensome to both. Again, the said young and stout French Gentlemen
Refuges, unhappily to spend their time, either in Idleness, or in
Divertisement, in Playing, sometimes in Slandering and Evil-speaking, or in
some kind of Riot and Debauchery. Moreover to which said Armies, many of the
French Refuges of whatever Degree, will also be easily induced to choose to go,
if some part of the product of the said Fund, when it shall be discovered, be
bestowed to maintain well all their Life time the Officers and Soldiers, who
have been, or hereafter shall be maimed in the King's Service, in the said
Armies.

2. That the said Discovery of the aforesaid Fund very much concerns this State
of England, in general and particular.

1. In general, because the said State, in general, by the said Discovery of
the said Fund, every Year, not only may save a considerable Sum of Money,
Charitably and Piously granted to the said Poor amongst the Refuges, by your
Honors; But also, may employ the said Sum in paying some of the Taxes, laid
upon the People, and granted to the King for the maintenance of his Armies by
Sea and Land, and by this, or other means, ease all the People.

2. In particular, because many Persons, Members of the said State of England,
having been very often Solicited, either by the troublesome Demands of the
said French Commissioners, or by the earnest Requests of the said Poor
themselves, to spare something for them, and the said Persons, thereby moved to
spare something for the said Poor Refuges hereafter will be no more obliged to
spare any thing for them, when the said Fund shall be discovered, whereof the
product, undoubtedly, will be sufficient continually to maintain all the said
Poor Refuges,

3. That the Discovery of the aforesaid Fund, which is in the French
Commissioners Hands, concerns very much the Church of the aforesaid State, in
general and particular.

1. In general, because it is certain, by the Discovery of the said Fund, the
whole Body of the Church of England will be partaker of the Prerogatives,
Conveniences and Benefits, which without doubt will be granted to the
Inhabitants of some Hamlets, Villages and little Towns in the said State of
England, which said Inhabitants have no means to keep a Minister Resident in
their Hamlet, etc. when some French Ministers, Refuges who are already, or may
be in time, very well acquainted with the English Tongue, shall be granted to
the said Inhabitants of the said Hamlets, etc. which said French Ministers, all
their Life time, will be maintained with the product of the aforesaid Fund, in
exercising their Ministry in the said Hamlets, Villages and Little Towns, under
the aforesaid Church of England Discipline.

2. In particular, because the aforesaid Inhabitants, of the Hamlets, etc. the
Church of England's Members, which have no means to keep a Minister Resident in
the said Hamlets, etc. by the aforesaid Discovery of the great Fund, will take
possession of one of the greatest Advantages in this World; if some French
Ministers, Refuges, maintained by the product of the aforesaid Fund, are
granted to the Inhabitants of the said Hamlets, etc. by the Discovery of the
said Fund, and the convenience to enjoy the Ministry of some French Ministers,
making their Residence in the said Hamlets, etc. and being maintained with the
product of the said Fund, will have no more the trouble to be exposed to many
grievous mischances.

1. Often to be exposed, to be a long while, without they can make their
Children be Christened, and sometimes to see them dye, before they can be
Baptized, for want of convenient time of doing it.

2. Upon many occasions, to be exposed, to the having no comfort, when they are
lying Sick, sometimes when they are dying, and at a great many other
opportunities, whereof the Comforts and Prayers, said by a Minister are of
great importance.

3. To be exposed, to a great many fatigues, especially in the Winter time,
when publicly to call upon God, and be instructed about their Religion, or to
make their Children be Christened, or to desire the Prayers of the holy
Congregations, for their sick Persons, the said Inhabitants of the aforesaid
Hamlets, Villages, and little Towns, must go to other Towns and Places from
their Habitations, one, two, three, nay, and sometimes four Miles, and
sometimes farther, when it rains, snows, freezeth, and the wind blows very
hard, which said Toils may dishearten oftentimes the said Inhabitants of the
said Hamlets, etc. and keep them from their public Christian Duty.

4. That the aforesaid Discovery of the aforesaid Fund, particularly concerns
very much, many French Ministers, Refuges, which were not in Orders in France;
but which have received Holy Orders, from the Hands of the Right Reverend
Fathers in God, and Lords, Bishops of the Holy Church of England; because the
said Ministers, having now no settlement at all, or having but an inconstant
one, shall have one, or one durable, upon the account of the said Discovery of
the said Fund, a part of the product whereof, must, according to the Rules of
Justice, be bestowed upon the said Ministers, as well as upon all other
Ministers, Refuges maintenance, which were admitted into Orders in France,
seeing that the said French Ministers, Refuges, who have received Holy Orders
from the Hands of the said Right Reverend Fathers in God, and Lords, Bishops of
the said Holy Church of England, at least, are Ministers and Refuges, by as
good a Title, as all the said other French Ministers admitted into Orders in
France can have, especially when the said Ministers, admitted into Holy Orders
in England, by God's Assistance, and that of the supreme Powers of this
Kingdom, and Heads of the said Holy Church of England approbation, will be
settled in the said Hamlets, Villages and little Towns, whereof the Inhabitants
cannot maintain a Minister, to exercise their Holy Ministry, and reside there
all their Lifetime.

5. That the aforesaid Discovery of the aforesaid Fund, concerns very much,
many particular English Ministers, and that upon two Accounts.

1. Because hereafter, when all the French Ministers Refuges shall be no longer
in this World, or in England, the Inhabitants of the aforesaid Hamlets,
Villages, and Little Towns, who cannot maintain a Minister, wherein the
aforesaid Minister's Refuges, and exercised their Ministry, for a yearly
allowance, taken out of the said Fund, hereafter, for ever may enjoy the
privilege of having, either an English Minister, or a Minister, come from
French Parents, born in England, to whom allowance taken out of the product of
the aforesaid Fund, being granted; because there is not any part of a Civil
Law, more just than that which prescribes, that, if the Done deceaseth before
his giver, the Gift must be given again to the said giver: So that, then the
aforesaid French Ministers, and all other French People fled for Refuge into
England, who are here the Dones, being deceased, or being no more looked upon,
as surviving all his Dones, after that, they may bestow their Beneficence upon
whomsoever they please.

2. Because it being possible, that the aforesaid Fund every day might be
increased, if the said Fund was put into the hands of some laborious, diligent,
and ingenious Persons, who besides, may be very zealous for the Protestant
Religion in general, and in particular, for the Holy Church of England's
Interests. In time, God willing, some English Ministers, maintained with some
part of the aforesaid product, taken from the said increased Fund, may be
granted to the Inhabitants of all the Hamlets, Villages, and little Towns of
the aforesaid State of England, who for want of competent means to maintain a
Minister Resident in their said Hamlets, etc. may have one, and in all
likelihood could never have had any, but by the aforesaid ways.

6. That, the aforesaid Discovery of the aforesaid Fund, concerns very much,
all the Poor amongst the French Refuges; but especially, all the Poor maimed
Soldiers, all the Old Poor Persons, all the Grave, Modest Widows, all the Poor
Orphans, all the Infirm and Weak Persons, and all the Poor Persons of
whatsoever Age, Degree, and Rank they may be off, if by their own means, they
cannot maintain themselves, neither their Families; and that upon five
Arguments.

1. Because, by the Discovery, of the aforesaid Fund, More Revenue than is
requisite, for all the said Poor amongst the Refuges, will be found out.

2. Because, without doubt, to some of the said Poor Refuges, a durable,
instead of an inconstant allowance, will be granted, and to some others, a
competent one too.

3. Because, those of the said Refuges, who never can obtain, either any
allowance at all, or but a competent one, from the aforesaid French
Commissioners, which being inexorable, upon every occasion, have protested
sometimes, they had no Fund at all, and sometimes that they had one, but very
small and scanty, scarce capable to supply all the said Poor Refuges, with any
relief, or but even with a competent relief: And all that very ambiguously, and
by way of amphilology.

4. Because by the said Discovery of the said Fund, it will appear, that the
said French Commissioners, have allowed, and do allow great Pensions, to many
of the aforesaid Refuges of both Sexes, which will come to be, either utterly,
or partly deprived of the said great Pensions. They will come to be deprived of
them. 1. Utterly, if the said Refuges are convinced, to have other competent
Revenues besides, for their Maintenance, or some means, whereby, it is clearly
demonstrated, that they may supply all their own wants, or especially, if it
appears, that the said Refuges, of both Sexes, have spent, or does still spend,
a good part of their Pensions in Luxury, both of Cloths and Diet, in Playing,
and in any excess, or if it appears, that the said great Pensions cause the
said Refuges, to live in Idleness and misspending their time, and they become
unprofitable Members to the Public, and to the Private: The said Refuges, will
come, but in part to be deprived of the said great Pensions, if they can prove
they want relief: So that the said Refuges being utterly, or in part deprived
of the great Pensions, as occasion serves, and as it shall be thought fit, the
aforesaid Poor Refuges, may be more relieved, than they were before the said
Discovery of the said Fund.

5. Because, by the Discovery of the aforesaid Fund, well managed and improved,
many Poor Persons, of both Sexes, who want employment, and look for some, to
maintain themselves and their distressed Families, may be put upon Business,
and in a way of living with their Families.

6. That the Discovery, of the aforesaid great Fund, concerns very much the
English Poor; Because the aforesaid French Poor Refuges, Living upon the
product of the aforesaid Fund, found out; and so being no more relieved by the
Persons of Quality, and Rich People of this Kingdom, the said English Poor will
Receive some Charities a great deal more from the said Persons of Quality, and
Rich People. And moreover, that all English, as well as French Poor, may be put
upon Business and live with their Families, upon the account of the said great
Fund, well managed, and several ways increased; Is what the aforesaid John
Chabbert heartily wishes to the said English and French Poor, and continually
offers up his Vows to the Omnipotent God; that it may please His Wise
Providence to prosper his undertaking, for His Eternal Glory; For the
Furtherance and Strengthening of the Kingdom of His beloved Son, Jesus Christ;
For the Immortal Memory of the Honorable House of Commons; For all good
Peoples Edification; And for all the aforesaid French Commissioners, etc.
Conviction, Shame and Confusion, So be it.

Hic opus hic Labor est, sed Labyrinthus non est.
FINIS.

