THE CHARACTER AND QUALIFICATIONS OF AN Honest Loyal MERCHANT.

Licensed, and Entered according to Order.

LONDON: Printed by ROBERT ROBERTS. MDCLXXXVI.

THE CHARACTER and QUALIFICATIONS OF AN HONEST LOYAL MERCHANT.
THE Loyal Honest MERCHANT is an Universal Tradesman, and all the World is his
Shop; A diligent Be, ever busy in bringing Honey to the Public Hive; The
Nations Purveyor, that improves its Superfluities, and supplies its
Necessities; The same to the Body Politic, as the Liver, Veins, and Arteries
are to the Natural; for he both raises and distributes Treasure, the vital
Blood of the Commonweal. He is the Steward of the Kingdoms Stock, which by his
good or ill management, does proportionably increase or languish. One of the
most useful members in a State, without whom it can never be Opulent in Peace,
nor consequently Formidable in War.

FOR he fetches in the good things of the remotest Regions to Enrich his
Country, and by the honest Magic of Industry, removes the Mines of Peru, and
the Golden Sands of Guinea whither he pleases. He can make a barren Heath, or a
contemptible Bogg, (that has not one Tree but what you must plant, nor one
Stone but what you must bring thither, a place that has nothing of its own
product worth speaking of) to be yet the richest City for its Bigness, and the
greatest Storehouse and Empory for all sorts of Commodities in the World.

It Is by his means,

The Taste of choice Arabian Spice we know,
Without those scorching Heats that make it grow.
In Indian Gems, and Persian Silks we shine;
And without Plan^ing, drink of every Vine.
WITHOUT him the World would still be a kind of Wilderness, one part unknown
and unbeholding to the other; and if ever its remote Inhabitants met, it would
be rather for mischief and slaughter, than mutual assistance; Whereas his pains
unites divided Empires, and those that never beheld the same Stars; joins
people separated by different Climates, Religions, and Policies, into one
common Society; And by the Mediation of Commerce, makes the Sunburned Ethiopian
contribute to the relief of the Frozen Muscovite.

HE is the true Orpheus that charms the Savages, and spreads Civility amongst
Barbarians; he communicates Arts and Sciences, and all useful Inventions both
for Necessity and Ornament: Unless he had advanced Navigation, Geography might
have still lain muffled in Strabo's Cloak, and Astronomy been confined to
Ptolemy's narrow Horizon; we might to this day have believed the Poets Fables
of Frigid and Torrid Zones uninhabitable; That there was no living (forsooth)
under the Equator, or within the Artick and Antartick Circles; Each
quick-sighted Vergilius might have been in danger of Deprivation, for holding
the supposed Heresy of Antipodes; The Art of Healing it self had incurably
languisht, our Apothecaries Shops been destitute of the best part of the
Materia Medica, or choicest Rarities of the Tripple Kingdom; and an English
Herbal might have bounded the studies of our most Learned College of Physicians.

NAY further, there seems yet a more sublime and mysterious designment of
Providence attending his pains; for by establishing an intercourse with
Infidels for Civil Traffic, a door is not seldom opened to advance the Divine
Interest; so that he may propagate our most Holy Faith, as well as vend our
Temporal Commodities; and by penetrating both Indies, and (like the Sun)
compassing the World, administers opportunities to divulge the Light of the
Gospel; whilst our stupid Gallants think, he Voyages only to bring them Pearls
to hang at the Ears of their Mistresses, Mango's to relish their Mutton, or
Pepper to strew over their Cucumbers.

IN these remote Negotiations, he counts it next to denying his Savior, to
occasion by any dishonest or immoral Act, his Blessed Name to be Blasphemed
amongst the Gentiles. He would rather endure the Rack himself, than stretch a
Piece of Cloth on the Tenters to make it three or four Yards longer, which
when sold to a Turk, shall in the next Shower, Cockle all up in a Ruck, causing
the honest Musulman to revile both the cheating Christian and his Religion; Tho
the later altogether undeservedly, since It most severely condemns
Circumvention, and enjoins not only strict Fidelity and Justice in our
dealings, but Charity too, toward all Mankind, even our most professed Enemies.

THIS our Merchant is sensible of, and trembles at that WOE pronounced against
those by whom such scandalous Offenses come; Therefore keeps a double Guard on
his Conversation abroad, as knowing that not only his own private Reputation,
but the Honor of his Religion and Nation, in some measure depends thereon. His
Faith is firmer than the Needle of his Compass, for it admits not of the least
Variation; his Devotion is one and the same, in all Countries, and his Zeal as
great beyond, as on this side the Line; For like the Sun, tho he traverse round
the habitable Globe, yet still he keeps constant to the Ecliptic of Truth, and
will not Barter away the Pearl of Price, for any worldly gains, but uses
diligence in the first place to Ensure his Soul, dreading no Shipwreck so much
as that of a good Conscience.

AND as Piety and Loyalty are inseparable; so next to Sacriledg, (which is a
robbing of God) he abhors Smuckling and Running of Goods, or Entering one
Commodity for another that pays more, etc. (Which is a robing of Gods
Vicegerent, the King;) His practice being a daily Comment on that Text, Render
unto Coesar the things that are Coesars, etc. He reckons all those that use any
such unlawful Courses, far from being either good Christians or Loyal Subjects;
Nay esteems it not only a simple Cheat or bare Felony, by any Pretensions,
Concealments, Trick or Artifices to defraud his Sovereign of those Dues the Law
has settled, But a kind of unfledged Treason against the Crown, since it is
apparently a design to weaken and subvert the Royal Power, when we purloin the
Revenues necessary for the support of the Government.

HE knows, That a Nation may be impoverisht and ruined by a great Trade ill
managed, as well as by too little; and that the Kingdom may get, even when the
Merchant loses, and the Merchant often get when the Kingdom loses; But for his
own part is so passionate a Lover of his Country, as to postpone his private
Advantages to the utility of the Public; And therefore thinks himself obliged
(whenever fit opportunity is offered) humbly to inform his Sovereign, or some
of the Chief Ministers of State, (or Parliament, when convened), of the
Overbalance of Importations from any Country; and of all Exportations or
Importations of any sort of Goods that are notably prejudicial or profitable to
the Kingdom, to the end there may be wholesome Laws made to prevent the One, and
encourage the Other;

FOR not only the increase or decay of Seamen and shipping, (the Walls of our
British Empire) The encouragement or discouragement of Manufacturers, and
consequently the Increase of People, (which if duly employed can never be too
many, their multitudes being always the first Riches as well as Strength of any
Nation) but also the Value of every Country-Gentlemans Lands, Rents, Corn,
Cattle, etc. does all ultimately depend upon, and are Influenced by It, and
must either Rise or Fall in equal proportion as Foreign Traffic is well or
ill managed, clogged, or Encouraged.

JUSTICE, square Dealing, and a punctual Honesty, are Essential Qualities in
our true-bred Merchant. Hence his Books are allowed Evidence, and looked upon as
a kind of Records; and a small Script of two or three Lines only under his
hand, without either Witness or Seal, passes over the world for Thousands of
Pounds, as Authentic as Twenty Noverint universi's, or other long-winded
Instruments, Sealed and Delivered in the Presence of John Do, and Richard Roe,
and half the Parish besides.

I AM not Ignorant that the Title of Merchant in some parts of the World, is
usurped by almost all sorts of little People whose Business is to Buy and Sell;
But properly (and wholly here in England) it belongs to none but such as drive
a foreign Trade, whereby they are vastly differenced from ordinary Shopkeepers
and Retailers; Our Merchant is a person of Bulk, and considerable Figure in the
Commonweal, and must be Endowed with Qualifications proportionate.

1. HE should have a competent Fund, or Estate left him by his Ancestors; for
tho Credit (charily kept) be a main support of, and Emprovement to his Affairs,
yet It (alone) can never be a good beginning for such an Employment; for if he
have not a fair Visible Stock to build on, every small puff of misfortune will
be apt to shock his Reputation.

2. THERE ought also to be strong Natural Parts, an Active Vigorous Body, to
endure the Fatigues of Travel; and a ready comprehensive Mind. A good dose of
Mercury should go to his Constitution, To render him (etsi non versuti,
versatilis tamen Ingenij) tho not of a crafty overreaching, yet of a brisk
accommodating Genius, whereby he may apply himself with an easy obliging
Address to all sorts of Humors or Accidents; yet this Mercury should be fixed
by Saturn, or the Gaiety of his Complexion tinged with a dash of Melancholy, to
keep him from the vanity and extravagancies of a Town-Wit, and the beggarly
fate of the everlasting Tatlers; For Secrecy is a virtue almost as necessary to
a Merchant as to a Statesman.

3. AS his Birth was Generous, so his Education was Liberal. He has Latin
enough to understand an Author, or Discourse a Stranger; and to serve as a
Preparative and Groundwork for the rest of his necessary Accomplishments; But
thinks it scarce worth the while to slave seven years under the Tyranny of the
Ferula, merely to obtain the skill of Hunting a Greek Derivative, and Capping
of Verses.

4. HE has the command of his Pen, and writes a fair Genteel Hand, not crampt
up to a set Secretary like a Scriveners Boy; nor scrawling Long-Tails, like a
Wench at a Boarding-School, but a neat charming mixture of Roman and Italian
flowing with a kind of Artificial Negligence. [Of which in my Opinion Mr. Airs
by St. Pauls-School, is at least one of the best Teachers about London.]

5. HE is well-skill'd in that Foundation of Arts, the Science of Numbers: for
as Merchandise (next after Religion and Justice) is the life of the
Weal-Publick, so Practical Arithmetic is the Soul of Merchandise. But
especially he is thoroughly versed in that noble method of Debtor and Creditor,
used only by those of his own Profession. And his Books are kept with so much
Order as well as Punctualness and Integrity, that it is the easiest thing in the
world to find out any thing inquired after; and as soon as found, it carries
with it Demonstration.

6. I NEED not tell you, that he is expert in the Nature and Forms of
Charter-Parties, Bills of Lading, Invoyces, Contracts, Bills of Exchange,
Policies of Ensurance, and the powers, obligations and effects of each of them.
He knows the Measures, Weights, and Money of all foreign Countries, I mean the
Coyns not only by their several Denominations, but also in their Intrinsic
Values in weight and fineness compared with the Standard of his own Country.

7. HE understands the Customs, Tolls, Taxes, Impositions and other Charges
upon all sorts of Merchandise Exported or Imported to and from foreign
Countries, or at home. In what Commodities each Region or Province abounds;
what convenient Ports they have, what Wares they want or are fond of; and how,
from whence, and at what Rates, furnished. As also what Goods are Contraband in
times of War, and what others in peace are Prohibited (for Reasons of State) in
each place, to be Exported or Imported, and how the Rates of Exchange by Bills
go from time to time.

8. PARTICULARLY, as Owner, or Part-owner of Ships, he has an Insight into the
Goodness and Prices of all Materials requisite for Building or Repairing them,
and in the diverse Workmanships thereof; as likewise for Masts, Tackling,
Cordage, Ordnance, Victuals, Ammunition, etc. Together with the Ordinary Wages
of Commanders, Officers, and Mariners; To know upon what Rates and Conditions
to Freight his Ships, and Ensure his Adventures from one Port to another; and
to be well acquainted with the Laws, Orders, and Customs of the
Ensurance-Offices and Courts of Admiralty both here and beyond the Seas.

9. BY his frequent Voyaging and seeing the Wonders of the Lord in the great
Deeps, he becomes skilful in Navigation, and not unacquainted with Astronomy;
And by his Residence in several foreign parts, he attains to the speaking of
diverse the most useful Languages, and is (by the way) a diligent Observer of
the Ordinary Revenues and Expenses of those Princes and States; Their strength
both by Sea and Land; Their Laws, Customs, Policies, Manners, Religion,
Architecture, Military Discipline, Arts, Manufactories, and other Observables,
of which he is capable to give an Account on all occasions for the good of his
Country.

SO that I scarce know any other Profession which leads into so much
Knowledge, either of the Great World, (as to its Situation, Products and
Mutual Dependence) or of the little World [MAN] (as to his Humors, Bigotries,
Passions, Intrigues, and Blind-sides) In the understanding of which two things
seems to consist (if I mistake not) the main part of what we call civil
Knowledge, Wisdom, or Policy.

NOW if our Merchants Occupation be thus necessary, and require such Variety of
excellent Qualifications, How can it but be Honorable too? For what can better
Recommend any Calling to Wisemens Regards, than its Usefulness? Or be more
Genteel and Glorious, than to supply the common Necessities of Mankind? Who is
more to be esteemed than the Man whose Industry underprops his Sovereigns
Throne with Wealth, and at the same time furnishes his Fellow Subjects with
Employment, and the means of a comfortable Subsistence?

VAIN therefore, unjust, and ungrateful too, are their Clamours who would
degrade this Noble Profession as below a Person of Quality to Practice; Because
(Forsooth) it is Questuary, and respects Gain, (and I wonder what Profession
does not in some degree or other?) As if a Gentleman might Honorably Buy an
Office, and Sell his Land or his Breath, but nothing else: As if a Lawyer, or a
Physician might Pocket his Fees (the just Engagements, or Remunerations of his
well-intended Endeavors) without Sullying either his Family, or his Gown; and
yet a Merchant should utterly forfeit his Birthright, by Receiving a Bill of
Exchange? I intend no odious Comparisons, or in the least to Affront those
other most Worthy and Learned Professions, but only to vindicate the Honor of
Merchandise, and convince the World, That if a person of Quality should happen
to breed up his Son, or Match a Daughter therein, there is no danger that they
should presently be levelled with the common Crowd, or Numbered with the Gaffers
and the Gammers.

FOR since a Person of Honor may without any disparagement, improve his Lands,
and let his Houses, and sell his Cattle for as much as he can get; And Buy his
Provisions, Furniture, and Equipage as cheap as he can; I am so dull as not to
conceive whence any Stains should reflect on his Scutcheon, If he should happen
to Equip a Ship, and send abroad Ten Thousand Pounds worth of Cloth or Tin, and
in return bring back a gallant Cargo of twice the value, to Enrich his Country
as well as himself.

IT IS a smart, but I hope, causeless Reflection of a late Ingenious Britannia
Languens, or a discourse of Trade, Printed, 1680.
Author. We are (says he) still pretending to be more Acurate in Logic and
Philosophy (which howsoever otherwise useful, do not add Twopence per Annum to
the Riches of the Nation) we continue to squeeze all the Sapless Papers and
Fragments of Antiquity; we grow mighty well acquainted with the old Heathen
gods, Towns, and People; we prise our selves in fruitless curiosities; we turn
our Lice and Fleas into Bulls and Pigs by our Magnifying Glasses; we are
searching for the World in the Moon with our Telescopes; we send to weigh the
Air on the top of Teneriff; we invent Paceing Saddles, and Gimcracks of all
sorts, which are voted Ingenuities, whilst the solid and most useful Notions
and Considerations of Trade, are turned into a Ridicule, or out of Fashion.

SURE I am, whatever low Conceits Aristotle or some other Pedants may have had
of Merchandise in old times, when its Dignity was not known, and when indeed it
was but Huckstering and Pedlary in respect of what it has since arrived to; it
must be avowed, That it is long since become not unworthy of Persons of the
first Quality; not only the Magnifico's of Luca, and Genoua, The
Illustrissimo's of Venice, and the High Mighty Burghers of Holland, and such
like Republican Grandees, make it their business; But absolute Sovereign
Princes have courted it. Ferdinando the first great Duke of Tuscany, and his
Successors, by their care and diligence to countenance Merchants in their
Affairs, have so increased the practice thereof, That there is scarce a
Nobleman or Gentleman in all their Dominions that does not Traffic either by
himself or in Copartnership, whereby within fifty or sixty Years, the Trade to
their Port of Legorn is so much augmented, that of a poor little Town (as some
yet living can remember it) it is now become a fair and strong City, and one of
the most famous places for Trade in Europe.

TO go higher, some of the most sacred Crowned Heads of Christendom, descended
from, and allied to the most Ancient and Illustrious Families that the World
can boast of; (and in that number principally our present most August and
Gracious Sovereign), are so far from counting it any diminution to their Royal
Majesty's, That in the highest manner they endeavor to encourage Trade, by
interesting Themselves therein. Hence our Exchange is allowed to wear that
lofty Title of ROYAL; nor can the Statues of our deceased Princes any where be
more Gloriously placed, (next to their Repositories in Sacred Ground) than in
that Magnificent Rendezvous of Merchants; To intimate, that the Advancement and
promoting of Trade, will be the Honor of our Kings Living and Dead.

THE Truth is, The wisest of Kings and Men has long since given his Judgment by
his practice in this case; For Solomon himself could never have made Silver and
Gold to be as plenteous in Jerusalem as Stones, and Cedars as Sycamores, if he
had not first turned Merchant, joined in Copartnership with King Hiram, and set
out a Navy at Ezion Geber (a Port in the Red Sea) which had the Advantage of
Traffic to the Indian Ocean, and from thence to Ophir (supposed to be the Isle
of Madagascar) whence they brought Gold and Silver and Elephants Teeth, as well
as Apes and Peacocks.

THEREFORE let none of our Nobility or Gentry think it a disgrace to Employ
themselves or their Sons in this NOBLE MYSTERY, which as it is most advantageous
to their Country and themselves, so the most excellent Personages have not
disdained to embark in it: For (as the judicious Mr. Mun Englands Treasure, p.
155.
most truly says) Foreign Trade, or the noble Profession of the Merchant, is
the great Revenue of the King, the Honor of the Kingdom; The School of our
Arts; The supply of our Wants; The employment of our Poor; The improvement of
our Lands; The Nursery of our Mariners; the Walls of the Kingdom; The means of
our Treasure; The sinews of our Wars, and the Terror of our Enemies.

FOR if Foreign Commerce be of such Import to all Nations, That the Wisest
Princes and States every where Endeavor (tho laboring under never so great
disadvantage) to Caress as much as they can, and obtain the good Graces of a
Lady, that is always attended with so vast a Dowry (for to speak freely, that
People that can get the Trade of the World, may quickly, without pursuing the
toils of the Coesars and the Alexanders, be, (in effect) Lords of their
Neighbors, and give Laws to the World) much more then ought We the happy
Inhabitants of Great-Brittain, highly to esteem of Traffic, which God and
Nature seem to have designed for our peculiar Portion; England affording the
most; and best natural Products and Materials for Manufactories; the most and
best Ports; most commodiously Situate for Trade, either to the Streights, the
Baltic, or either of the Indies; having also a numerous People, secured in
their Liberties and Properties by a Gracious Prince and most wholesome Laws;
Seamen as Brisk, Active, Skilful, and Adventrous as ever Plough'd the Ocean;
blessed besides, with the greatest plenty of all sorts of Provisions, and a vast
Fund of Land, by Taxes on which in time of War, the Government may be Supported
and Defended, and (in a word) enjoying all other. Advantages that can possibly
be imagined Requisite; so that it must certainly be our own Default, if we are
not possessed of a greater and more Advantageous Trade than any of our
Neighbors; and consequently be not the Richest and most Considerable People in
the World.

FINIS.

