A Short ABSTRACT of Doctor H. Chamberlen's PROPOSAL To the HONORABLE House of
Commons The Last SESSIONS.
And also of Mr. John Briscoe's present Printed Proposal compared together,
whereby the Benefits of each to the Nation, and every Freeholder concerned, may
plainly appear.
DOctor Chamberlen having attended this Honorable House with a Proposal for
Raising current Credit upon Land, the best of Securities, for above Four Years,
in which time he obtained Two several Committees; the first of which was ready
to make, after a strict Examination, a Favorable Report for it; and the last,
upon like Examination, did make a Report to this House, that the said Proposal
was both Profitable and Practicable, which is all that is necessary for the
Recommendation of any Thing or Design in the World. And now there having been
lately an Ingenious Book Presented to this House by Mr. John Briscoe, which
amongst other things has with much Reason and Argument Recommended the Basis
or Foundation, upon which the Doctor's Proposal is Built, but withal, has
something disguised the same; the Doctor therefore presumes humbly to present a
short Abstract of both Proposals to the Serious Confideration and Wisdom of
this Honorable House, that so they may Judge whether either deserves
Encouragement, and which of the Two the Preference.

THE Doctor proposes, that a Credit of Twenty Millions may be made current by
Act of Parliament, upon a Fund of the Yearly Rents of Private Gentlemen's
Estates in Land, voluntarily engaged to pay an Hundred equal Annual Rents
within an Hundred and Fifty Years. And for Encouragement, each Person obliging
his Estate to pay 100 l. per Annum accordingly, in current Credit only, shall
receive immediately 4000 l. in the same Credit, and have 2000 l. more in a
Jointstock of Trade, and pay 2000 l. more, without Interest or Repayment, to
the Government, for the use of the War, if the Parliament so please: Which will
save the Gentleman, and the whole Nation Eight Shillings in the Pound for once,
provided the said Estate so engaged be exempted from Taxes for the said Term of
a Hundred Years; and all this without much Trouble to the Freeholder, or any
Charge either to the Government or Subject.

Mr. Briscoe's Proposal offers, that the like current Credit be raised upon
Private Gentlemen's Estates in Land, engaged to pay half per Cent. for ever: And
for Encouragement, each Person engaging an Estate of 100 l. per Annum, to pay
Ten Pounds per Annum for ever, shall receive 2000 l. in hand; and that, if the
same be Lent to the Government at Three Pound per Cent. or for Term of Years,
according to that Rate, the Estate to remain Tax-free so long.

But as this is a far less Encouragement to the Freeholder than the Doctor's,
so there is required much more Care and Trouble to settle Estates according to
Mr. Briscoe's Rules, and also in passing and renewing the Paper Bills of
Credit, nothing so safe or easy to prevent Counterfeits by the Endorsements,
as by the Method offered by the Doctor.

So that an Estate of the same Value yields to the Freeholder, by the Doctor's
Proposal 6000 l. paying 100 l. per Annum for a Hundred Years, which at Six per
Cent. per Annum Interest, raises 360 l. and may much more if the Joint Stock
be well improved, which is 260 l. more than the same Estate yielded before, and
150 l. Yearly more than Mr. Briscoe proposes.

And by Mr. Briscoe's, but 2000 l. paying for ever 10 l. per Annum, which at
per Cent. may yield 120 l. which is but 110 l. per Annum more than before,
(...) 150 l. per Annum less than the Doctor's as by the following Scheme may be
re^^ perceived.

Value of Lands settled Paid in hand Jointstock To the Public. Years Engage
Yearly Interest of the whole Yearly Rent Paid Y^ 2000 l. Proposed by the Doctor.
4000 l. 2000 l. 2000 l. 100 360 l. 100 l. (...) 2000 l. Proposed by Mr.
Briscoe.
2000 l. 0 0 Perpetuity 220 l. 10 l. (...)

Clear Yearly Gain by the Doctor more than Mr. Briscoe's -- (...)

By the Doctor's Proposal, the Engaged Estate will be after a Hundred Years
(...) charged from this Encumbrance, and Free for the like Settlement of as
much (...) which being engaged for ever by Mr. Briscoe's, can admit of no
further Improvem^^^ And it is much better for the Nation to raise 10000 l. upon
the same Estate t^^ 2000 l. All other Advantages shall at present be past over,
except the Examina^^ of the Difference of the Charge of each of these
Proposals: And we will Calculate^ for Twenty Millions, though Mr. Briscoe aims
at Fifty Millions.

First, Mr. Briscoe's proposes, the King should allow 20000 l. per Annum to
Commissioners, besides some other petty Charges, as 1000 l. per Annum for (...)
Million, and that Half per Cent. be paid Annually for the Support of the
Office, w^ for but Twenty Millions, comes to 100000 l. per Annum for ever,
which toget^ at Twenty Years Purchase, arises to 2800000 l.

And Doctor Chamberlen proposes, to perform all the said Service, and much m^
only for a Reversion of Twenty Years, upon the Subscribing Gentlemen's Estates,
ter the Fourscore Years charged for themselves and the Government, shall be
elap^ which cannot be valued at above Half a Years Purchase, or 100000 l. for
the Twe^ Millions, raised upon 200000 l. per Annum, which is but the
Twenty-eighth (...) of what Mr. Briscoe's Charge amounts to: Now may it not
deserve Encouragem^ and Admission, if by the Doctor's proper Industry, without
Damage to the (...) prietor, and with new and great Advantage to the Nation and
Trade, he imp^ this small Sum, as so it shall fully defray all the great
Expenses, necessarily att^ing this Design, and find new Employments, very fit
for near an Hundred Gen^ men, without any manner of Charge to the King or
Nation, or without Depend^ on the Court?

There are some other Objections have been raised against the Doctor's Prope^
which equally affects Mr. Briscoe's, which shall be now only named, and when
^^manded, it is hoped will be answered to full Satisfaction: As, First, The
length the Term a Hundred Years, exceeded by Mr. Briscoe to a Perpetuity.
Secondly, (...) the Credit the Doctor gives exceeds the Value of the Purchase,
so does Mr. Bri^^ by Twenty Years; and if not mistaken, by Twenty more, in all
Sixty Years. Th^^ly, Imposing the Credit upon the Subject, which Mr. Briscoe
pleads for very ratio^ly. Fourthly, That we shall have more Credit than can be
employed; Mr. (...) aims at Fifty Millions, and is not limited there: the
Doctor proposes not to ex^ Twenty Millions by this Act. Fourthly, That the
Doctor's Credit willd rive Mo^ out of the Land; so then Mr. Briscoe's cannot
avoid the same Mischief. (...) Mr. Briscoe is in the following Particulars less
perfect than the Doctors; for by (...) Credit cannot begin to be issued, till
after Six Months at least; the Doctor's may Month. The Nation must pay for ever
Three per Cent. Interest for the Supply to King by Mr. Briscoe, when by the
Doctor's there will be Advanced, without Inter^ Four Millions, and a Million
per Annum, or more, for ever, if the Parliament ple^.

The Doctor did not think it necessary to Instruct Persons what to do with the
Money; because he presumed, that such as had Occasions for Credit, would raise^
and such as knew not how to employ it, would let it alone.

They that please to be better informed in this Subject, may peruse some late
Pamphlets Printed at Tacy Sowle's, next the Meeting House in White-Hart Court
in Gracicus^-street, as, Useful Reflections upon a Pamphlet, called, A Brief
Account of the Intendes Bank of England, with a Description of Doctor
Chamberlen 's Bank: And another called. Reflections on the same Pamphlet,
supposed to be Writ by Mr. Jerry Squirt: And lastly, The Tunnage Bank compared
with Dr. Chamberlen 's Land-Fund of Credit.


