THE CHARACTER OF A PRESBYTER, OR Sr. JOHN ANATOMIZED.

LONDON, Printed for John Calvin at the Presbyters Head in Pauls-Church-Yard,
1660.

THE CHARACTER.
I Will first present him in Gross, and then give you him in his Anatomy: but
I am afraid he will stink before I have read through every part of him. Let us
then unkennel the Fox, and we shall find him no better than a Crablouse crept
out of Luthers Codpiece when he unbutton'd to Katharin^ Bora; the immediate
issue of Perjury, as being begotten by that Monke-professed on that professed
Nun; which may be the reason perhaps he has kept his Covenants so well ever
since. From Saxony the Vermin crept to Geneva, where that Bears Whelp was
licked by Sodomitical John into Deformity, and if you will not believe my
Geography that Sodom stood where now Geneva does when Calvin lived there, I
have his Back, though not his Hand, to show for it, where the Oxford Doctor may
read the meaning of that hard word (...). You may know the Beast by his Brand,
if he be found in our Enclosure, I would have him put into the Pound. He is one
of Pharaohs Lean Kine, that signifies no less than Famine and Death: He was
sent amongst us as a plague; and we swarm no less with them, than Egypt did
with Frogs and Flies. If you please, that other Judgment of God, the General
Darkness, more resembles this Child of new light, who thinks forsooth that
the Day breaks first in at his window; but let me tell you, he that follows his
Dark Lanthorn, had need to call aloud hang our your Lights. But because the man
is apt to take pet, I will grant him some resemblance to that Courtly Creature,
and call him an Ignis Fatuus, that leads the passenger into Bogs and Waters; a
piece of Rotten Wood, or a Glittering Gloworm, a mere Quasi, and no more. Fewer
Tailors go to the making of a Man, than of these Inches of Theologues to the
constitution of a Divine, and yet they will say you a Grace of an Ell long,
London measure. He is just as much a Parson, as I in my black Coat, or you in
your Gray, for he wears both Disguises. Let the Stature of his Body be what it
will, you must take the dimension of his Knowledge, not as we do those Giants
of old in Learning, by the Cubit, but as we measure the poor Pigmyes of these
times, by the Span. Neither indeed can we expect that he should be strong
timber for the edifying of Gods Temple, who was plucked up as soon as he was
planted in the Nursery of the Academy. A Senior he is the first day of his
Matriculation, and thinks himself a Sophy before he arrives to a Sophister.
This fond conceit of his improvement, makes him like a careless Child, forsake
the Lap of his Mother, before he is so much a substantive as to stand by
himself; He thinks not that that largeness of his Head, is nothing but the
Rickets, a Disease, and not Discipline, he would not else sure set up the Trade
of Preaching, before he had served out his apprentiship in the University. We
must suppose him then fluttering in his flying Coat, and Pearching in the
Puipit, where we shall find him a pretty Parrot that has just learned to
speak; His excellency lies in praying ex tempore, that is, out of all time, for
you shall be sure to have him as long as a Cart-rope, as if he thought God
measured his devotion by the length and strength of his Lungs, or as if he
thought that God who is all Ear, did not hear him who is all Mouth, in
tautologising so often, Ah Lord! O God! His Sermon (that we may give it its
due) is a Noted one, or a Sermon of Notes taken up in Gross at the University,
or some Foreign Congregation, and disburst in the Retayl to his own
Parishioners. I grant he has taken some pains in wire-drawing it into words at
length, which he before penned in Stenography or short hand, whence we may
collect, That our Learned Sir John can Write and Read, and able if need
requires to make use of the Benefit of the Clergy. Trace him in his Doctrines,
and you shall find him to tread very much awry. He is an absolute man for
absolute Reprobation, and damneth you and me before we were born, or were so
much as capable of doing God or man the least injury: I say, by Gods revealed
will I may be saved, if I do as God commands me; and he says by Gods secret
will I am damned, thus he makes God one of his own Antipodes to tread contrary
to himself, and though his Motto is semper idem, he would have him to be (...),
to speak one thing and to mean another, as if he was one of Gods privy Council,
or as if he and not St. Peter kept the Keys of Heaven. And if they make so bold
with God himself, no wonder then if they invade the Liberties of his
Vicegerents, and maintain that a Subject may prescribe Laws to his Prince, and
depose him, if he does not observe them: this was the Dagger which stabbed so
many of the Scottish Kings, and this the Axe which struck off the Head of Ours,
and for our late civil dissentions, thank Buchanan and Knox, they led up the
Van in the Villainy, and our Presbyter brought up the Rear. He hates with a
perfect hatred the English Prelates, with all their Hierarchy, and counts his
Ordination as good as theirs. He is a mere Sloven in his Devotion, and would
have no heads bare in the Church, but what are so in reverence to his own
little Grace, no knee to be bowed except it be to ask him forgiveness. The
sight of a Picture he can by no means endure, when his self is no more but the
Picture of a Preacher. He cannot away with the superstition of the Holy Font,
because it cannot walk and wait upon his idleness to the Pew door, but will
celebrate the Sacrament of Baptism in the common Basin he last washed his dirty
hands and face in.

If you saw his Congregation receiving the venerable Body and Blood of our
blessed Savior, you would think the good People were set down to make a sober
meal of it, to refresh their hungry Bodies, rather than their Souls, nor dares
he Holy-man administer those heavenly Viands, without a severe scrutiny into
the lives of the Communicants; and though God of his mercy has invited all,
yet none must be admitted, but those to whom the Comptroller of Gods House does
please to give a Ticket, as if he forsooth, who so much hates the Catholic
Doctrine, had a months mind to become their Confessor, when indeed it is only to
pick a hole in his Neighbors Coat, to discover his nakedness, that so lying
but at open-ward he may wound him at his pleasure. For my part, if he should
tell me I had not my wedding Garment on, and so not fit to come to the marriage
Supper, I would be so bold as to ask him, Friend how came thou hither? He
tells the silly people, he is Gods Angel, and Ambassador, and shows them
Scripture for it, he comes to acquaint them with the mind of God, and that they
ought to reverence the Messenger for the dignity of his Message, and the
greatness of fom that sent it, and would fain imitate the unmannerly Hugonots
in France, and (if for the Civil power he durst) preach with his Haton. What
the Bishop was, he would be, and what Caesar and Pompey were in the State, he
is in the Church, impatient of either Superior or Equal. The Church of Rome,
which some have called the Spouse of Christ, he can give her no better
appellation than the Whore of Babylon, Scarlet Whore, and one of them was witty
and said in the Pulpit, she was a Whore that deserved to be Carted, but the
reason of this Obloquy I cannot immagine, except it be this, that he is ashamed
to acknowledge that he has his Christianity from Her, and that he had rather
borrow his Religion from Luther, and Calvin, Dod, and Cleaver, than Augustine
the Monk and Augustine the Bishop; thus Ingratitude will make one ingredient in
the composition of our Hotchpot Presbyter, in that he will not pay those thanks
and obedience that is due to the Mother Church, but Nickname her too, wherein
he has unworthy Epicurus in imitation, who nicknamed reverend Chrisippus by
the name of Chesippus, not withstanding he was his Master, and taught him his
first Lesson. But lest I should like him in his Sermon prove som-what
long-winded, I will leave the Divine (for he begins to smell somewhat strong,
though he be but a weak one,) and take a short survey of the man and his
manners: You shall find nothing about him to prove that he is descended of
humane Race, but his hands, and head, his face, and feer, all which the very
Ape and Drill can plead for their humanity: for take him as a neighbor, and he
is a pestilent peevish Fellow that shall sue you for a Tyth-Pig, you may
imagine his Suits at Law make his wife go so fine and gallant; He is more
conversant in Moses than St. Matthew, better read in the Law, than the Gospel,
and studies more Cook upon Littleton, than Cottons Concordance, which renders
him an excellent School-man, and most accomplished controversal Divine. Set him
out the largest Cock, or Sheaf, or else you must expect to be thundered at the
next Sunday out of the Pulpit, from that little Almighty, and shall be told per
nomen and cognomen, you are damned for robbing God of his due, and if with
Caligula you will not run under your Bed, be terrified at his thunder, and
descend to his large demands, up you go into the Exchequer, where you shall
have an Adversary of him as bitter as you would wish your bitterest enemy. His
own Solicitor he is, and keeps the Terms as constant as an Attorney. He knows
the Returns, and Essoin days, as well as he knows the Sunday, and is sorry that
that is not dies Juridicus too; If he chance to prove Victor, down he posts
upon his pitiful Palfray with his Io Triumph in his mouth, proclaims to every
one he meets the justness of his Cause, and continues his Conquest by
insultation. Now the Peacemaker begins to speak against his Conscience the
commendation of the Law, and commends its rules most concerning the Modus
Decimandi and Non Decimandi, and is only sorry that the Lawyer expects the
Dictates of his good Angels as well as he, before he will speak. Let us follow
him to his House, and there we shall find some Lazar at the Door, the Dogs
licking his Sores, for that is all the Plaster the poor man must expect, which
shows that the Savage Dog is more courteous than his Master: being entreated
but for a Morsel of Bread, he gives him perhaps some Crumbs of Comfort, diverts
his discourse to the bread of life, talks of the providence of God, how the
Raven fed Elias, the miracle of the Loaves and the Fishes, tells him he is to
feed the Soul and not the Body, and at last persuades the Mendicant to make a
meal of Air. But here I must in Charity (though he has none) lend him an
Apology; For how can he relieve the poor without, who has so many crying
mouths to be stopped within. That which to others is reckoned amongst Gods
Blessings, I am afraid to him may be counted as a curse, to have usually a
numerous issue, and no inheritance to support them, for relinquishing an
Angelical Caelibacy, and with it the greatest of the Theological Virtues
Charity, merely for the purchase of a Lazy Lechery. Thus did Codpiece Henry
renounce the Popes Supremacy, because he would not illegitimate a legal
matriage; thus you see the Great Plantation of Sir John sprang first from the
seed of the flesh.

He is an admirable Orator for a Funeral Panegyrik, and what his fear durst
not, or his power could not perform, during the life of his Adversary, he now
endeavors, to him being dead* knowing that Mortuus non Mordet, but never
thinking that inraking unworthily in the dead man's Urn he may chance to burn or
smutch his fingers. Thus he which by his sweet breath ought to preserve the
precious Ointments of a man's good name, proves a filthy fly to corrupt and
taint it. Sometimes he acts the Hypocrite, and carries two Faces under one
Vizard, he is of a double Tongue, and double Heart, words which usually are the
Light whereby we discover the Dark Secrets of the mind, with him are as a cloud
to shroud and conceal them. He is commonly squint-eyed, and when you think he
fastens his fight upon you, he intends it a quite contrary way, and with the
dissembling waterman, looks one way, and Rows another, or with the crafty
Lapwing, makes the greatest complaint when you are furthest from his Nest. Has
a man occasion to use him? he had best to try before he trust him, for he is a
dangerous Pit fall smoothly covered with Rushes, a soft Rose with abundance of
prickles, a Wolf in Sheeps clothing; He wears Christ's Livery, but is Satan's
Serving-man; He blows hot without and cold within, with a warm hand, and a
frozen heart. He makes you believe he brings you his heart in his mouth, when
his speech no more truly discovers his Soul, than the lying Almanac does the
weather. With the Satyrs guest he can warm his fingers with the same breath
wherewith he cools his pottage. He will kiss and betray, and with the unhappy
Boy in the Fable, pretends to whisper his Mother in the Ear, and bites it off.
I dare not descend to any more particulars, but must conclude my Anatomy, for
now he begins to meet my fears at first, and makes me hold at once my Pen and
Nose. I will dispatch him therefore in one line or two more. He is an I dolater
that worships the Golden Calf, and makes Silver his God, one of Samsons Foxes
with a firebrand at his Tail, a cursed Cow with short Horns, the only Promoter
of Faction and Sedition; He is a stubborn servant; and a Tyrannical Master, a
strange Composure of Contradictions; He will Fast at Christmas, Feast in Lent,
and Lie with his wife on Good Friday. He is an Angel in the Pulpit, and a Devil
out of it. He forgets the Lords Prayer, because others remembers it, and when
others only read the Scripture, He will sing it: You may know him by the Gogle
of the Eye, the zealous twang of the Nose, by his long Lugs, and short Locks,
with his Quirpo Cloak, or flying Coat, but no Cassack nor Canonical Girdle, for
fear when the Beast has run to the end of his Tether, he should make use of it
for a Halter and Hang himself.

FINIS.

