THE SONS of the EAST: BEING An EPISTLE written in English by Old Dr.
Chamberlen (Eldest Scarlet of Europe) Senior to all Popes, Cardinals, Bishops,
and Doctors, now living.) To the Synagogue of the Jews in London, being a
Remnant of the numerous People of Israel, scattered into all Countries over the
Face of the Earth; who were once the peculiar Inheritance, and only Beloved
People (above the Nations of the World) wishes Health, Grace, and Truth, from
God the Father of All, by the Means of the True Messiah; whose Coming Israel
expects on Earth, and Christians hope from Heaven in Glory. AMEN.
Greatly Beloved Nation, and People most Honored of God,
I Dare not but Love, and Honor you; for Salvation is of the Jews, (John
4.22.) And in the Seed of Abraham, shall all Nations of the Earth be Blessed,
(Genesis 22.18.).

I have heard, that some (of the most Worthy amongst You) ha^^ made some
Enquiry after a few Christians, who keep the Sabbath of the Lord Your God, and
Ours. Wherefore, (by the Providence of God) having been the First that
endeavored to rescue that Commandment from the Triple-crowned-little Horns
Change of Times, and Laws, as was foretold by your Prophet Daniel, (Chap. 7.25.)

I am in some hope, that God may provoke you to Jealousy, by a People that
were not then called his People, (Deuteronomy. 32.21.) And having been conversant with
several of your Nation in Italy, Germany, and the Low Countries, I think my
self the more engaged to salute you in mine own Native Country.

Of all the SYNAGOGVES beyond Sea, I found the kindest, and civillest Reception
at GENVA, in Italy: Where (after a few words spoken in Italian to the whole
Congregation, after they had intermitted their Devotions) I was invited to the
House of Rabbi ABRAHAM ATTIAS, the next Day after the Sabbath; where I met with
5 Rabbis more; purposely come together to hear what I would say, and to confer
thereupon.

I had saluted them in the Synagogue, as the Beloved Nation of God, who once
were the HEAD of all Nations; but asked of them, if they did not consider, that
now they were as the Tail of all, ( Deuteronomy. 28.13.) and lived scattered in all
Countries (as precario) by Permission? And what Prophet, or Manifestation of
Gods Love unto them had they found these 1600 Years, since the Crucifying of
the Young Man (as they call him) at Jerusalem? Were they ever so long kept from
some Prophet, or Manifestation of the Love of God, as since then? So now (being
met) I came to closer Questions; and asked them, Whether it was not a wonder,
that all Nations (except the JEWS) should be willing to believe in a JEW,
though they hated the Nation? But the Jews (and none else) hated Him, who was
of their own Flesh and Blood. Whereupon (to take off the Obloquy of
CHRISTIANITY) I told them, They must not think, that was the Christian
Religion, which they saw at Rome and Italy (in the Adoration of Crosses,
Images, Pictures, Relics, Wafer-Gods of Flesh and Blood, and the Virgin Mary,
(Queen of Heaven) no more than we call it the Religion of the Jews, when they
worshipped BAALIM and ASHTAROTH, (1 Samuel 12.10.) etc. We esteem none to be
Jews, but those who live according to the Law of Moses: So I would not have
them esteem any for Christians, but those (who in all things) were according to
the Gospel of Christ; of which they all did unanimously approve.

Then I said, I pray let it be considered, what you can say for the Old
Testament, that I cannot say for the New; Or what you can say against the New
Testament, that I may not (by the same Rule) allege against the Old. Upon
which the Learned Rabbi (Abraham Attias) lifted up his voice, and professed, He
never Read more excellent Rules of Righteousness, and of Holiness, than in the
New Testament.

I then proceeded, and said, was it incredible, that a VIRGIN should conceive
without a Man? Was it not much more to believe a Woman made of the Rib of a
Man? or a Man made of the Dust of the Earth? Or the Earth to bring forth Bears,
Lions, Tigers, Elephants, and all Beasts? And the Waters to bring forth Whales,
with all Fishes, and Fowls, etc. as Moses gives the Relation in the First, and
Second Chapters of Genesis? But all things are possible to God, as the Angel
told the Virgin, (Luke 1.34, 35, 36, 37.)

But I now Address my self unto you (most worthy and beloved Friends) when was,
or ever will be, all the Promises, and Prophesies fulfilled, if not in Jesus
Christ? I shall only offer some few to your Consideration.

First, Genesis 3.15. I will put Enmity between Thee, and the Woman; and between
thy Seed, and her Seed; it shall bruise thy Head, and thou shall bruise his
Heel. Why did not God say, between Thee, and the Man; but between thee, and the
Woman? And why not between His Seed, and Thy Seed; but between Her Seed, and
Thy Seed? Was not the Woman her self made of Man? And did not all the
Generations ever since come from Man, as well as Woman, and begot of Man,
except the only Firstborn of his Mother Mary? Is it not (in effect) the same
with the Prophet Isaiah, (Chap. 7.14.) A Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son,
and shall call his Name Emmanuel. When was this performed, if not in Jesus
Christ? Or if it were yet to be performed, could it be more exactly fulfilled
than in Him?

Secondly, Genesis 22.18. In thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be
Blessed.

1. Note, He says not in thy Seeds (as many) but Seed (as one, Gal. 3.16.) 2.
Note, That though it were to be the Seed of the Woman, a VIRGIN; yet she should
descend from him; and so that which was Born of her, must needs be of his Seed
also.
Thirdly, In like manner of David: The Virgin was of the Lineage of David, and
so was Joseph (his supposed Father) that Jesus might be the Son of David, and
King of the Jews, by Inheritance, Psalm. 89.3, 4.

Fourthly, Deuteronomy. 18.15. Moses testifies, a Prophet will the Lord thy God raise
up unto Thee, from the midst of Thee, of thy Brethren, like unto Me, unto Him
shall ye hearken. Now, who of all the Prophets was like unto Moses, unless you
allow of Jesus Christ? Whom the Jewish Apostles ( Peter and John) urged to your
Nation, persuading them to believe in him, Acts 3.22, 23. And ( Acts. 7.37.)
urged in like manner, by the Zealous Jew, Stephen; who was murdered by the
People, and High Priests, for reproving them of their murdering the Prophets,
and their unbelief. With this also agrees (Isa. 33.22.) The Lord is our Judge;
The Lord is our Lawgiver, (or Statute-maker;) The Lord is our King, and he
will save us. So Jam. 4.12. Joh. 12.48.

Fifthly, Psalm. 2. All along foretells the Lord Jesus Christ; the Kings and
Peoples dealing with him, as has been since performed. And more, that God
calls him there his Son, This day have I begotten Thee, (verse. 7.) Ask of me,
and I will give thee the Heathen for an Inheritance, (verse. 8.) Is not this
fulfilled, when the Heathen believe, and obey him, but the Jews do not?

Sixthly, Psa. 22. Is a Prophecy of the sufferings of Jesus: They pierced my
Hands, and my Feet, (verse. 16.) They parted my Garments amongst them, and cast
Lots upon my Vesture, (v. 18.) Is not the History in the very same Words? Mat.
27. Mark. 15. Luke 23. John 19.

Seventhly, Psa. 110.1. The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right Hand,
until I make thy Foes thy Footstool. Of whom is this spoken, if not of Jesus
Christ? If David then call him Lord, how is he his Son? (Mat. 22.45.) which is
more plainly amplified by your Divine Prophet (Isa. 9.6.) To us a Child is
Born; to us a Son is given; and the Government shall be upon his
shoul-shoulder: His Name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God,
the everlasting Father (or Father of Eternity) the Prince of Peace. Can all
this be said of God? Or can it possibly be said of any other Man, but Jesus
Christ, Immanuel, the Son of God, the Seed of the Woman, and Virgin, the Seed
of Abraham in whom all the Nations of the Earth are blessed? Can you believe
all those things in Gods Promises, and not in Gods Performances? Do you believe
them in God's Prophesies, and not in Gods Fulfillings? The New Testament is but
the fulfilling of the Old. How have you lost that value you once put upon all
Gods Words? was not Christ's Obscurity, sufferings, the Jews cruelty ( Isa.
53.2, 3, 4, 5.) together with the Jews Unbelief, and Hardness of Heart, all
foretold; That they should not believe it, though a Man declare it unto them?
Hab. 1.5. Acts 13.40, 41. Thus you find it, and yet do not believe your selves.

Dearly beloved Nation! Strive not so eagerly against your own Salvation. Jonas
was Three Days, and Three Nights in the Whales Belly ( Jh. 1.17.) And so long
was CHRIST in his Tomb, ( Mat. 12.40. Chapter 27.63.) Elias was carri^^ to Heaven
in a Fiery Chariot, (2 Kings 2.11.) And CHRIST ascended up into Heaven in a
Cloud, ( Acts 1.9.)

How long have ye been without an Ephod, and a Teraphim, (Hos. 3.4.) and not
sensible of it? How long have ye been without Prophets, and immediate
Revelations, and Signs from Heaven to you in particular? How long is the
Scepter departed from Juda? How long will ye wait for your Shiloh? Genesis 49.10.
How long for your Messiah, and refuse him that is so long since come unto you?
will ye needs delay till ye look on Him, whom your Fathers have pierced? Zach.
12.10. If you would know more particulars, command

Most Honored Nation, Your most Humble Servant, in the Lord, Peter Chamberlen.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Black Bull, in the Old-Bayly,
1682.


