A FURTHER VINDICATION OF THE Church of England, WITH Advice to all Emperors
and Kings of the Romish Faith.

Also some Arguments used to prove the Church of Rome no true Church, but
Antichristian and Bloody.

By William Chandler.

LONDON: Printed for the Author, 1682.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, CHALES the Second, by the Grace of God,
King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Most gracious and dread Sovereign,
HAving made a most diligent inquiry into the state of the Church of God,
militant upon Earth, I do find that it is not limited to any one Country or
Nation, as the Donatists held; who fondly imagined the Catholic Church of God
to be confined to a Corner of Africa, in which they dwelt; nor yet enclosed
within one Bishops Diocese, or Jurisdiction, as the Roman Catholics pretend,
who uncharitably exclude all Christians Heaven, putting them into the State of
Damnation, who are not subject to their Bishop; vainly pretending to be truly
Catholic or Universal; as we do believe in our holy Creed. The Apostles
preached not to one Country or Nation only, but to the whole World, according
to our Lords Command; Go teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

I shall speak something of this persecuted Episcopal Church of England, whom
the Lord, by his Providence, has made Your Majesty Overseer: This Church,
which was first planted by Joseph of Arimathea, some years before Rome,
according to the purest way, as he had it from Christ and his Apostles, the
great Bishop of our Souls; and so has continued a true Church, through much
Persecution by the Heathen, and by the common Enemy the Papists, and by the
Dissenters. As Gamaliel told the Jews; take heed, if it be of God ye cannot
overthrow it, lest you be fighters against God: No doubt this Church of England
is of God, and cannot be overthrown. You have heard of the Persecution in Queen
Mary's days, how she burnt twelve Bishops and Doctors, who sealed it with their
Blood in the Fire, and Charles the First, who sealed it with his Royal Blood
also; the Blood of the Martyrs is the Seed and Seal of a true Church.

We most humbly thank Your Majesty, that Your Majesty has taken such care for
this persecuted Church, which without doubt God prizes as the Apple of his Eye,
in preserving it from all these Eminent dangers.

And we most humbly thank Your Majesty, that Your most Royal Majesty has been
pleased to put those good Laws in Execution, against those Enemies of the
Church of England, that many of them have received Justice according to the
merit of their Cause. The Lord bless Your Majesty, for taking such special care
over both Church and State, for the good of us your unworthy Subjects, not
doubting but Your Majesty will have the same care, so long as Breath shall
remain in Your Royal Majesty, which the Lord of his Mercy grant for many Years
to come, that we may receive the Benefit, and give God the Glory: And all this
we beg for the sake of our Blessed Redeemer Jesus Christ.

A word to his Royal Highness the Duke of York, under Grace and Favor. O Royal
James! live for ever; Son to one of the best Kings that ever reigned; though
David were a Man after Gods own Heart, and Solomon was a wise Man, yet Your
Royal Father had less Errors than any of them. O Royal James, Heir to the Crown
of England, after Your Royal Brothers Decease; as the case now stands, the Lord
bless Your Lives with all blessings Spiritual and Temporal; and if ever
Providence orders it so that You be Crowned King of England, and of the
Dominions thereunto belonging, that you may come to it in peace, and not swim
to it in Blood, for then it will prove to you a Curse, and not a Blessing.

The Lord grant that you may maintain the true Government both in Church and
State, as it now stands, as Your Royal Brother does at this time, and your
Royal Father of ever blessed memory has done, and as your Royal Grandfather
King James has done; especially this Episcopal Church of England, which Your
Royal Grandfather told Your Royal Father, he having studied to find the true
Church of God, he was very well satisfied that the Church of England was the
nearest to the Primitive Church planted by the Apostles.

I shall add something more concerning the common Enemy the Papists, and
Nonconformists.

Our Savior Christ says, The time shall come, when they that kill you shall
think they do God good Service: So did the Dissenters when they killed one of
the best Kings that ever reigned; and so would the Papists, if they could have
killed our King that now is; you see how they tolerated Murder, Treason,
Perjury, and Rebellion; and he that could have killed Gods Vicegerent, should
have done God good Service; yea, it was thought he should have been Sainted for
his good Service: Yea, this temporal Man of Sin might as well have Sainted the
Spiritual Man of Sin, the Devil, as to have Sainted these Priests and Jesuits,
whom Satan had put into their Hearts to do his will; let this temporal Man of
sin pretend what he will, yet this wicked Plot, to kill our Sovereign Lord the
King, came from the Devil, who is the original of all sin; for they reckoned to
have sacrificed His, Royal Body to God, for the Honor of their Church; when
God tells them to obey is better than Sacrifice; that is, thou shall do no
Murder, and Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft.

Our Savior Christ says, I have chosen twelve, and one of them was a Devil:
but what shall we call these Priests and Jesuits sent by the Man of sin, to
kill Gods Vicegerent, the King? We may call them, as the Devil said their Name
is, Legion, for they are many. Judas betrayed his Lord and Master for thirty
pieces of Silver, but these Bloody Priests were to murder their Lord and Master
for a bigger sum. Judas, when he had betrayed Christ, repented, and said, I
have sinned, in that I have betrayed innocent Blood; but these Men were so far
from repenting, that they would not confess upon their Trial, though it were
proved by two of the Kings Witnesses.

You see then, Judas, for all he was counted a Devil, yet showed more of a
Christian in repenting, and in laying down his Money again, than those
Jesuitical Devils, which would not confess the Fact of their Devilish Designs,
though it was proved against them. The Wise Man says; He that covers his Sin
shall not prosper, but he that confesses and forsakes his Sin shall find
Mercy: Yea, when the Man of Sin heard of the good success of this wicked Plot
going on so well, the Conclave of Hell sang te Deum, and the Man of Sin gave
them his Blessing; you see for all they sung to God for Joy, and the Man of Sin
gave them his Blessing; their mirth was turned into sadness, and their blessing
into a Curse upon them, as TYBVRN will witness, and many Spectators that beheld
them. O my Beloved, take special notice, that this Plot was not from God, but
of themselves, with the help of Satan, and came to nothing, as Gamaliel says:
I beseech you all good People that fear God, to take special notice of the
Death of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, which discovers more of inhumanity in their
Religion, than any other of their wicked devices; if all the Devils in Hell had
been let loose to their assistance, they could not have done more than these
wicked Men did; they enticed him with flattering and lying words; as St. Paul
says; they told him if he would go along with them, they would show him more
of that wicked Conclave; and he being a Justice of the Peace, he might
apprehend them: this honest Justice being willing to serve the King, according
to his Oath, went with them, and they had him into a place, where they secured
him from the help of all his Friends; there, as I may say, they opened Hell
Gates, and let out the Devils, who fell upon him, and wickedly murdered him, he
being without any comfort, but the mercy of Christ Jesus upon his Soul.

O all you Emperors, Kings, Princes, and Dukes, whom God has ordained as his
Vicegerents to execute his will upon Earth, take care you come not near the man
of Sin, nor adhere to his deceivable bloody Doctrine, who allows his Priests to
color their Coats with the blood of Kings and Princes, and to wash their
Altars with the blood of Gods Saints, and garnish their Sepulchers with the
blood of Gods Elect; as our Savior says; and will not God avenge the blood of
his Elect, that cry to him day and night? yea, he will avenge them speedily.

You see this Scripture fulfilled quickly after the death of Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey, how God did avenge his Blood upon his Murderers, witness TYBVRN, and
many that beheld them.

All the Massacres, both in France, and other places, the Chronicles speak of,
in murdering many hundred of poor innocent Protestants, was done by that bloody
Church of Rome.

All you Emperors, Kings, and Dukes, whom God has ordered to execute his Will
upon Earth, have a care that you do not oblige your selves to the Man of sin,
by swearing Allegiance, or Canonical obedience; for then he makes you under the
Man of Sin and Satan, his Vassals and Slaves, that when he calls his Councils,
you must agree to his unlawful Decrees, which if you do not, he will put you
into the state of Damnation, as he thinks.

We see how this Church of England has been approved on, going through the
Firy-Tryal, witness the twelve Doctors and Bishops in Queen Mary's days, who
sealed it by Blood and Fire; and Charles the First, of ever blessed memory,
sealed it with his Royal Blood also, who without doubt is now a Saint in
Heaven; which except we could expect a better place of happiness than ever was
spoken of in Scripture, we could never desire to go to a better place of Joy,
than where this good King is gone, by the mercy of Jesus Christ, who dyed for
the Privilege of this Church and State, hoping, and not doubting but his Royal
Issue will maintain the same, according to their Royal Fathers last Will and
Testament, that they should take care of the Church, and love one another, then
will their poor Subjects love their Royal Majesty above measure, in taking such
care of this true Church of God, wherein contains all our happiness, both of
Soul and Body; then will God love us, when we love him and his Vicegerent; for
God is Love, and in him is no hatred; then will he dwell in us, and we in him,
then will God bless us with blessings both temporal and spiritual, wherein our
whole happiness, both of Soul and Body, consists.

The honor of a King is to have the love of his Subjects; and what is the
comfort of the Subjects, but a Godly and a pious King; which the Lord grant to
us such a measure of grace, that we may, every one of us, love one another, but
especially our King, and then shall Babylon mourn, but Zion shall rejoice.

One thing more I shall not forget to put His Majesty's Subjects in mind of,
That if ever His Majesty should call a Parliament, that they choose no
Dissenters; for if God do not bless them to agree in matters of Religion, he
will not bless them when they come to sit upon matters of State.

In the Fifth of the Galatians, it is said, The Works of the Flesh are these,
Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Witchcraft, Hatred,
Variance, Emulation, Wrath, Strife, Heresy, Sedition, Envying, Murder,
Drunkenness, which do appear to be some of the sins of the Church of Rome; and
that they that do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven: But the
Fruits of the Spirit is, joy, love, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, Faith, meekness, temperance, against such there is no Law; of which
you can find very little in the actions of the Man of sin, but quite contrary
to the said good Fruits.

A word in answer to the Presbyterians, whom a Person of our Neighborhood told
me, that they did attest they had no hand in the Death of King Charles the
First: Which I wish from my Heart that it were true, which I fear is not,
because the Scots sold him for certain hundreds of thousand pounds; because
that blessed King spoke in his little Book, called his Meditation, that he was
sorry he was sold for more than his Savior. Without doubt they sold him to the
other Dissenters, which at last Crucified him. If it were a sin in Judas for
selling and betraying of his Lord and Master, I fear it was a sin in them for
betraying and selling of their Lord and Master the King. Judas had some remorse
in him, and seemed to repent in, throwing down the Money, and saying, I have
sinned, in that I have betrayed the innocent Blood; and so I hope will these
repent from the bottom of their Hearts, that their Souls may be saved in the
day of the Lord; the which I beseech the Lord Jesus Christ to grant unto them
through his Grace and Mercy, and that they may return to us again from whence
they went out; and that they may renounce that wicked Covenant, if they have
taken it; that they together with us, and we with them, may serve God together
in love, that this Church militant may fit us for the Church triumphant, where
we may all meet together to sing Halilujah to the great God that reigns for
ever; where there is no division nor dissension, but all love and unity, which
the Lord of his Mercy grant.

FINIS.
THE EXCELLENCY OF THE GRACE OF CHARITY Set forth in a DISCOURSE ON 1 Corinthians.
XIII. 13.
By William Chandler.

LONDON: Printed for the Author, 1682.

1 Cor. XIII. 13. Now abides faith, hope, and charity, these three, but the
greatest of these is charity.
FAith is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not
seen: Faith is the groundwork of our Salvation; by Faith we believe that Christ
came into the World, laid down his life freely for us Sinners, was born of a
pure Virgin, preached the Gospel of our Salvation, that he was crucified, dead,
and buried, that he rose again the third day, and ascended into Heaven, and
there sits at the right hand of God making Intercession for us Sinners. By
Hope is to be understood that Hope which is annexed to Faith, that we obtain the
Fruits of our Faith, the salvation of all our Souls. Again, having a sound
Faith, made up with Good Works, we hope we shall obtain the salvation of all
our Souls, which Christ has merited by his death and passion; and by his Free
Grace and Mercy we hope to obtain the Kingdom of Heaven, which by hope and
patience we have long waited for. Charity is so great a Grace that Saint Paul
commends it above all other Graces, from the beginning to the end of this
Chapter, for he says, though he had the Gift of Prophecy, and understood all
Mysteries, and all Knowledge, and though he had all Faith, so that he could
remove Mountains, and had not Charity, he was nothing. So that, my Beloved,
though we have all these great Gifts and Graces, yet if we have not Charity, we
are as if we had nothing; though we bestow all our Goods to feed the Poor,
though we give our Bodies to be burned, and have not Charity, it profits us
nothing.

You have heard out of this Scripture, that if you had all the Gifts and Graces
the Scripture does afford, yet if you have not Love, you have nothing. In the
First Epistle of St. John, Chap. 3. Ver. 7. it is said, For this is the Message
ye have heard from the beginning, that we should love one another. And again in
the same Epistle, Chap. 2. Verse 10. He that loves his Brother abides in the
light, and there is no occasion of stumbling in him. And again in the same
Epistle, Chap. 3. Verse 23. And this is his Commandment, that we should believe
on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave us
Commandment. Again in the same Epistle, Chap. 4. Ver. 7, 8. Beloved, let us
love one another, for love is of God, and every one that loves is born of God,
and knows God; he that loves not, knows not God, for God is love. And in
the same Chapter, Ver. 16. And we have known and believed the love that God
has to us: God is love, and he that dwells in love dwells in God, and God
in him: Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day
of Judgment, because as he is, so are we in this world. And Ver. 18. There is
no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear: because fear has torment:
he that fears is not made perfect in love: And so to the end of the Chapter,
If any man say I love God, and hates his Brother, he is a Liar; for he that
loves not his Brother whom he both seen, how can be love God whom he has not
seen? And this Commandment have we from him, that he that loves God, love his
Brother also. In the second Epistle, Verse the 5th, Now I beseech thee Lady,
not as though I wrote a new Commandment unto thee, but that we had from the
beginning, that we love one another; and this is love, that we walk after his
Commandment.

Having spoken something of Faith and Hope, we come now to Charity, which S.
Paul commends above other Graces. Charity extends it self into two Branches,
viz. 1. Love. 2. Good Works, which are the Fruits of Love. S. Paul speaking in
the commendation of Charity, says, Though I have Faith so that I could remove
Mountains, and have not Charity, it is but as sounding Brass, or a tinkling
Cimbal. And a Father says, Magna fructus Spiritus sancto, Charity is the great
Fruit of the Holy Ghost. Love is of so kind a Nature, that it envieth not, it
is not self-willed, nor easily provoked, thinks no evil, does no evil; and is
of so kind an affection, that from it springs all other good Graces. This was
the Advice of that good old Preacher Saint John the Divine, Little Children,
says he, love one another. It was the advice of our Savior Christ to them
that asked him the way to Heaven, or which was the Great Commandment, says he,
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy mind, and
with all thy strength, and thy Neighbor as thy self; on these two hang the Law
and the Prophets: As much as to say, on these hang the great matters of our
Salvation, the Law and the Gospel. Love is of so peaceable a Nature, that it
makes our Enemies to be at peace with us. As for Example, when there was a
Malefactor hired to kill his King, the King gave him such loving words, and
smiled on him, that he could not execute his malicious Design.

You see then that Love is of so winning a temper, that it makes our Enemies to
be at peace with us, that they cannot execute their malicious Designs. It is of
such a winning moderation, that many times it makes our Enemies to be our
Friends; as says a Father, Omnia vincit amor, Love overcomes all things. O my
beloved Brethren, let us take care that a true and hearty love be in every one
of us both toward God and toward our Neighbor, and then we may be sure that
the love of God dwells in us, and we in him; for God himself is love, and in
him is no hatred. O my beloved Brethren, let us see that we esteem and prize
this great Grace of Love, as a great Jewel proceeding from the Holy Ghost. What
a great benefit and joy is it to us and to our souls, to have the great God of
Heaven and Earth to dwell in us and we in him! And having this Treasure, we
have all the Joys of Heaven and Earth.

I shall now speak something by way of Reproof: First, To the Common Enemy the
Popish Faction. Secondly, To the Dissenters.

And first to the Church of Rome, who will have no Charity with us; but instead
of Charity, they Plot mischief against us; they contrive to destroy our Bodies
as well as our Souls. Although we are out of their Church, and they have
nothing to do with us in their Church Discipline, yet they will uncharitably
and maliciously Excommunicate us, both Gods Vicegerent the King, and all his
Subjects, and put us into the state of Damnation, as they think; though we know
it works more for our good than for our hurt; so that they prove themselves
to be no good Christians, to be out of Charity with us who never meant any hurt.

The next sort that are to be reproved, are the Dissenters, from the
Presbyterian to the Quakers, who break the Bands of love and Charity with us of
the true Episcopal Church of England: I wish their Repentance may be their
Punishment. Saint Paul in the Acts of the Apostles, when he was brought before
Ananias the High Priest, when he commanded him to be smitten, Paul reviled him,
and called him, Thou whited wall, etc. those that stood by told Paul, Do thou
revile Gods High Priest? Paul rebuked himself, and said, I wist not that he was
the High Priest, it is written by Moses, thou shall not revile the Gods, nor
speak evil of the Ruler of my People. I fear, and it is much to be feared, that
many of these Dissenters have spoke evil, and reviled the King, and Gods
Priests, and spoke evil of the Ruler of Gods People.

Again, They break the bond of Love in going out from us, because they were not
of us: If they had been of us, they would have kept with us, says Saint John;
They break the Bond of Charity which cause Divisions as says S. Paul, Mark
them which cause Divisions, and avoid them, contrary to the Doctrine which we
have learned, for they serve not the Lord Jesus.

A third sort of men to be reproved, are those which neither love God, nor
their Neighbor, nor themselves, but covetously and miserably pinch both back
and belly, to heap up Riches, and they know not who shall inherit them; and set
their hearts upon their Money-bags, and as it were make them their Gods. The
love of Money is the root of all Evil, says the Apostle, and has caused men
to run into diverse Errors.

Now the Lord grant that all those that have broken the Bonds of Love and
Charity with us, may see their Errors and repent; the Lord give them Grace,
that they may with true love and charity come in to us again, they they with
us, and we with them, may serve the Lord in true love and sincerity, to the
Glory of God, and the benefit of our Souls at the last day, that we may be
received into those everlasting Mansions where there shall be no Division, but
Peace, Unity, and Love.

Saint Paul tells us that Charity shall cover a multitude of Sins: O my
Beloved, let us therefore embrace Charity, for it will cover a multitude of our
sins. How ought we therefore to prize this great Grace of Love, which is
Charity, and walk therein, for it proceeds from the Spirit of God, and is one
of the great Fruits of the Holy Ghost, and to make such use of it in our Lives
and Conversations as becomes good Christians; that our Love may be to God and
to our Neighbor in deed and in truth; that God may dwell in us, and we in him;
and if we do these things we shall never fall. If you would fulfill the Royal
Law according to the Scriptures, You must love your Neighbor as your self,
Jam. 2.8.

We come now to the next Branch of Charity, which is Good Works: In this
Epistle of St. James, Chap. 2. ver. 14. and so to the end of the Chapter, it is
said, what does it profit, my Brethren, though a man have faith, and have not
Works, can faith save him? If a Brother or Sister be naked and destitute of
daily food, and one of you say unto him depart in peace, be you warmed, and be
you filled, notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to
the body, what does it profit? Even so Faith, if it have not works is dead, it
being alone: Yea a man may say thou have Faith, and I have Works; show me thy
Faith without thy works, and I will show thee my Faith by my Works. Thou
believe there is one God, thou do well; the Devils also believe and
tremble: But will thou know, O vain man! that Faith without Works is dead. Was
not Abraham our Father justified by Works, when he Offered up his Son Isaac
upon the Altar? See thou how Faith wrought with his Works, and by Works was
Faith made perfect. You see then that by Works a man is justified, and not by
Faith only: As the Body without the Spirit is dead, so Faith without works is
dead also.

You see, my beloved, that it is the benefit of Good Works which makes our Faith
perfect; it brings us much into the favor of God. He that gives to the poor,
lends to the Lord, and doubtless he will pay us again with blessings Temporal
and Spiritual: If we lend him our Earthly Treasure, he will pay us again with
Heavenly Treasure, which is far better. God loves us if we give cheerfully,
for God loves a cheerful giver. To do good, and to communicate to the poor
forget not, for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased.

Love and Good Works make our Faith to shine in its luster, like precious
Jewels in a Kings Crown: Faith, Hope, and Charity may be compared to the Tree
of Life in the Garden of Eden, whereof Faith is the Stock, Hope is the
Branches, and Charity, which is Love and Good Works, is the Fruit which hangs
on the Tree of Life, and they that eat of that Fruit, shall live for ever in
the Kingdom of Heaven. Again, Good Works which proceed from love will go with
us to the Day of Judgment, and plead for us; for Saint John says in the
Revelations, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, even so says the
Spirit, that they may rest from their labor, and their works follow them. You
see here, my beloved, that the benefit of our Charity will follow us after
death, and will not leave us till we come to Heaven. It is to be feared, the
want of Good Works was the Cause why Christ pronounced that Sentence against
those that fawned on him, as it is said in S. Matthews Gospel, the seventh
Chapter, the two and twentieth and three and twentieth Verses, where Christ
says, Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in
thy Name, and in thy Name have cast out Devils, and in thy Name done many
wondrous works? I shall profess to them, I never knew them, depart from me ye
workers of Iniquity.

You would think those Ministers to be Saints, who have prophesied in Gods
Name, and in his Name have cast out Devils, and in his Name done many wondrous
works. If those that in Christ's Name work Miracles, and in his Name do many
wondrous works, be called by Christ, Workers of Iniquity, and bid depart from
him, he never knew them; what will become of such, in the end of the World, who
do no Good Works?

O all you that are called of God to be Ministers of his Gospel, and are of the
Church of England, the Lord grant you may be found in all Good Works, that
while you preach to others, your selves may not be counted Castaways, nor found
amongst those whom Christ calls Workers of Iniquity. Now the Lord grant every
one of us, from the King to the Ministers of Gods Word, and to all the rest of
the People, that all of us may be found in Love and Charity, and in doing of
Good Works, that we may be placed amongst that little Flock which stands at
Christ's right hand at the last day, and hear that blessed Sentence, which is
spoken in the Gospel of S. Matthew, Chap. 25. Verses 32, 33, 34. and so on,
Before him shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them one from
another, as a Shepherd separateth his Sheep from the Goats, and he shall set
the Sheep on his right hand, and the Goats on his left; Then shall the King say
to them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the Kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the World; for I was hungry and you
gave me meat, thirsty and you gave me drink; I was a Stranger, and ye took me
in, naked and ye clothed me, sick and ye visited me, in prison and ye came unto
me. Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, when saw we thee hungry, and
fed thee; naked, and clothed thee; thirsty, and gave thee drink; when saw we
thee a Stranger, and took thee in; or when saw we thee sick and in Prison, and
came unto thee? And the King shall answer them, inasmuch as ye have done it to
one of the least of these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me. You hear, my
Beloved Brethren, from our Savior Jesus Christ's own words, that Charity which
is the cause of Good Works is the chief cause why our Savior pronounces us
blessed, and of our inheriting of the Kingdom of Heaven; Charity is the cause
of blessings in this World, and of our happiness in the world to come.

Then shall he say also to them on his left hand, Depart ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels; for I was hungry and
ye gave me no meat, thirsty and ye gave me no drink; I was a Stranger and ye
took me not in, naked and ye clothed me not, sick and in Prison and ye visited
me not: Then shall they answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungered,
and thirsty, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee?
Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily, verily, I say unto you, in as much
as ye did it not unto one of the least of these, ye did it not to me: And these
shall go into everlasting punishment; but the righteous into life eternal.

O my beloved, you may see that the want of Good Works is the cause of that sad
Sentence pronounced against the wicked; if they had done Good Works they might
have obtained the Joys of Heaven, and there to have lived with the Saints and
Angels for evermore; and for want of Good Works they are sentenced into Hell,
there to remain in torments for evermore, world without end.

O my beloved Brethren, seeing that Faith, Hope, and Charity are all linked
together, and that Love and Charity are the perfection of our Faith, without
which Faith is dead, the Lord grant that every one of us may unite together in
love, as well Dissenters as others, who went out from us; the Lord grant they
may come in to us again, and that we may unite together in love, and serve God
together in love, without which we shall never come into the Kingdom of Heaven;
that the Lord may send his blessings amongst us, and delight to do us good,
that our light may shine like Stars in the Firmament; for this Church Militant
is to fit us for the Church Triumphant, where there is no division nor
dissension, but all are of one heart and of one mind. The Lord grant that every
one of us be found in Love and Good Works, that we may all meet in the Heavenly
Jerusalem together, there with the Angels and Archangels, and all the Heavenly
Host, to sing Hallelujahs and Gloria Pater, to God the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, who has made us, redeemed us, sanctified us, and justified us; to whom
be attributed all Might, Majesty, and Dominion, both now and evermore. Amen.

A word of Use and Application to our selves, and of the Benefits we shall
receive by this great Grace of Charity.

And first, It will cover a multitude of sins, as says S. James, Chap. 2. Ver.
17.

Secondly, It makes our Faith perfect, without which it is dead. The Lord grant
that every one of us may understand his Faith so well, that he may not deceive
himself, for without Good Works Faith is dead. Charity is the Band that ties
all our Graces together, without which they are all as nothing.

Thirdly, Charity makes God to dwell in us, and we in him; it makes us to be at
peace with all men, it overcomes the malice of wicked men, and makes them to be
our Friends. Charity with the Good Works which spring from it, is the cause why
Christ calls us, Blessed of his Father, in that glorious Sentence at the last
day: It is one of the chief causes that we inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, which
was prepared for us from the Foundation of the World. Christ tells us, that he
was hungry and we fed him, thirsty and we gave him Drink, naked and we clothed
him; and so on: as you may read in the 25th Chapter of S. Matthews Gospel, from
the 34th Verse to the end of the Chapter.

Again, the want of Charity and Good Works was the cause why Christ pronounced
that cursed Sentence to those wicked men on his left hand; Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels; for I was hungry and
ye fed me not, thirsty and ye gave me no drink, naked and ye clothed me not,
sick and prison and ye visited me not: And they shall ask him, when saw we thee
in this condition? And he shall answer them, In as much as ye have not done it
to one of the least of these, ye have not done it unto me: And these shall go
into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life eternal. Now I beseech
you, Brethren, to take good notice, and to lay it to heart, that the want of
Good Works was the chief cause that the Wicked went into everlasting
Punishment. And I beseech you, Brethren, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that every one of us, both Ministers and People, strive to be found in such a
measure of Good Works, as that we may be accepted of by Christ, that so we may
obtain life eternal. The Lord grant that every one of us may follow Charity in
all our lives and Conversations, it being the whole perfection of our
Salvation, without which we shall never go to Heaven, although we have heard a
thousand Sermons, and practiced the Doctrines of them all, yet if this Doctrine
of Charity be wanting, all profits nothing.

Now all good Christian People, I beseech you in the Lord, as well Dissenters
as others, to come in to the unity of the Episcopal Church of England, from
which you went out, and there to serve God in Unity, Love, and Charity; for
this Church Militant is to fit us for the Church Triumphant, where there is no
division nor dissension, and there to sing Hallelujah with the Heavenly Host
for evermore. Which the Lord of his Mercy grant, for Jesus Christ's sake, our
blessed Redeemer. Amen.

FINIS.

