A CHARGE Delivered in the Name of the ARMY under the Command of His Excellency
Sir Thomas Fairfax, Unto the Commissioners of Parliament with the Army, at S.
Albans, June 14. 1647. and by them sent up to the Parliament, against several
Members of the Honorable House of Commons.

ALSO A PAPER Delivered to the said COMMISSIONERS of Parliament, June 15. from
his Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, and the Army under his Command, of some
farther humble Proposals and Desires to the Honorable Houses of PARLIAMENT.

PRinted and published by the appointment of his Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax,
and the Officers and Soldiers of the Army under his Command.

S. Albans, June 17. 1647. Signed by me JOHN RUSHWORTH.

London, Printed for Laurence Chapman, JUNE 18. 1647.

June 14. 1647. The Heads of a Charge, delivered in the name of the Army under
the Command of Sir Tho. Fairfax, unto the Commissioners of Parliament, now with
the Army at St. Albans.
To be by them sent up to the Parliament, Against Denzil Hollis Esquire, Sir
Philip Stapleton, Sir William Lewis, Sir John Clotworthy, Sir William Waller,
Sir John Maynard, Knights; Major General Massey Mr. Glyn Recorder of London,
Colonel Walter Long, Colonel Edward Harley, and Anthony Nichol Esquire, Members
of the House of Commons, jointly or severally as follows.
1. THat contrary to the Trust reposed in them, the persons above named,
Members of the House of Commons, have jointly or severally invaded, infringed
or indeavored to overthrow the Rights and Liberties of the Subjects of this
Nation, in Arbitrary, violent or oppressive ways (and in this case where no
pretense was, or could be of the exigence of War, or other necessity which
might justify or excuse the same;) and they have likewise endeavored by
indirect and corrupt practices to delay and obstruct Justice, to the great
damage and prejudice of diverse of the poor Commoners of England, Petitioning
for the same.

2. That this Army being until the middle of March last, in a quiet and orderly
condition and posture, free from any color or appearance of distemper or
disorder, or from offense to any, and ready (upon reasonable satisfaction in
their necessary dues for service past) either quietly to have disbanded, or
else to have engaged in the service of Ireland. The persons above named have
jointly or severally indeavored by false informations, misrepresentations, or
scandalous suggestions against the Army, to beget misunderstandings,
prejudices, or jealousies in the Parliament against their Army; and by
deluding, surprising, or otherwise abusing the Parliament, to engage the
Authority of Parliament to such proceedings, as to put insufferable injuries,
abuses, and provocations upon the Army, whereby to provoke and put the Army
into a distemper, and to disoblige and discourage the same from any further
engagement in the Parliament Service: By all which, and other the like
particulars and proceedings of theirs, the Peace of this Kingdom has been
eminently endangered, and the relief of Ireland retarded.

3. That whereas the Parliament might otherwise have had out of this Army an
entire force, and answerable to their proportion designed to have engaged for
Ireland as aforesaid, under their old Officers and conduct; the persons above
named for advancement of their own ends, faction, and design, to the prejudice
of the Public, have jointly or severally, under pretense of the service of
Ireland, endeavored by such evil practices as before, to break and pull this
Army in pieces, to the weakening of the power, and indangering of the safety of
the Parliament and Kingdom; and have likewise endeavored to put the Parliament
and Kingdom, to the trouble, hazard, delay, and vast expense of raising a new
force as for that service.

4. That with the breaking of this Army as aforesaid, they have in the like
manner indeavored under the pretense of the service of Ireland, to raise a new
force as before to advance and carry on desperate designs of their own in
England, to the prejudice of the Parliament and Public; and in p^^^ance of the
same have endeavored to divert the forces engaged as for Ireland, and unto such
their purpose as aforesaid here in England; and have in like manner endeavored
to have gained a power from the Parliament for themselves, or some of them, of
diverting and misimploying those forces aforesaid, and to raise new forces
under pretense to guard the Parliament, and (not having obtained that) have in
like manner endeavored privately to lift and engage Officers and Soldiers, or
procure them to be listed and engaged without Authority of Parliament, for the
raising of and imbroiling this Kingdom in a new and bloody War, and to
interrupt and hinder the settling and securing the Rights, Liberties, and Peace
of the Kingdom; and for the settling, upholding, and protecting of themselves
and their accomplices, in their unjust, oppressive, and Factious designs and
proceedings.

5. That they have jointly or severally invited, encouraged, abetted or
countenanced diverse Reformadoes, and other Officers and Soldiers tumultuously
and violently to gather together at Westminster, to affright and assault the
Members of Parliament, in passage to and from the House, to offer violence to
the House it self, and by such violence, outrages and threats to awe and
enforce the Parliament.

The several Heads of Charge, the Army will by such Solicitors as they shall
appoint (when the House of Commons shall admit thereof) make good in
particulars each Head against some of the persons, and some one head or more
against each of the persons; and shall shortly give in the several particulars
against each person respectively, which shall be made good by proofs; the Army
desiring to save and reserve to themselves the liberty of exhibiting any
farther Charge against all or any of the said persons.

A Paper delivered to the Right Honorable Commissioners of Parliament now with
the Army at S. Albans, June 15. 1647. From his Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax, and
the Army under his Command:
Showing,
I. THat in pursuance of the Representation delivered in, we have prepared the
Heads of a Charge against diverse persons, Members of the House of Commons (to
whom many passages in the said Representation do relate) which we have
delivered in to be speeded to the Parliament, and shall (when the Parliament
shall have admitted thereof) appoint fit persons on our and the Kingdoms
behalfs to prosecute and make good the same.

II. That if the Parliament shall be pleased to admit these things into Debate
and Consideration at the Desire of the Army, in behalf of themselves and the
Kingdom, and to proceed thereupon for a general satisfaction therein; we shall
then desire,

1. That the persons impeached in the said Charge may be forthwith suspended
from sitting in the House, without which we cannot reasonably expect such a
proceeding upon any the things we have proposed, as may probably bring the same
to an happy or timely issue to the kingdom or our selves; or as may prevent the
present Designs and practices so imminently indangering the Peace of this
Nation, if those same persons (who have notoriously appeared most active in all
the late proceedings, to the prejudice and provocation of the Army, and
hazarding thus far the Peace of the Kingdom) shall continue in the same power
Judges of those things relating to the Armies satisfaction, and Peace of the
Kingdom.

2. That there may be at least a Months pay immediately sent down to the Army
for a present supply, out of which the Army shall pay Fourteen days quarter for
time to come, and the other Fourteen days pay shall be accounted as part of
Arrears. And to this we must desire a present Resolution to be with us on
Thursday next by noon at farthest.

3. That if the Officers and Soldiers of the Army, who have engaged for
Ireland, or those who have deserted the Army and come to London, have since
then received more then a Months pay, there may be so much more money sent
down to the Army (above the Months pay aforementioned) as may make up that
Months pay to the Army equal to what such Officers and Soldiers have so
received at London or elsewhere.

4. That no Officers or Soldiers who have so deserted the Army shall have any
more paid them as for Arrears, until the rest of the Army shall first be
satisfied in point of their Arrears.

5. Whereas there have been several Designs and Endeavors, without Authority
from tne Parliament, to raise and List new Forces within this Kingdom, to draw
together the Forces engaged for Ireland, and march them toward London, and
other secret practices to engage the Kingdom in a second War; We further
desire, That during the Debates and Transaction of this business betwixt the
Parliament and the Army, the Parliament would not suffer any new Forces to be
raised within this kingdom, or any Forces to be invited or admitted out of any
other Kingdom to this, or any thing else to be done, that may carry the face of
a new War, or of preparations thereunto, which may endanger or interrupt the
present proceeding to the settlement of the Liberties and peace of this Kingdom.

6. That the Parliament would be pleased (without delay) to put the things
contained in our several Representations and Papers already given in, into a
speedy way of resolution and dispatch, The present posture and condition of the
Kingdom and Army, As also of His Majesty himself not admitting Delays.

By appointment of his Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, and Soldiers of the Army
under his Command. Signed by me JOHN RUSHWORTH.
S. Albans, June 17. 1647.
FINIS.

