A RAGING WAVE Foming out his own Shame.

OR, An ANSWER to a Book Lately Published by Richard Hains (a Person withdrawn
from) Entitled, A Protestation against Usurpation.

Wherein appears such a measure of Envies bitterness heaped up, pressed down,
and running over, as the like in some Ages has not appeared by his many false
accusations, and malicious insinuations, thereby to provoke (if possible) both
the chief Magistrate, and all men of what degree soever, to have suspicious
thoughts of the innocent, easily proved to have no other foundation but his own
evil Imaginations.

Wherein also the Church of Southwater by him contemptuously rendered Papistical
in their act of withdrawment from him, is vindicated and cleared, First, by
Apostolical Authority, Secondly, by Rich. Haynes his own pen.

Written by Matthew Caffyn of Horsham in Sussex.

He that is first in his own cause seems just, but his Neighbor comes and
searches him, Prove. 8.17.

Neither can they prove the things whereof they accuse me, Act. 24.13.

London, Printed for Francis Smith at the Elephant and Castle, near the Royal
Exchange, in Cornhill. 1675.

A Raging Wave foming out his own shame.
SUch is the nature of this my necessary opposition against the protestation of
my cause-less adversary, as that it may seem useful for Christians to remember
how the saints and servants of God formerly did not only meet with perils
without amongst men, but also perils within among false brethren. 2. Cor.
11.16. and particularly how Alexander the coper-smith (he very likely that Paul
had excommunicated that he might learn not to blasphme. 1 Timothy 1.20.) did Paul
much evil, and greatly withstood his words. 2 Timothy 4.14.15. as also how the
Apostle prophesied that in the latter days (by reason of some professors,
having the form of godliness, becoming such as nevertheless were incontinent,
lovers of themselves, covetous, blasphemers, false accusers, fierce, despisers
of those that are good, heady, high-minded, from whom the Apostle advises
Timothy to withdraw) perilous times should be. 2. Tim. 3.

Now to what degree these Scriptures are fulfilled in this my adversaries
heaping up so many slanders, and abusive suggestions, against the innocent;
with an outcry made of usurpation and contempt of authority against them that
both fears God, and honors the king, (and so all, through grace, easily
proved to be no other then his own evil imagination) the reader is desired to
make judgment by his following treatise.

Whereas Richard Haynes in his first page declares his hopes that the
Congregation will not take occasion from his tenderness to perform his duty in
the acknowledgment of his sin against God, thereby to justify cruelty against
him: we the congregation of Southwater being assembled, and in the
consideration of this matter, do hereby declare our readynesse to comply with
his hopes concerning us therein, being well assured, that although it appear
most true (as himself here, and elsewhere suggesteth) that before the
controversy about his patent, R. H. had been conquered by sin committed against
the most high, yet may we not, nor are we conscious to our selves that at any
time we did, act or maintain any action of cruelty toward him upon that or any
other account; but as R. H. has published his hopes concerning us in the case
aforesaid: we likewise are willing here to publish our hopes, or desires
concerning him, namely, that he would (in the fear of him, into whose hands to
fall is a dreadful thing) be aware of that spirit of excessive bitterness, and
malitiousnesse against M. Caffyn the person reproving him (in private) for that
his sin committed against the most high, and that labored for some time
considerable to restore him: whose bitterness thus continuing and abounding
against him, gives us just occasion (at leastwise) to question that
unfaignednesse of his repentance for the same, which here willingly he would
possess the reader with the belief of, pa. 6. and very probably may to a
greater degree be questioned by him that knows more (it seems) then we do, who
nevertheless for good causes (as was then at leastwise conceived) did not
publish the same at the time of R. H. his withdrawment, in order to the trial
and examination thereof; there being in his understanding (as also in ours)
ground sufficient for other causes to withdraw from him: and the rather do we
here publish these our hopes or desires of him, for that he may be well
assured, while here he thus lifts up voice, with so much pretended discontent
against both us, and M. C. for our excommunicating him about the Patent, 'twill
be evidenced that himself elsewhere has readily confessed that his displeasure
against M. C. was not so much upon that account, as for the case in difference
before.

Now as touching our withdrawment from R. H. as one unworthy of communion, the
reader is to observe, that we (upon his earnest request) did give him in
writing a paper containing the grounds of our proceedings: the which surely had
he intended honestly and uprightly, he would have acquainted the reader with
it, and so endeavored to show (if he could) the unsoundnesse and imperfection
thereof: but oh what may be justly suspected, when he shall not only be silent
therein, but shall also in the mean time frame to himself, and publish to the
world an abusive account, with such alterations, additions, and omissions, as
might best suit with his envious disposition, and then fight against the image
thus of his own framing, and setting up, as an odious and detestable thing? for
(says he, pa. 5.) this new Lord (contemptuusly speaking of me) by his own
arbitrary, new laws, without one word of God for it, pronounced me
excommunicate, merely for this thing, purely civil, alleging that whether
lawful or unlawful it was all one: first, because that it was of an evil report
amongst the common sort of the world, secondly, that it was an offense to the
weak brethren. Now that this account of R. H. is false and abusive in five
respects may appear.

First, by his saying, that he was excommunicated merely, and in page the 4th.
says, only, for this thing purely civil, meaning the patent; whenas he may
well know, and as the congregation (in their paper sent unto him) declares,
that for his unworthy carrage in censuring his brethren after an unchristian
manner, together with his resolutions to stand in the defense of his Patent,
notwithstanding all that was objected to the contrary, they proceeded against
him.

Secondly, in that while the congregation with my self, judged and also
recorded his practice to be such as was an occasion of scandal and reproach to
the truth, he (the better to render us odious, and himself innocent as one may
think) says, that judgment was made against his practice, because it was of an
ill report amongst the common sort of the world, (as if, among men sober,
serious, and religious, we had no cause to judge it of an evil report) the
which, as it was never in our hearts to think, so was it never declared by us,
nor is there one word of that nature in the account which the Church gave him
in writing of their proceedings.

Thirdly, in that while the congregation with my self in the said account
signified their being troubled and offended with this his injurious
proceedings, so much savouring of his preferring the gain of this world before
the honor of the gospel, thus liable to reproach, while he a professor thereof
was both publicly in the market, and elsewhere reproachfully spoken of, to the
great shame of some that heard it, and the trouble and offense of all, when
they understood it; while (I say) we thus signified our trouble and offense, he
abusively declares his withdrawment to be upon the account that his patent
design was an offense to the weak brethren, whom (he says) he enquired after
that he might know who they were, as if there had been another party more
strong that were not offended with him, who yet, to gratify the weak brethren,
consented to his excommunication; and the more intolerable is this abuse, when
it shall be considered with the account we first gave him, wherein weak
brethren is not so much as once named, or signified; together with our
protestation since against it, as a conceit of his own framing, and which also
(as himself confesses in this very page) is denied by us.

Fourthly, in that while he knows that the congregation with my self did
excommunicate him, as himself confesses, pa. 4. he renders it here as if I
singly (after a Lordly manner) did it.

Fifthsy, in that while endeavors were used by me and others (and more might
have been, had he not obstinatly refused to reason the case with me) to
convince him from Gods word of the unlawfulness of his proceeding, and as
himself confesses, that Gods word was produced, pa. 22. yet slanderously does
he here declare, that without regard to the lawfulnes or unlawfulness thereof,
he was declared excommunicate, without one word of God for it: whose abuse
herein may further appear in our answers to his exceptions against our
proceedings: only observe, that while here he slanderously says, that there
was no regard to Gods word in the judgment given against him, he elsewhere in
pa. 29. (speaking of what the congregation had regard unto) in like manner
slanderously declares, that they did it only (Mark) to please their Idol,
forgetting surely what he had said in the 25. page, namely, that the
congregation did it only (Mark) to please the cursing and reviling sons of
Belial: to which two only's of his, I may well here add a third, only, and say,
that these malicious and inconsistant suggestions of his serves only to
represent him a man making little conscience of what he says, and so his words
deserving little credit.

The first exception which R. H. makes against our proceedings, is with respect
to the matter, we having (says he p. 4.) no just cause or warrant for the same.

In answer, we first say, that if it were deemed by him (or should be so
thought by any other) that in our zeal and care to preserve the truth (which we
believe and profess) blameless, and that none should have occasion of
stumbling, or to speak evil of the good ways of God, if (I say) upon this
account we should be thought by him inregularly to have proceeded (which yet we
believe not) surely were there not the spirit of malice and bitterness (for
some other foregoing cause) ruling in him, he would not thus revile and
reproachfully speak of us, nor use those swelling words of usurpation, tyranny,
Popish infallibility, accompanied with abusive comparisons, as if herein we
might be numbered with the Church of Rome, etc. whose extravigant thoughts, and
pernicious expressions (wherein he seems to outstrip the deeds of many men
merely moral:) we wish God may never lay it to his charge hereafter.

But secondly, whereas Gods word declares, that to condemn, or falsely accuse
the just, is abomination to the Lord. Pro. 17.15. 2. Tim. 3.3. we judge our
proceedings against R. H. is warrantable, for that he (as one too much governed
by that spirit that is the accuser of the brethren) thus did in his fury
censure and condemn some of his brethren (in the midst of the congregation) and
this without either offering proof to justify the same or his humility to
justify him therein: and whereas it is written 1. Cor. 10.32.33. that
Christians (in order to their seeking the profit of others that they might be
saved, more then their own profit, as also in order to their doing all things
to the glory of God) should give none offense, neither to the Jew nor the
gentile, nor the Church of God, but rather be thinking of, and pressing after,
whatsoever things are of good report, Phil. 4.8. it being (says the Apostle
Romans 14.15.) contrary to charity, yea and expressly evil, to eat flesh, or drink
wine, or any thing (Mark) whereby the brethren stumble or are offended or made
weak, Romans 14.20.21. (that is, when the forbearance of eating, or whatever else
is offensive or scandalous, is no transgression of Gods law) whereas (I say)
it is thus recorded, we judge our proceedings against R. H. just and
warrantable, for that he thus coveting and grasping after the wedge of gold,
did not only thereby greive and offend Christians here, and elsewhere that
heard thereof, but also, and more especially thereby deliver up the cause of
the gospel as liable to be condemned and crucified by the tongues of men, while
he a professor thereof, thus to their great offense proceeded: although his so
much affected gain thereby (as some think) has been put into such a bag of
holes, as that there will scarce remain thirty pence to be thrown up in the day
of his recantation, if God in mercy shall offer him such a blessing.

But whereas it possibly may be pleaded, that the case of R. H. is not any
thing that is sinful in it self, and so no just cause for professors to be
greived or offended, nor others to stumble thereat, or speak evil thereof. My
answer is, that he may well know that professors generally never so esteemed
his case, but rather that his Patent-design savoured much of covetousness, for
that some parsons cleansing the same seed of non-such to his knowledge, before
his coveting the Patent, and after another manner too, and without any
information from him, whereby as good seed as his (if not better) was procured;
and whom R. H. confessed (before witnesses ready to attest it if need be) that
by the law of God and man they might do it: that some such persons (I say) are
notwithstanding by this his Patent not only liable to be hindered of this their
lawful privilege, but also declared by him to have no right thereunto. But if
otherwise R. H. his Patent shall be deemed lawful in it self (as by several it
is) yet is it no more then what might be pleaded concerning those meats, which
the Apostle pronounced clean, and lawful to be eaten both by the law of God
and men, who nevertheless strictly charged the Christians of those times (as
they tendered charity on the one hand, and their avoiding evil on the other
hand) not to eat the same when any thereby was greived or offended: and surely
much more reason have Christians (in all humility) to yield their necks to this
Apostolical yoke, when not only the offenses of their brethren within, but also
manifest danger of stumbling those that are without, shall be inviting and
obliging them thereunto; nor may this be restrained to such meats only, because
the Apostles words does not only imply, but plainly express any thing else
besides that, might, as well as meats, occasion stumbling or offense, ver. 21.
to which agrees the Apostles advice elsewhere; saying, whether ye eat, or
drink, or whatsoever (mark) ye do, do all to the glory of God, which that they
might effectually do, in the next words, he advises them, to give none offense
to any, etc. 1 Cor. 10.31.32.

But oh that R. Haines would consider from his own pen (if not from the
Apostles) the justness and legalitie of our proceedings against him! lest
otherwise he give further cause and ground to men thereby to believe that it is
a spirit of envy, for some other cause, and not conscience of his duty toward
God, as he would insinuate, that provokes him to this kind of undertaking:
however thus he declares ( page 22.) that if the sense of the Apostles words
had been, That Christians should give no offense to the cursing and reviling
sons of Belial, or to the Church of Antichrist, as for laws and prerogatives
what have we to do with them? that then (Mark) our practice had been somewhat
authentic: that is to say, undeniable, and approved of all men.

Now that the unbelieving Jews and gentiles, whom Christians on the one hand
were obliged to give no offense unto, as on the other hand not to offend the
Church of God, were very many of them such, that is, men greatly polluted with
sin, is against all contradiction true, for that not only the publicans and
sinners of the Jews, but also the professing scribes and phraisees were found
defaming and reviling both Christ and Christianity; nor surely can R.H. (as
clouded as he is) think otherwise of the profane and Idolatrous Gentiles; and
so were they truly the Church of Antichrist, that is (as surely he intends)
such as were against Christ; and so doubtless no more deserving (nor yet so
much) Christians carefulness not to offend them, then the many persons that
profess Christ in our times: nor may he think himself innocent nor free from
transgression, if he should (or any others with him) conceive the Apostles
charge, to intend only, that Christians should give no offense to those Jews
and Gentiles that were more sober, serious, and honest, then those publicans
and sinners amongst them were, since even such men in this case as well as
others (if we may not say more then others, they being so much concerned
therein) were in like manner offended with him, and condemned his practice; or
will he think it becomes him to publish those that have showed their dislike to
his proceedings to be such only as are the cursing and reviling sons of Belial?
if so, and that such his publication were upon just grounds, yet should he not
(if he had learned of Christ, who so much tendered the good of publicans and
sinners) be regard-less of, or by any means despise, their low estate; but
alas! it seems he has rather of late learned of that pervese and froward
generation of the Pharisees, and so is found walking in their steps, upbraiding
Christians now (as they did Christ then) for being such friends to publicans
and sinners (the reviling and defaming sons of men) while they only now (as
their master Christ did then) tender the good of their souls, and therefore at
all times unwilling that any occasion of stumbling, should be given them.

But if R. H. shall still object and say, that although the Apostles charge in
relation to the not giving offense to sinful men should be as aforesaid, and so
your practice thus far justified, yet it may not be thought that the principles
of the Apostles could admit them to say also, as for laws and prerogatives what
have we to do with them? upon which also I concluded the authentickness of your
practice.

My answer is, that so far their principles did admit (as their practice
declares) as to endeavor that Christians should forbear their right to, and
privilidge of eating, those meats, which by the civil laws, and prerogative of
the chief magistrate, they might partake of: and so practically they declared
that they had nothing to do with the laws and prerogatives of their rulers, as
from thence to plead the lawfulnes of eating those meats, when the eating
thereof apparently tended to the greiving and stumbling others (though they
deemed it their weakness to be greived at it) and so that great and mortal duty
of charity thereby neglected toward them: and although the Apostles had many
bitter and cruel adversaries, yet was there none (at least wise as we read of)
so vile and base as thereupon to publish them as such that contemned the laws
and prerogative of the civil Magistrates; and yet alas R. H. cease not thus
unworthily to deal with me for no other cause save only that I (with others)
endeavored to stop him in his Patent-designe, and not to have pleaded the
privilege of the law, and his Majesty's prerogative, when his design so
apparently tended to the grieving the brethren, and stumbling others (though he
had deemed it their weakness to be grieved at it) and so that great and moral
duty of charity thereby neglected toward them.

But oh how great is the obscurity of the (much to be lamented) fruit of this
man's enmity! that he does not consider (while he so much speaks of contempt of
authority) that there is no law commanding or requiring men that they must have
(or else rebels by law) but rather that persons (whose ingenuity justly
requires it) may have Patents (marked as a privilege grantable by his
Majesty's prerogative (whose prerogative therein what Christian ever
questioned) therefore (as himself pleads) there being no law requiring it,
there can be no such transgression (as the contempt of authority) in the
persuading from it, those pious ends aforesaid being the ground of such their
endeavors, so that still the reader may observe that our proceedings against R.
H. is not only justified by Gods word, but by his own pen also.

If yet this be not sufficient, the reader may here also read his own words,
which elsewhere we have under his hand, as thus, if (says he) my brother being
a Jew, newly converted to the faith, and whilst he is young and weak, dares not
eat swines flesh, and therefore will have no communion with those that he knows
to eat thereof, because the law forbids it, shall I therefore eat swines flesh
whereby to offend this weak brother? God forbid (says R. Haines) I with the
Apostle will say, that I will eat no meat while the world stands, rather then
he for whom Christ died should perish, for who ever (says he) does otherwise,
becomes an offender, (and as elsewhere he says) if obstinate, deserves
publicly to be blamed, and if not then publicly to be excommunicated, if
still obstinate, let him assign a reason whereof such an offender should be
publikly blamed: now as from hence our public rendering him as an offender,
seems to be declared authentic; so also that his principles (and that since
this controversy too) about the not offending or not greiving one the other,
are of far greater severity and much more strictness, then can possibly appear
in our practice against him; so far as to public blame. First, because his
principle is, that whoever does not in charity avoid the offending and greiving
one only weak brother (and when he is grieved too, for that which is neither
the transgression of the law of God nor man, as must be allowed concerning
swins flesh, yet such a one says he) is an offender: where our practice in
blaming him was for his want of charity manifested by his offending and
greiving many, to wit, the congregation, as also many other brethren related to
other congregations.

Secondly, because his principle is, that whoever does not in charity avoid the
offending one only weak brother; without any manifest occasion thereby offered
for others, either to speak evil of the ways of the Gospel, or injuriously to
stumble thereat, for that they very generally believe the lawfulness of eating
swines-flesh, is notwithstanding an offender; when as our practice in blaming
him was, his want of charity manifested by his offending and grieving many, to
wit, the congregation, as also many others, with manifest occasion thereby
offered for others both to speak evil of the ways of the Gospel, and
injuriously to stumble thereat, for that they very generally did not believe
the lawfulness of his Patent-proceedings.

And whereas his only plea to evade self-condemnation, and our justification is
(as he has declared) that in all cases as it has relation to matters of
religion and worship, the strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, but
in things merely civil, and never by any law forbidden, as there can be no
real ground for any such offense, so does there not lie any such obligation,
whereas (I say) this is his only plea, the reader is,

First, to observe that while he (not the Scriptures) makes this curious
distinction, the Apostle says, R^om. 14.21. that it is not good to eat flesh,
or drink wine, or any thing (mark) whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is
offended.

Secondly, as he says there can be no real ground for any offense from such
cases as are merely civil, and never by any law forbidden, so likewise must he
conclude that in the cases of swines-flesh, and things offered to Idols, there
is no real ground for offense, because they lawfully may be eaten; but then,

Thirdly, as he concludes the weak brother (that dares not eat swines-flesh) to
be conscionably offended, because it was once forbidden; in like manner might
he conclude (however we do) that persons may as conscionably be greived at, and
offended with, the civil undertakings of men, wherein the ill savor of
covetousness does appear, for that covetousnes was always forbidden; and
surely a conversation unspotted from the world, has as much relation to pure
religion, as ever the not eating of swines-flesh had: but perhaps he will
plead that persons apprehensions of covetousness in such cases may proceed
from some mistake through weakness; and what then, if certainly so it be? the
like must R. H. confess concerning his weak brother, whose apprehension of sin
in the eating swines-flesh, proceeded from mistake through weakness; and yet
would he not offend him (if we may believe him) by no means.

Fourthly, as by the eating meats offered to Idols, some were made liable
thereby to offend, and so the eating thereof became sinful; so in like manner
by the undertakings of men in civil cases, as sometimes they are circumstances
(and as R.H. his case was) persons may be made liable thereby to offend, that
is, by speaking reproachfully of, and hardening themselves against, the good
ways of God and so likewise such civil undertakings (as are only lawful, and
so not sinful in the neglect thereof) may become sinful.

The premises then considered, amounting to no less then plain evidence from
the word of truth, justifying our practice, which (it seems was so firmly
received by, and grounded in R. H. heretofore; as that even yet while breathing
out his envy against me, his own pen is made use of to justify our practice to
be somewhat authentic, yea and his own principles (so far as to public blame)
declared to be such as out-strips our practice in relation to such as greive
their brethren, together with his reason-less, religion-less, president-less,
as also civil law-less suggestions against me, as if I were one disobedient to
authority barely for dissuading from that which was never commanded by
authority: these things together considered, may it not rationally be
conceived, that this (not to be paralled) publication wherein such an outcry
of usurpation, tyranny, contempt of authority is made, proceeds from some other
foundation than our excommunicating him for the causes aforesaid.

Whereupon as to his seeming willingness that the reader should make
observation of the good disposition and frame of his spirit in his performance
of family-dutys, and the government of his family, so as that (he says pa.
18.) in many years he has not known any thing committed by them worthy of
public blame; my answer is, that had it not been for the many transgressions,
(sometime before this controversy about his Patent, since which he never had
communion with us at the table of the Lord) committed somewhere in the family,
and not voluntarily confessed, as since he most falsely has suggested, but
through care and diligence discovered, with occasion given of continued
dissatisfaction; I am much persuaded that these extravagant thoughts and
pernicious actions of his envy against me had never appeared: but I comfortably
remember that snares were laid heretofore for Gods people that reproved in the
gate, Isa. 29.21.

But to return, having showed, that his exceptions against the matter of our
proceedings, is groundless, and that his protestations against us elsewhere,
as not proving him a transgressor of Gods law, before the fentence of
excommunication, is truth-less, that which remains in the next place worthy the
readers consideration, is his exceptions against the manner of our proceedings,
wherein he declares there was diverse irregularities, but there mentions none,
only I find in his protestations ( pa. 6.) two things whereat he seems to
remain dissatisfied.

The first is, that he was not suffered to know who his accusers were, either
as they were weak brethren, or as they were no brethren.

Reply. What can R. H. be ignorant who were his accusers, while he so well
knows, and so often confesses, that the congregation did excommunicate him for
crimes (in their account) thus public? or would he have the reader believe
that the congregation did excommunicate him for those things which they never
accused him of? as for his saying, that he knows not his accuser, as they were
weak brethren, (thereby suggesting another party more strong, not offended with
him, and so not accusing him upon the aforesaid account:) my answer is, that
there was no such distinguished party for him to know, as the Churches account
of their proceeding (greatly desired by him, and accordingly sent unto him)
sufficiently shows: as touching others (not under the notion of brethren)
that did accuse him, whose names (he says) he was not suffered to know, if
thereby he intends to insinuate into the Readers understanding, that we either
knew of none, or very few that spoke disdainfully of his proceedings, I do not
suppose that he can possibly in these parts (at least wise) proselite many, if
any one, into that belief; nor has he (whatever his intent may be) any
occasion to our remembrance thus to speak, save only the person having given an
instance in the meeting how R.H. his name was blasted in the market, upon the
aforesaid account, with such reflections upon the congregation, as was greatly
to the shame of some that heard it, did forbear to mention the said persons
name so speaking, to prevent some evil that supposedly might follow the
publication of his name.

His second Objection is, that he was not suffered to treat with the
Congregation, in order to the satisfying the offended, by reason of my
continual interruptions.

Reply, when R.H. appeared at our Church-meeting (after some words in order to
the right stating of the case) he was desired to speak what he could in
vindication of his practice, if still he deemed it lawful, it being upon our
parts fairly to treat with him thereabouts, he, contrary to our expectations,
and contrary to what himself for many years had allowed, when offenders have
been treated with, yea and (as I am much persuaded) contrary to the allowed and
reasonable practice of all Churches under what name soever, he (I say) did not
only require my silence in the debate of the matter, but also did,
notwithstanding the Congregations declared dislike to his usurping requirement,
continue his resolution to stop my mouth, not allowing me the privilege of
other members: yet nevertheless it being upon our hearts at that time to
endeavor his conviction, did permit him to reason with several persons, but
when at any time I perceived occasion and opportunity to offer, and accordingly
did something to the matter in hand as well as others, being also desired by
the congregation so to do, he (while groundlesly suggesting usurpation and
Lordliness in others) did really after a Lordly manner usurp a power (the
proper right of no member, much less of one called to the assembly as an
offender) and withstood me, pressing still for my silence; whereby the liberty
of reasoning intended him, he partly deprived himself of: so that in substance
my endeavors, (with the rest of the members) and this too by consent of the
Congregation at that time, is deemed by him, and now published as sinful
interruptions on my part; the truth of this abovesaid account, we the
Congregation do hereby testify, and may it not be thought fit, that for any
Church to sacrifice up that power and those privileges that God has given
them, and their elders for their preservation, to the envious wills and selfish
ends of offenders, would be not only a reason-less scripture-less, but also a
very injurious (if it may not be said also ridiculous) practice, and president;
for that thereby a wide door would be opened to all deceivers and Apostats,
when at any time they shall (and surely were such a thing granted, at all times
they would be ready and bold to) make attempts in Congregations of what
profession soever; there to divide and to devour, if when so they do, it may be
declared lawful for them to command the elders and ministers silence, (and if
them, consequently any other that they shall think are able to discover the
error of their principles) and that the several Congregations are bound in duty
to gratify such deceivers or Apostates, by their suffering it.

But if R. H. should (for I know not that he does) intend interruptions of
another kind, through too much earnestness, or quickness of spirit (though
occasioned through his haughtiness and perverseness) yet to what degree soever
any thing of that nature shall be evidenced, he may be assured that none of us
shall be ashamed to confess the same,

As touching his exceptions in the third place, wherein he declares our
proceedings to be both sinful as to our selves, and injurious to him, we
answer, that the intent of Christ in giving forth, and the design of
Christians in their prosecuting the ordinance of excommunication, was, that
transgressors might again be restored, when the Churches counsel and advice did
not effect it; therefore if R.H. be injured by it, it is through his abuse of
Christ his ordinance, and his condition is the more to be lamented: as to its
being sinful to our selves, we know no such thing, but rather the performance
of our duty toward God and him: as for letting in all kind of usurpation, and
subverting the Churches privileges (suggested also by him we conceive it only
his vain immaginations, for how it should so do, he declares not: as for our
practice being seandalous to the better and the more sober and judicious sort
(as he also insinuates) the contrary to us is most evident; and we doubt not
but that many from their own experience will be able (with us) to testify his
mistake herein; though they may (by their so doing) be excluded, by this spirit
of envy, from the number of sober and judicious persons, and counted amongst
the baser sort of men: yet is it not to us a matter incredible, that such (if
there be any to be found) that have so large a faith to believe all that he
suggesteth against us to be true, that such persons (we say) should render such
manner of proceedings with offenders to be scandalous, for our selves do
thereby declare them to be so; as touching his malicious suggestion, that our
practice tends to the infringing the lawful power of the supreme Magistrate,
easily appears both illegal and irrational, upon the aforesaid account, that
there being no positive law requiring R.H. that he must have his patent, there
could be no such transgression in us persuading him from it; and more
especially may our innocence herein, and his insolency appear, in the
consideration that so great a number of other persons bearing their testimony
(not only as well, but much more then we) against his Patent) are
notwithstanding by R. H. justified from any such contempt of authority; our
meaning is, those many persons from several Towns and Parishes, as well persons
of quality as others, that by their hands subscribed to a paper did appear
against him, as also others with the assistance of Council learned in the law,
as Sir Ed. Thurlow of Rigate, Sir Hen. Peckham of Chichester before the Lord
Keeper of the Broad seal, where, after some debate of the case, he having also
able Council on his side, his expectation was then frustrated, and his design
rejected as unreasonable, and illegal; for said the Council, what if a man
shall devise a new way to thresh his corn, shall he therefore have a Patent,
surely no: and what then may these be deemed innocent, (as doubtless he
conceives them so to be) in their opposition, for the sake of men's outward
advantages, and this too after his Majesty's grant of the same? and may we be
published to the world, as contemners of his Majesty's prerogative in our
opposition, for the sake of men's foul-advantages, without evident demonstration
of his malice against us?

In the Apostles times matters of wrong were punishable (as now they are) by
the civil laws of the Kings and rulers then in being, yet says the Apostle, 1
Cor. 6.1. dare any of you having a matter against another, go to law, etc.
what, would R. H. if he had lived in those times have published the Apostles as
one that contemned the Kings prerogative? if not, then what besides a bitter
root of envy (for some other cause) is the ground of this reason-less, and also
law-less publication?

Besides, if what is reported to us be true, that the statute, upon which
Patents are grantable, is to gratify the ingenuity of such as by considerable
charge, or long study shall invent something for public good (as we incline to
believe, because the Lord Bridgman with Council learned in the law put a stop
to his design, and also because R. H. would as yet never produce the statute
in such cases provided) if this, we say, be true, then it remains yet a
Question to some whether this Patent was not fraudulently procured; that is to
say, by suggesting something of ingenuity, study, or charge beyond what in
uprightness he could do: for since the common custom of men long before was to
dry the seed of Clover, and then to thresh it (for which no man merely mortal
coveted a Patent) we know not how reasonably to think that to dry the seed of
Nonsuch, and then to thresh it (which R. H. counts a worthy invention)
especially considering such a president before, should be numbered among the
deserving arts and inventions of ingenious men.

As to the inhuman and unchristian suggestions of R. H. against me, in relation
to contempt of authority, so often repeated by him (wherein he has outdone
the deeds of the worst of men to me, for what end other then (persecutor-like)
to provoke (if possible) the chief Magistrate against me, I know not; I only
shall add this more, that such has been my doctrine wherever I came, with
respect to Christian obligations, to be subject to the higher Power, and to
obey every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, such also has been my public
reasonings, and private conferences in diverse places, in opposition to that
spirit that despises dominion, such has been my forwardness, not only that
Festus his civil laws should be observed, but that his person also should be
honored, as Most noble Festus, though as to matters of religion he be found
telling Paul, that he is besides himself, yea, and such has been in that case
my principles many years ago published in print (which is yet visible)
subscribed by me, and many others, as that I do not suppose the unworthy
insinuations of a man thus over-mastered with the spirit of envy, will gain
credit among many, if any,

But I may not omit here to let the Reader understand how R. H. having
endeavored (as aforesaid) to render me an object of hate to the chief
Majestrate, descends ( pa. 28.) to provoke (as may be thought) the Judges of
Assize and Sessions against me, saying; that I have complained against them as
acting rigidly and illegally: but in what, when, or where he assigns not, nor
surely will he say, that for several years we have had any communion about such
persons, nor that he did give me the least Item of such a thing before, this
publication being my first information; which surely may be a sufficient
demonstration of the unworthiness of his spirit: but while I know nothing of
this nature, which he abusively suggesteth against me, this I well know, that
my principles have been (as my practice have declared when I have been called
before persons of such qualities) not only to submit to the King as supreme,
but also unto governors (as Judges) sent by him; and if it any time there
should be required, that, which should be thought by any to savor of
rigidness, or otherwise seem to them unlawful, or illegal, and so in
conscience to God they cannot actually obey, that there remains no other
lawful way for such to take, save only patiently to suffer, or humbly to
entreat favor: nor is this all, for in pa. 18. he descends to persons of an
inferior quality, saying, that I rebuked him for being conversant with great
persons, to raise in them also (as may be thought) a prejudicial opinion
against me: and from thence he descends in the same page, saying, that I also
forbid him to be a peacemaker amongst his neighbors; (he being extremely
unwilling, as may hereby be thought, that any from the highest to the lowest,
should have a good opinion of me) to all which I answer, that there is no more
true, then that from some fears, and godly jealosie, that he might, among some
persons of quality, take that liberty, which would neither be honorable to the
truth, nor conduceable to their good; as also from some fears, that while his
understanding was deeply exercised about civil controversies, he might (as some
have) forget his Christian obligations, and so misbehave himself, no more (I
say) true, then that upon this account I did cautionally speak something to him
about it; the truth of which, our approbation then, as well as now, of persons
that occasionally are conversant with persons of note, and also that are
concerned in matters of controversies, sufficiently demonstrate: nor yet is
this all, for (in page 18.) he also declares, that for what he can understand
familie-duties is spoken against, rather then encouraged, thereby to beget (as
one at least wise may think) an ill opinion among the several sorts of
professors of our times concerning me, whenas there is (to my knowledge) no
other foundation for these unworthy reflections (as my doctrine and practice to
many may declare) save only that sometimes I have dropped some words, importing
some dislike to such proceedings of men therein, as seem to be merely
customary, and more especially, when they thereby pretending religious
dispositions, shall in the mean time live in religious actions, and
paradventure in their families too, (as R.H. may well know some have done) and
for that end has been my so speaking that Christians should (both in their
families and in their closets) not only be frequent, but more fervent, more
sensible and serious in the performance of their duties therein: as touching
the discouraging his servants (whereof also he speaks) none surely can
reasonably think that we (who have conscionably refused to communicate with
him) can in conscience encourage any to join in communion with him, who has
thus heaped up sin upon sin to so great a degree.

Again, what besides R. H. his continued wrath against me (which faith the
Apostle works not the righteousness of God) could move him elsewhere ( page
6.) to declare, that I condemned Patents in general, whereas he has lying by
him these words of mine under my hand, namely, that for persons to have Patents
in several cases as they may be circumstanced, is both legal and reasonable,
let the Reader judge.

In the next place, the reader may understand, that as to the matter for which,
and the manner in which he was proceeded against, he has abused us; so also,
that he (no less extravagantly) proceeds to abuse us, but more especially my
self, ( page 3.) as a person that will not come to the light, lest my deeds
should be reproved, as if I were conscious to my self of irregularity in our
proceedings, and so have withstood his appeal to others.

Concerning which, all may understand, that he had (according to the custom of
our Churches) free liberty to make his appeal to any of the many Churches in
the Counties adjacent (though commonly some neighbour-Church has been the
persons appealed unto) but (to use his own words elsewhere) he utterly refused
so to do, and why? because faith he (further to use his own words) most of them
were inferior, and that I was adored (as he is pleased to term it) and
esteemed by many of them: so that it seems such as have esteem for me, are not
judged by R. H. suitable persons to hear and determine this controversy, and
yet does he (and oh that he would consider how envy has confounded him!) talk
much of impartial justice.

Furthermore, all may know, that if R. H. had, notwithstanding his appeal to
some one of those many Churches aforesaid, remained dissatisfied, or if
otherwise no determination should have been made; he then might have freely
made his appeal to our quarterly meetings (consisting of diverse elders and
brethren from several congregations) nor is this all the liberty which he might
freely have had, but upon his remaining dissatisfaction, might also have freely
made this appeal to the general Assembly at London: nor yet is this all, but
when at the first general Meeting his appeal (for some cause hereafter to be
mentioned) could not be then received, I then did freely offer (the truth
whereof R. H. surely will not oppose) that if the present Assembly would choose
out six men or more, I should be willing that they with the Quarterly meeting
in the Country should be the only Judges of the matter depending betwixt us,
and that I and the Congregation would not be concerned, save only to give
evidence, but he (as before) utterly refused it: nor yet is this all the
liberty or ways of condescension that was allowed R.H. for when at the next
general meeting he appeared with urgency not common, for a hearing of the
matter (they being such as himself made choice of and had esteem for) 'twas
declared to him (after some debate) that they would condescend ^o his motion,
though so to do crossed the method of proceedings that formerly they had (upon
good grounds) agreed upon, and which for the sake of some others was not
granted: and so the matter was examined, judged, and determined, to the utmost
of their present capacity, and their result recorded, as himself confesses,
page 10. the which when R.H. had perused, he in the face of the Assembly told
them, that he contemned what they had done: the which is confessed by him, p,
10. but in better words he presents it to the Reader, saying, that he signified
his dislike of their result, with his reasons for it: now in the consideration
of such our constant freedom, that he should make his appeal (not to this or
that Church of our choosing) but to what particular Church himself should make
choice of, among the many Churches in several Counties, being by him utterly
refused; together with the consideration of such his insolent contempt of the
result drawn up by the general assembly, consisting (as he may well know) of
the Messengers, Elders, and brethren (the Representatives of the Churches both
in the City and Country; one would think, that, were there an absolute death
of Christianity in him, and but humanity only remaining, he would not have thus
abusively published me, or any others, as persons refusing to have the case
heard or tried, as frequently he suggesteth.

And whereas he is pleased to say page 11. that he does not perfectly
understand the result of the General Assembly, though as far as he did
understand it, the effect of it was, that we should reverse the sentence of
excommunication; the reader may observe, how extremely unwilling he is, that it
should be understood, that the general assembly did at all favor us, to
prevent which, he plungeth himself into confusion, and self-contradiction, (and
so it is happened unto him according to what is written, where envying is, there
is confusion and every evil work) for in the page, just before, he tells the
Reader that he signified his dislike of their result, and his reasons for it;
whereby it is evident, that he not only understood it, but also well knew, that
the effect thereof was not, that we should reverse it, unless he would have the
Reader understand, that he showed his dislike to the Assemblies result, because
they had justified him, and condemned us.

As touching that conference we had first about it in a Coffeehouse, while
represented by him, a meeting of some great authority, in truth 'twas only
intended (as signified to me by letter) a private conference about the matter
with a few persons, not any particular Church, nor any particular persons
chosen by the Churches, nor the Church of South-water who excommunicated R. H.
so much as sent unto, to be present there; whereupon as in truth they could
not, so in truth they did not pretend to any power to determine the matter, but
plainly and publickely declared the contrary, nor was R. H. himself willing to
refer the matter to them (while he blames me upon that account unless his
declared resolutions to stand by, what end thereof others should make according
to the unerring rule in his judgment, may properly be called the referring it.

Yet is it true, that this conference intended with a few only, being known, in
the city, several others unconcerned, came, and contrary to rule and
expectation R. H. engages one to be there, that did not belong to any of the
baptized congregations in communion with us (whom I suppose) he conceived
sufficiently averse to me, who concerned himself (with some others) in favor
to his case, more then any of those that did belong to us, and that sent and
signified their desires to me of such a conference; and whereas he would
possess the Reader that I have given a false account of what was spoken by some
at this conference, my answer is, that as I am not conscious to my self of any
such thing, so also, that they, whom it concerns, never as yet signified any
such thing to me, nor do I suppose that they ever will thus judge of me, as R.
H. does, when their word at that time spoken shall be brought again to their
remembrance: and although it be true that some present at this conference do
entertain in communion one that has a Patent, yet is it not true that the same
person has a Patent upon like considerations as R. H. has his (as he would
have the Reader believe) for that the said persons Patent was not (as ever I
heard) attended with any reproach or scandal to his profession, to the probable
injury of men's souls stumbling thereat, nor yet with the grief and offense of
his brethren deeming it insufferable, (all which were the most evident
attendances of R. H. his Patent) and besides while R. H. his invention (as he
terms it) of threshing non such after the same manner, as for many years men
used to thresh Clover, has been (by men learned in the law) judged
undeserving, this man's art, and inventions on the other hand has been judged
so far deserving, and to advantage tending, as that his Majesty's pleasure is
to entertain him as his Hydrographer (if I mistake not the title).

And whereas he further suggesteth to the Reader that I very dishonestly
withstood his appeal afterward to the general Assembly at London,
notwithstanding my promise to do what I could to have it there determined, and
this to his considerable cost by reason of his witnesses that he brought
thither, which (says he) had I been honest and a Christian, might have been
prevented, by my telling him before, that there it could not be heard, pa. 8.

My answer is, that in all honesty to him as a Christian, I did tell him ( Jam.
Smith a living witness thereof being with me in R. H. his parlor) that by
reason of an agreement formerly made by the general Assembly, the case
depending between he and us, could not be there heard (unlikely therefore, that
I should tell him I would do what I could that it might be there heard and
determined) till such time he did first make his appeal to the Country
Assemblies, and then it might: for which cause I in reason could not engage the
Church, or their messengers to repair thither for a hearing, having also
perfect knowledge that several cases presented to the general meeting before,
and of great concernment too, had been for the present withstood upon the same
account, even, their not having made their appeal elsewhere before: now had he
not been already corrected for this abusive charge, that is my not telling him
before (for the prevention of his expense that his case could not then be
heard, I might reasonably have attributed it to his forgetfulness, but when the
reader shall consider (as justly he may) that he had now lying by him the
testimony of my self and Jam. Smith under our hands, without the least
exception since against it, both that he was, and the very place where he was
told of it: what can this his publication now be less then a manifestation of
his willingness to abuse me? and more especially when it shall be considered
with his own confession ( pa. 6.) that they (to wit the general assembly) would
not (to use his own words) hear the matter except it were examined by some
other Congregation before.

And whereas he would have the Reader believe, that I was the only instrument
to hinder the hearing of his case at this meeting, the truth is, that neither I
nor any other, but himself only, was the instrument to hinder it, for that he
refused to make his appeal first elsewhere, according to the method of our
proceedings, which upon good causes formerly we had agreed upon; and whereas
the congregation at Southwater determined not to appear at the general
Assembly at London, because they understood that by reason of their former
agreement, the case depending between them and R. H. would not then be tried;
if afterward I had said (though his bare saying that I did, who has said so
much extravagantly is little) that if the general Assembly, through his
excessive urgencie, should incline to the hearing his case, when by their own
former agreement the congregation of Southwater was absent, I could (and very
reasonably too) put it off for that time, till another opportunity when the
congregation might be there, yet does not this, in the least, suppose such a
withstanding his appeal, as he would have the Reader understand; for that it
was constantly allowed him there to appeal after his appeal, first in the
Country, is not only declared by us, but also confessed by himself; pa. 6. but
what may justly and reasonably be concluded from R.H. his so great earnestness
to have his case heard at the general Assembly, and when they did undertake it,
he not only found disregarding, but also contemning, what they had done;
besides that the impartial justice, which he pretends to be zealous for, to be
done by others, is no other then himself to be quitted, and others condemned,
according to his own judgment, let the Reader judge.

As touching his frequent suggestions that he has been put to great expenses
by his having up several witnesses, let him reflect upon his own folly therein,
for had he received the information given by me (and also by others) that his
case could not be heard there, till he first appealed in the Country, he might
thereby have pretended both his trouble and charges: nor may he only herein
reflect upon his own folly, but also in his having up witnesses the last
meeting, when his case was examined, for while he (to the abuse both of me and
the Assembly) gives such an account ( pa. 10.) as supposethto the Reader, that
the examination of his witnesses was refused, in truth they were never called
forth by him to testify any thing for him (as I know of;) but while here he
relates so much of his expensive troubles, in reference to his witnesses, I
doubt he considers not (as justly he might) his expenses otherwise, and more
particularly his expenses to his transcriber (he being a man learned in the
law) who, either that he might the better revenge himself upon the object of
his envy, or that he might seem to men eminent, or both, who ( I say) to use
his own words elsewhere, supplied with amendments his matter, where he had not
made it true english, or perfect sense.

And whereas R.H. does further declare, that though it were unusual for such
cases to come to the general meeting, yet his case might, because (says he) I
gave him liberty to appeal to whom he would in City or Country. My answer is,
that I gave him no other liberty to appeal (as I know of) but to the City and
Country as aforesaid, that is, to any whom he would of the Country-Assemblies,
and then to the general assembly in the City: and such liberty himself surely
will not deny but that 'twas always granted him: nor indeed could I give him
any other liberty, by reason of another agreement made by the general Assembly,
whereby the Churches in the City were unconcerned; yet if I had, and the
Congregation of Southwater also, without which no reasonable plea can be from
it to engage them to answer to such his appeal, as yet we are blameless;
because he as yet never did make his appeal to any particular Church in the
City or Country: so that still it appears, 'twas his obstinacy against the
regular way of appealing, and not our withstanding his appeal, that in any
measure hindered him.

To conclude then, as from the whole, since nothing arbitrary without regard to
Gods law, nor any thing of contempt to his Majesty's law, nor any thing
savouring of Popish infallibility, or usurpation, but rather ways of
condescension, appears in our proceedings first and last, against R. H. (the
foundation pieces on which he builds his conceit, that we properly may be
called Papisticall Baptists; whether this monstrous birth, (or new name of
contempt) may not be rationally concluded to proceed forth from the womb of
envy, in the beginning begotten by him, who is the grand accuser of the
brethren, let the Reader judge.

Now at last R.H. having obstinatly refused our constant readiness to answer to
his appeal, if made to any of the Country Churches, our condescending offers to
be judged by a select number of the general Assembly with others in the
Country, and last of all having signified his dislike to the result and
determination of the general assembly made, touching the case depending between
us, he now proceeds to a new offer, (not now to appeal, but) to refer the
matter in controversy, but to such persons, and upon such terms, as that he
well knows (as at leastwise may be thought) we cannot reasonably submit unto,
and thereby creates an occasion to make agreat outcry in the world against us,
as such that will not come to the light, least our deeds should be reproved: oh
the subtilty, but alas the sinfulnes of the device!

The persons nominated by him to whom this matter should be referred, are the
Elders and Ministers of the baptized Congregations in and about London, whereby
in all likelihood he intended, the Reader should understand, that they were
such persons as were in communion with us only, whenas the Elders and ministers
the representatives of the baptized Churches in London that are in communion
with us, were part of the general Assembly that have already determined the
matter to his dislike: as for the Elders and ministers of some other baptized
Congregations in London, that by reason of some difference in principles, are
not in communion with us, and so have not usually concerned themselves with us,
nor we with them, some of whose names are hinted at by R. H. in his 12. page,
namely. Mr G. Mr J. with several others, well known to some of us that are of
the same different persuasions: as for such (we say) we look not upon our
selves in reason obliged to refer the matter unto them, considered with the
Congregation they belong to, or others that may be allowed as assistants with
them, much less to particular persons picked out of them by an envious spirit,
such as (he paradventure thinks) are most averse to, and disaffected with us;
and in the mean time barely to allow us the liberty to choose one
Country-messenger: but here also by the way the Reader may further make
observation of his spirit toward me; for speaking of others that he envys not,
he calls them messengers, but speaking of me whom he does envy in the very line
before, he says Apostle, pa 15. (thereby to raise in the Reader thoughts of
admiration and disaffection) though he cannot; but know that I never pretended
my self to be, nor was thought by any others to be, but in the same capacity
with those called by him Messengers, in diverse respects beneath, and much
inferior to those sent out heretofore as the Apostles of Christ.

But then as to the terms upon which this reference is proposed to be, to which
he would have us foreengage, they are such also as surely becomes not a man
that pretends to such ingenuity, as to teach the whole Nation how they should
become rich, for,

First, R. H. having chosen all the referees himself (one only person out of
the Country left to our choosing) he now proposes that those that are parties
may not be allowed as witnesses, which is to say in all plainness, that all
those that are capable of being witnesses against him, shall be no witnesses,
for the Congregation (with my self) are parties; and who then shall be their
witnesses? if as to that one clause in our charge against him in relation to
that ill report, and scandal occasioned by his coveting his Patent, he thereby
intend that we should engage such persons not under our discipline, to appear
at London to give evidence, I would then know by what rule, and by what means
such a course may be taken? although when done, they, knowing nothing of what
otherwise he stands charged with, nor any thing in relation to the manner of
our proceedings against him, can possibly give no evidence as to those cases:
and therefore I say still who then shall be our witnesses?

Secondly R. H. allows such to be witnesses as are indifferent persons, that is
to say, truly inrerpreted, we shall have no witnesses; for that no such
indifferent persons, not related to us, were amongst us (at the time of our
proceedings against him) to take cognizance for what, and after what manner he
was proceeded against, but the congregation only.

Thirdly, while thus he would at once stop all our mouths (who only are capable
of witnessing any thing against him, he provides a way to open wide the mouths
of such as shall witness for him, for whatever they shall say, his proposal is
( pa. 15.) that we fore-ingage they shall be heard and credited, Mark,
credited: without the least provision made for any just acception, because he
says they were never proved to be false witnesses.

What? is this the man that tells the Reader of his great zeal after impartial
justice, who, having not only slited the result of the general Assembly
(consisting of the Messengers, Elders, and brethren from all parts, but also
slited and rejected all the Churches as aforesaid) in the several Countys
adjacent, because (to use his own I was esteemed by many of them, and having
now sound out (being much at London) some that (he probably thinks) has little
or no esteem for me, and that belong not to our Churches, and have not
communion with us, that (with some others) he would refer the matter unto, now
to propose such unequal and unreasonable terms too; I say again, is this the
man that tells the Reader of his zeal for impartial justice? and not only so,
but, as that which renders his condition the more to be lamented, also is found
( pa. 12.) not afraid to make solemn protestation in heaven, before God the
searcher of hearts, that his design is only (Mark) to obtain impartial
justice: what credit may be justly given to such a man's words, let the reader
judge.

Besides, such are, and so great a number, his trangressions heaped up since
his excommunication, namely, false accusations, reviling and reproachful
expressions, as also his malicious suggestions, as if we were Papistical
Baptists, for no other case but our conscionable testimony against his coveting
the Patent (whereby those of differing persuasions from us that have signified
their dislike to his proceedings therein, are suggested by him likewise to be
Papistical as well as me) together with what was chargeable before the Patent,
but for some causes then omitted, which favor intended him therein (though
upon a design to do him good) perhaps might be (however, so it is thought by
some) displeasing to God, he being altogether unworthy thereof, as his
deportment since seems to declare; I say, such and so great is the
unworthiness that he still abounds in (justly requiring his recantation to be
as public as his slanderous protestation, as that it justly leaves, not only
our selves, but others also, under discouragements to trouble our selves with
him while in such a spirit; being ready to think that the same mighty hand of
God that has already begun to rebuke this spirit of envy that was in his
abetter, is the only sufficient and likely means to effect his real
reformation, and so his reconciliation: and so much the more discouraged are
some, while they consider, that, if we had no just cause (as indeed we have) to
accept against the referring the controversy, etc. R. H. himself
(notwithstanding all his pretenses) is not willing to refer the matter indeed
(as some well know that have treated with him thereabout) his profers having
been no more (what he may do provided he might have the liberty to refer the
matter to whom, and after what manner he pleases I know not) then that he
would with contentment stand by what end others should make of it, according to
the unerring rule (Mark) these are his own words, page 10. which (as himself to
one or more have explained it, and as the words seem to import) is just nothing
at all; for if the judgment given shall not be according to the unerring rule
in his judgment, he presently proceeds to judge his Judges, and so all the
trouble and pains ends with no effect, except thereby further to demonstrate
his folly.

And whereas I have said, that God has already begun to rebuke the spirit of
envy, my meaning is, that whereas a certain person formerly abetting, and
assisting R. H. in his envious design against me, was in humility made to
confess the same, and declare as follows.

These may certify, whom it may concern that I being under the visiting hand
of God, am made freely, and heartily to declare, that whereas I have formerly
been a co-actor with Rich. Haynes in the publication of some things, wherein
Mat. Caffyn is accused as an enemy to the Kings laws, and his Prerogative,
together with other things relating to partiality, and the like, that (I say)
therein I have done very evilly, and do judge that it was disorderly, and
envyously done by me, and so am heartily sorry for it, and also farther
declare, that, having discourse with M. C. am satisfied toward him; and do
desire from my heart to be reconciled to the Congregation; declaring also, that
I do greatly fear that by my abetting, and standing by R. H. as I have done,
that thereby I have done him wrong.

Since which time, the said person is reconciled to the Congregation: and
whereas this so sudden, and great alteration by the hand of God tended so much
to the stripping and laying open the nature of that envious spirit, by which R.
H. (and his consederate) was governed; he presently suggested abroad, that the
said person, notwithstanding his confession of envy ruling in him, still
remained ready to declare, that what he had informed him of, was all true;
thereby insinuating that which is most false, as the persons own testimony may
evidence, which is thus.

And whereas Rich. Haynes since is pleased to report, that though I acknowledge
the irregularity and enviousnesse of my proceedings, yet that I do still
declare, that what I informed him of, was all true, as if therein I had still
matters of charge against my brethren: these are thereupon further to testify,
that what things soever of truth formerly declared by me to R. Haynes, which
then in the spirit of malice uncharitably and abusively was wrested, I now in
the spirit of charity do judge, that there was no just cause thereby given me
to accuse my brethren.

And whereas R. H. once again suggesteth to the Reader, that something he
forbears to mention, that is reported concerning me: and wherefore? in kindness
(says he) and in love to regain me: now whether he that observes his writings
may believe, that he in a design of love to me thus insinuates (which whoever
shall, has surely attained to a larger degree of faith then many others) or
whether it be a design of envy for want of something evident whereby to accuse
me, suggesteth hereby a mountain, which if he should have plainly declared (his
own conscience told him perhaps) would not have appeared a molehill: whether
(I say) the Reader may believe it a design of love to regain me, or a design
of envy to abuse me is the question to be resolved; and surely not difficult to
resolve, when it shall be considered, 1st, that he neither before this
publication, nor at any time since, informed me of any such report, and how
then should it be a design of love to regain me? while I know not in the least,
what it is that is reported, nor 2ly would he give me any present account of
this report (what he may in future do I know not) though provoked by letter
(sent by me, by the hands of his neighbor James Smith) to inform me with this
provocation, namely, lest otherwise his refusing so to do (that is, to discover
the report, and the reporters) should be judged, and construed his not knowing
any thing mrterirll by others repoeted as evil in me, and so a most abusive
suggestion: and how then this his pretended design of love to regain me,
(while he thus keeps me ignorant of the evil that he pretends by his words to
gain me out of) can reasonably be otherwise then a design of envy to abuse me,
let the reader judge.

And whereas it is written that the wicked are like the troubled Sea, that
cannot rest, whose waters casts up mire and dirt: whether R. H. his condition
does not much correspond thereunto, casting up such foul and dirty
insinuations, the like not to be sound (surely) among any sort of men that know
us, let the Reader judge by this further saying of R.H. namely, that he cannot
imagine what shall hinder you (meaning the congregation) from imprisoning,
banishing, and burning of people for not submitting to your government, if
power and opportunity were not wanting: what shall we render evil for evil?
God forbid.

And whereas R.H. is pleased to compare the proceedings of us the congregation,
to the illegal proceedings of one (supposedly) in authority that should become
a usurper and Tyrant, etc. and says ( p. 28.) that our consciences must needs
testify the truth thereof, etc. we the congregation thereupon do hereby
testify (before all men) the falsehood thereof, and protest against the same as
a scandalous, and pernicious parable.

Finally, omitting several other injurious insinuations, as if persons dared
not without my consent by lawful means to provide for their families, and such
like reasonless clamors, not likely to have entertaynment in the hearts of
reasonable men: I now conclude, wishing from my heart, that God may not lay
these, many slanderous accusations, and envious insinuations to his charge, so
as hereafter to reward him accordingly: for as God desired not, neither may we,
the death of a sinner, but rather that he return and live; for the which, that
it may seasonably be accomplished in him to Gods glory, and the Gospells
honor, nay prayers have been, is, and shall be to the almighty for him.

FINIS.

