A Charge of High Treason exhibited against Oliver Cromwell Esquire for several
Treasons by him committed
FOr that he the said Oliver Cromwell not having the fear of God before his
eyes, but being instigated by the Devil, did Traitorously and Villanously by
force of arms, dissolve the late Parliament of the Lords the people of
England, who they the said Parliament did Represent as the Supreme Authority
of the said Lords the people of England, and for that he the said Oliver
Cromwell being a hired servant to serve the Lords the people of England, in the
Conduct of them the said Lords the people of Englands forces, against their
Enemies, of their the said peoples LIBERTIES, RIGHTS and PRIVILEGES, and
notwithstanding the high trust reposed in him the said Oliver Cromwell, so to
do, yet the said Oliver Traitorously conspired many times before he the said
Oliver did dissolve the said Parl. by force of Arms, wickdly, and Traytorously;
thereby to render the said Lords the people of England utterly incapable for
ever, to recover their LIBERTIES, JUST RIGHTS, and PRIVILEGES, and did become
Master of all the strongholds; Arms, Forces, and Magazines, Armies, Navies,
and made, and still does make noe other use of them but to over awe, and force
the Lords the people of England aforesaid, to an Obedience and Compliance, to
his the said Oliver Cromwells Tyranicall will and pleasure; contrary to the
intent of the trust reposed in him, and contrary to all the Solemn
Engagements, and Declarations, of him the said Cromwell; which did invite the
foresaid Lords the people of England to a cheerful Contribution of their
assistance to the carrying on of the war against the common Enemies of their
LIBERTIES, JUST RIGHTS, and PRIVILEGES: And further that he the said Oliver
Cromwell, did in an unheard of manner, summon and require upon great penalties,
diverse persons, and Members of the Lords the people of England to take upon
them the Supreme Authority of this Commonwealth, and accordingly upon the
forth of July, they the foresaid persons summoned by virtue of the foresaid
Traitors summons did appear at White Hall, in or nigh the City of Westminster,
in the County of Middlesex: where they received an Instrument of Parliament
containing these words: I Oliver Cromwell do appoint you (meaning the
afforesaid persons summoned by his warrant, to make their appearance their, and
then as aforesaid; that is to say, the forth day of July, 1653. at White Hall)
to be the Supreme Authority of this Nation, and all Territories, and Dominion
thereunto belonging; and notwithstanding he the said Oliver in so doing did
commit the highest of Treasons that could be committed; for that he the said
Oliver did not entreat the Lords the people of England, to Elect their
Representative, according to their undubitable Rights, and that he would with
their Army stand by them as servants, as in duty he and they ( viz. the Army)
ought to have done; the which if they had done, their late Act of dissolving
the Parliament had not been Treason, because they ( viz. the late Parliament)
contrary to their trust indeavored to make themselves perpetual, contrary to
the Law of the Land, and the intent of the trust reposed in them, and after the
so many demands by Petitions of the Lords the people, for them ^o surrender
their power to a new Representative (equally Chosen) now for that he the said
Oliver Cromwell did not restore the peoples Rights in Election, upon the
dissolving the Parliament he has made that to be Treason, which otherwise
would not have been Treason.

But further he the said Oliver Cromwell having not the fear of God before his
eyes, and being instigated by the Divill, did contrive, or caused to be
contrived, a certain book called a copy of draughts of Acts of Parliament,
out of which this mock Parliament is to take their Lessons, and out of which
the late Act of Marriages was taken, and in which is the invention of unheard
of cruel torments as well for those that offend or oppose him, and his
consederats in this unheard of Tirany; as for the transgressors of the Laws of
civell societies:

And further the said Cromwell has by himself, and others, forced this mock
Parliament, to take away the body of our Law (that has been our Bulwark, and
defense, and only weapons counted against absoluteness) to the end and intent
that thereby the Lords the people of England, may be subject to the will,
pleasures, and intended Tirany of him the said Cromwell; all which considered
we humbly pray, the Lords the people of England, that justice may be had
against this abominable Traitor, and Enemy to God and mankind, Oliver Cromwell.

And to the end that this may be effected it is desired, that upon the 16th of
October 1653. being the next coming, that all the people of England would as
one man, as well Masters, Sons, as Servants, repair unto every County-Town, or
some other convenient place within England, and Wales, and appear Armed with
such weapons of war as with conveniencie they can, then and there to Elect, and
Choose such and so many persons as the people of the respective Counties,
Cities, and Boroughs wont to choose for to represent them in Parliament, the
which may be Conducted to London, with such forces of the several Counties as
they shall appear, and because this may not seem either dangerous, or
difficult; it is hereby declared that several Counties with agreat part of the
Army will engage in this work, and that it may not seem to be a weakness to
discover it: It is hereby also declared that it will be so unanimous, that no
power will be able to question any for so doing; for that which is not lawful
for one or two, may be, and is, lawful for all, or the greater part when the
remaninder is not able to question the party that attempteth, besides if you
the Lords the people of England will be unanimous in this the recovering of
your LIBERTIES, it will cost no blood; for rising in small parcells, is but to
be overcome in parcels.

And further, we do hereby delare that such of the Army as shall join in this
our shaking of this yoke, shall be received into the favor of the Lords the
people of England, and be continued in their trusts of Arms; for our
encouragement, we know this of old since man was placed upon the earth, that
the triumphing of the wicked is but short, and the joy of the hypocrite but for
a moment; for though for the present hipocrith mount up to the Heavens, and
their heads reach unto the Clouds; yet assuredly they shall perish for ever,
and they which now see them, ere long shall say, where are they for a long time
their Tabernacle have only prospered though they be robbers, and ^^ch as
provoke God, and that make the uprightman the greatest sufferer, yet for all
this the multitude of their lies shall not make all men hold their peace.


