ENVYS BITTERNESS CORRECTED WITH THE ROD of SHAME: OR, An Answer to a Book
lately Published by Richard Haines (a person withdrawn from) Entitled, NEW
LORDS, NEW LAWS; Wherein is showed such an Image of Envy, as in late Ages have
not appeared, by his heaping up false accusations, and abusive Expressions to a
great number, with Malicious Insinuations, thereby to provoke (if possible) the
Civil Magistrate to have suspicious thoughts of the Innocent, with a great
Outcry of Usurpation and Tyranny, proved to have no other Foundation but his
own evil Imaginations, and so Neither LORDS, Nor New LAWS. Wherein also the
several Persons therein Accused, are in Righteousness quitted, to the Shame of
the Accuser. By Matthew Caffyn of Horsham in Sussex.

He that is first in his own cause seems just, but his Neighbor comes and
searches him, Prove. 8.17. Neither can they prove the things whereof they
accuse me, Act. 24. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1674.

A WORD, to his WORD, To the Ingenious and Learned Perusers.
WHereas Richard Haines is pleased to suggest, that neither Nature nor
Education had furnished him with Arts and Accomplishments necessary for such
public undertakings, and thereupon entreats their favorable construction in
the ensuing leaves, as often as they found him unskilful in Language or
methodical Order. I would only say, that Persons of an ordinary Capacity may
easily judge him a man somewhat wanting simplicity and singleness of heart in
so speaking; for that it is so well known, and understood by many, (himself
being the cause thereof) that another person (whom both Nature and Education
has furnished with Accomplishments necessary for such public Concerns) did
frame his matter into that form and manner of language wherein it now appears,
and is sent forth to public View.

Envy's Bitterness Corrected with the Rod of Shame: OR, An Answer to a Book
lately published by Richard Haines, (a person withdrawn from) Entitled, New
LORDS, New LAWS.
Christian Reader,
HAving perused the Book, entitled, New Lords, New Laws, subscribed by Richard
Haines, and observing the many reproaches, false accusations, and abusive
expressions therein contained, and more especially those his malicious
insinuations, whereby he (as one much out of the fear of God, and greatly in
the Spirit of Envy) endeavors to suggest amongst the Sons of Men that we are,
but especially my self, (in and about our proceedings against him in way of
Excommunication) Enemies to his Majesty's Laws, and Royal Prerogative (the
contrary whereof, I doubt not but through grace, will appear:) having (I say)
observed these things, was made to remember SimeoNs description of envy (as may
be read in the Book of the twelve Patriarks) after this manner. Envy (says he)
makes a man's Soul to grow Savage, breeds War in his thoughts, sets his
Blood on fire, drives him out of his wits, and suffers no reason to bear
sway or rule, makes his body ghastly, pineth away at the prosperity of the
person envied, and is always egging him to slay the same. For (as says the
Apostle) the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God. Now the many
bitter, and dreadful streams that flow from this fountain of malice and envy,
you, in the ensuing discourse, are desired to observe; And first touching his
too common Language, how bitter, how unsavory, how unbecoming any professor,
but more especially such as excel in knowledge of the Fathers will, even, that
every idle word must be accounted for at last, who yet shall not only so do,
but as it were outstrip therein the deeds of the wicked! as this following
Catalogue of his expressions, gathered out of his Book, do plainly demonstrate.
To wit, Usurper, Tyrant, Idol, new Lord, Bell, infallible Apostle, Idol-God,
Seducer, Deceiver, Vpstart Lord Ecclesiastic, narrow Throated
tender-Conscience of his Lordships grace, Pope-ship, that, had he the
privilege of a torturing Inquisition, would severely deal with all that should
dare oppose him, a second Popish infallibility, Tyrannical cruelty, Deotriphes.
As touching the Congregation (whom but a while ago, with my self, was highly
esteemed by him) he now says, that they are such whose zeal has been much
more fervent for the adoration of their Idol, than for God, whose principles
and practices (meaning I suppose, with respect to their dealing with him) are
Popish and Antichristian, Confederats with a usurping Tyrant, whose actions he
supposes are like the hair-brained Proclamations of John of Leyden, or the
extravigances of a Popish Bull, and in one of his Letters sent to (C.G.) says,
That they are the seat of the Beast.

Now that such Language should proceed out of the mouths of men always
accustomed thereunto, is no marvel; (though every where to be lamented) but
that it should proceed out of the mouth of a professor, and not only so but
against his Friends, but awhile ago by him esteemed most beloved brethren, is
more than a little to be admired, yet not so much as when his reproachful words
shall be considered in conjunction with his malicious designs, no less
threatening than ruin and destruction, and that to his late-esteemed (and to use
his own words. Page 2.) Most worthy and most faithful Brother: whereby just
occasion is given for considerate persons to determine, that something more than
ordinary, gave being to this height of envy, at which root, (as the undoubted
cause thereof, and preceding the controversy about his Patent too) our friends
at London struck at, when by mutual consent on his, and my part, the matter was
to be revealed (without which, to intermeddle with other matters, is
questionless no more in order to communion than the plucking of branches, while
the bitter root, I mean his envy against me, and others, as some think, for my
sake remains) but how this then was prevented by his means (contrary to earnest
expectations) friends may well remember, though the making that private case
from being in some kind a public case was not prevented; for which he may
complain of no man's folly more than his own, for hereby and other such like
unwary proceedings of his elsewhere, the case by me only hinted at, when
thoughts of presenting it to the Churches consideration was entertained, (the
only Judge of such cases as many believe) though from a holy design the better
to regain him, afterward to the contrary resolved, there being for other
causes sufficient ground to withdraw from him: the case, (I say, to that degree
private) is now become, and by some called; The private public case.

But since he pretends, and still would lay the cause of his so great
displeasure upon injustice, supposedly, acted on our parts toward him in the
case of his Excommunication; though that was no preventing cause of his
expected gain by his Patent, thereby to enrage him; nor could (in likelihood)
the apprehension of his, supposed, illegal Excommunication, (especially when
good reason according to the common belief of Christians) so plainly testifies
our design therein to be good) provoke to such a height of malice, for that we
have no president (I suppose) of like malice, in the whole Nation, amongst the
many excommunicated persons that are there, who doubtless are as strongly
persuaded as he can be (at leastwise many) that their Excommunication was
unreasonable and unwarrantable: but since (I say) he otherwise pretends, the
matter of his Book is now to be considered.

And first that pressing necessity that (he says) engaged him to this
publication, is worthy observation, namely, that our proceedings against him
did appear to him no less than usurped Authority; to which I say, that had our
proceedings against him been according to his representation thereof in all
points, some reason he had to manifest (at leastwise) some dislike, but
forasmuch as the ensuing account will hereunto be a resolution, I shall not
here insist thereon.

As to his second reason for publication, to wit, his care to preserve the
truth, and the professors thereof from reproachful abuses and censures. I
answer, that to us it is unknown that any reproach was upon the account, of the
method and manner of our proceedings, neither indeed could it be, for that
persons not in Communion with us, were ignorant thereof, if he have represented
it after that abusive manner (as he has in his Book) to some, and thereby some
reproachful words have been raised, that lies at his door, and not at ours;
and as to the ground and cause of our proceedings with respect to his coveting
the Patent, nothing is more apparent than that we are (amongst men) very
generally justified, and rendered is doing well and wisely therein; but, alas,
how may the Reader be convinced that his plea to preserve the truth from
reproach, is a candid and real plea? since he has not ceased to do, and
justify that which is so great an occasion of reproach, and so generally too,
as the like in our time scarce have been, so many persons, in so many places
being concerned therein.

As to his third Reason for publication, to wit, because all admonition and
advice had been disregarded, and that from a full meeting, and (as he says) of
the most eminent in London, to hear and determine that case. I answer, that all
this splendid show of rejecting Counsel when stated in plainness, was no more
than that some few friends at London, (willing to make an Assay for Peace, for
some good reasons expressed in their Letter to me, wherein only I was by a
Friend or two desired to come up) did appoint to meet at a Coffey-House, and
this without the least advice or consent from us, which surely must have been
as one thing necessary in order, to the meetings Authority to determine as he
would suggest, the which was so far from their intention, as that plainly and
publicly they declared the contrary, as may very well be remembered; yet (by
this) my meaning is not that therefore the counsel and advice of any men
fearing God may be rejected, but rather (as a truth nothing to be doubted of)
to follow the Souls conviction of truth, by what means soever convicted; now
this appointment, by those few Friends, being known, several others came, who,
I suppose, had a mind thereunto; at which place, Mr. G. by his desire was (and
some others of the same differing persuasion from us) who most principally
spoke, and advised in the case, as being (with others) not satisfied that he
deserved such blame as we thought him worthy of, though they readily believed
(with us) that his undertakings were of an ill report, and of a
gospel-dishonouring Nature. And whereas he says, that some have declared that
they do not own our London-Friends, nor regard their Counsel; for the
rectifying those mistakes, that, very possibly, may from thence arise, all may
know (if any there be that know not) that there is the same concord between
them and us, and agreement in Communion, and that not only with some, but with
all the Elders and Congregations in London, as was before this difference
happened, too evident to be denied. As for Mr. G. and those Friends of the same
persuasion with him, it is indeed true that we, and as true that others in City
and Country as well as we, have for some well known cause, forborne
communicating together at the Table of the LORD with them.

Whereas our Publication of his Excommunication to the World within three days
after 'twas done, and that to them that hated him most, is pretended by him to
be the original cause of this publication. My answer is, that neither within
three days, nor any day since did I to those persons open my mouth thereabouts,
what others have done, certainly I know not, but this I know, that since our
with-drawment from him was (partly) to preserve the truth, and the professors
thereof from reproach, the divulging thereof was not so improper as he may
conceive.

And whereas he further adds, that when he was at the General meeting at
London, in order to make his appeal there, I hindered the determination
thereof, when as (he says) I promised to do what I could to have it determined
there. I answer, first you may observe that (as himself confesses in his Book)
I seeing him there, did move his request to the assembly, whereupon, after some
little debate about the matter, a very fair and unanimous result was given,
that they, by reason of an agreement formerly made, could not then hear his
case; but if he would first make his appeal to the Country association, or
quarterly meeting whereunto he belonged, and they, by reason of the difficulty
of the case, or difference thereabouts, could not decide the matter; that then
they would readily hear it: nor could he reasonably mistrust this result as
proceeding from his supposed Enemies, because they were generally silent in the
case; and when his motion was thus stopped, by virtue of that aforesaid
agreement, I then offered my willingness to condescend (beyond what is common)
namely, that, if he would accept of the assemblies advice by making application
to the quarterly meeting, I should be willing that the present Assembly should
choose out six men or more, who with the quarterly meeting in the Country,
should be the only Judges of the matter depending betwixt us, and that I and
the congregation would not be concerned, save only to give evidence: all which
he very obstinatly refused; whereupon some motion was made by some one or more
about choosing some certain persons out of the Assembly, to whom the case might
be referred, to which was replied by some of the meeting, that the matter
concerned the Congregation, and they were not present; and that I said any such
thing, I am not certain; if I did, 'twas true; and besides he may not think
that the Assembly would have imposed any such thing upon them, if they had been
present; what may be done by mutual consent, is another case; nor may it be
thought strange that I did not engage them to be there, because of our former
agreement, whereby I well knew that many cases upon that account had been
refused; nor may he think that Churches are obliged to follow the motions of
excommunicated persons whither they please; but rather (as some think) that the
Church appealed unto, should (if they see cause to stir) by their
representatives come to the Church, concerning whose actions the appeal is
made, but by this my account aforesaid, I do not thereby mean that in pursuance
of such a promise as he speaks of, I did what I did in and about his case,
for no such promise can I remember, nor do I in the least incline to believe
that I did so speak, and have forgot it, (though in many cases that is
probable) because I certainly know (and in the same page himself confesses)
that I told him, as I, with another Friend, (J. S.) Who is ready to witness the
truth thereof) sat with him in his own Parlour by the Fire; I say, that I told
him of this our agreement, whereby (to use his own words) he was made by me,
and others, to doubt that his cause could not be heard; probably if the whole
Assembly had pressed for the hearing thereof (as they wholly declined it) I
should not have endeavored to have hindered it, both parties being there. The
case then being thus, why he should further charge me (as he does) for wanting
civil honesty in not telling him before to prevent trouble and unnecessary
charges, I verily know not.

And whereas he rejected the general Assemblies Advice, first to Appeal to some
Country and Quarterly Meeting, he would very willingly justify the same, by
saying, ( page 4. Epist.) That in some respects they were inferior to me, and
that I was adered, and esteemed by many of them. To which I answer, that were I
such a person as he now represents me to be, 'twere not likely I should be thus
esteemed, or does he think that they are all in the dark, and he only in the
excellent discovering light, while a Reviler, a Reproacher, and false accuser
of his Brethren, but how observable is it that while he in his fourth Page of
his Epistle represents me to be thus esteemed and adored by the Country
Congregations, in the sixth Page of this Epistle, he in answer to some (I know
not who) that strange why he does not withdraw from the Baptized Congregations,
says, That he knows not any other Congregation of that persuasion, corrupted
with those Errors, but that their actions and conversations are according to
their Profession, If so, why then would he not (I pray) make his Appeal to some
of them according to the Assemblies advice? but it is happened to him according
to what is written, where envying is, there is confusion, as well as every evil
work.

Now, whereas the Countries motion and stiring against his coveted Patent, and
that with more then a little pains and charge, while from Town to Town, and
from one Gentleman's house to another, persons did Ride up and down, in
obtaining their Hands subscribed against him, by which, as also the pleadings
of Counsel eminent in Law, the Patent before the Lord Keeper was threw out,
whereas (I say) the Countries Motion thus against him, but especially their
Prevailing, seems to bare hard against him, not only as an Infallible Testimony
that his design proved scandalous, and of an ill report, but that also it
seems to render the reasonableness pretended by him for his Patent,
questionable; he thereupon (I fear) have desperately lanched out into false
accusations, in order to the helping his cause, namely, in publishing ( page
3.) That I and my Confederates did report (whereby the Country was provoked to
Conspire against him) that his design by his Patent was to hinder Persons from
cleansing Clover as well as Non-such, and that other persons had made discovery
thereof before him, then which nothing is more evidently false.

We the Congregation Assembled, and judging our selves concerned, do hereby
declare, that we never heard our Brother Caffyn at any time either plainly
declare, or by any hints suggest such an intention to be in R. H. concerning
Clover; nor did we at any time believe, and thereby declare to others, any such
thing: nor do we know that our Brother Caffyn, or any Confederates, (as he
speaks of) that did believe, and so report that other persons had made the
discovery before him, thereby to provoke those persons at the first to conspire
against him, for the most discourse of that kind coming to us from persons not
in the Profession, (whether true or false, we certainly knew not) was after
those persons had actually conspired (as he calls it) against him, as is
easy to be demonstrated. But whereas the falseness of this charge cannot
appear to the Reader, but upon his prefering my Testimony in conjunction with
the Congregations Testimony, before his bare and single Testimony, in a state
of apparent Envy, and Excommunication, (though that be a case of much clearness
and plainness) I therefore am made willing here to present an accusation of
his, for nature and kind such, as that many persons, in many places, upon their
own knowledge, may determine the slanderousness thereof, these lines of his, I
suppose, not likely to be read in many Congregations, either in City or
Country, but where either my words sometimes there, or my practice there, or
agreements made by me, and others to the contrary there, or however some that
well knew my judgment to the contrary there, may testify against him as a
false accuser therein; his accusation is, ( page 12.) That by my Law I
maintain that when a Widow or Maid shall Marry with one not in fellowship,
she shall be accused as an Offender, and no humility to be accepted of, but
Excommunicated she must be, and she not to be forgiven to the hour of Death,
except they part, or he be converted to them, but in the mean time she is to be
adjudged to live in fornication, and so their Children are Bastards. Now, what
show in Reason he had thus to speak, I can by no means conceive, there having
been at no time, either while he was with us, or since he was separated from
us, any person so Excommunicated here, or by me, as an instrument elsewhere;
nor did I ever believe any such thing, that persons so Married, might be
separated (as he insinuates) nor that they were to be adjudged such as lived in
Fornication, so as that no humility might be accepted of, nor that their
children were Bastards, the contrary being most evident from the actual
receiving and embracing several, in several places, upon their professed
humility for their so doing; and whereas he excuses them at London, as men of
other Principles; they of London can tell him that I was one of the Assembly at
London, where these things were treated of, and well do I remember that I then
wrote the agreement, in contradiction to the thoughts of some few that way
inclined, as by him is mentioned: If from some reports these things have been
suggested to him, (though not likely) why did he not at some time speak of it?
and not thus to have as it were sold us into the hands of Scorners: and
besides, if it were true, (as nothing is more false) what is it so great an
evil now, and thought worthy thus to be published, and no evil at all when he
was in fellowship with us? for he never showed the least dislike as (I know) to
our Principles in this case. Oh! what will not Envy do? well said the wise Man,
Prove. 12.18. There is that speaks like the piercings of a Sword, but the
Tongue of the wise is health.

We the Congregation, do hereby testify and declare, that neither we with our
Brother Caffyn, did after the aforesaid manner Excommunicate any person at any
time, nor did we ever hear him, either publicly or privately, teach any such
Doctrine.

Now if R. Haines, (too regardless of Gods honor, and the Gospels credit)
shall thus, even to the knowledge of most of you, publish falsehoods, what
credit and esteem his bare sayings, and naked suggestions may justly require,
when they shall lie in the balance together with our Testimonies to the
contrary, let the judicious judge.

The next thing in the way considerable is, our proceedings at the Quarterly
Meeting, where we thought it expedient to offer to our Brethren, the Strangers,
the case of (R. H.) his coveting the Patent, that in the mutual consideration
thereof we might the better be confirmed what to do, whom we found in like
manner dissatisfied, they not knowing how his case might be justified, so as
that the truth might be justified, and quitted from reproach: also as touching
my calling the laws of men unjust (as he says there I did) and saying, what
have we to do with the Laws of men? whereby (as one much beneath not only
Christianity, but even moral civility) he would have the reader to suppose that
I am a man (as his Title Page declares) Acting grand Usurpation in contempt of
the good Laws, and Royal Prerogative of his Majesty. In answer thereunto,
first let it be observed, that this so confident a Publisher of a matter so
criminal, if true in his Sense, was not (as himself says) at this meeting
himself to hear it; he being about thirty or forty miles of; and so this his
publication (as to this particular) is only from information, and with no small
probability from one then present, who bares much of his envious image, and
also out of communion for want of a good conversation.

How much therefore beneath the actings of men (qualified with but common
honesty) he in this case appears, is not hard to conceive; for that he neither
considered how probable it was that the informer might be mistaken in his
relation (a case very common among men, where nothing of prejudice rules, but
much more where it is manifest) nor yet considered the great unliklyhood of the
truth thereof that might very easily to him appear from the expressions
themselves; which supposes no less then my passing judgment against the Laws
of men in general as unjust, which cannot rationally be thought to proceed out
of the mouth of the greatest Fifth-Monarch in the world, (much less from him
that is a Writur, a Preacher, and a disputer against them; for it is not the
injustice of the civil Laws of Nations that by them is so much opposed (however
not in such a general sense as envy here represents me) as the unworthiness by
them supposed in some persons that have to do in the execution of those Laws;
however right well do we know, and accordingly have we always declared, that by
the justice and equity of the civil Laws, our common Rights, Privilegdes, and
properties are preserved from such as are unreasonable; as also our lives
secured from the hands of blood-thirsty men: nor since reason will not permit
the entertainment of such thoughts may any one think that the Laws of men, in
relation to Patents, were generally by me condemned as unjust, for that
frequently I have said, and do now again say, that for Persons to have Patents
in several cases, as they may be circumstanced, is both legal and reasonable,
as many can testify; his frequent therefore representing me an Enemy to
Patents (generally) and the Kings Prerogative thereabouts, is altogether
groundless and unjust.

Nor is there so much in that Question, what have we to do with the Laws of
men? (though that it was ever so spoken I know not) if righteously considered,
the outmost thereof being no more then that we, apprehending the Laws of the
Gospel, to forbid this his Gospel dishonouring Patent, did not think our selves
concerned in our Congregational affairs with the Laws of Men, if they did allow
it: No more surely did Paul judge the Corinthians concerned with the civil Laws
of the Country where they lived, and therefore (knowing the Gospel rules would
not allow them in the apprehension of wrong and trespasses received in civil
things, to do what the civil Laws would allow them to do) said, Dare any of
you, having a matter against another, go to Law, (that is, with their Brethren)
as if it had been said, you may by no means so do, for that you have another
Rule from Christ to act by, as you are Members of the Church of Christ: what
have you to do with the Laws of Men, thereby to trouble and vex your Brethren
withal? yet might not any therefore think (though R. H. think so of me) that
Paul was an Enemy to the civil Laws of the Country, nor to the Prerogative of
the King, or Governor that made them: but such have been my Doctrine where
ever I came, with respect to Christian obligations, To be subjest to the higher
Powers, and to obey every ordinance of Man for the Lords sake; such also have
been my public Reasonings, and private Conferences in diverse places, in
opposition to that spirit that despises Dominion, such has been my
forwardness, not only that Festus his civil Laws should be observed, but that
his person also should be honored, as most noble Festus, though as to matters
of Religion, he be found telling Paul, that he is besides himself, yea, and
such have been in that case my Principles many years ago published in Print
(which is yet visible) subscribed by me and many others, as that I do not
suppose the unworthy insinuations of a man thus over-mastered with the spirit
of Envy, will gain credit among many, if any.

At this our Meeting, it is true, that in answer to a question proposed, some
discourse we had touching such as should make opposition against, and condemn
the Church, in abeting, and justifying a person that should by such means be
the occasion of so much dishonor to the Truth, but that I, by any Usurped
Authority or Threats, conjured them to do my will (as he abusively speaks) by
me is denied.

Neither do we the Congeregation know any such thing, nor do we suppose that
our Brethren the strangers, if they shall be enquired of can testify any
things of that Nature, no nor any thing tending to the contempt of his
Majesty's Laws, or Royal Prerogative as by him is suggested.

Nor is it true that Patents was at this meeting rendered odious (as he would
suggest) nor that I could as freely have fellowship with an Idolator, or an
unclean person, as with a man that should obtain a Patent, the truth being
only, that his Patent in that particular case, thus circumstanced, neither I
nor others could bare with, no more then other public transgressions.

Nor had he reason to say, That I with the advice of my adherents, did all this
Meeting enact by Usurped Authority, that none might buy or sell for him: since
no more is true of that Nature, save only that (in answer to one enquiring,
whether it might be safe for him to be concerned, if desired in some one
particular place, to Trade in Buying and Selling that particular Seed for him,
who was thus defamed, censored, and evilly spoken of upon that account) some,
very few, did declare their present thoughts that it was not; but that there
was an agreement of the Assembly, neither I nor others do know, and that he
that reported this matter unto R.H. was (in the best sense imaginable)
mistaken, is evident by our peaceable communion with his Servants that we well
know Trades in Buying, Selling, cleansing, if not also Buying the same Seeds
for him; and yet may this be published as a sign that his Brethren (but a while
ago, Beloved, and most faithful Brethren) are now like unto the Antichristian
Beast: Ah poor piece of Envy!

The next thing considerable, is that R. H. being formerly by several Friends
persuaded to desist his design, and he not being persuaded, was afterward
desired to come to a Church Meeting to treat with our Friends thereabouts,
before he did endeavor the accomplishment of his design, the which also being
obstinately refused by him, saying, that we had nothing to do to meddle in such
matters, and so he prosecuting effectually his design, at a Meeting some time
after, we desired him to appear, he accordingly did appear, where, says he, we
excommunicated him as a Sinner, before we had proved him to have Transgressed
any known Law. In answer to which, I say, that sure I am, there was some
endeavors to convict him of his Sin, and to prove his proceedings
unwarrantable, but that what we said appeared to him as good evidence or proof,
that he was a person so offending; I cannot say, I rather think that the love
of Gain, (supposedly great) in conjunction with his malice manifestly great,
might blind his eyes: but what is his complaint against us herein, more then
the complaints of persons excommunicated very generally elsewhere.

And whereas he multiplieth many words of Lordly Usurpation and Acts of
Tyranny, it may be observed that at this meeting there was also charged against
him, his unrighteous dealing with a man about a bargin of Clover, the which
then I did and still do believe deserved blame, and in like manner 'twas judged
by the friends, two persons only excepted, whom I perceived not without some
doubts, in the case, whereupon I condescended, and so that case was omitted;
and one of those two persons was he, of whom he abusively speaking in his Book,
says, that he would have a man damned for displeasing his Lord Caffyn, rather
then for displeasing the most High: which if it had been true that I was thus
Idolized by this friend, then surely he would have pleased me in giving consent
with me and others in the case; or if it were true that I were such a Lordly
Usurper (as he would suggest) surely then I should some way or other have
constrained them (or as he speaks) threatened them into a consent; but while he
is thus speaking reproachfully of others, worthy consideration it is, whether
himself did not act somewhat like an Usurper, in that he (called there as an
offender) would (and it seems is yet greatly offended because he could not)
stop my mouth, (who, as it is well known, was concerned with the Congregation in
the Congregations affairs) so as that I might not speak in the discourse of the
matter, till he had first disputed with the brethren; a ready way for seducing
Spirits to corrupt assemblies, while their Elders silently stand by, without
doing what is their duties to do, even, to defend the flock, if such Usurping
motions of transgressors might be gratified; and whereas he, says, (page 5.)
that he was not suffered to treat with any of the Congregation, nor they with
him by reason of my perpetual interruption, as they if they be honest will
testify.

We the Congregation in the honesty and uprightness of our hearts, do testify
that R. H. did at that meeting reason with several of us, and the only thing
denied by our brother Caffyn, and yet no more by him then by our selves, was
only that unreasonable Usurping request of him to stop our brother Caffyns
mouth as aforsaid, he being willing in himself, and we seeing no cause to the
contrary, did many times, as well as the rest of the assemblies, offer
something to the matter in hand, which he not willing to allow (though it no
ways savoured of Lordliness in him desiring it, but rather of Lordliness in
him denying it) by that means a deal of obstruction we meet withal.

As touching our proceedings against him, he (the better to render it odious)
would have persons believe that I as a New Lord had made new Laws, called by
him also a new cheat, namely, that no person may offend the weak brethren in
any case, or oppose his Lordships design upon pain of Excommunication, and
further, that when a man shall have a lawful right to do any thing in civil
matters, if any weak brethren should say they were offended with it, it may not
be suffered. Page 20.21. But as one not content thus far to abuse us he further
insinuates, that if the weak brethren should be offended with his Majesty's
Crown, etc. It being made of Gold (they being already, says he, offended with
such professors as wear Gold) according to our principle he must submit or be
dealt with. Page 22. And as if this were not enough to represent him weak
indeed, while he thus reproachfully speaks of the weak, he further suggesteth
that if a weak brother should cry unto him in a fair for a Ballard, as a
fairing, and he should offend him by not answering his request, by our Law,
(though in truth it be his own evil imaginations) he says, thereby he may
incur an Excommunication, Page 28. Oh how is Wisdom turned into folly, and
strength into weakness! and yet thus (I suppose) he thinks the matter of his
Book will agree with the Title thereof, New Lords, New Laws, and so having
imagined and framed this image by the art of malice, falls on furiously in
several Pages fighting against it, as a most odious thing, thereby intending
that the Reader should understand that we excommunicated him for offending the
weak brethren.

In answer to which we the Congregation, with our brother Caffyn, do declare
that we never heard of such principles (or practices) till his own Book
informed us, and therefore we think that they may very well be called, New Laws
indeed; our principles being the same as when he was amongst us, the same with
other Churches, yet never such as did allow that persons should be
Excommunicated for not parting with their lawful rights upon weak brethren,
saying, they are offended with it, or that required persons upon pain of
Excommunication to gratify any ones design, or thus to humor the weak brethren
offended in any case, as he suggesteth; rather have we believed, and still do,
that in such cases the Congregation with her Elders, should endeavor the
information of such weak brethren, that they may be more strong, and so no
longer offended with the Legal proceedings of their brethren, and commonly such
endeavors prove effectual; and as we are of no such principles, so neither are
we in our dealings with him, men of such practices (as he supposes) for that
he was Excommunicated to humor and gratify a company of weak brethren, upon
their saying they were offended, we do with all clearness deny. Further, in
answer, the Reader is to observe, that after his Excommunication there was
(according to his desire) a paper sent him, containing the grounds of our
proceedings against him, the which (had he dealt uprightly) he should have
truly stated in his Book, and so have endeavored an answer thereunto, but to
pass it over in silence, without the least making mention of any such Written
account from the Church, and yet pretend to give an account of the Churches
proceedings against him and not only so, but in the mean season to frame a
false account of the Churches proceedings, with endeavors to father that upon
the Church, and so with many swelling words from a vain mind, exclaim against
it, is such a practice that is seldom heard of, and surely never found among
any but such as want either wisdom or sincerity, or both, what did he think
that he being first in his own cause, should meet with none coming after him to
search him out?

Now that the account given by him is a false account, our paper (yet visible,
and that since have been read by many) will evidence, (though his silence about
this paper may sufficiently Minister suspicion to the Reader of the trueness of
his account) in all which paper of ours (considerably Large) those expressions
(to wit, weak brethren) so often named by him, is not once named; nor that a
party of weak brethren, being offended with his proceedings, was by others not
so offended, gratified and humored by casting him out of the Church, once
signified; but rather his resolutions (against all Counsel to the contrary) to
persist in his Patent design (in conjunction with his unworthy carriage) as a
practice savouring of his preferring the gain of this World, before the honor
of the Gospel, for that thereby Reproach and Scandal was brought upon the same,
whereby the brethren, (that is, the Congregation, being sensible thereof, and
not a party only) was offended, and yet are that he should so seek himself, his
own profit, as no more to regard the obligations of the Gospel, to avoid such
occasions for the profit of others, that they might be saved.

Though it be also true that we were not satisfied that his coveting this
Patent was upon just and lawful grounds, for that nothing (Worthy
consideration) can be pleaded (either as great charge, long study, or more then
common ingenuity) as might with a good conscience enright him thereunto; and it
seems the like judgment was made thereof by Counsel (Learned in the Law) Sir E.
T. and Sir H. P. Before the Lord Keeper when the Country appeared at London, in
their great dislike and discontent about it, with a paper subscribed by the
hands of many, as well persons of quality, as others; where one of the Counsel
to evade the cause of this desired Patent, Pleaded (if I mistake not the
information) what (says he) if a man shall devise a new way to thrash his
Corn, shall he therefore have a Patent? surely no. However they soon made
judgment against it. Nor did we think it a consideration void of Reason, that
he a separate, a professor, should seek a Patent in this case of Nonsuch, there
being Clover (as a president) cleansed after the same manner long before; when
as no person out of the profession sought after a Patent, in the case of
cleansing Clover upon the account of being the first inventor thereof, though
without a president; Nor did we think it a vain consideration that he, having
an estate considerable, and having besides no small advantage by cleansing this
seed, while others cleansed it as well as he, that he should now, as one not
content there with endeavor to grasp all into his own hands, thereby opening
the mouths of men to judge him and revile him as a covetous person; to the
dishonor of Religion; and indeed how he may be cleared (I cannot tell) from
censures of that kind, since, for the sake of this wedge of Gold,
(circumstanced as aforesaid) he could part with his brethren (greatly beloved)
at once, and not only so, but all his Christian privil does respecting
communion; and as he parted with, and lost these on the one hand (with who,
upon the like account, besides a Worldly-minded man would do?) so on the other
hand he purchased infamy to himself, and reproach to the Gospel, and also
rendered himself an occasion of stumbling to the Sons of Men, while sometimes
upon the road, sometimes in the Markets, and sometimes elsewhere, persons were
heard revileing, defaming, and cursing him upon this account: and what, may
such a man that shall loose freely so much good, and purchase unavoidably so
much evil, and all for that which is but momentary, yet think himself innocent
herein? Oh how is it to be lamented!

The matter then before specified, and thus circumstanced, being had in public
consideration, and those wholesome Laws, and Gospel rules, mentioned and given
in charge by the Apostle for the prevention of offenses, and things of an ill
report, being produced, and treated of without offering the least alteration of
his mind, he also after an unworthy manner censoring some of his brethren in
the face of the Assembly, we thereupon did judge him as one that did transgress
the wholesome Laws of the Gospel, and so unfit for, and unworthy of, communion.
Even, those wholesome Laws (we mean) that the Saints of old (in order to a
Gospel-Honoring conversation) were enjoined to observe; namely, give none
offense neither to the Jews nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God, and
that not only in Eating and Drinking, but whatsoever we did, we should do all
to the Glory of God, and not please our selves, nor seek our own profit, but
the profit of others that might be Saved. 1 Cor. 10. and that, if their be any
virtue, if there be any praise, whatsoever things were lovely and of good
report, they ought be the thinking on those things. Phil. 4.8. Which counsel of
the Apostle, occasioned by that forgoing discourse of his, where he charge
them not to eat that which was lawful to be eaten, when by their so doing,
others were offended, shows that Christians (in order to their doing all
things to the Glory of God) should carefully avoid all occasions of ill
reports, and not give offense to any, neither the Church nor the World, which
(as cases might be circumstanced) they might do by the performance of things,
(otherwise) lawful; provided always that it be construed to such things as are
only lawful, and so may be done, and not such things as are matter of duty, and
so must be done. The which is readily granted by Richard Haynes himself,
saying, Page 27. That if his brother (formerly a Jew) being week dares not eat
swins Flesh, because once forbiden, and so could not have communion with those
that he knew did eat it, rather then to offend such a one, he would eat no meat
while the World stood, notwithstanding swins Flesh be lawful in its self to be
eaten: so that now that which he has conceived to be our Judgments about the
not offending brethren, is no other but that his own opinion and judgment in
the same case of not offending, is come within, even, a hairs breadth of the
same; the difference being only (as himself defines it) that the strong should
bare the infirmities of the weak, in all such cases as have relation to matters
of Religion and Worship, and not in such civil cases as his; now so much as the
eating swins Flesh is contrary to the true Religion and Worship of God, in the
weak brothers account, more then his coveting this Patent, thereby raking, and
grasping in all to himself, to the Gospels reproach, and offense of the
brethren, is contrary to the pure Religion and Worship of God in our account,
(which plainly is that a man keep himself unspoted from the World) so much and
no more is the difference betwixt us. Surely, either none at all, or now if any
there be, let it be shown, at leastwise any requiring such a publication, what,
may one weak brother (formerly a Jew) who by reason of his weakness cannot have
communion in case swins Flesh be eaten, though the eating thereof be lawful in
the sight of God, may such a one (I say) find more favor with R.H. then a
whole congregation, that could not have communion with him in case he did
prosecute that Patent design.

Nor is that all which may be wondered at, for as in the case justified by him
about the not eating swins Flesh, there is not only a disproportion betwixt a
single person offended, and a whole congregation offended; but also that the
single persons offense is only injurious unto himself without any such
attendance as the dishonor of the Gospel and injury to others, when as the
Congregations offense is attended with (as a main thing too in our account)
dishonor to the Gospel, and so injury to many others, that by that means may
stumble at the Truth.

And whereas he supposes injustice and cruelty in our proceedings against him,
for that he conceives he has not broken neither the Law of God nor man: does
not R. Haines himself (that has laid so many grevious complaints against us)
now plainly justify us? by saying that he might justly be charged as an
offender, and (as in his other initance) publikly to be blamed if obstinate.
Page 27. (as was his case) and all this for eating swins Flesh, which to do, is
neither the transgression of the Law of God nor man; nay, when I enquire
whether he does not now justify us? may I not say that he does (as it were)
more then justify us? because in our proceedings against him, we were not
satisfied that his Patent might as lawfully be prosecuted, as swins Flesh might
lawfully be eaten: but if to that satisfaction we had attained, yet that pen
which has so often and so much abused us, is made, even, in such a case now to
justify us. And does it not then follow that this so great a heat of Spirit
flows from something besides and before, the Patent too?

Moreover, since the eating things offered to Idols, whereby the weak brother
is made to transgress in matters of Religion, is in his account a sin, and such
a sin too, that deserves public rebuke (as he confesses, Page 27.) is it not
as much, if not more deserving rebuke, this his Patent proceedings (against all
Counsel and advice to the contrary) since not only one person (as he states the
case thus blamable) but many persons of the World, is thereby liable to
disesteem the true Religion and Worship of God, and so to harden themselves in
their salfe ways of Religion, and so many may come to perish for whom Christ
died? and therefore if he did esteem it his lawful right (though one may think
it could not be done without some doubts, being circumstanced as aforesaid)
should he not have said (and accordingly done) that, rather then thus to
dishonor the Gospel, offend the Congregation (and many others) and loose
communion and Christian privileges, I will not have such a Patent as long as
the World stands? consider in the true fear of God.

Whereas also he often affirms, that I should say that Patents were of the
Devil. My answer is, that therein (as in many other cases) he charge me
falsely. Secondly, we the Congregation do testify that we never heard our
brother Caffyn so to speak. Thirdly, I. H. S. desired to come to London by
letter from R. Haines, to be a witness for him, in which letter he seems to
speak that I did not only hear brother Caffyn say that Patents were of the
Devil, but also that he did declare it at the latter end of his sentence of
Excommunication: I. H. S. do hereby declare that I neither heard brother Caffyn
so to speak in the latter end of his sentence of Excommunication, nor at any
other time, save only that he at some time said, that the evil one put him upon
his Patent particularly.

And whereas he is pleased to call me great Apostle, and to say (in answer to a
supposed question. Page 43.) that he was wholly ignorant of my great Office and
Authority. All may know (if any yet do not know) that I never pretended to any
thing of that kind, save only, as one sent to preach the Gospel, but in diverse
respects beneath, and inferior to those sent out heretofore, as the Apostles of
Christ; and so never thought my self to be, nor was thought of others to be, in
any other Office, or place of Authority, then those that he again and again
appealed unto at the general meeting at London: so that his pointing at my name
particularly, must needs flow from a Spirit of malice against me particularly;
but to be as short as I can, the Reader is to observe, That

Whereas he says, I think my self equal with St. Paul. Page 6. that I (with
the Congregation) do judge that my displeasure is punishable (without
submission) with no less then eternal damnation. Page 15. That I do contemn the
Authority of all above me. Page 18. That it is not necessary in my Government to
reprove according to the Scripture Rule, that I have in effect Autherity to do
all, to wit, accuse, judge and condemn. Page 20. That Whoredom, Fornication, or
Idolatry, is rather allowed of then this of the Patent. Page 21. That if a
certain person did not confess her sin to me, she must (according to my
principle) be damned eternally. Page 44. That I prophesied he should not
prosper neither in body nor estate, Page 53. That I question the Kings Royal
perogative in secular things. Page 41.

All which, I do hereby solemnly protest against as false, and most unworthy
accusations, which together with those many before named, and yet is to be
named, respecting particular cases yet to be spoken to, (passing over other
things of like kind) will make up such measure, as if it were heaped up,
pressed down, and running over to the great shame of the accuser, and I could
wish that in the issue it might tend to his humiliation, for I do not desire
that the Lord may lay it to his charge.

Further, he charge against me partiality, and conniving at sin, etc. And I
suppose none may think (considering his so great malice against me) that he
has left unmentioned any thing that either near, or afar of, lately or
formerly, he could meet with, all which fairly answered as it respects me
(which to do, through grace, I nothing doubt of) he may reasonably doubt of
ever obtaining his end; for these things now considerable were, (I suppose)
partly more then seven Years ago, and in a another County, and partly (I
suppose) about five and six Years ago, and partly more lately, but all of it (a
very little excepted) while he was in communion with us; nor can he plead (at
leastwise to all) that he was ignorant thereof till now, for in the case of the
woman dying under blame, himself tells the Reader, Page 44. That 'twas before
the difference betwixt us, gathered from a certain discourse between he and I,
about which he then signified not the least dislike as I know of, nor at any
time since, this publication being my first information; and now with no less
aggravation then an infallable mark of Popish infallibility: but as touching
the matter, I remember nothing thereof, save only a few words with him in way
of some mistrust of her condition, but that I should, for want of her
confession to me, that I might forgive her my self, say, that 'twas all one if
she did repent of her sin before she died; and so conclude her one that could
not enter into the Kingdom, for want of my pardon: my answer is, that I know no
such thing as ever spoken by me, nor at any time believed, but rather that a
sinner may truly repent before God, and so enter the Kingdom, who yet for want
of either opportunity, or capassity of body, may not confess his sin to the
offended; neither is it true that the controversy lay between the woman and I,
if thereby he mean, the woman and I only, for sever I were acquainted
therewith, and her Husband the party that was originally offended, (and in some
respects more concerned then ever I was) who is ready to testify the truth
thereof.

And whereas this woman's infirmities, reproved by me and others, consisted in
her two much bitterness of Spirit (to the preventing her Husbands will) against
her Husbands daughter that came home with a great belly (one never in the
profession) who charging it upon a certain person, he readily confessed it, and
so married her; whereas (I say) the case was so, he having no other cause (for
doubtless if he had, he would even gladly have published it, he concluds the
matter, with this question, namely, which of the two, the Mother or the
Daughter, I had most kindness for.

To which question, and what else seemingly may look that way elsewhere; I shall
only say, that God Almighty (the alone searcher of hearts) knows both his and
mine, and if I should be innocent herein, and in all cases of that kind, (as
the Lord knows I am, and ever was, who, should I not be upright herein, would
be a swift witness against me) and he should be a man that have been really and
foulely guilty in cases of that kind, and now become an Enemy to him that has
told him the truth; how dreadfully, presumptuously, and daringly, does he
thereby Treasure up Sin and Wrath, against the day of Wrath, unless timely and
greatly he does repent?

And whereas he endeavors to render me partial in my proceedings against a man
and his wife, whom he would suppose to be my Favorite, because my kinswoman, of
whom he speaking, Page 11. says, that there was a necessity of marrying her to
some body, as if she were with Child by some one besides her espoused Husband.
The case was thus, to wit, that these persons being engaged one to the other,
did, before public marriage according to Law, accompany together, the which
when they had done, being under trouble of conscience (as was declared) did
voluntarily tell the same to a certain friend, from whom I had the Relation,
and so did immediately take an opportunity to treat with them about their
transgression, and finding them in a humble fram, considered with their
voluntary acknowledgment, did proceed no further as to any public rebuke; yet
not so satisfied as to permit either of them to communion, neither have they
unto this day: in process of time some imaginations did arise, and at last a
discovery of the unlawful fact, as that the Gospel thereby was liable to be
evil spoken of, whereupon we at a public firstdays-meeting before the Church
(and others) bare our testimony against their ungodly proceedings, without the
least show of favor to one more then another.

The truth of which we the Congregation do testify. And further say, that we
never heard before (the fruit of malice discovered it) the least word drop from
any of our brother Caffyns favoring his kinswomen in that particular.

As touching the person that did Beat and (as he says) Curse his tired Horse,
from the relation of which, he further argues partiality in me; the Reader is
to observe, that when I understood there was such a report of this person, and
that he did deny what was reported, I nevertheless did (with another Friend,
and two more sober persons, not in fellowship with us) go to the place where
'twas reported that such words of Cursing was spoken, and went from house to
house treating with those that were concerned in the report, and finding them
partly to differ in their testimony, and partly mistaken, as in the case of his
Riding by the Reporters house after such a manner as was described, when as it
appeared that he came by the house on Foot, driving his Horse before him,
having also the testimony of one that Rod along the Road with him, not very far
from him, when the Reporters say he spoke those words, who testifies that he
heard him speak no such thing: so likewise says some others, who were nigher
them then the Reporters, having also a paper subscribed by several of his
neihgburs, that under the greatest provocations, they never heard him to Curse
nor Swear. We (I say) finding the case after this manner, though it were true,
that two or more did testify they heard him speak such words, which he did
possitively deny, we knew not, neither yet do we understand that 'twas our duty
to condemn him as a Transgressor in the case of Cursing, upon their bare
testimony, in contradiction to his denial, and the circumstances aforesaid:
though as to beating his Horse too furiously and intemperately, (yet with
nothing but a common flash) we did judge him worthy of blame, which he also
readily confessed, neither may R. H. think it strange that we receive not the
testimony of these persons, while we blamed him (as yet we do) for not dealing
righteously with a poor man about a bargin of Clover, he being accused by one
single witness in the same capacity; because our blaming him respects his own
account and confession of the matter, and not a contrary account from the party
concerned, which must have been true to have rendered his charge against me just
and reasonable.

And whereas R. H. further declares this persons unworthiness, (I suppose more
then seven years ago) in smiting his Apprentice with his Fist, he being one
that was in the Profession, and consequently that I was guilty of partiality,
in reproveing the same but gently and sparingly: The Truth is, that at our
Meeting, with respect to this persons Transgression, after due blame laid upon
him, and his ready acknowledgment of the same, he was required to go to the
people, where in his passion, this evil was acted, and there to confess his sin
before the people, the which accordingly he did, as may be proved, whether
therefore this may evidence my partiality, or his malignity, let the Reader
judge.

Further as to this person R. H. says, That in his apprehensions he serves
two Gods, to wit, me as one, and his belly as another God. From which person,
(I being not at all concerned in the case) take this acount, namely, whereas
such and so great Idolatry is suggested against me, because that I did for some
time forbear eating and drinking with him, and yet nevertheless at a certain
time did in his Chamber eat and drink with him, and said that I could do so
again, and since have refused to eat and drink with him, from whence I am
published to be guilty of so great Idolatry, p. 11. these are to let the Reader
understand, that my eating and drinking with him at that certain time, though
true in the same Chamber, was no more (at leastwise in my judgment) then what
might consist both with my former and latter practices; for as he called for
something for himself, I also called for something for my self, and after a
distinct manner, eat the same by my self, though at the same Table; which
measure of distinction (however others might do in such a case) I thought to
agree with my Principles, and therefore said, I could do it again; how then
righteously it could be said, that I thereby did Idolize Brother Caffyn, I
verily know not; since what I did, was with respect to Religion, as himself in
his own Relation confesses, I pretended for my so refusing to accompany with
him, but then how I should, either justly or reasonably be thought by him to
serve my Belly as another God, I neither can understand, unless by concluding
that in eating with him (as aforesaid) to please and satisfy my Belly, thereby
I did what I was persuaded really and Religiously I ought not to do, which if
so he thought, then does he at once destroy the only foundation laid to bare up
his other argument to prove that I did Idolize brother Caffyn as another God,
to wit, that I did sorbare eating with him to please my Idol Caffyn. Alas, the
darkness! Alas, the envy of this poor man! again, how it should be thought that
I (or any) should forbear eating and drinking with persons Excommunicated to
please brother Caffyn (which supposes him displeased, if not) I reasonably
cannot think, because it is manifest (too evidently to be denied) that several
friends are not (nor ever were) convinced that 'twas their duties to abstain
from eating with such, who nevertheless are his well-beloved brethren.

As touching another person whom he represents as one covetous and deceitful,
for that he, having some-estate, and a good Trade, nevertheless covets another,
and to maintain the same, bound himself as an Apprentice to a person at some
distance. The true Relation whereof (according to my best information) is thus,
namely, that this person having served an Apprentiship with a Master that was a
Tailor by Trade, and also sold Cloth and other things (very common to persons
of that Trade) he in process of time, when Trading for himself as a Tailor, did
also sell Cloth with other commodities, during which time, he came to obey the
Gospel, keeping forth his Trade as before, with whom R. H. as well as we had
communion several Years, without the least dislike showed on his part, as ever
I heard; and afterward when he had a Trial at the Assizes about his selling
Cloth, etc.

He was (serving such a Master as aforesaid, who was present to bare his
Testimoney thereunto) he was (I say) justified by Law, without the least plea
from, or advantage by, his being an Apprentice, which through some fear he
submitted unto.

Further, R. H. to prove another of his brethren an Idolator, and that he was
more ready to do the will of his new Lord, then the will of him in Heaven, he
says, that while he was forward (with others) to Excommunicate him for a
pretended sin against his new Lord, he was backward or neglected his duty
toward God, in way of reproving him in another case according to what he
thought his sin deserved. To which I say, that unless he had first proved that
this persons not bareing with him, and so concuring with the Church, in their
proceedings against him, had been because he had sined against me, his New
Lord, as he is pleased to speak, Page 14. and not in conscience of his duty
toward God, not only without good, but also without show of Reason; and so I
return it back to his shame: it being well known that this person was so far
from censuring R. H. to please me, as that he was, and yet is, convinced that
his coveting this Patent was not only a sin against God, as many believe it,
but in some respect a sin wherein others do not so understand it; and as
touching this persons presenting R. H. his sin in another case after that
manner in the meeting, which for some time before was acted, and had not been
publicly reproved, the account from the said person is, that though it be
true, sometimes he was made to doubt, by Reason of his smooth words, whether it
might deserve such reproof or no, though at some other times again satisfied
that it did, yet that he did readily confess his sin therein, and not only to
him but also at the meeting at London, where R. H. did accuse him for it,
before all the friends then present, he did confess his fault therein, as I
suppose many do well remember, and as I do well remember: what should be the
occasion of its now publication I cannot interpret, unless his continued wrath
which works not the righteousness of God.

Further R. H. Page 15. To prove another of his brethren to be an Idolator,
tells the Reader that he at a certain time should say, that he could as freely
Steal a Horse as to have a Patent. From whence he proceeds thus, saying, I pray
Sirs observe how great zeal appears in this deluded person for the observation
of the new Laws of this his new Lord, for rather then to sin against his
commands, he had rather sin against the commands of the most high God. And
thereupon concludingly speaks that I must needs be their Idol, and so calls
upon all that are not seduced to judge in this matter. Alas, poor man! will he
judge all men are seduced that does not see the weight of Truth and Reason,
which (by this general appeal) he supposes attends him in this his arguing?
may it not be thought rather that among even the seduced, in many points, and
much more among them that are not seduced, that unless he had first proved that
this persons zeal against his Patent had been to please me (called by him, his
New Lord) and not out of conscience to God, may it not (I say) rather be
thought, that judgment may be given against him, as one Reasoning without
Reason?

But while he thus, either for the want of the Use of Reason, or uprightness,
pleads, and all this too from the report of another disorderly person, the
person concerned says, that his words were only that he thought he could as
freely have fellowship with him that had stolen a Horse, as with him that
should have such a Patent, for that in his account 'twas covetousness: and so a
transgression of Gods Royal Law as stealing was.

And whereas he Further represents me as an actor of Usurpation, because
sometimes I have signified my fears, that while persons are intent upon, and
deeply exercising their understandings about matters of civil controversies,
they may (and sometimes do) forget their Christian obligations, and so
misbehave themselves, as also because of the reproaches that probably may come
by the discontented parties; he might as well have known (however others do)
that I have not usurpingly withstood such undertakings, for that several
amongst us have concerned themselves in making peace between their Neighbors.
Where then is this New Law of Usurpation which he speaks of? Page 8. Does a
man's fears and so his particular dislike make it a Law? surely no. Much less an
Act of Usurpation deserving such a publication. But this only more shall I say
to it, that while he so much pleads for making peace between men, himself is
become an enemy to the peace of them that very lately he esteemed most faithful
and beloved brethren.

But says he also, I reproved him for keeping company with great Persons.
What, would he hereby, while himself insinuates into their favor, endeavor to
cast me out of their favor, that so he might the better accomplish his
malicious design? Alas, poor man! I would have him know that in simplicity and
humility to stay upon God, is a more surer refuge, and Rock of defense, then by
sinful subtilty to comply with, and put confidence in the Arm of Flesh. True it
is, that I having some fear that he might among some persons of note, take that
liberty which would neither be Honorable to the Truth, nor conducable to the
good of those he associated with, did cautionally, but not censuringly, drop a
few words of that import, yet is it no other then what occasionally many do
without gainsaying: but the better to effect an evil eye in them against me,
he (as one little questioning whether their prudence would lead them to comply
with his reasonless distracted thoughts of malice) further imagines, and so
declares that I had some great antipathy against such Men; and, as an
agravation of my supposed transgression in those cautionary words, he tells the
Reader, that those persons of Quality that he associated with, were such as I
well knew to be sober men of good report, and Favorites to that which is good.

To which I say, that if I conjecture aright, whom he means (of which I do not
much doubt) then I must confess that I have no reason to gainsay him therein,
nor have I any Reason to think, that he does not associate with some other
persons of whom those things cannot so well be spoken. Yet again have I no
Reason to think that among any of them, such a Spirit of malice against
professors rules, that leads them to do, not only what he thinks may be done,
but what he believes is his duty to do; the which (if I mistake him not) his
words do employ, which are these, Page 37.

I must tell you that according to what is Further my duty I am resolved to
prosecute what I have undertaken against him; as though I never knew him, but
as an Usurping Tyrant; and further, says he, Page 29. Suppose the worst
imaginable, to wit, that the civil Magistrate for contempt of Authority, should
cause him to be punished, can he complain of them, or be offended with me,
considering what himself has done infinitely beyond it? what? shall I punish a
Man with eternal torments for doing that which is no transgression of any known
Law, and cry out by reason of so little pain, as may be over in a quarter of an
hour? Now, whether he does not by all this, intimate a compliancy of his
Spirit, that I should be prosecuted against, even, unto death temporal, who
have (as he suggesteth, if any one would believe him) punished him with eternal
torments, (though in truth the end of our punishing him by the censure of the
Church is to preserve him from punishment eternal) now whether (I say) by all
this he do not intimate such a thing, I leave to be considered; in conjunction
with his Dream, which (were it Divine) signifies no less then that he that
used to stand at the upper end of the Table, and perform his Devotion (called
by him, in way of reproach, unjust Judge or false Apostle) was lost and could no
where be found. Page 51. To which I shall only say, he that has a Dream, let
him tell his Dream, and he that has my word, let him speak my word faithfully,
what is the chaff to the Wheat says the Lord?

And whereas he seems to render me as one faulty, Page 9. For that I did not
accept of an Offenders confessing of his offense, for that 'twas not from the
heart, I pretending (as he says) to know the heart. My answer is, that from
what appeared, and does yet appear, I with the Congregation were, and yet are,
dissatisfied with that person in respect of communion: nor is that true
touching this persons committing, (...) in my conceit many Years ago, the
which as 'twas a sin against God I could bare with, but when he had sinned
against my self, then I could not: For that 'twas no more in my understanding,
save only suspicion of sin from report, and that not several Years ago neither
(as he says) but some late report that lead me, but no Further then into
private enquiry; without the least discovery on my part to the infamy of either
of the persons concerned. It Is true that some endeavors on my part have been to
make discovery of sinners (for which it may be feared that some hate me,) but
none of the Godly and Truly gracious Souls; but I consider that to lay a snare
for him that reproves in the gate, is no more then what the more worthy
Prophets of the Lord have meet with, Isa. 29.21. But yet as to the creeping
into a House and standing behind a wall, to hear the discourse of some persons
thereby to make discovery of sinners, the Reader may observe that (passing by
the mistake of the Relation) what thereof is true concerning me, is no more
then what the same disorderly person, now abeting this man, (and the reporter
thereof) did (before the discovery of his now transgressions) speak in way of
justification thereof, as J. E. does testify being an ear witness. And
whereas the Relation supposes some fear and mistrust of one of these persons,
it is to be observed that accordingly in time it did appear, that is, some
uncivil behavior, for which cause the person was kept out of communion some
Years: and also observable it is, that the matter concerning which the
Reflection is, was about six Years ago, since which time both Richard Haines
and the other disorderly person, and the now reporter thereof, have had long
communion with the Congregation; and yet is it far more evident that a
malicious Spirit is the now Author of this Relation; for that long ago the
reporter was told in the Congregation (as also before) when there the case was
proposed by him, that such a practice as he spoke of then (and as is now
printed) was not justified nor allowed of neither by me, nor any other; The
truth of which, we the Congregation can testify.

Moreover, he declares that he had b^^^ ^^^^^med that I did (to evidence that
self interest could (...) induce me thus to appear against him, but rather t^^
^^prehension of my duty toward God) makes mention of his respects considerably
large toward me; and thereupon does (in a way much beneath Christianity, if I
may not say common humanity) reflectingly say these words. Page 35. To wit,
that he did always (...) his contributions to one of the Deacons to be disposed
thereof according to (...) discretion; and whether Bell devoured all, and the
poor eat none, and the Idol ignorant (till of late) from whence he had his
belly full I know not. To which we the persons (S. L. D. P.) receiving his
contributions in in order to the disposing thereof, do hereby testify that as
it is true we received some thing from him, so also it is true that according to
his direction, the same was faithfully disposed of, that is to say, partly to
the poor, and partly to our brother Caffyn, without the least show given for
this Reflection.

Nor had he cause to Reflect ingratitude upon me for that I could, I suppose,
show him the very place where it was signified, but had there been somewhat
really worthy of reproof, the Reader may easily conclude that the time, which
his contributions now spoken of respects, was while he was in fellowship with
us; which if so, what may be the Reason of these public reflections now, and
not the least suspicion then signified, I cannot conceive, unless to gratify
the Spirit of malice, and vain glory that does as it were hereby, blow a
Trumpet of what formerly he has done.

And whereas he also Further suggesteth to the Reader, that I hold an error
concerning the Lord Jesus, and that Mr. M. had Wrote something against it; the
Reader is to understand that the Title of the Book is but partly represented by
Richard Haines, to wit, a cure for the Cankering error.

Which being (...) presented is, a Cure for the Cankering error of the New
Eutychians, which error at no time was, nor yet is by me believed, nor do I,
as concerning the Lord Jesus, nor any other point of Faith, or religious
Worship, (...) then the very same (...) was believeed (...) ^^^fessed when he
for many Years (...) And if by his saying, that I deny that Jesus Christ took
his Flesh of the Virgin Mary, he means, that the Redemption of Mankind is no
more precious then the Death, and Blood-sheding of a body of Flesh, in the
fallen Estate, under Condemnation for Original sin, and that was in the
beginning of the Earth, as the first Man Adam was, then do I readily declare my
dissent thereunto, and so will (in some respect) the Author of that Book, (Mr.
M.) and most others.

But this I consent unto, and verily believe, that the true Messiah, whom the
Father has sealed to be the Blessed Savior of the World, was conceived in the
Virgin Mary, and there took our Nature, and our Form, and so was in all points
like unto his Brethren, sin excepted; the Son of Abraham, the Son of David,
confessed to be, while the first Man was of the Earth, Earthey, the second Man
the Lord from Heaven, 1. Cor. 15.47.

Finally, as it is true that there is many more great swelling words of Vanity,
proceeding from his troubled Spirit, unanswered, as if I were a friend to
Popish infallability, and had an unlimited power, and admirable greatness, and
that knowingly, purposedly, and designedly I told a lie, without making any
mention wherein, together with many other things unworthily, and untruly
charged, too large here to repeat, nor do I see material cause obliging me
thereunto; there being such a cloud of Witnesses (...) his more then ordinary
envy, his malicious insinuations, his bitter expressions, his false accusati^^^
(...) ^is manifold reproaches cast upon me (and (...) ^ot long since were
judged by him (as his (...), Page 2.) most faithful most worthy (...) with a
discovery of (...) regardlesness (...) Honor, the (...) credit (...) good of
Souls, by this his publication (...) feared that (...) is as (...) by (...)
seems to (...) if (...) you my (...), then let me beg of you the^^ (...),

First, That you all in Gods fear, whose judgments are made manifest, take heed
of rejecting or sliting the admonition of Gods people, as this poor man to his
great injury has done.

Secondly, That you do, in the sense of the great danger, and deplorable
condition he seems to be in, pray for him, that God may not lay all these
things to his charge, so as hereafter to suffer the due desert of the same.


