THE CHARGE OF HIGH TREASON, MURDERS, OPPRESSIONS, And other CRIMES, EXHIBITED
To the Parliament of SCOTLAND AGAINST THE Marquess of Argyle And his ACCOMPLICES,
January 23. 1661.

LONDON, Printed for Richard L^^^des, at the White Lion in St. Paul's Church
yard, near the little North door. 1661.

CHARLES by the grace of God. King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, To (...) Heralds, Pursivants, and Messengers of arms,
respective, conjunctly and severally, specially constituted, Greeting.
For So Much as it is humbly meaned and complained to US, by our trusty and
well-beloved Counselor, Sir John Fletcher Knight, our Advocate for our
interest, in the action underwritten; and by Sir James Lamount of Inneryue
Knight, for himself and in the behalf of his kindred, friends, Vassals,
Tennants and Servants, (...) parties grieved and damnisyed in manner after
specified, upon Archibald Marquess of Argyle; George Campbell his Justice and
Sheriff Deputy: James Campbell of Ardkinglar Officer under the said Marquess
his command; Colin Campbell of Stra^uhir, Duncan Campbell of E^angreg. Officer
under the command of the said Marquess; John Campbell Fiare of Dunstafneich,
Officer also under the said Marquess's command; Dongal Campbell, alias
Mackconnichie of Innerram. Officer under the said Marquess's command; Du^can
Campbell, Uncle to the Lord of Lochnell, Officer under the said Marquess's
command; Robert Campbell of Auchimwilling, John Campbell of Ardtariche, Hew
Campbell his Son; Colin Campbell of Otter, Patrick Campbell his Brother; (...)
Campbell of Derburgh, Charles Campbell of Ballach^ll, Ever Campbell of Kilbryd
his Brother; D^^e (...) Glasie, alias Campbell in Glead^^^ell, John Ger
Campbell there: John Ma^k^^^ Officer to the said George Campbell, D^nald (...)
of Glensel^ech. Andrew Macklaneidan^. Uncle to Archibald Marklanchlant of
Lethimetre, A^gus Mack^h^er^^k Son to E^^r Mackener^ek of Obb, James Campbell
of Ormsay, D^^gald Mackleriehe of Bralycha^^, D^ncan Macknil^i^^r in Es^^g,
Archibald Campbell in Evinn^cha^^e, Son-in-Law to the said Land of Otter, Mr.
Colin Mackla^chlan^, Min^i^^^ L^b^aylisheid; All or the most part of them,
being the said Marqurss of Argyle his Friends, Followers, or Complicer under
his command, and such as he might have stopped or let.

That where notwithstanding by the 129. Act of the eight Parliament of Our
dearest Grandfather, King James the sixth of blessed Memory. His Majesty and
His three Estates then Assembled in Parliament, ratifyed and approved the Royal
Power and Authority, over all Estates: As well Spiritual as Temporal, within
this Realm, in the person of. His Majesty. His Heirs and Successors: and did
Statute and Ordinance, that his Highness and his Successors by themselves, and
their Counsels, were and should be Judges Competent to all persons, his
Highness's Subjects of whatsoever degree, sunction, estate, o^ condition they
should be of, in all matters wherein they, o^ any of them should be
apprehended, summoned or charged to answer: And that none should presume, not
take upon hand, to decline the judgment of his Highness, his I ^eites and
Successors, or their Council, in the premises under the pain of Treason. And
sicklike, by the first Act of the eight Parliament, of our said dearest
Grandfather, King James the sixth. His Majesty's Sovereign Authority, Princely
Power. Royal Prerogative and Privilege of his Crown, over all Estates,
Petions, and Causes whatsoever. And the whole Estates then conveen'd in
Parliament for them, and their Successon, faithfully promised, perpetually to
acknowledge, obey, maintain, defend and advance the Life, Honor, Safety,
Dignity. Sovereign Authority and Prerogative Royal of Our ^id deatest
Grandfather, his Heirs and Successors, and Privilege of the Crown, with
their Lives, Lands and Goods; And to withstand all Persons, Powers and Estates,
who should presume any ways to impugn, or prejudge the same. Which Act is
ratifyed, by the third Act by the first Parliament of King Charles the first,
of blessed Memory our dearest Father.

Likeas, by the third and forth Acts of King James the first, his first
Parliament, and by the 37. Act of the second Parlialiament of King James the
first, and several other Acts, His Statute, that none rebel against the Kings
Person or Authority; or if they do in the contrary, or make War against his
Liedges, or reset any such Traitots, or supply them in red or counsill, or do
favors to Rebels, or any waye^ assist them, or do not rise at His Majesty's
command, being required; they being convicted thereof, are punishable as
Traitors. Likeas by the 134. Act Parl. 8. the 10. Act of the 10. Parl. of King
James the 6. All depravers of His Majesty's Laws, and medlars in His Majesty's
affairs, or Misconstruers of His Proceedings, whereby any mistake may be moved
between His Majesty and his loving subjects, are punishable by death. Likeas by
the 1. Act of King James the fifth his 3. Parliament, and by the 51. Act of the
11. Parl. of King James the 6. All burners of folks in their houses, all
burners of houses and Corns, and wilful fire-faising; As also all murder or
slaughter of His Majesty's Liedges, where the party slain is under trust,
credit, assurance and power of the flayer, the same is declared Treason and
Laese-Majesty. Likeas by the 75. Act of Queen Mary's Parliament 9. and diverse
other Acts, it is Statute, that no manner of person of persons, of whatsoever
Quality, Estate, Condition or Degree they be, Liedges of this Realm, Attempt to
raise any bands of men of War, on horse, or foot, without special ^icence in
Writ, had and obtained of the Queens Majesty for the time, and Her Successors
under the pain of death, to be executed upon the raisers, and risers in Arms.
As also, by the 50. Act of the 11. Parliament of King James the 6. it is
Statute and Ordained that in case it shall happen, any landed man to be
convicted of the crime of common thest, reset of theft, or stealth, reift in
time coming. They shall incur the caime and poine of Treason; That is to say.
Tinsell and forfeiture of Life, Lands, and Goods. Likeat, by the common Law and
practice of this Nation, all Committers of Murder, Manslaughter; Robbery,
Rapine, or Reiff, is punishable by death; and who are Act or Part of any such
crimes. As also by the same Laws, all private Imprisoners, Keepers of private
Pritions, and false Imp^^soners, and all Oppression whatsoever are punishable
in the like manner.

Nevertheless the Persons above named complained upon, having laid aside all
Fear of God, Loyalty and Obedience to their Sovereign Lord and King, natural
affection and reciprocal duty to their Countrymen and sellow Subjects, Have
most traicesously, trecherously, perfidiously and cruelly committed the crime;
of high Treason, and other crimes, Murders, Oppressions, Robbeties, Misdoods
and Malversations underwritten, contrary to out said Laws and Acts of
Partiament; and thereby have incurred the tespective pains and punishments
therein contained. In so fatas the said Persons above written. Desendants,
porticularly the said Marquess of Argyle, George Campbell his Servant, and
Justice, and Sheriff-deputy; James Campbell of Ardkinglas, Colin Campbell of
Straquhir, Robers Campbell of Anchi^willing, John Campbell of Ardrariche,
Master Calin Macklan^hane, D^^can Campbell of Ela^greg, John Campbell Fiare of
Dunstafaiche, Dargall Campbell, alias Mack^^^chie of I^^^etram: Having from the
beginning of the Insurrections and troubles in the year of God 1639, 1640,
1641. and 1642. both secretly and avowedly, appeared in constant opposition to
Our deatest Father, his Royal Counsels and command^: And after His Majesty's
most gracious Condescendencies to all the desires of his Liedges, how
unteasonable soever; He having depatted to his Kingdom of England, a cr^^ ented
Prince from a contented people. Nevertheless the aforesaid persons continuing
in their treasonable malice against their own Sovereign, did in the months of
January, February, March, April, May, June, July, August, September, October,
November, December, or one or other of them, in the year of God 1641. most
traite rously without their Sovereigns at thority or sicence, and expressly
against his will, pleasure and service, at their own hand and by their own
power, caused call, and convocate a prerended Committee and Convocation of His
Majesty's Lieges; wherein they themselves, or one or other of them, did
personally convene and meet; and in the said treasonable and unlawful
Convocation did act and appoint treasonable leavies of His Majesty's own
Subjects, in opposition to His Majesty's person, authority and express command.
And thereafter did actually invade and enter within His Majesty's Kingdom of
Engl. in open hostility, taking His Majesty's Towns, killing his Subjects,
wasting and destroying their Estates and fortunes, joining with his rebellious
Subjects in Eng. and an Army of Sectaries there, for destruction of His
Majesty's Person, Royal Family, authority and government of these Nations, so
far as in them lay. And thereafter in the months above written, or one or
other of them, in anno 1646. the said Archibald Marquess of Argyle, and the
remnant persons above named Defendants, or one or other of them, in an unheard
of way of treachery and treason, delivered His Majesty's sacred Person into the
hands of the said Rebels, who thereafter most trecherously murdered him. For
eschewing and preventing whereof, the whole Estates of this Nation finding it
necessary and incumbent to them, for the relief of their Sovereign Lord from
his captivity, to ^aise an Army for that effect. The said persons complained
upon, or one or other of them, not only by subtle and clandestine means, by
Declamations and familiar Conserences, and openly by Declarations and public
Speeches in face of Parliament, opened the same; but also the same being past
into an Act in the month of (...) 1648. years, publicly entered their
disassent or Protestation against the same, most treasonably and trecherously
against the authority of the King, our dearest Father, and the Estates of
Parliament. And yet their malice not testing satisfied, they did by themselves,
their friends and adherents, in October 1648. years, or thereby, convocate or
raise in arms great numbers of His Majesty's Lieges, without any Warrant from
King or Parliament; and did in open hostility march to His Majesty's Burghs
Royal of Edinburgh and Sterling, prosecuting his said Army, killing His
Majesty's good Subjects, wasting and destroying their lands and houses. And
thereafter most basely and traite^ously invited the late Tyrant and Usurper
Oliver Crom^ell to enter His Majesty's Kingdom of Sc^^land, with an Army of
^^angers, Traitors and Secta^ies; sustained him and his treasonable Army with
all so^ts of provision, ^easting and countenancing himself and prime Officers
in the metropoly^an City of Our Kingdom, and within His Majesty's ^ort and
strength there of the Caille of Edinburgh, where the most considerable strength
of the Kingdom was for the time: By these mean^ ca^^ing the secresies of His
Majesty's Kingdom and Forts thereof upon to the view of those strangers and
trayto^^ Which, by the laws of this and all Nations, is high treason: and in
all probability was the Kingdoms bane and ruin, and was the act immediately
preceding the cruel Regicide and murder of their sacred Sovereign Our Royal
Father. At least they, or one o^ other of them, were either aiders, abe^tors,
assistants, promo^ers, divisers, or act and part, and particularly the said
Marqars^ of Argyle, of the aforesaid treasonable crimes and others above
libelled.

Secondly, the aforesaid persons, and particularly the said Archibald Marquess
of A^^y^^, not having yet satisfied hit malice, treasonable attempts and
purposes, not considering the duty either be owed to God, his Prince, Country,
Nobility of his Family, nor his own honor or reputation, after multiplicity of
Honors and Offices graciously conferred upon him by Our sacred Father, and the
dignity vouchsafed to him by Our Self, in allowing him the tr^st and honor of
setting Our Imperial Crown upon Our head upon the day of Our Coronation in
Scotland, which was the first of January 1651. years, in presence of Our whole
Nobility and Estates of Our said ancient Kingdom, putting the Crown upon Our
head, with bowed down knees and up listed hands, in presence of God, Angels and
men swore as sollows. By the Eternal God, who lives and reig^eth for ever, I
shall supp^^s thee to my ^^termost: And I s^^ar to be a loyal and true subject,
and faithful to the Crown. And thereafter also kneeling, and holding his hands
betwixt Our hands, did swear these words, By the Eternal and Almighty God, who
lives and reigns for ever, I became Your Liege, and truth and faith shall
bear to you and live and die with you, against all manner of folk whatsoever in
Your service. Notwithstanding of all which, after the said Archibald Marquess
of Argile had dissoyally and basely deserted Out Person and Army at Sterling,
when We were on Our match to Engl. in the year 1651. did in the months above
written, or one or other of them, anao 1652. at the desire of General Dean and
Colonel Overton, Our known and public enemies, they having come to In^^rrarey
with a Regiment of Soldiers, and there the said Marquess had conference and
consultation with them, and did swear, at least subscribed and acknowledged the
government of Our Dominions, as it was then established by the said wicked
Tyrant and Usurper Oliver Cromwell and his said adherents, in a Commonwealth,
without King or House of Lords; and obliged himself to live under it, and be
obedient thereto. And conform thereto most perjur'dly and infamously the said
Archibald Marquess of Argile, after the said Army of Rebels and Sectaries under
the command of the said General Major Dean and Overton, were drawn to such a
streit in their return from Innerarey, they being in the power of certain of
the said Marquess his friends, and diverse others of His Majesty's loyal
Subjects then in arms, standing in opposition against them; and they having
taken in all Passes, the said Marquess being then Our Justiciary in these
bounds, and Sheriff of Argyle, most traitorously and infamously against his
said Oath and duty, did interpose himself in favors of the enemy, commanding
and counselling Our said faithful Subjects, who stood in opposition to the said
enemy, did suffer them safely to pass without opposition: and by the said
Marquess his insinuation there was a safe pass given to the said enemy from the
foresaid danger. Like as further to evince the said Marquess his treasonable
compliance and affection to the said wicked Tyrant and Usurper Oliver Cromwell
in all his wicked and treasonable courses and attempts, he in the month of
(...) a thousand six hundred and fifty (...) years, upon a pretended call from
the said Tyrant and Usurper, to convene a pretended Parliament, without any
coaction or necessity, did engyre himself in favor of some Shires, and dealt
with them to elect him for their Commissioner; at least being elected he
voluntarily accepted thereof; and upon their said pretended Commission he went
to the said pretended Parliament at Westminster, and there most perfidiously
and perjuredly, t^^cherously, treasonably and ^^^ribily, contrary to his own
dignity and degree, sat and acted by Voting and other ways, in the said
pretended Parliament, as a Member of the House of Commons, for establishing the
said Tyrant his usurped authority, and abolishing of Us and Our Royal Race from
Our just right and title to Our Crowns of Scotland, England and Ireland. And
also the said Marquest in further prosecution of his treasonable rebellious
coune and designs, in the months above written, or one or other of them, in
the year 1653. or 1654. or either of them, sold and delivered several muskets
and other ammunition to the said Rebels, to the number of seventeen Cannon, and
seven hundred muskets, or there abouts.

Thirdly, in the year 1654. several of Our loyal subjects having for
Vindication of Our Authority, and revenge of Our Royal Father of blessed
Memory. His Murder, Taken arms under the command of Our. Trusly and right
well-beloved Cousins and Counsellouts, William Earl of Glencairn^, and John
Earl of Middlettes, then Our Commissioners for that effect. Against whom, and
Our forcer under their command, the said Enemies being about to transport eight
hundred men to the North, under the command of Col. Gebber, and being driven to
the Isle of M^le, and shi: broken in their way, and so ready to perish: The
said Archibald Marquess of Argyle and the remanent persons above complained
upon, or one or other of them, in the months above-written, or one or other of
them, in the year 1654. or 1655. did gather together all their own Boars and
others, and therein did safely transport them to Dunburten, from the said Isle
of Mule, and to other safe places. At least the said Archibald Marquis, of
Argyle, and remanent persons above complained upon, or one of other of them
were authors, aiddes, abettors, assisters, advisers, or ar^ and part, of the
foresaid treaso^r, and other crimes and misdeeds above libelled.

Fourthly, the said Marquis and remanent persons above complained upon, or one
or other of them in the months above written, or one or other of them in the
year 1654. 1655. most perfidiously, treacherously, and traitorously, went into
the said English Rebels, without any coaction or necessity to the Highlands in
Lochquhaber, and several other places; and joined with the said Rebels, for
suppressing of the said Parles of Glencairne and Middleton, then our
Commissioners, and our Forces under their command; and countenanced,
counseled, and conveyed the said Rebels, through diverse places in the
Highlands, in their expedition against our Forces. At least the said persons
defendents, and particularly the said Archibald Marquess of Argyle, were
Authors, Actors, Aiders, Abettors, Assisters, and Countenancers of the said
treasonable crimes, and others above specifyed.

Fifthly, when the said Arch-Traitor and Regicide dyed, Richard Cromwell his
Son, was by order of his Fathets traitorous Council, sitting at London
Proclaimed Protector of our three Kingdoms, at the Market Cross of Edinburgh;
which was done accordingly by a pretended Council sitting at Edinburgh for the
time. At the doing whereof, the said Archibald Marquess of Argyle most
traitorously, treacherously, and persidiously in the months of (...) a
thousaid six hundred fifty (...) year, went up to the said Cross of Edinburgh,
at the time of the said Proclamation, and did countenance and assist the same;
by which our authority was altogether abolished. And moreover, to further
evidence the said Marquess of Argyle, his willingness to serve the said
Usurper in the accomplishing of all his treasonable designs, and to extirpate
us from our Royal authority and Government, he endeavored by all means
possible, when the foresaid Tyrant and Usurper had commanded Commissioners from
shires in Scotland, to appear at London in his pretended Parliament, for
Establishing his Usurped authority, and abolishing of Us and Our Royal race
from our just Right and Title to our Crowns of Scotland, England, and Ireland;
and for suppressing of the Privileges, Laws and Liberties of this our ancient
Kingdom of Scotland. The said Marquess did in obedience of the said Traitorous
command, obtain himself to be Elected Commissioner for the Sheriffdom of Ba^^f:
and thereafter went up to England, and there sat as a Member of that Traitorous
Correction and meeting at London, wherein Declaration was made against Us and
our Successors, debaring us for ever, from our Just and lawful Right and Title,
to the Crowns of these our three Kingdoms. Likeas thereafter the said Marquess
did embrace the Office of Sheriff-ship of Argi^e from the enemy, and exercised
the same under them for his own ends; and did several times swear, at least
subscribe, in their favors against U^, Our Successors, Crown, Government and
Sovereignty; and to be obedient and live peaceably under their Government of
Our Kingdoms in form of a Commonwealth, at it was then established by the said
Traitor and Usurper. Of the which treasonable deeds and acts, and others
aforesaid, the said Defenders, and particularly the said Archibad Marquesi of
Argyle, or one or other of them, were anthory, aiders, abettors, assisters,
contrivers, promoters and countenancers.

Sixthly, to further manifest the said Marquess of Argyle his treasonable
deeds, acts and intentions against Us, contrary to his oath and duty, the same
evidently appears by his treasonable speeches following; in so far as he being
present in a Provincial assembly at Innerarcy in the month of (...) (...) one
or other of the months above written, in the year 1652. or 1653. or one or
other of them, some Ministers being then present, praying for His Majesty's
happiness and welfare, the said Marquess did openly say and declare before
them, That they were has fools to pray for that wicked, false, malignant King,
whom God had casten off, and would never restore again, and certain ^^ber words
to this purpose and meaning; the said Marques^ having uttered the like
treasonable speeches at London and elsewhere. And also in one or other of the
said two years above written, in the month of (...) or one or other of the
said months, the said Marquess being within a Chamber of his mansion house at
Lochhead in Ke^tyre, stamping with his foot did vaunt himself, saying, That he
was the only man that plotted the rising of the Forces in the West, terming
the same the Whig-rode, which proved the main cause of our ruin. Moreover his
correspondence, joining, acting and consulting with the Enemy for Our ruin is
more manifest, in so far as he did receive precepts from the said Tyrant and
Usurper Oliver Cromwell, directed to his Council at Edinburgh, for payment of
the sum of Twelve thousand pounds sterling, for good and thankful service
done by the said Marquess. Likeas he did keep correspondence with the Usurper
Richard Cromwell, and Charles Fleetwood in the year 1658. and 1659. by missive
Letters and other ways. As also with Sir Archibald Iohnston of Wariston, his
fellow traitor, in the said year 1659. when he sat in that traitorous meeting
or Council of the Rebels at London, called the Committee of Safety, wherein the
said Wariston sat as President: and did of new emit Declarations for
abolishing of Us and Our Successors, from Our just right and title to the
Crowns of these Our said Kingdoms. Of all which treasonable acts and deeds
aforesaid. intended or committed in one or other of the months of the
respective years above written, contrary to Our said Laws and Acts of
Parliament, and several other Laws, the said Defendants, and particularly the
said Archibald Marquese of Argyle, at least they, or one or other of them, were
authors, aiders, abettors, assisters, promoters, countenancers, contrivers, or
act and part.

Seventhly, Our said deceased Sovereign Lord and dearest Father, having granted
Commission upon the (...) day of March 1643. years under His said Majesty's
hand, authorizing and giving express order to the said Sir James Lamond to
prosecute a War, and levy Forces in His Majesty's name, against those in
Rebellion, and particularly against the said Marquess of Argyle, and to invade
his Bounds and Lands, as he was the principal Promoter of these odious and
rebellions practices against His Majesty's authority, as the said Commission by
way of a missive Letter directed to the said Sir James at more length bears. In
obedience whereunto the said Sir James, according to his alleagiance and bound
duty, levied all his friends and followers, and accordingly acted as became a
good Subject in His Majesty's service. For promoting whereof till the year
1646. That after His Majesty's comeing to (...), and casting himself upon the
trust of his Army lying there, the said Sir James did then lay down arms, and
with his friends reteared in a peaceable manner, to his own houses of Temart
and Esoog; there being no other houses for the shelter of his friends, the
Country having been formerly wasted and burnt. After which in the month of
(...) or thereabout, in the same year, the said defendents, or one or other of
them, being commanded by the said James Camphell of Arakingla^, Dr^gall
Campbell of I^^^^raw, and others their Officers, and others under the said
Marquis^ his command, old in a hostile manner lay siege to the said two houses,
using all manner of violence. And the said Sir Tames, after all legal meant
used for his own defense, did bring them to a treaty, where in by articles of
capitulation, they did grant to him, and has said friends and followers
indemnity in their persons and (...), with power to pass freely where they,
leased; as the said articles, subscribed by the hands of the said James
Campbell of Ar^^^^^las, Colin Campbell of Str^quhir, John Campbell Fire of
Dansta^^^ich, D^^can Campbell of Elangreg, Deugall Campbell of (...), Duncan
Campbell Uncle to the Lord of Lorbinell, and John M^ckl^^^^ F^are of
Craigintareiff of the date the third day of I^^e at more length bear^
nevertheless the aforesaid persons complained upon, or one or other of them,
did most persidiously, treacherously, and treasonably, shortly after the said
capitulation, plunder the said houses of their whole furniture and goods
therein; and did tob and take away from the persons within the same, their
whole money and clothes, did drive their whole Cattle of all sorts, which
together with the wallations formerly done by them, to the said Sir James, his
Friends, Vassals and Tenants, did exceed the sum of fifty thousand pound
Seerling. And in a most cruel and bath^rous way, win^^ some of his poor
friends were rescuing their own goods, they bacharously murdered and massacred
a member of innocent women, as namely. Marie Gila^^^, Marione Mackleish a young
maid, Cale^ch Breidmachfoyne, Margne^s Crawforde, and certain others; and
inhumanly left their bodies, as a prey to ravenous beasts and fowls. At the
least, the said persons or one or other of them, and particularly the said
Marquess of Argyle, were authors, actors, aiders, abetters, assisters,
contrivers, and art and part of the said cruel bloody murders, robberies,
oppressions, and other deeds and malversations above lybelled.

Eighthly, the said persons defendants, shortly after the said capitulation, and
contrary to the same, or one or other of them, and specially the said James
Campbell of Ardkinglas, Dougall Campbell of Iauerra^, Colin Campbell of
Straquhir, Duncan Campbell of Ellangreg, Dancan Campbell, Uncle to the Lord of
Lochnell, John Campbell Flare of Danstafneiche, did most treacherously,
perfidiously, and traitorously felter and bind the hands of near two hundred
persons, of the said Sir James his friends and followers, who were comprehended
within the said capitulation; detaining them prisoners with a guard, their
hands being bound behind their backs like thieves, within the said Sir James's
house and yards of Towart, for the space of several days in great torment and
misery, they being His Majesty's free Lieges and people. Likeas most
traitorously and persidiously, contrary to the said capitulation, they did
carry the said Sir James Lamond prisoner to the said house and castle of Escog,
and by that means, and for fear of the said Sir James his life, the keepers of
the said Castle, being the said Sir James's Friends and Vassals, they did
surrender the said house, upon capitulation of life, fortune and goods: which
capitulation was most traitorously and persidiously broken. And in pursuing of
their further villainy, after plundering and robbing of all that was within and
about the said house, they most barbarously, cruelly and inhumanly, murdered
several young and old, yea sucking children, some of them not one month old.
And further the said defendents or one or other of them, and particularly the
foresaid subscryvers of the said capitulations in the month of (...) 1646.
years, did most traitorously and perfidiously carry the whole people that was
within the said house of Escog prisoners with a guard to the said Sir James his
house of Towars, and shortly after their removal from the said house of Escog,
the said defendents, or one or other of them, caused burn the same, destroying
the whole Orchards and Plantings about the said house of Es^ng. And not being
content with their former cruelties, they shortly thereafter carried all the
said person, who were prisoners in both the said houses of Escog and T^^ars,
bound prisoners (being His Ma^ell^^ (...) Lieges) to several boa^s, sending
the said Sir James Le^^ind, his two brethren Robert Lamond of Escog, Patrick
Lamond his only Son, Dancan L^mand his Brother, and John Lamond of
A^chingylie, prisoners to the said George Campbell Sheriff. Deputy to the said
Marquess his house of (...), at which time the said persons or one or other of
them, most Villanously, contrary to the said capitulation, laws and acts of
Parliament aforesaid, burnt the said Sir James Lamonds mansion house of I^^a^e:
Of the which cruel crimes of treason, murders, fire raisings, burnings,
oppressions, robberies and other crimes above mentioned, committed contrary to
our said laws and acts of Parliament, and the capitulation abovewritten, the
said defendents, and particularly the said Mar^ness of Argyle, at least one or
other of them were aiders, abetters, assisters, commenancers, contrivers,
promoters and countellers of the same.

Ninethly, the said Persons Defendants, or one or other of them, contrary to
the aforesaid Capitulations, Our Laws and Acts of Parliament, upon the (...)
day of Inac 1646. most traitorously and perfidiously did carry the whole
people, who were in the said houses of Escog and Towars, in the said Boats, to
the Village of Den^^^e, and there most cruelly, traitorously and persidiously
caused hang upon one tree near the number of thirty six persons, most of them
being special Gentlemen of the name of Lamond, and Vassals to the said Sir
James, viz. Neill M^c^parrick altas Lamond, Archibald Lamond son to Baron Match
pa^rick of ^ersto^ne, Robert Lamond his brother, Duncan Lamond brother to the
said Robert, and Hugh Lamond their other brother. Dancan Gerlamend in
Kil^sarneck, Gocie and John L^^^^ds his some, Ew^n Lamond in Midtowars, Gilbert
Lamond, D^^can Lamond, John Mackqutin alias Lamond, Ar^hibald Mack^^in alias
Lo^^nd his brother. Donald Mackqu^in alias Lamond, Duncan and John Lamonds sons
to Walter ^am^^d brother Germane to the Lord of Escog, Hugh Lamond in Corrs of
the Carris, Robert Lamond in the Carris, Du^can Lamond there, Augus Lamond
there, Donald Lamond there, Walter Lamond there, Duncan Lamond called
Mackwalter there, Alexander Lamond in Ardyne of Nethercowall, William Lamond,
John Mackqutin younger alias Lamond, Patrick Brigle son to the deceased Mr.
John Beigle Minister at Ruliesay, Dovgall Haerper alias Mackalaster servant to
the said Sir James Lamond, John ^^^ond son to Gilbert Lamond of Knockour,
Gilbert Macklay in Glendarewall, James Lamond in Ardyne, Donald Lamond, James
Mackquein alias Lamond in Netherconall, James Lamond his son, and John
Mackpatrick alias Lamond in Ardyne. And also the said Persons Defendants, or
one or other of them upon the foresaid (...) day of June 1646. most cruelly,
barbarously, inhumanely and unchristianly murdered with durks, and cut down
with swords and Pistols the persons following, viz. John Lamond in
Auchinshallech, who being about the age of fourscore years, having a Flux upon
him, and being also pined away with hunger and thirst, they most cruelly and
barbarously stobb'd him with durks and skanes at the Ladder-foot: and did also
most barbarously murder stob and cut down the persons following, viz. Thomas
Brown, Neill Mankneill, Meldonich Mackman, John Mackman his Brother, Archibald
Hamilton, Meldonick Mackilmichael, Robert Michael, John Mackinlay, John Hendry,
Alexander Hundry, Patrick Hendry, John Lamond, Angus Mackilm^^^, John
Mackyunes, John Macekdongall, John Henry, William Mackwilliam alias Wilson, Hew
Mackcrow, John Mackcr^w his Brother, John Mackperson, Donald Mackperson, Duncan
Mackperson, Donald Mackilbreid Lamond, Duncan Lamond, Duncan Mackalaster,
Thomas Membryd, John Michaelson, John Moodie, and John Iamison then Provost of
R^besay, who being shot thrice through the body, finding some life in him, did
thrust several durks and skanes in him, and at last did cut his throat with a
long durk; The said John Iamison, not only representing His Majesty's
authority, as a prime magistrate of his burgh Royal, was so cruelly murchered
in contempt thereof, and of the Statutes made in that behalf. And to manifest
their further cruelty, they did cast some of the aforesaid persons into holes
made for them, who were spurning and wrestling, whilst they were suffocated,
with earth; having denied to them any time to recommend themselves to God;
albeit earnestly desired and begged by the said murdered persons. Insomuch
that the Lord from Heaven did declare his wrath and displeasure against the
foresaid inhumane cruelty, by stricting the ^ree whereon they were hanged, in
the said month o^ June, being a lively fresh growing as^^tree, at the
Kirk-yard of Demer^c, amongst many other fresh trees with leaves, the Lord
struck the said tree immediately thereafter; so that the whole leaves fell from
it, and the tree withered never bearing leaf there after, temaining so for the
space of two years: Which being cut down, there spring out of the very heart of
the root thereof a spring like unto blood popling up, running in several
streams, all over the root, and that for several years thereafter: Till the
said murthere^ or their savourers, perceiving that it was remarked by persons
of all ranks (reforming there to see the miracle) they did cause boock out the
root, covering the whole with earth, which was full of the said matter like
blood. Of the which cruel murders, the said persons, and specially the said
Marquess of Argyle, or one or other of them, were authors, actors, aiders,
abetters, assisters, contrivers, countenancers and (...), many of the said
persons defendents, being Officers under the command of the said Marquess of
Argyle.

Tenthly, Upon the Month of (...) 1646. the said Sir James Lamond, his said
brethren and friends, being detained prisoners at the said Marquess his house
of Iunerary, the said George Campbel Sheriff, and Justice deputy to the said
Marquess, James Campbel of Ardkenglas Collunder thecommand of the said
Marquest, Dougall Campbell alias Mackconnachie of En^rran Maso^ under the
command of the said Marquess, and certain other persons being met in a kind of
Conventicle, who did enquire of the said Sir James, whether he would submit his
life and s^^ tune to them, or not? who answered, That he would not pleading
upon His Majesty's Commission, the Capitulation given to him, and that he being
the Kings Baron could not be judged by them, none of them being such. Whereunto
the said George Campbell replied, that the said Sir James was a false Knave,
and that he would judge him whether he would or not, and hang him as
Justice-deputy of the said Marquess of Argyle; at which time the said George
Campbell did rob and seize upon the sum of 1000 l. belonging to Archibald
Lamond Brother to the said Sir James, and having within a little time
hereafter, searched the said Sir James for the said Capitulation, finding that
he had it not, and they considering the prejudice that might follow to them
thereby, they caused the said Sir James to subscribe a paper penned by the said
George, declaring therein that his quarrel was unjust, and that he repented
thereof, as also that he did pass from the Capitulation; which paper with
certain other Articles therein, was subscribed by the said Sir James, he being
compelled thereto for fear of death, having gotten notice at that same very
time, that his said friends and follows were cruelly Murdered by them at
Denron, as is above mentioned, after subscribing of the which Paper, two days
after the said Sir James, his two brethren, and four friends aforesaid were
committed prisoners, in several houses, appertaining to the said Marquess of
Argyle, the said Sir James remaining prisoner in the house of Dunstuffnagh, for
the space of four years, thereafter being carried to the Castle of Ineheoneill,
where he remained prisoner for the space of two years or thereabout, until he
was carried from thence to Sterling, by virtue of an Order from Us and Our
Estates of Parliament, they having not time to take trial of the matter at
that time, by reason of our Marching into England, sending the said Sir James
up to the Castle of Sterling, for fear of the said Marquess his cruelty; in
regard he often threatened, that if ever the said Sir James came in his power,
the World should not save his life, and that he repented nothing more, then
that he took not that bloody knave his life, whilst he had him in his power;
saying likewise, that all was but one fault: the which cruel crimes of
oppression and others above specified, the said Desendants, particularly the
Marquess of Argyle, one or other of them, were Actors, Aiders, Abettors,
Contrivers, Countenancers or Promoters.

Eleventhly, The said persons Defendants, their cruelty against the said Sir
James is manifest, in so far as the said Month of (...) 1651. Donald Campbell
sent John Campbell of Ardtarich of their special causing, bounding out and or
under their command o^ direction, came accompanied with 30. men, all armed with
Guns, Swords, Pistols, and other Weapons, invasive to the Coast side of the
Sheriffdomes of Air and Ranfrew, where they heard that the said Sir James had
his residence, and did search the house of Southern belonging to my Lord
Sempell, and the house of Corsby belonging to the Layrd o^ Auchnames, where the
said persons did make search for the said Sir James, two of them coming early
in the morning to the said house of Auchnames, the said Donald running up
staries, with a drawn Durk and benden Pistol, in either hand, making search
through the whole house and beds, to have Murdered the said Sir James, who by
providence was in the Wood, not knowing any thing of the intended Murder. And
the said persons being disappointed of their intentions, did retire to their
boats, the said Sir James flying at that time to the Isle of A^re^ to shelter
himself under the Protection of the now Duchess of Hamilton, who did reside
there for the time. Like as immediately thereafter the said Marquess of Argyle
and his accomplices, failing of their said intended Murder, the said Marquess
did desire a Warrant from the Committee of Parliament, in the said year 165^.
for apprehending the said Sir James Lamond, intending thereby to prosecute the
aforesaid Murder; which warrant was then refused to be granted to him, as
least the said Defendants, and particularly the said Marquess of Argyle or one
or other of them, were Authors, Actors, Aiders, Abettors, Assistors,
Contrivers, Countenancers, of the aforesaid crimes of Murder and oppression,
and others aforesaid.

Twelfthly, And further to evidence the aforesaid persons Defendants, and
particularly the said Marquess of Argyle, their cruelty and oppression against
the said Sir James, the said Marquess in the Month of (...) 1647, or
thereabouts, came to our house of Dunstasneiche, where the said Sir James had
been kept most unjustly and unwarrantably prisoner several years before, and
sending to him the late deceased Archibald Campbell keeper of our said Castle
under the said Marquess, C^^in Campbell of Loch^^ell, and Do^gall Campbell
alias Mack^^^^^chie of Inner^^, as Commissioners, with certain proposalls
following, viz. First, that the said Sir James should renounce and for ever
overgive all right, title and interest, he had to his own property, and his
vassalls superiority. And upon condition also, that the said Sir James, should
under his own hand abjure Scotland, and never to be seen therein: which being
done the said Marquess said he would give to Sir James a considerable sum,
threatening also that if the said Sir James would refuse the said offer, so long
as the said Marquess had an house in the World, the said Sir James should be
prisoner therein, and should torment him with pain and misery, till the marrow
should ^ot within his bones. The said Marquess declaring also, that he has
already possessed himself of the said Sir James, and his Vassals estates, which
he said he and his should possess, in dispight of those who would or would not.
Whereupon the said Sir James, considering with himself, within some few Months
thereafter, that what a prisoner did was Null in Law, and being most desirous
of his liberty, from so miserable and so long imprisonment, professed to be
willing to grant some of the former desires; the said Marquess hearing thereof,
caused carry the said Sir James with a guard, to the Town of Innerarey, where
the said Sir James did write some few lines, the substance whereof contained
the most part of the said Marquess's desires. Notwithstanding whereof, and the
said paper was delilivered to the said Marquess, he persisting in his former
cruelty and oppression, did send back the said Sir James to prison, where he
remained at Our said house of Dunsta^neich, so that the said papers so
subscribed and delivered to the said Marquess and George Campbell his Justice
and Sheriff Deputy (for which they and their accomplices ought to be punished as
oppressors and as actors and art and part of the aforesaid crimes) and all
following upon the said writings and papers ought to be declared void and null.

Thirteenthly, the said persons defendents, and particularly the said Archibald
Marquess of Argyle his Friends, and Complice, persevering in their further
oppression, in the month of (...) 1649. years, caused the said deceased
Archibald Campbell, then keeper of our said castle of Dunstasneich, under
command of the said Marquess, compel the said Sir James to grant a band to the
said Archibald, his heirs, executors and assigns, for payment of the sum of
four thousand four hundred Ma^^s of thereabouts, for alleging 4. years
entertainment in our said Castle, where the said Sir James Lamond was
violently, trai^^ously and illegally detained prisoner: Unto the which Band the
said Marquess be assigned, he did intend action thereupon before the English
Judges, and for that and certain other pretended debts, which were paid, the
said Marquess took forth caption against the said Sir James, intending thereby
to prosecute his forethought cruelties and oppressions, and to incarcerat him,
for obtaining his former designs. And so the said Marquess by acceptance of
the said assignation, pursued thereupon his imprisonments, threatenings and
others above and after specifyed.

Fourteenthly, the said George Campbell Justice under the said Marquess, still
continuing in his former cruelties and oppression, in the month of (...) 1647,
years or thereabouts, not only contrary to his said Majesty's Commission, but
also contrary to the Articles of Capitulation, our Laws and Acts of Parliament,
having taken Patrick Lamond F^are of Escog, and John Lamond of Auchingylle out
of the said Castle of Escog, after they had ^endred the said Castle upon the
Capitulation abovementioned, having detained them prisoners, the one in the
Castle of Car^ick, and the other in the Castle of Inchc^^ntill, for the space
of a year and three quarters, till the (...) day of January 1648. years. At the
which ^^^e the said Marquess, and the said George his Deputy, caused call a
pretended Court of Justice at the said Town of Innerrarey; where having
conv^en'd the said Patrick Lamond Flate of Escog. and John Lamond of
Auchingyll, at the said Town did call an Assize, consisting of High-land-men,
under power of the said Marquess, and his Deputy their Justiciarie, being also
their dependents and followers, and of the said George his making use of, for
the most part, for murders and oppressions. Which Assize having convicted the
said Patrick Lamond Fiare of Escog, and having absolved the said John Lamond,
in respect of some favors done to them, the said George Campbell nevertheless
caused the said pretended inquest thereafter to meet, contrary to the express
Law and Act of Parliament; the said George saying, that it was not fit that one
young man should die alone: Conform to the which unjust and illegal command and
direction, the aforesaid persons of the Assize did meet again, and did convict
the said John Lamond also, who by virtue of the said George his unjust and
unlawful sentence, the said two Gentlemen were hanged to death at Innerarey.
Like as the said Marquess of Argyle his concurse, countenancing and promoting
of the said cruel murders and oppressions, the said Marquess by himself,
James Campbell of Ardkinglas, and their Accomplices have still possessed the
Lands of Escog, and Auchingyll, belonging to the said two murdered Gentlemen;
whereof they are yet still in possession to this same very hour: the said John
Lamond leaving two Children behind him, the Eldest of them not two years old,
to whom the said Marquess refused to give any supply or entertainment; they
living still as yet upon the charity of the people. Likeas the said Marquess of
Argyle does most violently, illegally and unjustly, possess the lands
belonging to John Lamond of Auchinshelloch, who for age and infirmity, as said
is, was cruelly murdered at the ladder foot in manner above-written. At least
the said persons defendents; and particularly the said Marquess of Argyle,
George Campbell his Justice and Sheriff-Deputy, James Campbell of Ardkinglas,
or one or other of them were Authors, Aiders, Abettors, Assisters, Promoters,
Counselors, Contrivers and Art and Part of the said wicked murders,
oppressions, burnings, robbery, and other Deeds, and malvers actions
above-written. And further, to manifest the said Marquess of Argyle, George
Campbell his said Justice and Sheriff-Deputy, and their Accomplices, their
cruelty and oppression, they or one or other of them in the month of (...)
1648. years, having at that time murdered the said Patrick Lamond younger of
Escog as aforesaid, they caused immediately thereafter bring before them,
Duncan Lamond of Str^nalbanoch his Uncle and old man, being then prisoner at
Castle Lanchlane, to the Town of Innerrarey: threatening him, that if he would
not renounce and dispose his Right of the whose Lands of Re^^es, which he bold
of the Land of Lamond, then they would cause hang him, as his N^^hew was
immediately before. Likeas for safety of his life, the said Duncan Lamond did
grant a disposition of his said Lands of Re^^res, to the said Marquess of
Argyle, and did deliver to him the whole writings thereof, conform whereunto
the said Marquess con^^ still in possession.

And in like manner the said Marquess of Argyle, George Campbell his Justice
and Sheriff-deputy, and their said Accomplices, by their power and warrant have
possessed and do possess the Lands belonging to the said James Lamond, viz. The
Lands called Archibald Rey-Stewart, the Sixt-mark land of Ochrerhe^^^, the
lands of Craignifr^che: on which lands of Craignifr^che the said Marquess had
his own Bow^en and Herds, keeping thereon a number of his own proper goods
several years: The said Marquess possessing also several other lands both in
property and superiority belonging to the said Sir James, the Marquess having
no right thereto, but possessing the same by mere opposition. Of the which
crimes of Oppression and others above specified, the said Marquess of Argyle,
George Campbell Justice and Sheriff-deputy to the said Marquess, James Campbell
of Ardkinglas, Officer under the said Marquess's command, and remanent
Defendents, were authors, actors, aiders, abettors, assisters, contrivers,
promoters, and art and part. And fu^ther, the said Marquess of Argyle, George
Campbell his Justice and Sheriff-deputy, and their Accomplices and remanent
Defendants above named, or one or other of them, in the month of (...) 1648.
years, of thereabout, did seize and apprehend the person of Dongall Mackl^^gall
of D^^^a^ch, after he had surrendered the house of Dru^lick, upon a subseryv'd
Capitulation under the hands of Lieutenant General David Lesley for his life,
liberty and estate. Notwithstanding whereof the said Marquess and his said
servant, or either of them and their Accomplices, caused incarcerate the said
Dongall Mackl^^gall in the house of Inche^^ill, laying Irons upon him; who
being in miserable torment for the space of a year and a half and above, was
enforced at the said Marquess's desire to be free of the woeful Imprisonment and
torture, to grant to him a disposition and renunciation of the said Dongall's
lands of Barninggarr; whereof the said Marquess is still in possession since
the said year 1648. Of the which cruel acts of Oppression, particularly the
said Marquess of Argyle and George Campbell his servant, or one or other of
them, were authors, aiders, abettors, assisters, countenancers, promoters, and
art and part. And in like manner, Duncan Campbell of Elangreg most
trecherously, traitorously and perfidiously, after subscryving of the
Capitulation by him granted to the said Sir James, his friends and followers,
being a member of the Conventicle, and meeting at the foresaid cruel and wicked
murders committed at Deno^^, was a main author, actor, abettor, assister,
contriver and promoter of the said wicked murder committed there. Likeas
thereafter the said Duncan Campbell did take unlawful possession of Leymont
Lamond of Cowston's lands of Str^an and Cowston, and also the lands of
Trowstonne and Ardbeg, belonging to the said Sir James and Leymount. And also
the said Duncan Campbell with certain of his Accomplices, in the month of March
1646. years, came from his own house to the said lands of Costoun and Str^an,
and there murdered early in the morning of men and children to the number of
forty persons, viz. Archibald Lamond in Auchinf^^re, John Lamond there, (...)
L^mond son to Ewen Lamond there a child, Archibald Lamond of Rive, C^ll Lamond
his only son a child, Ewen Lamond in Midtowars, Duncan Lamond his brother,
Donald Mack^eill servant to the said Sir James Lamond, Donald Macklanchlane in
Kilmichael, Finlay Mackilbreid, Donald Makilbreid his brother, two of the name
of Mackalasters sons to Archibald Mackalaster in Killer^ane; (...) Macklelland
in Knockmillie, Robert Moodie in Castle Towart, John Mackiller servant to the
said Sir James, Harry Lamond, Archibald Mackperson, John Mitchelson, John
Leith, Dongall Leith, and several others. As also the said Duncan Campbell most
traitorously, trecherously and perfidiously, with the said Defendents his
Accomplices, were main actors, abettors, assisters, and art and part of the
burning of the said Sir James his house of Towart, taking away the goods and
plenishing therein, destroying of the said Sir James his own men, Tenancs,
Vassals and Servants; robbing and taking away of their goods the forsaid years
1645, and 1546, in one or other of the months thereof. Of the which
treasonable deeds, murders, fire-raisings, oppressions, robberies, and other
cruel acts and malversations above mentioned, the said persons Defendants, and
particularly the said Marquess of Argyle the said Duncan Campbell, an Officer
under the said Marquesse's command, George Campbell Sheriff and Justice-deputy,
of one of them, were authors, actors, aiders, abetters, assisters, contrivers
and promoters of the same. And in like manner Robert Campbell of A(...)ng, and
remanent defendents aforesaid, or one or other of them, most basely and
perfidiously, after the said Capitulation, and contrary thereto and Our said
Laws and Acts of Parliament above-written, in month of (...) or one or other
of the months above specified, in the year of God, 1646. 1647. 1648. 1649.
1650. 1651. 1652. 1653. 1654. or one or other of the said years, did violently
reave and carry away, several of the said Sir James's (...) plenishing, and
did destroy and cut down the whole plantings in and about the said Sir James
his house of T^^^^^, Orchards, Parks and Walks thereof; and did sell, use and
dispo^e thereupon, burning spailes and branches of the said Trees, socurred
upon the roots of the same, that they might never grow thereafter, demolishing
the walls of the said house, taking away the great hewed stones thereof, and
building therewith houses to himself. And also being present at the said bloody
and cruel murders committed at De^^^^e, and a main actor, aider, abettor,
assister, counselor and promoter thereof; as also was a main actor, aider,
abettor, assister, and a^^ and part of the great burnings, hairships, and tyffs
committed by the said Defendants, or one or other of them, of the said Sir
James his own men, tenants, Vassals and servants houses, in the year of God
1645. and 1646. in one or other of the months thereof. Of the which cruel
crimes, deeds and malversations above written the said Robert Campbell of
Auchin^illing, and the said defendents, or one or other of them were main
Actors, Aiders, etc. And also the said John Campbell of Ardtariche and remanent
defendents above written, or one or other of them, in the said month of June
1646. years, most villanously contrary to the said Capitulation, was accessory
to the burning of the said Sir James his house of Towart, and in the said
month was present at the meeting, and a main Counselor, Aider, Abetter or
Assister of the said Cruel and Bloody Murders, committed at the Village of
Dencone. And to make the Premises manifestly appear, the said John Campbell, by
meet Oppression having possessed the Lands belonging to the ^eceas'd Dancan
Lamond a Murdered person, particularly the Lands of Knockdaw, Innerchellane,
the Lands of Lettingall and Towart fleeming: And in like manner having by
Oppression also possessed himself of the Lands of Gortamlesk, Kilmarnock and
Brackleys, pertaining to the said Sir James; Taking away also before the
burning of his said house, several of the housholdstuff and plenishing
therein. Of the which Deeds and other Crimes above written, the said John
Campbell of Ardtariche, and remanent Defendents aforesaid, or one or other of
them were Authors, Aiders, etc.

And further Mr. Colin Macklanchlane, Minister at Lochgolisheed, being present
at the meeting in the said Village of Den^one, in the said month of June 1646.
most Villanously and Treacherously contrary to the said Capitulation, was a
main Counselor, Actor, Author, Aides, Assister, Abettor, Promoter and Art and
Part of the foresaid cruel murders, committed at the said Village of Dencone.
And further the said James Campbell of Ardkinglas Officer under the said
Marquess's command accompanied with his Regiment in the Lowlands, at the
Village of the L^rgis, in the month of (...) 1645. adding to his former
^^uelties, one (...) Lamond a beggar coming to the said James Campbell, and
craving his charity, the said James caused apprehend the said beggar, and most
cruelly caused murder and hang him, without any ground or warrant. Of the
which cruel Crime of Murder the said James Campbell of Ardkinglas, and the
said Defendents, or one or other of them were Authors, Actors, Abettors, etc.
And moreover the said James Campbell of Ardkinglas, Officer under the said
Marquess his command, and remanent persons Defendents aforesaid, intending
never to put a period to th^i^ cruelty, so long as any of the name of L^mond,
and their friends and followers were left in the month of (...) 1646. the said
James Campbell being accompanied with his said Regiment in the Lovelands, there
being brought to him by Ang^^ Mackil^^r^^ck, Der^^^^ Campbell, and the deceased
Francis Campbell his Brother, one John Machpatrick alias Lamond, the said James
Campbell of Ardkinglas, and remanent Defendents aforesaid, or one or other of
them, caused cruelly murder and hang the said John Machp^trick alias Lamond,
and that without any ground or warrant. Of the which crime of murder, the said
Defendants, or one or other of them, and particularly the said James Campbell
of Ardkinglas, were authors, actors, aiders, abettors, assisters, or art and
part.

And also, Alexander Campbell of Penny^^ir, with certain of his followers and
accomplices, upon the month of (...) 1645. years, did cease and apprehend, in
the Isle of Comeraw, one Robert Lamond Merchant residenter in Ireland, from
whence having come about his lawful occasions, to the said Isle of Co^^raw, the
said persons did most cruelly and villainously murder and shoot the said
Robert Lamond to death, at the said Isle: of the which cruel murder the said
Defendents, or one of other of them, and particularly the said Alexander
Campbell of Pe^n^m^ir, were authors, actors, aiders, abettors, assisters, or
art and part. And likewise the said George Campbell, Justice and Sheriff-Deputy
to the said Marquess of Argyle, still persisting in his wonted cruelties and
murders, in the month of (...) 1645. years, caused murder and hang one John
Don Maclanchlan of Ard^^d^^^^, at the said Town of I^^rary, and that without
any ground o^ warrant. Of the which cruel murder, the said Defendents, or
one or other of them, and particularly the said George Campbell, were authors
actors, aiders, abetters, assisters, of art and part.

And further, the said Archibald Marquess of Argyle, and George Campbell his
Justice and Sheriff-Deputy, likely never to make ^n end of their cruelty, in
the month of (...) 1647. years, or thereby, did most barbarously, cruelly, and
unch^^i^nly, murder and cut off Hector Macallaster of (...) and his two Sons,
at L^chhead in Ki^^yre, they being His Majesty's free Lieges, having received
Capitulation from the said Lieutenant General David Lesley, for life, lands,
estate and goods; who according to the said Capitulation did go home to their
dwelling house, living peaceably: Notwithstanding whereof the said Archibald
Marquess of Argyle and the said George Campbell his said Justice and
Sheriff-Deputy, sending so the said Hector Macallaster and his said two Sons,
coming and fearing nothing, they most traitorously and villainously, contrary
to the said Capitulation, caused to murthe^ and hang the said persons at
Lochhead in Kintyre. Of the which cruel murders the said Defendents, or one
or other of them, and particularly the said Archibald Marquess of Argyle and
George Campbell his Justice and Sheriff-Deputy were authors, actors, aiders,
abetters, contrivers, assisters, and promoters or art and part thereof. As also
Archibald Campbell Evinnochan, Son-in-Law to the Lord of Otter in the month
of (...) or one or other of the months respective above written, in the year
1646. was accessory, art and part, and aider, abetter, and assister of the
foresaids cruel and wicked murders, committed at the lands of Stroane, and at
the foresaid village of Den^on, being accessory also to the robbing and taking
away of the household stuff and plenishing of the said Sir James his said house
of Towart, and of the burning of the same. Of the which cruel acts of murders,
robberies, and fire-raising, the said Archibald Campbell was actor, author,
abetter, assister, contriver, counselor, promoter, and art and part thereof.

And likewise the said Marquess of Argyle and George Campbell his Justice and
Sheriff-Deputy, or one or other of them, in the month of (...) or one or other
of the said months above written, in the year of God 1639. or thereby, caused
sease upon and apprehend Col. Mac Gillespy, alias Mac Donnald, he being then
His Majesty's free Liege, incarcecate him in our said house of Dunstafneich,
where he remained prisoner till the year 1645. at which time being excambet
after the battle of Inverlochie, he was taken prisoner in Ila in the year
1647. being then in His Majesty's service, and within few days or weeks
thereafter, the said Marquess and the said George caused most cruelly hang the
said Col. Mac Gillespy, at our said house of Dunstafneich. And further, the
said Archibald Marquess of Argyle and George Campbell his Sheriff and Justice
Deputy, or one or other of them upon the month of (...) or one or other of the
months above written, in the year 1647. or 1648. caused cruelly murder and
hang Ronnald Macdonnald Son to the said Col. at In^^rary.

And also the said Marquess of Argyle and George Campbell his Justice and
Sheriff-Deputy, most treacherously, trasterously, and perfidiously caused
cruelly murder and hang, in the month of (...) or one or other of the months
above written, in the year of God 1647. Alexander Maccoll Vick^^^nald alias
Mackallaster in K^^^ichell of L^rgy, notwithstanding of a Capitulation granted
by the said Marquess of Argyle and Lieutenant General Les^y, or one or other
of them: Of the which three cruel murders immediately preceding, committed at
Inverary and Dunst^^^eich the said Defendents, or one or other of them, and
particularly the said Archibald Marquess of Argyle, and George Campbell, his
Justice and Sheriff-Deputy, were authors, actors, aiders, abettors, assisters,
advisers, countenancers, and promoters, o^ art and part.

Of the which treasonable crimes, Murders, Robberies, Oppressions, and all
other crimes, misdeeds, and malversations above mentioned, or one or other of
them, the forenamed persons above complained upon, and every one of them, at
least one or other of them, were Actors, Authors, Abetters, Assisters,
Countrivers, Devisers, Consulters, Advisers, or Art and Part. And thereby they
and each one of them, at least one or other of them, have incurred the
respective pains and punishments, prescribed by our said Laws, and Acts of
Parliament, viz. the forfeiture of Life, Lands, Dignity, Estates, and Goods,
and the benefit thereof to be applied to our use, or such use as we and our
said Estates of Parliament, or these empowered by us for that effect shall
appoint; at the least have incurred such other censure and punishment, in their
Bodies, Names, Fames, Estate, and Goods, as we and our said Estates of
Parliament, or those empowered or authorized by us for that effect, shall think
fit, to be applied, as said is, according to the nature and quality of their
several crimes, misdeeds and malversations, done and committed by them, which
ought and should be inflicted upon them with all rigor, in example of others.

Our Will is herefore, and we Charge you that you lawfully Summon, Warn, and
Charge, the whole forenamed persons, Defendents, above named as follows, viz.
so many of them as are within this our Realm of Scotland, personally, if they
can be apprehended, and failing thereof, at their dwelling places, and by open
Proclamation at the Market Crosses of the head Borroughs of our Sheriffdomes,
or other Jurisdictions within the which they dwell; and so many of them as are
without the same, by open Proclamation at the Market Cross of our Burgh of
Edinbargh, peir and shore of Leith, upon threescore days warning, to appear
personally before us and our Estates of Parliament, or those empowered or
authorized by us for that effect, at Edinburgh, or where it shall happen them
to be for the time, the (...) day of (...) with continuation of days to answer
at the instance of our said Advocat, for our interest, and at the instance of
the said Sir James Lamount, for himself, and in name and behalf foresaid for
his interest above written. That is to say, the said Defendents, to h^^r and
see it found and declared, verified and proved, in presence of our said
Estates of Parliament, or such as shall be authorized by us and them, that the
said Defendents, and every one of them, at least one or other of them, have
committed, and are guilty of, the crimes of High Treason, and other crimes,
Murders, Robberies, Oppressions, Misdeeds, and Malversations, respective above
specified, or one or other of them; at least they and every one of them, or one
or other of them, were Authors, Abetters, Contrivers, Devisers, or Art and Part
thereof: and the same being so verified and proved, to hear and see it found
and declared, by us and our said Estates of Parliament, or those empowered or
authorized by us for that effect, that the forenamed persons, and every one of
them, have thereby incurred the respective pains and punishments, prescribed by
our said Laws and Acts of Parliament; and to hear and see the sentence and doom
of forfeiture pronunced against them for the same, viz. the forfeiture and
loss of Life, Lands, Dignities, Estates and Goods, and the benefit thereof to
be applied to our use, or such as we or our said Estates of Parliament, or
those authorized by us for that effect shall appoint; at least to hear and see
themselves adjudged to be censured in their Persons, Nature, F^^^es, Estates
and Goods, as we and out said Estates of Parliament of those empowered or
authorized by as for that effect, shall think fit, according to the nature and
quality of their several Crimes, Misdeeds and Malversations, committed and
done by them; and to hear and see the foresaid pains and punishments decerned
to be executed, and inflicted upon them, with all rigor, in example of others,
at the ^^bitt^^ent and determination of us and our said Estates of Parliament,
or those empowered and authorized by us for that effect: With certification to
the disobeyers, if they be con^um^cious and appear not, we and our said Estates
of Parliament, or those empowered and authorized by us, for that effect, will
then instantly proceed against the said Defendants, and every one of them, who
does not appear, as Rebels and Traitors, and guilty of High Treason against Us
and our Crown, and the Estates of this our ancient Kingdom; to the forfeiting
of their Lives, Lands, Estates and Goods, to be applied, (...) said is (...)
and that their absence and contumacy shall be holden, as a manifest probation
of their guiltiness, without necessary of any further probation. But if they
appear and remain present at the whole dyets of the procedure, that then we
and our said Estates of Parliament, or those empowered and authorized by us for
that effect, will proceed against the said Defenders upon lawful probation, to
the forfeiting of their said Lives, Lands, Estates, and Goods, to be applied as
said is; Or otherwise by punishing and censuring of them, according to the
nature and quality of their Crimes, Misdeeds and Malversations, in their
Persons, Estates, Goods, Name and Fame, or some other manner of way, as we and
our said Estates of Parliament, or those empowered or authorized by us for that
effect, shall think fit and appoint, conform to our sentence, decree and
determination to be given and pronounced by us against the said Defenders
therein, according to justice, to be called summarly without diet, table or
continuation of other summons; because the foresaid action is for crimes of
High Treason, and other Acts, Misdeeds and Malversations, committed and done by
the forenamed persons against us, and the Estates, of this our ancient
Kingdom, and the public good and peace of the same; at least, whereof the
forenamed persons Defendents were Aiders, Abetters, Assisters, Consulters,
Devisers, Advisers, or Art and Part. And therefore merits summary process,
conform to daily practique, used in the like cases, and an deliverance granted
by our Committee of Estates theranent. Moreover, that you lawfully Summon,
Warn and Charge, to appear before Us, and Our Estates of Parliament, or those
empowered or authorized by us, for that effect, the said day and place with
continuation of days to bear seill and soothfast witnessing, in so far as they
know, or shall be asked at them, in the said matter, under all highest pain and
charge that after may follow: As you will answer to us thereupon. The which to
do we commit to you, conjunctly and severally, our full power by these our
letters, delivering them by you duly executed, and indorsed again to the bearer.

Given under our Signet at Edinburgh, the twenty eighth day of December, and of
our reign the twelfth year, 1660. Edingburgh January 23. 1661. Ex deliberatione
commissionis Parliamenti sic^subscribitur. Jo. Cunynghame.
Signed by warrant from the Parliament. Sic subscribitur, W. Sharp.

FINIS.

