A Copy of the COMMISSION OF ARRAY: Granted From His Majesty TO THE Marquess
of Hertford.

REad in the House of Commons, and Ordered to be forthwith Printed and
published:

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



AUGUST 24. 1642. London, Printed by L.N. and I.F. for E. Husbands and J.
Franck, and are to be sold at their shops in the middle Temple, and the
King's Head in Fleetstreet.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms
CHARLES REX:

CHARLES by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To Our Right trusty, and Right welbeloved Cousin
and Councellor, William Marquess of Hertford, Greeting.

Whereas there are now at and near the City of London, great Forces levying,
and Moneys raising by way of Contribution and otherwise, toward the charge of
the raising, and maintaining an Army or Forces, by Order of Our two Houses of
Parliament, not only without Our Consent, but contrary to Our several
express Commands, published by several Proclamations, Letters, and otherwise;
and the same Forces are actually in so much forwardness, as that there are
diverse Horsemen daily Exercised, and Trained in places about Our said City of
London, and great numbers of Foot raising, and a General, and other principal
Officers declared; We have found it necessary to raise and levy Forces for the
defense of the Protestant Religion, Our Person, the two Houses of Parliament,
the Laws of the Land, the Liberty and Property of the Subject, and Privileges
of Parliament. And for the special trust and confidence We have and do repose
in your approved Wisdom, Fidelity, Valor, and great Ability, Do name, assign,
constitute and ordain you the said William Marq: of Hertford, to be Our
Lieutenant General of all such Forces, as by virtue of this Our Commission
shall be levied and raised, or by virtue of this Our Commission shall be
brought unto you within all or any Our Counties of Devon, Cornwall, Sommerset,
Dorser, Southampton, Gloucester, Berks, Oxon, Hereford, Monmouth, Radnor,
Brecknock, Glamorgan, Carmarthen, Pembroke, Cardigan, and in Our Cities of
Exeter, Bristoll, Gloucester and Oxford, and the Counties of the same; And
likewise in Our Cities of Bath and Wells, New Salisbury and Hereford, and also
in Our Towns of Pool, Southampton and Haverfordwest, and the Counties of the
same Towns. And therefore We do give you full Power and Authority, in case of
any Invasion, Insurrection and Rebellion, or any of them; and for the
suppression or prevention of acting, or further executing the same, to raise
and levy Forces, as well of Our Trained-B^nds as others, within all or any of
the said Counties and places, as well within Liberties as without, meet and apt
for the Wars: And likewise to command and enjoin the Commissioners of Our
Commissions of Array, and Sheriffs of Our said several Counties, and all Our
Lieutenants, which are or shall be of or for Our said several Counties, and
every or any of them respectively from time to time, according to such
direction as you shall receive from Us, or as you in your good discretion for
the purposes aforesaid shall think fit to send, or cause to be sent unto you
such numbers of Our said Subjects, apt and meet for the Wars, Armed and Arrayed
as aforesaid, to such place or places, and at such times as shall be directed
by Us, or as you by your wisdom and good discretion for Our said services shall
require, or from Our said Commissioners, Sheriffs or Lieutenants, to be sent,
brought or conducted unto you. And We do further by these presents give you
full power and authority to try, Array, and put in readiness the persons so by
you to be raised, levied, or assembled, sent, conducted, or brought unto you
and them also, and every of them after their abilities, degrees and faculties,
well and sufficiently to cause to be armed and weaponed, and to take the
Musters of them from time to time in places most meet for that purpose after
your good discretion: And also the same Our Subjects so Arrayed, tried and
armed, as well men of Arms as other Horsemen, Archers and Footmen of all kinds
of degrees meet and apt for the Wars, to conduct and lead, as well against all
and singular Enemies, Rebels and Traitors, and every of their Adherents,
attempting any thing against Us, Our Crown and Dignity, in any of the said
Counties or places, from time to time as occasion shall require: And the said
Enemies, Traitors and Rebels to invade, repress, and in case of opposition or
resistance, to slay kill, and put to execution of death, by all ways or means,
according to your go^^ discretion; And to do, fulfill and execute all and
singul^r other things which shall be requisite for the levying, conducting and
government of the said Forces for the conservation of Our said Realms and
Subjects in peace: And also We give you full power and authority t^ (...)
constitute, and ordain Laws, Ordinances and (...)ions from time to time, as the
case shall re^^^^^ (...) the good government and order of all the Force^ (...)
shall be under your command, and the same and every of them to cause to be duly
proclaimed and performed, and executed against the said Enemies, Traitors and
Rebels, and every of them, their and every of their Adherents; And of such
offenders apprehended, or being brought into subjection, to save whom you shall
think good to be saved. And Our further will and pleasure is, and We do by
these presents give unto you full power and authority, in case any Invasion of
Enemies, Insurrections or Rebellions shall happen to be moved in any place in
this Our Realm, within or without the limits of this Our Commission, that then
(as often as need shall require, by your good discretion, or as you shall be
directed by Us by any special commandment) you, with such power to be levied
within the limits of this Our Commission as you shall think requisite, or as
shall be directed from Us as is aforesaid, shall with all diligence repair to
the place or places where any such Invasion, Rebellion or Insurrection shall be
made, to subdue, repress and reform the same, as well by Battle or other kind
of force as otherwise, according to the Laws of this Our Realm, and according
to your good discretion. And our further will and plersure is, and We do by
these presents give unto you full power and authority, in case any Invasion of
Enemies, Insurrections or Rebellions shall happen to be moved in any of the
said Counties or places, That then, and as often as you shall perceive any such
offenses or occasions to grow or arise, you with all the power you can make,
shall with all diligence repair to the place where any such Invasion,
Insurrection or Rebellion shall happen to be made, and to subdue, repress and
reform the same, and every of them. And We do give full power and authority to
you, for the execution of this Commission, to appoint and assign ^ll
Commanders and Officers necessary and requisite for government and command of
Our Army. And further also, That in case you shall in your discretion think fit
to divide or dispose the said Forces by land or by sea, into several parts,
that then you may as often as occasion shall ^e, divide and dispose the same
for the purposes aforesaid, unto such parts and places at your pleasure, and
appoint ^uch Commanders over such parts of the said Forces, as in your
discretion you shall think meet: And We do further give and grant unto you full
power and authority for Us and in Our name (as occasion shall require, according
to your discretion) by public Proclamations to make tender of Our Royal Grace
and Pardon to all such Traitors and Rebels (if any shall be) as shall submit to
Us, and desire to be received to Our Mercy; And for the better execution of
this Our service, We do further give and grant to you full power and authority
(as occasion shall require) whenever you shall (according to the intent of
these Our Letters Patents) have an Army, or Forces under your command, in Our
absence to command all Our Forts and Castles now fortified, or hereafter to be
fortified, in or near the parts or places where the said Army shall be, and to
remove, displace or continue the Captains, Lieutenants, Commanders and
Soldiers, as you shall think meet, for the good and safety of this Our Kingdom.

Wherefore We will and Command you Our said Lieutenant General, with all
diligence duly to Execute the Premises with effect; And whatsoever you shall
do by virtue of this Our Commission, and according to the tenor and effect of
the same, touching the Execution of the Premises, or any part thereof, you
shall be for the same by these presents discharged in that behalf against Us,
Our Heirs and Successors. And further, We will and command all and singular
Our Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Officers of Our Ordnance, Justices of
Peace, M(...) Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, Headboroughs, and (...) Our
Officers, Ministers and Subjects, meet and ^pt ^o^ the Wars within the said
Counties and pl^ces, to whom it shall appertain, that they ^n^ ^very of them
from time to time shall be atten^ant, ^iding, assist^nt and helping to you, and
at the commandment of you as aforesaid in the Execution hereof, as they and
every of them tender Our pleasure, and will answer for the contrary at their
utmost perils. Nevertheless Our will and pleasure is, That you the said
William Marquess of Hertford, in the Execution of this Our Commission, shall
from time to time proceed according to such private Instructions as are or
shall be delivered unto you under Our Sign manual.

In Witness whereof, We have made these Our Letters to be made Patents, and to
have continuance during Our pleasure.

Witness, etc. Our Self at York the second of August, 1642. Vera Copia.
HERTFORD.

FINIS.

