THE Deceived, and deceiving Quakers DISCOVERED.

Their damnable Heresies, horrid blasphemies, mockings, railings, unparalled
Deceit, and Dishonesty laid open.

In the discovery of which, is made known the pure use of the holy Scriptures
(which by them is denied) the true Christ, and how he justifies, his second
coming proved not to be already (as the Quaker affirms) Also the Resurrection
from the dead, and the Eternal JUDGMENT, and several other particulars that
Saints are required to be steadfast in.

Set forth especially for the good of those that are called out of the World,
into the primitive order of the Gospel, but may be useful for all people. By
Matthew Caffyn a servant of the Lord, related to the Church of Christ near
Horsham in Suffex, being an eye, and ear-witnesse.

As we have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now are there many
Antichrists, whereby we cannot but know that this is the last of the last time.

Antichrist made known. OR, The Romish Whore of Babylon proved not to be the
Antichrist, or Man of Sin, In seven particulars.

1 Who is this great Whore of Babylon, and where her chief Seat has been, and
is. 2 Her Fall, and the means how and by whom. 3 What is the spirit of
Antichrist, and who has that spirit. 4 That the Antichrist will be a single
person. 5 The manner of his rising, and when. 6 Some of the great things he
will do. 7 Lastly, His Fall, when, and by whom.
By William Jeffery Servant of the Church of Christ.

Entered into the Register book, kept by the Company of Stationers.

LONDON, Printed by R. I. for Francis Smith, and are to be sold at his shop in
Flying-horse-Court in Fleet street, near Chansery-Lane. 1656.

To the Reader.
REader, take notice, that the hour is coming and now is, that Satan in a more
than ordinary manner does transform himself into an Angel of Light, and shape
his Ministers into the similitudes of Ministers of Righteousness, that so he
may not only take faster hold of those that are already under his dominion, and
blind their minds, lest the Light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ should
(in the purity thereof) shine unto them; but also that he may (if possible)
deceive the very Elect, and cause them that have escaped the pollutions of the
World, to be again entangled therein, and overcome. Therefore those
exhortations so often repeated in the Scripture, to take heed, watch, and pray,
etc. are of great necessity, by all Saints, to be in a special manner
regarded; for that Satan will endeavor to deceive such, is most certain; And
it is as certain that the most likely way and means that he has to effect this
his design, must be by fair shows of holiness, and excellent pretenses of
Piety, which is figured out in Scripture under the name of Sheeps clothing,
with which Christ says the false Prophets (which are Satan's Ministers) shall
be attired. Therefore it is possible that a Christian-like outside may be, in
some, but a cover for an Antichristian spirit. And that Satan should thus
delude his Servants into such a conversation that savoreth of sobriety,
self-deny all, and a transformity from the World, in very many things, which
are very eminent characters of Christianity; I say, that the Devil should
delude some into a show of such things, is no more to be admired at, than his
acting forth himself in the Magicians of Egypt, to work miracles, much like to
those which God showed by his servant Moses. Yea the Apostle testifies, that in
his days some did make resistance to the truth after this manner, 2 Timothy 3.8.
and of some also that were deluded into a voluntary humility, and such things
as he confesses to have a show of wisdom in will worship, and humility, and
neglecting of the body, not in any honor to the satisfying of the flesh. Now
it is a kind of self-denial to neglect the body, and not to satisfy the desires
of the flesh; And also to abstain from meats, which God has created to be
received with thanksgiving, as he says, 1 Timothy 4.^ 2, 3. that some should do,
who yet were such as had departed from the faith, and given heed to seducing
spirits and Doctrins of Devils. And thus Satan by transforming his servants
into such shows, does make them the more fit to advance his deceiving design
amongst the sons of men; for hereby he does not only deceive them, but also
furnish them with ability to be DECEITFUL WORKERS to prevail upon others, 2
Cor. 11.13. And of this sort are those people now called QVAKERS, whose
deceitful, and heretical ways (in part) are in this little volume presented
before thee (in answer to a book entitled, An untaught teacher witnessed
against) lest thou should by their subtle insinuations and fair pretenses of
self-deny all, etc. so far let out thy affections toward them, as not to try
them in other things, which being thoroughly searched out, will prove them to
be those deceivers which ye have heard should come in the last days, of
whose deceit (O reader) be thou aware, and consider that the deceiver cannot
put away his brass money but by mixing it among good silver, whereby men may, if
not circumspect, be unawares deceived. Wherefore be CIRCV MSPECT, and stable
in all thy ways; And if through reading and due consideration of this ensuing
treatise, thou shall be the better fitted to discern truth from error, CHRIST
from ANTICHRIST, and so (through grace) be the better enabled to stand fast,
the aim of me herein is accomplished, who am

An unworthy servant of Christ, desirous of the eternal welfare of thy soul,
MATTHEW CAFFYN.

The Damnable Heresies of the Quakers Discovered.
CHristian Friends, it does not a little concern the People of God at this time
to walk circumspectly, having their Lights burning as wise Virgins, that they
may be the approved of the Lord, and so the preserved of the Lord in these last
days, wherein the evil is great; justly may we be blamed (as others have been)
by the Lord, if we discern not this time; which is, and much more will be full
of peril, yea such a time of trouble as never was since there was a Nation,
Dan. 12.1. in which the Mystery of Iniquity that did in measure work in the
Apostles days, shall be finished, and the Man of Sin revealed the Son of
Perdition; which then was let, even till our days, by the power of the Kings of
the earth, which withstood the liberty of men's Consciences, 2 Thessalonians. 2.6, 7, 8.
but now the Lord has removed it in this our Nation, and so we have (praised be
the Lord) enjoyed much Liberty and Freedom; by means whereof the Gospel of
Jesus has been, and yet is declared among the Sons of Men; whereby diverse have
been fully convinced of the Truth of Christ, some of which have denied
themselves and become obedient: and other some have put from them the words of
everlasting life; yea notwithstanding all the goodness of God, together with
his long-sufferance, and long patience toward them, have not received the love
of the Truth, that they might be saved; for which cause God has sent a strong
delusion, that they (as considered opposing Grace) might believe a Lie, and so
be damned, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11. wherefore in the fear of the Lord God who thus
judges, let us grow, and abound in pure love unto the Lord, and his Truth,
that we may stand in these last perilous days; wherein Satan will work not only
with power, but with all Power, Signs, and lying Wonders; not only with deceit,
but with all deceivableness of unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10. O then let us
be watchful, and with all care awake to righteousness; putting on the whole
Armor of God, that we may be able to withstand all the wiles of the Devil, for
the time is come wherein we must wrestle against the Powers of Darkness, and
Spiritual wickedness, which is crept into Sheeps clothing, having such fair
pretenses, as that those that are not in some measure acquainted with their
double-meaning expressions, cannot suddenly find out the iniquity of the
Mystery. Wherefore I concluded it necessary, having some experience of the
deceitful, pernicious ways of the people called Quakers, to signify to all,
what I have been an ear, and eyewitness of concerning them, whom we see many
follow, whereby we hear the way of Truth is evil spoken of, and the professors
thereof slandered, and falsely accused; but this is, that the Scripture might be
fulfilled, which testifies of the coming of the Wicked one, before the coming
of the Just one, (the Lord Jesus) Mat. 24.24. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3, 4. who shall
destroy him with the brightness of his coming, verse. 8.

The Quaker says, That there is such a light in every man (which they say is a
measure of Christ) that leads, and guides into all the ways of God, without the
Scripture, or any outward Teachings; and ( says Nayler) is the ONLY revealer
of the Gospel; as appears in his Book called, Satan's design discovered, page 32.

Let us mind the Law, and Testimony, for if they do not herein speak according
to it, it is because they have no light in them.

True it is, that there is such a knowledge, or light in man (considered with
the continual voice of the Heavens, Psalm. 19.) as to know that there is a God,
and in measure also what is just, and good, according to that he was first
Created in, and so in measure evil, when he walks contrary to this light; and
to this was added, (in the days of Moses) the written Law, which remains to us;
showing to us (as it did to them) things that are MORE EXCELLENT, being
instructed out of the Law, Romans 2.18. sin also appearing by it exceeding
sinful, Romans 7.13. for had not the Law said, Thou shall not covet, Paul
signifies, that he had not known lust to be sin, Romans 7.7. wherefore he
concludes, that the Jew had great advantage, and profit above the Gentile, and
chiefly because that unto them were committed the Oracles of God, Romans 3.1, 2.
now the Gentiles having not the Law, were indeed a Law unto themselves (says
Paul) but to the Jews that had the written Law he says no such thing; but
(says Moses) THIS BOOK of the Law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou
shall meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe to do according
to all that is written therein, Josh. 1.8. wherefore it follows, that the
Gentiles, considered HAVING NOT THE LAW (mark) were a Law unto themselves; that
is, in reference to such things as were contained in the written Law of Moses,
by the deeds of which the Apostle afterward says, No flesh shall be justified
in his sight, Romans 3.20.10.5. it being weak through the flesh, Romans 8.3. that
is, man being by the Fall under manifold Curses, is often overcome, and acts
contrary to his knowledge from the Law, while his Nature still inclines to its
first ease, pleasure, and delight; and so by the Law he is condemned, for by it
is the knowledge of sin, Romans 3.20. wherefore no righteousness, no Soul-peace
by it, for he that DOES these things shall live by them, says the Law; the
Soul is wounded, and nothing will cure it, but the knowledge of remission of
sins, which is made known by outward means; wherefore it was said of John, that
he should go before the face of the Lord, to give knowledge of Salvation unto
his people by the remission of their sins, Luke 1.77. which was to be preached
by the Commandment of Christ to all Nations by the APOSTLES, Luke 24.47. yea
at the beginning was it made known by outward discoveries, for it is recorded
of Abel that he was righteous by faith; now, says the Apostle, there is but
one faith, and this comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, Romans
10.16, 17, 18. which people in Primitive times heard, as spoken UNTO them
diverse ways; and so whoever of the Gentiles that sought for glory, honor, and
immortality (having faith therein by hearing) and in the mean while, patiently
continued in doing well according to the Law written in their hearts, Romans 2.7.
they so believing were excused in themselves, but if otherwise, accused; for
so, and no otherwise Israel that had the (written) Law could be excused by it,
for by the deeds thereof no flesh shall be justified; wherefore God at sundry
times, in diverse manners spoke unto the Fathers BY THE PROPHETS, the way of
Justification, Heb. 1.1. Wherefore, says the Prophet, should ye not hear the
words which the Lord has cried by the former Prophets? Zach. 7.7. if ye will
not heat the words of my servants the Prophets, then will I make this house as
Shiloh, Jer. 26.4, 5, 6. showing plainly, that God did not, (as by himself
dwelling in all men) speak to them his whole counsel, but unto them, by his
Prophets; and Judgments are threatened upon the not hearing of their words, not
upon the slighting of such a light within; and besides, Faith is said to come
through their words, Romans 10.16, 17, 18. no where is it said, no not by any of
the Prophets, that God required men to wait altogether upon such a light
within; yet says Nayler, that is the ONLY revealer of the Gospel; it is plain
the Prophets had another spirit; for Jeremiah bids the people stand in the
ways, and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk
therein, and you* shall find rest for your souls, Jer. 16.16. now if the good
way, and all the way were within them, why were they to ask for it, and to
enquire, standing in the ways? and not rather to stand still silent, waiting
upon the light within; the wise must needs judge, the reason was, because the
will of the Lord in order to soul-peace, and rest, was discovered by outward
means; wherefore incline your ear, and come unto me, hear, and your soul shall
live, Isa. 55.3. which when Israel neglected, Isaiah complains, saying, Who
has believed OUR report? the Quaker cries, who has waited upon the light
within, the light within? another report, wherefore another Spirit.

Though we may not deny, but that through the report of the Prophets they were
enlightened within* from whence they were to act; so faith comes by hearing,
and hearing by the word of God; now the Quaker may not say that word is Christ;
(the light within) because Paul affirms, that in order to that Faith which
comes by hearing; their sound went into all the earth, and THEIR words unto the
ENDS of the world, Romans 10.18. now (THEIR) cannot be ascribed to one Preacher
singly; therefore is not such a light within, which is but one; and if the
Quaker slight this, he is more inexcusable than other men, since he has so far
searched, as to find that (you) relates not to a single person; also by this
saying of Paul we may consider that the Gentiles also were enlightened by the
Gospel-preaching Prophets, who sometimes were to go unto the Heathen to
minister unto them, as witnesses Jonahs going to Nineveh, and most evident it
is, that there were some proselited out of every Nation under Heaven to the way
of the Lord, which the Jews professed, Act. 2.5. yet the Jew had a privilege
in this, but where much is given, much is required; moreover if we look yet
farther back, I say as I said before, that there is not to be found such an
admonition, no not from the very beginning, as that men should wholly depend
upon a teacher within; this I find, Judge. 7.14. that Enoch the seventh from
Adam prophesied of the Lords coming WITH (he says not in) ten thousand of his
Saints, as the Quaker pleads; Noah also is said to be a Preacher of
Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.5. and through his obedience in preparing the ark he
is said thereby to condemn the world, Heb. 11.7. also it appears that the Lord
showed his wrath, and made his power known upon Pharaoh, and his mighty Host,
that his name (through that memorable act) might be declared throughout all the
earth, Exodus 9.16. also we find that God did speak unto Moses out of a cloudy
pillar which descended in the sight of the people; unto Abraham he spoke by an
Angel from Heaven; and the common expression in Scripture to signify the way of
Gods speaking is this; the Lord said unto Abraham, unto Isaac, unto Moses, but
I find not where it is said, that God did speak in his people, his whole will
and counsel, as the Quaker affirms.

Object. That which may be known of God is manifest in man, says Lawson.

Answ. As Paul informs us that which may be known of God is manifest in (or to)
man (says the Notes) so also he informs us how it comes there, and by that we
find him to have a spirit differing from Lawsons: for Paul tells us that God
has showed it unto man by the things that are made, whereby is clearly
understood his eternal power, and Godhead from the Creation, for day unto
day, night unto night it shows knowledge, Psalm. 19.2. and so is man without
excuse, Romans 1.20. that is in respect of knowing there is a God: all which
shows that there is not such a light within as he speaks of, because man's
inexcusablenesse is ascribed to his neglect of due respect to outward means,
wherefore Lawson that talks so much of the tongue of the learned, is found
unlearned himself by wresting the Scriptures.

Consider also I pray you, from the days of John the baptist hither wards, and
you shall find all the Scriptures unanimously contradict this Principle of
theirs. John is said to be a burning and a shining light, being appointed of
God to GIVE KNOWLEDGE of salvation unto his people, Luke 1.77. and to prepare
his ways before the Lord, which had been useless, had the people a knowledge
of all his ways by an internal light; yea John himself (though none greater
than he born of women) depended not upon such a light thereby to know all
things, for he sent two of his Disciples to Christ to know whether he were the
Christ that should come, or that they should look for another (having a sign
given him before, that, on whomsoever he saw the Spirit descending, and
remaining, was the baptiser with the Spirit, John 1.33.) and this depending
upon outward discoveries, Christ-himself established by sending back a message
consisting only of externals; the blind receiving sight, the lame walking, the
lepers cleansed, etc. which the two Discipies saw, and heard, these things
Christ returned for John's satisfaction, Mat. 11.5. in the days of John, Christ
testified that he was the light of the World, not the Spirit in him only, but
HE as he was the son of man, the intended Sacrifice of God for to dye for the
life of the World; HE thus considered went from place to place preaching the
Gospel of the Kingdom, informing persons particularly of their duties, Mat.
5.6.7. chap. not commending them to a Teacher within, neither John the preparer
of his way, when the publicans and soldiers came to him and asked him what
they should do, but taught them their duties, Luke 3.11, 12, 13. and as Christ
personally taught his Disciples, and the people, so also he confirmed what he
declared by outward miracles, which many seeing believed on him, John 11.45.
and others which heard and saw such works done by him which no other man did,
and believed not, Christ pronounces inexcusable, having no cloak for their
sin, John 15.22, 24. being such as John admires at, John 12.37. saying, THOUGH
he had done so many miracles before them, YET they believed not on him; Some,
Christ said were cleansed by what he, as the son of man, said unto them, John
15.3. other some were without excuse, subject to the Judgment, because they
received not his words which he spoke unto them, John 12.48. what less oh
friends can these things import, than that the words of Christ thus considered,
did work convincements within men of the truth? considering that the rejecting
thereof rendered them inexcusable; if a light within (in their sense) be the
only Revealer, then John had no cause to admire in reference to the many
miracles, but rather in respect of the Light being rejected which Christ set up
within them, without such outward manifestations; nay indeed he had no cause to
admire at them more than others, all having (as they say) a Light within
leading in all the ways of God; but most evident it is that Christ has
otherwise appointed to make known the Gospel, as appears by his similitude
about the sower, who says, Christ went FORTH to sow, Mat. 13.3. went OUT to
sow, Mar. 4.3. contradicting the Quaker who says the sower is dwelling in all,
godly and ungodly (though the Sower be said to be the SON OF MAN, Matthew.
13.37.) wherefore when Christ sent his twelve Apostles to the lost sheep of
Israel, he said, that it should be more tolerable for Sodom in the day of
Judgment, than for that City that should not receive THEIR WORDS, Mat. 10.14.
yea when his very Disciples were blameable in respect of their ignorance, he
charges it not for neglecting a Teacher within, but says, Oh fools and slow of
heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken, and to make them wise, he
expounded the Scriptures to them, Luke 24.25, 27. upbraiding their unbeleef
also, because they believed not THEM (he says not Light within) but them which
had seen him after he was risen, Mar. 16.14. now when Christ was to ascend, he
authorized his Servants to go, and teach all Nations to observe all things
which he had commanded them, mark, not to turn them to a Teacher within, but
to teach them all things; who accordingly went and testified that God did
beseech people by them, and that they in Christ's STEAD prayed persons to be
reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5.20. yea declaring the whole counsel of God, the
sum of which is, that Christ sent his Servants to teach all things which he
had commanded them, they accordingly taught his whole counsel, Act. 20.27. yet
says the Quaker, the Light in every man is the ONLY Teacher: Judge ye that
are wise. Moreover it is said that the Church of the Thessalonians received of
the Apostles how to walk, and to please God, yet not as the words of men, but
(as it is in truth) the Word of God, 1 These. 4.1, 2, 13. and these were the
elect of God, 1 These. 1.4. yet not thought by the Apostle capable by any Light
within them (in an ordinary way) to comprehend all things relating to their
faith, wherefore he prayed night and day EXCEEDINGLY that he might see their
faces, and PERFECT that which was lacking in their faith, 1 These. 3.10. also
Paul writing to the Saints at Rome, Romans 1.11. said, that he longed to see
them, to impart some spiritual gift that they might be established; now if
Paul had been of the Quakers spirit, he need not so exceedingly desired to see
them, or to write unto them upon that account, because their (alone Teacher)
and leader toward perfection was always in them; needless I say, except it
had been to exhort them to keep close to their Teacher within, but neither this
do we find was their aim in writing, neither was it their aim in desiring to
see them, but that they might be established, and perfected in their faith
through what they delivered, considering that as the Apostles gave the Churches
to know and understand, so also they directed them to wait upon the Lord who
gives the increase, that by him they might be enabled to walk up according to
what they knew, through their ministry, their ministry I say, because it agrees
with the Scriptures, which testifies, that by them was made manifest the savor
of his knowledge in every place, 2 Cor. 2.14. and says Paul, if OUR Gospel be
hid, it is hid to them that are lost, who are blinded, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ should shine UNTO them, not from a Teacher within,
but from the Apostles, who plainly affirms, that they were to give the Light of
the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus. God having first shined
in their hearts, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4, 6. that is in the hearts of Paul, and Timothy,
who sent that Epistle, who were enlightened, yea both of them, through outward
teachings; Paul in an extraordinary manner by the Lord Jesus was changed in his
mind to believe in him, which makes him say, that the Gospel was not taught him
by man, but by the revelation of Jesus; who (says Luke) appeared UNTO him, and
spoke UNTO him, a Light shining round ABOUT him from HEAVEN, Act. 9.3, 4, 17.
and by him was he commanded to go into Dam^scus, and there he should be told of
all things which were appointed for him to do, Act. 2^.10. not by a Light
within him, but by Ananias a certain Disciple, verse. 12, 14, 15, 16. thus Paul,
being instructed, went forth preaching the Gospel, through which, Timothy was
enlightened in the Truth, and so commonly called by Paul his SON in the Faith, 1 Timothy, 1.2. even as Onesimus was, whom Paul BEGOT in his bonds, Phile. 10. by all
this we may learn that the Ministers of Christ were by their ministry to make
known the Lords will, yea moreover the Churches of old were to mark the
walkings of the Apostles, as an ENSAMPLE to them; Paul commanding them to do
those things which they had both learned, and received, and heard, and seen in
him, Phil. 3.17.4.9. and to this purpose agrees also his words to Timothy, give
attendance to reading, 1 Timothy 4.13. wherefore false and erroneous is that
spirit which bids men give attendance to a Light within, as their ONLY Teacher.

Wherefore hold fast the counsel of the Spirit of God, and give attendance unto
reading the Scriptures, being by a good argument provoked thereunto, even that
they are able to make us wise unto salvation through Faith in Christ, 2 Timothy
3.15. for even unbeleeving men are required by Christ to search the Scriptures,
wherein they thought they had eternal life, but they were mistaken, wherefore
search (says he) for they testify of me, John 5.39. plainly showing, that
the* Testimony of Scripture was to rectify their understandings which if they
had believed, they would have believed me (says Christ) FOR HE WROTE OF ME,
verse 46. but says (Antichrist) if ye would believe in the Light within as
your only Teacher, then ye should be led by it up to Christ. Mark ye, I pray,
the great difference betwixt the Doctrine of Christ, and the Doctrine of the
Quakers, who make void the Commandment of Christ, by their extolling an
internal Light as the only Teacher, which is their OWN tradition, it being
tried and compared with the Spirit of Light indeed which dwelt in the Apostles;
as you may further learn from what Paul's Spirit led him unto concerning his Son
Timothy, 1 Timothy 3* 14, 15. unto whom he hoped to go shortly, but if he tarried
long, that he might KNOW how to behave himself in the house of God, he WROTE an
Epistle unto him, and therein he did not counsel him to wait upon a Teacher
within (as is the substance of the Quakers Epistles) but particularly informed
him of his duty, as will appear to him that reads the Scripture with due
respect thereunto; now if there be such an internal Light that makes known all
things, judge I pray you, what ground Paul had to question Timothys knowing
those things in his absence, considering also how eminent in grace T^mothy was,
even so disposed unto the work of the Lord, as that Paul had NO man likeminded,
Phil. 2.2^. you even he was to read Paul Epistle (which was Scripture) and for
that end, tha^ (...) ^i^ht kn^^^ h^w he ought to walk in the house of the Lord.
O^^^ (...) now to re^^ the Scriptures that we may know (...) our selves? God
forbid! God forbid! (...) peoples ignorance to their not knowing (...) err*
not knowing the Scriptures, nor the (...) 29. and upbraideth them with this
qu^^^ (...) have ye not read? Mat 12.3, 5. chap. (...) the will of Christ was,
that men should lear^^^ (...) ^^^veries; which if you seriously consider (...)
blame, in case they ought not to have learn^d (...) Scriptures, which is said
by Paul, 2 Timothy 3.1^, (...) for Doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, THOROUGHLY
furnished unto all good work; all which Scripture is given by inspiration from
God, and so originally God is the Teacher of his people, yea of all, but as it
is written, 2 Cor. 5.20. God beseeches you BY US, in Christ's STEAD.

Object. The Spirit (an internal Teacher) says the Quaker from that in Joh.
16.13. is that which is to lead into all truth.

Answ. Christ indeed there speaks of the Spirits leading into all Truth, but it
is to be observed that it was spoken unto such as were so far before led into
Truth by Christ's personal preaching, as that they were pronounced clean
through the words which he had spoken unto them, John 15.3. Wherefore in an
especial manner he there speaks of those many things which the Disciples then
could not bear; as is most plain, verse 12. and besides the acts of the
Disciples, together with their directions sent to the Churches, when they were
led by this Spirit, are left to us in Scripture; yet we may not deny but that
the Spirit, in whom he dwells, is a Teacher, evidently, and particularly laying
before the soul the privy deceit, and evil inclinations of his heart, and
leading him to a mortification thereof; (he being waited upon) and also
revealing many other useful things, which unto the natural man is
foolishness; but judge Oh friends how far off this is from the Quakers
purpose, who exhorts all ignorant persons of the World whatsoever to depend
upon a light within them, when as Christ in plain words says that the World
CANNOT receive this Spirit whereof we speak, John 14.17. the promise thereof
(so as to dwell with a soul as a comforter) being to obedient believing
persons, Act. 2.38.5.32. John 14.15, 16. Ephesians. 1.13. even such as walk up in
duty toward God according to the instruction of the holy Scriptures; Oh how
great then is the darkness of him that talks so much of the Light! and counsels
all to depend upon it alone; which is contrary to the counsel both of Christ
the true Light, the Angel of God, and the holy Apostles; For when the Disciples
inquired of Christ What sign there should be of his coming (by which it is
plain, they distrusted that Light they had within) he directs them not to a
Light within, but readily answers their desires; to which agrees also the
relation of Saul's conversion; so also when Cornelius cried out saying, what is
it Lord? the Angel of God bid him send for Peter, and HE should tell him what
he ought to do, Act. 10.4.5, 6. so also when those that were pricked in heart,
said unto the Apostles what shall we do? Act. 2.37. Peter directs them not to
an internal Teacher, but teaches them himself, verse. 38. Likewise when the
Jaylour cried out, saying, what must I do to he saved? Paul and Silas neither
directed him to a Light within, but THEY spoke unto him the Word of the Lord;
likewise when the Eunuch said, how can I understand, except some man guide me?
Act. 8.31. Philip said, not as the Quaker does, that the Light within is to
guide into all Truth, but himself began at the same Scripture, and preached
unto him Jesus; consider I pray ye how fair an occasion in all these instances
there was for such counsel, namely to wait upon the Light within, in case it
had been the Lords pleasure so to teach men; but we find another Doctrine, and
consider that Jesus Christ is the same, yesterday, and to day, and for ever.

Wherefore be counseled not to be carried about with DIVERSE and STRANGE
Doctrins, Heb. 13.8, 9. for this I affirm with all confidence, that it is not
to be found from the beginning of Genesit, unto the end of the Revelations,
that either Christ, or any of the holy men of God, from the beginning of the
Creation, that did at any time counsel ignorant, self-serving persons, which
had not been before enlightened within, through outward teachings, to wait upon
a Light within them, as the ONLY revealer of the Gospel; Christ indeed gave
this counsel to some, that they should walk in the Light, while they had the
Light, but they were such as were with Christ the Light, and had heard him
preaching the Kingdom of God often, and had seen so many miracles done by him,
that John admires at their unbeleef, John 12.37. wherefore this shelters not
their opinion, and so it remains naked; an Heresy proceeding from the flesh,
which, by reason of its pride, would not submit unto the self-denying Laws of
Christ, but has found out a way to pass by it, even by turning the Scriptures
into mysterious senses, and so makes void many plain Truths of Christ, by their
dreams which they tell every man to his neighbor, Jer. 23.27. which at the
time of awaking will appear even to them, to be a mere deceitful dream,
proceeding from him, who pretends himself an Angel of Light; but greater is he
that is in us, than he that is in the World, whereby the Quaker is discovered
in his nakednesle, and Christ the true Light of the World more and more
gloriously made known unto us, even him who is a Light indeed, not as John who
was a shining Light to Israel only, but the glory of Israel, and a Light to
lighten the Gen^les also, Luke 2.32. being for salvation unto the ends of the
earth, a Light that lights every man that com^^^^ the World; from whence the
Quakers would gather that Chr^^^ the Light is within all, as their ^nly
seacher, but P^^l (...) Barnahas being of another spirit, gathers (...) thing,
eve^ thence, saing, A^. 13.46.10, we turn to the Gentiles or so (...) lord ha^^
com a^^ded us, saying, I have set (...) Light o^ the Gentiles, verse 47 So far
were they from beleev^^^ thence, that (...) ^as the alone Teacher in men, that
they conc^^^^^ (...) ^he Gentiles in Christ's STEAD, 2 Cor. 5.20* yet will (...)
say ^^at^^^y have the same Spirit which the Apo^^^^s^^a^^ judge y^^ hat^^^ wise.

Object. The Children of the New Test^^ (...) not t^^^every man his Brother,
saying, Kn^w the Lord, (...) the ^moi^ting ^^^^^th them all things, so that
they need not that any man ^each th^^^ ha^^^^ ^^e Law written in their hearts.

Answ. Abraham's seed, with whom the old C^^enan* was made, was Children thereof
by generation, which. Pa^l al^egorically sets ^orth by the bondwoman and
(...); even I^hmae* who was born after the slesh: and being so in covenant,
they had need to be taught to know the Lord; but the children of this more
glorious administration, are not so accounted of, but otherwise, even by
regeneration, and such none can be, till they first know the Lord, and such
(considered AS children of the New Covenant) need not teach one another to know
the Lord, for all such do know him, as did the Church of the Galathians, whom
Paul calls children, no^ of the bond woman, but of the free, Gal. 4.31. (that
is of the New Testament) yet consider they were such as heard the Gospel from
the Apostles, who said unto that people, that if we or an Angel from Heaven
preach any other Gospel unto you, than that which WE have preached unto you,
let him be accursed; yea at that time, when they were children of the New
Testament, they were also to give heed unto the Scriptures for direction; for
otherwise Paul would not have sent unto them an Epistle in Scripture, and
therein tell them that as many as walked according to this rule, peace be on
them, Gal. 6.6. yet this their respect to the teachings of the Apostles, and
the Scriptures, in things pertaining to the Faith, and order of the Gospel,
does not in the least contradict Gods promise of writing his Law in their
hearts, for such they are, that have a promise of his Spirit, Act. 2.38. and
are the Temple, wherein God dwelling by his Spirit, 1 Cor. 3.16, writes his
Law, even in their hearts particularly, and plainly makes known his ROYAL LAW,
that so together by the power of the Spirit, such may have the Righteousness
of the Law^fulfilled in them, they walking not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit, Romans 8.4. wherefore it still remains, that though the Children of the
New Testament need not to be taught to knew the Lord, yet have need to be
builded up in the knowledge of the Lord, for Timothy knew the Lord, (as his
Savior) yet Paul sends Scripture unto him that he MIGHT KNOW how to behave
himself in the Church of God, 1 T^^^^ 3.14*15. and also by Scripture stirs up
the Saints to edify ONE AN^^^HER, 1 These. 5.11. and says Pe^^^ grow in the
knowledge of (...) Lord, 2 Pet. 3.18. to them that k^ew the Lord 2 ^^t. 1.3.
and this might ^e the practice of them John wrote (...), for ^ught ^^a^ is said
against it; for though he judged them so ^m^^^^t in spiritual gi^ts, and in the
knowledge of the Ant^chri^^^an dec^its (which the there speaks of) as to
conclude there was no abso^ute ^^^ssity for hi^^ o^ any other of the Apostles
to write unto them y^^ this is far from showing that they ought not ^o edifi^
(...) there, as other* Sa^^s were to do; the anoin^ing indeed was dwelling in
them, and so was he in other ^ain^s, that were enjoined to edify one another,
even the Spirit of truth, whose gi^ts^^^^ivers, the manifestations whereof are
given to every man to profit withal; he that techeth is to wait ^n teaching,
and he that exh^rteth on exhortation (...) 12 7, 8. these with other of the
gifts of the Spirit* it appeat^ this Churen was enriched with, and so in a
capacity to press forward notwithstanding all oppositions) as good Stewards
ministering one to another the manifold discoveries of Truth.

Object. The Apostles were indeed to go unto the Gentiles, but it was to turn
them from darkness to the Light within, through which the word of Faith which
they preached was nigh them, even ^n their mouths, and in their hearts before,
as a Light shining in darkness, but darkness comprehended it not.

Answ. Surely the Messengers of Christ that were led by one Spirit, had but one
message, which was to go and teach all Nations, baptising them, etc. teaching
them to observe ALL things whatsoever Christ ^ad commanded them, Mat. 28.19.20.
To which agrees the words of Paul, Romans 15.19. where he testifies, that from
Jerusalem, and round about unto Illyricum, HE had FULLY preached the Gospel of
Christ, and moreover ^aith, that if we, or an Angel from Heaven preach any
OTHER Gospel than that which WE have preached, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.8.
and this Gospel was not in every man's heart before thus preached, or by some
other outward discoveries, for Paul testifies, that he strived to preach the
Gospel, where Christ was not named, but as it is written, to whom he has not
been spoken of, they shall see, and they that have not heard, shall understand,
Romans 15.20, 21. wherein it is very observable, that the Gentiles ignorance is
not ascribed to their darkness, not comprehending what was spoken in them, but
to the want of some to speak unto them to whom Christ had not been spoken of
(as come in the flesh) to which agrees these words of the Apostle, How shall
they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? that is, has not heard by an
outward ministry, as plainly appears by his continued questions; how shall THEY
preach except THEY be sent? as it is written, how beautiful are the feet of
THEM that preach the Gospel? Romans 10.14, 15. wherefore not by the Light within,
which even in our adversaries sense is but one; (yet by this do we not limit
God to this his ordinary way, and so make void his speaking by Angels, or
otherwise UNTO men at his pleasure) and further, if you consider, the word of
Faith cannot be said to be in men's hearts, and in their MOUTHS, and they not
comprehend it; nay it is no better than an unlearned, ignorant mystery, which
cannot be received by any, except sensualists, that have not the Spirit, Jud.
19. for they that so possess the word of Faith, are at present in a fit
condition to believe with the heart, and also to confess what they believe,
with their mouths, and even so says Paul in that place, verse 9. that if thou
shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart,
etc. thou shall be saved.

Now we know that a man cannot make confession to Salvation with his mouth, of
such things which in his heart he comprehends not; wherefore well observe that
saying of Paul, Romans 10.8. and you shall find, that though he say that the
word of Faith which he (with others) preached, was nigh them, even in their
mouths and hearts, yet he does not say that it was there before it was
preached unto them, while they were in ignorance and blindness; for at that
time when he spoke these words unto them, they were converted persons, such as
believed through Paul's preaching before, and persuading them both out of the
Scripture of Moses, and out of the Scripture of the Prophets, from morning till
evening, Acts 28.23, 24. which is agreeable with that which Moses said to
Israel, Deuteronomy. 30.14. even that the Word was nigh unto him, in his mouth and
heart, that he might do it; but most plain it is that Israel was enlightened
within through the written Law of Moses, which there he speaks of, verse. 10.
which he preached unto them, saying, That the words which I command thee shall
be in thy Heart, Deuteronomy. 6.6. and these my words shall ye lay up in your hearts
and souls, Deuteronomy. 11.18. after which means he said, and well he might, that the
Commandment which I command thee, is not hidden from thee, but is in thy
mouth, and in thy heart; wherefore still it remains that the Lord in all Ages
did teach men, through outward discoveries, and not that they were led into all
truth by a light within them, as the only revealer of the Gospel, as says the
Quaker; and so he is tried, and sound to have spoken contrary to the Law, and
Testimony; wherefore I conclude that it is because there is no light in them,
though they so much talk of light.

The Quaker says, That the Scriptures are not a rule, whereby men may know the
Will of Christ, as often they have spoken, being pressed to it, and as appears in
Tho. Lausons Book, called, The untaught Teacher, page 6, 7, 8. wherein he
repearts my saying, That the Scriptures does so far reveal the mind of God,
and Christ, to a Creature, as that he walking up to its revelation, to his
lives end, with a single heart, should be saved; this I say he repeats, and
publishes as great Heresy.

God who at sundry times, and diverse manners, spoke unto the Fathers by the
Prophets, has in these last days spoken to us by his Son, who in his own
person (while personally upon earth) instructed the sons of men, exhorting them
to repent, and turn from sin, pronouncing them everlastingly blessed that so
did. and followed him; unto whom he particularly revealed his Will, Mat. 5, 6,
7. chap. saying, that he was a wise man, building upon a rock, that heard his
sayings, and did them, and that he was a foolish man that heard his sayings,
and did them not; which plainly shows, that the words of Christ proceeding from
himself was a rule to lead persons then in the way of Salvation; and so is made
good that saying, Heb. 2.3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great
Salvation, which at the FIRST began to be spoken by the Lord Jesus; afterward
his Disciples took in hand to set forth in order a Declaration, (by writing) of
those things which Christ had spoken unto them, which was most surely believed
by them, Luke 1.1. Acts 1.1. to whom he showed himself alive after his Passion,
being seen of them forty days, speaking of the things per^aining to the Kingdom
of God, verse. 3. who also went forth after his ascension into the Nations, an
spreached that Word of Truth unto them, which was FIRST spoken by the Lord to
themselves, teaching them to ob^erve ^ll ^h^^g^ whatsoever Christ had commanded
them, according to (...) commission, Matthew. 28.20. God also bearing them
w^^^^s^ w^^^^ig^^, Miracies* and diverse girts of the Holy Gho^t Heb. 2 3.
th^^^g^ which n^ny obtained like precious faith with the Ap^^tles 2 Pet. ^ ^
W^^^ A^ts of the Apostles Luke also signifi^^^^ (...) writing ^y all which
Scriptures together with the ma^^^^ (...) unto the persons thus converted, the
preach^^, (...) made man^^^st; and by the Scriptures of the Prop ^^t ((...) to
the Commandment of God) made know (...) Nations (...) obedience of faith, Romans
1^.25, 26. whe^^^^ore (...) was cou^^ (...) ^^OBILITY in the m^n of Berea
because (...) daily whether those things were so, (...) ^^h^d, which indeed had
been a very igno^^^, ^^sig^^^ (...) of them had not the Scriptures been (as a
r^l^) (...) know the truth of what was preached, as it appears (...) it is
said, that therefore many of (...) ^^eeve^, (...) 7.^, 12. ^or which cause
Christ bids the Jew, ^earch^^ Scrip^ure^ saving, That if they had believed the
Scriptures ^. ^oses they (...) I have to believed on him, Joh. 5.39.46, ^7 t^
w^om (...) T^^t if they believed not in him, the w^rds which he spoke (which
are now in Scripture) should judge them at the ^^^t day, Jo. 12.4^ 48. And
says Paul, Sylvanus, and ^^morh^us (...) a^y man obey not OUR word, by this
Epistle (which was ^^criou^^) (...) that man, and have no company with him that
he ^ay be ^h^ned; now that the disobedience to the Scriptures should render men
subjects of so great shame in this ^^fe, and that (...) the last day Christ
should also judge them by it (even the words which he has spoken) and yet not
a rule now to walk by is altogether incredible; the ways of God being just^and
righteous altogether, will might the Quaker be ashamed, were he not given over
to believe Lies, while he affirms that the Scriptures is not a rule whereby to
know the Will of Christ since Luke signifies no other end, in his writing in
order a Declaration of the sa^ings, and loings of Christ, but that the
CERTAINTY THEREOF MIGHT BE KNOWN, Luke 1.1, 3, 4. These are written that ye
MIGHT BELIEVE, Joh. 20.31. wherefore says Christ, O fools, and slow of heart
to believe all that the Prophets have spoken; Oh then let us be wise, like the
holy men of old, who esteemed the Scriptures holy (in reference to the use
thereof) able to make MEN WISE TO SALVATION through faith which is in Christ,
it being profitable for Doctrine (which in English is teaching) for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. yea so
great was their respect to the Scriptures, that though Peter was an eye witness
of the Majesty of Christ in his Transfiguration upon the Mount, wherein was
presented the manner of his coming, yet says he, We have a MORE SURE WORD OF
PROPHECY, that was in the Scripture, as appears 2 Pet. 1.16, 17.19, 20.
whereunto (O friends) we shall do well if we take heed; for whatsoever was
written before time, was written for our LEARNING, that we through patience, and
COMFORT of the Scriptures, might have hope, Romans 15.4.

Obj. The Scripture is not the rule ( says Lawson) for no man can come to the
Son except the Father draw him; and no man can come to the Father but by the
Son.

Ans. Gods way to draw men is by the cords of his great love, manifested in
Christ, which the servants of Christ, in Christ's stead are to publish to the
Nations, persuading men thereby to be reconciled to God; and this is (says
Paul) as though GOD DID BESEECH YOU BY US, 2 Cor. 5.20. the Saints indeed are
said to be the called of God; but says Paul BY OUR GOSPEL, 2 Thessalonians. 2.14. so
also it is said of the Corinthians, That they were called of God, 1 Cor. 1.9.
yet says Paul, In Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel; I have
espoused you to one husband, 1 Cor. 4.15. 2 Cor. 11.2. and so it is that as God
did speak unto the Fathers BY THE PROPHETS, so now by his Servants in Christ's
stead, who are to minister, by his Spirit, that which was FIRST spoken by the
Lord himself, Heb. 2.3. who spoke not of himself, but what God the Father
commanded him, and so it was that the Saints (to their commendation) received
the words of the Apostle, not as the words of men, but (AS IT IS IN TRUTH) the
word of God, 1 These. 2.13. wherefore the Quaker (supposing that God himself in
men is their Teacher only) erres not knowing the Scriptures; for Israel was
willing to be taught, yet said they let not God speak with us, but speak thou
with us, ( Moses) and we will hear, Exodus 20.19. and in this they well said,
says God, Deuteronomy. 5.28.

Most true it is, that no man can come to the Father, but by the Son, who
offered up himself to death, that we might have life, by whose stripes we are
healed; without his blood there is no remission, Heb. 9.22. by him also we have
access unto the Father, who at his right hand makes intercession for us, and so
he becomes our righteousness, our sanctification; and this Gospel was
witnessed first by Christ himself; but since, says the Apostles, we pray you
in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God; and those that were thus wrought
upon, through their ministry, are said to be the called of Jesus Christ, Romans
1.6. Act. 28.23. and so is made good the words of Jude 3. contend earnestly for
that Faith which was ONCE delivered to the Saints.

Object. By this ( says Lawson) we set the Scriptures in the room of the
Father, and Son, and so (says he) deny both Father and Son.

Answ. Many are the shifts of men to race out of the World that esteem of the
Scriptures, which indeed is but due, being accounted by the Apostles HOLY
Scriptures, in respect of their use, Romans 1.2. whereby is made known the will
of Christ, in which we walk endeavoring (through his grace) the honor of the
Father, and Son; which cannot be a denying of the Father and Son; but he that
has his eyes closed will say so; it is said, the Scripture is profitable for
teaching, correction, and instruction in Righteousness, and that there ought to
be attendance given to the reading of it, yet most surely neither Paul that
spoke it, nor Timothy to whom it was spoken, denied either Father, or Son; nor
pulled off the Crown from Christ's head, putting it upon the Scriptures, as
says Lawson we do; yet say no more than they did, he most surely is worthy of
the Crown, that dyed to bring forth a word of salvation for men, and that
strengthens us by his Spirit to walk up accordingly; from whom the Apostles
removed it not, yet said to men, WE pray you in Christ's STEAD, 2 Cor. 5.20.
yea, and that from the Scriptures, persuading men from morning till evening,
Act. 28.23. Aaron was to hearken unto Moses, who was to put words into his
mouth, and therein to be unto him in STEAD of God, Exodus 4.16. yet neither he
nor the Apostles robbed God of his honor, he being the original; of him, and
through him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory for ever, Romans 11.36.

Oh how great are the self-exaltations of these men! how does their arrogance
appear! while they so mightily endeavor to destroy men's faith of the
Scriptures, as being adiscovery of the Lords will, and yet in the mean while
furnish the Nations almost in every corner with THEIR SCRIPTURES (which is
writings) calling them a DISCOVERY of several particulars, which they publish
to men, as the will of the Lord; as witnesses Deusburys book, which he calls a
discovery of man's return to his first estate; with a discovery of Mystery
Babylon. Martha Simmons also speaks something in discovery of the nakedness of
all professions etc. Farnworth also has writ that the Truth might be cleared,
and the ignorance both of Priest and people might be discovered. What! O
friends, may men know from their writings, and yet not from the holy writings,
which were written for that very end, that the CERTAINTY of the Lords will
might be known? Luke 1.3, 4. and that men MIGHT believe, Joh. 20.31. God forbid.

Object. Also I deny the Spirit ( says Lawson in his book) in saying, that by
the Scriptures is made known or revealed the will of Christ; because the Spirit
searches all things, yea the deep things of God.

Answ. There is indeed such words spoken by Paul, 1 Cor. 2.10. but Lawson
waiting so much upon the darkness within him, has wrested the Scripture, and
so himself is found unlearned, 2 Pet. 2.16. though he has talked so much of
the tongue of the learned; for the Apostle in the words before, says that eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, etc. the things which God has prepared for them
that love him; but God (says Paul) has revealed them unto us by his Spirit;
that is, them things which God has prepared for those that love him; wherefore
he says verse. 12. that we might know the things which are freely given to us
of God; wherefore most plainly will it appear to him that searches, that the
Apostle THERE speaks not of the Spirits revealing the duty of man, but rather
of the great glory, and reward, that is the portion of them that walk up in
their duty; though it is not to be denied, but rather witnessed by experienced
souls, that the Spirit does teach them, manisesting and laying open
particularly the corruption of the heart; (which is but in general heads
signified in Scripture) and not only so; but also mortifies the same, Romans
8.13. and also bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of
God, verse 16. (...) so are we sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, Ephesians.
1.13. moreover by the Spirit is revealed and clearly made known, those
particulars which are obscurely signified in the Scripture, Ephesians. 3.5, 6.
which things, together with the revelations of the future glory, the natural
man receives not, for they are foolishness unto him; wherefore he is required
in the first place to repent, and be baptized for the remission of sins, and
then is he under the promise of the holy Spirit, Act, 2.38. through which he
may discern these things, for they are spiritually discerned.

Object. The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit
withal, but by reason of darkness it is not comprehended.

Answ. Christ the true Light speaks otherwise, saying, that the World CANNOT
RECEIVE the Spirit; wherefore though the Spirit be a Teacher as aforesaid, yet
it is to be considered that the promise thereof, so as to dwell in men, is to
such as yield obedience to that self-denying Doctrine of repentance, and are not
ashamed of those ordinances that belong to penitent men; wherefore says the
Apostles, God has given the Spirit to them that OBEY him, Act. 5.32. and those
that say God has given him also to disobedient men, as a dweller in them, does
make the Apostles words of no effect; if the Spirit dwell in every unbeleeving
man, what means Paul, when he asked the Disciples whether they had received
the Spirit SINCE they believed? moreover when they signified their ignorance,
saying, we have not so much as heard whether there be any holy Spirit, Paul did
not, as we find, tell them that they were mistaken, showing them that the
Spirit was in them, but by reason of darkness they comprehended it not; but
rather questions their faith, Act. 19.2, 3. showing plainly that faith is to
precede the receiving of the Spirit, as an indweller, wherefore says Paul,
after ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, Ephesians. 2.13.
all which being considered, may show us the Quakers misunderstanding of Paul's
words, in 1 Cor. 12.7. who speaking before unto the Church concerning the
diversities of the gifts of the Spirit, said unto them (considered as a Church,
such as were sanctified in Christ) that the end of the manifestation of the
Spirit given to every man, was to profit withal, but him the World cannot
receive; John 14.17.

Another shift of those men, to put by the true intention of writing the
Scriptures, is to tell people that they are not the Word of God; and their
reason is, because Christ is called the Word, which may not be denied; but yet
Christ is not so the Word, but that himself testifies the Scriptures to be the
Word of God; for says he to the Pharisees; Moses said, honor thy Father and
thy Mother; but ye suffer a man no more to do ought for his Father, or his
Mother, and thus ye make the Word of God of no effect, Mar. 7.12, 13. Mat.
15.6. that is plainly, the Scriptures, which says, honor thy Father; and thy
Mother. God said to Moses that he would raise up a Prophet unto Israel, and
that he would put his words into his mouth, Deuteronomy. 18.18. unto this, Christ
bears record, saying, I speak not of my self, but the Father gave me
commandment what I should speak; now judge ye I pray whether any of Christ's
hearers might have said, and well said, that the words which he spoke was not
the Word of God; if they might not, then the Scriptures being a presentation of
what Christ did do, and teach, Act. 1.1. may properly be said to be the Word of
God; even so it appears Paul, Sylvanus, and Timotheus understood it, who
writing unto the Saints, testified that they had heard of them, and RECEIVED OF
THEM how they ought to walk, yet they received it not as the word of men, but
(as it is in Truth says the Apostles) the Word of God, 1. These. 2.13.4.1. or
the word of Truth, which Timothy was rightly to divide, 2 Timothy 2.15. but Christ
is not divided; or a word of faith, because it testifies of Righteousness no
otherwise attainable but by faith; yet not but that Christ is the author of
Faith, he being that pure sacrifice that makes reconciliation for sins, through
Faith in him; which the Scripture speaks of; and so it still remains, that
through the Scriptures is made known the will of Christ, yea the CERTAINTY
thereof, Luke 1.3, 4. it being evidently his will that his saying should be set
forth in writings as they are, as will appear by several counsels, and
cautions of Christ, the danger whereof he well knew would not happen in the
days of his then Disciples, and so had been useless, had he not intended that
what he spoke unto them should be recorded for the benefit of after
generations, Mat. 24. Mar. 13. Luke 21. wherefore diligently observe what is
written, and give attendance to the reading thereof, and I beseech you in the
fear of the Lord, that ye slight them not, no not in the least; least the
judgments of God break out upon you (I mean hardness of heart to believe
lies) Oh remember how the anger of the Lord was kindled against Jehoiakim King
of Judah, when he burnt the Scripture, that was sent unto him, that he might
know the Lords will, and turn unto him, Jerem. 36.23.30, 31. whatsoever things
were written aforetime, were written for OUR LEARNING, Romans 15.4. let us learn,
let us learn.

The Quaker also denies that the Ministers of Christ (endued with the Spirit
of Christ) ought to minister, or preach from the Scriptures; as appears in
Lawsons book, called the untaught Teacher. pa. 2.3.

Undoubtedly this will seem strange, because in their preaching, and also in
their books they commonly speak of Scripture; but friends, there lies a winding
Serpent in that grass; for from it they speak not, (though OF it) but from that
which they call Light within them; which they wait upon, as their ONLY TEACHER,
the teachings of which they witness forth, and least iniquity should appear as
iniquity nakedly, they pervert the plain Scriptures into mysterious meanings,
and frames them up one way or other to that which their Light speaks within
them, and SO speak much of the Scriptures; thus is it a MYSTERY OF INIQUITY;
yea though it be altogether against the plain Scripture, yet will they follow
the dictates of the darkness within them; and that herein I abuse them not, I
present unto you one revelation of their Teacher, that is concerning the
Scripture, which testifies that a woman is not permitted to speak in the Church
by way of teaching, though permitted in other cases; by which (say they) is
meant the wisdom of the flesh, either in man or woman, which revelation
Farnworth thought worthy of the press, and so published it; yea I have been
told by them, that that woman which is forbidden thus to speak, was within me,
and spoke in me; this say they proceeds from the Light, but woe unto them that
puts darkness for Light, Isa. 5.20.

All that has been already said, serves for the proof of this, which by them
is denied; for the Light which they speak of within being tried, and found
darkness, and the Scriptures that which makes known the will of Christ, it must
needs follow as a safe practice, for the spiritual man, to minister from the
Scriptures, since we find it also agreeable with the practice of the Apostles,
who at their first public preaching after Christ's ascension directed the
people to the Scriptures, yea a great part of that which Peter preached, Act.
2. consisted of repetitions of the Prophets words, which was to them, and is to
us, in Scripture; yea as matter of proof of what he spoke; when he had asserted
that Christ was risen from the dead, he adds this reason, verse 25. FOR DAVID
SPEAKS concerning him, etc. yea very much Scripture does he there relate, and
then expounds them, verse. 29, 30, 31. and reasons from them, verse 34. and this
became effectual, whereas if Peter had been altogether instructed by a Teacher
within him, and owned no other, than the same Teacher within, his hearers, must
have been the only means to convince them of their sins; but it is otherwise
recorded, verse. 37. when they heard THIS (that is Peter's preaching from the
Scriptures) they were pricked in heart; and also the only thing through which
they might be added to the Saints; but it is otherwise said, even that they
which gladly received HIS WORD were baptized, and the same day there was added
unto them about three thousand souls, verse. 41. to this agrees also the manner
of Paul's preaching. who having asserted the same Doctrine, Act. 13.33. proceeds
on with this argument, IT IS WRITTEN, making much use of the Scriptures of the
Prophets, for the establishment of the Doctrine which, he delivered, verse 34,
35, 36. so also Apollos by his ministry mightily convinced the Jews, showing BY
THE SCRIPTURES, that Jesus was Christ, Act. 18.28 and this is noted of him as
his worthy practice. Paul also when he was at Thessalonica reasoned with the
people three Sabbath days OUT OF THE SCRIPTURES, opening, and alleging that
Christ must needs have suffered, Act. 17.2, 3. and when he was at Rome, he
persuaded the people concerning Jesus OUT OF THE LAW OF MOSES, AND OUT OF THE
PROPHETS from morning till evening, Act. 28.23. through which many believed,
and they are happy (whatever others say of a Light within, as the only Teacher)
for Christ has prayed for them, Job. 17.20. I pray not for these alone, but
for them also which shall believe on me through THEIR WORD; wherefore the
Quaker erres; not knowing the Scriptures, when he affirms that the only means
of Faith, is the immediate teachings of Christ dwelling within men, for the
Scripture testifies that the Gospel at the FIRST was spoken by the Lord Jesus,
Heb. 2.3. which saying the Quaker makes of no effect, by his saying that Christ
first, last, and so always by himself; in men, preaches it.

Object. If it be objected, and said that many things, which the Apostles
preached could not be proved by the Scriptures of Moses, and the Prophets, they
in the least not speaking of them.

Answ. I answer to him or them whose objection soever it is, that particularly
indeed some things was not spoken of in the Scriptures before them, which they
preached; but most plain it is, that such things they delivered from what
Christ personally had be fore commanded them, Matthew. 28.20. teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I HAVE commanded you; which things are written
that the certainty thereof MIGHT BE KNOWN, Luke 1.1, 3, 4 and so in preaching
from it, we do no more than what the Apostles were commanded to do; which
things, though not particularly spoken of in those Scriptures before them, yet
therm generally included, for when the Apostles had proved, and convinced men
that Jesus was the Christ, the Prophet which the Scriptures of Moses foretold
of, by the same Scriptures they were required to hear him (that is Christ) in
all things whatsoever he should say unto them, Deuteronomy. 18.18.

Obj. By this Tho. Lawson says, we shut out our selves from the holy men of
old, who were Ministers of the New Testament, of the Spirit, and not of the
Letter.

A. Many are the shifts of these men, to make void the true use of the
Scriptures, yet the waking eye will see, and that clearly, that the Apostle
there speaks of the Letter of the Law, which both then, and now considered
alone, kills, for in the next verse he calls it the Ministration of Death,
written, and engraven in stones, which all may easily know was the Law of
Moses, by which no flesh shall be justified, 2 Cor. 3.6, 7. of this Letter the
Apostles were not Ministers of, neither are we; but even this the Apostles
slighted not in the least, because men spoke of it from the Letter, for
themselves ministered forth the sayings of the Prophets, which also was in
Letter, Acts 18.28. and 28.23. but because it testified of death to sinners
(which all were, and now are in their first condition) and of no remission of
sins, which the New Testament does; therefore the Apostle says, we are able
Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit, which
testament (as it is ministered forth) testifies that men may receive the Spirit,
through submission to the law of Faith; to which agrees the words of Paul, he
THAT MINISTERS TO YOU THE SPIRIT, does he it by the Works of the Law, or by
the hearing of Faith? Galat. 3.5. and says Peter, Repent, and be baptized, and
ye shall receive the Spirit; who also prayed, and laid on his hands upon the
baptized Samaritans, that they might receive the Spirit, Acts 8.15.17. this
appears also so to be, from that which the Apostle opposes it unto, even the
Law, the ministration of Death; (which is) that which testified of Death; so
contrariwise, the ministration of the Spirit is that which testifies of the
Spirit, as receiveable in the way aforesaid; wherefore the Servants of Christ
ministering from, or out of the Scriptures, through his Spirit, are not shut out
from the holy men of old, for they also ministered out of the Scriptures, Acts
28.23. and showed by the Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ, Act. 18.28. yet
were they not ministers of the Letter; yea their common Language in their
Ministry was, FOR IT IS WRITTEN, FOR IT IS WRITTEN; but he that has another
spirit says, THE LIGHT WITHIN, THE LIGHT WITHIN, yea as the only teacher.

Herein is Lawson found to be unlearned, having wrested the Scriptures, though
he has spoke much of the tongue of the learned in his Book against me; the
occasion of which I here shall present unto you. At a certain time Tho. Lawson
demanded of me what the tongue of the Learned was? according to that saying,
Isa. 50.4. now I knowing the snatching, and catching nature of these men,
desired him to signify the meaning of his Question in other words; which was,
as he said, What the servants of Christ are to minister from? and so, said he,
What is it that thou ministers from? Your Question, said I, shall be presently
answered, and as for the former expressions we will pass by, since you say that
this is your intention therein; for I am not satisfied concerning the intention
of the Prophet in that place; and so immediately both Question and Answer was
written. (Q.) What it was that I ministered from? (Ans.) I minister from the
Scriptures, through the assistance of the Spirit of God, yet notwithstanding
has he from this made a great outcry of my unlearnedness, entitling a Book
thence, therein informing men that I told him, that I knew not what the tongue
of the learned was; but how far his information savours of sincerity, and how
well it becomes him that so mightily pleads for perfection, I leave it to the
wise to judge; remembering this saying, what do these FEEBLE JEWS? Nehem, 4.2.

The Quaker affirms that the Law without man, that is, the written Law, does
not convince men of sin, but Christ the light dwelling in the godly, and
ungodly, Laws. Book, p. 15.

That which has been already said, serves also to manifest the error of this
Principle, for the Scriptures being written, that the CERTAINTY of the Lords
Will might be known, which was most surely believed by the Saints of old, Luke
1.1, 3, 4. must needs also certainly give us to know when we walk contrary
thereunto; yea in plain words says Paul to Timothy, the Scripture is
profitable for REPROOF and CORRECTION, 2 Timothy 3.16. and Apollos showing by the
Scriptures that Jesus was Christ, is said MIGHTLY TO CONVINCE the Jews; to
which agrees Paul's direction to Timothy about Bishops, signifying therein that
he must be one, able by SOUND DOCTRINE, both to exhort and CONVINCE the
gainsayers, Tit. 1.1.9. according to which agrees the relation of the people
dwelling at Jerusalem, Act. 2.37. WHEN THEY HEARD THIS (to with, Peter's
powerful preaching by the Spirit out of the Scriptures) they were pricked at
the heart; thus was he a sower that went forth, and went OUT to sow good seed
into the hearts of men, Luke 8.5. but according to the sense of the Quaker, the
sower dwells in the ground (the wicked world) oh horrible confusion! but it may
be the Quaker will take some advantage, because it is said a sower, and not
sowers; but the wise will consider that there is no room in the least for an
advantage against what here, or elsewhere has been said, for by the parable of
one lost sheep, or one lost piece of silver; Christ justifies his practice in
companying with many Publicans, and sinners, Luk 15.1, 2, 4, 8; therefore it
follows not that Christ himself in men is the sower only, though all is from
him originally, for the Apostles said, 1 Cor. 9.11. WE have sown unto you
spiritual things; which they did in Christ's STEAD, 2 Cor. 5.20.

Object. Christ says when the Spirit is come he shall reprove the World of
sin, of Righteousness, and of judgment, Joh. 16.8.

Answ. It is to be observed that he does not say, when he is come, in the
World, but having before, verse 7. showed the expediency of his going away,
said, if I depart, I will send him unto YOU, that was his Disciples, and when
he is come, (that is to you, for the World says Christ CANNOT RECEIVE HIM,
Joh. 14.17.) he shall reprove the World of sin; by which Spirit, when the
Disciples had received it, they went forth with all boldness, and utterance,
plainly declaring the word of Truth, persuading men OUT OF THE LAW OF MOSES,
AND OUT OF THE PROPHETS (which was in Scripture) from morning till evening,
Act. 28.23. with such power, and wisdom, as that the adversaries were not able
to resist the Spirit by which THEY spoke, Act. 6.10. wherefore (notwithstanding
this objection) I have not so learned Christ, as to believe that the wicked
has this Spirit of promise dwelling in them, when as Christ says, they CANNOT
receive it; what God may do by his Spirit for men, at certain times, especially
where other means are wanting, I here speak not against; but against this
conception of theirs, viz. that the holy Spirit of God DWELLS in all UNHOLY
persons of the World, as that which alone convinces them of sin, and of
Righteousness.

Moreover says Paul, Romans 3.20. by the Law is the KNOWLEDGE OF SIN, yea that
Law by the deeds of which no flesh shall be justified; whereby the Apostle
prevents the Quakers objection concerning his spiritual Law, by which alone he
says men shall be justified; and also says Romans 7.7. that he had not known
sin, but by the Law, for, says he, I had not known lust, except the Law had
said, thou shall not covet, which Law he says, verse 6. they then were
delivered from, and verse 4. dead to; James also being of the same Spirit told
the Saints, that in case they had respect to persons, they would be by the Law
(the tenor of which was, thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not kill)
CONVINCED as transgressors, Jam. 2.9, 10, 11. yet says Lawson, the outward Law
does not convince man of sin, and his reason is, because Paul said that he was
once alive without the Law; not considering that persons in their childish and
youthful days which are vanity, Eccles. 11.10. may properly be said to be
without the Law (though nurtured by them that have the Law) whike they live in
lusts, coveting after every pleasant object of the eye; not understanding the
things of God; but when the commandment comes to their understandings, capable
to comprehend such things, then sin is revived, and they dye, and so remains,
till remission of sin is assured to them; now in reference to those Gentiles
that have not the written Law, Paul says that they HAVING NOT THE LAW (mark
that) are a Law unto themselves, (which never was said to them, or of them that
had the written Law;) that is concerning such things as is held forth in the
Law of Moses, which says, the man that does those things shall live by then,
Romans 10.5. but the things relating to Faith in Christ we find was made known
UNTO men by outward discoveries but something to this has been already said.

The Quaker says that the Scriptures are not a touchstone to try Spirits
withal, as says Lawson in his book, pa. 14.

The sum of all concerning the Quakers esteem of the Scriptures is thus, THEY
OWN IT NOT A RULE, WHEREBY THE WILL OF CHRIST MAY BE KNOWN; NEITHER THAT WHICH
SAINTS (endued with the Spirit) ARE TO PREACH FROM; NEITHER THAT WHICH
CONVINCES OF SIN; NEITHER THE TOUCHSTONE TO TRY SPIRITS WITHAL; yet will they
say that they own all the Scriptures from the beginning of Genesis, unto the
end of the Revelations (but oh their shameful deceit!)

Now this last particular must needs be found short of truth, because the
Scriptures are found to be the rule; now that which is the rule, must needs be
the tryer, or touchstone to manifest unruly persons, though it be true that
there is a gift of the Spirit, which discerns the unsound man, yea by very
slender appearances, yet hereby is he not so to be tried, as to be openly
published, and judged, till some evident disobedience to the written Law, and
so by their fruits we must know them, not he that says Lord, Lord, or Light,
Light, shall enter into the Kingdom, but he that does the will of the Father;
whose will is signified in the Scripture; moreover when Christ had informed his
Disciples of false Prophets, and false Christ's, together with their works, and
sayings which should come, he said unto them, take heed, behold, I have
FORETOLD YOU ALL THINGS, Mar. 13.23. ye that fear God consider, how inexcusable
we shall be found if (when Christ has so expressed his kindness in foretelling
the danger, and prescribing the manner of its appearance, that we might escape
it) it, I say we shall not take heed thereunto, comparing the workings, and
sayings of men with this written Prophecy, and so try the Spirits thereby; have
we not good ground to believe that these men are evilly disposed, in that they
refuse to come to the rule to be tried? what, is not that to try men withal
now, which Christ will judge and try, and judge men by in the last day? the
word that I have spoken (says Christ) shall judge him in the last day, Joh.
12.48. which word is witnessed to us in the Scripture; but Lawson supposes this
day to be now, which is to try every man's work, wherein the righteous is to be
discerned from the wicked, according to that Mal. 3.17, 18.1 Cor. 3.13. and
therefore (says he) not the Scriptures; but alas, the more he endeavors to
avoid the trial thereby, the more thereby he is manifested; for by this he is
found unlearned, though he has so much spoken of the tongue of the learned, by
wresting the Scriptures; for the Prophet there speaks of a day, wherein all
that are proud, and all that DO wickedly shall be destroyed, leaving neither
root, nor branch, Mal. 4.1. which the opened eyes sees clearly is not now; of
which day Paul speaks, in that place instanced by Lawson, wherefore he says,
the day SHALL declare it, from whence these men conclude, that that day then
did, and now does; but Paul had the Spirit of Truth; whom we find (even as a
dying man) expecting a Crown of Righteousness, which (says he) the Lord SHALL
give me at THAT DAY, 2 Timothy 4.6, 8. wherefore let us prize the Law, and
Testimony, to which if men speak not according, it is because they have no
Light in them; though they may speak much of Light.

The Quaker says, that Christ is already come the Second time, and George Fox
affirmed in plain words, before many witnesses, that he knew him come within
him, and he looked for him to come NO OTHERWISE; and James Parnel affirms:
that they that confess not Christ come in THEIR flesh, are the Antichrist, and
also affirms, that by preaching of a Christ in heaven, the Devil gets his
work done on earth; as appears in his Book called, Satan's Design discovered, p.
19.25.

This being well considered, is the ready way to fulfill that which is written
concerning those that shall come, saying, I am Christ, deceiving many, before
the coming of Christ indeed, which cannot be till first the true Faith of his
coming be made void, which these men endeavor to do; by saying that the
coming of the Spirit, which Christ said he would send, was that second coming
of Christ, which the Scripture so much speaks of; but evidently it appears
otherwise, because the Spirit by Christ is called ANOTHER COMFORTER, John
14.16. which says, he will not come except I go away, but if I depart, I will
send him unto you, John 16. 7. plainly showing, that the Spiritis the comforter
of the Lords people, in Christ's personal absence; for when Christ spoke of his
own coming, he said on this wise, I will come again, yea as the SON OF MAN,
Matthew 24.37. John 14.3. but speaking of the Spirit, says, I will send HIM unto
you; which when the Apostles had received, they went forth testifying the Lord
Jesus, not come within them, but as Peter said, whom the HEAVEN must reveive,
till the times of restitution of all things. Act. 3.21. yet at this time had
Peter the Spirit; but lest there should be room for the Quakers to say that
that Heaven was within them; consider also the relation of Stephen, who
steadfastly looking UP into Heaven, saw the HEAVENS OPENED, and the SON OF MAN,
standing on the right hand of God, yet was he FILLED with the Spirit; but his
wisdom was to distinguish between him sent, and the sender; and in this Faith
he DYED; and a long season afterward we find Peter remaining the same;
confidently affirming that Christ was gone into Heaven, 1 Pet. 3.22. signifying
to the Elders, that when the chief Shepherd SHALL APPEAR, ye (says he) shall
receive a Crown of glory, 1 Pet. 5.4. to which agrees the Faith of Paul, and
Timotheus also, who looked for the Savior Christ FROM HEAVEN, Phil. 3.20. what
from the fleshly hearts of men? judge ye that are wise; these also at that time
had the Spirit; to which agrees also the Faith of the Apostle John. who said,
when he SHALL appear, we shall be like him, 1 John 3.2. yet then it was the
Spirit appeared unto him; the Church of the Thessalonians was of the same
Faith, waiting for Christ FROM HEAVEN, 1 These. 1.10. yet then were they the
Elect of God, verse. 4. the Corinthians also being enriched by him in all
utterance, and in all knowledge, coming behind in no gift, yet were waiting
for the coming of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.5, 7. the Church of Thiatyra was to hold
fast, that which they already had, till he come, Rev. 2.25. judge nothing
before the time, until the Lord come, 1 Cor, 4.5. yet says Thomas Laucock,
where is the promise of his coming? is he asleep? but Peter tells such
scoffers, that the Lord is not slack concerning his promise, but is
long-suffering toward men* not willing that any should perish, 2 Pet. 3.9.
wherefore be patient UNTO THE COMING of the Lord, Jam. 5.7. for this is the
true Grace wherein we stand, even that which brings salvation; for (says Paul)
the Grace of God, that brings salvation, teaches us to live godil^y in this
world* and to LOOK FOR the glorious appearing of Jesus Christ, Titus 2.11, 12,
13.

Object. The Saints waiting for the coming of Christ, was but for a greater
measure of Christ.

Answ. That which is spoken elsewhere concerning their denial of the Lord
Jesus, will show the emptiness of this objection: yet consider, Christ was not
taken up into Heaven by measures, and at times; but while he blessed them, he
was parted from them, Luke 24.51. and he shall SO COME IN LIKE MANNER as the
Disciples did SEE him go into Heaven, Act. 1.11. wherefore the usual expression
in Scripture is, the COMING, not COMMINGS of Christ; where it is spoken of
him, since his ascension; wherefore says Paul to the Saints, be ye not soon
shaken in mind, or troubled, neither by Spirit, nor by Word, nor by Letter, as
from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand, for that day shall not come,
except there be a falling away first, etc. 2 These. 2.2, 3. yet says the
Quaker, it was in a great measure come, but thereby he is found to be led by
that Spirit, which then troubled the Saints, pretending the day of Christ to
be, before it was to be, which Paul afterward calls a mystery of iniquity then
working, verse 7. by this also he makes void the use of Christ's parables,
concerning his coming, which himself sets out by a man taking a far journey,
giving authority to his servants, Mar. 13.34. who after a long time comes,
and reckons with them, Mat. 25.19. in what manner he is capable to come,
judge ye, and remember that Christ says HE IS AS A MAN, as abovesaid (that is
in respect of his sudden coming at a time;) wherefore he says, watch, and
pray, for ye know not when the TIME is; Mar. ^3.33. moreover consider that
Peter, even when he was ready to DYE, witnessed not the day of the Lord come,
but says, the day of the Lord WILL ^OME, 2 Pet. 3.10. and 1.14. in like manner
Paul when he was r^ady to DYE, said that there was laid UP for him a Crown of
Righteousness, which (says he) the Lord SHALL give me at THAT DAY, and not
only to me; but unto all that love his app^aring, ^ T^^^. 4.6, 8. and the holy
men of old dyed in the faith, NOT HAVING RECEIVED THE PROMISES, Heb. 11.13.

Another way I take notice of, whereby faith in the true coming of Christ is
endeavored to be (at present) made void; and that is by perverting the signs
of his coming into mysteries, and so scrues them to be signs fulfilled in
them, before their conceived coming of Christ; but unto you that fear the
Lord, this

I say, that there is a good ground for us now to believe that distress, and
perplexity of Nations; the Sea, and waves roaring, men's hearts sailing them for
fear, the powers of Heaven being shaken, are signs of Christ's coming; as
there was for the Saints of old to believe that Sion^ King, even the Lord
Jesus, should come riding upon an Ass, and a Colt the sole of an Ass, Zach.
9.9. which even so was fulfilled, Matthew. 21.4, 5.

And also as good ground for us now to believe, that as the lightening shines
out of the East, even unto the West, SO the coming of the son of man shall be;
as there was for the people of God in the days of old to believe, that the
Christ which was to come, should be prized at thirty pieces of silver; with
which should be bought the Potters field, Zach. 11.12, 13. which even so came
to pass, Matthew. 27.3, 7, 9.

Also as good ground for us now to believe, that there shall arise many false
Christ's, saying, I am Christ, showing great signs and wonders, before the
coming of Christ, as signs of his coming; as there was for Israel to
believe, that the Christ was to be numbered with transgressors, Isaiah 53.12.
which even so came to pass, Mark 15.28.

There is also as good ground for us to believe, that the Sun and Moon shall be
darkened before the coming of Christ, as signs of his coming; as Israel had to
believe, that a Virgin should bear a Son, whose name should be Immanuel, that
is, God with us, Isa. 7.14. which even so also came to pass, Mat. 1.22, 23.

As good ground also there is for us now to believe that the Stars shall fall
from Heaven, before the coming of Christ; as Israel had to believe that there
was a time to come, wherein a voice of lamentation, and bitter weeping in Ramah
should be heard, Rachel weeping for her Children, etc. Jerem. 31.15. which you
know came so to pass, Mat. 2.17, 18.

As good ground also there is for us now to believe, that Christ shall come in
the Clouds of Heaven; as Israel had, to believe that the Prophetical words of
David should be literally fulfilled ( viz. in my thirst they gave me vinegar to
drink, Psalm. 69.21) as evidently they were, Mat. 27.48.

O remember the mystery of iniquity, least you dash your selves in pieces
against that rock; for, consider, would Christ, yea when he made it his work to
prescribe the future dangers, that the Saints should not be deceived, would he,
I say, then deliver these many Signs, as he did, and intend that they should
be mysteriously understood, and not in the least signify it, judge ye that
are judicious; and consider how this opinion of Christ's coming only in men
crosses the Scriptures, for when Christ comes, he comes in glory, WITH his
Angels, and WITH ten thousand of his Saints, Jud. 14. And the Lord my God
(says the Prophet) shall come, and all the Saints WITH thee, Zech. 14.5. (they
being first caught up to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall EVER BE WITH THE
LORD, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. BEFORE whom shall be GATHERED all nations, and he (AS A
SHEPHERD) shall divide one from another, Matthew. 25.31, 32. Moreover, then
Saints shall be free from death, from sorrow, from tears, yea from all manner
of pain says the Lord, Revel. 21.4. yea Saints vile bodies shall then be made
like unto the glorious body of Christ, Phil. 3.20.21. and they that be wise
shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and as the Stars for ever and
ever, Dan. 12.3. yet says Fox, Christ is come, and he looks for him to come no
otherwise, but how, where, and in whom do these things appear? O the nakedness
of this Dream! Moreover, when he comes, he shall rebuke strong Nations, and
they shall bear their Swords into Plow shares, and their Spears into
Pruning Hooks; Nation shall not lift up sword against Nation, neither shall
they learn War any more, Mich. 4.3. yea he makes Wars to cease unto the end
of the earth, Psalm 46 9. But does this (O Friends) appear? and not rather
Nation against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom, even as Christ foretold
should come; wherefore he that shall come will come, and will not tarry.

Obj. Saints are the Temple of God, and God dwells in them; and know you not
that Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates; and Christ is in you the hope
of glory.

Ans. Most true it is that Saints are the Temple of God, and God does now as
well as heretofore dwell in his people; but Paul that spoke these words, also
says, that Saints are an habitation of God THROVGH THE SPIRIT, Ephesians. 2.22.
which (says he) ye have OF God, and your Body is the Temple of the holy
Spirit. 1 Cor. 6.19. And know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that
the SPIRIT OF GOD dwells in you? 1 Cor. 3.16. yet we find that these WAITED
FOR THE COMING of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.7. and unto that very Church unto
which Paul said, (Christ in you the hope of glory) He also says, When Christ
who is our life SHALL APPEAR, then shall we appear with him in glory, Col. 3.4.
even when the Lord Jesus SHALL be revealed FROM HEAVEN, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. wherefore
Stephen (though filled with the Spirit) yet testified to death, that he,
looking UP into Heaven, saw Jesus standing on the right hand of God; yet if any
man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of his, Romans 8.9. which (says
Christ) will not come unto you except I GO AWAY, Joh. 16.7. which Spirit the
Saints receiving, did not declare him to be their only inheritance, but (says
Paul) the EARNEST of our inheritance, UNTIL the redemption of the purchased
possession, Ephesians. 1.14. Christ dwelt in them by faith, the hope of glory; he
says not as the possession of glory: yet says the Quaker, Christ is come
already in their flesh, and has given them eternal life in possession; and is
not afraid to say, that by preaching of a Christ in Heaven, the Devil gets his
work done on earth, though a Cloud of Witnesses, from the Saints of old, that
witnesses their faith in Christ, that was in Heaven; yet did they the work of
the Lord, opposing the Antichristian spirits; though the Quaker, to the great
abuse of the Scriptures, say, that such are the Antichrists that cannot confess
Christ come in THEIR flesh; (but of this you shall hear in the next particular.)

The men of God said, that Christ Jesus shall SO COME as ye have seen him go
into Heaven; the Quaker says, not SO, but let us (with John) say, even SO COME
LORD JESUS. But that which is written must first be accomplished, even the
revelation of the Man of sin, the Son of perdition, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3, 4. the vile
person which Daniel Prophesied of, succeeding the raiser of Taxes, Dan. 11.20,
21. who shall do according to HIS WILL (the light within he says) and shall
exalt himself, and magnify himself above every God, and shall speak mavelous
things against the GOD OF GODS; neither shall he REGARD THE GOD OF HIS FATHERS
(who witnessed their God to be in Heaven) but tells us of a God within their
flesh, so as to expect his coming NO OTHERWISE; wherefore says Daniel, he
shall acknowledge a STRANGE GOD, verse. 36, 37, 39. by whose direction he shall
make War with the Saints, and shall prevail against them; UNTIL the ancient
of days come, and the time when the Saints shall possess the Kingdom, Dan.
7.20, 21, 22. he shall indeed THINK to change Times, and Laws, but the
Judgment shall sit (though he say it be past to him) and the Kingdom, and
Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven shall be
given to the Saints; wherefore comfort one another with these words, verse. 25,
26, 27. for though for a season we may be slighted by reason of him, whose
looks ( Daniel says) is more STOVT THAN HIS FELLOWS, Dan. 7.20. and though
GREAT WORDS may be spoken against the most High, verse. 25. who is our God,
whom we witness to be in Heaven, as the holy men of old did; yet he shall
descend from Heaven to our joy, and in that day this shall be said, LO, THIS
IS OUR GOD; we have waited for him, and he will save us THIS IS THE LORD, we
have waited for him; we will be glad and rejoice in HIS SALVATION, Isa. 25.9.
but of this Salvation the foolish Virgins comes short of, as well as the
Antichrist; wherefore in the fear of the Lord, our God, BE ZEALOVS, WATCH AND
PRAY WITH FASTING.

Mark I pray you, the foundation that is already laid, for the mystery of this
iniquity to work upon; (I mean their saying that Christ is come, and their
looking for him no otherwise to come) for the Scripture says, when Christ
comes, he will command his Angels, to gather out of his Kingdom all things that
offend, Mat. 13.40, 41. then also the Nations is to be ruled with a Rod of
Iron, and shall be broken like a Potters vessel, Rev. 2.25, 26, 27. Christ
revealing himself from heaven, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that
know not God, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8. we (says the Quaker) are the only Ministers of
God; and they are said to be made a flame of fire, Heb. 1.7. and (say they)
Christ is now revealed in us, as aforesaid; what then should hinder them (who
are so apt to pervert the Scriptures) in time, to be persuaded in flaming
fire, to take vengeance on them that know not God, in their sense, and that
offend in their sense; and pretend it to be Christ in them, the flaming fire
taking vengeance according to the Scriptures; but perhaps the Quaker will say
at present, as Hazael did, What, am I a Dog, that I should do this great
thing? 2 King. 8.13. yet it may be the issue like that of Hazael; however (O
Friends) let not things present, nor things to come separate us from the love
of God which has abounded to us in Christ Jesus.

The Quaker says, that the Offering of Christ's Body to be broken, and his
Blood to be shed, avails not, so as (through faith therein) to set free from
sin; but blood in a Mystery, and a body in a Mystery, which we know not what it
is, says Lawson in his Book, p. 18. which was typified by the fleshly body of
Christ, and his Blood; and so in them is fulfilled the Prophecy of Peter, who
foretold the bringing in of damnable Heresies, even DENYING THE LORD THAT
BOVGHT THEM, which they must needs do, that affirm Christ is already come the
second time; and LOOKS for him to come NO OTHERWISE, whom (they say) NEVER DIED.

All that is written must be fulfilled, therefore this may not seem strange,
nor indeed those many DOVBLE-MEANING expressions that we meet withal, as
coverts to hide the nakedness thereof; for says Peter, they shall PRIVILY
bring in this damnable Heresy, 2 Pet. 2.1. therefore though John speak of a
people that denies both Father, and Son, yet that they should not pretend
both, is altogether incredible; considering that Satan transforms himself to
be (as it were) an Angel of LIGHT, wherefore it is said to be a MYSTERY of
iniquity; Oh then how should we labor to be enriched with heavenly wisdom? for
the hour is a coming, and now is, wherein we must wrestle against
Principalities and the Powers of the darkness of this World; and who is
sufficient for these things? surely they, and they only that are not ashamed of
the Lord Jesus, and his words, without whom we can do nothing, whom the Quaker
knows not, owns not, for God has sent him the strong delusion that he should
believe a lie.

Wherefore he says boldly, but blasphemously, that the Lord Jesus whom we
profess is accursed, professing a spirit within him, to be the only Christ,
which he supposes was in the fleshly Body of Christ, and there suffered
reproaches, revilings, and the like, and is (says Parnel In his Shield of
Truth, p 34.
) NOW manifested in the likeness of sinful flesh, to condemn sin in the flesh,
yea and that (says Nayler In Satan's design discovered, p. 25.
) by his own sufferings with them, in them; but Paul being of another spirit,
speaks of the fleshly Body of Christ, in that place, Romans 8.3. which was indeed
the likeness of (but not) sinful flesh, Heb. 4.15. and not in the least of the
sinful flesh of men, so as to bear away sin by his suffering in their bodies;
for says the Apostle himself bare our sins in his OWN BODY on the Tree, 1 Pet.
2.24. and by this ONE OFFERING he has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified, Heb. 10.14 having made thereby a way for such to enter boldly into
the holiest, even by his BLOOD, through the vail, that is to say, HIS FLESH,
verse. 19. 20 according to which the Apostle says, he has made peace through
the blood of his Cross, Col. 1.20. and you has he reconciled in the BODY OF
HIS FLESH, THROVGH DEATH, verse. 22. not flesh and blood as Types, for my Flesh
is meat INDEED (says Christ) and my Blood drink INDEED; which he gave for the
life of the World, himself being the substance of those many types of the Law;
wherefore the bodies of those Beasts, whose blood was brought into the
Sanctuary for sin, being burnt without the Camp, Jesus also, that he might
sanctify the people, with his own blood, suffered without the Gate, Heb.
13.11, 12. according to which, says Peter, ye were redeemed with the precious
blood of Christ, as of a LAMB without blemish, 1 Pet. 1.19. and without
SHEDDING of blood is no remission, Heb. 9.22. even the blood of his CROSS, Col.
1.20. now consider I pray you, whether he be not of that numb^r which counts
the blood of the Covenant an UN HOLY THING, that shall deny the effect of this
blood, and tells us of blood in a mystery? Oh remember that iniquity appears in
a mystery; for what is there required of us by the Lord, that may not, upon
this account, be made void at man's pleasure, though never so plain? Did the
Apostles preach up Justification by the Blood of Christ, and yet is
Justification by another thing, which they in the least speak not of? God
forbid; moreover, how full are the Scriptures of expressions that signifies to
us reconciliation by the death of Christ, yea the death of the CROSS, Ph^l.
2.8. yet even this also is perverted into a mystery by these men who imagines
that Christ never dyed; but this Serpent lies hid in the Grass, and is not
easily to be seen, but the Grass withers, and the Man of Sin shall be
revealed the Son of perdition; and this mystery springs from an opinion that
the spirit suffering within that Person of Jesus, was the Christ, and so
readily you shall hear them say, that they own him, who witnessed a good
confession before Pontius Pilate, meaning the spirit within him. Moreover they
will say, that they own him, who suffered upon Mount Calvary, meaning the
spirit within him; which spirit they say, is now within their bodies of flesh;
now judge ye, how fair a foundation hereby is laid for those sayings to be
built upon, which was foretold should be said by many that should arise,
saying, I AM CHRIST; which must be before the end, which when ever it is, let
us remember that the Christ indeed has charged us, saying BELIEVE THEM NOT.
Now that the fleshly Body of Christ, as it was by him offered up to death, even
the death of the Cross, relates to the salvation of the Believer, as effected
through that, is further evident, because the Apostles (who well knew what
Christ was) testified to the Jews, that they had by wicked hands crucified, and
slain the Lord Jesus, Acts 2.23. and betrayed, and murdered the just one,
says Stephen, Acts 7.52. whom they slew, and hanged on a tree, says Peter,
Acts 10.39. and this was charged upon them for their wicked act toward the
person of Jesus of Nazareth without them (and not for murdering of Christ
within them, as it is very likely the deceived soul would have it) because the
Apostle in his charge, declares that when they had fulfilled all that was
written of him, they took him (whom they had slain) DOWN FROM THE TREE, and
laid him in a SEPVLCHRE, Act. 13.28, 29. whom God raised, with whom the
Apostles ate, and drank after his resurrection, Act. 10.41. even him whom the
Jews slew, and hanged on a tree, verse 39.

Now we cannot but know, that it was a fleshly, substantial body of Christ,
that they slew, murdered, and crucified upon the tree, and in so doing, the
Apostles unanimously affirm that they slew Jesus, (which in English is SAVIOR)
and yet does he not, through it, save? God forbid that we should thus deny the
Lord that bought us; for HE that the Jews thus slew, and hanged on a tree, with
whom the Apostles ate, and drank after he rose from the dead, HE (says Peter)
commanded us to preach, and to testify that it is HE (mark) which was
ordained of God to be the Judge of quick, and dead; and to HIM, says Peter;
give all the Prophets witness, Act. 10.39, 41, 42, 43. yea the Angel of God
descending from Heaven, bears witness to this truth, who said to the holy
women, that came to the Sepulcher; Jesus (that is the Savior) is not here, he
is risen, behold the place where they laid HIM, Mar. 16.6. where the LORD LAY,
Matthew. 28.6. yet will the Quaker slight this body, but thereby he is found to
have a differing Spirit, from that which the Apostles had, and so a false
Spirit; for they handling this body with their hands, in the relation thereof,
said, that which we have seen with our eyes, and looked upon, and our hands
have handled of the Word of life, 1 John 1.1. and says Peter, God has made
that SAME JESUS, whom ye have crucified both LORD AND CHRIST, Act. 2.36. and
the Quaker denying this, is Antichrist* for he that confesses not Jesus Christ
come in the flesh is Antichrist, says John, 1 John 4.3. now by what has been
said, it is evident that the Quaker confesses him not come in flesh all the
Apostles did, so as through the breaking of it, and blood-sheding of it, to
effect man's salvation; but the body that does this, we know not what it is
(says Lawson) yea so slender a respect have they to his body of flesh, that
they deny the glorification of it, and so its ascension into Heaven, and so now
(say they) has it not; and this they manifest, by saying Christ is already
come the second time, and looking for him to come no otherwise; and moreover
these men makes void the ordinance of the Lords supper, which was instituted to
hold forth (by a resemblance) the breaking of the body of Christ, and the
shedding of his blood, which was shed for the remission of sins; this I say
they totally dis-own, as a carnal thing by which they show their low esteem of
that which is signified by it, having conceived to themselves a body, and blood
in a mystery, that sets free from sin; which we find not according to the Law,
and Testimony, therefore it proceeds from darkness.

Object. This is (says the Quaker) a knowing Christ after the flesh, 2 Cor.
5.16.

Answ. The diligent Scripture-searching soul may find, that the knowing of
Christ, reconciling men in the body of his flesh, through death, Col. 1.22. and
his being now glorified therein, is not a knowing Christ after the flesh; for
equally as the Apostles knew not Christ after the flesh; so they knew not the
Saints after the flesh, but them they could not know, as not having bodies of
flesh, neither as not to practice with their bodies, through the Spirit, for
themselves required the same people to glorify God both in their body and in
their Spirit, (which says the Apostle) are Gods, 1 Cor. 6.20. which bodies
being sown in the earth, they testified should be raised again glorified, so
that by this the Apostles did not in the least slight the fleshly body of
Christ, nor the effects wrought for the sons of men, by his being put to death
in the flesh; but having spoken at large before in the third chapter concerning
the ministration of the Law, as done away, and of the present being of the more
glorious ministration of the Gospel, concludes as to that, saying, that
henceforth we know no man after the flesh, yea though we have known Christ
after the flesh, that is, had esteem of him, in reference to the fleshly,
birth-priviledged seed, of whom he came, as concerning the flesh. Romans 9.5.
thus the Apostles knew Christ no more, out rather as HE was declared to be the
Son of God with power, according to the Spirit of holine^e, by the resurrection
from the dead, Romans 1.4. and that Paul's intention, in slighting the knowing
after the flesh, is after this manner, is further evident Phil. 3.3, 4. where
he speaking of himself, says, that if any man might trust in the flesh, or
have confidence in the flesh, he might much more, and his reasons are, because
he was circumcised the eight day, of the stock of Israel, of the Tribe of
Benjamin, etc. verse. 5. which plainly shows how men were known after the flesh
in the old ministration, which is now made void by the coming in of a more
glorious ministration.

Object. The flesh profits nothing, says Christ, from whence it is likely the
Quaker will object.

Answ. Consider, we find the Apostle Peter, being one of them that Christ spoke
these words unto, testifying that Christ has once suffered for sins, that he
might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the
Spirit, 1 Pet. 3.18. now did not he, even HE understand Christ, though filled
with his Spirit, which was to guide them into all truth, judge ye? and withal
consider the occasion of these words of Christ, John 6.63. which was a proposed
question by Christ himself, as appears verse 62. what will ye say if ye shall
see the son of man ascend up where he was before? the flesh (says Christ)
profits nothing; (that is, in reference to his personal tarryance with his
Disciples) for it is (says he) the Spirit that quickneth, which will not come
unto you except I go away, wherefore Christ persuades them that it was
expedient for him to go away, Joh. 16.7. that is, to ascend up where he was
before; but as himself says, he must FIRST suffer many things, Luke 17.25. yea
and it behoved him thus to suffer, Luke 24.46. and what, does this profit
nothing? God forbid; for herein is the love of God manifested, in that, while
we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us, who (at that time) said to his
Disciples, that he gave HIS FLESH for the life of the World, verse 51. that
whosoever eat thereof, and drink his blood (that is, as himself says,
believes on me) shall never hunger, nor thirst, verse 35. whosoever therefore
loves him not, let him be (says Paul) Anathema, Maranatha.

This may serve also to discover the unlearnednesse of Lawson, who cannot
confess that Christ is a distinct being from the Father, though he say, John
14.28. my Father is greater than I; unto whom he prayed, lifting up his eyes
unto Heaven, John 17.1. who is now a MEDIATOR between God, and men, even the
MAN Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. now if Christ be not distinctly considered, then
how is he a mediator? for Paul says a mediator is not of one, but God is one,
Gal. 3.20. wherefore by this the Quaker is but the more revealed what he is;
for consider, the Spirit now dwelling in their flesh, is also the Father, and
Son, (in their account) and they look for him to come NO OTHERWISE, as said
George Fox, before many witnesses; (the truth in Christ I speak, and lie not)
and so are they found to be the ANTICHRIST, that the Apostle speaks of, denying
the Father, and the Son, 1 John 2.22. in whose fear let us live, not TOUCHING
THE UNCLEAN THING.

The Quaker saying, as aforesaid, also says, and indeed cannot but say, that
Christ ascended not into Heaven, with that body which God raised from the dead,
and glorified, and Thomas Laucock being several times asked by me, where that
Heaven was that Christ ascended up into, and now was in, he answered, clapping
his hands upon his breast, saying, WITHIN ME, WITHIN ME.

Him, whom the Jews crucified on the tree, and slew, God raised from the dead,
Act. 10.39, 40. who being raised, bid his Disciples behold his hands, and feet,
bidding them also to handle him, saying, a Spirit had not flesh, and bones, as
ye see me have; HE that was raised again, and THUS spoke to his Disciples,
Luke 24.39. HE led them out as far as to Bethany, and HE lift up his hands, and
blessed him, verse 50. and while HE blessed them, (...) ^^s parted from them,
and carried UP INTO HEAVEN, (...) 51. and this is made good also by the
Testimony of Stephen, who said that he saw the Heavens opened, and the SON OF
MAN standing on the right hand of God, even Jesus whom God raised (says Paul)
from the dead, 1 These. 1.10. yea confirmed with his own Testimony, Rev. 1.18. I
am he that lives, and WAS DEAD, and behold, I live for evermore; wherefore I
say; as Peter said, LET ALL KNOW ASSUREDLY that God has made the SAME JESUS,
whom the Jews CRUCIFIED, both LORD and CHRIST, Act. 2.36. but if any be so
obstinate, and ignorant, as to believe that Heaven is within these men's
mortal, and corruptible bodies, and that Christ, whom the Jews crucified, is
now dwelling therein, as his throne, and there is a mediator between God and
men, let him be, let him be ignorant still -- that which is said in the
former particular, manages this truth also.

The Quaker says, that some of them are already come unto the END OF FAITH,
this Thomas Lawson, John Slay gave me in writing, which thing I denying, they
thought it advantageous to their cause to publish it: Laws. book. page 10.

This their affirmation gives us to understand what glory (if I may say glory)
it is they expect, and own, and moreover by this we may most clearly discern
their denial of the resurrection, for otherwise they cannot say with any
pretense, that they are NOW at the end of Faith; wherefore our confidence
toward God, concerning a resurrection, is alone sufficient to manifest the
emptiness of this saying of theirs; which they would establish from Paul's
expression to Timothy, chapter 1.9. Who has saved us, etc. but how? according to
his own purpose, and grace given us (says Paul), in CHRIST JESUS, who is our
life, and when he shall appear THEN shall we appear with him in glory, Col.
3.4. for unto them that LOOK for him, shall he appear the second time without
sin unto salvation, Heb. 9.28. in which day, all tears shall be wiped awa^
(...) but Timothy, who among others is said there to be saved, was in (...),
even to tears, wherefore Paul had a great desire to see him (...) mindful of
his TEARS, verse 4. in that day also all (...) ^^ous, and misery shall be done
away, but Timothy is exhorted (...) of afflictions, and to endure hardness,
verse 8.2, 3. more^ (...) Paul, the Scripture is able to make thee (not has
made thee) wise unto salvation, etc. yea and that which is more plain, verse 5.
Timothy is said to have unfeigned faith, and verse 13. is exhorted to hold fast
the form of sound words, in Faith, and Love; yet is this brought by Lawson to
prove that they were at the end of faith. Oh sad blindness! how do they err,
not knowing, or rather slighting the Scriptures? -- the sum of this is thus;
the Quaker affirms, that Faith is at an end; Paul affirms, NOW ABIDES FAITH, 1
Cor. 13.13. another Doctrine, another Spirit.

The Quaker also holds, that they are NOW in possession of the Kingdom of
Christ, and have eternal life really in POSSESSION. Lawsons book. page 9.19.

Oh how are the right ways of God perverted! what is it, that men come not to
believe, when they leave the holy Scriptures as to be their rule? these men
talk much of Light, but they that were in the Light indeed, testified that the
Saints inheritance was RESERVED in Heaven for them, 1 Pet. 1.4. yet did they
rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory, verse. 8. through Faith in the
Promises, which the holy men of old RECEIVED NOT, but died in Faith, Heb.
11.13, 39 what has not Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob received the Promises? and
yet will these men say that they have? oh that they had a face, to blush at
these things; how do they, in their conceptions, exalt themselves above the
Saints of old? yea above the Apostles; for hencerorth (says Paul) there is
LAID UP for me a Crown of Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.8. whose confidence was,
that he should be preserved UNTO his heavenly Kingdom, verse 18. and so they
witnessed Christ to be a Priest of good things, TO COME, Heb 9.11.

Object. This cannot be so says Lawson, because Saints are said to be
delivered from the power of darkness, and translated into the Kingdom of
Christ, Col. 1.13.

Answ. Men before conversion are under the power of darkness, which is the
broad way that leads to destruction; but being converted, are on the contrary,
under the power of Christ; and so are in the ready way to the possession of the
Kingdom; for unto that very people that Paul testifies thus to be translated
into the Kingdom; he speaking of their hope, said that it was LAID UP for them
in Heaven verse. 5. and to them also (he says) ye know that of the Lord ye
SHALL receive the reward of the inheritance, Col. 3.24. not HAVE received,
therefore not in the possession of the Kingdom; which is Saints reward; which
they have now by promise, wherefore says the Apostle, God has chosen the poor
of this world rich in faith, and HEIRS (not possessors) of the Kingdom, which
he has PROMISED to them that love him, Jam. 2.5. this little will serve for
them that owns the resurrection, for the apprehension of present possession of
eternal life (which is Saints reward) destroys the truth of that; wherefore
let us give diligence to make our calling, and election SURE, and so an
entrance shall be ministered unto us abundantly, into the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ, 2 Pet. 1.11.

The Quaker also fully denies the Resurrection of the body, which they have
often to me acknowledged, and Thomas Lawson, John Slay (Quaker-teachers) gave
me their understandings thereof in writing (namely) that NOTHING that goes into
the Grave shall rise again; I speak the truth in Christ, I lie not.

Many are the shifts of them concerning this particular, insomuch that
sometimes they do (by their DOUBLE-MEANING expressions, persuade enquiring
Souls that they own the Resurrection, sometimes also they endeavor to show
persons their weakness, in searching after the Resurrection, it being a deep
mystery; showing them, that they ought first to wait upon the light within, and
that will reveal such things unto them in due season; and indeed hereby they
show that they have a spirit like Bala^ms; who being willing to answer the
desire of Balack (but could not, because Israel was obedient according to the
Scriptures) at length taught Balack to lay a stumbling block before Israel; and
when they forsook their God, in committing Whoredom, etc. THEN Israel was
subject to the Curse; so likewise does the Quaker, endeavoring first to take
off people from observing the Scriptures; as their rule, persuading them to
wait upon their light within, as the ONLY teacher; and when they have herein
prevailed, then (oh then) the poor souls are subject to swallow in errors
apace, yea though most plain, in opposition to the Scriptures, for otherwise
they would not slight that cloud of Witnesses, concerning the resurrection from
the dead; but though Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend, but fear
ye the Lord who is Almighty, and can as well raise up man again, after he is
returned to dust, as he did at first form him of the dust of the earth; and
withal search ye the Scriptures; remembering that men formerly erred
concerning the Resurrection, not KNOWING THE SCRIPTURES, nor the POWER of God,
Matthew. 22.29. Consider, Christ is said to be the first fruits of them that
sleep, 1 Cor. 15.20. the FIRST that should rise from the dead, Acts 26.23. and
the Quakers mystery may not here show its self, for Christ never was dead in
sin; but bodily dead he was, and the same body which was laid in the Sepulcher,
God raised, as is evident, Luke 24.3, 5, 6, 12. who being raised, testified
that he had flesh, and bones, verse. 39. but yet in a glorious manner; thus was
Christ the first that rose from the dead; now if the fleshly bodies of men
shall not also arise, and be made glorious, consider how Christ can be said to
be the FIRST that rose from the dead; for where there is not a second, there
cannot be a first; wherefore it follows, that the Sons of Men shall be raised
in the likeness of his Resurrection; wherefore the Apostle makes the
Resurrection of Christ his first, and great Argument to satisfy the
Corinthians that staggered about the Resurrection; concluding that men must
needs rise, because Christ was risen; to which agrees the words of Christ, Joh.
5.28, 29. the hour is COMING, in the which all that are in the Graves shall
hear his voice, and shall come forth, they that have done good unto the
Resurrection of Life, and they which have done evil unto the Resurrection of
Damnation; but when I have produced this to these men, they slight the pure
intention thereof, and tell me, that I am NOW in the grave there spoken of,
meaning the grave of sin; O remember the mystery of iniquity, that is to be
revealed in the last days! which has here no place, though it shrouds its
self in with his fig-leaved garments, but truth discovers its nakedness; for
by graves, cannot be meant graves of sin, in this place; first, because Christ
had spoken before in the 25. verse of men dead in sin (whom the Quaker supposes
are in their graves) saying, the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God,
and they that hear shall live; (secondly) because of the time mentioned by
Christ, when this rising again from the grave should be, which he signifies in
these words; the hour is COMING, not come, and now is, as he said before, when
he spoke of rising from deadness in sin, which had been true, provided his
meaning had been as the Quaker would have it; for men were as really risen from
sin then, as now; (thirdly) because some that rise out of the graves, there
spoken of, are signified to rise fit for damnation, but those that rise from
sin, are fit for salvation; (fourthly) because othersome that rise, or come
forth out of the graves here spoken of, are such as HAVE done good, and so are
subjects of life, in reference to what they HAVE done before they rise from the
grave, which could not be so, if it be meant the graves of sin, for the wages
of sin is death; to this agrees the answer of Christ, to the Sadduces question
(to wit) whose wife of the seven she should be in the resurrection, when they
shall rise? for says Christ, when they SHALL RISE from the dead, etc.
signifying that should certainly rise again, yea from that death, which cannot
possibly be understood a death in sin; the nature of the question being
considered; also in the resurrection whereof Christ speaks, they shall neither
marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the Angels of God, Mar. 12.23, 25.
wherefore most plainly it appears, that by these words Christ preached up the
resurrection of the body, for from the beginning, persons risen from sin did
marry, and were given in marriage, and after Christ spoke these words, it was
accounted honorable by the Children of God, and is now so to be; to this
agrees also the voice of the Prophet, Isa. 26.19. thy dead men shall live,
together with my dead body shall they arise, and the earth shall cast out the
dead; and says Daniel, many that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake,
yea from such a death as some awakes from it, to shame, and everlasting
contempt, Dan. 12.2. and in this truth was Job well satisfied, insomuch that he
wished his words were printed in a book, and graven with an Iron Pen, in the
rock for ever; saying, in my flesh shall I see God, whom I shall see for my
self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another, though my reins be consumed
within me, and after my skin worms destroy this body, Job 19.23, 24, 25, 26,
27.

Object. Job saw God in his flesh ( says Lawson) with a spiritual eye, before
his returning to the dust, Job 42.5, 6.

Answ. Jobs testimony concerning his seeing God, then is not to be slighted,
neither that of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who also, and after the like manner,
talked with God, and saw God; yet they dyed in Faith, NOT receiving the
promises, Heb. 11.13. the Prophet also bearing testimony, saying, though
Abraham be IGNORANT of us, and Israel acknowledge us not, yet there is a time
that shall come; and will come (spoken of by Christ, Luke 13.28, 29.) when
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets, with many that shall come from
the East, and from the West, from the North, and from the South, and shall sit
down in the Kingdom of God; and to this agrees the words of Job, speaking of
his seeing God, but the time when, he intimates to be after his body was
destroyed by worms, and the consuming of his reins within him; which had not
been when he spoke these words, Job 42. read 1 Cor. 13.12. Moreover if it were
true that these men were in the resurrection, and so in the Kingdom (as they
say they are) then should those that are thrust out, in their account, SEE
Abraham, and all the Prophets, in the Kingdom with them in glory, and
themselves, weeping, and gnashing their teeth; for so said Christ to the
rebellious Jews, Luke 13.28. but this, with many more things, which shall
appear in the resurrection, now appears not, yet will they say that they NOW
are in the resurrection; oh STRONG DELUSION!

The truth of this is yet further evident; for (says Paul) since by man came
death, by man came also the resurrection from the dead, for as in Adam all dye,
even so in Christ shall all be made alive, 1 Cor. 15.21.22. that is from that
death, occasioned by Adams sin, which God tells us was a returning to the dust;
of that which was taken out of the dust, or ground, Genesis 3.19. which we know
was the fleshly body of man, which by reason of sin must dye, but through
Christ all shall be made alive again; now we know that all are not made alive
from a spiritual death, therefore the Apostle speaks not here of that, but
indeed of the fleshly bodies of men that are buried, or sown into the earth,
(even as the sown Corn, which cannot hold comparison with any thing else of
man) which he testifies shall rise again, saying, that THIS corruptible, must
put on incorruption, THIS mortal must put on immortality, verse 53. mark, not
an immortal body, of other matter, but THIS which is now mortal, now
corruptible, shall be made immortal, incorruptible, and so is made good the
words of the Apostle, Phil. 3.21. who shall change our VILE body, that IT may
be fashioned like unto his glorious body; but the Quaker having another Spirit,
says that it shall never come out of the grave; but a less, how greatly do
they err while they leave the Scriptures, as not to be their rule! wherein is
clearly testified the conquest of the grave, for, says the Lord, Hos. 13.14. O
grave, I will be thy destruction; wherefore the Sea shall deliver up all that
are in it; Hell, or grave, shall deliver up all that are in it, and death which
feeds on many, that were never buried in the earth, or in the Sea, shall also
be delivered up, and so all shall come to judgment, Rev. 20.13. this is
certain, for repentance is hid from mine eyes, says the Lord, Hos. 13.14. but
according to the Quakers opinion, the grave is the conqueror (having got the
bodies of men in it, and so holds them fast for ever, says Lawson) that is
originally the Devil; but Christ in the Apostles account; oh let him be also in
our account, even him who through death has destroyed him that has the power
of death, (that is the Devil) who will in his time, ransom all from the power
of the grave; O remember Hymeneus, and Philetus, who are men branded with
error, for saying the resurrection was past already, 2 Timothy 2.18.

Object. The Quaker says this cannot be so, because (Paul says) flesh and
blood connot inherit the Kingdom of God, -- and thou sowest not that body that
shall be, but God gives it a body, as it has pleased him.

Answ. True it is, that flesh, and blood, as now it is corruptible, cannot
inherit, wherefore the Apostle afterward says, that it must put on
incorruption, then shall it inherit the incorruptible inheritance; and so is
made good the comparison (thou sowest not that body that shall be) for we sow,
that is, commit man's body to the dust corruptible, but God gives it a body as
it has pleased him, even an incorruptible body; that is, raises the body which
was sown corruptible, in an incorruptible condition, so it is, that to every
seed is given HIS OWN BODY; for the Corn consumes not away, which is sown into
the earth, neither there abides, but the very same springs up again to its
proper body, but more excellent through a change: and even so our vile body
shall be changed and made like unto his glorious body, Phil. 3.21. wherefore
the sum of all is thus.

The bodies of men that are committed to the earth, CORRUPTIBLE, DISHONORABLE,
WEAK, NATURAL; (WHICH SO CONSIDERED CANNOT INHERIT THE KINGDOM OF GOD) SHALL
RISE AGAIN, INCORRUPTIBLE, HONORABLE, POWERFUL, SPIRITUAL, AND SO CONSIDERED
SHALL INHERIT THE KINGDOM OF GOD, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44. the Lord has said it,
and who can disannul it?

Object. It is the pure inside of the Corn that springs up again, and not the
shuck with it, so it is the internal Spirit of man that shall be glorified, and
not the body of flesh, which is as the shucke.

Answ. Most evident it is, that that, and so much of man, as is SOWN into the
earth, is resembled by the sown corn; now the Spirit returns to God that gave
it, and the fleshly bodies are sown into the earth, resembled by the Corn that
is sown into the earth; and God gives it, mark, it is not said that he gives,
or makes A body, as if it were another in respect of matter, but gives IT, even
IT that was sown into the earth, a body glorious, immortal, as it has pleased
him; this is evident if the reasoning with flesh and blood be ommitted, and the
holy Scriptures considered, which testifies of the GRAVES OPENING, and the DEAD
bodies arising, Matthew. 27.52. that is to say, SO FAR as they consist of the
PURE CREATION.

Object. Paul tells the Saints that they were risen with Christ, Col. 2.3. chapter

Answ. He does indeed represent them as risen with Christ, but says he through
Faith, of the operation of God, Col. 2.12. which evidences things not seen,
Heb. 11.1. wherefore he tells them afterward that their life was HID with
Christ in God, Heb. 3.3. and when Christ did appear, THEN they should appear
with him in glory; verse 4. to which agrees these words, Ephesians. 2.6, 7. God,
who is rich in mercy, has raised us up together, and made us sit together in
heavenly places IN CHRIST JESUS, that in the ages TO COME, he might show the
riches of his grace toward us; even at the resurrection day, when Saints shall
be rewarded, Luke 14.14. unto which they had not attained, for Paul himself,
the Teacher of them, strongly affirms, that HE had NOT attained unto the
resurrection of the dead, Phil. 3.11, 12. but labored that he might attain
(that is) to the resurrection unto life, at the appearing of Jesus, which he
might come short of, if not diligent; though notwithstanding come to a
resurrection; but great was his desire; O let it be even our desires also, to
be of that number that shall be raised, and meet the Lord in the air, and so
EVER be with the Lord, 1 These. 4.17. at which time Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
and the rest of the Saints that dyed in Christ shall rise; though the Prophet
have said that Abraham was IGNORANT of them, and Israel acknowledged them not,
Isa. 63.16. and the Apostle bare record, saying, that they RECEIVED NOT the
Promises, Heb. 11.13. but Christ testifies of a time when they shall sit down
in the Kingdom of God, Luke 13.28, 29. in reference to which time God said to
Moses, that he was the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as appears by Christ,
who testified that God is not a God of the dead, but of the living, and so from
this concludes, that they must needs rise again, Matthew. 22.31, 32. God having
provided some better thing for us, that they without us, should not be made
perfect, Heb. 11.40. this is the resurrection which the Apostles preached,
which was esteemed strange, which made Paul say, why should it be thought a
thing incredible to you, that God should raise the dead? Acts 26.8. now that
the rising from sin (wherein men are said to be dead) to newness of life, was
accounted an incredible thing, I leave honest judicious souls to judge; this is
the Resurrection, concerning which Paul had hope toward God, both of the just,
and unjust, Act. 24.15.

Which (says the Quaker) is the old corrupt man, rising in a man, which is the
unjust; and Christ, the Light rising in the same man, is the just.

And so one man is to witness both the Resurrection of the just, and unjust in
himself. This have I been plainly told (I speak the truth in Christ, I lie not)
by one of them; well, and truly said the Apostle, the MYSTERY OF INIQVITY, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7, 8. what had Paul hope toward God, that the Old corrupt Man should
rise again, either in himself, or in any others? Oh how great also is the
darkness of this mystery!

Moreover, men that are turned from sin to a new life, cannot say, and say
truly, and understandingly, that they are risen AGAIN, because they were always
fallen, and dead in sin; now the Resurrection is not only a rising, but a
rising AGAIN, according to the true, proper, and prime signification of both
the Latin (...) resurrectio, a rising again.
Greek * word; wherefore, O friends, look to your selves, and hold FAST, FAST,
the form of sound words, as ye have been taught; ABOVNDING in the work of the
Lord, for as much as ye know your labor is not in vain in the Lord; for thus
says the Lord, O GRAVE, I will be thy DESTRVCTION, repentance shall be HID
from mine eyes, Hos. 13.14.

The Quaker also says, that the eternal Judgment is PAST already as to them,
having (as they say) given an account to God already, for all that they have
done, and RECEIVED THE REWARD FOR THEIR SINS, even WRATH, and CONDEMNATION;
that is, the wounds of Conscience, and the like; this, and more to this purpose
you may find in Desburies Book, called, A Discovery of Man's return to his
first estate, page 7.

This, will they say, proceeds from the light, but Christ, the LIGHT INDEED,
discovers it to be gross darkness; who speaking of rebellious Capernaum, said,
that it SHALL be more tolerable for Sodom in the DAY OF JUDGMENT than for
thee, Matthew. 11.24. now we know that Sodom was destroyed long before for their
great wickedness, for which no doubt they had many wounds of Conscience, yet
repented not, and this was not in Christ's account, the Judgment, for he speaks
of that as to come; and so is made good that saying, Heb. 9.27. It is appointed
unto men one to dye, but AFTER THIS the Judgment; alas, alas, how does vain
thoughts lodge within these men? how greatly are they deceived! while they
slight the true use of the Scriptures, which (before the strong delusion seized
upon them) would have shown them, that the Lord comes with, not in, but WITH
ten thousand of his Saints, to excute judgment, Jud. 14.15. this Paul, and
Timotheus looked for (yet men of high degrees of Christianity) saying, We must
all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ; but (says the Quaker) we HAVE
appeared: another Doctrine (O Friends) wherefore another spirit; but unto us,
that look for the Lord Jesus from Heaven, who shall judge the quick and dead at
his appearing, and his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.1. unto us, I say, a little may
suffice, for the manifestation of this error,

The Quaker also believes, that sin is NOT the cause of man's body returning to
the dust, as Tho. Lawson, Tho. Laucock affirmed.

Strange, yea very strange is this saying, considered nakedly by it self, but
considering that it comes from a spirit that denies the Resurrection of the
Body, it is not so strange; yet nevertheless the error thereof is not thereby
lessened: Error, I say, for when Adam by eating had sinned, God said unto him,
BECAUSE thou have eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee saying, thou
shall not eat of it; cursed is the ground for thy sake, in the sweat of thy
face shall thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground, for dust thou
art, and unto dust shall thou return; and to this agrees the words of the
Apostle, Romans 5.12. As by one man sin entered into the Word, and death BY SIN,
and so Death passed upon all; not such a Spiritual death as the Quaker would
have, because in Christ all shall be made alive from it, 1 Cor. 15.21, 22. he
having (through his appearance in the likeness of sinful flesh) condemned sin
in the flesh, which is the sting of that death which brings into the Grave the
bodies of men, verse. 55, 56. thus by sin comes the death of the body, and not
only so, for those many Curses, as eating our bread in sorrow, in the sweat of
our faces, women, bringing forth Children in sorrow, even these attends the
bodies of men and women by reason of sin, even BECAUSE thou have eaten, says
God; showing that God at first, in his threat upon the transgression of his
Law, intended punishment upon the body; that which did eat, and in eating
sinned, dyed; and so DEATH BY SIN, says the Apostle.

The Quaker also slights, and denies Baptism in Water, calling it a low Carnal
thing; This is signified by Naylor in his Book called, A Salutation to the Seed
of God, Page 33, 34.
pleading that it may be now taken away by them (they seeing it to be abused)
without any Scripture warrant; they having (as they say) that Spirit within
them which gave it forth.

This also, they will say, proceeds from the Light, but not so indeed; for
Christ (the true Light) was not ashamed thereof, but was obedient, even to
Baptism in water. Matthew. 3.16. also said, that whosoever is ashamed of him, and
his words, of him he also will be ashamed when he comes in the glory of his
Father; wherefore look to yourselves, that ye be not beguiled of your faith,
in this so plain a Commandment; and for your stedfastness therein, I do here
represent unto you Three considerations, as reminding you of the ground for
Baptism in Water.

First, remember that John testifies that he was sent (from the Lord) to
Baptize with Water, Joh. 1.33. and in preaching Repentance, and Baptism, for
the remission of sins, he is said to be a preparer of the way of the LORD, Mar.
1.2.3.4. in which Ministration he was very famous, so that all the people went
out unto him, to be baptized; but when Christ went forth, preaching the Gospel
of the Kingdom, then the fame of John decreased; and all went out unto him, as
most famous, John 3.26. at the hearing of which, John in all humility said, he
must increase, but I must decrease, verse 30.

Secondly, Remember also that the Lord Jesus, in plain words, gave it forth, by
commandment, saying to his Disciples, Matthew. 28.19. go ye therefore, and teach
all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, etc. that is, baptizing
them in water, as undeniable appears, in that the DISCIPLES were to administer
it, (mark that) they could not, they did not baptize with the Spirit; but,
says John, (speaking of Christ) he that comes after me, whose shoes I am
not worthy to bear, HE shall baptize you with the holy Spirit, Mat. 3.11. which
(says Peter) GOD has given to them that obey him, Act. 5.32. the glory of
this ministration the Lord has reserved unto himself, and has no where given
it to man.

Thirdly, Remember also that as baptism in water in John's time, was with other
things, a preparation of the way of the Lord, and afterward established by the
special command of the Lord himself, so also (after his ascension) was it
confirmed by an Angel from the Lord, who (well knowing his message) bid
Cornelius send for Peter, and he (says the Angel) shall tell thee what thou
ought (he says not, what he might do, as an indifferent thing) but what
thou OUGHT to do, Act. 10.5, 6. who, then he was come, and had seen the
goodness of God, said, who can forbid WATER, that these should not be
baptized, which have received the holy Ghost, as well as we? making their
receiving the holy Spirit, a great argument why they should be baptized with
water; yet will men use the same argument, why they need not be baptized with
water; alas, alas, what will the poor souls answer, when God rises up? Job
31.14. these, even the Spirit-baptized people, Peter commands to be baptized,
verse 47, 48. wherefore, whatever men say, this being submitted unto, from an
inward principle of love, to him that first loved us, is not a carnal thing,
but to be held fast; remember, that Jesus is the same yesterday, to day, and
for ever.

Object. Paul said that Christ sent him not to baptize, but to preach the
Gospel.

Answ. Christ also said, labor NOT for the meat that perissieth, but for that
meat which endures unto everlasting life, Joh. 6.27. what, did he hereby make
void moderate working? surely nay; for Paul having his Spirit, said, if any
would not work, neither should he eat; but rather that men should not make it
their SPECIAL labor, (as the Jews did, verse 26.) after the things for the
present, bodily subsistence; so Paul's ESPECIAL work was not to baptize (that
is, personally to administer baptism) but to preach the Gospel, to which
belongs baptism; unless we should believe that he preached one Doctrine, and
Peter another, but that is incredible; but credible it is that they did not
always personally administer it, and so it was that Paul had baptized but few
of the Corinthians, for which he gave God thanks, not from a low esteem
thereto, but because they thereby had no show, to say that he baptized in his
own name; as they were apt to say, 1 Cor. 1.12, 14, 15. wherefore (O friends)
as ye have received, hold fast, and grow, as to the use of it.

The Quaker also denies the practice of the Lords supper, which ( says Lawson)
Christ put to an end at his death.

It is no marvel that they deny this, since they are not afraid to say, that
the body, and blood of Christ, is unprofitable, (as to the setting free from
sin) which is to be in this remembered; but unto us, to whom the one is
esteemable, let the other also; for indeed it is absurd to affirm that Christ
should give forth a commandment to his Apostles, bidding them to do it, in
remembrance of him, and within four or five days, put it to an end by his
death, yea before they were, or could be in any considerable posture to observe
it; and yet afterward to command them to teach all Nations to observe all
together incredible; most evident it is, that afterward the Apostle delivered
this ordinance unto the Saints, and afterward regulated their disorder
therein, according to Christ's institution, 1 Cor. 11. and the bread which they
(in this ordinance used) Paul says they BREAK, 1 Cor. 10.16. by which their
mystery is excluded, wherefore (though Parnell be pleased to say, that this is
a feeding upon husks) yet let us therein hold forth the Lords death, TILL HE
COME.

The Horrid Blasphemy of the Quaker revealed.
MAny a time when I have spoken, both words of truth, and soberness, the Quaker
has pronounced the curses and plagues of God, to be my portion, which seemed
not a little strange unto me; that men pretending perfection should thus rage;
but since I have found him, not afraid to speak evil of the Lord himself, for
more than once Thomas Laucock* (Quaker-teacher) has said that the Lord Jesus
Christ is ACCURSED; him whom we profess, even him that was born of the Virgin,
anointed of God with the holy Spirit, whom the Jews crucified, and slew, whom
God raised from the dead, who ascended into Heaven, and there mediates between
God, and men; this is the Christ whom we own, against whom the Quaker
blaspheming, is found not to have the Spirit of God, though he talk so much of
the Spirit; for plainly, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.3. NO man, speaking by
the Spirit of God, calls Jesus ACCURSED; and so being sensual, having not
the Spirit, said at other times, that he knew me BEFORE THE WORLD WAS, in
whom is made good that saying, ( viz.) they speak great SWELLING WORDS OF
VANITY, 2 Pet. 2.18. and as Isaiah prophesies, shall say in his heart, I will
be LIKE THE MOST HIGH, Isa. 14.14. for foreknowledge is that, by which God
advances his supreamacy above all, wherefore it is said, Isa. 41.26. who has
declared from the beginning that we may know? and before time, that we may
say he is righteous? yea there is none that declares, there is none that
shows; yet says Laucock; HE knew me before the World was; and James Parnell
says, In Naylers book called Satan's design discovered. p. 51.
before corrupt reason was, I AM; Oh that they had such a heart that could
learn, not to blaspheme! but this is that the Scripture might be fulfilled,
which testifies of this strong delusion; which being seized upon these men,
they conceive the foreknowing God is so appeared in them, as that he shall
appear no otherwise, and so speaks these words in them; what is there (O
friends) that ever was spoken by the Lord himself, to the sons of men, that
these may not (upon this account) attribute unto themselves, and speak
likewise? and what is there, of all that is to be done, by the mighty power of
God, that these may not as well challenge unto themselves (thus conceiving of
God in them) as to say that THEY knew men before the World was? what is there
to hinder them from saying, VENGEANCE BELONGS UNTO US? and so become the
revealed SON OF PERDITION, who opposes, and exalts himself above all that is
called God, or that is worshipped, showing himself that HE IS GOD, 2 These. 2.3,
4. yea so strong already are they in their conceits of the present finishing of
things, as that Nayler Satan's design discovered, p. 26.
blasphemously affirms that to promise freedom after death is a CHEAT OF
ANTICHRIST; and moreover says pa. 19.
that by preaching of a Christ in Heaven, the Devil gets his work done on
earth. O how does arrogance, and spiritual pride put forth it self! how great
is the darkness of this pretended Light! the imperfection, of this pretended
perfection! such also is their pride and self-conceitednesse, as that they will
not (by no means) say, MOST NOBLE FESTUS, Act. 26.25. but rather are such as
despise DOMINION, and speak evil of dignities, Jude 8. but this also is, that
the Scriptures might be fulfilled, Dan. 7.20. whose look was MORE STOUT THAN
HIS FELLOWS, fear ye the Lord, fear ye the Lord.

The Scoffings of the Quaker manifested.
AS we have heard that Scoffers should come in the last days, even now already
are they come, whereby we may know that it is the last of the last days; for
at a certain time, when I, with other brethren, was reasoning with Thomas
Laucock; concerning the coming of Christ, he scoffingly said, WHERE IS THE
PROMISE OF HIS COMING, IS HE ASLEEP? these very words (I speak the truth in
Christ, I lie not) did he utter, before many witnesses; by which he is found to
be of them, that Peter prophesied of, saying in the last days there should
come scoffers, saying, where is the promise of his coming? 2 Pet. 3.3.4. he
that by this sees not, let him remain blind; moreover such and so great is the
darkness of the Quaker concerning Christ, and his coming, as that at another
time, in a conference about Christ in Heaven, he scoffingly replied, saying,
WHAT IS HE, THREE, OR FOUR STORY HIGH, ABOVE SKY? but says the Saints,
seeing then that we have a high Priest, that is passed into the Heavens, even
Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession; but says the scoffing
Quaker, How can we have comfort or peace by Christ, and he so far off from
us, above sky? he is (says the Saints) gone into Heaven, whom having not
seen ye love, in whom though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice
with joy UNSPEAKABLE, and FULL OF GLORY, 1 Pet 1.8.3.22. whatever they say, he
that SHALL come, WILL come, and will not tarry; fear ye the Lord, fear ye the
Lord.

The Fierceness, or Raylings of the Quaker discovered.
IVde the Servant of the Lord, speaks of a people, that are as RAGING waves of
the Sea, foming out their own shame, verse. 13. how nigh of kin the Quaker is to
them, judge ye by this following description, of their behavior toward me,
when I have been amongst them, who at several times thus have said to me in
great rage, and fury of spirit; Thou Beast, bruit beast, thou Witch, thou
Devil, thou Reprobate, thou Enemy of God, for the Lake, thou Swine feeding upon
husks, thou Cain killing thy brother Abel, thou Drunkard, thou Thief, thou
Murderer, thou Serpent, the Curses, Plagues, and Vengeance of God is thy
portion, and says Lawson in his Book against me, Thou Image-maker, thou
Cockatrice hatching Eggs, Vultures eye, (and this because I said, Christ was
ascended with that body that God raised from the dead) thou Heathen (because I
said, the will of Christ was made known by the Scriptures) thou Liar, bundle of
Lies, thou Esau selling thy Birthright, a Mate for the Night-birds,
Cormorants, Bitterns, Owls, Ravens, Dragons, wild Beasts, Satyrs, Vultures,
Scritch-owles; (and this because I said that the Saints had not the Kingdom by
possession, but by promise; and when they thus with fury, and loftiness of
spirit, have pronounced Judgments, I have endeavored to moderate these raging
waves, but presently it is replied, KNOW YE NOT THAT THE SAINTS SHALL JVDGE
THE WORLD? sometimes also they endeavor to shelter themselves with the
expressions of Christ, and the Apostles; but consider, did ever Christ, or any
of his Apostles, use such expressions to men, for preaching up the Kingdom
(which is Saints reward) as by promise? nay himself did so; and his Apostles
also; Luke 12.32. Jam. 2.5. or did they because men searched the Scriptures,
thereby to know the will of Christ? Nay search the Scriptures, says Christ;
but indeed to the Jews, and to Elimas the Sorcerer, who had a long time before
kicked against the counsel of the Lord, and would not CEASE to pervert the
righteous ways of God, to them they did SOMETIMES use some of those
expressions (which might be with a low Spirit delivered) but what is this to
justify the Quakers raging against men that hold forth the counsel of God?
yea, and that at the first dislike of their ways; yea, and at all times, when
opposed; nay, rather is he found to be of that number, that the Apostle
prophesied of, saying, In the last days perilous times shall come, for men
shall be FIERCE, 2 Timothy 3.3. their look being more STOUT THAN HIS FELLOWS, Dan.
7.20. but render YE not evil for evil, railing for railing, but contrariwise
be ye temperate, of a good behavior, and HOLY IN ALL YOUR WAYS.

The Abominable Deceit of the Quaker discovered.
HOw far off the Ministry of the Quakers are from the Apostolical Ministry,
who renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, nor
handling the Word of God deceitfully, 2 Cor. 4.2. judge ye by these following
lines, though I question not but that many have experience of their deceit, as
well as I; if you ask them, whether they own the resurrection from the dead?
they will (I say will, except they be changed) readily answer you, that they
do; (but means, a present rising from a dead condition in sin;) whether they
own a resurrection from the grave? yea, (will they say) we do; (but mean, a
rising from the grave of sin, wherein living men now are) whether they own a
resurrection to come? yea, (will they say) we do; (but mean, a rising from sin
to come, to OTHERS) but when I have asked them whether they own a resurrection
to come unto THEM? then SILENT FLESH, SILENT; moreover, as I said before, so I
say again, that Thomas Lawson plainly said, that all that goes into the grave,
shall never rise again, which was written by his consent, at my house; yet
notwithstanding in his book tells people, that he owns the resurrection both of
the just and unjust; and calls me slanderer, for saying that he denied the
Resurrection; Now he knows that we and the major part of men, own the
resurrection of the bodies of just and unjust men, which are commtited to the
graves of the earth; but their meaning is, the rising and being of the old
corrupt nature in man (which they call the resurrection of the unjust) and the
rising of Christ the Light in man, as (they say) is the resurrection of the
just, which the Scripture speaks of; and so they, NOW witness both; this have
I been plainly told by one of them, I speak the Truth in Christ; O shameful
deceit! If you ask them, whether they own the coming of Christ? they will
answer you, that they do; (but they mean, his coming to others) but when I have
asked them, whether they own Christ to come to THEM? then SILENT FLESH, SILENT;
but through importunity George Fox said, that HE looked for him to come, no
otherwise; the like will they say, concerning the eternal judgment; likewise
when we speak of the Righteousness of God wrought through the person of Jesus,
as it was offered up; they will say, as Nayler has said, Satan's design
diseovered. page 4.
that they own no other righteousness, than that which was wrought IN the
person of Jesus of Nazareth, his suffering, resurrection, and ascension; (but
they mean, Righteousness wrought BY the Spirit, IN that person; and the
sufferings of that Spirit IN that person, whose resurrection is now within
THEM, Naylers book called a salutation to the feed of God. pa. 21.
excluding all this while the effect wrought BY the Person of Christ, offered
up to death.) If you ask them, whether they own justification by the blood of
Christ? they will answer, yea; (but they mean, blood mysteriously.) Whether he
died yea, or nay? they will say, yea also to that; (but they mean, death in a
mystery) for he that suffered, (says Nayler Satan's design, etc. pa. 25.
) is NOW in his people, leading them through sufferings, himself now suffering
with them. If you ask them, whether they believe that Christ has now a body?
they will say, yea; (but they mean, his Church) Whether he ascended into
Heaven, yea, or nay? they will say, yea; (but says Laucock, Christ is ascended
into Heaven WITHIN ME) At a certain time having reasoned with Lawson
concerning Gods making of the earth on which we went, and the Heaven above, I
asked him, whether Gods presence was not more in Heaven, than on earth? to
which he said, yea, but being suspicious of his deceit, asked him, whether he
did not mean that he was more in heavenly-minded men, than in earthly-minded
men? O then, how did he shuffle? consider ye that fear God, whether this be not
deceit, for men to answer plain-meaning questions, with such double-meaning
expressions, as may seem to agree with the judgment of him that asks, and YET
by the same words intend the contrary; what? is this the language of Canaan
which they speak of? nay, surely deceit is of the deceiver; TOUCH not the
unclean thing; for blessed are the PVRE in heart, they shall see God.

The Dishonesty of the Quaker, in contending for his Principles, discovered.
IF dishonesty in and about the things of this life, be odious in the sight of
God, and godly men; what may be said of men that shall defend, yea, unsound
principles with impure dishonest endeavors? and not only so, but in the mean
time advance themselves (by their supposed, pleaded-for perfection) above the
Saints of old, that said in many things we offend all: now that they so do,
consider these following passages; At a certain time I was in Lawsons society,
conferring about Christ's words, viz. that no man could come to the Father but
by him; to which I said, that he was indeed the way to the Father, that is
(said I) through faith in his sufferings, for by his person no man comes to the
Father, considered without his sufferings; from which words, and many more of
this nature, he picks out these words, (that I said) that no man comes to the
Father by the person of Christ, and prints it in his book, though no more
ground so to do, than he may have to say that David said there was no God,
leaving out the former words, viz. the fool has said in his heart; but that
which aggravates his dishonesty is, that (while he blames me for disowning
the coming unto the Father by the person of Christ, when as I do not) himself
does, as has been proved; and in his book elsewhere calls me image-maker, for
owning the person of Christ ascended, and yet he, even HE upbraids me for
denying the coming unto the Father by the person of Christ; does this (O
friends) look like unto perfection? nay, rather an inexcusable condition, in
that he blames another, and yet does the thing, which he blames another for,
HIMSELF; at another time being greatly upbraided, for acknowledging my self
sailable in some things, (by George Fox) I at length desired him to consider
that which is recorded of Peter, who, (said I) was eminent in the service of
Christ, yet sinned; for the proof of which I read that in Gal. 2.11, 12, 13,
14. verse. where it is said, that Paul withstood him to the face, because he was
to be blamed; and that he with other Jews dissembled; which to any honest man
is proof sufficient; but so far was Fox from receiving it, that he furiously
falls on calling me beast, and liar, because I affirmed that Peter sinned, and
that word (SINNED) was not there; yet will this man say he is perfect; but
judge ye whether a man that is but a babe in Christianity; would not abhor
such a thing; for can it be thought that he that dissembles, and is to be
blamed, is unblamable? moreover at another time I made repetition of this
passage, before Thomas Laucock to hear what he would say to it, but in the
least would he not blame his Brother, but violently puts me to prove that
DISSIMULATION WAS SIN, Many witnesses hearing.
which at first I was unwilling to do, but being pressed to it by Laucock, I did
produce Scriptures for the proof thereof; then said one of them to me, but was
it sin in Peter? are not these (O friends) perverse reasonings of men of
corrupt minds? was it ever known since the World was, that a man should be put
to prove dissimulation to be sin? would any of the profane World, the
drunkard, or swearer, thus reason? surely nay; but that which is mostly to be
admired, is, that all this while they should justify themselves, saying to
all, STAND OFF, WE ARE PERFECT. Oh that the poor souls had hearts to consider
their great imperfection! at another time I being accused by Laucock, for
putting the title (Brother) upon one that was withdrawn from, endeavored to
prove the lawfulness thereof by the Scriptures, 2 These. 3.14, 15. moreover I
said, it was clear according to a similitude for (said I) PROVIDED my finger,
(pointing thereat) WERE cut, yet it is not presently to be slighted, and cut
off, but first to apply means of cure (...) even so in the other; to which
Laucock answered, saying, that I was a liar, a liar; if my finger was not
really, and indeed cut; I speak the truth in Christ, thus did he say, before
several men; wherein he has fomed out his own shame; but this is that the
Scriptures might be fulfilled, which testify, that in the last days,
perilous times shall come, wherein men shall be -- UNHOLY -- FALSE ACCUSERS, 2 Timothy 3.2, 3. Oh let us be holy in all our ways. This little, of much more of
this nature, I offer unto your considerations.

Notwithstanding all that has been said, the Quaker looks upon himself as
perfect, yea, ( as Laucock has said) as PERFECT WITHOUT SIN, AS GOD IS;
condemning others, because they say with the Apostle, in many things we offend
all.

He that is so ignorant as to believe this, let him be ignorant still. Yet true
it is, that Saints were perfect, and now may be perfect, (that is) as
considered in Christ, who, of God, is made unto us wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption, unto whom we are now to live, and no longer
unto our selves; even perfecting holiness in the fear of God; wherefore let
every soul awake unto Righteousness, and know for certainty, that perfection is
far more than the forsaking of the false worships of men, and the gross
crimes wherein we have lived, for that may be, and yet we shut out of the
Kingdom, like foolish Virgins, that have not been zealous for God; far more
also is it, than a walking blamelessely to the view of men; for that a man may
do, and yet be defiled within, wherefore with the Apostle renounce the hidden
things of dishonesty; even private, evil motions, which surely cannot but make
the soul mourn, that truly fears God; for it is not a work done, but a work
well done that is acceptable in the sight of God; even when SELF is shut out,
and not mixed with good intentions; yea and when the heart is affected with
duty, which cannot be till the soul is fixed upon the Lord, as the object of
his affections, then, and not TILL THEN is there passage to perfection; for
where the treasure is, the heart WILL BE; wherefore LOVE YE THE LORD GOD WITH
ALL YOUR SOULS, AND WITH ALL YOUR STRENGTH; yea and the Children of God also,
with a pure heart fervently; yea, yet further must we go, if we will be
perfect, even to the doing him good, that does us evil; yea, and that with
freedom of Spirit also.

O then live in the fear of the Lord, crying mightily unto him, that from him
you may receive such measures of Grace, as that you may experience good degrees
of Christianity; and by no means shelter negligence, and coldness, under the
Apostles words (it is not I, but sin that dwells in me) but be zealous, (as
wise Virgins) so shall ye enter into the Kingdom; but if contrariwise you
shall trifle away this day of liberty, which was purchased with much blood,
what will ye answer, when God visits? what will ye do when he rises up,
Job 31.13? wherefore redeem time, and apply your hearts unto wisdom, and let
every one attend upon his work; hear ye diligently, and do ye accordingly;
ye that teach, teach in sincerity, through the ability which God gives, and
let the ARTIFICIAL, METHODICALL, OLD-MAN-PLEASING FORMS, in the ministration
of the word, DIE DAILY, wait ye upon the Lord; Again I say, wait upon the
Lord; yea, and let us all serve the Lord in simplicity of heart; O LET OUR
SOULS, OUR SOULS follow HARD after the Lord, WATCHING, AND PRAYING, PRAYING
WITH FASTING.

He that shall come WILL come, and will not tarry: For he is not slack
concerning his promise (as some men count slacknesse) but is long suffering,
not willing that any should perish. NOW the just shall live by faith.

THE END.
Antichrist made known; OR, The Romish Whore of Babylon proved not to be the
Antichrist, or Man of Sin, In seven particulars.
1 Who is this great Whore of Babylon, and where her chief Seat has been, and
is? 2 Her Fall, and the means how and by whom. 3 What is the spirit of
Antichrist, and who has that spirit? 4 That the Antichrist will be a single
person. 5. The manner of his rising, And when. 6 Some of the great things he
will do. 7. Lastly, His Fall, when, and by whom.
By William Jeffery Servant of the Church of Christ.

MAny honest men fearing God in these latter times, have been mistaken in
saying that the Romish Whore of Babylon is the Antichrist that the Scripture
speaks of; but men may see in this latter part of this last time, with a
serious and diligent search of the Scriptures, through grace, that the great
Whore of Babylon is not the Antichrist; And it being so that God having showed
it me through the Scriptures, I being not accounted of in the World, knowing
that God does great things by them that are not esteemed among men, that no
flesh may glory, etc and considering that this which I do in this work may be
seasonable and for much profit to the people of God, and for the praise and
glory of God, I shall show in brief, that the Whore is not the Antichrist. And
for the clearing up of this Truth,

First, You may see who this great Whore of Babylon is, by noting her chief
Seat where it is, and that is at Rome, for John says, Revel. 17. that the
great Whore of Babylon, which sits upon many waters, is that City which
reigns over the Kings of the earth. Now Rome only was the chief City, and
reigned over the Kings of the earth, when John wrote the Revelation, for when
Christ was born Augustus Caesar taxed all the World, Luke 2.1, 2, 3. and when
Paul appeals to Caesar, they send him to Rome, Acts 25.11. chap. 27.1. chap.
28.16. so it is plain by these Scriptures, and many more, that when John wrote
the Revelation, that Rome reigned over the Kings of the earth, therefore the
chief Seat of this Woman the great Whore, the Mother of Whoredoms, is the City
of Rome; so then the Pope and his Cardinals, Bishops, and Clergy, and all
Ministers that have ordination from them immediately, or by succession, which
stand in a National way, is the Whore that sits upon many waters; which is,
people, and multitudes, and Nations* and Tongues, Rev. 17.15.

Secondly, The Church of Rome, and all National standing is truly said to be
whorish, because she brings in Members, and accounts them of the Body or
Church of Christ by generation, and so makes her Church National; whereas the
Church of Christ is by Regeneration, or New Birth, Tit. 3.5. and so not
National, nor dependent, but particular, or independent.

Thirdly, This appears fully, that the Church of Rome is a Mother of Harlots,
and all National Churches that spring from her are Whorish, because she
baptiseth or sprinkleth upon a fleshly account, and so accounts of her Members
in a fleshly way by Generation, and so brings in Infants in a lineal way,
bringing in the Old Covenant in a confused manner, and so receives false Seed,
and so knows her Members, and her Children in a fleshly way, contrary to the
express way of Christ, as Paul shows, Romans 9.8. says he, They which are the
children of the flesh are not the Children of God, but the Children of the
Promise are counted for the Seed; and 2 Cor. 5.15, 16, 17. he shows that
since the death of Christ, henceforth know we no man after the flesh, yea
though we had known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no
more; therefore if any man be in Christ he is a new Creature, old things are
passed away; behold all things are become new.

Fourthly, The Church of Rome, the Lord Bishops, and Presbyters which spring
from her (for they hold their Ordination which they had of her) show themselves
to be whorish, because they have forsaken the Lord Jesus Christ (the Head) and
his ways, and have gone a whoring after their own inventions, as Israel did,
Psalm. 106. 39. for the Lord Jesus ascended up on high, and gave gifts to men,
and so sends forth a Ministry by gifts, for the gathering together of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, and for edification of the Body of
Christ, till we all meet together in the unity of the faith, and the knowledge
of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, etc. Ephesians. 4.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. but
this Harlot contrariwise brings up her Ministry to Human learning, in sending
them to the Universities to learn Philosophy from Aristotle, a Heathen Author,
and such like; and for them that are gifted by the Lord, if they preach, she
forbids them. And note also, that the Ministers of Christ ministering by gift,
Romans 12.6, 7. being qualified according to this, 1 Timothy 3. and Tit. 1. and
approved by the Congregation of the Lord, they are chosen by them, and
ordained, and so made Bishops, or Elders, Acts 1.21 to the end, chap. 6.5.
chap. 14.23. but this Harlot makes her Ministers, or rather Lords, without the
consent of her Parishes, and forces them in upon them whether they will or no,
and so her maintenance is by Tithes forced from men, bringing in the old
Priesthood; yea in the time of the Law they did not imprison men, if they did
not pay their tithes that we find, and yet she does; and so this Romish Harlot
which has made all Nations drunk with the wine of her Fornication, her
children are children of Fornication, according to the flesh by generation, a
Carnal seed consisting of Parishes, which many of them consist of Swearers and
Liars, and Drunkards, and Whoremongers, and such like, and a Human carnal
Ministry forced upon the people, and forced maintenance, and also her poor is
maintained by force, and forcing men to worship with her, or else Fines,
Imprisonment, Banishment, or Death must be their Portion, and also she has
changed the Ordinances, and the manner of administering them, and the subject,
and so her way is not the way of love, and so not the way of Christ; and yet
she says in her heart and word, I am, and there is none else, I sit being a
Queen, and am no Widow, and shall see no sorrow; and so let every one (weigh
well) what is said, that the Saints at Rome were once famous, Romans 1.8. but in
time they departed from their espoused Christ the Lord, and so came to change
the Ordinances, and yet she pretends to be the Spouse of Christ, and so has a
show of all the Ordinances, or the names of them, for Believers Baptism she
has Infants baptism, or sprinkling, and for laying on of hands she has
Confirmation, or Bishopping (but the Presbyters have left this out, and in this
they are nearer Antichrist than the Lord Bishops, and for breaking of Bread, or
the Lords Suppor, that is in Part ministered to the People, or Parish, and so to
the wrong subject, being not penitent, nor Baptized persons; and instead of the
true Call of her Ministry, she has a Human way, as has been showed, which is
not mentioned in Scripture, and so Tithes and forced maintenance instead of
that which is to be by free gift; and instead of singing with the spirit, and
with the understanding also, 1 Cor. 14. 15. they have singing in Rhyme, in a
Carnal formal way, many together without understanding, the Psalms being
collected into English Meeter by Thomas Sternhold, John Hopkins, and others,
and so she has a glorious Show, and a golden Cup, and through the Popes
Supremacy, and the Peter Pence, and Prayer to Saints, and false Doctrine of
Purgatory, and such like trumpery, the Clergy is very rich, and proud, and
covetous, and so all may see the way of the Whore which is National,
Generational, Fleshly, Carnal, Human, after men's Traditions, making void the
Commandments of God through her Traditions, thus she goes a whoring after her
own inventions; and so you have a brief discovery of the Whore of Babylon,
which is the Mother of abominations of the earth, and is drunken with the blood
of Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. Rev. 17 5, 6. and that
is and will be the cause of her Fall, and that brings me to the second thing,
even the Fall of this Whore of Babylon, and the manner how and by whom. And for
the clearing up of this,

First, Consider that this woman sits upon a scarlet-colored beast, full of
the names of Blasphemy, which had seven heads and ten horns Reve. 17.3. now
note, that five of them heads, or Kings were fallen when John wrote the
Revelation, and the sixth was then in being, verse. 9, 10. now this woman the
Harlot was to sit upon the sixth head, and has so done a long time, and so the
beast that had seven heads carries her, and bears her up, for the
Magistrates have supported her all along, understand also, that the sixth head
of the beast has reigned ever since the writing of the Revelation, but now is
partly strong, and partly broken, and that the sixth head is not fallen, is
plain if you note well, for the seventh head when he comes, he must continue a
short space, now that head of the Roman Monarchy which is in being, has
coutinued long, even from before the birth of Christ* and this the Scripture
clea^eth, Rev. 17.10. five are fallen, and one is, and another is not yet come,
and when he cometque he must continue a short space; the power of the Pope
and his Clergy cannot be the seventh head, for that has continued long.

Secondly, The Whore cannot be any of the heads of the beast, because she sits
upon, and is carried by the beast that has seven heads, and ten horns.

So she causes the beast to serve her, and makes the beasts and the Kings of
the earth slaves to her, to do her will; so then the sixth head of the Roman
power is not fallen, though it be in part; and the seventh head is now arising,
which will take away the sixth, and does, will, and must give some liberty to
preach the Gospel, and to administer the Ordinances in the old way thereof, and
so the Lord God will bring things to pass, for not one jot or tittle of his
word shall fall, and so in the rising and reign of the seventh head, and of the
ten horns, the Angel shall fly in the midst of Heaven, having the everlasting
Gospel, to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every Nation, and
kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice, fear God, and give
glory to him, for the hour of his Judgment is come, and worship him that made
Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and the fountains of waters, Rev. 14.6, 7. so the
Gospel and the way thereof being preached, the Nations will be enlightened,
and so God will put it into the hearts of the ten horns, or Kings, to hate the
Whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn
her with fire, Rev. 17.12, 16. so through the preaching of the Gospel in the
pure way thereof, the great Whore of Babylon falls, and so the hour of her
Judgment is come; and to this agrees that in Rev. 14.6, 7, 8. which shows,
that after the Gospel is preached to the Nations, then shall follow another
Angel saying, it is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon the great City, for she made
all Nations to drink of the Wine of the wrath of her fornication, verse 8. much
more might be spoken to this, but let this suffice as touching what the Whore
is, and her fall, the manner how, and by whom.

In the next place, note diligently what the spirit of Antichrist is, and who
have that spirit; now John in his first Epistle, chap. 4. and verse 3. does
declare what the spirit of Antichrist is, namely, every spirit that confesses
not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God, and this is that
spirit of Antichrist, whereof you have heard that he should come, and even now
already is in the World. Also understand, that John did not intend simply the
Heathen that never did believe, nor the unbeleeving Jews, which never did
acknowledge Christ come in the flesh, but those have the spirit of Antichrist
that went out from (the Churth of Christ) chap. 2.18, 19. John shows them
that it is the last time, and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even
now are there many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last time, THEY
WENT OUT FROM US, etc. so that the spirit of Antichrist is that spirit that is
found in them that have been enlightened, and have known the truth, and go out
from the Church of Christ, and in a mystery deny Christ come in the flesh; and
so Paul speaking of the Antichrist, or man of sin, 2 These. 2.7. says, the
MYSTERY of iniquity does already work, etc. and Peter speaking to the Saints,
says (in his second Epistle, 2.1.) there shall be false teachers among you,
who PRIVILY shall bring in damnable Heresies, even denying THE LORD THAT BOUGHT
THEM, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. So the spirit of Antichrist
denies Christ come in the flesh secretly, and they that have this spirit, say,
Christ is come in their flesh, and so say the light within them is Christ, when
at the best it is but the light of nature, and in many the spirit of error,
their light being become darkness* being delivered up to strong delusion, to
believe lies, thinking they have Christ in them, when it is a spirit of error,
and so pervert the sense of the Scriptures, declaring the anointing, and the
anointed to be all one, teaching up the Spirit of Christ, apart from the body
of Christ, to be the Christ, or rather the spirit of error in them, to be the
Christ come in their flesh, and so in a very deceivable secret way, deny Christ
come in the flesh, in saying he is the Christ that is within them, which is an
evil spirit, so applying the Scriptures that speak of the Spirit of Christ
dwelling in men, to be that evil spirit in them, so declaring that Spirit of
error in them apart from the body or flesh of Christ, to be the Christ, and
so deny Christ come in the flesh; but note well, what the Scripture; of truth
says, they declare that Jesus the Christ was slain, Act. 2.22 23. chap. 3. 5.
chap. 4.10. in chap. 5 30. Peter who was ful^ of the Holy Ghost, says, the God
of our Fathers has raised up Jesus, whom ye SLEW and HANGED on a tree; and
Paul says to the Corinth. 1 Cor. 15.3, 4. first of all, I delivered unto you,
that which I received how that CHRIST DYED FOR OUR SINS, according to the
Scriptures, and that he was BVRIED, and that he AROSE the third day according
to the Scriptures; so it is plain, that the Spirit apart from the body or flesh
of Christ, is not the Christ. And therefore again note, what Paul says, 1 Timothy
2.5. There is one God, and one Mediator, BETWEEN God and man, which is the MAN
Christ Jesus; and Heb. 10.10 shows that the Hebrews were sanctified by the
offering of the BODY of Jesus Christ, verse 19, 20. seeing therefore Brethren,
that by the BLOOD of Jesus, we may be bold to enter into the holy places by the
new and living way which he has consecrated for us, through the veil, that is,
his FLESH. So that Jesus, that was baptized of John in the River Jordan, was
anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, Mat. 3.13, 16. Psalm.
45.7. so Jesus the Savior is the anointed of God, for he gave him not the
Spirit by measure, Joh. 3.34. and so the Spirit of the Lord rests and abides
upon the MAN Christ Jesus, Isa. 11.2. Jo. 1.32. so then the Spirit of God, or
of Christ, apart from the BODY of Christ, is not the Christ.

Therefore most abominable is that which men say, that that which is in them is
Christ, when it is a spirit of error, and so men may see how through this
mystery of iniquity, men come to say they are Christ; for consider, if the
spirit in some man be the Christ, what hinders him to say he is Christ, and
therefore some one presumes to say he is Christ; let no man mistake me, for I
say that the Spirit of God does dwell in the Saints, and that Christ does dwell
in their hearts by faith; but note, that faith is the substance of things hoped
for, and the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1. so the just live by faith,
and look for the Son of God from Heaven, whom he raised from the dead, even
Jesus that delivers us from the wrath to come; but to return, so as to show
yet further who has the spirit of Antichrist, and they are such as race out
the Ordinances of Christ, which came in being, when Christ came in the flesh,
and so declare Christ come in the flesh, dead, and risen again, as baptism of
water, and breaking of bread, which does declare the Lords death till he comes,
1 Cor. 11.26. Rom 6.3, 4. Col. 2.12. now there are a sort of men which say, to
know or acknowledge Christ in the practice of those Ordinances, is formal, and
fleshly, and low, and carnal, and so reject the Counsel of God, and will not be
baptized; and so not walking up in the Ordinances that did come in being, when
Christ came in the flesh* and do so excellently declare him come in the flesh,
and are to continue unti^l Christ come from Heaven, and change our vile bodies,
and make them like his most glorious body, Phil. 3.20, 21. I say those that do
slight and reject those ordinances, and say they are formal, and will not
practice them, have the spirit of Antichrist, and do deny Christ come in the
flesh, because they will not practice those ordinances that declare Christ come
in the flesh, yea, more fully than the Whore, for she has a show, and so a
remembrance of those Ordinances, though she have changed the subject, and the
manner, as aforesaid; but THESE root out the very being of them, and so deny
Christ come in the flesh, and so are discovered to have the spirit of
Antichrist, also those that have been enlightened, and have believed the
Resurrection of the body, and also the eternal Judgment, and then come to
question it, and deny it, and say, the Judgment day is come, have the spirit
of Antichrist, for Christ being put to death in the flesh, and rising again
from the dead, so brings in the Resurrection of the bodies of all men, and
then comes in the eternal Judgment, according to that in Act. 17.30, 31. he
has appointed a day in the which he will judge the World in Righteousness, by
that MAN whom he has appointed, whereof he has given assurance to all men, in
that he has raised him from the dead, so as by man came death, by man came
also the resurrection of the dead, for as in Adam all dye, so in Christ shall
all be made alive, but every man in his own order, the first fruits is Christ,
afterward they that are of Christ, at his coming, 1 Cor. 15.21, 22, 23. so
Christ being come in the flesh, the MAN Christ Savior, dyed and rose again,
and so comes in the Resurrection, and no otherwise; therefore they that deny
the Resurrection of the body, deny Christ come in the flesh, and so have the
spirit of Antichrist, and therefore John writing to the Saints, warning them
that they take heed of the Antichristian spirit, that they be not deceived,
exhorts them thus; let that therefore abide in you, which you have heard from
the beginning; if that which you have heard from the beginning shall remain in
you; ye also shall continue in the Son, and in the Father, 1 John 2.24 read
also for this purpose the whole chapter. Now that which they heard from the
beginning, was the beginning Word of Christ, according to that of Paul, 1 Cor.
15.3, 4. which he delivered first of all to the Corinthians, that Christ dyed
for our sins, according to the Scripture, etc. and the first principles of the
word of God, which is the principles of the Doctrine of Christ, to wit,
repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God, the Doctrine of Baptismes,
and laying on of hands, and of the Resurrection of the dead, and of eternal
judgment, Heb. 5.12. chap. 6.1, 2. now these principles of the teachings of
Christ, came in being by and through Christ, being manifest in flesh, his death
and Resurrection, as has been showed before; therefore whosoever
transgresses, and abides not in the Doctrine of Christ, has not God, for he
denies Christ come in the flesh, and so he has the spirit of Antichrist, 2 John 6.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and so having in part declared what is the spirit of
Antichrist, and who has that spirit, I come now to the fourth thing, which is;
that the Antichrist will be a single person.

And for the proof of this, first, consider how the Antichrist is set out in
Scripture, in the singular number, not in the plural, as the MAN of sin, 2
These. 2.3. not men, and Isa. 14.16. is this the MAN that made the earth to
tremble, and did shake the Kingdoms, the SON of the morning, and SON of
Perdition? not Sons, the vile person, not persons, Dan. 11.21. Isa. 14.12.
there fell a great Star from Heaven, Rev. 8.10. chap. 9.1. not Stars.

Obj. This in Isa. 14. was fulfilled in Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel of
Chaldee. Answer, That cannot be, for after this power that is there spoken of
is fallen, the whole World is at rest, and is quiet, they sing for joy, yea the
Firre-trees rejoice at thee, and the Cedars of Lebanon, saying, Since thou art
laid down, no feller is come up against us, verse. 7, 8. now the World did not
enjoy such a rest as is there spoken of, so as that no Feller came up against
the people of God no more, for since the time of Nebuchadnezzar, and that
Monarchies fall, there has come up many fellers, or destroyers of the Jews,
and the believing Gentiles, as is clear, that Antiochus, and the Romans against
the Jews, and the Whore of Babylon against the Christians; and again, the
Apostle in 2 Thoss. 2. takes up the same words in substance, and applies them
to the Man of Sin, which is the Antichrist, therefore that in Isaiah cannot be
fulfilled in Nebuchadnezzar; for this compare Isa. 14.13, 14. with 2 Thessalonians.
2.4. though he might be a type of Antichrist.

2 It appears that the Antichrist will be but one man (though many have his
Spirit) because it will suit best with his way of delusion, for he will pretend
he is the very Christ, and will cause fire to come down from heaven on earth,
in the sight of men, Rev. 13.13. and so he will endeavor to imitate Christ in
all things: for as the Lord Christ shall be revealed from heaven with his
mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and
that OBEY not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; so the Antichrist will make
fire come down from heaven in the sight of men; so he will endeavor to make
all the Scriptures that speak of Christ's coming, and of his reign, to meet upon
him; SO his coming will be after the working of Satan, with all power, and
signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in
them that perish, because they receive not the love of the truth, that they
might be saved, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9, 10. so as there is the MAN Jesus, the Christ the
Son of the living God, which came in his Fathers Name, Mat. 16.16. Joh. 5.43.
without sin, 1 Pet. 2.22. so there will be the MAN of Sin, the Antichrist,
which will come in his own name, and profess to be the Christ, but will be
directly an enemy against Christ and his people.

And so I come to the Fifth thing, which is the manner of Antichrists rising,
and by what means; for the clearing up of this, First, consider, that the
Gospel, and the way thereof, is to be purely preached, and the Ordinances
rightly administered, and so the Angel is to fly in the midst of Heaven, having
the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to
every Nation, and Kindred, and Tongue, and People, Rev. 14.6. and so the Gospel
being preached to the Nations, and the Ordinances administered in the good old
way, according to the Scriptures, men come to be enlightened, as many are in
these Nations, where the Kingly power is fallen that did support the Whore, and
would not give Liberty of Conscience, so I say, as the Gospel comes to be
ministered, in the old way thereof, men come to be enlightened, the power of the
Whore falls, and men slighting, and rejecting the truth, and also many of
them that do receive and obey the truth, fall and depart from the Faith, and so
receiving not the love of the truth that they might be saved; for this cause
God does, and will send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11. and so are given up to the Spirit of Antichrist; and so as the
Apostle Paul shows* that the day of Christ's coming shall not come, except
there come a falling away first, and that Man of Sin be revealed, the Son of
perdition, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.8. chap. 2, 3. and so the Spirit speaking expressly,
that in latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing
Spirits, and Doctrins of Devils, speaking Lies in Hypocrisy, having their
Conscience seared with a hot Iron, forbidding to marry, etc. as in 1 Timothy 4.1,
2, 3. and the Apostle Peter writing to the ^aints, in his Second Epist. chap.
2.1, 2. shows, that there shall be false Teachers among you, who privily
shall bring in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and
bring upon themselves swift destruction, and many shall follow their pernicious
wicked ways, by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of; and
chap. 3.3, 4. he says, that there should be Scoffers, walking after their own
lusts, saving, Where is the promise of his coming, etc? and so men
transgressing, and abiding not in the Doctrine of Christ, fall from the faith of
the Gospel, and so the Spirit of God departs from them, and an evil spirit is
sent unto them, which is the spirit of Antichrist, so out from them that thus
fall away, and go out from the Church, 1 John 2.19. and so separate themselves,
sensual, having not the Spirit, as Jude has it, verse 19. and also from them
that have been enlightened* and have neglected to walk up in truth, and so
reject the Counsel of God, as the Pharisees and Lawyers did, Luke 7.30. so I
say from them that so fall away, and neglect to hear and obey the Gospel, from
them arises the Antichrist, or man of sin.

Again, the sixth head of the Roman Monarchy, which is the Imperial, or kingly
power, has and does by the guidance of the Pope and the National Ministry
(which rides upon the beast, as has been showed) always persecuted men for
their consciences, and so has let and hindered the Gospel from being preached,
and the Ordinances from being rightly administered, and so the light of truth
was exceedingly kept back, and but few received it, and them that did receive
it, she persecuted, some she put to death, others she banished, or caused to
fly into strange Countries, and into howling Wildernesses, others imprisoned
and fined, and so she comes to be drunken with the blood of Saints, and with
the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, and so the Gospel could not be declared in
the pure way thereof, to every Nation, Kindred, Tongue, and People, Rev. 14.6.
and so also, if any did arise that had the spirit of Antichrist, she took off
him also, and so she plucked up much Wheat, and Tares also, contrary to that of
Matthew. 13.29, 30. let both grow together until Harvest, and so forth: So the
sixth head of the Roman Monarchy being rid upon, and guided by the Whore, did
let the Gospel from being preached, and the Antichrist from rising, and so I
think that the sixth head did hinder the coming in of the man of sin in the
Apostle Paul's time, for the Emperors being Heathens then, persecuted the
Saints; and so that sixth head supporting and carrying the Whore also, so as
that it did let, and will let, until it be taken out of the way, 2 These. 2.6,
7. but now the sixth head being in part taken away, and the seventh head
arising, he giving some liberty of conscience, the Gospel is preached, and
truth appears, and many receive the knowledge of it, and obey it, and many fall
away from it, and so the spirit of Antichrist arises, and so the seventh head
of the Roman Beast shall take away the sixth head, and shall continue a short
space, Rev. 17.10. and so the ten horns also shall arise in one hour with the
Beast that was, and is not, even he is the eight, and is of the seventh; or is
one of the seventh, verse 11, 12. and so is the little horn that Daniel speaks
of, chap. 7.11, 24, 25. and the last power or Beast, the Antichrist, the man of
sin, and so the seventh head and ten horns, or Kings giving liberty, the
Servants of God sound forth the truth as it is in Jesus, ministering in the
Gospel glad tidings of the Kingdom to the Nations, men come to know the truth,
and so are enlightened with it, and so many may come to shine as stars, and yet
fall away as the Antichrist, or man of sin himself will be some notable man
shining as a star for a time, yet afterward falling from the truth, according
to that in Rev. 8.10, 11. the third Angel sounded, and there fell a great Star
from Heaven, burning as it were a Lamp, and it fell upon the third part of the
Rivers, and upon the fountains of waters and the name of the Star is called
Wormwood, and the third part of the waters became Wormwood, and many men dyed
of the waters, because they were made bitter. So the man of sin falls from the
truth, or true Church, as a great Star from Heaven burning like a Lamp, through
Satan's transforming himself as into an Angel of light, and so falls upon the
Rivers, and fountains of waters so that he makes them bitter; so that the
sweet promises of the Gospel, and way of Christ, in which men shall be made
partakers of the Waters of life, and so made glad in the City of God; are so
made bitter like Wormwood changing the taste of them; so that many men dye of
those waters, according to that of Jude 12. twice dead, plucked up by the
roots; and thus he causes men to fall, so that the third part of the Sun is
smitten, and the third part of the Moon, and the third part of the Stars, so as
a third part of them is darkened, and the day shone not for a third part of it,
nor the night likewise, Rev. 8.12. the Sun is here compared to the Church,
because the Church or Saints through Christ are said to be the light of the
World, Matthew. 5.14. and so Jacob who is called Israel according to Joseph's
dream, is compared to the Sun, Genesis 37.9, 10. the Moon I take to be the World,
or the Whore, the false Church, which has her light from the true Church, as
the Moon has her light from the Sun; the Stars are the eminent teachers in the
Churches, Rev. 1.20. and this in the eight chapter before spoken of, is an
allegory, because the waters are said to become Wormwood, and yet men drink of
them, which cannot be, if they were made Wormwood, therefore it is
allegorical, that the Word of the Gospel in the ministration of the Prophets,
is compared to water, look Ezekiel. 34.18, 19. Isa. 55.1. Rev. 22.17. so then a
many of the Church will fall from the faith, and the Stars, the elder or chief
teachers also, and many of the World or false Church that shall be enlightened,
and will not obey, shall be darkened, and so shall lose that light they have,
and so shall be given up to gross darkness, and so after a great falling away
from the truth; SO the man of sin, the Antichrist is revealed, and gets the
power and rule by flatteries; after the working of Satan, with all power, and
signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceivablenesse of unrighteousness, and
SO opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or is
worshipped, so that HE as God, sits in the Temple of God, showing himself
that he is God, Dan. 11.21. 2 These. 2.3, 4, 9, 10. and so I come to the sixth
particular, which is, some of the great things that the man of sin will do.

Which in the first place take what Daniel says of him, setting him out by a
little horn, chap. 7, 8.11, 24.25. he says that he shall subdue three Kings,
and he shall speak GREAT words against the most high, and shall wear out the
Saints of the most high, and think to change times and laws, and they shall be
given into his hand, until a time, and times, and the dividing of times, and
so he shall reign in full power, three years and a half, for time, is taken for
one year, and times, two years, and half a time, is half a year, as in Dan.
4.25. some translation reads for seven times, seven years; and so the woman
clothed with the Sun that flies from him into the wilderness and is there
three years and a half, Rev. 12.1.14. so he shall persecute the Saints of the
most high, verse. 11.17. and the false Prophet causes the first Beast whose
deadly wound was healed, to be worshipped, and he does great wonders, so that
he makes fire to come down from Heaven on the earth, in the sight of men, and
deceives them that dwell on the earth, by means of those miracles, which he
shall have power to do in the sight of the Beast, saying, to them that dwell on
the earth, that they should make an image to the Beast which had the wound by a
sword, and did live, and he had power to give life, or breath to the Image of
the Beast, that the Image of the Beast should both speak, and cause that as
many as would not worship the Image of the Beast, should be killed, and he
causes all both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to give a mark
in their right hands, or in their foreheads, and that no man might buy or sell,
save he that had the mark, or the name of the Beast, or the number of his
name, Rev. 13.11, to 18. so the Beast that had a wound with a sword, that is,
one of his seven heads was slain to death, yet ye having another, which is of
the Seven, or one of the seven, and is the eight, and so lives; and so it is
the Beast that was, and is not, and yet is, and so the false Prophets shall by
miracles, cause the World to worship the Beast, the man of sin, the Antichrist
as God sitting in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God, 2 These.
2.4. and cause as many as will not worship the Beast or his Image to be
killed, and so the fallen Star before mentioned which is the Beast, the
Antichrist ascends out of the bottomless Pit, the key of the bottomless Pit
being given him, he opens the bottomless Pit, and then arises a smoke out of
the Pit, as the smoke of a great furnace, and the Sun, and the air will be
darkened, by reason of the smoke of the Pit, Rev. 11.7. chap. 9.1, 2. and near
the end of his reign, when the sixth vial is poured, or pouring out, then
shall come three unclean spirits like frogs out of the mouth of the Dragon, and
out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet, for
they are the spirits of Devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the Kings
of the earth, and of the whole World, to gather them to battle of that great
day of God Almighty; and he gathered them together to a place called in the
Hebrew tongue, Armageddon, Rev. 16.12, 13, 14, 16. which is into the Land of
Canaan, according to Joel 3.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Multitudes, Multitudes in
the Valley of Decision, or threshing, for the day of the Lord is near in the
valley of decision, and so I come to the seventh particular, which is, the fall
of the Beast, or man of sin, and when, and by whom.

Now Paul says, that the Lord will consume him with the Spirit of his mouth,
and shall destroy him with the brightness of his coming, 2 These. 2.8. so when
the enemy shall come in as a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a
standard against him, Isa. 59.19. and so when the Lord himself shall descend
from Heaven, with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute Judgment upon all,
and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds,
and of their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have spoken against him, Jud.
15. then the Sun and the Moon shall be darkened, and the Stars shall withdraw
their shining, the Lord also shall roar out of Sion, and utter his voice from
Jerusalem, and the Heavens and the earth shall SHAKE, but the Lord will be the
hope of his people, and the ftrength of the Children of Israel, Joel 3.15, 16.
and in that day will the Lord make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all People,
all that burden themselves with it, shall be cut in pieces, though all the
people of the EARTH be gathered together against it, Zech. 12.1, 2, 3, 4. then
the Lord Jesus (that DYED and ROSE again) himself shall descend from Heaven
with a shout, and with the voice of the Arch Angel, and with the Trumpe of God,
and the dead in Christ shall arise first, then we which are alive and remain,
shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the
air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord, 1 These. 4.14, 15, 16, 17. and so
as Zechary has it, the Lord my God shall come* and all the Saints with him,
chap. 14.5. and then the ten horns which received power as Kings in one hour
with the Beast, the man of sin; THESE have one mind, and shall give their power
and strength unto the Beast. THESE shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb
shall overcome them, for he is LORD OF LORDS, and KING OF KINGS, and they that
are with him are called, and chosen, and faithful, and so according to Rev.
19. the Lord Jesus the KING OF KINGS, and LORD OF LORDS, with his armies which
were in Heaven, following him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white
and clean, descends from Heaven against the Beast, the man of sin, and the
Kings of the earth, and their armies gathered together to make war against him
that sat on the horse, the MAN Christ, and against his armies, and the Beast
was taken, and with him the false Prophet that wrought miracles before him,
with which he deceived them that had received the mark of the Beast, and them
that worshipped his Image; these both were cast alive into a lake of fire
burning with brimstone, and the remnant were slain with the sword of him that
sat upon the horse, which sword proceeded out of his mouth, and all fowls
were filled with their flesh, so the Beast, the Antichrist, the man of sin, and
the false Prophet which did work miracles before him, shall be taken alive,
and cast into a lake of fire, burning with brimstone, and so Tophet is ordained
of old, yea, for the King it is prepared, he has made it deep and large, the
pile thereof is fire and much wood, the breath of the Lord like a stream of
brimstone does kindle it, Isa. 30.33. and so as men are threatened in Rev. 14.9,
10. that if they worship the Beast, or his Image, and receive his mark in their
foreheads, or in their hand, the same shall drink of the Wine of the wrath of
God, which is poured out without mixture, into the cup of his indignation, and
he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, in the presence of the holy
Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb. SO it shall come to pass when the Lord
Jesus shall appear; and therefore take the 11 verse, and the smoke of their
torment ascends up for ever and ever, and they have no rest day nor night,
who worship the Beast and his Image, and whosoever receives the mark of his
name, for this purpose, read Isa. 14.^8, 19. and cha. 66.24. Ezekiel. 38.22, 23.
THUS the Lord will magnify himself, and sanctify himself, and he will be
known in the ^yes of many nations, and they shall know that he is THE LORD, and
then in that day shall his Servants say THIS IS THE LORD WE HAVE WAITED FOR
HIM, WE WILL BE GLAD IN HIS SALVATION, Isa. 25.9.

So then you may see that the Whore is not the Antichrist that the Scripture
speaks of, for the Whore is set out in Scripture thus: As a Woman a Harlot, A
false Church, As a Queen, the Mother of Harlots, And abominations of the earth;
The Antichrist is set out thus: A Man of Sin, The man that did shake Kingdoms,
The Son of the Morning, The Son of Perdition. 2 The Sixth Head of the Roman
Beast carries the Harlot, but the Antichrist, the Man of Sin is the eighth and
last Beast, as has been showed. 3 The Whore confesses Christ come in the
Flesh, and has a show, and remembrance of his Ordinances, though she have
changed the subject and the manner; but the Antichrist denies Christ come in
the Flesh, and his Ordinances that declare him come in the Flesh, as it has
been showed. 4. The Woman, the Harlot, and her Members that do worship
according to her Traditions, and inventions, have space given them to repent,
and many do repent; but they that do worship the Beast, the Antichrist, or
receive his Mark in their right hand, or in their forehead, they cannot
repent, they must drink of the wine of the Wrath of God, etc. as it is, Revel.
14.9, 10. and also in chap. 16. they repented not of their deeds, verse. 11.
note that the first Vial is poured out upon the earth, and the men that had the
mark of the Beast, and worshipped his Image, are plagued; therefore none of the
Vials are poured out until the Antichrist reigns, verse. 1, 2. 5. The Ten
Horns hate the Whore, and destroy her, and make her desolate, Rev. 17.16. but
the Antichrist is taken alive, when the Lord comes, and punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, in a Lake of fire, 2
These. 1.9. and Rev. 19.20. And so to draw to a conclusion, I do desire all men
to take heed to the Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles, for they are able
to make men wise unto Salvation and if men speak not according to the Law and
Testament, it is because they have no light in them, Isa. 8.20. O give heed to
the most sure word of the Prophets, as unto a light shining in a dark place,
until the Day of Christ dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts, noting
diligently all things that are spoken of; that must come to pass, for when the
signs concerning Christ's coming are come to pass, the day of Christ's personal
appearing will dawn.

Secondly, Is there such a spirit of delusion among men, wherein is a mystery
of iniquity? then let all take heed, that they seek the Lord while he may be
found, and to kiss the Son least he be angry, and ye perish in the way. O do
not neglect to read, and know, and search the Scriptures, and walk up in that
you do know; be not deceived, God will not be mocked; what a man sows that
shall he reap, for he that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap
corruption, but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life
everlasting, Gal. 6.7, 8.

Thirdly, Is it so that God does, and will give up men to a spirit of delusion,
that they should believe a Lie, that they all might be damned who believed not
the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness? then be exhorted from hence to
forsake all unrighteous ways in conversation, and all whorish inventions of men
in point of Worship, for if Moses Law be abolished, which was given to him by
the Lord, let no man think that he shall be excused, if he worship according to
men's inventions.

Fourthly, Let all the Saints consider, and lay to heart what has been spoken,
and search the Scriptures, that they may be informed what is to come to pass,
and so according to Christ's exhortation, in Luke 21.36. watch ye therefore,
and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things
that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man; O give all
diligence to add to your faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to
knowledge temperance, and to temperance patience, and to patience godliness,
and to godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness love; let these
things be in you and abound, give diligence to make your calling and election
sure, be not weary of well-doing, for you shall reap in due time if you faint
not; grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ;
to him be glory both now and for ever, So be it.

FINIS.

