A CHARITABLE DESIGN Recommended for Erecting FREE-SCHOOLS Of Pious Education,
For Training up POOR CHILDREN IN THE Principles of Christianity.
WHEREAS some well disposed Persons, laying to Heart the miserable Ignorance of
the poorer sort of People, whereby is occasioned that Dissolution of Manners
which generally prevails among them, have of late endeavored to promote a
Charitable design of setting up Free-Schools of pious Education, in several
Parishes of London and Westminster, for the Benefit only of poor Children; FOR
the encouragement and satisfaction of all that are or may be concerned in so
good a Work, It is thought fit to give here a short Account; Of the Manner of
the Foundation; The nature of the Schools, and the Methods taken for the
effectual management of the Schools, and Contributions to the ends proposed.

The Foundation that is laid for the Maintenance of the Master and Charge of
the School, is by the voluntary Subscription of Charitable Persons, who oblige
themselves thereby to pay during pleasure, a certain Sum Yearly, by Quarterly
Payments toward it. For this purpose there is a Roll with a preamble,
specifying the intention of the Subscribers which is offered to any one that is
disposed to subscribe.

The Schools are designed chiefly for training up the Children in the fear of
God, and the Knowledge of the principles of Christianity, and at the same time
for teaching them to read well in the Bible, to Write and cast Account as far
as each one is capable, or need requires to fit them for Apprenticeship.

As to the management of them, there is generally about Seven of the
Subscribers (whereof one is the Minister of the Parish) faithful and discreet
Persons, who are entrusted by the Approbation of the rest, to choose the
Master, to Oversee and direct the School, to receive and collect all Money
given or subscribed upon that Account, in their several Parishes, and thereout
from time to time to defray the necessary Charge of the School; etc. reserving
the Overplus in Bank to be employed to the best advantage of the poor
Children, either for Clothing or putting them out Apprentice; a fair Account
of all which they are obliged to keep to be viewed by any other of the
Subscribers upon occasion.

In order to the choosing a good Master, such an one as may be most likely to
answer the ends proposed, the Trustees require in him these following
Qualifications.

I. That he be a Member of the Church of England, of a Sober Life and
Conversation. II. One that frequents the Communion at least once a Month. III.
One that keeps good Orders in his Family (if he have one). IV. One that has the
Government of himself and his Passions. V. One of a solid Judgment, and good
Genius for Teaching. VI. One that is well grounded in the true Principles of
Christianity, so as to give a good Account of himself to the Minister of the
Parish upon Examination. VII. That he be sufficiently provided with a good
Writing-Hand, and the Grounds of Arithmetic.
The Trustees do also represent to the Master, that the chief end of the School
being to instruct young Children in the Grounds of the Christian Religion; he
is required to take particular Care and Pains as to that matter for the good of
their Souls, by frequent Catechizing, Exhortation, Reproof, etc.

As to the manner of choosing the poor Children into the School, that there be
no Confusion nor Dislike taken at any Proceedings therein; any one of the
Subscribers may have the liberty of recommending a poor Boy in the Parish
against a day appointed by the Trustees, at which time, if there be more than
the Number mentioned to be taken (that upon Examination are found to be equally
^eal Objects) there shall be as many Billets prepared as Objects proposed; upon
Fifty of which there shall be written the word CHARITY, or some such Motto,
after which being all rouled up and shaken together, the Boys shall e^ch of
them take out a Billet, and those Fifty Boys who draw the Charity Bills are to
be admitted into the School.

There are several Schools already erected upon this Foundation for Boys, and
others following the good Examples set before them, are also endeavoring to
promote a School of the same Nature for the Education of poor (...) in the
Parish of (...) And it is hoped that there will he a general Encouragement given
to this Noble design, so as ^o improve it to the universal Benefit of this
Nation, which cannot sure be wanting from all who consider that as Charity is
the best of Works, so this sort of Charity that is employed about the Religious
Education of Youth, is the best of Charity's.

SOLI DEO GLORIA.
Printed by J. Brudenell, in Jewin-street, 1699.

THE ORDERS OF A SCHOOL For Poor BOYS.
IT being evident enough, that when Children are left by themselves, they are
apt to learn of one another naughty Tricks; The Master is required to be
constantly in the School at the Hours appointed to keep them in order, and from
tune to time to observe and correct their Behavior.

The Scholars shall come to School at Eight in the Morning in Winter time, and
at Seven in Summer, and to continue there till Eleven; in the Afternoon they
shall be there at One and not be dismissed till Four in Winter, and at Five in
the Summer, at which times the Master shall strictly require their Attendance,
so that if any of them without Leave or just cause shall absent themselves they
shall first be corrected, and afterward if they still neglect to come, they
shall be then dismissed the School.

The Master shall teach the Boys to Spell and Read well in the Bible, and
afterward to Write and cast Account, as they are capable, in order to qualify
them for service or apprenticeship.

And to the end the design of the School (which is chiefly for promoting
Christian Knowledge and Discipline) be fully answered as far as may be; let the
Master frequently consider the Charge that lies upon him, and by what means he
may improve the Children under his Care; let him therefore set apart two days
in the Week to teach them their Catechism perfectly and distinctly, and for
variety, some part of the Reading or Singing Psalms, or of a Practical Chapter
in the Old or New Testament, taking a little Pains at such times to make things
plain to their Understandings, and applying it also according to each ones
particular Condition. Let him diligently study their Inclinations, and from
time to time to reform what he finds amiss in them by Admonition and Report,
and sometimes by severe Correction where the Faults require it, such as those
of Lying, Stealing, etc. wherein if they remain incorrigible they shall be
dismissed the School.

The Master shall use Prayers, such as shall be appointed him by the Trustees,
every Morning and Evening publicly in the School, the Children being all
present; he shall also teach them their private Prayers to be used constantly
at home, when they Rise and when they go Bed. The Master shall also bring the
Boys to Church once a day at least, if there be opportunity.

Those that are to be admitted into this School, are to be only such as are
real Objects or Charity in the Parish, not exceeding the number of Fifty Boys.

That poor Children only, whose Parents are not able to afford them any
Learning, may receive the full Benefit of the School. It is required of the
Master, that he teach no other Scholla^s than those appointed him, under the
penalty of forfeiting his Place.

The Parents are to keep their Children clean, washed and combed; least they
prove offensive by Vermin or Noisome Smells.

These or any other Orders to be made by the Trustees, shall be Written in a
Fair Legible Hand, and read over publicly in the School Four Times a Year.

FINIS.

