FAITH IN GODS PROMISES, THE Saints best Weapon: OR, The great Use and
Availableness of Faith, both for the support and growth of Saints in times most
perilous. Plainly discovering that the want of Faith in the way of Gods
Promises, is the great cause of the want of Gods Presence. With several
Considerations for the increase of Faith, that henceforth the Saints may by
Faith* so draw nigh unto God, and in Faith so wait upon God, as with certainty
of receiving from him. Whereunto is added something concerning the great Error
and Mistake of many men concerning the True Christ, and how he is said to be in
his People; with other things very necessary to be known in order to Saints
resisting the Temptation of the present Times.

Set forth as (useful for all People, but) especially intended for the good of
such as are returned to the Good Old Way of the Lord, By MATTHEW CAFFYN of
Horsham in Sussex.

And it is of Faith, that it might be by Grace, Romans 4.16.

LONDON, Printed by S. Dover, for F. Smith, at the Eleph^nt and Castle, without
Temple Bar.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
FOrasmuch as there are many among the number of Professors, that have somewhat
considerably laid out themselves in a Holy pursuit after the more excellent
degrees of Christianity, hoth frequently and fervently, seeking the Lord in
order thereunto, who nevertheless yet remain short thereof; and much below the
desired estate, to their great dissatisfaction, even, sometimes tending to the
begetting such temptations as are of a very dangerous consequence: These things
therefore write I unto you, whereby you may (as some already have) come to see
that there is one thing yet much lacking, even Faith, to believe that God is a
gracious Rewarder of them that seek him; without which, it is impossible to
please God. For though it be true that men have always spoken of, and readily
acknowledged, Faith to be that, which greatly engages Gods grace and goodness
for their help; yet Oh! how far have men been from living by Faith indeed, so
as to esteem Gods Promises their ALL in every condition, and at all times?
Whereupon these also are to direct you unto such enlargednesse of heart in
believing Gods Promises, as may with certainty reach the prayed-for Blessings
from God; that so having sweet experience of Gods Faithfulness to your Souls,
you may be encouraged for the future, and made able to say (with the Saints of
old) I love the Lord, because he has heard my Supplications; therefore will I
call upon him as long as I live, Psalm. 116.1,2.

But as there are some who have diligently sought the Lord, that, for want of
believing him to be a faithful Rewarder of such, have notwithstanding been much
without the things sought for; so also there are some, yea, very many that are
apt to say (with Israel of old) that no evil shall come unto them; and very
confident, that the Lord is among them, that have indeed no real ground to
depend upon the Lord; such and so great are their miscarriages to Godward, as
that their seeming Faith and Confidence is rendered thereby to be mere
imaginations, groundless persuasions, and so they found such as think
themselves to be what they are not, and so are deceived: These are therefore
also to discover and lay open their great miscarriages and corruptions, even in
such performances of theirs, as are supposed by them to be the best of their
actions, that henceforth they may upon better terms draw nigh unto God, even so
as that they may enjoy Gods drawing nigh unto them, which is the only real
cause of Soul-satisfaction.

True it is, that the days wherein we live are perilous, and much more may be;
yet sure may you be, that no condition may possibly befall you, wherein you may
not by Faith so lay hold of Gods Promises, as nevertheless to be greatly
supported, and inwardly comforted: Wherefore above all things take the shield
of Faith, and in every condition let the gracious Promises of God be the ground
of your hopes, and no longer visible things; that the presence of the invisible
God may be (with all certainty) experienced by your Souls: Which, that you may,
is, and shall be, the Prayers of,

Your Brother in the Lord, MATTHEW CAFFYN.

FAITH IN GODS PROMISES, The Saints best Weapon.
IN the beginning when God made the Heavens and the Earth, it seemed good in
his sight, to make and ordain Mankind to be head over all other his Creatures;
to whom he freely gave the glory of Paradise (a present possession of
happiness) which he (during his innocence) enjoyed, not as an inheritance first
obtained upon conditional terms, but as a free gift, given him of God, without
any condition required of him in order to his first entrance thereinto, Genesis
2.8,15,16. Which possession when he had lost by his tra^gression, and thereby
made himself and all his posterity sub^ the first death; such was the Fathers
love, as that he freely gave his Son (in due time) to dye for the world, that
is, for every man, Heb. 2.9. By means whereof was procured a Resurrection of
all men from the first death, with the gift of Eternal life, and glory, 1 Cor.
15.22. Mat. 19.14. Which gift of eternal (and more excellent) life, was as
freely given to Mankind, now since his fall, as was that first life of
happiness in Paradise, before his fall; not upon terms or conditions, nor any
foreseen Faith in, or works of Righteousness done by the Creature; but merely,
and alone the goodness, and richness of grace dwelling in God himself, moving
him thereunto: which life of glory all mankind have right to, and are in sure
capacity thereof, during their infancy (wherefore, of such, says Christ, Mat.
19.14. is the Kingdom of God) till by their own personal transgressions they
procure to themselves the severity of Gods wrath; that is, the second death,
which is Eternal, John 3.19. Rev. 20.14. Under the desert of which death, all
persons quickly come; all goes out of the way, following the lusts and desires
of the flesh, which draws, and vehemently inclines to its first estate of
present pleasure, ease, and delight, which mankind enjoyed (while he stood in
his first created estate) without those many bodily miseries which now attends
them, which flesh and blood would fain be freed from; and so it comes to pass
that in all men, in one measure or other (according to every man's experience)
there arises such natural lusts, and desires in the flesh, as greatly provokes
them to follow after these present things, and too too often prevails with them
to break the known Laws of God, that something (like to their first enjoyments)
might be attained: but to follow the present glory of this life, so as to
delight in, and love the same (though once lawful for Adam in Paradise, who
undoubtedly might then as well love, delight, and take pleasure therein, as
Saints may take pleasure, and delight in the heavenly glory, when in the real
possession thereof, though then lawful, yet (I say) is not now lawful for the
posterity of Adam, because God has now commanded (as in very reason 'twas
meet) that mankind, having lost (by sin) the glory of present enjoyments (once
enjoyable in Paradise) and Christ having freely purchased a more excellent,
even, a Heavenly and Eternal glory; (I say) God has now commanded that mankind
should deny themselves and take up a Cross: that is to say, that men should not
now follow their own natural lusts, which so greatly inclines to this present
world, but should deny and cross them, and settle their affections and delights
upon the more excellent estate of glory, purchased by the Lord Jesus, 2 Cor.
5.15. Col. 3.2. And therefore the sons of men now following the natural lusts
of the flesh, become by nature the children of wrath; led by the Prince of the
power of the Air, who also stirs up them to follow their own lusts and hearts
desires, with endeavors (by deceit) to enlarge the same; and thus all men go
out of the way, there is none Righteous, no not one.

But such, and so great was the Fathers love to the world, considered thus
miserable, lying under the burden of their own personal transgressions, as
that he willed, and accordingly commanded (by the Lord Jesus) that the Gospel
should be preached to every Creature thereof, Mark 16.15. that is, The
Glad-tydings of the Pardon, and Remission of their sins, so as that whosoever
of the world (thus miserable by reason of sin, now repents of the same)
believes and is Baptized, shall be saved, Ver. 16. But this purpose of God
concerning Election (that is in English, choosing out) all such as believe to
life Everlasting, was not in the least arising from, or begotten in God, by, or
because of any foreseen Faith in, or works of Righteousness done by the
Creature; but merely, and alone from the purpose of his own gracious Will,
nothing in man first, or last, moving him thereunto; for the purpose of God
according to Election is not of works, but of him that calls; I (with the
Apostle) bear Witness, Romans 9.11.

And whereas the glory and excellency of Gods presence, is such, as cannot
admit of any unholy or unclean thing; for that Cause his Decree of Election or
Predestination, reaches the holy Ones, or the number of Believers only; and
not because God saw any worth or excellency in men's Faith, or Holiness, whereby
to provoke him thus graciously to decree, but according to the good pleasure of
his Will (says the Apostle) has he Predestined us, (that is in English)
fore-appointed us unto the Adoption of Children, Ephesians. 1.5.

Now whosoever of you (that bear the name of Saints) hearing this so gracious
Gospel of Jesus Christ, did in your hearts acknowledge the truth thereof,
verily believing, that there was remission of sins to be had in Christ; And
that Christ therefore (being the Justifier, and so the most amiablest Object in
the World) was most worthy your affections, and Soul-desires, and thereupon
resolved (with godly sorrow for the sins past) for the time to come to serve
him with all affections and faithfulness, and no longer your selves; and so
committed your selves to his grace, confidently depending upon him, for that
which you verily believed was to be had in him, even the remission of your
sins, and eternal life; whosoever of you have So believed in Christ (publicly
professing the same by being Baptized, that is in English, Dipped in his Name)
by Faith you were justified from all your sins (past;) and being thus
reconciled, the gift of eternal life, freely purchased by Christ Jesus for you,
without any respect of Faith foreseen in you, or any condition required of you
in order thereunto; I say, the gift of eternal life remained your portion.

This Faith being professed by you, next thereunto (O Friends) you may
remember, that you with others, and others with you, and for you, made
application to the gracious God by Prayer and Supplication, with the Laying on
their Hands (according to the Scriptures speaking in that case, Heb. 6.12. Acts
8.15,17.) That you might receive the holy Spirit, by the gracious supplies of
which, you might be both furnished to continue the Faith professed, and also to
bear much fruit therein to the honor of him, who had called you out of
darkness into his mavelous light.

But since it is the receiving of the holy Spirit, and not the bare asking of
him, nor the much talk of him, that makes men thus happy, and the more and more
receiving of him that makes men, men indeed, even strong in the Faith; it
remains a work (none of the least) for all such who have so believed, and so
practiced, well to consider what they have received from God, and how they may
come to receive more from him; for it were a lamentable weakness (even greatly
tending to the provoking of God) for men practicing as aforesaid, to rest, and
lie still secure, as if all were well, barely because they have called upon the
Lord for his holy Spirit, when (for a long time) they know him not received;
nothing of this work upon their own heatts, whereby they can declare to others,
what the Lord has done for their Souls. David (that heavenly pattern) being in
the profession of the Law of God, rested not in that, but followed hard after
the Lord therein, Psalm. 63.8. to whom having diligently sought, and Prayed
often, he abode waiting upon him, till the Lord gave him ground to say to his
Soul; Return unto thy rest, O my Soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with
thee, Psalm. 116.7. and as elsewhere he says, Psalm. 63.8. Thy right hand
upholdeth me. How good a thing were it for Professors in this day, to take
pattern hereby, so as henceforth not to content themselves, in that formerly
they have prayed (with subjection to the Laying on of Hands) for the gift of
Gods Spirit; nor in that they continue (sometimes) yet to pray for the same,
for most surely it is the known hand of God upon the Soul, that only can give
real cause of satisfaction, the certain experience of Gods bountifulness
renders poor Souls (otherwise restless) to be at rest and true peace: And then
how boldly may such speak of Gods goodness to others, having themselves sweet
experience of his goodness to their own Souls? And how boldly may such stand up
and exhort others to keep under, and mortify the deeds of the body; they in
the mean while knowing the deeds of the Body mortified in themselves, through
the operation of Gods Spirit upon their Souls? Yea, and how boldly also may
such reprove them, that shall notwithstanding live after the flesh? whereas
otherwise the reproof of the reprover, reflects and sticks fast on himself; and
not only so, but there is this mischief also attending, even that thereby the
fleshly part in the reproved, has occasion given it to follow its lusts; and
so how great are the retortings and reflections of such upon the reprover?

Sure I am that for men to have, long after the practice of Gods Ordinances, no
other plea nor ground, to contend for the same before Adversaries, but barely
because such Ordinances are spoken of in the Scriptures, is that which verily
tends to discouragement, and Soul-faintings therein; yea at length to say,
(with those careless ones of old) What profit is it that we have kept his
Ordinances? Mal. 3.14. When as men hearing the Gospel of Christ, which
promises rest and peace to the Soul, through the Remission of sins, with the
gift of Gods Spirit; have thereupon subjected to the Gospel with such a renewed
mind, as would not be satisfied with hearing of the good things thereof, till
they were able to say, that as they had heard, so they have seen; that which
was promised, our Souls have tasted; rest and peace we know, the fruits of Gods
Spirit we experience, etc. Whenas (I say) men, thus following hard after the
Lord, have this knowledge of Gods goodness and powerful presence in his Way, as
a great Argument, together with Scripture Arguments, to embolden them to
contend for the Way, and to establish them against all oppositions.

It Is common amongst men to look upon themselves, discharged from duty of love
to such Beggars, who after their asking for Alms, shall presently turn their
backs, and mind other matters of trifle, more than their reasonable waiting to
receive what they have asked for. Now may any so much as once think, that God
will turn his face (in love) to such, who sometimes shall ask of him Spiritual
Alms, but presently are found (as it were) turning their backs to the Throne
of Grace, and not waiting there; as if their receiving of Grace were little
minded by them (which is only the Christian man's life) but rather other things
more, mere trifles, compared to what they have asked for of God; their hearts
(may be) running after covetousness, as the hearts of Israel were, who
nevertheless would be spreading forth their hands before God, but they
flattered him with their lips, and lied before him with their tongues, and he
regarded them not, Psalm. 78.36. May any (I say) once think that God will turn
his face (in love) to, and not rather withdraw himself far from such, as
persons greatly unworthy of his benevolence to whom he is no ways engaged by
promise to do any thing for them, since they come not up to the terms of his
goodness? Surely, delay to consider these things is very dangerous, even nigh
to, an irrecoverable estate.

There has been indeed much contending for this Principle of Laying on of
Hands, and great pains taken both by speaking and writing for the same; and I
bear them record, that they therein have had zeal for the Truth (for so I do,
and hope ever shall, believe it to be) but (alas!) their zeal has not been
according to true knowledge; if they have not as well, yea, and much more too,
in the mean time, endeavored that the great end of this Ordinance might be
obtained, to wit, the sanctification, strengthening and guidance of their Souls
in the Truth of God; without which both their subjection to the Doctrine
thereof, and also their much pleadings for the same, would be of no effect.

But I hope better things (at leastwise of many) though I thus speak, being
persuaded that there are such who (knowing themselves in a justified Estate
through faith in Christ) have a clear sight and deep sense of their souls
wants, as not knowing how to live, nor to work in Gods services, without the
gracious supplies of Gods Spirit: (which sight and deep sense of want is seen
through their great (Heaven-born) desires to honor God, which desires springs
from their Souls great love to God, which love in them to Godward, is begotten
by Gods great love first to them, 1 John 4.19.

And that these hereupon have a very high esteem of Gods spiritual presence
(being the true Bread from above, which only will satisfy their Souls born
from above) valuing it far above the presence of all things whatsoever, seeing
more worth and excellency therein, than in any thing of the world. True it is,
that most Professors confess and talk of such things, but these experienceth
the same in their Souls, and so their Righteousness exceeds the Righteousness
of those many lifeless and senseless Professors, who as much as others talks of
these things, but knows it not in themselves.

And that these hereupon do greatly desire the presence of Gods Spirit; and so
both frequently and fervently are found praying for the same, lifting up holy
hands to the Lord, and (being in David's sense) with all earnestness (
David-like) beseech the Lord to make have for their help, and to make no
tarrying, Psalm. 40.17.

And that these, till the Lord does visit them with the special Graces of his
Holy Spirit, are found mourning before the Lord, and greatly complaining
against themselves, as being wonderfully short and low in their own
apprehensions, as to what God requires, and which they know is due to his Name:
Wherefore their souls (like David, Psalm. 77.2.) refuses to be comforted with
any thing, though the very chiefest of this worlds enjoyments; they looking
upon themselves as such who want all things, while the supplies of Grace is
wanting.

And that these, during the time that the Lord withholds the visitations of his
Grace, are not only continuing in Prayer, but walking therein, communing with
their own hearts, and (like David in such a case, Psalm. 77.) making diligent
search, fearing least there should be some secret sin, for which cause the Lord
may forbear to draw nigh to their Souls.

And that these (while in this capacity) think it not much, but rather delight
to spend days in the Closet, there to humble themselves with Fasting and
Prayer before the Lord, not as Pharisees do, to be seen of men, neither as
sluggards do, because they read that Saints formerly did, and now sometimes
does so; but purely and zealously are led out thereunto, from that vehemence of
desires and Soul-affections which they experience in themselves, after the more
excellent estate; for as God has graciously opened their understandings, to
know that there is an excellent estate attainable; their satisfaction is not in
the knowledge thereof, nor in the much talk thereabouts, nor in the ready
Confession, that the same is excellent, and of a special goodness (as is too
much the satisfaction of some) but rather in living the life thereof, even,
that their Souls may be spiritually framed, nnd wonderfully strengthened with
might, both to the pure doing what is spiritually good, and also to the
renouncing of the hidden things of dishonesty, 2 Cor. 4.2.

Now forasmuch as there are such that are found (to some considerable degree)
thus prizing, and so following hard after spiritual Blessings, that thereby
they (having so far tasted of the Lords goodness, as to know themselves in a
justified estate from sin by his Grace) might now for the time to come bear
much fruit to the honor of his Name; who notwithstanding yet come short, and
are much below that more excellent estate, which they have longed for, and
which is certainly to be attained: These are therefore to inform (or remind)
all such, that there is yet one thing much lacking, namely, Faith, or the
steadfast believing Gods Promises, graciously made in order thereunto; for they
that come to God, must believe, not only that God is, or that he is diligently
to be sought unto; but also that he is a Rewarder of such as thus seek him,
(mark) you must believe (says the Apostle, Heb. 11.6.) showing plainly, that
notwithstanding what measure soever of holiness in point of conversation,
diligency of seeking, or importunity of praying there is, unless it be
accompanied with faith in the Soul, that God will reward, according as he has
Promised, all other virtues found in the Creature will not reach the desired
Blessings from God; For without Faith it is impossible to please God.

To which also agrees the Advice of the Apostle, saying, let us draw near with
a true heart, in full assurance of Faith, etc. Heb. 10.22 Moreover, I will,
(says the Apostle) that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands, without
wrath and doubting, 1 Timothy 2.8. Showing that it is not enough for men to lift
up holy hands to God, though attended also with Charity, so as to be without
wrath (both which are very special things) unless attended also with that
(more special) virtue of Faith, so as to be without doubting; not enough (I
say) whereby to reach the prayed-for Blessings from God: for as it is the duty
of Saints always to be ready to do Gods Commandments, thereby to acknowledge
and declare him to be the Supreme, and Almighty God; so also it is their duty
always to be ready to believe Gods Promises, thereby to acknowledge and
declare him to be a just and faithful God; for they that receive his Testimony,
sets to their seals that God is true, John 3.33. Both which being experienced
by the Prophet David, caused him boldly to pray, and confidently to conclude,
that he should not slide, saying, Judge me, O Lord, for I have walked in mine
integrity, I have also trusted in the Lord; therefore I shall not slide, Psalm.
26.1. Both which also being found in the Prophet Daniel, did (as it were) fetch
from God an extraordinary power for the stopping the Lions mouths, so as that
he had not (though among them) the least hurt? And why? Because of his
innocence toward God and man, Dan. 6.22. and because he believed in his God,
ver. 23.

True it is, that God has promised his Spirit to them that ask him; but it is
worthy all observation (and I pray you to mark) what kind of asking it is,
which the Promise is made to; which you may observe from Christ's own words,
where he says, What things soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye
receive them, and ye shall have them, Mark 11.24. To which agrees Paul's
Testimony, to wit, That we might receive the promise of the Holy Spirit,
through Faith, Gal. 3.14. Plainly discovering what kind of Prayer it is, Gods
ears are open unto, which I wish all your hearts may be open to consider, even
that it is the Prayer of Faith, that reaches the Blessing from God, whereby to
strengthen the weak and sickly Soul: for when Gods Promises shall be so
magnified in the heart, as that (like Abraham) there shall not be so much as a
considering the deadness of its own body, (that is to say, its own weakness and
inability to bring forth fruit to God) but shall confidently rely upon his
Promises, considering that he is both able and willing to cause the barren womb
to bear (even, the unlikeliest of men, the base things of the world, things
that are not, to confound the things that are, even, the Wise and Prudent of
the World) surely, Gods ears are open to hear the Prayers of such, they shall
not go empty away; but rather (as it is written) shall be like the Tree planted
by the waters, that shall not see when heat comes, whose leaf shall be green,
and shall not be careful in the year of drought, neither shall cease from
yielding fruit, Jer. 17.7,.8

When Israel of old distrusted the help of the Lord, and so went down into
Egypt for help, the Lord spoke unto them, saying, In quietness and confidence
shall be your strength, Isa. 30.2,3,15. Showing, that if Israel had been quiet,
so as not to have stirred for Egypts help, but in confidence (or Faith) stayed
upon the Lord, he (even the Lord) would have been their strength and Salvation,
so as that they needed not to have feared, though an Host had risen up against
them; but (alas!) because of their unbelief, God could do no mighty work of
deliverance for them; for, said they, We will flee upon Horses, and ride upon
the swift; and therefore God (in his wrath and great displeasure against them)
said, That those that should pursue them should be swift, a thousand (of them)
should fly at the rebuke of one, and the shadow of Egypt should be their
shame, ver. 3, 16, 17. and he would wait that he might be gracious, ver. 18. If
peradventure, when they had tasted of his Judgments, they would thenceforth
believe in him, and confidently rely upon him, that so he might be their
strength.

So much to do has Faith with the powerful Virtue of the Lord, (it being the
Lords pleasure that it should) as that when the Woman, that had an issue of
blood twelve years, was cured by means of the Virtue that was in Christ, he
casts her Cure upon her Faith, saying, Daughter thy Faith has made the whole,
Mark 5.34. So likewise the Sanctification or Cleansing of the heart, is
ascribed unto Faith, Acts 26.18. Yet not in the least, as if Faith of it self,
or in its own strength, could sanctify or cleanse any heart (or cure any man's
body) for that is the proper work of that spiritual Virtue and Power which is
in the Lord: but inasmuch as the good pleasure of his good Will is, that the
same powerful virtue shall serve for the cure of none, but such as shall touch
him by Faith, whereby to draw the Soul-healing Virtue from him; therefore it is
said, that through Faith men are sanctified; and kept by the Power of God
through Faith to Salvation. So tha notwithstanding the readiness, and great
willingness that there is in God, to cure the distempered and diseased Souls
(as his many Promises and gracious Protestations in order thereunto plainly
declares) yet unless they shall make selious and ^arty Applications unto him,
together with a holy dependence upon him, and a serious waiting in Faith for
the same; they may nevertheless remain very much out of frame, and greatly
unhealthful in their Souls; there being not ground otherwise for the Lord (the
great Curer of Souls) to say, Sons and Daughters, your Faith has ^ade you
whole.

When the Church of the Hebrews were likely to faint in their Minds, the
Apostle (being greatly desirous of their holding out) could find no better way
(it appears) then mightily to press them to a close dependence upon God by
Faith; and therefore he begins his account from Abel, who through faith
obtained witness that he was Righteous, and being dead, yet speaks; and so
down to Enoch, Abraham, and the rest of the Fathers and Prophets, who through
Faith obtained a good report, wrought Righteousness, obtained Promises;
mentioning many other also, as well extraordinary as ordinary deliverances
obtained by Faith, and yet he mentions not all he could touching the Power of
Faith; for himself says, That the time would fail him to tell thereof, Heb.
11. Now what less is there to be learned, by this so large an account of the
Apostle touching Faith, then that Faith is somewhat more concerned in the
receiving spiritual Power and Divine Light from God, in order to their standing
and thriving in his way, than any other thing (on the Creatures part)
whatsoever? As elsewhere, the Apostle mentioning diverse pieces of Armor,
wherewith Christians are to be attired (not one of which but that is of special
concernment) yet (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.16.) Above all things take the
s^ld of Faith, wherewith you shall be able (through the Grace handed to the
Soul by Faith) to quench all the fiery Darts of the wicked; for none of them
that trusts in the Lord shall be left desolate, says the Prophet, Psalm.
34.22. So much does Faith carry the sense and scope of the Gospel Covenant, as
that sometimes the Apostles called it, the Faith, as you may read, Jude 3. Act.
6.7. Gal. 3.23. And it is of Faith (mark it I pray) that it might be by Grace,
Romans 4.16.

Now then if it be so, that men's prayers to God, though never so many or
largely performed, renders them not happy; but that their happiness consists
in their receivings from God what they have prayed for; and that the way
(proposed by God) wherein persons may come to receive from him, is not only
for them to lift up Holy hands to God, but that also they be without doubting;
that is to say, such as believe that they shall receive what they have sought
for; it remains a weighry work for every Gospel-professing Soul, well to
consider of what nature and kind their applications have been, which they have
made to God; considering that his grace and goodness is no otherwise engaged
for their Souls help, but as they shall rely and depend on him, to receive the
same by Faith: which considered, and believed as true, may well remove all
doubts and suspicions concerning the way of God, which sometimes arise in the
Professors thereof, upon the account of so little received from God; for
undoubtedly the Lords hand is not shortened, his way he has not left, his
Promises thereunto are Yea, and Amen, in the Lord; but alas! How short have men
been in coming up to the terms of his goodness? That part of Gods Word which
consists of Commandments, men indeed have been somewhat busied about; but as
for that part which consists of Promises, Oh how little has it been minded!
they have been indeed often read of, and sometimes talked of; But how are they
that have seriously pondred them, and in their hearts magnified them, so as to
wait in, and live upon them, counting them all things to them, in every
condition?

Have thou then (O thou that out-strippest some others in thy zeal after
spiritual things) have thou (I say) often visited the Throne of Grace (as a
work most pleasant to thy Soul) beseeching the Lord to draw nigh to thee, in
the large givings forth of his Grace to thy Soul (well knowing that without it
all thy drawings nigh to him is nothing) and have thou there waited in the
sight of the worth and excellency thereof, and so in the sense of thy great
need of the same; thy Soul (as it were fainting, and thine eyes (like the
Prophets) failing for the Word of God; that is, the Word of his Promise to be
fulfilled to thy Soul, saying (with him in thy Soul-longings after the desired
Bread from above, to refresh and strengthen thy Soul, born anew from above)
when, Lord, will thou comfort me? Psalm. 119.81,82. (I say) have thou thus
waited upon God, and art thou yet often with God in thy most solemn and serious
Meditations? O do but now give the Lord, ( who waits to be gracious, being as
willing to do good, as thou art desirous of good) give the Lord (I say) ground
to say to thee (as once the Woman of Canaan, Matthew. 15.28.) O man, great is thy
Faith; and then, O then will the Lord readily say to thee, Be it unto thee,
even as thou will: according to thy faith be it unto thee. But if otherwise,
the account will be a sad and doleful account, even, that the Lord could do no
mighty work of love for thee, because of thy unbelief, Matthew. 13.58. Mark
6.5,6. O that all were wise (that bear the name of Saints) even with the Wisdom
which is from above: So that the bare knowledge of these things, or the much
talk (or preaching) of them to others, might not be their satisfaction, but
that all would rather carefully and speedily endeavor to know, and be
satisfied, that they themselves does so wait upon God by Faith, and
consequently does so receive from him, which to know, and experience within, is
real cause and ground of peace, and Soul-satisfaction.

In order whereunto, even, that Faith may grow and flourish in your Souls,
consider (O Friends) whether we are not to believe that a Son shall be given,
when God has promised it, without giving the least heed, to what the deadness
of body on either hand may say? Romans 4.19,20.

Are we not to believe that the promised Seed shall be as the Stars for
multitude, when God has spoken it? Genesis 15.5,6. notwithstanding all the
fleshly opposition arising from the Commandment to slay Isaac, the only
promised Seed, from whence the multitude should come forth.

Are we not to believe that the Israel of God shall be brought into the good
Land, flowing with Milk and Honey, when God (that cannot lie) has spoken it,
notwithstanding all the gain-sayings of the red Sea before, and the Egyptian
Host behind?

Are we not to believe and confidently to expect a great plenty, even, a
measure of fine Flower for a shekel, and two measures of Barley for a shekel,
and that so soon as to morrow, when the Lord God has spoken it, 2 Kings 7.1.
notwithstanding the many and great oppositions and contrary speakings of this
days poverty, even, that an Asses head is sold for fourscore pieces of Silver,
and the fourth part of a Cab of Doves dung for five pieces of Silver? Chap.
6.25. And was not unbelief in this Promise the cause of sudden Judgment taking
hold upon the mighty man, upon whom the King leaned? Chap. 7.2,19,20.

Are we not to believe that the mighty Hosts of the Midianites, and Amalekites,
who for multitude are as Grasshoppers, and their Camels as the sand by the
Seashore, shall be put to flight, when the Lord of Hosts has spoken it,
notwithstanding all the strong reasonings of flesh and blood (that is for
walking by sight) because there is no more than three hundred men allowed by
God to do it? Judge. 7.

Are we not to believe that the Meal in the Barrel, and the Oil in the Cruse
shall not waste nor fail, when the faithful God has spoken it, though never so
much contradicted by the nature of flesh and blood, because that at present it
is but a handful of Meal in a Barrel, and but a little Oil in a Cruse? 1 Kings
17.

Are we not to believe that the great Walls of Jericho shall fall down flat,
there being a Promise of God that they shall, without giving any heed to the
many fleshly gain-sayings, because of their height, or great strength, or
because of the low means ( as blowing in Rams-horns) appointed of God in order
thereunto? Josh. 6.

The sum of all which is, whether such as have attained to a state of
Justification from their old sins by Faith in Christ, are not in Faith and full
assurance to wait for the gift of the Holy Spirit, whereby to carry on, and
work through the work begun (which otherwise will never be finished) there
being a plain and most certain promise of God to pour out the same, John
2.28,29. Act. 2.38. Without the least harkening to fleshly gain-sayings, or
yielding to fleshly dullness or any mistrust, because of the low means (as
Imposition of Hands, Heb. 6.1.2. Act. 8.12,15,17.) appointed of God in order
thereunto, or whatsoever else shall attempt the making his word of Promise of
no effect? Yea, and not only a Promise of God, but also very strong
provocations whereby to believe the same, being assured from the Lord Jesus,
that he does not only as readily as Fathers that are evil, give to their
Children, but how much more will your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to
them that ask him, Luke 11.13.

That is, the Scriptures compared, the Lords good pleasure and great freeness
is to give his Holy Spirit to them that ask him, with lifting up of Holy hands
unto him, in Faith, that they shall receive from him, Mal. 21.22. And so
waiting with opportunity, till they do receive him, Luke 11.8,9. so as to know
his Power, and enjoy his Comfort and Light in their Souls: that as uncleanness,
wrath, strife, with many other such manifest fruits of the flesh, heretofore
reigned in them; now love, joy, peace, gentleness, goodness, with many other
such like Virtues, the manifest fruits of the Spirit, may appear in them, Gal.
6. for where such things are designed by the Soul, so as that all other
enjoyments of the world gives no satisfaction to it, while this spiritual frame
is wanting, which it desires of any thing, yea, above all things that the world
can afford, and thereupon have diligently sought the Lord for it, and now
setting to its seal that God is True, by believing that he is a Rewarder of
them that so seek him: where (I say) spiritual things are thus designed, Gods
ears are open to hear their Prayers, he will be nigh unto them in all
conditions.

Moreover, for the growing and flourishing of Faith, consider that the Lord
sought after you, when you sought not after him, and said to you when you were
in your blood, turn, turn, for why will ye dye? Turn at my reproof, and I will
pour out my Spirit unto you, Pro. 1.23. And all this before you saw any beauty
or excellency in the Holy Spirit, and so had no desire after him, and therefore
sought not God for him; and yet even then God thus magnified the riches of his
Grace in the kind tenders thereof to you, while such; And will he not now much
more take care for you, and possess you with that, which he before tendered
unto you, even, the comfortable presence of his Holy Spirit? Since you are now
turned unto him, and become his servants, not seeking the honor of the world
as before, but his Holy Spirit, whereby to do him service for the honor of his
Name; Will he not much more (I say) tender such? Will he withold his good
Spirit from such, He, the Lord the Righteous God, that has said, He will
withold no good thing from such as walk uprightly? Psalm. 84.11. Surely no;
Has God begot by his Word of Truth, brought to the birth, caused the Man-child
(the New Creature) to be born into the world, to whom he says, Open thy mouth
wide, and I will fill it, Psalm. 81.10. and may you judge, and not desperately
sin through unbelief, that God will now starve this New Creature of his own
begetting, and bringing forth, that he will withold the spiritual Bread,
which only will satisfy it, and so famish his own adopted Children, as starve
they must, and starve they will, if God give not his Holy Spirit unto them? No,
surely no; carnal men will not starve, but nourish and cherish their Children;
And will not God, who is rich in mercy, and delights in mercy, nourish his?
Yea, how much more will your Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that
ask him (as abovesaid.) Moreover, consider that God having promised his Holy
Spirit to such as seek him with Faith to receive the same, both his
Faithfulness and Righteousness is engaged for them that so seek him, which the
holy and believing man fears not to make mention before the Lord, saying (with
David) Hear me O Lord in thy Faithfulness, and in thy Righteousness, Psalm.
143.1.

Moreover, for men highly to esteem Gods Promises, and so to magnify them in
their hearts, as that all pleading of Flesh, World, or Devil, because of, the
deadness of body, or barrenness of the womb, shall be utterly rejected, as not
worthy to be considered, when God has spoken: (I say) for men thus to esteem
Gods Promises (there being every whit as much reason for them so to do, as to
esteem and keep his Commandments) is not only the way leading to their
Happiness, but also that which mightily gives glory to God. Abraham staggered
not at the Promise of God through unbelief, but was strong in Faith, giving
glory to God, Romans 4.20.

These things write I unto you (O Friends) that henceforth your senses might be
much exercised, and your minds more and more busied in the consideration of
these (and such like) things, that the knowledge which you have of Gods
Promises, may be a word so planted in your understandings by Faith, as that all
fleshly staggerings and carnal oppositions may fall down before it, and by such
endeavors on your part, you shall appear to be such who are obedient to the
wholesome Counsel of the Apostle, who exhorted Timothy to follow after Godliness,
Righteousness, Charity, Faith, Meekness, Patience, 1 Timothy 6.11. Who
questionless knew how Faith was to be obtained, as well as any of those that
speak so much of Faith's being the gift of God; who being almost, if not
altogether, silent concerning men's following after Faith, have thereby (I
greatly fear) been a means to freeze up the desires of men, and wholly to stop
their endeavors, after Faith, which (if so) I could wish that henceforth they
would hearken unto the Apostle, who puts men upon following after Faith,
equally (observe it) as he puts them to follow after Meekness, or Patience,
etc. Which considered, may be a means to thaw them out of that benumbed and
frozen estate, even unto due considerations and serious stirrings on their
parts, in order unto the growth and increase of Faith.

And withal be sure that your Prayers and Supplications be not wanting to the
Lord, that he would be pleased to increase your Faith, and so shall you in due
time come to experience the being of Faith in you, after special degrees,
wrought there by the operation of Gods Spirit, according to Paul's words to the
Galatians, Chap. 6.22. while you diligently sought, and carefully followed
after Faith, according to his words to Timothy, Chap. 6.11.

Together with these things, let it not be thought a needless work, or besides
the business in hand, to consider whether Saints are not now (in these latter
days wherein it is evil, as appears by the Apostle, to depart from the Faith
professed in former Apostolical days, 1 Timothy 4.1.) whether Saints (I say) are
not now to seek for, and in Faith to wait whereby to receive the Spirit, with
the same particular gifts and operations which Saints formerly enjoyed, in
order to their carrying on the great Work of the Gospel, both among themselves
and others? Since God in his making Promise of pouring out the Spirit upon his
People, (which Promise we in these latter days fly unto as the ground of our
Faith) makes mention also of several gifts of the same Spirit, John 2.28,29.
And withal considering, that the Apostles exhorted the Churches earnestly to
covet, and follow after the several gifts of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.28,29,30,31.
14.1,39. Which exhortations, if they reach us, and speak to us* (...) much as
any other Scripture-exhortations (which for any to deny is hard) then, Oh then!
great need have all to pray, Lord, (...) Faith.

But in reference to the forementioned drawing nigh unto God by Faith, I
suppose that which is a very general hinderance thereof, is the great
unworthiness that persons find in themselves by reason of sin, by means whereof
they are (as it were) afraid to draw near unto God; or however if they do, it is
very coldly, having little or no hopes of acceptance with the Lord; and so
being not in a justified estate from sin, are without Faith in reference to the
special Graces of Gods Spirit: but among these there are some, much more worthy
than others, who by reason of the strength and subtilty of temptations,
sometimes (as well as others) transgress the Laws of God, but not as such who
overtake sin, but rather are overtaken with sin, Gal. 6.1. Not allowing
themselves therein, as their great trouble, and Soul-heaviness, with daily
complaints because thereof, plainly declares; and yet these for want of a right
understanding Gods Way to justify sinners, and his readiness to justify them;
alas! even these go mourning all the day long, rather decaying than flourishing
in the Way of God. You, even you in particular (the beloved of my Soul) do I
hereby exhort:

First, That ye always abide watchful, and abundantly careful that ye sin not:
But,

Secondly, If any man sin, that you remember there is an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, who is a propitiation for our sins, by whom
way is made for you boldly to come to the Throne of Grace, that you may find
mercy; that is to say, for all you that having sinned, feels the stroke of sin,
and forgets it not (as Sluggards do) and so in the sense and godly sorrow for
sin (in particular) attended with holy Resolutions, with humble and hearty
Confession of the same, with fervent desires, leading unto earnest Prayer to
God for the Remission of the same, you forgiving them that have trespassed
against you; and not only this, for one thing is yet lacking, even, that you
in Faith also commit your selves to his Grace, Believing that as he has in
mercy promised, so in faithfulness he will perform what he has promised, even,
the Remission of sins; for what things soever ye desire when ye pray (says
Christ) believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them, Mark 11.24. And
who then can lay any thing to your charge? It is God that justifies such; Who,
(or what) is there then that condemns? It is Christ that has died? yea,
rather that he is risen again, who also makes intercession for you through
Faith in his blood, Rom 3.25.

Thus you being very serious and diligent in your Applications to God, laying
hold on his Promises of Pardon and Remission of sin by Faith, and so standing
always justified by Faith, quitted and freed from all your sins through Grace;
have (so considered) no ground or plea, because of your unworthiness (being now
made worthy in the Beloved, the Lord Jesus) any longer to mistrust or question
the good Will and Pleasure of God, in reference to your receiving from him the
more special Discoveries and Operations of his Spirit, but may now boldly go to
the Throne of Grace for the same, being such whom God waits to be gracious
unto, you having that Faith which his pleasure is to account unto you, for
Righteousness.

This being considered, how speedily should every Soul (not as a thing by the
by, but) as their greatest work, when at any time overtaken with sin, to draw
nigh unto God, and that in the sense of every known sin, with godly sorrow for
the same: not daring to delay, (heaping up sin like the wantons) there being
every way as much cause of Repentance and Faith for the latter sins, as there
was for the many former sins committed in ignorance; which though persons are
ready to acknowledge, yet are (I fear) too apt to neglect the same, upon the
account that they have renounced their former ways, and their now being in the
Way of God, and that Christ is now a Mediator for them, and the like; not
considering that the Soul-satisfying benefit of Christ's Media orship is enjoyed
according to men's Applications unto the Father by him: But O what comfort can a
Soul have in any thing, or with what boldness shall he walk, talk, or commit
himself to his Bed, that having sinned against his God, has not as ye been
with him, and so by Faith received a Pardon from him? True it is, that such,
while they neglect the great Soul-searching work, and are tossed up and down
with the cumbrances of this life, may have an imagined Peace and supposed
Comfort, and so may go on (somewhat cheerfully) in their thoughts and
thinkings, as if all were theirs; but alas! these (though they may talk of Gods
Love and Mercy) are not able to say, upon sure experience (with the Prophet)
that the Lord has crowned them with loving kindness, and tender mercies, Psalm.
103.4.

O let him then that reads understand, that every Soul that comes by Faith to
be justified from their old sins, have a great work to do, requiring much
watchfulness, care and circumspection, in order to their maintaining and
keeping themselves in a justified estate.

But moreover, let men consider, whether they do not (while wanting in their
Applications to God for the Pardon of sin) ignorantly go on in a way very
dangerous, while the true Fountain of Grace is neglected; it is greatly to be
feared, that they have hewed to themselves broken Cisterns that will not, yea,
cannot answer their expectations; that is to say, persons being made sensible
that they have sinned against God, have thereupon resolved for the time to come
to be more watchful, and to walk more wisely before God; and then, having a
little while in measure reformed themselves, have thereby spoken peace to
themselves, thinking all is well: And why? Because they are reformed: And thus
do they, as it were, make their own works of Reformation, the ground of their
peace and satisfaction. True it is, that works of Reformation in such that have
sinned, is good, for the Lord calls for it; yet sure I am (and I pray you to
consider it) that it is not that, no nor any work of Righteousness that they can
do; yea, though they should for ever afterward so exactly walk, both in words,
thoughts and actions, as not again to sin; yet I say, and confidently conclude,
that it is not in the least that, which can justify or cleanse them from the
sin already committed: And therefore it remains a work, none of the least, for
persons that have sinned against God, speedily to draw nigh unto him, that by
humiliation (attended with holy resolutions) and Faith, they may reach his
promised Grace and Mercy, the only sure ground of peace and satisfaction;
which whosoever attains, may understandingly (with the Prophet) say, Return
unto thy rest, O my Soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee: And so
then (as persons justified and quitted from sin) are to endeavor (with calling
upon God for his Grace to help them) some real and through Reformation,
answering to their former resolutions, (far exceeding what is, or can be in
such who neglect the true means of Justification) in which Reformation of
theirs they may rejoice, but not as imagining peace from thence, but rather
upon the account that God is thereby more honored, even, God who has
justified them from all their sins.

Now forasmuch as it is Saints great work to keep themselves in the way of Gods
Grace and Mercy, that they may always stand quitted and justified from sin,
without which they cannot go to the Throne of Grace with confidence to receive
the special presence of Gods Spirit; I would pray all such (who are in the
godly sorrow, because of their sin) to weigh these following considerations,
that henceforth there may be a more apt and ready closing in with Gods
Promises, in reference to Pardon and Forgiveness of sins.

Namely, that the Lord, the Lord God against whom ye have sinned, is a gracious
God, abundant in goodness, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity,
transgression and sin, plenteous in mercy, rich in mercy, abundant in mercy,
that will abundantly pardon; all which the Scriptures witnesses.

Consider also, That God delights in mercy, Mic. 7.18. and takes pleasure in
such as hope in his mercy, Psalm. 147.11. and is full of compassion, ready to
forgive, Nehem. 7.19. but slow to anger, Psalm. 145.8.

Consider also, That Gods mercies endures for ever, and is from Everlasting to
Everlasting, to such as keep his Covenant, reaching over all his Works, as the
Heaven is high above the Earth, so great is his mercy: even also as a Father
pitieth his Children; so the Lord pitieth them that fear him, Psalm.
103.11,13,17. Psalm. 145.9.

Consider also, That God who spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for
us all, will with him freely give us all things, Romans 8.32. For if when we were
enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son; much more shall we
be saved, (and justified from sin) by his being alive for evermore, making
intercession for us, Romans 5.10.

Consider also, That notwithstanding the great backslidings of Israel, even
playing the harlot with many lovers, upon every high Mountain, and under every
green Tree, and that after God had drawn near unto them in much mercy and love;
yet even to them after they had done all these abominations, says the Lord,
the gracious God, turn thou unto me, Jerem. 3.1,6,7. And that in a day when
they called not for mercy, even then said the Lord, return O backsliding
Israel, for I will be merciful, and not keep anger for ever, v. 12. Much more
therefore will God extend his mercies unto such who mourn in the sense of their
sins, and call upon him for mercy whereby to be healed.

Consider also, That to believe the Record of God touching the forgiveness of
sins, is a setting to our seals that God is true, John 3.33. But contrariwise,
not to believe, is (as much as in us lies) a making God a liar, 1 John 5.10,11.

Consider also, That if we confess our sins, God is just and faithful to
forgive us our sins, 1 John 1.9. Showing that we may as well question the
justness and faithfulness of God, as question his readiness to forgive the sins
of such as confess the same: (but let none question the necessity of Faith in
order to the forgiveness of sins, because the Apostle here assures it to such
as confess their sins, without the least word concerning Faith; let none (I
say) question it upon that account, for by the same reason they may question
the necessity of Prayer, for that neither is mentioned in this place: To this
therefore I say (as in many other cases must be concluded) that it is such that
shall find mercy that are qualified, not only as says one Scripture, but as
says the Scriptures compared together.

Consider also, That we have an High Priest, passed into the Heavens, sitting
at the right hand of God, for that very end to show mercy, even to save to the
uttermost, by making intercession with his blood, Heb. 7.25. That speaks far
better things than that of Abel, not for vengeance, but for mercy, for all such
as have Faith in his blood; and therefore (says the Apostle) Let us come
boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy.

Consider also, That we have not such an High Priest, which cannot be touched
with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted like we,
Heb. 4.15. and being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted, for
he is a merciful High Priest, to make reconciliation for the sins of the
People, Heb. 2.17,18. God knows our frame, he remembers that we are dust,
Psalm. 103.14.

Consider also, That in thy desiring of God the blessing of Remission of sins,
thou desire not more of him, than what he did freely for thee, before thou
desiredst it of him; yea, when thou wast an enemy to him.

And with these Considerations consider, That if you shall distrust his mercy,
it renders you altogether incapable to please God; For without Faith it is
impossible to please God, for he that comes to God, must believe that he is,
and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him.

From these and such like considerations, how may you be encouraged to throw
your selves upon Gods Grace, rejecting all fleshly staggerings at the Promises
of God through unbelief, that you may receive what is promised by Faith in the
Promises, even the sure and certain Pardon of all your sins; that the hands
which have hung down by reason of sin laying upon the Soul, may be lift up with
praises to God, and the feeble knees now made strong and lively, in the true
sense of the Fathers love shining to the Soul; and then, Oh! then, with what
boldness, courage and confidence may you go to God for the manifold Operations
and Discoveries of his Holy Spirit, your sins being pardoned, and your
iniquities washed away by Faith in Christ? What state or condition is there,
that possibly you can fall into through the utmost rage, either of the world or
Satan, or both, wherein there is not a Promise of God, either to be delivered
out of it, or wonderfully to be supported and comforted in it? All which
Promises lies before, as tendered to such that by Faith are justified from sin,
whereon they by Faith, may take hold, and so therein rejoice for evermore, in
all conditions.

If at any time the believing man fall into calamity and great tribulation, he
presently considers where his Refuge is, and believes in God, who has said,
that he will be with his People in all their troubles; and so (during his
continuance in the tribulation) he experiences the truth of that within
himself, which he has read was in others, even, tribulation working patience
(in him) and patience, experience (in him) and experience, hope (in him) which
makes him (bold, and) not ashamed, before all those that trouble him, Romans 5.
and at length (possibly) is delivered from all his troubles, and so made able
to say (with the Prophet) I trusted in the Lord, and he has delivered me.

If at any time the believing man, through the unexpected events of things,
come to be clouded with many piercing cares, and Soul-vexations: he considers
that it is written, we should cast all our care upon God, for he cares for us,
1 Pet. 5.7. And through Faith he receives this word (and so it becomes to him
an engrafted word, planted in his understanding) concluding that he, having on
his side a word from God to care for him, has more on his side to free him
from those piercing cares, than if all the world were joined together for his
freedom; so mightily does he magnify Gods Word in his heart: Thus he
believingly commits all, and casts all his cares upon God; and while others
only talk, and read of being careful for nothing, this believing man
experiences the condition, being supported in his serious consideration, that
God who has declared himself willing to care for his People, is every way more
able to care for them, than they for themselves: And also how unsafe it is for
them to trust to, or lean upon their own understandings, as former experiences
sufficiently declare; therefore this man believing in God is delivered, and
cared for by God, and so made able to say what the Lord has done for his Soul.

If at any time, by reason of Wars, and rumors of Wars, or the great frowns of
great men, many fears shall assault the believing man, he well remembers that
these things must first be before the possession of the Kingdom, and he (while
others that are not in David's integrity, and so not in his Faith, yet talks
much of his words, but out of his life:) I say he, even the believing man truly
in both David's Integrity and Faith, in David's words boldly says, The Lord is
my Light, my Strength, and my Salvation, of whom shall I be afraid? though an
Host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear, though War should rise
against me, in this will I be confident, Psalm. 27.1,2,3.

If the believing man at any time fall into reproaches and persecution for
Christ's sake, by Faith he takes hold of the good and powerful hand of God to
support him, and in the greatest of afflictions to comfort him: Faith so
acquaints the Soul with the unspeakable riches and glory of Christ, in the time
of his suffering for him, as that ( Moses-like) he esteems the reproaches of
him greater riches than the pleasure of sin for a season; so he endures the
persecution by Faith, seeing him (and his glory which he has promised) even
him who is invisible.

If the believing man fall into temptation, he remembers how it is written, 1
Cor. 10.13. that God is faithful, and so will not suffer his People to be
tempted above what they are able to bear: Which word (while among others only
talked of) this man embraces, often considers, upon it leans, and in it is
comforted: not suffering the violence of the temptation, nor any unlikeliness
of deliverance by other means, to take the least place in his heart (which is
not an evil heart in departing from the living God, Heb. 3.12. but a true
heart, drawing nigh unto God, Heb. 10.22.) whereby that should make the word of
Promise of no effect, but rather considers, that God knows how to deliver the
godly, (and that he is every way able to deliver them) out of temptations.

If at any time Trading fail, or loss of Goods come, or Lands and Livings be
taken away, and he that is the believing man thereby come to be indebted; yet
he considers that Gods Promises fail not, though all these things somewhat
frown upon him, and therefore he shelters himself in Gods most holy Word, and
waits patiently by Faith, yea, though he may see little or nothing in sight,
yea, and no ways able to conceive how he shall be in a capacity to live for
the future, which more than a little will trouble flesh and blood, (which would
live by sight) all which makes not him stagger, or if stagger he do, yet he
falls not, but keeps close to Gods Word, magnifies it greatly in his heart,
knowing no reason why he should more esteem Gods Commandments, than his
Promises; he therefore prises them above Gold, yea, fine Gold, concluding that
they are a more surer maintenance, than the possessing of Kingdoms; and so
speaks peace and much satisfaction to himself through believing, taking
joyfully the loss or spoiling of goods, rejoicing that he has a merciful God
on his side, that knows all his wants; yea, and that is able to make that
little Pot of Oil, which yet only remains, so wonderfully to increase, as that
he therewith may be able both to pay his debts, and to live comfortably on the
rest, 2 Kings 4.2,7. Wherefore he makes it his great work, to seek first the
Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, being that which is required on
his part, in the doing of which he believingly waits for the fulfilling of that
promised on Gods part; namely, that he will add all such things: being also
encouraged in this his confidence with those weighty considerations published
by the Lord Jesus, for that very end, to beget Faith in his Disciples; namely,
that God does feed the Sparrows, and richly cloth the Lillies of the Field;
and therefore surely will much more take care for those that are his adopted
children, for whom he spared not his own Son to do them good; and therefore (as
the Apostle reasons) most surely will with him (the mercy of mercies) freely
give all other good things: Also this believing man considers, that if he
should care and carp, doing what possibly can be done, yet cannot add one cubit
to his stature, as Christ witnesses; as his own former experiences witnesses;
and as the apparent event and issues of men's carping cares and intemperate
thoughts witnesses; therefore he with all seriousness and readiness of mind
commits his condition to the gracious God, who has promised never to leave nor
forsake his People; so that he boldly prays to God for his daily bread, and as
confidently expects it of him, yea, and as certainly receives from him, which
he receives with thanksgiving, being one of them that believes and knows the
truth.

And thus while others depend upon visible things, and so have them (to wit,
Lands, Livings, Tradings, Relations, Powers) often in their minds and
affections, and consequently under many piercing cares, and Soul-vexations
while depending thereupon; while others (I say) are thus, the believing man
(whose dependence is not upon things that are seen, but upon the Lord)
contrariwise has the Lord often, and much in his mind (for men are apt to mind
that which is their constant help) and so this man having the Lord much in his
mind, is thereby wrought into his fear, kept tender of his glory, and greatly
affected with, and much desirous of the much-wanted presence of his good
Spirit; and thus his mind, and the Meditations of his heart is much in Heaven
with God, in Faith praying unto him for the same, and much there expecting what
in Faith he has prayed for, and having received, much there also in praising
his Name therefore; by all which he is become much heavenly-minded, spiritually
framed, able to say (as they of old) My conversation is in Heaven, (when others
only reads of it, and talks of it, but knows it not in themselves) O
therefore, how much more blessed is it to live by Faith than by sight! it being
both a God exalting, and a Creature-comforting state and condition.

But why do I speak these things? Not because I think that any will say in
words, that it is better to live by sight than by Faith. But alas! What is it
for men to acknowledge what is best, and yet still abide in what is worst? For
I would pray you to consider, whether or no it be not some visible thing in
present being that gives you your hopes of daily bread, rather than the sure
Promises of God? Is it not both your words, and in your inward thoughts, that
you hope to live comfortably, and to bring the year well about, in that you
have either Lands in possession as your own, or a good Farm, or good Trading;
or good Friends, or the like? If not so, I would know what means then the usual
complaints, discontents, great fears and vexations of spirit, when at any time
these outward things fail, or begin to fail? If your hopes did arise from the
only pure fountain, to wit, Gods gracious Promises; Why then should you be so
disquieted? For the decaying or failing (in measure) of these outward things,
does not make Gods Promises to be no Promises, he abides faithful, and all his
Promises are Yea and Amen in Christ: You indeed may sometimes in the time of
need, and in the day of trouble, pray unto God that he would give you daily
bread, and that he would deliver you out of trouble (it being generally known
that Saints should do so) and from hence conclude that your dependence is upon
God, and possibly you may be a telling others that you desire; and Oh! how good
a thing it is, to trust in God, and rely upon him in all conditions, etc. When
alas! (and for the Lords sake consider it) you all that while may be far from
trusting in God indeed; and even such who draw nigh to God with your mouths,
when your hearts may be far from God, even depending upon, and trusting in
things visible, instead of a heatty believing in God whom you pray unto, with a
serious and constant waiting upon him for to receive that which you have asked
of him.

Contrariwise, as the Faith of the Faithful, renders them happy, and in all
conditions comfortable; so the Unbelief of the Unbeliever, renders him
miserable, and in all conditions comfortless; it being a most bitter root from
whence springs many, yea, a very great multitude of corrupt branches, the fruit
whereof has so mightily corrupted the earth; for the purging of which there is
but little hopes, till such time the bitter root (to wit, Unbelief) be plucked
up out of the hearts of the Sons and Daughters of men; which remaining in the
hearts of the Children of Israel, kept them out of the promised Land; for
although their sins were many, bearing diverse names, yet by the Apostle, Heb.
3.19. it is said, They entered not (...), because of their unbelief; as if that
were the root or cause of all, (or most) of the rest: And again, those that did
enter in, in aftertimes were broken off, because of unbelief, Romans 11.20. In
some certain places Christ did not do many mighty works, because of their
unbelief, Mark 6.5. Mat. 13.58. He that believes not is condemned already,
because he believes not in the only begotten Son of God, John 3.18.

For what (consider I pray you) is the cause of men's so dishonouring God by
transgression? Has not Israel heard, does not Israel know? Yes verily, they
have both heard and known, but the Word preached does not profit them, not
being mixed with Faith in them that hear it, Heb. 4.2. They well know that they
should improve their time to the best advantage, sometimes in the Closet in
serious and sober Meditations, sometimes in solemn Prayer and Supplications to
^od, and sometimes in Praying with Fasting; but alas! Unbelief rises up, and
too much keeps under the Light of Truth in their Souls, filling them with
distrustful thoughts, even, how then they shall live and maintain their
Families, Wherewith to eat, and wherewith to put on, if thus they should spend
their time: And so it comes to pass, that men too too much are found dwelling,
as it were satisfied, in their own cealed houses, while the House of God wants
perfecting, and much of its original Ornaments.

It Is well known, that Saints should be rich in Good Works, willing to
communicate, and ready to distribute: But Oh! How does Unbelief choke the
inward movings hereunto, possessing Souls with many fears, touching what may
happen in the time to come, though at present they enjoy all fullness? and so
the bowels of compassion are too much shut up.

It Is well known, that Righteousness and Just-dealing is commanded of the Lord;
but says the unbelieving Steward, I cannot dig, to beg I am ashamed, and what
then shall I eat, or what shall I put on? (being discharged of my place)
Wherefore Unbelief drives him unrighteously to account with his Lord, even
fifty, for that which was (in Righteousness) a hundred measures, Luke 16.

But I forbear instancing in Particulars, concluding that as living by Faith,
is a God-honouring, and Creature-comforting state and condition; so not to live
by Faith, but by sight, is a God-dishonouring, and Creature-discomforting state
and condition.

But having spoke something touching the great use of Faith, with provocations
thereunto, which probably may be for advantage to some: yet very possibly for
disadvantge to other some, for want of a wise understanding every thing in its
place: Therefore in the next place, I do hereby warn, and strictly charge all
such, who are carnally minded, who have so embraced this present world, as that
the growing in the knowledge of Jesus, is little minded by them, or regarded:
and yet are apt to lean upon the Lord, and seem to be very confident, and (with
Israel) ready to say, Is not the Lord amongst us? being as it were offended
with those that shall question their condition, they think it so good, and
therefore are ready to conclude (as some of old have done) that no evil shall
come unto them; when alas! they are poor and miserable; And all such I exclude
as being none of them (while such) whom I hereby persuade to lean and stay upon
God by Faith: Therefore, O ye sluggards and carnal-minded men, think not to say
within your selves, because you profess, and have practiced some of the
Ordinances of Christ, and still do own them, that therefore you have ground to
believe that Gods Promises reaches you, for this did Israel do, and the Church
of Laodecea, who nevertheless were miserable, and their leaning upon the Lord
rendered of no effect, because of their unworthy walking in other things.

Neither think to say within your selves, because you do (as well as others)
acknowledge that it is not enough to come into the Profession of Ordinances,
and Church Fellowship, with a heavenly and spiritual walking therein to the
glory of God, that therefore you have ground to believe the Promises of God
reaches you; for alas! though you in words deny such a condition, yet your
conversation plainly declares to others (and to your selves also, if you would
seriously heed it) that you own it: it is not men's saying, that there must be,
nor their much talking of, a heavenly and spiritual walking in the Profession,
that proves them to be such, even, heavenly-minded men, or spiritual walkers;
to talk of Life, Light, Spirit and Power of Godliness, is now become a mere
Form among men, many getting the words, but have not the thing it self; and
such are most apt to declare against others, even to slight and disdain little
ones that believe in Christ, calling them carnal, literal and low professors;
Yea, some of this sort in the Apostles days, were grown up to such height of
spiritual pride and arrogance, as that they thought Paul and the rest of the
Ministers of Christ, did walk after the flesh, 2 Cor. 10.2. and so they looked
upon their bodily presence weak, and their speech contemptible, ver. 10.

Neither think to say within your selves, because you walk honestly among men,
so as to abstain from gross and public evils, that therefore the Promises of
God reaches you; for all this you may do, and continue so, and yet go to Hell
among the unprofitable servants, that have not gained by trading with the
Talent committed unto them: this kind of common honesty you have possibly for a
long time manifested in your conversations; But where are the fruits that God
justly looks for to be brought forth in the Power and Light of his Grace? If
you know these things, and can talk of them; happy shall you be if warned by
them.

Neither think to say within your selves, because you assemble with the Saints
at their meetings, that therefore you have ground to believe the Promises of
God reaches you; for so did Israel, yea, they seemed to take delight in
approaching before God, to tread his Courts, Is. 58. Whose practices
nevertheless was not regarded by God; neither may yours, being (possibly) to
prevent the reproof of men, more than Gods; or at best to remove trouble of
Conscience, which sometimes possibly you have undergone for neglect of
meetings, but now frequenting them, you thereby speak peace to your Souls,
though for years you experience no advantage, or Soul-profit reaped thereby
(which is the true end of meeting) a true Testimony (O ye) that your
satisfaction is not in the right thing.

Neither think to say within your selves, because you confess your sins and
iniquities before the Lord, that therefore the Promises of God reaches you; for
you may in words confess sin, having at that time little or no sense, either
what sin you have committed, or when committed; and so your words of confession
may proceed rather from a notion that such a thing is spoken of in the
Scriptures, and that others do so, than from a spirit wounded with the stroke
of sin, and broken in the deep sense of sin, from whence the words should flow;
and so having made confession of sin, presently imagine that all is well,
speaking peace to your selves, barely because you have spoken words as Saints
did formerly, and now do; but alas! are far from having any real ground to say
(with the Prophet) Bless the Lord, O my Soul, for the Lord has forgiven thee
all thine iniquities, Psalm. 103.2,3.

Neither think to say within your selves, because you pray sometimes, both
public and private, that therefore you have ground to believe the Promises of
God reaches you; for many and long Prayers were found among the Children of
Israel, who nevertheless were a sinful Nation, laden with iniquity, Isa.
1.15,4. And so may you be notwithstanding your many Prayers, and that not only
upon the account of your unworthiness in other things, but also upon the
account of imperfection (or rather corruptions) that may be in these your
prayers (supposed by you the best of your performances) for instead of speaking
words of Prayer, proceeding from a serious sense of the want of Grace, which
flows from a great desire to honor God, because of its love to God; I say,
instead of this kind of sensible praying to God, which is always attended with
(as its constant companion) a serious and constant waiting to receive from God,
what is prayed for; alas! there may be by you words uttered proceeding from a
mere notion, which may be exercised (as upon narrow search may be seen) to find
out words and expressions, and to utter them in such a way and manner, as may
to the eyes and ears of men render you fervent and zealously affected after the
things prayed for, rather than from any real and internal sense begotten in you
of God, leading you up nearer to God; your words (may be) importing more
longings after Grace, than really is in you, and greater desires, and larger
affections after the Wisdom and Power of God, than (indeed and in truth) is in
you; your words (may be) importing also more detestation of sin and
transgression, than may be true from your hearts; and if so, What shall I say
of this? Is it an acceptable service in the sight of God? Nay, it is in truth,
a speaking lies before the Throne of Grace; a dead work timely to be repented
of.

Moreover, when you for some time neglect Prayer, probably are somewhat
troubled; but then coming to a more frequent practice thereof, you thereupon
put the trouble from you, and seem to be satisfied, though for a long time you
experience no answer to your Prayers; which proves that your satisfaction is
not in that which is bread indeed: Yea, does it not prove, that either yet you
have not attained unto the New Birth; or if you have, that it is now even
languishing, and almost senceless? for that (if in health) will not be
satisfied with asking for the bread which is from above, unless it also receive
it: no more than the birth which is after the flesh, will be satisfied with
asking for outward bread, unless it be also received, and enjoyed within.

Moreover, when you join with others Praying in public, it may be a small
occasion, as a persons coming in, or going out, or the like trifles, presently
causes the ear to listen, and the eyes to gaze up and down; which if so,
account not that an acceptable approaching to God: What, no more reverence in
speaking to the Almighty? No more sense of your conditions, and of the
necessity of receiving from God, to keep your minds more close to God? In the
true fear of God consider these things.

Neither think to say within your selves, because you sometimes praise God, and
give thanks unto his Name; that therefore you have ground to believe the
Promises of God reaches you; for this may you do (as Israel did) and yet far
from that kind of praising God, which God accepts of, and which glorifies his
Name: which proceeds from a true knowledge and sense of mercies received, and
so hearty desires thereupon to set forth his praise: you being (it may be)
only led forth to speak words of praise (possibly the very same, which the
sensible man does) from a naked apprehension that such a thing is spoken of in
the Scriptures, and that others do so; and therefore you cannot quiet
Conscience, unless you do so too: and it may be herein also utter expressions
importing a greater and larger receiving from God, than indeed and in truth you
have received; which to do, is hypocrisy and iniquity.

Neither think to say within your selves, because you sometimes read the Holy
Scriptures, that therefore (with what is above said) you have ground to believe
the Promises reaches you; for so did the sinful Jews do, yea, and thought that
they had in the Scriptures Eternal Life; who nevertheless were such to whom
Christ said, How can ye believe, that receive honor one of another? John
5.39,44. And may I not say to you touching this your practice, as touching the
rest of your performances? That is to say, when you read not, then are you
disquieted; but when you sometimes read; then the trouble is removed and you at
quiet, though little or no experience of profit reaped thereby, which is the
proper end thereof: should you not (even as your principal care) when you read
Commandments, have an eye open within to see whether you have obeyed them, and
kept close to them, yea, or nay? And when you read Promises, to consider
whether you have or still do believe them with all the heart, yea, or nay? Most
surely this becomes such as wait for the real substance of things.

Neither think to say within your selves, Because when you at any time sin
against God, you can remember that there was something within you that
testified against the sin, and opposed it; and so judge your selves in Paul's
condition, Who did that which he would not; that therefore you have ground to
believe the Promises of God reaches you, as well as they did Paul; for alas!
how great may be your mistake herein, the ground of your confidence, of being
in Paul's condition, it may be no more than what the Drunkard may have to say,
that he is in Paul's condition, who purposing to go to a merry meeting, is
warned by his Friend not to go, who nevertheless with full purpose of heart
goes, and is drunk with the drunken; yet may he say, and truly too, that he was
warned not to go, and that his friend opposed it; which (may be) is all you can
say, even that the Word of God in your hearts, testified against the sin which
you were tempted unto; who nevertheless with full purpose of heart committed
the sin, without the drawings back, and contradictions of any regenerate part
in you, but only the knowledge you have that such and such things are sin and
evil, contradicted it; which even the wicked and abominable in some measure
have: Which if so, you are not able to say with Paul, from sure experience,
that your inward man delighted in the Law of God, Rom, 7.22. And that you were
carried captive to the evil, by the Law in the members, ver. 23. And that you
were overtaken with sin, Gal. 6.1. And not that you overtook sin; though
possibly you may have these words in your mouths; but alas, if they are not
true as to your condition, you do but deceive your selves thereby, thinking
your selves to be what you are not.

Neither think to say within your selves, Because you do nothing but that you
are able to show some seeming ground and reason for your so doing; that
therefore you have ground to believe Gods Promises reaches you; for that you
may be able to do (as could Saul and the people with him for their sparing the
best of the Sheep and Oxen) and yet nevertheless live after the flesh; the
which whosoever does, shall die eternally. My meaning in many cases of this
nature, more clearly you shall understand by this one instance; namely, A
certain carnal man, beholding a very new and curious fashion in matter of
Apparel, presently falls in love with it, enters into Bed, and commits Adultery
therewith; but having received some Light from the Word, that Saints should not
fashion themselves according to their former lusts, and also living (possibly)
among a people that are ready to reprove such fashions: Hereupon is led forth
by the hand of the old corrupt man, to search for some reasonable account that
may be given, both to himself (a little troubled through the Word bearing
testimony against it) and also unto others; and while searching with this
corrupt mind (Satan being not wanting) he finds that in some respect this new
fashion may be profitable (whereat he is glad) and so hastily casts out all
former questions, and so procures it (though it cost him a great deal more,
than at any time he is willing to bestow on the poor) and then with a loud
voice, and much carnal disputings, he stands to plead for it, for (says he)
it is thus and thus profitable, which possibly may be true in some small sense:
But alas he considers not how the lust first conceived in him, by his assent
with love and delight thereunto: He considers not, that though there be some
small profit therein, that 'twas not that which lead him to get it; for 'twas
the love, and heart-delight which he had to it, as being a fashion pleasing the
eye of flesh, and whereby he might seem to others to be thus and thus; that
first moved him thereunto. The worldly man will say, that he must spend much
time, and take a great deal of care, to get this Worlds goods, that he may have
somewhat considerably to give to the poor; but he lies in his heart before God
and men.

Neither think to say within your selves, Because you sometimes distribute
something to the poor Saints, that therefore Gods Promises reaches you; for
alas, sometimes that may be only a matter of constraint, and not willingly,
and so not rewardable: I mean by constraint, so as that you may rather than you
will publicly oppose such and such works of Charity, whereby you may think
that people will speak hardly of you, and you thereby come to have an ill name;
rather than this, you may be constrained to give something, though little or no
heart to it otherwise: and sometimes upon the account, that conscience with
such a loud voice calls for works of Charity, you may be persuaded to part with
something to quiet conscience, having all that while but little real and hearty
love and compassion on the poor Saints; as appears (among some:) First by their
being quieted, and altogether satisfied, in that they have distributed
something; never considering whether they have done what is their duties to do,
whether the poor Saints have food and raiment sufficient, yea, or nay.
Secondly, As appears by their much more diligent eye over such as are poor,
than over others; whereby to find some kind of flaw or other in their walkings,
that so they may quiet conscience thereby, while they administer not to them;
this savours of much carnality where ever it is, for should you not be
merciful, even as your Heavenly Father is merciful?

Neither think to say within your selves (some of you,) Because you are more
kind, mild, and more meek than others, that therefore the Promises of God
reaches you: For although these things be good qualifications, yet may be no
certain testimony to you of your striving, and laboring in the grace of God,
whereby these qualifications in you may be truly said to be the fruits of the
Spirit; though they being found in others may be so, yet (I say) not in you,
because it is but the same which was always in you naturally; and you in the
mean while may be far from it, and a great stranger unto any experiences of
Conquest, and victory (through Divine help) over those other Passions that have
reigned in you, to the great dishonor of God. Oh that you would remember
Christ's words, as thus, Every Branch in me that bears not fruit, God takes
away.

Neither think to say within your selves (some of you,) Because you are able to
preach, and to dispute for Truth, that therefore you have ground to believe the
Promises of God reaches you; for all this may you do, ( as some of the Jews
that were become Teachers of others, but were not taught themselves) and yet at
last may be inexcusable, (as they were) while the life of Godliness preached to
others, is not lived up to by your selves: For alas, what avails it men to
Preach unto others, that they must be new Creatures, if in the mean while they
themselves have not put off the old Man with his Deeds? And with what comfort
or boldness can men Preach to others, that they should Repent, Believe, and be
Baptized for the Remission of sins, and so shall receive the gift of the holy
Spirit; if in the mean while they know not their own sins remitted, nor the
gift of the holy Spirit received? Or with what comfort can any Preach the
Gospel of the Kingdom of Christ to others, if they in the mean while know not
themselves out of the Kingdom of Darkness, and so have themselves (by faith)
interest in the Kingdom of Christ? What, men talk, talk of life and eternal
glory, and in the mean while, do the works that leads unavoidably to eternal
death? Oh horrible blindness! Oh what a lamentable condition is this! How great
is the disproportion betwixt it, and the condition of the Gospel-Preachers in
days of old, who persuaded others to have fellowship with them (saying) Truly
our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ? 1 John 1.3.
And so were such as were able to tell others what the Lord had done for their
souls; how God had comforted them in all their tribulations, and so were made
able to comfort them which were in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith
themselves were comforted of God. 2 Cor. 1.4.

These things write I unto you, not because I slight you, (under what name or
Title soever you are, on whom these words may take hold) neither for your
destruction do I thus speak; but rather desire you, and (with the holy Spirit
speaking to the Churches) do I hereby exhort you (O Laodiceans) timely to
repent, and be zealous, that so Gods Promises may reach you, as well as any
other; (for the Lord is not willing that any of you should perish) and that so
his people may with all freeness have fellowship with you.

The great Error and mistake of the Quakers, concerning the true Christ; and
how he is said to be in his People: And concerning the Rule of Mankind.
MOreover, Since it is not the Talker, nor ready Disputer, nor the Busy
Preacher of this World; but the single-hearted doer of what is Preached,
Disputed, or Talked of, that shall enter into the Kingdom: It remains a work
very great, for every Professing Soul to abide very circumspect and watchful,
together with a constant trusting in, and dependence upon the Lord, (who waits
to be gracious) that thereby they may be more and more wrought up unto a
well-pleasing the Lord in all things. But lest any soul should be deceived by
the subtilty of the evil One, of whose devises (through grace) I am not
altogether ignorant: I hereby also present before you the experiences of some
men, as thus:

Certain men being somewhat troubled about their present conditions, and
thereupon following after a more excellent estate, (though possibly not with
that care and watchfulness, as was meet should be) have on a sudden been
greatly carried forth with inward Power and Zeal, and wonderful quicknings
after some matters of holiness, so as scarce able to bear with the least
appearance of Pride, Covetousness (or the like) in others, without reproof;
yea, scarce content without a leaving their Callings in order to the reproving
others; who at length (while in this state) have been secretly informed, That
the powerful workings within them, was Christ come in them the second time to
salvation; he being a Spirit, and not man, and so no other coming to be looked
for but within; and that the Scriptures was not the Rule; and that the
Ordinances of Christ were ceased, being imposed only till the time of
Reformation, which time was come; and such like.

But being somewhat fearful of delusions, did thereupon give up themselves
diligently to pray unto the Lord, who at length graciously delivered them from
the strong delusion: I say, the strong delusion; for is it not so indeed, when
an evil spirit shall carry forth persons zealously, to some things that is
Just, Holy, and Good, (though he no lover of Holiness or any Goodness; but that
being really an Angel of Darkness, he may seemingly appear to be an Angel of
Light, 2 Cor. 11.14.) thereby to gain their affections? That then having got
the affections, he may the better drop into their understandings, Principles of
Error in matters of Faith, with likeliness of acceptance.

Whereupon (dear Brethren) as I have here briefly proposed to you the ready and
plain Way in order to the Life of godliness, without which, all profession
thereof is little; together therewith I hereby also counsel you (in the words
of John) not to believe every spirit, for there are many false spirits gone out
into the world; the one and true Spirit of God, being plainly to be known by
his guiding and moving the Saints, not only to be Just, Holy and Zealous in
point of conversation; but also to be steadfast in the Principles of Faith, yea,
and as zealously to contend for the same, as for any other things: as was the
Apostles of Christ, in whom the true Spirit of Light was, as appears by their
Writings, for that a great part of it consists of matter tending to the
instruction and regulation of the Saints, concerning their Faith, as in reading
is observable: Wherefore, for the removing all doubts and scruples which
(through the subtilty of the deceived Quaker) possibly may arise, or already is
risen in the hearts of any well-minded people, I here next offer a little of
that much, which might be said, touching Principles of Faith, the error
whereof is abundantly dangerous.

First, Whereas it is owned by the Quakers, (and as to me has plainly been
declared) that the Eternal Spirit of Light and Power which dwelt in the Man
whom the Jews Crucified, is the Christ, the Savior of the world; and not the
Man that was Crucified, that was seen with visible or carnal eyes; according to
which you may observe the words of Wolrich (the Quaker) in his Book, entitled,
A Declaration to the Baptists, page 13. saying, That Christ was never seen with
any carnal eye, nor his voice heard with any carnal ear. And in the Book,
entitled, Saul's Errand to Damascus, page 14. (the words of George Fox the
elder, I suppose) it is said, That the flesh of Christ is a figure. And Joseph
Fuce (in his Book entitled, The fall of a great visible Idol, page 14.) says
(by way of reproof to us) these words, The Baptists (says he) make flesh their
Arm, and therefore look without to know Christ after the flesh; although the
Apostle said, They were to know him so no more: (mark) thus says the Lord,
Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his Arm, Jerem. 17.5.
(as if they were a cursed people that trust in the man Christ.) Whereas (I say)
this is asserted by them, I here offer several grounds from the Holy
Scriptures, whereby to prove, that the Eternal Spirit which dwelt in the Man,
whom the Jews Crucified; which Spirit the Apostles afterward received in them,
is not the Christ, the Savior of the world; but the visible man, to whom the
Spirit was given, John 3.34. The offering it self, (no figure, but the
substance of figures) is the Christ of God.

First, Because that the Eternal Spirit never died, when nothing is more plain
than that Jesus Christ died, as appears by a Cloud of Witnesses.

Secondly, Because the Apostles (with one consent) declare that the Jews
Crucified (that is fastened to a cross) the Lord Jesus, the Lord of Glory, Act.
2.36. 1 Cor. 2.8. and killed the Prince of Life, Act. 3.15. Whom they crucified
not, nor killed, if the Eternal Spirit that dwelt in the visible man, be the
Christ: and so the Quakers by this their opinion do as much as in them lies,
declare the Holy Apostles to bear false witness to the world concerning Christ:
but let them be true, and every one of these men liars, in the judgments of
the Wise: But to evade this, sometimes they will say (whereby to deceive) that
the Jews did crucify Christ, that was, they opposed and resisted the Spirit of
Light within them, which they call Christ: and withal will say (whereby to
deceive) that the Jews did Crucify a man without; I say to deceive, because
that in their confession of this, (which seems sometimes to the Hearers to be
sufficient) they intend not the Truth, namely, that that visible man whom the
Jews crucified without, was the Christ; as appears by their own words above
signed.

Thirdly, Because that not only the Apostles, but also Christ himself by his
Institution of those two Ordinances, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, has
plainly declared Gods Way, graciously provided for man's Redemption and
Justification contrariwise, even, by a broken, bloodshedding, dead, buried and
risen Christ, as says the proper signification of these Ordinances: neither of
which is either proper or true in relation to the Eternal Spirit, who was (all
may know) neither dead nor buried, and so not risen again, nor broken, nor at
any time shed blood; all which these Ordinances testify concerning the true
Christ: and so the Quakers by this their opinion are found also such, who in
effect do say, that these Ordinances of the Lord (which once they say were in
being) were lying Ordinances, bearing false witness to the Saints, touching the
Lord Jesus; but to all such as fear the Lord, Let them be true, and every one
of these liars.

Fourthly, Because not only the Apostles, Christ the Son, but also God the
Father himself, most plainly declared from of old by his Commandment, for the
killing and slaying those many Sacrifices, and sprinkling the blood thereof,
that Jesus Christ should be slain, and his blood shed, as the glorious
substance thereof: all which part of the Fathers Law, was, and is of no effect;
God thereby bearing false witness to the world; if the Eternal Spirt, which
dwelt in the visible Man, and which the Apostles afterward received in them,
be the Christ, which Spirit never was slain, nor never had blood to shed: but
let God be true, and all these men liars.

Fifthly, Because he most plainly is said to be the Christ, Ordained of God to
be Judge of quick and dead, to whom all the Prophets gave witness, he (I say)
with whom the Apostles did eat and drink, and that after his Resurrection from
the dead, Act. 10.38,41,42,43. which must needs respect the visible Man.

Sixthly, Because the true Christ blamed his Disciples when they supposed him
to be a Spirit, saying to them, Handle me, and see, for a spirit has not flesh
and bones, as ye see me have, Luke 24.37,38,39.

Seventhly, Because the true Christ was seen with visible and carnal (that is
fleshly) eyes; for it is written, the eyes of all them that were in the
Synagogue were fastened on him, (to wit, Christ) and sure I am that the Quaker
cannot imagine (from any show in the Scriptures) that these had any other eyes,
as invisible and spiritual eyes, because it is said also, that all they in the
Synagogue were filled with wrath, and thrust him out of the City, Luke
4.20,28,29.

Eighthly, Because he is declared in the Holy Scriptures, to be Jesus Christ,
who was Circumcised; which were also a false account, if the Quakers opinion
were true, namely, That the Eternal Spirit in the Man, and not the Man, was the
Christ.

Ninthly, Because the Eternal Spirit which dwelt in the Man Christ, which
afterward the Apostles received in them, is called another Comforter, and that
by Christ himself, which would not come unto the Apostles, unless he (the true
Christ) went away, John 14.16,17. 16.7.

Tenthly, Because it is said, Jesus Christ lift up his eyes to Heaven, and
Prayed to God his Father, John 17. Both the action and the manner thereof
showing, that the visible Man is the Christ: And besides, if the Quaker shall
suppose that 'twas the Eternal Spirit in the visible Man Christ that prayed,
and that the same Eternal Spirit is one essence or being with God the Father,
and Christ his Son, without distinctions; I then would demand of them two
things; first, Who it was that the Spirit Prayed unto? And secondly, For what
he prayed, or what he stood in need of?

Elevently, The Eternal Spirit which was given to, and received by the visible
man, cannot be the Christ, that is in English Anointed, because he is said by
the Apostle to be the Anointing with which the Savior was anointed: as it is
written, how God anointed Jesus, (that is, the Savior) of Nazareth with the
Holy Spirit, Act. 10.38. If the Eternal Spirit, as Spirit, was anointed, I
would know with what, and wherefore?

Twelfthly, Because the true Christ, even Sions King, is said to come sitting
and riding upon an Ass, meek and lowly; who also in lowliness washed the
Disciples feet: all which proves that the visible man is the true Christ,
Zecha. 9.9. Mat. 21.5. John 13.14.

Object. Henceforth know we no man after the flesh, yea, though we have known
Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him (so) no more.

Answ. What Paul intends by these words I verily believe, but that Christ is
departed from and without that outward body of flesh, which once was visible on
Earth, and so not to be known after the flesh; that is, not now having that
body of flesh, this indeed I believe not.

First, Because that then, and upon the very same ground, we are to know
henceforth none amongst men to be the Children of God, but such only as are
departed from, and without their outward bodies of flesh; and where those men
are, or what kind of men they are, I verily know not: I thus speak, because in
like manner as the Apostle says, Henceforth we know Christ no more after the
flesh; so also he says, even, in the same words, that henceforth know we no
man after the flesh; if true in one, then in both: but that it is untrue in
one, you have hereby a weight of reason forbidding; that the other is also
untrue, consider the Scriptures forbidding it: As,

Secondly, Because those that were of the number of Gods Elect in Ages past,
Waited for the Son of God from Heaven, who was raised from the dead, 1 These.
1.4,10. Now sure I am, that 'twas the visible body of flesh which was dead, and
so raised from the dead, that which was raised from the dead, the Saints of God
waited for; and therefore they ceased not to know Christ as having the body of
flesh, which once he had, though both they and we believe that it is glorified.

Thirdly, Because the same Apostle that speaks these words, is so far from such
an opinion of undervaluing the fleshly body of Christ, as that he tells the
Church, they were reconciled to God in the body of his flesh through death,
Col. 1.21,22. And surely, neither Paul nor the Church was at any time to cease
knowing or honoring, that through which they were reconciled to God, His flesh
is meat indeed, and his blood drink indeed; and although in one sense it
profited nothing; yet such is it in another sense, as that whosoever eats and
drinks the same ( that is, believes in the Lord, John 6.35.) shall never
hunger nor thirst; And therefore for the constant remembrance thereof, we have
that Ordinance of Breaking Bread, which surely was never instituted to hold
forth an unprofitable thing.

But true it is, That neither Christ nor men, are to be known after the flesh;
and how once men were known after the flesh, is plain from the same Apostles
words, as thus, We are the Circumcision which worship God in Spirit, and have
no confidence in the flesh, wherein if any might trust, I more (says Paul:)
Now what he means by this, is manifest, to wit, being Circumcised, of the Stock
of Israel, of the Tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews, etc. Phil.
3.3,4,5. But he well knowing that the Ministration of the Law (under which
persons were thus known after the flesh) then done away, and a more glorious
Ministration in being, which forbids men to plead, we have Abraham to our
Father, we are his Children after the flesh, of the Stock of Israel, of this or
that Tribe; and therefore let us be Baptized and known among you (according as
you may read the Pharisees did, Mat. 3.7,8,9.) Paul, I say, well knowing this,
declared that he had no confidence in the flesh, as in reference to himself;
neither henceforth would he know any other man after the flesh, as once during
the time of the Law men were known and accounted, even, the Children of Promise
(in respect of temporal enjoyments) being such as descended from that fleshly,
birth-priviledged Seed of Abraham: Therefore (says he) If any man be in
Christ, he is a New Creature, the Seed of Abraham, according to the Faith of
Abraham, either Jews or Gentiles: In like manner as there was a time when
Christ was esteemed and known, upon the account, or because of his being born
of the Tribe of Judah, and of the birth-priviledged Seed of Abraham; yet now
henceforth (says the Apostle) know we him (so) no more; that is, as to esteem
him upon that account, or for that reason meritoriously the Savior of the
world, but rather upon the account of his coming down from Heaven, his being
the Son of God reconciling the world unto himself, in the body of his flesh
through death.

Object. The first man Adam was made a living Soul, the last Adam was made a
quickening Spirit.

Answ. True it is, that the Apostle thus speaks; but consider how he is, or
can be called the last Adam, or the second Man (as afterward he is called) if
Christ be so a quickening Spirit, considered as he was before the world was: for
if the Spirit (as Spirit) be the last, or second Adam, then it follows that the
first man Adam, who was of the earth, earthy, was first, and before the Eternal
quickening Spirit; which were very absurd to think: and therefore Christ of
necessity must be understood to be the last Adam, upon the account of his being
become visible man, a condition that he was not always in, but since the
creation and fall of the first man Adam, and so is truly and very properly the
last or second man, made a quickening Spirit: yet not so a spirit in the
Apostles sense, but that he is also spiritual (ver. 46.) and also the man, by
whom came the Resurrection from the dead (ver. 21.) and also the Christ that
died, was buried, and rose again (ver. 3, 4.) and therefore not so a quickening
Spirit, as in the Quakers sense: for the Spirit considered as from Eternity was
not man, and so was never dead, and so not buried, and so not raised again: all
which Paul testifies in that very Chapter concerning him, whom he calls a
quickening Spirit, (in reference to his now being a spiritual glorified man)
which considered, it remains, that all the House of Israel know assuredly that
God has made that same Jesus, whom the Jews Crucified, both Lord and Christ.

Moreover, as the Quaker holds, That the Spirit which was in the visible man
(and not the man) was the Christ: So also he holds, and indeed it leads him to
hold, that the second coming of Christ is in men, and not otherwise; and
therefore Humphrey Smith in his Book, entitled, A true and everlasting Rule,
page 19, 20. compares such, who look after the body of Christ, to those young
men that sought in vain the body of Elijah, and plainly says, that such (whom
he calls wandering stars) shall never find the body they look so much after: he
also speaking of Christ, page 30. says, That he is come, whom we long waited
for, and we do not look for any other; who now (says he) appears the second
time without sin, to the saving that which was lost; and so (says he) we
confess Christ come in the flesh, and do not look for another, page 32.

Now as their persuasions concerning Christ being a Spirit, and not man, leads
them to expect the coming of Christ in them: so contrariwise our Faith and full
persuasions, that Christ is a visible glorified man, leads us to expect his
second coming as a distinct appearance from, and not in, his People; whereupon
I forbear to urge those many Scripture-grounds which with all plainness ane
loudness of voice reproves these men's swelling words of vanity, and shall only
speak something touching those Scriptures, which speaks of Christ's being in his
People, whereat some, for want of understanding, may possibly stumble.

True it is, That the Apostle tells the Church of the Colossians, that Crist
was in them, the hope of Glory, Col. 1.27. Yet not so in them, but that he
could also say, and that at the same time, to the same Church, that when Christ
who is our Life shall appear, then ye shall appear with him in Glory, even, in
the possession of that Glory which then they had hopes of, ver. 3, 4. The
Apostle also declares Christ to be in the Corinthians, except they were
Reprobates: Yet not so in them, but that they were also waiting for the coming
of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.7. Yea, at that time when they were sanctified in Christ,
ver. 2. and in every thing enriched by him, coming behind in no gift, ver. 5,
7. Paul also testifies concerning himself, That Christ lived in him; yet not
so, but that he looked also for the appearing of Christ, Tit. 2.13. Yea, and at
that time when he had finished his course, and the time of his departure at
hand, he speaks to Timothy of a Crown of Righteousness, which the Righteous
Judge (says he) shall give me at that day, even, at his appearing, 2 Timothy
4.1,6,7,8. The Apostle John says, Christ is come; that is, the first time;
which John might well say, for he had seen him with his eyes, and handled him
with his hands, 1 John 1.1. But Christ afterward ascended, from whom John
received great things, yea, much of the special presence of Gods Spirit
mightily working with him; yet did he not say, that Christ was come the second
time, for himself (after those many Visions and Revelations we read of was
discovered to him) readily prayed, even so, come Lord Jesus, Rev. 22.20.
Stephen a man full of the Spirit, yet looking up into Heaven, testified that he
saw (in Heaven) Jesus Christ standing at the right hand of God; and the truth
of this, he sealed with his blood, Act. 7.55,56,58.

Moreover, as Paul bears witness of Christ's dwelling in the Saints; so also he
declares, that the Saints were in him, even, as it is meet (says he) for me to
think this of you all, because I have you in my heart, Phil. 1.7. And elsewhere
says, that you are in our hearts, to dye and live with you, 2 Cor. 7.3. Now
it is out of question, that the several persons of the Churches were not in the
Apostles heart, but only they were deep in his affections, and much in the
Thoughts and Meditations of his heart, even, so as to dye and live with them
(he believing them to be the beloved of God) So the Saints, having Christ deep
in their affections, much and often in their Thoughts and Meditations,
(believing him to be their most precious Redeemer, Who is gone into Heaven to
prepare a place for them, John 14.2.) So, I say, Christ dwells in his People,
or in the hearts of his People by Faith: And this kind of Language is both
proper and common to this day, for persons that are deep in each others
affections, in their personal absence one from another, to say that such are in
their hearts, or that such are often in their minds, etc.

Moreover, as it is said, that Christ is in his Saints, so likewise it is said,
and that more frequently in the Scriptures, That the Saints are in Christ, and
in God; as thus, Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, unto the Saints, and
faithful Brethren in Christ that are at Colosse, chapter 1. v. 2. Unto the Church
of the Thessalonians, which is in God, the Father, and in the Lord Jesus
Christ, chapter 1.1. Unto all the Saints in Christ Jesus which are at Philippi, chapter
1.1. Unto the Saints and faithful in Christ, which are at Ephesus, chapter 1.1.
Now, that the Saints are in Christ, after the manner that these men plead for
Christ's being in the Saints, judge ye that fear the Lord and serve him with
uprightness of heart; remembering that he is the true Christ, who was dead, but
is alive for evermore, a Mediator betwixt God and Men, the man Christ Jesus.

Moreover, hear what the Lord Christ says, as a most clear resolve to this
case, as thus, John 17.21,23. Thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they
also may be one in us. I in them, and Thou in me, that they may be made perfect
in one; compared with these his words, John 15.10. If ye keep my Commandments,
ye shall abide in my love, as I have kept my Fathers Commandments, and abide
in his love. Most clearly showing, that Christ's being in the Father, is meant,
in the Fathers love, as himself witnesses: and so the Fathers being in the
Son, is meant, in the Sons love: so likewise our being in the Eather, and in
the Son, is meant, in their love: So, even so Christ's dwelling in the Saints,
is meant, his dwelling in their love, in their affections (as has been said.)
Now, whereas the Son was in the Fathers love, there was given unto the Son,
from the Father, the Holy Spitit, (without measure) working in him, whereby he
did the works that no man ever did, to the glory of the Father: So in like
manner the Saints being in Christ, in his love and affections; there is also
given to the Saints, (through Christ) the Holy Spirit (in measure) working in
them, whereby the deeds of the body are to be mortified, Romans 8.13. and the
fruits of Righteousness brought forth to the Glory and Praise of God, by Jesus
Christ.

Obj. From these words of Christ, John 14.16,17. I will pray the Father, and he
shall give you another Comforter, even the Spirit of Truth, whom the world
cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him: but ye know him,
for he dwells with you, and shall be in you. From these words (I say) it is
conceived, and declared by the Quakers, that Christ that was then with the
Disciples, should afterward be in them, etc.

Answ. He that has an ear to hear, may easily understand, that he, who is said
to be with the Disciples, and should afterward be in them, was not the Christ,
but another Comforter, whom the Christ would pray to the Father for, even, the
Spirit of Truth, whom the world could not receive, because they saw him not,
nor knew him to be the Spirit of Truth, from God, (though through him was done
such works as no man ever did,) yea, they were ready to say, that he had a
Devil (in him) but the Disciples knew him to be the Spirit of Truth, and
acknowleged the mighty works to be done through the Spirit of God in him;
therefore says Christ, Ye know him, for he (the Spirit of truth, another
Comforter,) dwells with you; (that is* the Spirit, being in Christ, and so
with the Disciples, for he was not then given to them, as he was afterward,
Joh. 7.37.) and shall be in you, that is, the Spirit of Truth, another
Comforter; which, when Christ was exalted, having received of the Father the
Promise of the Holy Spirit, he made good to his Disciples, by sending his Holy
Spirit in them, which before was with them, being in Christ that was with them.

These men say, Christ is come in them the second time, and they look not for
any other; and withal have good words and fair speeches, crying, Grace, grace,
Light, light. But let all assuredly know, that they themselves are not in the
True Light, nor Grace of God that brings Salvation, wherein the Saints of old
walked; for they thereby were taught to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and
to look for the glorious appearing of Jesus Christ, Tit. 2.11,12,13. But says
Humphrey Smith, Christ is come, and we look not for any other, another voice
from another Spirit.

Moreover, the Quaker utterly denies (as most men I suppose knows) the Holy
Scriptures to be a Rule: whereunto Humphry Smith, in his Book intitlued, A true
and everlasting Rule, pa. 29. in the face of men and Devils affirms, That
there is no other Rule, Ways, Means, or Name, by which man shall ever come to
walk with God, but by that which is manifest of God in him, which (say they) is
sufficient to guide in all the ways of God without Scripture, or any other
outward means.

Answ. The time was, (and that not long since in our Nation) when it was no
less then ridiculous, and a matter of contempt, for men and women to go to the
public Place of their Worship, with the Bible under their Arms, whereby to
search whether those things they heard were so or no: such and so great was the
Romish cloud of darkness then spread over the faces of the multitude, they
being informed by their blind Guides, that Ignorance was the Mother of
Devotion: But Satan's device (...) discovered in this, and the Scriptures very
generally searched into, he has now found out another way, whereby to produce
a low esteem to the Holy Scriptures, even by his manifold endeavors to
persuade people that there is a Light placed in them, which is to be their
Rule, and is sufficient without the Scriptures, or any other outward means, to
guide them in all the ways of God; which being believed unavoidably leads
people to have a low and slender esteem of the Scriptures; and by this means it
is become again a very rare thing to see (among these people called Quakers,
when they are assembled together (the Book of the Holy Scriptures diligently
searched, whether those things spoken be agreeable thereunto, yea or nay: and
thus the Ministers of these people are hereby put into a capacity greatly to
deceive their Hearers while in their preaching up their manifold Errors, they
make use of (with their own) some Scripture Expressions also, seemingly
favoring their Opinions, (but not really) as to instance; Say they in their
Doctrine, Ordinances, to wit, Baptism in water, and the Lords Supper, are now
ceased, for Christ has blotted out the handwriting of Ordinances that was
against us, and nailed them to his Cross, Col. 2.14. which being heard by the
People, they remember well that they have read such kind of words, and for the
trial thereof they (according as they have been taught) begin to look within
them, to see what Testimony is there; now the Devil being a Spirit, and so
working within, being also an Enemy to Christ and his Ordinances, he, even he
bears testimony within them, that what they have heard is true, even that the
Ordinances are ceased, etc. whenas those that search the Scriptures according
to the commandment of Christ, quickly see, that it is the Ordinances of the Old
Testament, and not of the New, that Christ nailed to his Cross: Now if you
observe these men, being first deceived concerning the Rule, thereby are
greatly disinabled to descern the Evil spirit speaking within them; for by what
should he be tried, if the Scriptures be not a Rule? and so these (alas poor
creatures!) finding such and such persuasions within them, greatly fear to
contradict or gainsay it; it being no less to them then to contradict or
gainsay the mind of the Lord Jesus, they believing that it is Christ the Light
that speaks within them; yea although their inward persuasions never so much
contradict the Scriptures, yet they adhere to them, not daring to question the
Light (as they call it) within them, but presently concludes that they have
understood the Scriptures, and so perverts the plain meaning thereof into some
kind of (imagined) Mystery, that so they may one way or other cause the
Scriptures without to speak agreeable to that they call Light within them: And
that I wrong not these men hereby, consider one thing of many that might be
instanced, namely, touching Women, who in all plainness are forbidden (by the
Scriptures) to teach in the Church: but since the Spirit in these men says,
that women may teach, they adhere thereunto, and perverts the plain Scripture
into a Mystery, and so declares, that the woman which is forbidden to teach (1 Timothy 2.12,13.) is the wisdom of the flesh either in man or woman, and not the
Female kind, as you may read in Farnworths Book, entitled, A Woman forbidden
to speak in the Church, page 3.

But that there is no such Light in every man, as aforesaid, appears in that
Christ gave commandment to his Apostles, to go into all the world, and teach
all Nations, to observe all things whatsoever he had commanded them, Mark
16.15. Mat. 28.19,20. And Paul witnesses, that he had declared all the Counsel
of God, Acts. 20.27. whereupon it is required, that men incline their ear, and
hear, that their Souls may live, Isai. 55.3. and such as turn away their ears
from the truth are reproved, 2 Timothy 4.4. All which were empty and useless
things, both Christ's Command, That all things whatsoever should be taught the
Nations, the Apostles obedience to that Command in Preaching all things, and
also the Nations lending their ears to hear what is preached to them; if it
were true that there were such a Light in every man of the Nations, as were
sufficient to guide in all the ways of God, and were placed in the Nations for
that very purpose, and that no other Rule, or Means could lead to God, (which
Humphery Smith affirms) It Is indeed said by the Prophet, that Christ should
be given a Light to the Gentiles, from whence these men plead, That Christ is a
Light in every one of the Gentiles, without any other outward means: But Paul
and Barnabas (well understanding the Scriptures) pleaded another thing from
thence, directly contrary, namely thus, Lo, we turn to the Gentiles, for so
has the Lord commanded us, saying, I have set thee to be a Light of the
Gentiles, etc. Acts 13.46,47. because 'twas said, Christ was set to be a Light
of the Gentiles, therefore they would go and preach to the Gentiles: And what
were they to preach to them? not that one thing of turning to (a Light) their
Teacher within, but ALL THINGS WHATSOEVER, Mat. 28.19,20. all the Counsel of
God, Act. 20.27. I then (with the Apostle) conclude thus, How shall they
believe in him, of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a
Preacher? and how shall they preach except they be sent? How beautiful
therefore are the feet of them that preach the Gospel! So then, Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the Word of God, Romans 10.

Among many things contradicting this Opinion, That every man's Rule is within
him, and that there is no other Rule, Means, or Ways that leads to God: this
is none of the least, namely, Because when there was asfair occasions given,
(as well can be conceived) for the Doctrine of turning to a Light within, to be
preached; as fair occasions I say, as well can be conceived, through the many
enquiries of men, even what they should do; that then 'twas not preached,
neither by God, Christ, Angel, nor men; as to instance,

In the days of the Prophet Zechariah, Sherezer and Regem-melech were sent by
the Children of Israel to enquire of the Priests and Propets which were in the
House of God, whether they should weep in the fifth Month, separating
themselves as they had done many years before?

Turn to the Light within (says the Quaker.)

But God speaks by the Prophet, saying, Should you not hear the Words which the
Lord has cried by the former Prophets, when Jerusalem was inhabited, and in
prosperity, Zech. 7.2,3,7.

Also John the Baptist, who is declared to be a burning and a shining Light,
sent two of his Disciples unto Jesus, saying by them, Art thou he that should
come, or do we look for another?

Turn to the Light within (says the Quaker.)

But (says the man Christ) Go, and tell John what things you have heard and
seen, how that the blind see, the lame walk, the Lepers are cleansed, etc. such
outward means was returned by Christ, the true Light, for John's satisfaction,
Luke 7.19,20,21,22.

In the Days of John came the people unto him, saying, What shall we do? also
the Publicans, saying, Master, what shall we do? also the Soldiers demanded of
him, saying, What shall we do?

Turn to the Light within (says the Quaker.)

But says John (having another Spirit) He that has two coats let him impart
to him that has none, exact no more then that which is appointed you, do
violence to no man, neither accuse falsely, but be content with your wages, Luke
3.10,11,12,13,14.

Also a certain Young man came to Christ, saying, What good thing shall I do,
that I may have eternal life?

Turn to the Light within (says the Quaker.)

But says Christ, Keep the Commandments, and sell that which thou have, and
give to the poor, etc. Matthew. 19.16,17,21.

Again the Jews demanded of Christ, saying, What shall we do, that we might
work the works of God?

Turn to the Light within (says the Quaker.)

But says Christ, This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom he has
sent, that was Christ himself that talked with them, and was not in them, that
afterward dyed for the sins of the World, John 6.28,29. Lord, What will thou
have me to do, says Saul?

Turn to the Light within (says the Quaker.)

But says the Lord Christ, (and this after his Ascension) Arise, and go into
Damascus, and there it shall be told thee of all things which are appointed for
thee to do, and that not by a Light within him; for when he was come to
Damascus, Ananias (a certain Disciple) told him many things, as you may read;
and said, Why tarryest thou? Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins,
calling upon the name of the Lord, Act. 22.10,11,12,13,14,15,16.

Moreover, when Peter had preached many things to the People at Jerusalem, it is
said, when they heard this, they were pricked in their hearts, and said unto
Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles, What shall we do? and (says the
Jalour) What must I do to be saved?

Turn to the Light within (says the Quaker.)

But says Peter, Paul, and Silas, (being led with the Spirit of Light indeed)
Repent, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and be baptized every one of you in
his Name for the Remission of Sins; and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy
Spirit, Act. 2.37,38. Act. 16.30,31.

In like manner when the Angel of God appeared in a vision unto Cornelius, he
said, What is it Lord?

Turn to the Light within (says the Quaker.)

But says the Angel of Light, Send men to Joppa, and call for one Simon, who
is surnamed Peter, he shall tell thee what thou ought to do; and when Peter
was come, he preached unto him Christ, whom the Jews slew, and hanged on a
tree, with whom they had eat and drank, etc. and at length said, Can any man
forbid water, that these should not be baptized, and he commanded them to be
baptized, etc. Act. 10.4,5,6,38,39,41,47,48.

Object. John says, That the anointing which ye have received, abides in you,
and ye need not that any man teach you, etc.

Answ. Consider, The Churches unto whom the Apostles wrote their Epistles, were
gifted with the Holy Spirit, the anointing, as themselves acknowledge in their
Writings; yet nevertheless, they saw need for them to write: but it appears
that this Church, or Churches, to whom John speaks these words, were so
enriched with spiritual gifts, so many gifted Brethren among themselves, in
whom the anointing so mightily wrought, as that John does as it were say, that
these things I have written indeed unto you concerning them that seduce you,
but I look upon you so furnished with the gifts of Wisdom and spiritual
Understanding, as that there was no absolute necessity for any man, either I
John, Peter, or Paul in remote places, to write unto you, whereby to instruct
and teach you: Furthermore, the anointing abode indeed in them, John says, but
that every particular person had the anointing so in them, as that not any of
them needed to be taught, John says not: the anointing Spirit abode in them
(in the Body, the Church) so as that there was (it seems) several able (through
the anointing) to teach and instruct the rest, which is the Will and Mind of
the Lord, even for spiritual men so to do, Col. 3.16. 1 These. 5.11.

Object. It Is said, That ye shall not teach every man his Brother, saying, know
the Lord, for all shall know me from the least to the greatest, Heb. 8.

Answ. It Is to be observed, that those whom the Lord says, shall not teach
every man his Neighbor, are such only as have their sins forgiven them, (by
Faith in Christ) and not all men in the world whatsoever (which is the fence of
these men) I say, only such, because in that very place it is said as from the
Lord, even, that all shall know me from the least to the greatest; for I will
be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and iniquities will I
remember no more, Heb. 8.12. And this pardon I am sure (and I think none
opposes) reaches not every particular man in the world: Therefore all those
that have so repented of their sins, believed and obeyed the Lord Jesus, as to
know this gracious pardon reaching them, they indeed need not teach one
another, saying, know the Lord, (as the Children of the old Covenant had need
to do, they being Children thereof by generation.) These, I say, that are
Children of the new Covenant by regeneration, have no need so to teach one
another, saying, know the Lord, as if they knew not the Lord to be their Lord
and Savior; for it is most certain, that he is the Lord and Savior of all such
whose sins and iniquities he remembers no more; but though these have no need
to say to one another, know the Lord, upon the account aforesaid; yet even
these have need to be builded up in the knowledge of the Lord, and that by
outward means; for Timothy knew the Lord as his Savior, and so needed not to
be taught to know the Lord, in that sense; yet Paul sends Scripture unto him,
That he might know how to behave himself in the Church of God, 1 Timothy 3.14,15.
And Peter says to them that knew the Lord, 2 Pet. 1.3. Grow in Grace, and in
the knowledge of the Lord, Chap. 3.18. Therefore you that serve the Lord in
simplicity of heart, and fear to offend him, receive the Word of Exhortation,
even, That you stand fast, and hold the Traditions which you have been taught,
whether by Word or our Epistle; (heed it well, 2 These. 2. 15.) And as for such
who will not hear Moses and the Prophets, you may be sure will not be
persuaded, though one rose from the dead, Luke 16.31.

But withal, let each Soul take good heed, that while they be careful to avoid
this extreme concerning the Light within, the Quakers sense, they do not run
out into another extreme, also dangerous, even, little to mind, or wholly to
neglect walking up to the Light they have received within their Souls,
according to the Scripture sense, or Gospel way of enlightening men; for alas!
it is not enough for men to know and talk of what is good, what are spiritual
things; but to do good, and to be spiritual: Oh how much more excellent is
that! there is the peace known, that others only hear of, even, the Peace of
God which passes understanding.

Above all things take the shield of Faith, whereby ye shall be able to quench
all the fiery darts of Satan, and to open the Windows (in your service to God)
as afore-time, Dan. 6.10. For should such a man as I flee? I will not go in,
says Nehemiah, Chap. 6.10,11,13.

MATTHEW CAFFYN.

THE END.

