HIS MAJESTY'S DECLARATION To all His loving Subjects, Upon occasion of a late
Printed Paper, ENTITVLED, A Declaration and Protestation of the Lords and
Commons in Parliament to this Kingdom, and the whole World, of the 22d of
October.

Printed by His MAJESTY'S Command AT OXFORD, By LEONARD LICHFIELD Printer to
the University. 1642.

HIS MAJESTY'S DECLARATION TO ALL HIS LOVING SUBJECTS Upon occasion of a late
printed paper, ENTITVLED, A DECLARATION AND PROTEstation of the Lords and
Commons in Parliament to this Kingdom, and the whole World, of the 22d of
October.
IF in truth the framers of this Declaration are not engaged by any private
passion or respect, by any evil intention to Our Person, or design to the
prejudice of Our Just Honor and Authority, to raise these forces and Army
against Us (as they call Almighty God to witness they are not) they will think
it their duty to disclaim the Protection of the Conductors of that Army, who
the next day after this so solemn Protestation, used their utmost power by the
strength of that Army to have destroyed Us, and put Our Person (for whose
defense they would make the world believe this Army is raised) into as much
danger as the skill and malice of desperate Rebels could do, otherwise this
Protestation now made, will appear of the same nature with those by which they
promised to make Us a glorious King, when by their ninteen Propositions they
endeavored to strip Us of all those Rights which made Us a King, and them
Subjects.

What those Actions and proceedings have been which have manifested their
Loyalty and Obedience unto Us, will be as hard to find, as their humble
Petitions and Remonstrances, when in truth their Actions have been the greatest
scorns of Our Authority, and their Petitions the greatest reproaches and
challenges of Us, which any age have produced; And we have not only the clear
evidence of Our own Conscience, but the testimony of all good men, that We
left no Action unperformed on Our part, which might have prevented the misery
and confusion which the Ambition, Fury, and Malice of these seditious Persons
have brought upon this poor Kingdom, neither is there any thing wanting to the
happiness of Church and State, but that Peace and Order which the faction of
these men have robbed them off.

But they directed their General the Earl of Essex to deliver an humble
Petition to Us, wherein they desire nothing from Us, but that We would return
in peace to Our Parliament, and by their faithful Counsel and advice compose
the distempers and confusions abounding in Our Kingdoms, as We are bound to
do. We were never so backward in receiving, or so slow in answering the
Petitions of either or both Our Houses of Parliament, that there was need by an
Army to quicken Us, which either or both Houses of Parliament have in no case
no more shadow of Right or Power to raise by any Law, Custom, or Privilege,
then they have by their votes to take away the lives and fortunes of all the
Subjects of England; yet the Framers of this Declaration take it unkindly that
upon their profession in the sight of Almighty God (which is they say the
strongest assurance that any Christian can give) We did not put Our self into
their hands (those hands which were lifted up against Us, and filled at that
time with Arms to destroy Us) and leave a strength God had supplied Us with,
of good and faithful Subjects, who notwithstanding all their threats and
menaces had brought themselves to Our Assistance. If that Petition had been so
humble as they pretended, they would not have lost the advantage of publishing
it in this their Declaration, that the World might as well have been witness
of our refusal of Peace, as it has been of their disdain of any way to it,
when they rejected Our several earnest offers of a Treaty.

But why did they not send this humble Petition? His Excellence twice sent unto
Us for a safe conduct for those who should be employed therein, and We refused
to give any, or to receive this humble and dutiful Petition. Sure when Our
good Subjects shall understand the strange enmity between these men and truth,
the no-conscience they use in publishing, and informing those by whom they
pretend to be trusted, things monstrous and contrary to their own knowledge,
they will not be less offended with their falsehood to them, then their Treason
to Us. It Is well known We never refused to give admittance to any Message or
Petition from either or both Houses of Parliament, their Messengers have been
received and entertained not only with that safety, but with that candor, as is
due to the best Subjects, when their Errand has been full of Reproach and
Scorn, and the Bringers bold, arrogant, and seditious in their demeanor, and
therefore there needed to have been no more scruple made in the delivery of
this, then the other Petitions which have been brought Us; the truth is We were
no sooner acquainted at Shrewsbury by the Earl of Dorset that he had received
a letter from the Earl of Essex intimating that he had a Petition from both
Houses to be delivered to Us, and to that purpose asking a safe convoy for
those who should be sent, but We returned this Answer, That as We had never
refused to receive any Petition from Our Houses of Parliament, so We should be
ready to give such a reception and Answer to this as should be fit, and that
the bringers of it should come and go with all safety, only We required that
none of those Persons whom We had particularly accused of high Treason should
be, by color of that Petition, employed to Us. After this We heard no more
till a second letter, at least a fort* night after the first, to the Earl of
Dorset, informed Us that Our former Answer was declared to be a breach of
Privilege that We would not allow any Messengers to come to Us, that is, that
We were not content that such Persons who had conspired Our death, might
securely come into Our presence; Our second Answer differed little from Our
former, insisting that the address should not be made by any of those Persons
whom We had particularly accused of high Treason, amongst whom the Earl of
Essex himself was one, but declaring that Our ear should be still open to
hear any Petition from Our two Houses of Parliament: whether this were a
denial from Us to receive their Petition, or whether if Our two Houses of
Parliament had indeed desired to Treat with Us by Petition, they might not as
well have sent it to Us, as they have done since their Instructions to their
Ambassadors into Ireland, and their new Bill for rooting out Episcopacy, and
devising a new form of Church Government, let all the world judge. We have
reason to believe that the Petition then prepared for Us (if We have seen the
true copy of it) was thought by the Persons trusted for the presenting it,
fitter to be delivered after a Battle and full Conquest of Us, then in the head
of Our Army, when it might seem somewhat in Our power whether We would be
deposed or not.

For that continued dishonest Accusation of Our Inclination to the Papists
(which the Authors of it in their own Consciences (which will one day be
dreadful to them) know to be most unjust and groundless,) We can say no more,
and We can do no more to the satisfaction of the world, If they know that the
Romish Priests have encouraged those of that religion to conform themselves to
the Protestant Religion, by coming to Church, receiving the Sacrament, and
taking the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, they are more conversant with the
subtilties of them then We are, but We must confess till We be certain they
have found that way to deceive Us, that is, to delude the Laws which are
against them, We shall in Charity believe their conformity to be real, and not
pretended; but that any Priests or Jesuits imprisoned have been released by Us
out of the Goal of Lancaster, or any other Goal, is as false (to use an
expression of their own) as the Father of Lies could invent, neither are the
Persons named in that Declaration to whom Commissions are supposed to be
granted for places of Command in this War; so much as known to Us, nor have
they any command, or, to Our knowledge, are present in Our Army, and it is
strange that Our Oaths and Protestations before Almighty God, for the
maintenance of the Protestant Religion, should be so slighted in the end of
this Declaration, when in the beginning of it, it is acknowledged to be the
stronggest obligation and assurance that any Christian can give. We desire to
have Our Protestations believed by the evidence of Our Actions.

But they are informed (and that is ground enough for them to lay the basest
imputation upon their Sovereign) that Sir John Henderson, and Colonel Cockram
(men of ill report both for Religion and Honesty) are sent to Hamborough and
Denmark; (We thought We should have heard no more news from Denmark) to raise
foreign forces and to bring them hither: We have before in Our Declarations
(sufficient to satisfy any honest man,) declared Our opinion and resolution
concerning Foreign Force, and We had never greater cause to be confident of
security in Our own Subjects, and therefore cannot believe so vile a scandal
can make any impression in sober men. Let a List of the Nobility and Gentry
about Us, and in Our service be viewed, and will they not be found the most
zealous in the Protestant Religion, the most eminent in Reputation, of the
greatest fortunes, and the greatest fame, the most public Lovers of their
Country, and most earnest assertors of the Liberty of the Subject, that this
Kingdom has, how different the Reputation of the principle Ringleaders of this
faction and Rebellion is, how careful they are of employing virtuous and
honest men, is apparent to all the world, when they have entertained all the
desperate and necessitous Persons (whereof very many are Papists. which We
speak knowingly, as having taken several of them Prisoners) they can draw to
them, and when they supercede a proceeding at the Common Law for an odious and
infamous crime, that M. Criffan may have liberty to keep them company in this
Rebellion.

For Our affection and gracious Inclination to the City of London, and how
far we are from any such purpose, as these impious men charge Us with,
appears in Our late Proclamation, in which We declare the Suburbs to be
comprehended as well as the Cities of London and Westminster, to which We
doubt not they will give that credit and obedience, as We shall have cause to
commend their Loyalty in joining with Us to suppress this Rebellion, which
uncontroled, in a short time, must make that place most miserable.

For the Oath and Covenant which they threaten Us with, if it be to engage them
to do or not to do any thing contrary to the Oaths they have already taken
of Allegiance and Supremacy, as it cannot oblige them being taken, so We doubt
not Our good Subjects will easily discern that it is a snare to betray and
lead them into a condition of the same guilt, and so of the same danger with
themselves; And We must therefore declare whosoever shall hereafter suffer
himself to be cozened by those Stratagems, and take such a voluntary Oath
against Us, We shall impute it to so much malice, as will render him incapable
of Our Pardon, and shall proceed against him as a desperate Promoter of
Sedition, and an Enemy to the Kingdom.

Let all honest men remember the many gracious Acts We have passed this
Parliament for the ease and benefit of Our people, that when there was nothing
left undone or unoffered by Us, which might make this Nation happy, these
mischievous Contrivers of Ruin, instead of acknowledging Our Grace and
Justice, upbraided Us with all the Reproaches malice and cunning could invent
in a Remonstrance to the People (a thing never heard of till that time) that
having thus incensed mutinous and seditious minds, they made use of them to
awe the Parliament, drove Us, and the major part of both Houses from Our City
of London, that they took away Our Fort and Town of Hull from Us, kept Us from
thence by force of Arms, and employed Our own Magazine against Us, that they
seized upon Our Royal Navy, and with it chased Our good Subjects, and kept all
supply from Us, that they voted away Our negative voice, and then raised a
formidable Army to destroy Us, that when they had thus compelled Us, by the
help of such of Our good Subjects who against the fury of these men durst
continue loyal, to raise some power for Our defense, they absolutely and
peremptorily refused to treat with Us for the peace of the Kingdom; and lastly
that on the 23d of October they brought this Army (raised for the defense of
Our Person) into the Field against Us, and used their best skill and means to
destroy Us and Our Children, We say whoever remembers and considers this
progress of theirs, will think of no other Covenant then to join with Us in
the apprehending the Authors of this miserable Civil-Warre, that Posterity may
not with shame and indignation find that a few Schismatic ambitious
persons, were able to bring such a flourishing glorious Kingdom, which has so
long resisted the Envy of Christendom, to a speedy desolation, to satisfy
their own pride and Ambition. And We doubt not Our good Subjects of Scotland,
will never think themselves engaged by the Act of Pacification (to which We
willingly consented) to assist a Rebellion against their own natural King, for
the assistance of Persons accused and notoriously known to be guilty of High
Treason, the bringing of whom to condign punishment, would with Gods blessing,
be a speedy means of happiness and Peace to Our three Kingdoms.

FINIS.

