HIS MAJESTY'S Declaration, IN ANSWER TO A Declaration of the LORDS and COMMONS
assembled in Parliament, for the raising of all Power and Force, as well
Trained Bands as others, in several Counties of this Kingdom, to lead against
all Traitors and their Adherents, etc.

YORK: Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty:
And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. MDCXLII.

A DECLARATION OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
WHereas certain Information is given from several parts of the Kingdom, that
diverse Troops of horse are employed in sundry Counties of the Kingdom, and that
others have commission to raise both horse and foot, to compel his Majesty's
Subjects to submit to the illegal Commission of Array, out of a Traitorous
intent to subvert the Liberty of the Subject, and the Law of the Kingdom, and
for the better strengthening themselves in this wicked attempt, do join with
the Popish and Jesuiticall faction to put the Kingdom into a combustion and
civil War, by leavying forces against the Parliament, and by these forces to
alter the Religion, and the ancient Government, and lawful Liberty of the
Kingdom, and to introduce Popery and Idolatry, together with an Arbitrary form
of Government: And in pursuance thereof, have Traitorously, and Rebelliously
leavyed war against the King, and by force robbed, spoiled and slain diverse of
his Majesty's good Subjects traveling about their lawful and necessary
occasions in the Kings protection according to Law, and namely that for the end
and purpose aforesaid, the Earl of Northampton, the Lord Dunsmore, Lord
VVillowby of Eresby, Son to the Earl of Linsey, Henry Hastings Esquire, and
diverse other unknown Persons in the Counties of Lincoln, Nottingham, Leicester,
Warwick, Oxfordshire, and other places, the Marquess of Hertford, the Lord
Paulet, Lord Seymer, Sir John Stawell, Sir Ralph Hopton, John Digby Esquire,
and other their Accomplices, have gotten together great forces in the County of
Sommerset.

The Lords and Commons in Parliament duly considering the great dangers which
may ensue upon such their wicked and Traiterous designs, and if by this means
the power of the sword should come into the hands of Papists and their
Adherents, nothing can be expected but the miserable ruin and desolation of
the Kingdom, and the bloody massacre of the Protestants: They do Declare and
Ordain, that it is, and shall be lawful, for all His Majesty's loving
Subjects, by force of Arms to resist the said several parties, and their
Accomplices, and all other that shall raise or conduct any other forces for the
ends aforesaid, and that the Earl of Essex Lord General, with all his forces
raised by the authority of Parliament; as likewise the Lord Say, Lieutenant of
Oxfordshire, Earl of Peterborough, Lieutenant of Northamptonshire, Lord
Wharton, Lieutenant of Buckinghamshire, Earl of Stamford, Lieutenant of
Leicestershire, Earl of Pembrook, Lieutenant of Wiltshire and Hampshire, Earl
of Bedford, Lieutenant of Sommersetshire and Devon, Lord Brook, Lieutenant of
Warwickshire, the Lord Cramborne, Lieutenant of Dorsetshire, the Lord
Willoughby of Parham, Lieutenant of Lincolnshire, and all those who are or
shall be appointed by Ordinance of both Houses to perform the place of Deputy
Lieutenants, and their Deputy Lieutenants respectively, Densill Hollis Esquire,
Lieutenant of the City and County of Bristoll, and the Majors and Sheriffs of
the City, and Deputy Lieutenants there, and all other Lieutenants of Counties,
Sheriffs, Majors, Deputy Lieutenants, shall raise all their power and forces of
their several Counties, as well Trained Bands as others, and shall have power
to conduct, and lead the said forces of the said Counties against the said
Traitors and their adherents, and with them to fight, kill and slay all such as
by force shall oppose them, and the Persons of the said Traitors, and their
Adherents and Accomplices to arrest and imprison, and them to bring up to the
Parliament, to answer this their Traiterous and Rebellious attempts according
to Law, and the same or any other forces to transport and conduct from one
County to another, in aid and assistance one of another, and of all others that
shall join with the Lords and Commons in Parliament, for the defense of the
Religion of Almighty God, and of the Liberties and Peace of the Kingdom, and in
pursuit of those wicked and Rebellious Traitors, their Conspirators, Ayders,
and Abettors and Adherents, requiring all Lieutenants of Counties, Sheriffs,
Majors, Justices of Peace, and others His Majesty's Officers and loving
Subjects, to be ayding and assisting to one another in the Execution hereof,
and for their so doing, all the parties above mentioned, and all others that
shall join with them, shall be justified, defended and secured by the Power and
Authority of Parliament.

His Majesty's Declaration, In Answer to a Declaration of the Lords and Commons
assembled in Parliament, for the raising of all Power and Force, as well
Trained Bands as others, in several Counties of this Kingdom, to lead against
all Traitors and their Adherents, etc.
AS much experience as We have had of the inveterate rancour and high Insolence
of the malignant Party against Us, We never yet saw any Expression come from
them so evidently declaring it, as the Declaration, entitled, A Declaration of
the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament for the raising of all Power and
Force, as well Trained Bands, as others in several Counties of this Kingdom,
to lead against all Traitors and their Adherents, etc. In which that Faction
has, as it were distilled and contracted all their Falsehood, Insolence, and
Malice, there being in it not one Period which is not either Slanderous or
Treasonable. And nothing can more grieve Us, then that by their infinite Arts
and Subtilty (employed by their perpetual and indefatigable industry) and by
that Rabble of Brownists and other Schismatics, declaredly ready to appear at
their call, they should have been able so to draw away some, and drive away
others of Our good Subjects from Our Parliament, as to prevail with the major
part remaining of both Houses (how much soever that major part be the smaller
in comparison of the whole) to suffer that name (whose reverence by all means
We desire to preserve) to be so soiled, as to be prefixed to a Paper of this
unsufferable nature, that tends not only to the destruction of Our Person, but
to the dissolution of this Government, and of all Society; If at least this
Declaration (which We rather see cause to hope it has not) have so much as
been seen in the Houses, and be not the single work of the same omnipotent
Committee, to which is devolved the whole power of the Parliament, and which,
as We understand, is trusted (without acquainting the Houses) to break up any
man's House, and take away the Arms and Money intended to defend and feed him
(if they shall see cause to suspect that he meant to assist his Sovereign with
them) and may well be as fully and implicitly tri ted to declare, as to Act
whatsoever they please. And though We doubt not, but to their utmost they will
continue that Injury to Us, and that Violation of the Subjects Liberty, and of
public Right, to vex and Imprison those who shall publish any of Our Answers
to their Declarations (and indeed whilst they affirm against all Truth, and
command against all Law, it concerns them to take care, that nothing be heard
but what they say) yet Our comfort is, that Our Intentions, and the Duty of
Our Subjects are so well and so generally known to Our People, that We cannot
fear (from whom soever it come, and though no Answer came out with it) that,
either what is there said should be believed, or what is there commanded should
be obeyed. Who knows not, that Our Commissions for Horse and Foot were not
granted out, till not only Our Prerogative, but Our Propriety, Our Goods,
Arms, Towns, Milita, and Negative Voice were taken from Us, and all the Kingdom
commanded to be in Arms, and invited to bring in Horse, Plate and Money, to
frame an Army against Our Command and Proclamation, and till Horse were raised
and Mustered accordingly, and then with no intention (nor has any Action in
any of Our Ministers given the least suspicion of such an Intention) by them to
compel Our Subjects to submit to Our Commissions of Array, or make use of them
against the Parliament, but to regain Hull held out in Rebellion against Us,
and to suppress all such as without Our Authority and against Our Commands
should raise Forces in this Our Kingdom, and leavie War against Us, under
pretense of any Order or Ordinance of one or both Houses, and such Traitorous
Assemblies and Marches have been the only lawful and necessary Occasions of
Our good Subjects, which have been so much as interrupted by any Troops of
Ours; And what is affirmed of the spoiling and killing them, as they were so
traveling under Our Protection, and according to Law, is a most malicious
Affirmation, as well without Truth, as without Instance; invented at once to
make Our Troops terrible, and Us odious to Our People.

What care have We taken, that by this means the power of the Sword should not
come into the hands of Papists, who have by Our Proclamation strictly charged,
That no Papist should presume to List himself, either as Officer or Soldier in
this Our Army, having directed how he should be discovered, if he did presume,
and suffer, if he were discovered? What care have We taken to avoid Combustion
and civil War, offering to lay down Our Arms when they should have laid down
theirs; in whom it was Treason to take them up, and restored Us those things
which could not without Treason, as well as Injustice, be forced away and kept
from Us, Our Arms, Ships, Town, etc. And when We might meet both Our Houses in
a safe and secure place to debate freely of all the differences in a
Parliamentary way. And by whose influences these Propositions were received,
and whether the Proposer or Rejecters were most careful to avoid this ruin
and desolation of the Kingdom, We leave all the world to judge; and whether
they who divert the Men and Money collected for the relief of distressed
Ireland, to raise Forces against their Prince (who asks them nothing but what
is legal, nor will deny them any thing that is) do not join with the Popish
and Jesuitical Faction in the bloody massacre of many thousand Protestants in
that miserable Kingdom. We propose likewise to every man's judgment, whether the
declaring those to be Traitors, who execute Our Commission of Array (issued in
so many Kings Reigns, agreed upon by Parliament, and there yielded to by the
King, to be settled as now it is, as a matter of great Grace; and since that
time, which was in 5. Hen. 4. in no Parliament complained of) whilst Our good
Subjects are vexed and imprisoned, not only for resisting, but for humbly
petitioning, so as may seem but to insinuate something against their most
illegal Commands concerning the Militia; (to which power of Commanding no
Title can be made by any Statute, or any President, nor can We ever find by
search, nor obtain to be told what those Fundamental Laws are by which it is
pretended; so deep those Foundations are laid beyond all means of discovery)
And the declaring that those who raise men by virtue of Our Command and
Commission, (the only Legal way) Traitorously and Rebelliously leavy War
against the King; and ordaining it to be Lawful for all Our Subjects by Force
of Arms to resist them, and their Accomplices; and the raising Forces by
Authority of Parliament (that is by the remaining part of both Houses) never in
the most outrageous Times before attempted, and commanding several Persons,
whom they call Lieutenants, to lead, and giving them Power to transport from
one County to another the Forces of several of Our Counties against them; and
to kill and slay all such as by Force shall oppose them, Our Self not excepted;
commanding all Our Officers and Subjects to be assisting to them, and
undertaking to secure them for so doing, by the Power and Authority of
Parliament, (which is first to allow, and next to command, and then to pardon
Treason) be not to have already subverted, as much as in them lies, the Liberty
of the Subject, the Law of the Land, and altered the Ancient Government of the
Kingdom, leaving Our Subjects without all Rule to walk by, when the most clear
Laws cannot direct and secure them, and they see all those ancient Bounds past
over, which were ever as much known to be the duty of both Houses to observe,
as it was evident that there were, and that it was necessary that there should
be Two Houses of Parliament; and at once behold the Law (which is to protect
and defend the Subject) and Us (who are to protect and defend the Law) need
defense and protection. We doubt not therefore but all Our good Subjects will
come in to Our Assistance, and that this wicked Charge of intending to
introduce Popery, Idolatry, and Arbitrary Government, laid by Implication upon
Us (because We defend Our Self, and would recover Our Own) will be so far from
being a Motive against Us, that this intolerable Indignity and damnable
Scandal (so daily and visibly confuted by all Our Professions and Actions)
will increase Our good Subjects zeal toward Us, and their indignation against
the Contrivers: And they will esteem themselves obliged by the Religion of
Almighty God, to oppose this War, so impiously, so treasonably, and so
groundlesly made upon Us, their King, and His Anointed. We therefore require
all Our Commissioners of Array, Sheriffs, and all Our other Officers and
Ministers, to raise all the Power and Forces of their several Counties, to
assist the Marquess of Hertford, the Earl of Northampton, the Lord Willoughby
of Eresby, the Lord Paulet, the Lord Dunsmore, the Lord Seymour, Henry Hastings
Esquire, Sir John Stowell, Sir Ralph Hopton, John Digby Esquire, and all other
in the Legal and necessary execution of Our Commissions of Array, and in the
raising and conducting of such Horse and Foot as shall be raised by Our
Commission, and by Force of Arms to oppose the Earl of Essex, the Lord Say, and
all other that shall raise or conduct any Forces raised by pretense of
Authority of both Houses, and the persons of all such Traitors and their
Adherents and Accomplices to arrest and imprison, to the end they may be
brought to a fair and Legal trial by their Peers, and according to the Law:
And this We require from them, as they tender the defense of Our Person, The
true Religion, The Law of the Land, The Liberty and Property of the Subject,
And the true and just Privileges of Parliament: And for so doing they shall be
defended and secured by Us, and by the Law; with whom, and with which We doubt
not but Our Subjects will sooner choose to live and die, then with the Earl of
Essex and his Adherents.

FINIS.

