From Scotland.

Two coppies of Letters, The one sent from his MAJESTY Aug. 31. to the Lord
Keeper, and by him read unto the Lords in Parliament.

Wherein is contained four Reasons why he subscribed not unto the Commission
sent to him.

The other Sept. 1. from a Gentleman to his friend, concerning the proceedings
of the Parliament in Scotland.

royal English blazon or coat of arms

Printed for Tho. Bates. 1641.

A COPY OF A LETTER OF the Kings, sent from the Parliament in Scotland, to the
Lord Keeper; Showing the Reasons why he did not subscribe the Commission sent
Him by both Houses.
THe first Reason was, for that the Treaty was fully determined between Us and
Scotland.

Secondly, It might cause a new matter of difference, and His longer stay in
Scotland.

Thirdly, That the Scots were totally disbanded, and marched home.

Fourthly, That he had performed his promise to the Parliament in disbanding
his forces, beginning with the horse first, which is not usual.

A Copy of a Letter which came from Scotland, the first of September, 1641. to
a Gentleman in London.
WOrthy Sir: I salute you with the joy which we do receive of the happy going
on of this Parliament; certifying you, that they received the report of the
final concluding of the peace with great joy, and that the General
Thanksgiving will be observed by them on the seventh of September next.

There was great opposition against the Duke of Lenox and Marquis Hamiltons
sitting in Parliament, until they had sworn to the Covenant.

All their Army is come home, and disbanded, save only five thousand four
hundred foot, and 500. horse, which remain in a body, and it is expected every
day they shall be disbanded.

Mountresse his business, it is conceived, will be well composed, if he submit
unto the Parliament, as it is expected. He petitioned the House with great
submission, whereupon he was sent for, but his answers were so obscure in the
main part, that it gave little satisfaction; wherefore he was again sent to the
Castle.

Sir John Hey, and Sir Robert Spotwood, seemed to recant from their former
confidence, yiedling themselves up to the Parliament for their trial.

Traquires Charge is drawn up, it containing five and twenty sheets of Paper
close writ.

The King was feasted on Tuesday last, the 31. of August, by the Provost of
Edinborough, in the Parliament House, with great triumph.

Master Hinderson is in great favor with the King, and stands next to his
Chair in Sermon time.

His Majesty does hear two Sermons every Sunday, beside week-dayes Lectures;
but there is no service at all read, but only a Psalm before Sermon.

The King hasteneth his preparation for England, which is expected will be very
suddenly.

From Edinborough Sept. 1. 1641. Your friend R. C.


