His Majesty's Message to both Houses of Parliament. Die Lunae 14. Febr. 1641.
THough His Majesty is assured, that His having so suddenly passed these two
Bills, being of so great importance, and so earnestly desired by both Houses,
will serve to assure His Parliament, that He desires nothing more then the
satisfaction of His Kingdom; yet that He may further manifest to both Houses,
how impatient He is till He find out a full remedy to compose the present
Distempers, He is pleased to signify:

That His Majesty will by Proclamation require, That all Statutes made
concerning Recusants, be with all Care, Diligence, and Severity put in
execution.

That His Majesty is resolved, That the seven Condemned Priests shall be
immediately Banished (if His Parliament shall consent thereunto:) And His
Majesty will give present Order (if it shall be held fit by both Houses) that
a Proclamation issue, to require all Romish Priests within twenty days to
depart the Kingdom; and if any shall be Apprehended after that time, His
Majesty assures both Houses, in the Word of a King, That He will grant no
pardon to any such, without consent of His Parliament.

And because His Majesty observes great and different Troubles to arise in the
hearts of His People, concerning the Government and Liturgy of the Church, His
Majesty is willing to declare, That He will refer that whole Consideration to
the Wisdom of His Parliament, which He desires them to enter into speedily,
that the present Distraction about the same may be composed: But desires not to
be pressed to any single Act on His part, till the whole be so digested and
settled by both Houses, that His Majesty may clearly see what is fit to be
left, as well as what is sit to be taken away.

For Ireland (in behalf of which His Majesty's heart bleeds) as His Majesty
has concurred with all Propositions made for that Service by His Parliament,
so He is resolved to leave nothing undone for their Relief, which shall fall
within His possible Power, nor will refuse to venture His own Person in that
War, if His Parliament shall think it convenient for the reduction of that
miserable Kingdom.

And lastly, His Majesty taking notice by several Petitions of the great and
general decay of Trade in this Kingdom, and more particularly of that of
Clothing, and new Draperies (concerning which He received lately at Greenwich a
modest, but earnest Petition from the Clothiers of Suffolk) of which decay of
Trade, His Majesty has a very deep sense, both in respect of the extreme want
and poverty it has brought, and must bring upon many thousands of His loving
Subjects, and of the influence it must have in a very short time upon the very
subsistence of this Nation, Does earnestly recommend the consideraton of that
great and weighty Business to both Houses; Promising them, that He will most
readily concur in any Resolution their Wisdoms shall find out, which may
conduce to so necessary a Work.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of John Bill.


