THE KINGS MAJESTY'S LETTER, Sent to the House of Commons, and there Read.

With A WORTHY SPEECH SPOKEN by Sir WILLIAM WROTH, concerning the Parliaments
complying with His Majesty's Propositions contained therein.

Desiring that it may be taken into present Consideration, and an Answer
returned to His Majesty, concerning the same.

Printed at London for John Wright, and are to be sold in the Old Bailey. 1643.

THE HEADS OF THE PROPOSITIONS IN HIS MAJESTY'S LETTER.
I. He upholding and maintaining of his Majesty's just and Regal Authority.
II. The settling of his Revenue. III. The establishing of the Liberties of the
Subject, in the free and quiet enjoying of their Estates and Fortunes. IIII.
The Liberties of their Persons. V. The Security of true Religion, now
professed in the Church of England. VI. The settling of Ceremonies in such a
manner, as may take away all just offense.
A WORTHY SPEECH Spoken by Sir WILLIAM WROTH unto the House of Commons,
Concerning His Majesty's Letter.
THis Letter, or Declaration now read from His sacred Majesty, expressing His
Princely care, and tender affection toward the Parliament, and all His
Maisties loyal and dutiful Subjects, is now to be taken into Our
Consideration: And I verily believe there is none here present, but has as
tender care and dutiful affection toward His Royal Majesty, and the
preservation of His Honor and Dignity, the Laws and Religion established in
His Majesty's Dominions, Parliaments, and their just rights and Privileges, as
any subjects to any Prince in the whole Christian world.

No man, M. Speaker, I think doubted, or had the least thought of jealousy
(that are true Protestants and Loyal Subjects) of His Majesty's sincerity, and
integrity toward His Liege People: For we have sensibly felt, and understood
His Clear Intentions, and Gracious meaning to us all; not only these His
Princely expressions in this His Gracious Letter, and Declaration, but also by
former Speeches, Proclamations, and Protestations, both Public, and Private;
His willing and cheerful granting us from time to time, our just desires, and
Requests, and His cheerful passing of many wholesome Acts and Laws for the
good of this Kingdom, and the redressing of many grievances and oppressions,
which His good Subjects did suffer, by groaning under the burden of them; and
His willing Complying with His Parliament, for the appeasing of the great
Differences that was between this Kingdom, and Scotland, and (we hope) the
settling of Peace, and amity amongst our selves (which God grant.) These have
been sufficient testimonies of His Princely and tender Care over His People,
and enough to endeare our hearts and affections to His Royal Majesty, and His
Posterity forever.

M. Speaker,

These Propositions recommended by His Majesty to the Consideration of the
House consists of these Heads.

The upholding and maintaining of His Majesty's just and Regal Authority, and
settling of His Revenue, and the establishing of the Liberties of the Subject,
in the free and quiet enjoying of their estates and fortunes, the Liberties of
their persons, the security of true Religion, now professed in the Church of
England, and the settling of Ceremonies in such a manner, as may take away all
just offense.

1 For the first of these, it has been our Principal Care, and endeavors
hitherto, as far as the present distempers and distractions in the State
would give us leave, to maintain the just Prerogative, and Regal Power of His
Majesty, and to settle His Revenue. But being necessitated to consult, and
consider of the great and weighty Affairs of this State, being so perplexed,
and distracted through the malice and pernicious endeavors of wicked and
disaffected persons, to the Peace and Tranquillity both of His Majesty, and
His Kingdoms, thereby forced to lay aside the Determinations of His Majesty's
Demand, till His Majesty's Kingdoms be secured, and preserved from fatal
destruction, which by the malignant Adversaries thereof, daily sought and
practiced: but not leaving the same, either as negligent, or forgetful of His
Majesty's just Demands, or in any undutifulnesse, but that in due time, upon
the first opportunity to take the same again into Consideration, and proceed
therein to the final conclusion thereof; desiring this House that His Majesty
may be informed of our real intentions therein.

Secondly, for the other Proposition by his Majesty, we cannot but in
dutiful obedience return our thankfulness to his Majesty in the Name of the
whole Parliament, for his Princely Care of our Liberties and Privileges, and
Pious Resolution to establish our Religion in its Truth and Purity, and his
indifferency in the use and exercise of Ceremonies; concerning which, we have
received many Petitions from diverse Counties and parts of this Kingdom, signed
with many thousand Hands, for the utter abolishment of the same: showing
likewise the inconvenience in the use and exercise of the same, the great
Damage and many Evils that have succeeded upon the Toleration thereof
hitherto; which, with the continuance of the use thereof, is also like to
continue the Evils, and daily increase more and more d^ngerous: upon which, it
has been thought fit by this Honourable*House to extinguish and abolish the
same, from being joined with the worship of God in the Exercise of Religion by
the general Vote of the House; and diverse Orders have issued through the
Kingdom, for leaving off and laying by the further use thereof. These things
being thus far proceeded in by joint consent o^ Parliaments, I humbly desire,
His Majesty may be moved by Petition of both Houses, for his Royal assent
thereunto.

Thirdly, as for the settling of Religion, and goo^ Discipline in the Church,
we have been much opposed and interrupted in our proceedings therein, (when
we had the same in Consultation, and in Consideration) by the Prelaticall
Faction in the Lords House, it having been a great part of our Business, to
remove such Impediments as have hindered our Proceedings, not only in that,
but other the great Affairs of State, and to appease the present Distractions
and Distempers in this Kingdom; To supply with aid and assistance all our
afflicted Brethren in Ireland, and to preserve and secure our own persons from
the malice and wicked Designs of our malicious and Malignant Adversaries,
Enemies to our Peace and Safety, and Enemies to the Prosperity and
Tranquillity of his Majesty, and his good subjects. Which Lets and
Hindrances, which have caused these Stops, in our Proceedings in the settling
of Religion, I likewise desire may be represented to his Majesty.

And thus much concerning his Majesty's Propositions; which I desire may be
taken into present Consideration, and Answer returned to his Majesty
concerning the same.

FINIS.

