HIS MAJESTY'S MESSAGE Sent the twentieth of May, MDCXL III.
CHARLES R.

SInce His Majesty's Message of the twelfth of April, (in which He conceived He
had made such an overture for the immediate disbanding of all Armies, and
composure of these miserable and present Distractions by a full and free
convention of Parliament, that a perfect and settled Peace would have ensued:)
Has in all this time, above a full Month, procured no answer from both Houses;
His Majesty might well believe Himself absolved both before God and man, from
the least possible charge of not having used His uttermost endeavors for
Peace. Yet when He considers that the sense of all this Calamity is in the
bowels of His own Kingdom, that all the blood which is spilt of his own
subjects, and that what victory soever (it shall please God to give him) must
be over those, who ought not to have lifted up their hands against him, when
he considers that these desperate civil dissentions may encourage and invite a
foreign Enemy, to make a prey of the whole Nation: That Ireland is in present
danger to be totally lost: That the heavy judgments of God, plague,
pestilence, and famine, will be the inevi^able attendants of this unnatural
contention: And that in a short time, there will be so general a habit of
uncharitableness and cruelty contracted through the whole Kingdom, That even
Peace it self will not restore his people to their old temper and security;
His Majesty cannot but again call for an Answer to that His Gracious Message,
which gives so fair a rise to end these unnatural distractions: And His
Majesty does this with the more earnestness, because he doubts not the
condition of His Armies in several parts, the strength of Horse, Foot,
Artillery, His plenty of Ammunition, (when some men lately might conceive He
wanted) is so well known and understood, that it must be confessed, nothing but
the tenderness and love to His People, and those Christian impressions, which
always live, and He hopes always shall dwell in His heart, could move Him
once more to haza^d a refusal: And He requires them as they will answer to
God, to Himself, and all the World, that they will no longer suffer their
fellow Subjects to welter in each others blood, that they would remember by
whose authority and to what end they met in the Council; and send such an
Answer to His Majesty, as may open a door to let in a firm peace and security
to the whole Kingdom. If His Majesty shall again be disappointed of His
intentions therein, the blood, rapine, and destruction, which may follow in
England and Ireland, will be cast upon the account of those, who are deaf to
the motive of Peace and Accommodation.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the Vniversty, 1643.


