C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A Proclamation against the Spoiling and losing of Arms by the Soldiers of His
MAJESTY'S Army, for the keeping of them fixed, and bringing all Arms hereafter
into His MAJESTY'S Magazines.
WHereas We have not received that satisfaction We expected (notwithstanding
Our many Proclamations and Orders made for the Government of Our Army, and
particularly against the losing, seiling away, and spoiling of Our Arms by the
Common-Souldiers, and for the keeping them fixed) But on the contrary, finding
those abuses and neglects still to continue and increase; We are therefore once
more enforced, and do hereby straightly Require and Command all Colonells,
Lieutenant-Colonells, Serjeant-Majors, Captians, and other Officers of Our
Army, whom it may concern, forthwith, or within four days after the
publication hereof, to return to Us, Our Council of War, or to the
Serjeant-Major-Generall of Our Army, a true account of the number and quantity
of Arms in each Company and Regiment of Our Army, attested by the Colonel,
Lieutenant-Colonell, Serjeant-Major, or Captain of each Company; and if any
Arms shall henceforward be found unfixt by the negligence of the Soldier, the
Reparation thereof shall be made good out of his or their Entertainments; and
this course We will constantly to be continued and put in practice, the care
and oversight whereof to be committed to the respective Quartermaster of each
Regiment (or some other fit person appointed by the Colonel) whom We command,
once in fourteen days, to take a view of all the Arms of the Regiment, and to
see Our Commands therein fully obeyed: And for the more speedy execution
thereof, Our will is, That each Colonel make choice of two able Gun-smiths to
be employed therein, on whom We intend to settle an Allowance fitting for the
same. And to the end the loss of Arms may not be so frequent (to the prejudice
of Our Service) as formerly, Our further pleasure is, That each Captain, upon
the return of the Certificate of the number and quantity of the Arms of his
Company, stand charged to Us by Indenture (in the Office of Our Ordinace) for
such numbers certified; which Arms are to be made good out of His
Entertainment, if hereafter they shall be wilfully or negligently made away by
His Soldiers. Lastly, Our Will and Command is, That all Arms bought, or
provided by Us, or by any Person for Our Service, as likewise all Arms borrowed
in any Counties hereafter, or taken from the Rebels, or Persons disaffected to
Our Service, be first brought into Our Magazines, and from thence, as we shall
direct, be distributed, and given out for Our Service. To Our Pleasure herein
declared, We require full and speedy Obedience to be given by all Officers and
Soldiers of Our Army: And that it may be the more fully put in execution, Our
further Pleasure and Command is, That this be read within four days after the
publication, at the head of every Regiment and Company, that so all Our
Officers and Soldiers, whom it may concern, may take notice of it, and observe
the same, as they and every of them will avoid Our high Displeasure for their
neglect of any the least particular herein mentioned.

Given at Our Court at Oxford, this Tenth day of March, in the Eighteenth year
of Our Reign. 1642.

