HIS MAJESTY'S Proclamation, CONCERNING The Book of Common Prayer, AND The
DIRECTORY for public Worship. (Given at Oxford, November. 13. 1645.) With some
Observations thereupon.

royal coat of arms C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE



OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University: and
Reprinted at London, by R. Austin. 1645.

By the King.
WHereas by a printed Paper, dated the third of January last past, entitled,
An Ordinance of Parliament for taking away the Book of Common Prayer, and for
establishing and putting in execution of the Directory for the public Worship
of God, it is said to be ordained, amongst other things, That the Book of
Common Prayer should not remain, nor be from thence used in any Church, or
Chapel, or place of public Worship, within the Kingdom of England, and
Dominion of Wales; and that the Directory for public Worship in that Paper set
forth, should be from thenceforth used, pursued, and observed in all Exercises
of public Worship of God in every Congregation, Church, Chapel, and place of
public Worship. And by another printed Paper, dated the 23. day of August last
past, entitled. An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament,
for the more effectual putting in execution the Directory for public Worship,
etc. particular Directions are set down for the dispersing, publishing, and
use of the said Directory in all Parishes, Chappells, and Donatives; for the
calling in and suppressing of all Books of Common Prayer, on the several
forfeitures and penalties to be leavied and imposed upon conviction, before
Justices of Assize, or of Oyer and Terminer, and of the Peace, as by the said
two printed Papers may appear. And taking into our consideration, that the
Common Prayer, which is endeavored thus to be abolished, was compiled in the
times of Reformation, by the most learned and pious men of that age, and
defended and continued with the Martyrdom of many, and was first established
by Act of Parliament in the time of King Edward the sixth, and never repealed
nor laid aside, save only in that short time of Queen Mary's Reign, and upon
the return of Popery and superstition: And in the first year of Queen
Elizabeth, it was again revived and established by Act of Parliament, and the
repeal of it then declared by the whole Parliament, to have been to the great
decay of the due honor of God, and discomfort of the Professors of the truth
of Christian Religion, and ever since it has been used and observed for above
fourscore years together in the best times of peace and plenty that ever this
Kingdom enjoyed, and that it contains in it an excellent form of worship and
service of God, grounded upon the holy Scriptures, is a singular means and
help to devotion in all Congregations, and that, or some other of the like
form simply necessary in those many Congregations which cannot otherwise be
supplied by learned and able men, and keeps a uniformitie in the Church of
England. And that the Directorie, which is sought to be introduced, is a m^ans
to open the way, and to give the liberite to all ignorant, factious, and evil
men, to broach their own fancies and conceits, be they never so wicked or
erroneous, and to mislead people into sin and Rebellion, and to utter those
things, even in that which they make for long prayer in their Congregations in
Gods presence, which no conscientious man can assent, or say Amen to: And be
the Minister never so pious and religious, yet it will break that uniformitie
which hitherto has been held in Gods service, and be a means to raise
factions and divisions in the Church, and those many Congregations in this
Kingdom, where able and religious Ministers cannot be maintained, must be left
destitute of all help and means for the public worship and service of God.
And observing likewise, that no reason is given for this Inconveniencie
alleged in the general, and whether pride and avarice be not the ground,
whether Rebellion and destruction of Monarchy be not the intention of some, and
Sacrilege and the Churches possessions the aims and hopes of others, and
these new Directories the means to prepare and draw the people in for all, We
leave to him who searches and knows the hearts of men. And taking into Our
consideration, that this alteration is introduced by color of Ordinance of
Parliament, made without and against Our consent, and against an express Act
of Parliament still in force, and the same Ordinances of Parliament made as
perpetual binding Laws, inflicting penalties and punishments, which were
never (before these times) so much as pretended to have been the use or power
of Ordinances of Parliament, without any express Act of Parliament, to which
We are to be parties. Now lest Our silence should be interpreted by some as
connivence or indifferency in Us, in a matter so highly concerning the worship
and service of God, the peace and unity of the Church and State, and the
established Laws of the Kingdom, We have therefore thought fit to publish Our
Proclamation, and do hereby require and command all and singular Ministers in
all Cathedral and Parish Churches, and other places of public worship, within
our Kingdom of England, or Dominion of Wales, and all other to whom it shall
appertain, That the said Book of Common Prayer be kept and used in all
Churches, Chapels, and places of public worship, according to the said
Statute made in that behalf, in the said first year of the late Queen
Elizabeth, and that the said Directorie be in no sort admitted, received, or
used, the same pretended Ordinances, or any thing in them contained to the
contrary notwithstanding. And We do hereby let them know, that whenever it
shall please God to restore Us to peace, the Laws to their due course, wherein
we doubt not of his assistance in his good time, We shall require a strict
account and prosecution against the Breakers of the said Law, according to the
scope thereof: And in the mean time, in such places where We shall come and
find the Book of Common Prayer suppressed and laid aside, and the Directorie
introduced, We shall account all those that shall be Aiders, Actors, or
Contrivers therein, to be persons disaffected to the Religion and Laws
established, and this they must expect, besides the great loss they shall
sustain, by suffering themselves to be deprived of the use and comfort of the
said Book.

Given at our Court at Oxford the thirteenth day of November; in the one and
twentieth year of Our Reign.

Observations.
Our present breaches call out to every honest Christian to become a
continual Centinell, watching against the incessant assaults of such, whose
endeavors have been, and still are, to bring utter ruin upon this Kingdom:
His Majesty's private Councillors, although they have been for some space, by
reason of the several victories obtained, (through the blessing of the
Almighty) by the Parliaments Forces over the Kings Army, yet after a long
progress being returned to Oxford (the old Forge of their invectives against
the Parliament) it seems they thought good to try one stratagem more to work
upon the people, by publishing the abovementioned Proclamation, pretending it
in his Majesty's name, upon which I thought fit to publish the following
Observations, lest many too-credulous people might be ensnared by the specious
and flourishing pretenses the^eof (especially upon the underhand divulging of
it (by many of the Malignants in London, and other places) the scope of it is
against the Directorie, as it is established by two Ordinances of Parliament,
and therein would persuade the people again to set up the Book of Common
Prayer, which they know was much idolized in England.

The first Argument used to infuse this into the peoples heads (for I shall
briefly examine the particulars of the Proclamation as they lie) is, That it
was compiled in the times of Reformation, etc.

1 Obs. The first Reformers of Religion doubtless did never intend the use of
the Book of Common Prayer further than to be an help in the want or weakness
of a Ministers gifts, but that Ministers and people should be still strictly
tied to the use thereof is sinful and unlawful, for the ability to offer up
the peoples wants in prayer is part of the Ministeriali Office as well as
preaching, 1 Cor. 12. 10. This he cannot do by reading in a Book devised by
another; besides, the shadows of darkness now flying away, and the truth more
fully and gloriously appearing, it is now as shameful to use, as it were again
to revive the Book of Homilies.

Procl. And defended and continued with the martyrdom of many.

2 Obs. Though many holy and zealous Martyrs then died for the Protestant
Religion, yet it can never be proved that any suffered particularly in
maintenance of the Common Prayer, since all know it is (for a great part) but
the Mass in English.

Procl. It was first established by Act of Parliament in the time of King
Edward the sixth, etc.

3 Obs. Besides, the palpable difference between the Common Prayer in Edward
the sixth his time, and that afterward set forth, yet (as is expressed Obs.
1.) Though the Liturgy, with the ceremonies belonging to it, were then
(tollerabiles ineptiae) now it is time to leave off those and other things,
which we had formerly by tradition from the Papists.

Procl. It has been used and observed for above eighty years together, etc.

4 Obs. The long use of any thing does not make it lawful, they might then
have pleaded a far longer prescription of time for the continuance of Papacy,
and then when should we have had a Reformation? The like may be said for
outward peace and plenty, which abounded as much in times of Popery as ever.

Procl. It is grounded upon holy Scriptures, etc.

5 Obs. It contains in it many false and corrupt translations of holy
Scripture, with additions to it, or leavings out, and abstractions from it.
Take only one instance for many, Psalm 105. 28. the Service Book has, They
were not obedient to his Word; In the Text thus: They were not disobedient.

Procl. The Directory which is sought to be introduced is a means to open the
way, etc. to all ignorant Factions and evil men to broach their own fancies.

6 Obs. Common experience (blessed be God) now manifests the contrary to all
the world, England having at this present in the places within the power of the
Parliament, more learned, pious, and able Ministers then ever; They having now
the opportunity to exercise and increase their gifts in prayer and preaching,
whereas formerly the Common Prayer was a means to nuzzle up a non-preaching
and ignorant Ministry, were his Majesty persuaded but to come up to London,
he would perceive a great difference between the Ministers here, and those
Episcopal Sycophants, which are now in such favor with him. And for able and
religious Ministers the great care of the Parliament is to store all the dark
places of this Kingdom with them.

Procl. It will break the uniformity, which hitherto has been held, etc.

7 Obs. What greater stumbling block was there in all times both in the times
of Queen Elizabeth, and King James, and the beginning of his now Majesty's
Reign, to make non-Conformists, then the general imposing of the
Common Prayer to be every where publicly read.

Procl. Inconveniencie alleged in the general.

8 Obs. The words used in the Ordinance are manifold inconveniences, which in
regard of the numerousnesse of them were too many for to be particularized,
both the manner of it as well as the matter, was offensive to tender
consciences, which his Majesty in some Declarations expres^es his desire so
much to keep from offense; it brought the Land generally to Atheism, gross
superstition, profaneness, ignorance of God and his ways; the people in many
places where they had it most frequent, were so superstitious and ignorant,
that they learned not all the days of their life to open their souls before
the Lord in prayer.

9 Obs. For those charges of Rebellion, Sacrilege, the destruction of
Monarchy, etc. The establishing of the Directorie doubtless will occasion none
of these, we have had some experience of it at present, and King James himself
who defended Monarchy in several Treatises, thought it no diminution for him
and the former Kings that ruled there to maintain the government of the Church
of Scotland (who use a Directorie) and what commotions and differences happened
lately in that Kingdom by the imposing the Common Prayer on them is fresh in
memory, nor was the continuance of it without much disturbance here; And for
the Churches possessions which were formerly devoured by a company of lazy
Prelates, deboyst Priests, idle singing Boys, Chanters, etc. they are now by
the vigilance of the Parliament disposed of for the maintaining of a pious,
learned, and preaching Ministry, and for the setting up of Lectures, more for
the edification of the people then all the popish trumperies whatsoever.

Procl. This alteration is introduced by color of Ordinance of Parliament, etc.

10 Obs. The Parliament have a power (upon the Kings withdrawing himself from
them) to order and ordain all such matters as shall be for the safety of the
Realm, it was so by a known Law, and so wisely established in Edward the first
days, the right of the people to be summoned, ad tractandum ordinandum
faciendum approbandum in all things appertaining to the people, and this as
then was not prejudicial to the King, why should the Kings Proclamation now
abreviate or annull the same? In inferior Courts the Judges are so
Councillors for the King as that the King may not countermand their judgments.

Procl. Never before these times so much as pretended to have been the use or
power of Parliament, etc.

Obs. There are diverse presidents upon Record of greater things that have been
done by former Parliaments then ever yet have been by this, such as these: Anno
7. and 8. H. 4. Numb. 31. Councillors appointed by authority of Parliament,
An. 1. H. 6. Numb. 15. The Protector and Defensor Regni, appointed by
Parliament, Numb. 16. Privy Councillors; in E. 3. time, the whole Navy
disposed of by Parliament, in other times the Militia, Castles, and Forts,
disposed of by Parliament.

For a conclusion I will make that apology which Plutarch observes in the life
of Brutus, That though Pompey had been the cause of his fathers death, yet he
judging Pompey's cause to be better than Caesar's, adheres to Pompey's party,
preferring the public good before his private ends. So although the King be
dear unto me, yet the public good is enore dear. Amicus Plato, amicus
Aristoteles, sed magis amica veritas.

FINIS.

