C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A Proclamation declaring His Majesty's express Command, That no Popish
Recusant, nor any other, who shall refuse to take the two Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy, shall serve Him in His Army: And that the Soldiery commit no
rapines upon the People, but be fitly provided of necessaries for their money.
WHereas We have heretofore, by Our Proclamation, straightly charged and
commanded, That the Laws should be put in due execution against Popish
Recusants, and We have, and shall have it still in Our care, to suppress and
prevent the growth of Popery, and to use all good means that may tend
thereunto, and not to countenance Papists, by any employment or trust, by or
for Us. And whereas there are now at and near London great Forces levied, and
in levying, and Moneys raising, by way of contribution, and otherwise, toward
the charge of raising, and maintaining an Army, or Forces, under pretense of
the Order of Our two Houses of Parliament, not only without Our consent, but
contrary to Our several express Commands, published by several
Proclamations, Letters, and otherwise. And the same Forces are actually in so
much forwardness, as that t^ere are diverse Horsemen daily Exercised, and
Trained in places about London, and great numbers of Foot in raising; and a
General, and other principal Officers are nominated and declared, and they
have accepted and taken upon them those places, and have already done several
Acts of Hostility against Us, which clearly appear to be a levying of War
against Us; We have found it necessary, to raise and levy Forces, for the
defense of the true Protestant Religion, Our Person, the two Houses of
Parliament. And now, lest any Popish Recusants should presume to offer to serve
Us herein, or procure themselves to be listed, as Officers, or Soldiers in Our
Army, without Our knowledge, and to the end that Our intention herein may be
clearly known, That whereas one principal aim of raising these Forces, is, for
the defense and maintenance of the true Protestant Religion, We may not be
served with Papists, as falsely and slanderously has been objected against Us,
We do hereby declare Our express Will and Pleasure to be, and We do hereby
straightly Command, That no Person or Persons soever being Popish Recusant,
shall presume to come to Our Court, contrary to the Law in such Case provided,
nor any Popish Recusant, or Papist take any Office, or Place, or List himself
as a Soldier in this Service.

And to the end there may be as full discovery as can be made of such as shall,
contrary to this Our Proclamation, be (...) listed into such Our service, We do
straightly command and charge all Officers and Soldiers, who shall be entered
or listed for this Our service, That upon the first Muster-day after they shall
be so listed, they take the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, both which We
shall take care shall be tendered unto them according to the Law, thorowout Our
Army. And if any shall continue his name in those Lists, and yet shall refuse
the said Oaths, We shall not only cashiere them, but also otherwise proceed
against them, according to the Law.

And as We shall be careful that all Our Officers and Soldiers shall be duly
paid, that there be no occasion or pretense of necessity amongst them to burden
any of Our Subjects, So we do hereby straightly charge and command, That none
of the said Officers, or Soldiers presume to take any thing from any of Our
good Subjects, without due payment for the same, nor commit any unlawful
Violence or Outrage. And to all these Our Commands We expect a strict Obedience
of all Our Subjects whom it may concern, as they will answer the contrary at
their uttermost peril. And being thus careful that by this Our necessary
service, Our Subjects should not in any degree suffer or be wronged, so We do
expect and require, That all Our Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Majors,
Bayliffes, and all other Our Officers and Subjects, should use their best
endeavors as there shall be occasion for the assistance and convenient
supplies of Our said Officers, and Soldiers, with such things as shall be
necessary and fit for them, at reasonable Rates and Prices.

Given at Our Court at York the tenth day of August, in the eighteenth year of
our Reign. 1642. August 15th
Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most (...)


