BY THE KING.
A Proclamation for taking of Prizes at Sea in the Time of this Rebellion.
WHEREAS in the time of this Rebellion diverse of Our own Subjects do Trade
with their Goods and Merchandises by Sea in ships or Vessels of their own or
belonging to others, to and from Our Port of London, and to and from diverse
other Our Cities, Towns and Ports, which are not in Our Possession, or in
obedience to Us, but are possessed by the Rebels in Arms against Us, and under
their power, And great store of Ammunition, Victuals, and other necessary
provisions for War, is and has been carried or conveyed, in Ships and
Vessels belonging to strangers and Foreigners to diverse of Our Cities, Towns
or Ports, which are in Rebellion against Us, or under the power of the Rebels,
or abetting or assisting to this Rebellion, whereby the Rebels have been much
strengthened, and We and Our good Subjects much prejudiced: And whereas in
these times of Distraction within Our Kingdom of England, diverse of Our
Subjects of Scotland have traitorously and perfidiously risen up in Rebellion,
and taken up Arms against Us, and have in a hostile manner invaded Our
Kingdom of England, and diverse ships as well Scottish as others are employed
in carrying or conveying unto them, Arms, Ammunition, Victuals, and other
provisions for their aid and assistance. We do thereupon by this Our
Proclamation, Ordain, Declare, and Publish, That it shall and may be lawful
to and for Our Vice-Admiralls and their Deputies, and for the Captains of any
of Our Castles, and Forts, and for the Officers of any of Our Ports and
Harbors, and for all or any of the Captains, Commanders, and others of or in
any other ships or Vessels set forth by any of Our Subjects at their and their
Partners own Charges, by virtue of Our Commission or Commissions, to take,
seize, or surprise, and in case of resistance by force to compel and subdue
all ships, and Vessels, belonging to any of Our Subjects whatsoever, either of
England, or Scotland, with their Tackle, Furniture, Goods, and Lading, which
shall Trade, or Traffic to or from any of Our Cities, Towns, Ports, or
places, within either of Our Kingdoms of England, or Scotland, which are not
in Our Possession or under Our obedience: And likewise the ships, and Vessels,
of or belonging to any Person or Persons whatsoever, with the Furniture, Goods
and Lading, of the same which shall carry or convey any Arms, Ammunition,
Victuals or other necessaries, or provisions for War, other then such as
shall be for their own ordinary and reasonable use and service to any such of
Our Cities, Towns, Ports, or places, which are not in Our Possession and
obedience, or to or for the aid, reliese, or assistance, of any other of Our
Subjects, either of England, or Scotland, in Arms or Rebellion against Us. And
Our Will and Pleasure is, That the Ships, Vessels, Furniture, Goods and
Lading, which shall be so taken, seized, surprised, or subdued, by Our said
Vice-Admiralls, Captains of Our Castles and Forts, or by any Officer of Our
Ports, or Harbors, or by any Captains, Commanders, or others of or in any of
Our own ships, or Vessels, which are in Our Possession, or set forth by Our
Warrant or Order, or of, or in any other ships or Vessels which are in Our
Service, and set forth at Our Charges; shall (after Adjudication) be accounted
for, and disposed of for Our use and service, as We shall direct and appoint;
Out of the Goods and Lading of which ships so taken, We shall allow-or-cause to
be allowed, such share and proportion, for the reward of the Captains,
Commanders, Officers, and Mariners, which shall be employed in the service, as
shall be just and honorable. And that the ships, Vessels, Furniture, Goods
and Lading, which shall be taken, seized, surprised, or subdued as aforesaid,
by any Captains, Commanders, or others, of or in any ships or Vessels set
forth by any of Our Subjects, at their and their Partners own Charges, by
virtue of Our Commission, or Commissions, shall and may after Adjudication be
made lawful prize to and for the proper use and benefit of those by whom the
same shall be taken, surprised, or subdued, and of their Partners to be shared
and divided among them according to such Rates, and proportions, as are, or
shall be agreed between them, saving the Tenths, Customs, and other duties to
Us usually answered in like cases, and as are reserved, or agreed, to be paid
and answered by, or according to the tenor of Our Commission or Letters of
Marque, in that behalf granted.

Given at Our Court at Oxford, the nineth day of May, in the Twentieth year of
Our Reign.
GOD SAVE THE KING.

