HIS MAJESTY'S PROCLAMATION, against a Traitorous BAND contrived in the North.
CHARLES, By the grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith.
To our Lovits (...) Our Lion King at Arms, and his brethren Heralds and
Pursevants our Sheriffs in that part, greeting.
Whereas the Committee of Estates of our Kingdom of Scotland, being most
careful, according to the trust committed to them, To use all means for
advancing the Cause of God, settling the public Peace, and for preventing the
practices of such as would in any wise hinder or oppose the same. And seeing a
Paper emitted under the Title of An humble Remonstrance, yet being in effect, A
Band against God and his Covenant, Us and our authority, and this our native
Kingdom and its Peace and Happiness, tho covered with the specious pretenses
of Piety and public Liberty, Have found themselves obliged in duty to take
notice thereof, And to undeceive our good Subjects by unfolding the wickedness
and treachery of the same, which evidently appears, The persons who have
special hand therein being formerly under the like guiltiness of Banding,
contrary to the National Covenant which themselves had sworn; And having since
by several Bands and Oaths to be seen under their hand writings joined
themselves to the Rebellion of that Excommunicate Traitor James Grahame and
his Irish associates, with whom they have corresponded this time past, Have now
(as it seems) by his advice entered into this Band (the natural issue of those
consultations and meetings they have kept together of late) without the
knowledge of the public Judicatories of our Kingdom, contrary to the Law of
the Land, and Acts of Parliament expressly made in that behalf: And that they
may the more easily inveigle the simpler fort, they have usurped to themselves
the flourishing Titles of Lovers of Religion, Our Royal authority, and Our
Kingdoms Peace; their Paper notwithstanding clearly evidencing their intentions
to be contrary to all these, By their changing and omitting several essential
Articles in the Covenant, which are at length discovered by the Commissioners
of the Kirk in their Declaration; By their slighting and contemning the ways
proposed by both our Kingdoms, in sending Propositions to us, for attaining a
safe and well-grounded Peace: And presumptuously taking upon themselves to
prescribe other ways, and to be Arbitrators of the present differences betwixt
us and our people: By their traducing the public proceedings of that our
Kingdom, in their seeming regrait of the silence of the civil Judicatories,
which by the Plague of Pestilence and present Rebellion (fomented by the
Remonstrants themselves, who despised the maine Orders given to them by the
public Judicatories for suppressing thereof) has been so long occasioned, and
is now happily provided for by the care of our Parliament, which has appointed
these Judicatories to meet at the ordinary time, if they be not let by the
indirect practices of their Banders, and such others, who under fair pretexts
study the continuance of the present troubles, And by their open withholding
their assisting, and secret resisting the resolutions of the Kingdom, Do what
in them lies to weaken the strength thereof, and render it a prey to Foreign
powers: As also by their large enumerating the public Burdens, which have been
so necessarily laid on for preserving our Kingdom from ruin, and are so much
the heavier on these parts, That these who now complain most, have by their
compliance with the Rebels, and refusal to join against them, been altogether
free thereof as yet: and which have been so sparingly imposed and providently
disposed of, that no just occasion of complaint can be made thereof, as will
appear by the public Accounts at length perused by the Estates of our
Parliament; and yet extant to the view of the world. And last, these Banders
finding no readier mean to dishearten our good Subjects in the pursuance of
this Cause, make large expressions of their sense of the distressed condition
of the Country, whiles they themselves by their bygone correspondence and
present Banding with declared Traitors and bloody Irishes who have invaded
this our Kingdom, Do really witness their intentions to continue, and (so far
as they are able) increase the troubles and distresses thereof, and sear the
bowels of the same. For which purpose they labor to weaken the confidence and
Union betwixt our Kingdoms of Scotland and England, which are so firmly joined
in the solemn League and Covenant, that no respects can make them forget their
mutual engagements, or withhold their assistance from others, as the condition
of affairs shall require. All which being at length considered by the Committee
of Estates, And they finding this Band to be Destructive to the Covenant, and
ends contained therein, Illegal, and against the Laws of our Kingdom,
Prejudicial to the public Peace (now drawing toward a happy close, if not
interrupted by such treacherous Plots) and Divisive for fomenting of Jealousies
and continuing the bloody Wars within our Kingdoms, Have declared they will
proceed against the same accordingly: And therefore

OUR WILL IS, and we charge you straightly and command, that incontinent their our
Letters seen, you pass, and by open Proclamation hereof at the Market Crosses
of Edinburgh, Stirling, Glasgow, Dundee, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Innernesse,
and other places needful, In our name and authority command, charge, and
inhibit all our good Subjects, That none of them presume nor take upon hand, to
acknowledge or sign the said Band, nor join themselves with the subscribers
thereof in pursuance of the same, under all highest pains which by the Law or
practice of this our Realm can be execute upon such unlawful and seditious
Bands. And yet because possibly some of our good Subjects have been through
misinformation, fear, or other means ensnared and drawn to join herein,
without any ill intention of themselves; And We being willing to reclaim all
such, Do therefore declare, that whosoever has signed or joined in this Band,
and will betwixt and the fifteenth of May next to come disclaim and quit the
same, shall be free of all censure therefore. The which to do, we commit to you
our full power by their our Letters.

Given under our Signet at Edinburgh the 5 of April, and of our Reign the 22
year 1646. Per actum Dominorum Commiss. predict. Arch. Primerose Cler.

Printed at Edinburgh by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1646.


