By the King.
A Proclamation forbidding all Levies of Forces without His Majesty's express
pleasure, signified under His Great Seal, and all Contributions or Assistance
to any such Levies.
WHereas, under pretense that We intend to make War against the Parliament
(the contrary whereof is notoriously known to all that are here, and as we hope
by this time apparent to all other Our Subjects, as well by Our Declaration of
the sixteenth of June, as by the Testimony of all Our Nobility and Council,
who are here upon the place) And by color of the Authority of both Houses of
Parliament (a major part whereof are now absent from London) by the contrivance
of some few evil persons, disguising and coloring their pernicious Designs
and hostile Preparations under the plausible names of The preservation of
public Peace, and defense of us, and both Houses of Parliament from Force and
and Violence, it has been endeavored to raise Troops of Horse and other
Forces:

And for that purpose they have prevailed, not only to prohibit Our own Moneys
to be paid to Us, or to Our use, but, by the Name and Authority of Parliament,
to excite Our Subjects to contribute their Assistance to them, by bringing in
Moneys, Plate, or underwriting to furnish and maintain Horses, Horsemen, and
Arms; And to that purpose certain Propositions or Orders (as they are styled by
them) have been Printed, whereby they have endeavored to engage the Power and
Authority of Parliament (as if the two Houses, without Us, had that Power and
Authority) to save harmless, all those that shall so contribute, from all
Prejudice and Inconvenience that may befall them by occasionthereof.

And although we well hope that these Malignant persons (whose Actions do now
sufficiently declare their former Intentions) will be able to prevail with few
of Our good people to contribute their Power or Assistance unto them; Yet, lest
any of Our Subjects (taking upon trust what those Men affirm) without weighing
the grounds of it, or the danger to Us, themselves, and the Commonwealth,
which would ensue thereupon, should indeed believe (what these persons would
insinuate, and have them to believe) That such their Contribution and
Assistance would tend to the preservation of the public Peace, and the Defense
of Us and both Houses of Parliament, and that thereby they should not incur any
danger;

We, that we might not be wanting (as much as in Us lies) to foreshew and to
prevent the danger which may fall thereupon, Have hereby thought good to
declare and publish unto all Our loving Subjects, That by the Laws of the Land,
the power of raising of Forces or Arms, or leavying of war for the defense of
the Kingdom, or otherwise, has always belonged to Us, and and to Us only, and
that by no Power of either, or both Houses of Parliament, or otherwise,
contrary to Our personal Commands, any Forces can be raised, or any war (...)

And therefore, by the Statute of the seventh year of Our famous Progenitour,
King Edward the first, whereas there had been then some variances betwixt him
and some great Lords of the Realm, and, upon Treaty thereupon, it was agreed,
that in the next Parliament after provision should be made, That in all
Parliaments, and all other Assemblies which should be in the Kingdom for ever,
that every man should come without Force and Armor, well and peaceably: Yet at
the next Parliament when they met together to take advice of this Business
(though it concerned the Parliament it self) the Lords and Commons would not
take it upon them, but answered, That it belonged to the King to defend Force
of Armor, and all other Force against the Peace at all times when it pleased
Him, and to punish them which should do contrary, according to the Laws and
Vsages of the Realm, and that they were bound to aid Him, as their Sovereign
Lord, at all seasons when need should be. And accordingly in Parliament, in
after times, the King alone did issue His Proclamations, prohibiting bearing of
Arms by any person, in, or near the City where the Parliament was, excepting
such of the Kings Servants as He should depute, or should be deputed by His
Commandment, and also excepting the Kings Ministers. And by the Statute of
Northampton, made in the second year of King Edward the third, it is Enacted,
That no man, of what condition soever he be (except the Kings Servants, in His
presence, and His Ministers in executing the Kings Precepts, or of their
Office, and such as be in their company assisting them) go, nor ride Armed by
night or day in Fairs, Markets, nor in the presence of the Justices, or other
Ministers, nor in no part elsewhere.

And this power of raising Forces to be solely in the King, is so known and
inseparable a right to the Crown, That when, in the reign of King Henry the
eight, there being a sudden Rebellion, the Earl of Shrewsbury, without Warrant
from the King, did raise Arms for the suppression thereof, and happily
suppressed it, yet was he forced to obtain his Pardon. And whereas the Duke of
Gloucester, and other great Lords, in the eleventh year of King Richard the
second (upon pretense of the good of the King and Kingdom, the King being then
not of age, and led away, as they alleged, by evil Counselors) did raise
Forces, and by them mastered their Adversaries. In that Parliament (such as it
was, for it was held and kept with Force, how good use soever has been made of
the Presidents therein) they procured a special Act of Pardon for their
raising of Men, and that those Assemblies should not be drawn into example for
the time to come.

And as no man can leavie War, or raise Forces without the King, so much less
against the personal Commands of the King opposed thereunto: For, by the
Statute of the 25. year of King Edward the third (which is but Declaratory of
the old Law in that point) it is Treason to leavie war against the King in His
Realm; within the construction of which Statute, it is true (which was said in
the late Declaration, under the name of both Houses of Parliament, of the 26.
of May last) leavying War (in some sense) against the Kings Authority (though
not intended against His Person) is leavying war against the King: And
therefore the raising of Forces, though upon pretense of removing of some evil
Counselors from about the Queen, has been adjudged Treason, in the Case of
the late Earl of Essex in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and in diverse other
Cases. (And we wish all Our Subjects to consider, Whether, if men shall be
raised contrary to Our Proclamation and against Our Will, it be not against Our
Authority.) But it is as true (and was never denied, but in that Declaration)
That the raising of Forces against the Kings personal Command (being no Idiot,
nor Infant, incapable of understanding to Command) being accompanied with His
presence, is, and is most properly leavying of War against the King; For if it
be a sufficient pretense for raising of Men against the Kings person, that it
is for the defense of the Kings Authority, and of His Kingdom (though against
His express Command and Proclamation) the Irish Rebels will have color for
their horrid Rebellion; For they say (though it be notoriously false) It is for
the defense of the Kings Authority, and of His Kingdom; And Wat Tyler, and Jack
Cade, and Kett the Tanner wanted not public Pretenses, which were perhaps just
causes of Complaints, though not of raising of Men.

And though these persons have gone about subtly to distinguish betwixt Our
Person and Our Authority, as if, Because Our Authority may be where Our Person
is not, that therefore, Our Person may be where Our Authority is not; We
require all Our good Subjects to take notice of the Law (which is in Print and
full Force) Cook 7. Rep. Calvin's case.
That their Allegiance is due unto the natural Person of their Prince, and not
to His Crown or Kingdom distinct from His natural Capacity. And that by the
Oath of Ligeance at the Common Law (which all persons above the age of twelve
years are, or ought to be sworn unto) they are bound to be true and faithful,
not to the King only as King, but to Our Person as King CHARLES; and to bear
Us truth and faith of Life and Member, and earthly Honor; and that they shall
neither know nor hear of any ill or damage intended to Us that they shall not
defend. And that when, in the time of King Edward the second, Hugh Spencer
being discontented with the King, caused a Bill to be written, wherein was
contained amongst other things, That Homage and the Oath of Allegiance was more
by reason of the Kings Crown (that is, His Kingdom) then of His Person; and
that seeing the King cannot be reformed by suit of Law, if the King will not
redress and put away that which is ill for the Common People, and hurtful to
the Crown That the thing ought to be put away by force, and that His Leiges be
bound to Govern in aid of Him, and in default of Him; he was condemned for it
by two Parliaments, and perpetually vanished the Kingdom.

We have made mention of these cases, not so much to clear Our Right, That We
alone have the power of raising Forces, and none of Our Subjects, either in
Parliament or out of Parliament against Our Will, or personal Command (which
We think no man that has the least knowledge in Our Laws, and is not led away
by private Interests, and may speak his mind freely, will deny; nor was ever
questioned in any Parliament before this time) as to let them see how dangerous
the effect and consequence of raising of Forces, without Us, may be unto Us,
and to the Commonwealth, uuder pretense of Defense of both.

And though We cannot doubt of the affections of Our good Subjects, considering
their interest is involved with Ours, and how precious the peace of the Kingdom
is, and ought to be unto them; and that according to the words of the Statute
of the eleventh year of King Henry the seventh, and the eighteenth Chapter, By
the duty of their Allegiance they are bounden to serve and assist Us at all
seasons when need shall require.

Yet, to the end that Our good Subjects may know what their duty is, and what
We expect from them, and that all others, who, through Malice or private
Interests, shall be transported beyond their duties, may be left without
excuse; we do therefore by this Our Proclamation charge and command all Our
Subjects uopn their Allegiance, and as they tender Our Honor and Safety, and
the Peace and Safety of the Kingdom, that they presume not to raise or leavie
any Horses, Horsemen, or Arms, or any Forces whatsoever, by color of any
Authority whatsoever, without Our express pleasure signified under Our great
Seal, (other then such as shall be raised, leavied and imprested by the Order,
as well of Our Self, as of both Houses of Parliament, according to an Act made
this Sessions, entitled, An Act for the better raising and leavying of
Soldiers for the present defense of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland (by
Justices of Peace, and otherwise, in such manner as is prescribed in the said
Act) or Contribute, or give any Assistance in Money, Plate, finding of Horses,
horsemen, or Arms, or any other ways, to or for any such Preparation, Levy, or
Forces: And that such of Our good Subjects, who through Ignorance have been
misled to consent or subscribe to any such Leavie, Contribution, or
Assistance, forthwith, upon publication of this Our Proclamation, desist from
continuing such their Contribution or Assistance, or giving any Countenance to
any such Leavies, at their utmost perils.

And We do likewise straightly Charge and Command as well all Sheriffs, Justices
of Peace, Majors, Bailiffs, Constables, and all other Our Officers whatsoever,
That they use their utmost endeavors, as well for publishing this Our
Proclamation, as for the suppressing of all Leavies, or Forces raised, or to be
raised without or against Our consent: As also all other Our loving Subjects,
That they be attending, Aiding, and Assisting Our said Officers and Ministers
therein, as they, and every of them will answer it at their utmost perils.

Given at Our Court at York the eighteenth day of June, in the eighteenth year
of Our Reign. 1642.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of John Bill. 1642.


