THE KINGS MAJESTY'S RESOLVTION CONCERNING, ROBERT Earl of Warwick, Lord
Admiral of His Majesty's Navy Royal, Wherein is Declared the Kings full
Resolution and Intention concerning his Navy, now lying upon the Downs.

With the Earl of Warwicks Declaration to both Houses of PARLIAMENT, and the
Oath taken by all his Captains, Lieutenants, and other Inferior Officers,
under his Command, belonging to the fleet.

Also the Proceedings of the Earl of Warwick and Sir John Pennington, lying
near to the said Earl with a great Number of Cavaleers near the Downs.

Ordered, that this be forthwith published in Print, JOHN BROWN, Cler. Parl,

Whereunto is annexed, exceeding joyful News from Ireland, being the Copy of a
Letter read in the House of Commons on Saturday last, July the 8.

Ordered that this be Printed and published, Hen. Eising. Cler. Parl. Com. D.

Printed for J. SMITH July. 12 1642.

THE KINGS MAJESTY'S RESOLUTION Concerning the Earl of WARWICK.
THe differences betwixt His Royal Majesty and the high Court of Parliament,
are apparently known and made manifest; insomuch, that the Subject is so
vehemently distracted, that the differences betwixt the Head and the Body, are
not, nor will not be suddenly brought to an end, or full period; His Majesty
stands for his Prerogative, and the Parliament for their privileges, two
great matters now in dissent between His Majesty and the Parliament, businesses
of no little Consequence: yet this is not all the Concroversie which is betwixt
the King and Parliament, but the Laws and Liberties of the Subject is in great
dissent betwixt His Royal Majesty and the Honorable Court of Parliament, and
the subject is in a great perplexity, by reason of the differences now in
contention, not knowing how to obey the Prerogative nor privileges, the
prerogative standing for the Honor and Dignity of His Royal person, the
privilege for the Liberty and Freedom of the Subject.

But the placing of Officers by the Honorable Court of Parliament, without the
consent of His Majesty, has been the Cause of many Distempers arising from his
Majesty's Royal Breast, all which being for the good and safety of the whole
Kingdom, by reason of the great danger this Kingdom were in, and the great
hazard of ruin that were like to befall this Nation, had not they out of
their judicious care took into consideration the danger that were like to
ensue, happy are we to escape such a design.

His Majesty taking into consideration, the Government of his Navy Royal, his
will and pleasure was, That Sir John Pennington should have the place of
Admiral ship resigned unto him, being against his Majesty's will and pleasure,
that the Earl of Warwick should enjoy that place any longer, and to that end
and purpose did send a Message to the Earl of Warwick to give up his place,
and that he should obey his special Command, which was, that he should resign
his place to S. John Pennington, the said Sir John being near unto him,
expecting the Receipt thereof.

His Majesty were likewise Resolved, that he should not enjoy that place any
longer, but that He should obey his Command therein.

The Earl of Warwick having received this Message and Command from his
Majesty, wherein was specified his full Resolution and intention, being much
perplexed, thinking and conceiving it a matter of no small consequence, which
he was entrusted with, being for the defense of HIs Majesty's Royal Person,
and the safeguard of the whole Kingdom, knowing the integrity of his own heart
both to His Majesty and the Parliament, he resolved not to desert that charge
committed to his trust, wherein God since his beginning has prospered him with
such happy and fortunate success; and therefore he set down his full
Resolution, that he would not resign that place, but to continue it; until he
should be revoked by that Authority which has entrusted him with it.

Which Resolution he declared likewise to all His Majesty's Captains, at a
meeting which he had appointed for that purpose; and at the same time, they
unanimously and cheerfully took the same Resolution; taking many solemn Vows
and Protestations, to continue the same as long as breath remained in their
bodies, and that they would for the performance thereof, seal it with their
dearest blood; being a token and witness of their fervent love and affection,
which they bear both to their King and Country, vowing to maintain the same to
the utmost of their power.

And that His Person which the Honorable House of Peers and Commons, had set
over them to be their Governor, meaning the Right Honorable the Earl of
WARWICK, should never take the least blemish, so long as they were able to
perform any service to his Lordship, the Resolution of them being so constant
and true, that such men of spirits were never known, which we must all
attribute to the great God of Heaven and Earth only. So I beseech the Lord of
Heaven to continue them in the same Minds and Resolutions, which they have most
faithfully and unanimously expressed to the vast world, ingenerall,

All Nations admiring at the Courage of those men, thinking it to be the
wonderful work of God, that such courage and truth should ever into the heart
of man, but we must think and conceive with our selves, that it was the Lords
will and pleasure, to endue those Christian hearts with such gracious and
omnipotent gifts.

Thus may we all see, the miraculous Actions and Proceedings which the Lord
entrusteth with his servants.

The Proceedings in Yorkshire and Lancashire the last week, were very
tumultuous, there appearing diverse in a warlike manmer in those Counties. But
praised be God, although we have but little comfort here in England, yet we
have most happy and joyful News from Ireland, the Earl of Ormond having fought
a great Battle with the Rebels, putting above 2000. to the sword, with little
loss, the which Letter was read in the House of Commons on Saturday last, and
Ordered to be forthwith Printed.

Hen. Elsing Cler. Par. D. Com.

Ordered that this be printed and pu blished.

John Brown Cler. Par.


