DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A Proclamation of His MAJESTY'S Grace, Favor, and Pardon to the Inhabitants
of His Counties of Stafford and Derby.

WHereas we have taken notice, That by the Malice, Industry, and Importunity of
several ill affected and seditious Persons Our Countries of Stafford and Derby
very many of Our Weak and seduced Subjects of those our our counties have not
only been drawn to exercise the Militia, under color of a pretended Ordinance
without and against Our consent,(a crime of a very high nature, if We would
strictly enquire thereinto) but have made contributi-ons of Plate, Money, and
Horses, toward the maintenance of the Army now in Rebellion against Us, and
have at last actually themselves taken Arms against Us; we do hereby publish
and declare, That we are graciously pleased to attesbute the Crimes and
Offenses of Our said Subjects of those Our Counties to the power and saction of
the their Seducers, who, we believe, by Threats, Menaces, and false
informations, compelled and led them into those Actions of Undutifulnesse and
Disloyalty toward Us; And we do therefore hereby offer Our free and gracious
Pardon to all the Inhabitants of Our said Counties of Stafford and Derby, for
all offenses concerning the premises committed against US, before the
publishing of this Our Proclamation, except Sir John Gell, and Sir William
Brereton Knights, against whom We shall proceed according to the Rules of the
Law, as against Traitors and Stirrers of Sedition against Us, And whom we do
hereby require all Our Officers and Ministers of Juctice, and all Our lobing
Subjects Whatsoever, to apprehend and cause to be kept in safe Custody, till
our pleasure be further known. Provided that this Our grace shall not extend to
any person, who after the publishing this Our Proclamation, shall presume by
Loan, or Contibution to assist the said Army of Rebels, to assemble and
Mustrer themselves in Arms without Authority derived from Us under Our hand, to
enter into any Oath of Association for apposing Us and Our Army or to succor
or entertain any of the persons excepted in this Our Proclamation, or in Our
Declaration of the twelfth of August, But we must and do declare, That
whosoever shall henceforward be guilty of the premises, or of either of them,
shall be esteemed by Us, as an Enemy to the public Peace, a Person disaffected
to Us, and to the Religion and Laws of the Kingdom, and guilty of High Treason,
and shall accordingly recieve their condign punishment, of which We give them
timely notice, that they may proceed accordingly at their perils. And we do
hereby require Our high-Sheriffs, Commissioners of Array, Justices of the
Peace, and all other Our Officers and loving Subjects to resist, oppose, and
apprehend all such persons as shall presume to make any Levies in those Our
Counties, under what pretense soever, Without Authority derived from Us under
Our hand. And we likewise will and Require them and every of them to be
Assistant to all such as shall either Command the Train-bands of those Our
Counties, or make any Levies in the same by virtue of Commission under Our
great Seal or Sign Mannuall. And Our Pleasure is, That this Our Counties of
Stafford and Derby.

Given at Our Court at Oxford, this five and twentieth day of March, in the
Eighteenth year of Our Reign. 1642.

