CR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A Proclamation forbidding all His Majesty's Subjects belonging to the Trained
Bands or Militia of this Kingdom, to Rise, March, Muster, or Eye cise by virtue
of any Order or Ordinance of one, or both Houses of Parliament, without Consent
or Warrant from His Majesty, upon pain of punishment according to the Laws.
WHereas by the Statute made in the seventh Year of King Edward the first, the
Prelates. Earls, Barons, and Commonalty of the Realm affirmed in Parliament,
That to the King it belongs, and His part it is by his Royal Seigniority,
straightly to defend wearing of Armor, and all other Force against the Peace, at
all times when it shall please Him, and to punish them which shall do contrary,
according to the Laws and Vsages of the Realm; and hereunto all subjects are
bound to aid the King, as their Sovereign Lord, at all seasons, when need shall
be. And whereas We understand, That expressly contrary to the said Statute, and
other good Laws of this Our Kingdom, under color and pretense of an Ordinance
of Parliament, without Our Consent, or any Commission or Warrant from Us, The
Trained Bands, and Militia of this Kingdom have been lately, and are intended
to be put in Arms, and drawn into Companies in a warlike manner, whereby the
Peace and Quiet of Our Subjects is, or may be disturbed: We being desirous by
all gracious and fair Admonitions to prevent, That some malignant Persons in
this Our Kingdom, do not by degrees seduce Our good Subjects from their due
Obedience to Us, and the Laws of this Our Kingdom, subtly endeavoring, by a
general Combustion or Confusion, to hide their mischievous Designs and
Intentions against the Peace of this Our Kingdom, and under a specious pretense
of putting Our Trained Bands into a Posture, draw and engage Our good Subjects
in a warlike Opposition against Us, as Our Town of Hull is already, by the
Treason of Sir John Hotham, who at first pretended to put a Garrison into the
same, only for Our Security and Service.

We do therefore by this Our Proclamation expressly Charge and Command all Our
Sheriffs, and all Colonells, Lieutenant-Colonels, Sergeant Majors, Captains,
Officers, and Soldiers belonging to the Trained Bands of this Our Kingdom, and
likewise all High and Petty-Constables, and other Our Officers and Subjects
what soever, upon their Allegiance, and as they tender the Peace of this Our
Kingdom, Not to Muster, Leavy, Raise, or March, or to Summon, or Warn upon any
Warrant, Order, or Ordinance from one, or both Our Houses of Parliament
(whereto We have not, or shall not give Our express Consent) any of Our
Trained Bands, or other Forces, to Rise, Muster, March, or Exercise, without
express Warrant under our Hand, or Warrant from Our Sheriff of the County,
grounded upon a particular Writ to that purpose under Our great Seal. And in
case any of our Trained Bands shall Rise, or gather together, contrary to this
Our Command, We shall then call them in due time to a strict Account, and
proceed Legally against them as Violaters of the Laws, and Disturbers of the
Peace of the Kingdom.

Given at Our Court at York the seven and twentieth day of May, 1642.
By the King.
OUr Will and Pleasure is, That the Ministers, Freeholders, Farmers, and
substantial Copyholders of this Our County of York, do assemble and meet
together at Heworth Moor, near Our City of York, upon Friday in VVhitson week
(according to former Summons) by nine of the Clock in the Morning. For that We
are informed there are diverse Fayrs to be kept in this Our County the day
following, at which time many of them may have necessary occasion to be absent:
And therefore, out of Our tenderness and care of Our good Subjects, We have
thought fit to give this early Notice, to the end the said Inhabitants may be
put to as little Prejudice as may be. And this Our Pleasure We require to be
forthwith Printed, and Copies thereof to be speedily published and dispersed by
the Sheriff of this County: For which this shall be sufficient VVarrant.

Given at Our Court at York, the seven and twentieth day of May, 1642.
Imprinted first at York, and now Reprinted at London for Edward Husbands, May
31. 1642.


