C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE KING.
A Proclamation of His Majesty's Grace, Favor, and Pardon, to the Inhabitants
of His County of Willts.

WHEREAS We have taken notice that by the malice, Industry and Importunity of
several ill affected and seditious persons in Our County of Willts, very many
of Our weak and seduced Subjects of that Our County have not only been drawn
to exercise the Militia, under color of a pretended Ordinance, without and
against Our Consent (a Crime of a very high nature, if We would strictly
enquire thereinto) but have made Contributions of Plate, Money and Horses,
toward the maintenance of the Army now in Rebellion against Us; We do hereby
publish and declare, That We are graciously pleased to attribute the Crimes and
Offenses of Our said Subjects of that County to the power and Faction of their
seducers, Who, We believe by Threats, Menaces, and false Informations
compelled and led them into these actions of undutifullnesse and disloyalty
toward Us; And We do therefore hereby offer Our free and gracious Pardon to
all the Inhabitants of Our said County of Willts, for all Offenses concerning
the premises committed against Us before the publishing of this Our
Proclamation (except Sir Edward Hungerford, Sir Henry Ludlow, Sir John Evelin,
and Walter Long Esquire) against all which We shall proceed according to the
Rules of the Law, as against Traitors and Stirrers of sedition against Us, And
Whom We do hereby require all Our Officers and Ministers of Justice, and all
Our loving Subjects whatsoever, to apprehend and cause to be kept in safe
Custody till Our Pleasure be further known. Provided that this Our Grace shall
not extend to any Person, who after the publishing this Our Proclamation shall
presume by Loan or Contribution to assist the said Army of Rebels, to
assemble and Muster themselves in Arms without Authority derived from Us under
Our Hand, to enter into any Oath of Association for opposing Us and Our Army,
or to succor or entertain any of the Persons excepted in this Our
Proclamation, or in Our Declaration of the 12 of August. But We must and do
declare, That whosoever shall hence forward be guilty of the premises, or of
either of them, shall be esteemed by Us as an Enemy to the public Peace, a
Person disaffected to Us, and to the Religion and Law of the Kingdom, and
shall accordingly receive condign punishment, of which We give them timely
notice, that they may proceed accordingly at their perils.

Given at Our Court at Oxford, this second day of November, in the Eighteenth
year of Our Reign. God save the King.

