CR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A Proclamation forbidding all Assessing, Collecting, and Paying of the
Twentieth Part, and of all Weekly Taxes by Color of Orders or Ordinances, And
all entering into Protestations and Associations against his Majesty.
WHereas, an actual and open Rebellion being raised against Us under the
Command of Robert Earl of Essex, and diverse other Traitorous Persons, for the
destruction of Us and Our Posterity, and the subversion of the Religion, Laws,
and Liberties of this Our Kingdom, great Endeavors are daily used to persuade
and fright Our good Subjects in Our City of London, and thorowout this Kingdom,
to submit to several illegal Impositions, by pretended Orders or Ordinances
of one or both Houses of Parliament, for the levying of the Twentieth Part of
their Estates, and for Weekly Taxes upon the same, and to engage them into
unwarrantable Protestations and Associations, to no other end then to foment
and maintain this unnatural War against Us; All which Contributions,
Protestations, and Associations are by the known Law of the Land Acts of High
Treason, and Endeavors to take Our Life from Us; We do therefore strictly
charge and command all Our loving Subjects whatsoever, and particularly of Our
Counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, Hertford, Essex, Cambridge, Kent, Surrey,
Sussex, South-Hampton, North-Hampton, Leicester, Derby, Rutland, Nottingham,
Huntingdon, Bedford, and Buckingham, where this Association has been already
attempted, upon their Allegiance not to enter into any such Association or
Protestation, And all Our loving Subjects in what parts of this Our Realm
soever (particularly of Our City of London) not to submit to any such
Imposition, Levy, or Tax as aforesaid, nor to presume to be assistant thereunto
by Assessing, Taxing, Levying or Collecting thereof. And We do hereby publish
and declare, That We are resolved to grant out Our Commissions for the seizing
of the Goods, and the sequestring of the Estates of all such Persons as shall
rebelliously disobey Us herein, To the Intent that such their Goods and Rents
may be safely deposited, until such time as the Offenders can be brought to a
Legal Trial, which shall speedily proceed against them, as soon as they can
be apprehended and delivered into the hands of Justice. And We do hereby will
and command all Persons who are any ways indebted unto, and all the several
Tenants of all such Persons, who shall by submitting to, or assisting of any
such Imposition, Levy, or Tax, contribute to the maintenance of the Armies in
Rebellion against Us, or that shall join in any such Traitorous Association or
Protestation, That they forbear to pay any Rents or Debts due to the said
several Persons, but detain the same in their hands toward the maintenance of
the Peace of the Counties, and the Reparation of such men who have suffered by
the Violence of the aforesaid Armies, The same course being already taken by
public Order and directions against such as have faithfully and according to
their Allegiance assisted Us against this unnatural Rebellion. And as We have
heretofore declared, That whosoever sold lose his Life in this Our necessary
Defense, the Wardship of his Heir should be granted by Us without Rent or
Fine to his own use; so on the other side We do here by publish and declare,
That whosoever of Our Subjects shall not make use of this Our gracious
Warning, but persist in, or hereafter engage themselves into either actual
bearing Arms against Us, or any such Traitorous Assistance of those that do
bear Arms either by Contribution or Association as aforesaid, in case they dye
or be so killed during this Rebellion, that the Coroner cannot have Inspection
of their bodies, their Heirs shall have no benefit by Our Instructions of
Grace to Our Court of Wards; The Benefit of which, We shall ever be careful
that all Our good Subjects may fully enjoy.

Given at Our Court at Oxford the Eight day of March, in the eighteenth year of
our Reign. 1642.

