royal blazon or coat of arms C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT.

His Majesty's second Message sent to the Parliament concerning Sir John Hothams
Refusal to give His Majesty entrance into His Town of Hull. 28. April. 1642.
WE are so much concerned in the undutifull Affront (an indignity all Our good
Subjects must disdain, in Our behalf) We received from Sir John Hotham at Hull,
that We are impatient till We receive Justice from you: and are compelled to
call again for an Answer, being confident (however you would be so careful,
though without Our Consent to put a Garrison into that Our Town, (...) against
any attempt of the Papists) that you never intended to dispose and maintain it
against Us your Sovereign: Therefore We require you forthwith (for the
Business will admit no delay) that you take some speedy course that Our said
Town and Magazin be immediately delivered up to Us: And that such severe
exemplary Proceedings be against those Persons (who have offered Us this
insupportable Affront and Injury) as by the Law is provided: And till this be
done, We shall intend no Business whatsoever, other then the Business of
Ireland. For if We are brought into a Condition so much worse then any of Our
Subjects, That whilst you all enjoy your Privileges, and may not have your
Possessions disturbed, or your Titles questioned, We only may be spoiled,
thrown out of Our Towns, and Our Goods taken from Us; It Is time to examine how
We have lost those Privileges, and to try all possible ways, by the help of
God, the Law of the Land, and the Affection of Our good Subjects, to recover
them, and vindicate Our Self from those Injuries. And if We shall miscarry
herein, We shall be the first Prince of this Kingdom that has done so, having
no other end, but to defend the true Protestant Profession, the Law of the
Land, and the Liberty of the Subject: And God so deal with Us, as We continue
in those Resolutions.

Imprinted at York by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. 1642.


