C. R.

By the KING.
A Proclamation warning all His Majesty's good Subjects no longer to be misled
by the Votes, Orders, and pretended Ordinances, of One, or both Houses, by
reason the Members do not enjoy the freedom and Liberty of Parliament. With
His Majesty's Gracious Offer of Pardon to the Members of both Houses, and of
Protection to such of them as shall repair to Him.

WHereas We have been long since driven by Force and Violence from Our Palace
at Westminster (the place of sitting for Us, and Our two Houses of this
Parliament) so that We could not with safety of Our Life be present with Our
great Council, and much the greater part of the Members of both Houses of
Parliament have been likewise driven by Tumults and Force for their safety from
their attendance upon that Council, the said Members having been threatened and
assaulted for delivering their Opinions freely in the Houses; or have out of
Conscience and Duty withdrawn themselves from being present at the Debates and
Resolutions, which they have well known to be so contrary to their Duty and
Allegiance, or for so withdrawing, or for freely speaking in the Houses, have
been expended or suspended from being Members of that Council, contrary to the
ancient Practice, and just Privileges of Parliament. Since which time, and by
which means, a great and Rebellious Army has been raised against Us, under
the Command of Robert Earl of Essex, which Army has not only endeavored to
take away Our Life from Us in a set Battle, but the same, and other Forces
raised by the like means, has committed all the Acts of Outrage, Robbery, and
Murder, upon Our good Subjects throughout the Kingdom, and still continues to
do the same. And though in truth, a very small part of that great Council
remain there together, yet under pretense of having the countenance of Our two
Houses of Parliament, some seditious persons assume to themselves (with the
assistance of those Rebellious Armies, and of diverse mutinous and desperate
Brownists, Anabaptists, and other ill affected persons in Our City of London,
by whose means they awe such Members of both Houses who yet continue amongst
them) a power to do things abslolutely contrary to the Laws of the Land, and
destructive to Our Rights, and to the Liberty and Property of the Subject, and
to alter the whole Frame and Government of this Kingdom, disposing of the
Lives and Fortunes of Us, and Our good Subjects, according to their discretion,
subjecting both to their own unlimited arbitrary Power and Government: We have
only accused some particular persons, whom We well know to be the Authors and
Contrivers of these desperate Counsels, and Actions, and have forborne to
censure or charge the whole number of the Members remaining, by whose Orders
and Authority the evils have been pretended to be done, We hoping that the
sense of the miserable Distractions of the Kingdom would at length have brought
them to discern where they had erred, and Our ^ften Messages, and Complaints of
the violence offered to Us, and to the Members of both Houses, would have
procured justice and Redress and that the Power and Reputation of such amongst
them, who wished well to the Peace of the Kingdom, and Honor and Dignity of
Parliaments, would at last so far prevailed, that a right understanding might
have been begotten betwixt Us and Our People, and all show of Force and
Violence so taken away and suppressed, that We might in a full and peaceable
convention of Parliament, with the advice of that Our great Council, have so
settled the present distempers, that there might be no fear left ofthe like for
the future. But finding to Our great Grief, that the power of those seditious
persons, who first contrived these desperate and bloody Distractions, continues
so great, that as they have driven, and now keep Us, and the much greater part
of both Houses, from being present at that Council, so they so far awe those
who remain there, that they cannot with freedom give their Votes and
Resolutions according to their Consciences, and the Laws and Constitutions of
the Kingdom, that the Members of both Houses have been compelled to make
Protestations to live and dye with the Earl of Essex, the General of the
Rebellious Army, and other unlawful and Treasonable Protestations; and that
such who have refused to take the said Protestations, have been expelled and
imprisoned for such their refusal. That the great affairs of the Kingdom are
managed and concluded by a private Committee without being ever reported to the
Houses, contrary to the Laws and Rules of Parliament. That the Common Council
of London (most of them being persons factiously chosen out of Brownists,
Anabaptists, and such who oppose the regular wholesome Government of that City,
and have promised themselves the destruction of the Church, are grown the
superintendents over both Houses, and obtrude upon them what conclusions and
resolutions they please. That they take upon them to justify this Rebellion
against Us; And have presumed under pretense of the Order of both Houses, to
invite foreign Forces to invade this Kingdom. To send Agents to foreign
Princes to Negotiate and Treat with them in their own names. To imprison Our
good Subjects contrary to Law, prohibiting Our Judges to grant Habeas Corpus
according to Law. To introduce a new Clergy throughout the Kingdom, by
displacing godly learned Divines, Without the least color of Law, or
judicial, proceedings, and putting ignorant and seditious Preachers in their
places to poison the hearts of the People. To countenance the vilifying of the
Book of Common Prayer established by the Law of the Land. To seize, leavy, and
take away what they please of the Estates and Fortunes of Our Subjects by
disposing of the twentieth part of their Estates, by exhausting them with
unsupportable weekly Taxes for the maintenance of their Rebellious Army; and by
endeavoring to lay odious Excises upon Victuals, Goods and Merchandise of Our
People for the same purpose, while they suffer Our poor Protestant Subjects of
Our Kingdom of Ireland, whose defense was undertaken by Our two Houses, and
that Army raised for the suppressing of that horrid Rebellion, to be starved,
and in danger of disbanding, or necessitated to desert that Kingdom for want
of money, victual, and such other necessaries as were to be provided for them
by Act of Parliament, out of those moneys which they have spent to destroy Us
and this Kingdom, by exacting from Merchants Tunnage and Poundage, and other
impositions upon Marchandises, as well Native as foreign, contrary to an Act
made this present Parliament, with a penalty of praemunire on those who shall
pay or receive it. And lastly, That they have (after the breaking of the late
Treaty, by a peremptory recalling the Committee, who in truth, during their
abode with Us, had no power to Treat by reason of their strict limitation) so
far rejected all possible means and overtures of Treaty and Accommodation,
that instead of answering Our Gracious Messages, the House of Commons has
imprisoned Our Messenger sent by us to them, to invite both Houses to an
Accommodation, and especially to move them to take such a course for the
freedom of Parliament which we might safely advise with that Our great
Council for the settling those miserable Distractions, and Distempers. And has
maliciously and in contempt of Us (and after an attempt to murder Her at
Burlington Rode, the place of Her landing) impeached Our Royal Consort of High
Treason, for assisting Us with Arms and Ammunition to defend Us from this
Rebellion. It Is time now to let Our good Subjects know, that they may no longer
look upon the Votes and Actions of the persons now remaining, as upon Our two
Houses of Parliament, Freedom and Liberty to be present, and of opinion and
debate there, being essential to a Parliament, which Freedom and Liberty, all
men must confess to be taken away from this Assembly, when they remember the
great Tumults brought down to awe and terrify both Houses, and that they were
then brought down when any great Debate was in either House, and not like to
be so carried as some seditious persons who governed those Tumults did desire;
that in the greatest heat and fury of those Tumults the principal governors
amongst them directed the unruly people to go to White Hall, where Our own
Person then was, and designed by force to have surprised the Person of Our Son
the Prince; that when it was desired that a Declaration might be made against
such Tumults, in stead of consenting thereunto, the Tumults themselves were
justified; and when a legal course was prescribed by the Lords, and taken by
the proper Ministers of Justice to suppress and prevent such Tumults, and
Riots, that legal course was superseaded by those who were then present of the
House of Commons, and the Ministers of Justice punished and imprisoned for
executing the Law, when they remember that several Members of either House
have been threatened and assaulted in those Tumults, and their own names
prescribed as persons disaffected, because they freely used to speak their
consciences in both Houses. That the House of Peers have been so far threatened
and menaced, that the names of those have been with threats demanded by the
House of Commons at the Bar of the Lords House, who refused to consent to this
or that Proposition which had been in debate before them: And tumultuous
petitions countenanced which have been presented to that same purpose. That the
Members of both Houses have been imprisoned, and forbid to be present at those
Councels, for no reasons but because their opinion have not been liked. That
Our Negative Voice (Our greatest and most Sovereign Privilege) is boldly
denied. That a presumptuous attempt has been made by the major part of the
remaining part of the House of Commons to make Our Great Seal of England, the
making of which by the express letter of the Law, is high Treason, and would
subvert the ancient and fundamental administration of Justice. That at this
time, We and the Major part of both Houses are kept by a strong and Rebellious
Army from being present at that Council, and that those who are present, are
by the same Army awed and forced to take unlawful and Treasonable
Protestations to engage their Votes. And that such Resolutions and Directions
which concern the Property and Liberty of the Subjects are transacted and
concluded by a few persons (under the name of a close Committee consisting of
the Earl of Manchester, the Lord Say, Mr. Pym, Mr. Hampden, Mr. Strood, Mr.
Martyn, and others, the whole number not exceeding the number of 17 persons)
without reporting the same to the Houses, or having the same confirmed by the
Houses, contrary to the express Law and Customs of Parliament. All which for
the matter of fact, We are ready to make proof of, and desire nothing but to
bring the Contrivers of all the aforesaid mischiefs o their trial by Law, and
till that be submitted to, We must pursue them by Arms or any other way, in
which Our good Subjects ought to give Us assistance to that purpose. The
imagining the death of Us, Our Royal Confort, or Our eldest Son, the leavying
War against Us in Our Realm, giving to them aid of comfort, the counterfeiting
Our great Seal or Money, being by the express words of the Stat. of the 25
year of King Edw. 3. Cap. 2. high Treason, and how applicable this is to those
who have borne Arms against Us, and to those who have consented that such Arms
be borne, to those who have promised to live and dye with the Earl of Essex,
and to those who every day consent to some Act for the support and increase of
that Army, We shall leave to all the world to judge, and hope that this
Gracious Warning and Information now given by Us, will make that Impression in
the hearts of Our People, that they will no longer suffer themselves to be
misled from their Duty and Allegiance upon any pretenses whatsoever: And We do
declare, That We shall proceed with all severity against all persons
whatsoever, who shall hence forward, insist, vote, or incur in any kind toward
the maintenance and countenancing such Actions and Resolutions, which by the
known and express Laws of the Land, are high Treason, and against all those
who shall adhere to them who are in Rebellion against Us, against Rebels and
Traitors, in such manner as by the Laws and Statutes of the Realm is directed
and appointed: And since by the power of seditious persons, We and both Houses
are kept from being secured against tumultuous Assemblies, and both Houses from
adjournment to some place of safety, which being done, might quickly make an
end of these miserable Destractions, whereby We are debarred from the benefit
and advice We expected from that Our great Council, the Members thereof being
scattered into several places; Therefore that the whole Kingdom may see that
We are willing to receive Advice from those who are trusted by them though We
cannot receive the same in the place to which they were called, for the Reasons
aforesaid, nor intend to receive advice from them elsewhere in the capacity of
Houses of Parliament: We do hereby declare, That such of the Members of both
Houses, as well those who have been by the faction of the Malignant party
expelled for performing their duties to Us, and into whose rooms no persons
have been since chosen by their Countries, as the rest who shall desire Our
protection, shall be welcome to Us at Our City of Oxford, until by the
adjournment of the Houses to some fit and free place, or otherwise due course
be taken for the full and free convention in Parliament of Us, and all the
Members of both Houses. And for their better encouragement to resort to Us, We
do hereby will and command all the Officers and Soldiers of Our Army to suffer
all such persons who are Members of either House, with their attendants and
servants to come to Us to this Our City of Oxford: And that none of Our good
Subjects may believe that by this Our necessary Declaration against the freedom
and liberty of that present Assembly, We may have the least intention to
violate or to avoid any Act or Acts passed by Us for the good and benefit of
Our people this Parliament: We do hereby declare to all the world, That We
shall, as We have often promised as inviolably observe all those Acts, as if no
such unhappy interruption had happened of the freedom and liberty in that
Council: And desire nothing more then to have such a free convention in
Parliament, that We may add such further Acts of Grace as shall be thought
necessary for the advancement of the true Protestant Religion, for the
maintenance of the Liberty and Property of the Subjects, and the preservation
of the Liberty, Freedom and Privileges of Parliament. And that all the world
may see how willing and desirous We are to forget all the Injuries and
Indignities offered to Us by such who have been misled through weakness or
fear, or who have not been the principal Contrivers of the present miseries:
We do offer a free and general pardon to all the Members of either House
(except Robert Earl of Essex, Ro^ert Earl of Warwick, Edward Earl of
Manchester, Hen. Earl of Stamford, William Vis. Say and Seal, Sir John Hotham
Knight and Baronet, Sir Arthur Haslerig Barronet, Sir Henry Ludlow, Sir Edward
Hungerford, Sir Francis Popham Knights, Nathaniel Fines, John Hampden, John
Pym, William Strood, Henry Martyn, and Alexande Popham Esquires, Isaac
Pennington Alderman of London, and Captain Ven, who being the principal
Authors of these present Calamities, have sacrificed the Peace and Prosperity
of their Country to their own pride, malice and ambition. And against whom We
shall proceed as against persons guilty of high Treason by the known Laws of
the Land, and shall in the proceeding be most careful to preserve to them all
privileges in the fullest manner that by the Law or the usage of former times
is due to them,) If they shall within ten days after the publishing of this
Our Proclamation return to their Duty and Allegiance to Us. And lastly, We
further injoyne and Command all Our Subjects upon their Allegiance to Us, as
they will answer the contrary to Almighty God, and as they desire that they and
their Posterity should be freed from the foul taint of high Treason, and as
they tender the peace of this Kingdom, that they presume not to give any
assistance to the before mentioned Rebellious Armies in their persons or
estates in any sort whatsoever, but join with Us according to their Duty and
the Laws of the Land to suppress this horrid Rebellion. And Our Pleasure and
Command is, That Our Proclamation be read in all Churches and Chapels within
this Our Kingdom.

Given at Our Court at Oxford, the 20 day of June, in the 19 Year of Our
Reign.
Printed at Oxford by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University, 1643.


