HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A Proclamation for the better Government of His Majesty's Army, and for the
preventing the Plundring, Spoiling, and Robbing of His Majesty's subjects,
under any Pretense whatsoever, upon pain of the Punishments herein declared.
WE having taken into Our Princely and serious Consideration the great misery
and ruin falling, and likely to fall upon Our good Subjects (if not timely
prevented) by the Plundring, Robbing, and Spoiling of their houses, and taking
from them their Money, Plate, Household Stuff Cattle, and other goods, under
pretense of their being disaffected to Us and Our Service; And these unjust and
unlawful Actions done by diverse Soldiers of Our Army, and others sheltring
themselves in the same, under that Title; Have, of Our tender commiseration of
such their sufferings, as detesting all such horrid and barbarous proceedings,
and for their future defense and preservation, thought fit to publish and
declare Our Royal Pleasure to be; That from henceforth no Officer, Soldier,
of Horse or Foot, or Party sent from Our Army, presume to search for, or seize
upon any Money, Plate, Goods, or Household Stuff belonging to any of Our
Subjects, of what Condition soever, without Our express Warrant for the same,
under Our Sign Manual, declaring the cause of such seizure: And if any, either
Officer or Soldier of Our Army of Horse or Foot, presume from henceforth, to
Plunder, Spoil, or Rob any of Our People, or take from them any their Money,
Plate, Household Stuff, or any Oxen, Sheep or other Cattle, or any Victuals,
Corn, Hay, or other Commodities or Provisions going to, or from any Our Markets
or otherwise, Being in the Grounds, Houses, or Possession of any Our Subjects,
without giving full satisfaction for the same: Upon complaint made thereof, We
will and command the Officer in chief of the Quarter within which such fact
shall be committed, to proceed against such Offender or Offenders by the Law
Martial, without Favor or Connivence, and cause him or them to be executed
accordingly without mercy. And if any Officer in chief of such Quarter, shall
either neglect or refuse to do Justice upon any person whatsoever, offending
against any particular herein mentioned, Our Will is, and We do require the
party grieved to repair unto Us, wheresoever We shall remain, and appeal to Our
Justice, which We shall be ever most ready to afford any of Our Subjects for
redress of their suffering, in any the least kind whatsoever. Likewise for
the better Order in Our Army and for the preservation of the due Government
thereof, We do farther strictly Charge and Command all Officers and Soldiers,
both of Horse and Foot of the same, as also all Parties sent out, That they,
nor any of them, presume to depart or be absent from their Quarter, without a
Pass or License under the Hand of the Officer commanding in chief in such
Quarter of Our Army, upon pain of death; nor that any other, but such Our
Officer in chief, presume to give any Pass or other License to any Officer or
Soldier to be absent, upon pain of cashiering. And that Our Pleasure herein
declared, may be fully observed, and produce the effects We intend, for the
good and security of Our Subjects, We do hereby further require all the
Officers commanding in chief, in any the Quarters of Our Army, to cause this
Our Proclamation to be published and made known to all the officers and
soldiers under their Command, and to see that severe and due punishment be
inflicted upon such as shall henceforth offend against any the least
Particulars herein before mentioned, as they and every of them expect to avoid
our high displeasure for the neglect thereof.

Given at Our Court at Reading, the 25 day of November, in the eighteenth Year
of Our Reign.

