C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A Proclamation to inform all Our loving Subjects of the Lawfulness of Our
Commissions of Array, issued into the several Counties of Our Realm of
England, and Dominion of Wales, and of the use of them: And commanding them to
obey Our Commissioners therein named, in the Execution of their said
Commissions.
WHereas by the Laws of this Land, the Ordering and Governing of the Militia of
the Kingdom, for the preventing and suppression of all Invasions and
Rebellions, has (as a most known and undoubted right and prerogative) belonged
in all times solely to Our Self and Our Progenitors, Kings of England. And
accordingly we have heretofore awarded Commissions of Lieutenancie into the
several Counties of this Our Realm, for the governing and exercising of the
Souldiory and Trained Bands there, like as Queen Elizabeth and Our dear Father,
both of happy memory, had done before Us. And therein (amongst other things)
gave power to the Commissioners in each County, to Levy, call together, Arm,
Array, Train, and Muster Our Subjects inhabiting in the said several Counties,
and to conduct and lead them against all Our Enemies, and all Rebels and
Traitors from time to time, as often as need should require.

All which Commissions (although We did, since the beginning of this
Parliament, grant the like for the County of York, to the now Earl of Essex,
with the privity of both Our Houses of Parliament, and without exception from
either) have, without hearing any of Our Council learned, been since Voted in
Our said Houses of Parliament to be illegal and void; the reason whereof We
have not yet been informed of, nor can imagine: For that neither any illegal
Clause (if any such be) in those Commissions, nor any excess or abuse of their
Authority, by any Lieutenants or their Deputies, in raising of Moneys, taxing
of the Inhabitants, or otherwise could, by Law, make void any such Powers as in
themselves were lawful to be granted and put in execution.

And whereas, in case of danger and necessity, it had been more suitable to the
condition of the times, and the good liking of Our Subjects (who cannot be well
pleased with any new ways, how specious soever) that Our Houses of Parliament
should ^^^e taken Order that Our Commissions of Lieutenancie (the Course
whereof had so long continued) should, for the present, have been put in
execution, at least wise such part thereof as was undeniably and unquestionably
legal, and was sufficent for the purposes before mentioned, or that (according
to the like Presidents in former times)they would have desired Us to have
granted new Commissions of that nature, omitting such Clauses as might justly
have been excepted against, which we would not have denied; and not to have
called in so suddenly for those Commissions to be cancelled, as was done
(though we know not by what Law) in Our House of Peers. Yet notwithstanding,
Our two Houses of Parliament, in stead of such Our Commissions, under pretense
of evident and imminent danger, and urgent and inevitable necessity of putting
Our Subjects into a posture of Defense, have made a late Order for the settling
of the Militia, under the name of an Ordinance (which two or three several
times had been refused by the major part of Peers) and being made, not only
without, but against Our Consent (the reasons whereof are sufficiently known to
all Our Subjects) is not only without any one warrantable President of former
times (as We believe) but (as we are well assured) void in Law.

Wherefore, out of the care which We have of Our people, lest under the
pretense of danger, necessity, and want of Authority from Us to put them into a
Military Posture, they should be drawn and engaged in any opposition against Us
or Our just Authority; and that they may know they are by Us otherwise provided
for, and secured against all just causes of Fears and Dangers from any Force in
a legal way (for We are resolved to rule and govern Our Subjects according to
Our known Laws only) We have thought fit, for the present, hereby thus timely
to publish and declare, That We have awarded into the several Counties of Our
Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, Our several Commissions of Array,
thereby giving power to several persons of Honor, Reputation, and Estate in
the said Counties, for the safety and defense of Us, Our Kingdom, and Our good
Subjects from time to time, as it shall be needful to Array, Train, Arm, and
Muster Our Subjects inhabiting in the said Counties, and in case of imminent
danger to conduct and lead them for the destruction of Our Enemies, and in the
defense of their Country and the Kingdom.

Which power of granting Commissions for the defense of Us and Our Kingdom, as
it is inherent in Us, and inseparable from Our Crown, so it has been warranted
by Presidents of the like Commissions in all Ages, both before and since the
grant of the great Charter by King Henry the third, down to the very time that
Commissions of Lieutenancie were granted, and was agreed to be legal even by
the two learned Judges, Sir George Crook, and Sir Richard Hutton (amongst all
the rest) in their Arguments, which concluded on the Subjects part in Our
Exchequer-Chamber in Master Hampdens Case, as by the same (now since printed)
may appear, together with diverse particular Records in several Ages therein
mentioned, to which many more may be added.

And in these Our Commissions, to prevent all manner of Exception, We have, in
the powers given to Our Commissioners, in all points followed that Commission
of Array, which was agreed upon by the King and both Houses of Parliament,
after conference with the Judges of the Realm, in the fifth year of King Henry
the fourth, and was done upon the desire of the Commons, to have some
alterations from former Commissions in certain overstrict Clauses, whereunto
nevertheless no exception was taken for the legalitie, but the Kings Assent
acknowledged as an Act of great Grace, as appears by the Parliament Rolls of
that year. Since which time Commissions of Array have frequently issued for
prevention of danger, either of Enemies abroad or at home (in both which
respects Our Houses of Parliament have voted this Kingdom to be in danger) the
same being indeed the old ordinary way for the preservation of the King and
Kingdom, who must not delay their preparation till such danger break forth into
Action, and so perhaps prove too late. And these Commissions of Array were not
discontinued, till by reason of the Commissions of Lieutenancie (which in
substance contained the powers given by those Commissions of Array) they came
to be of little use.

And, whereas by the Statute of the fourth and fifth years of the Reign of
Philip and Mary King and Queen of England, it is enacted, That if any person or
persons that shall be commanded generally or specially to Muster before any such
as shall have Authority or Commandment for the same, by, or from the King, or
by any Lieutenant, Warden, or other person or persons authorized for the same,
do willingly absent him or themselves from the same Musters, having no true and
reasonable excuse of Sickness, or other lawful Impediment, or at their
appearance at such Musters, do not bring with them such their best Furniture, or
Array and Armor, as he or they shall then have for his or their own person in
readiness, that such person or persons shall, for every such default and
offense, incur such penalties, and to be inflicted in such manner as by the
said Statute are limited. Which Statute is in full force.

We do therefore, by this Our Proclamation, expressly charge and command all Our
Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Majors, Bailiffs, Constables, and all other Our
Officers, and other Our loving Subjects of Our several Counties of England,
and Dominion of Wales respectively, That they be attending, aiding, assisting,
counselling, and at the commandment of the said Commissioners of Our several
Counties respectively in the execution of their Commissions, as they will
answer the contrary at their utmost perils.

And although We can nothing doubt that any of Our loving Subjects shall or
will oppose or hinder Our said Commissioners in the Execution of their said
Commissions, by putting in Execution any Power touching the Militia, not
warranted by Our Authority, or otherwise disturbing Our said Commissioners in
Execution of Our Service, considering the extreme danger wherein such Act may
upon the several Circumstances, by the strict construction of the Law involve
them: Yet, lest any ill-affected Persons, too far presuming upon Our Clemency,
and in hope of impunity or pardon, should dare to off^nd Us, and Our Laws,
contrary to this Our Proclamation; We do hereby declare to all Our Subjects,
That whosoever shall, after this Our Proclamation published, do any thing in
opposition of Our Commissioners, by disobeying their Commands, according to
Law, or putting in Execution any other Command concerning the Militia of Our
Kingdom, contrary to Law, We shall account them unworthy of Our Grace and
Mercy, and such as must expect, that justice (how penal or capital soever it
be) shall be done upon them according to their demerits.

Given at Our Court at York the twentieth day of June, in the eighteenth Year
of Our Reign, 1642.
Imprinted first at York, and now Reprinted at London. 1642.


