THE Wiltshire-Petition FOR TITHES EXPLAINED, For the better understanding of
the PEOPLE Of this COMMONWEALTH.

Herein you have first the Petition it self at large inserted, and then the
Observations follow, being directed to each material passage in the Petition by
a letter of the Alphabet.

By E. C. and R. E.

LONDON, Printed for William Larnar, at the Black-moor's head near
Fleet-bridge. 1653.

To the Honorable the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England. (A)
The humble Petition of us Gentlemen, freeholders, and other (B) Inhabitants
in the County of Wilts,
Shows,
THat your Petitioners having to their unspeakable grief observed the workings
of Satan, transforming himself into an Angel of light, tending to the
underminding of holiness and Christian Religion, by a generation of men who cry
down Learning, Ministry, Ordinances, and almost whatever belongs to us as
Christians or Civil men. (C) And having observed the endeavors of some, by so
many ways to disturb and remove the so long settled way for the maintenance of
Ministers established by the same Laws by which any property is enjoyed in
this Nation (D) without any regard to the settling of a sure and full
maintenance in stead of it, (E) Conceive themselves bound in Conscience both of
Duty to God and to the Commonwealth, to give in their testimony against them in
their practices. We dare not be silent, when in the Language and the workings
of many amongst our selves the Ministry, and Ordinances of Jesus Christ are so
manifestly exposed, not only to the insultings of men openly and professedly
profane, (F) But (which is more to be lamented) to the scorn and contempt of
such as pretend to great lights in Religion, which do so manifestly tend not
only to the utter subversion of all Religion, but, as a necessary consequence
of it, to the destruction and dissolution of all bonds of Civil Government. (G)
To whom under Heaven should we make our-moan, and before whom should we spread
our complaints, but before your Honors? to whom we cannot but with all
thankfulness acknowledge the goodness of God toward this Nation (I) in
governing and disposing your Honors hearts at such a time as this, when there
are so many desperate suggestions and attempts against Universities,
Ordinances, Ministry, and their necessary maintenance, to declare your selves,
as you have done, real countenancers and supporters of them all; which gives
the godly of this Nation ground of hope, the Lord will further honor you to be
instruments for establishing and countenancing of all these, for the glory of
his great Name, and for the settling of the Gospel in purity and power, to be a
blessed inheritance to succeeding generations; and to whom we thought it our
duty in our places to declare that your Petitiones, in consent (as we humbly
conceive) with the People of God generally in this Land (K) (whatsoever some
suggest to the contrary) do greatly rejoice in those your Christian actings,
that so your hands may be strengthened in the work of God, and therefore are
further encouraged to make their humble addresses to this Honorable assembly,
with these (as we conceive) necessary requests.

1. That by your wisdom and care, the Ordinances of Jesus Christ may be
countenanced and preserved from the scorn, contempt, and profane neglect to
which they are exposed both by some Ministers themselves, who give too much
occasion thereof by their ignorance and scandalous living, old empty
formalities still continued, and also by many others both profane and humorous
persons. (L)

2. That Pastors and Teachers (M* for the work of the Ministry and edifying
of the body of Christ, may with the like wisdom and care be countenanced, your
Petitioners being well assured that it will be a very acceptable service to
Jesus Christ your Lord and ours, to own and encourage those Ambassadors of his,
to whom he has committed the word of Reconciliation, and with whom he has
promised to be to the end of the world, and in whom we have found (by sweet
experience) upon our souls, the power and the sense of Jesus Christ according
to his promises.

3. That as the Lord of old settled the Schools of the Prophets amongst his
peculiar people, and has blessed our Universities and Schools of learning,
for the breeding up and sending forth many choice instruments of his glory both
in Church and Commonwealth; so you would be pleased to continue our
Universities, and other Schools of learning under your special care and
protection. (N)

4. That for preserving the Ministry from contempt, (O) freeing them from the
temptation of men-pleasing and humane dependences, from distracting diversions
in the work of the Lord, enabling them to works of mercy, and for supplying
them with necessary provisions for their studies and families, that so they
which preach the Gospel may live of the Gospel, Your Honors would be pleased
to continue their maintenance, with necessary inlargment in those places where
means are wanting.

These things we humbly and earnestly request of your Honors; and who knows
whether God has not raised you up for such a time as this is? in the
performance whereof, you shall the more engage the Lord Jesus to defend both
you and us, who has so eminently appeared hitherto in our preservation, and
will be the surest defense of those that act for him: and you shall also make
glad the hearts of the godly in this Land, stop the mouths of those who are so
ready to speak evil of you, and also prevent the designs those who are contrary
minded, and further oblige us to pray.

The Observations, or Explanation.
(A) IF the old Spirit of Malignancy and high Presbytery, had not remained in
the contrivers of this Petition, they would have suffered it to have spoken in
the Frontispeece, Right Honorable, and in words at length and not in figures,
acknowledged them the Supreme Authority of this Commonwealth; but such are the
cunning slights and devices of the Clergy, the contrivers and promoters of this
petition, though they make the people of the Land, Gentlemen and Freeholders,
etc. their slaves and Asses to ride on, to uphold their Lordly dommination, and
exorbitant Tyrannot*s maintenance by Tithes, yet will not let then go so far as
to own this Authority downright, as Supreme, Because they lie at the hope of
advancing another Authority; unto which they will speak aloud, and full, and
say, To his most Sacred Majesty.

(B) You should have said, in the room of (other inhabitants) Hostlers,
Chamberlains, Tapsters, and all the profane people of Wilts, with the
Schoolmaster not many miles from Marlingsborow, who set his name to it, and
made all his little School-Boyes set theirs: and he contrived many other names,
and caused his Boys to write them, to fill up the number of the Gentlemen,
Freeholders, and other inhabitants of the County of Wilts; or else they must
have been whipped. Is not this a fine way to carry on a Petition, and abuse the
Gentlemen and freeholders, to rank them with such companions? but you may see
what blind zeal will do. It was the practice of the Caviliers, to carry on
their wicked designs by lies and forgeries, and so do these.

(C) It were to be wished that the Petitioners in these words did speak truth:
it is to be feared they do not; for the Tapsters, Hostlers and Chamberlain,
and the profane people of Wilts, with the Schoole-Boyes, never troubled their
hears to be so observant; but as they began with a lie, so they go one. But if
they all had been so diligent observers, they might have seen Satan's working
and carrying on his design in this Petition, who striveth to set up himself,
and advance his Kingdom by his instruments, by persecuting all others that are
not in their way, though they be such as do live in all godliness and honesty.

(D) Here is the great business in this petition: you may know the Lion by his
pawe, the hand of Joab is in all this: the Merchants that are trading here, are
discovered: yet may know who they are that make all this dust; they are
Demetrius his Apprentices, Silver-smiths by occupation: therefore they cry it
up in every Pulpit and Press, and preach it in every Town and Village, this
their Diana, by which they get their so great gain, riches and honors, else
you should never have heard of the Clergy coming to the Parliament with a
Petition; for do but observe, when they did join or set forward any good thing
for the profit of this Commonwealth, or ease of the people thereof, but have
been the obstructers of many, and the causers of many burdens to be as heavy
yoaks lying on the necks of them; and viper-like have endeavored to eat out
the very Bowels of this Parliament: so that saying in the Prophet is made good:
And as thieves wait for a man, the company of Priests murder in the way by
consent: for they work mischief. See and read history, if there were any
Villainy in a Nation, if a Priest had not a hand in it. See Master Pryme's
Looking Glass for Lordly Bishops. Was not the Pope and his Lordly papal
Authority, with all his Popish Hirerchy, and Lordly Bishops, and their Rabble,
with all their maintenance settled by the same law? See the Acts of Parliament:
and they are taken away, and yet we enjoyed property still; and surely if
Tithes as well as Bishops Lands, and Colledge-Lands as well as Dean and
Chapters Lands, should be sold and taken away, the people of the Commonwealth
would enjoy property more then they do now; yea Religion and learning also.
Therefore it is hoped that none but the worshippers of the Beast and lovers of
the whore will be against the clear rooting up of Tithes root and branch, and
need not fear the touching of the Law by which we enjoy property.

(E) Well said, cunning fellows; they will be of the surest side; they will not
part with their fair Dal^lah's, but for a good and better exchange, a more
fuller and better maintenance. Its wondered whither the coveteousness of these
Priests will in the next petition enlarge it self: they have the fifth of every
man's estate already; the next surely must be all: so that like hell they will
enlarge their desires, and then the poor countryman that now is feign to save
it out of his own, his wives and childrens bellies, shall have no bread at all
to live on. But surely we are not delivered to work all these abominations; but
as the former have been found to have been of the Devils setting up, by his
eldest son the Beast, and his Queen the great whore and the false prophet, the
body of the Clergy spoken of in Revel. 13. and 17. Chapters; so will these
Tithes and Colledge-lands: for they stand on the same bottom: and as Hamans
wife said to him, Esth. 6. 13. They have begun to fall, and they shall surely
fall; for God will not suffer such wickedness long to continue, as is practiced
by these Clergymen, on the poor people of this Land, as they do by treble
damage on all the people that refuse to pay it them out of a pure conscience:
so that saying of the Lord by his Prophet, is made good, Micah 3. 5. Thus says
the Lord, The Prophets that deceive my people, and bite them with their teeth,
and cry peace; but if a man put not into their mouths, they prepare war
against him.

(F) From your conscience as your duty; is it one good and sure grounds? had
you a Lawyer to your Counselor? for a Priest its believed you had: and if both
were there, they might show you a couple of reasons for it, but perhaps one
Reason of the Sun were worth them both. You that have been sharp sighed to see
Satan's working, and transforming himself, its strange you missed it here; but I
believe he opened the bottomless pit, that there was so great a smoke with his
angels the Priests, that you took falsehoods for truths, and so presently say,
you are bound in conscience as your duty so to do: and therefore we will pity
you, and the next time desire you to clear your eye-sights, and not so to
mistake and be so sottish to be led so by the nose.

Can there be greater prophaners and contemners of the pure ordinances of
Christ, then the Clergy of the world are, nay of this Nation, yea of the County
of Wilts? is there not all profane ignorant persons received into their Church?
is not the holy things of God, and the Childrens bread given to dogs? all must
pay Tithes, else, No penny, no Paternoster; but pay penny, and have all; he
shall pass, if he be a rich man, and pay his Tithes, for a very good and
precious Saint, thought he be a profane Devil; as witness Master Vmpheries book
pleading for the same, and Master Mastersons practice at Clements Danes London:
and is not this a great profaning the ordinances of Christ, and a bringing
them in contempt? it is left for the wise to judge.

(G) O strange! here is a change indeed; the Clergy are zealous for the Civil
Government: Surely they are converted, and now have swallowed that hard bit
that lay so long on their stomachs, the honest and harmless Engagement to be
true and faith^ul. Dare you believe them? hark, you may smell their secret
plots and tamperings now with the Dutch, as in Cambridge-shire and other
places; it is pity they have not Sion-Colledge, that they may there sit and
hatch more Cockatrice eggs: but now I do remember my self, it is granted them:
then look what will follow --

(H) It is not long since you could go and say, To your Sacred Majesty, next
under God Supreme head and governor, full mouthed and at large; witness 1647,
48, 49, 50, 51, 52, and it will reach -- to 53. Did not you all with Love,
Case, Drak^, and Jenkins, with our dear brethren of Sco^land, make your
complaints to his Most Sacreed Majesty the Lords anointed, our dear Barn and
Covenanted Child? it is well if the wind be changed: but how long will it
continue? no body knows; and trust to them you may not.

(I) Here they come sorth in a goodly dress, as if they were true and faithful
Commonwealths-men; and do now fawn one the Parliament with a little
acknowledgement of Gods blessing them: and truly it is but a little indeed; for
if tney had said less, they had said nothing: and that they knew would be a
Remora in the establishing their Tithes, and a prospering of this pretty Babe
maintenance. They do also put up a faint prayer: but they are to be born with;
for they have but new learned to speak the language.

(K) Do not say so: for the godly both Gentlemen and others the Freeholders of
Wilts do not consent to this Petition; and its hoped the godly ^n this
Commonwealth know better, as you may see in the petitions of Hartford, Bucks,
and in a book called The Husbandmans plea against Tithes, sold at the
Blackamore by Fleet-bridge, signed by many of the honest and well-affected
Freeholders of the same Counties: therefore you do not speak the mind of the
truly godly.

(L) Is it not to be feared that Adoniram the Scribe, when this was writ, had
his head troubled about settling sure of his new flock, almost 400 l. per an.
that made you thus mistake? for, as is before said, there is none like them for
profaning Ordinances; and therefore its hoped that seeing the laws of Christ
will not prevail with them to keep them from committing the sins of profaning
and contemning the purest ordinances of Christ, the Parliament will make a Law
to teach them more wit, and better manners; for they are judged to have need of
both, as you may see by their good brother Clergie-man of Ridlington in
Rutland-shire, who preaching on this text, Fear not, little flock, it is your
Fathers will to give you a Kingdom, he observed this doctrine, That God would
make the heads of this Nation a footstool for the King to get up to his
Throne. Judge now whether they have not need to be better taught, before they
be better fed.

(M) How came these words in fashion amongst the Clergy? for Priest was all
the term. O but we are told by the Petitioners, that Satan has transformed
himself into an Angel of light, and therefore Priest must be buried, and now
they will be Pastors and Teachers: of what? of people? Do they preach for the
saving of souls? no; for 400 l. a year: and if a Benefice fall of 100 d. a year
better then that they are possessed of, away goes this Pastor, and leaves his
300. l. a year flock, and embraces his 400. l. as Adroniam the Scribe did
Fulham, for one in the County of Wilts; and Isaac, that was sometime the
glass-man, did Hammersmith, for Fulham: so that indeed that saying (by them and
this Petition) in the Prophet is verified Jer. 5. 31. The Prophets preach lies,
and the Priests divine for hire, and my people delight to have it so: and what
will ye do in the end thereof?

(N) To this Article, I will only refer you to Beza his notes on Acts the 6.
and 9 verse, beginning at the figure 7. Whose words are these: Schools and
Universities were of old time addicted to false Pastors, and were the
instruments of Satan to blow abroad and defend false Doctrines of the company
and College, as it were. 8. False Teacbers, because they will not be overcome,
fly from disputations to manifest and open slandering and false accusations.
(9) The first bloody persecution of the Church of Christ began and sprung from
a Counsel of Priests, by the suggestion of the Vniversitie-Doctors. Thus says
he. Had we not need to Petition for their standing? why were then the Bishops
put down? for popery is there practiced still, as all their Popish Offices and
Garments, their Scarlet Robes, their Maces, Tip-staves, and their square
Tiburne-Caps, and a hundred other trinkets of the Whore.

(O) Had you but been diligent observers of the doctrine of Christ, you would
never have flown to the Civil powers to have defended you from contempt: for
it is the portion of his people to be reviled and made contemptible: but it
seems you do not like it; and you may believe Christ will not much esteem of
you: and be sure, fence your selves as strong as you will or can, the thing you
so much fear, God will bring to pass; as the Lord has said in Mal. 2. 9.
Therefore have I also made you to be despised and vile before all the people,
because you kept not my ways, but have been partial in the Law.

Thus Reader in brief, we have given you a taste of the Clergy of Wilts; by
which our Countrymen may judge of the rest of their Petitions from other
Counties.
So we bid thee farewell.
FINIS.

