A Fresh Bit of Mutton, for those Fleshy minded Canibals that cannot endure
Pottadge.

OR A Defense of Giles Calfine's Mess of Pottadge well seasoned and well
crummed.

Against the idle yet insolent exceptions of his monstrous Adversary
MT.ST.RA.IS.PH.

By Drupheyra Thexylvenic: Cosmopolites

IOELL 2.17. Let the Priests the Ministers of the Lord weep between the Porch
and the Altar and let them say, Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine
heritage to reproach, that the Heathen should rule over them, etc.

ECCLESIAST. 5.2. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty
to utter any thing before God; for God is in Heaven and thou upon Earth,
therefore let thy words be few.

Printed for T. P. in Queens head-Alley, 1462.

A Fresh bit of Mutton for those fleshy minded Cannibals that cannot endure
Pottadge.
Our blessed Savior himself, and also John the Baptist justly called the
Pharisees of their times, a Generation of Vipers and Hypocrites; And certainly
the new resined Pharisees of our days are just the same, professing all good,
yet practicing nothing but what is evil and destructive to the peace of the
Church. The old Pharisees said of John Baptist, who came neither eating or
drinking, that he had a Devil; of our Savior (who came both eating and
drinking) that he was a Glutton and Winebiber, etc. and that he also had a
Devil: Of the same humor are our new nice Pharisees, if fasting at Church
like honest Christians, or full fed in a Conventicle amongst their own
licentious Libertines, they are still the same, still going contrary to the the
Orders of the Church, fasting when they are allowed to feast, and feasting when
fasts are enjoined. But these men go beyond the old Pharisees in this, that
they are not content to deny obedience to Church Orders, but revile the Church
as adulterous, for not conforming her self to their giddy devises. They are
never so happy in their own opinions, as when they are casting foul
indignities and aspersions on those whom Christ has chosen, and his Church
ordained to be the faithful dispensors of his word and Sacramets. Hence
proceeds those scandalous reproachs against that sacred government, which
Christ instituted in his Church. It is true, as Christ said to his Apostles,
Menshal think they do God good service when they revile and persecute you It
appears nowby these men's practices, who think themselves almost capable of
Heaven, If they can but rail at Gods faithful Ministers and Ambassadors.
Traducing their calling as diabolical and Antichrist^an, ^rophaning their
practice and worship as Idolatrous and Superstitious, blasting their good names
as odious and scandalous, and calumniating their lives as lewd and licentious;
but why do I rake in this dunghill of blasphemies and reproaches? For what good
language can Christ's Messengers expect from such incendiaries, whose tongues
are set on fire from Hell? What calamities this viperous generation has brought
on poor Germany is known to all and what it may bring on us is very much to be
feared, by the monstrous increase of these pestilent sects of late in this
Kingdom? We see how they resist the Orders of our Church in troops, and labor
by their multitudes to effect that, which by plain arguments and reason they
cannot accomplish.

The patient and pious humble Remonstrance met with a plural adversary, a five
headed monster, styled Smecty m^u^s; Out of the same sea was revealed the
second Beast with 7 heads, in arms against our Lyturgy, (known by the name of
^walphineramis) but that the mystery of iniquity may appear every day more
abominable, Giles Calfines answers are discovered under this heathenish name,
MT.ST.RA.IS.PH. And now that you may know him to be a true viper, you may see
he has eaten his way through the belly of his damme: Impudently proclaiming in
his Title and Book, that the Lyturgy of our Church is no better than Popish
Poradge, etc. Making the Church (too good a mother for such a bastard) no
better than an harlot. He says he has such arguments against it, as are
unanswerable. A bold speech of an uncircumcised Philistim: Yet in the name of
God I will throw one stone out of David's sling at this Goliath, though I cannot
put on Saul's armor, nor was ever wrapped in Samuels mantle. And now Sir, I
must a little reason with you, if you will allow of any reason.

This you say, It is no indignity to call the Service Book Porradge, by a
metaphor, because fat Cooks out of the Popes Kitchen composed it. I had though
(my unlettered many lettered brethren) that Cooks did make Porradge within, not
out of the Kitchen, and if it had been composed by the Popes Cooks, it would
never have had so many arguments against Popery, as may with small pains be
deduced from thence. If it be Porradge it is milk Porradge made of the fincere
milk of the word, and boiled before the Pope had either Cook or Kitchen, at
least allow it to be as Giles Calfine affirms good wholesome Porradge well
easoned and well crummed, etc. If there be any thing that does not agree with
your nice palate, it is herb of Grace, whereof there is good store; an
ingredient which you cannot abide, because it will vex your fleshly desires.
But if the whore of Babylon did chop into it (as you say) weeds of Idolatry, to
poison the children of Grace; The blessed Reformers did by their Porradge as
Elisha did by those (whereof the sons of the Prophets cried out, saying, there
is death in the pot, that is, not throw them away, but cure them, by putting
therein the fine flower of Gods Word, and making them conformable to the truth.
So that there is now nothing in them, but that which is in for our nourishment
and comfort; and I dare confidently affirm that never any child of Grace
perished by any nightshade or Colloquintida in the Porradge. But you say, the
name Lyturgy and Mass are used promiscuously by Jesuits, and therefore the
Lyturgy is unlawful. A pretty formal argument, the word Communion and Sacrament
are used promiscuously by us and the Papists by the same argument we should
not receive the Lords Supper, because Papists agree with us in the name: By
this you may behold on what slender argument your found opinions are grounded.
But, you say, Na^nes are the Images of things, and therefore the Lyturgy is
either a Lethargy of Will Worship, or a Mass^ of Idolatry. Well bowl'd Brether
Nicholas, but that one is too wide, and the other too narrow. Tenterdon Steeple
is the cause of Goodwins sands, the more Logical argument of the two; if the
Name be always the Image of a thing, then every one that is named John must be
as good as S. John, and he that is called Peter as S. Peter. I warrant that is
the matter that S Paul was so wicked before his name was altered, because he
was King Saul's name sake. I by this can see the reason why you delight to give
Scripture names to your children, because you think their names will make them
good; when as we see these poor children, being misled by their parents and
separating from Gods Church into Conventicles, loose all Religion and God too,
while they run a whoring after their own invention^, and worship the Calves of
their own imagination. But again the name being the image of a thing, you hence
assirme that bowing to a name is bowing to an Image; Ergo, it is Idolatry tobow
to he name of Jesus. If this be your Logic, God keep me from your conclusions.
You have I believe forgot bow a worthy Gous: did of late vindicate this part of
worship; but I will bear with your short memory seeing you have almost spoiled
it by hearing long winded Sermons. But now comes another of your great
arguments, that the Lyturgy is taken out of the Popish Brevia^y, and therefore
it is unlawful. I can tell you that the Lords prayer is taken from thence,
will you therefore say it is unlawful? Your Brethren do as good, for many of
them will not use it; the Apostles Creed is there too, but those Articles are
now no part of your says; Turner is your Apostle; (but I am sure his Creed
will never save your souls) the ten Commandments are there too, but the
World, the Flesh and the Devil are so potent in your affections, that you will
not keep them, and therefore desire not to hear them. But if the Papists mix
with our Prayers their superstrtious ones, must not we therefore use the good
ones? The Devil confessed Christ to be the Son of God, so did Peter, yet our
Savior never blamed Peter for using the Devils confession. Next you find fault
with the translation of the Psalms in the Liturgy; for answer to this, pray
understand (if you can) that the Psalms in the Service book were never yet
allowed of by any Papists, but were one of the first translations since our
blessed Resormation, and authorized by Act or Parliament for public Service.
This last which is the best translation, was done by King James his Command,
and by him appointed to be read in Churches; and if they were (as I wish they
might) be enjoined by Parliament to that use, I dare say, none would refuse to
read them instead of the old. Next you find fault that we use Gloria Patri,
instead of praise the Lord: It seems you think holy duties enjoined are
unlawful to be performed, for what is Gloria Patri, but praise be to the Lord?

Another frivolous Cavil you have against reading parts of Chapters, as in the
Epistles and Gospels; he is a fool they say, that can say nothing, and rather
than you will have nothing to say, you will talk like a fool; for tell me
(good Sir) is it not lawful nor commendable on such occasions to take those
parts of holy Writ only, as are agreeable and pertinent to the time and
occasion? If you will not allow a part of a Chapter, do not allow a Chapter of
a Book; for the division of books into Chapters was not original, but of
latter times, done few ages ago. I will give you one instance more delightful
to your fleshly desires; Why is your Mutton your own dear dish, brought to
your table by the joint, and not by the whole sheep? and why do you cate but
part of that joint only, such as you best like, and not all of it; you cannot
give me a reason of one, but I can return it to you in behalf of the other,
only this one excepted: that this your trade of Pamphleting will not maintain
so great a table, as a whole sheep every meal, and two legged Mutton into the
bargain.

Your last and worst argument is against the Letany, which (you say) is not the
stumpe or limb of Dagon, but the head of the Mass book, in which you say are
nothing but repetitions, and a multitude of words, as Good Lord deliver us,
hear us etc. ridiculous invocations, Magic spells, and no beeter than
conjuring. Oh horrid Profanation of true zealous devotions! stop thy mouth
audatious Blasphemer, and blush for the abuse of those cries for mercy, and
short ejaculations for and ience at the Throne of grace.

Look on Psalm. 136. and see if there be not more repetitions in these very
words, for his mercy endures for ever: See also our Saviors practice, Matthew.
26. praying three times the very same words, Father if it be possible let this
cup pass from me: Can you teach David and our Savior? will you charge them
with vain repetitions? He that is wise in his own conceit is a fool; but take
heed, pride goes before a fall, and an high mind before destruction. You have
great need to say one part of the Letany, from all blindness of heart, from
pride, vain glory, and hypocrisy, from envy hatred and malice, and all
uncharitableness, etc, Look I beseech you to an extemporary prayer of one of
your own trib; how many vain and impious Tautologes have you there, a dozen
expressions of one thing; crying good Lord, merciful Father, gracious Lord,
etc. three times in a breath to stop a gap, and keep his tongue in play,
profaning the name and attributes of God, to fill up his nonsense, and help
out his dull invention. Lastly tell me, do you ever think to come to heaven by
conjuring? Can you come thither without the Incarnation, Nativity,
Circumcision, Temptation and Agony, the death and burial, the glorious
Resurrection and Assention of Christ? This it is to cast most glorious pearls
before Swine, who will be sure to trample them in the mire. You need no other
answer but the whipping post or gallows, that dare defame the mysteries of
Salvation. But though you will call it conjuring, it shall ever be the chief
part of my public devotions, and I will add this to my private Letany.

From the numerous generation of Smects.
From viperous tub Preachers and their giddy Sects,
From those who holy prayers of our Church neglects,
Good Lord deliver me.
And now Sir, having in some measure laid open the invalidity of your
arguments, I crave leave a little to rub you by the elbow for your jeering; I
perceive you are a carnal man fleshly minded, you love Mutton well, but cannot
away with Porridge: Take heed you do not surfeit your self, too much of your
straight-laced Mutton it will bring you to a Consumption, and then good Porridge
well seasoned and well boiled, will prove the best nourishing diet to restore
your decayed nature.

You are I perceive a Cook too, but no ordinary Cook, for you never would
dress Porridge.

One of the Popes fat Cooks you are not, for they put poison in the Porridge,
You are then a lean Cook, and for your leanesse you may thank your Mutton. You
are no ignorant Cook, but one that is well experienced, one that knows the
whore of Babylon well, and cannot abide her, because she is out of your reach.
For if she were near you would be one of her best customers, having as good a
desire to the flesh as the best. Experience is gained by old age, so it seems
you are an old Cook; and then (if the name be the image of a thing) you are a
Cook-old. But will nothing down with you but Mutton, sure your stomach is very
strong. Your extemporary exercises are but raw meats full of crudities, but you
know where to vent them, and no carryon will kill an old Crow. The learned
Clergy you will not hear, for they are Baals Priests you say. But you love
strong backed men, as Potte^ and Carmen, inspired Weavers, and soule-curing
Cobblers; such as were Ieroboamb's Priests made of the lowest of the people. I
^e ceive you hope to gain something by their Calves. But to return to the
matter in hand, and come to a Conclusion; since I perceive you are such a great
Mutton monger, pray what part of the Mutton shall I assign. If I allot you the
head, you may think I account you a Sheeps head, (blow your R^ms Horn, and
assemble your tribe to a consul;tation) if the neck, you will say, I jeere your
stiff neckednesse. The shoulders you are content to keep for Friday nightsu
spper, with the help of a good fat Coney for your digestion. The breast and
loins you and your Brethren love dearly. But above all, I commend unto you
the rumpe, and least you should blend legs with your sisters, I will take the
legs and begone.

Psalm. 78.30, 31. They were not estranged of their lusts, But while their meat
was yet in their mouths, The wrath of God came upon them, and slew the fattest
of them and smote down the chosen men of Israel.

Levit. 19.27. Ye shall not round the corners of your heads, neither shall
thou mar the corners of thy beard.


FINIS.

