ARTICLES OF PEACE Between His Sacred MAJESTY, CHARLES THE SECOND, KING of
Great Britain, France and Ireland, etc. and the City and Kingdom of Algiers,
concluded by Thomas Allen Esquire, Admiral of His said Majesty of Great
Britain's Ships in the Mediterranean Seas, according to Instructions received
on that behalf from His Royal Highness the Duke of York and Albany, Earl of
Ulster, Lord High Admiral of England and Ireland, etc. Constable of the Castle
of Dover, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, and Governor of Portsmouth, etc.
Being the same Articles concluded by Sir John Lawson Knight, on the 23. of
April, 1662. and afterward more solemnly confirmed on the 10. of November
following, and since ratified by the Grand Signior.

EDINBURGH, Reprinted in the year, 1664.

PREFACE.
IT is not needful to say much concerning the late agreement betwixt His
Sacred Majesty Charles the Second, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
etc. and the City and Kingdom of Algier; (the Articles whereof are in these
following Papers, word for word exhibited) For certainly, that man is very
little read in the world, who sees not how much this Peace imports the benefit
and security of the English Commerce, and no less the honor of the English
Nation; especially considering the start it has given us of our powerful
Neighbors, who are still laboring under great trouble, charge and difficulty
with those people: and the Accord is yet more glorious, if we observe the time
wherein it was made; that is to say, it was made at a time when the English lay
patiently exposed to all the inconveniences, which either the Fables or the
Councils of Holland could give them; menaced in the very Channel by an open
Force, and deserted in the Mediterranean after such a manner, that we are loath
to make use of a word, answerable to the quality of the action: the Hollanders
having first invited us into a conjunct engagement with them, and afterward not
only quitting the place by stealth and surprise, but invading at the same time
our Rights in Guine: And yet so it is at last, that notwithstanding all these
practices and disappointments, we have now lived to see the Hollanders swallow
their own resolutions, by withdrawing their Shipping, and contenting
themselves with the blind Passage of the North, rather then adventuring to give
his Royal Highness the Lord High Admiral of England, the un-mannerly
provocation of pressing through the Channel. And we ha^^ likewise lived to
enjoy the Fruits of that Peace, which others have in vain attempted; and not
only so, but to fee our selves acquitted of the guilt of the (...) by a solemn
Declaration of the Government it self of Algier, and the breath charged upon
the tumults and disorders of their own Subjects: they themselves not sticking
publicly to avow, that an agreement with England was to them so necessary,
that they were not able to maintain an intercourse and correspondence without
it.

This being the sum and state of that Affair, gives sufficiently to understand,
how great a care His Majesty has of the reputation and welfare of His people,
and of the true interest of the English Crown and Nation. And it is our further
happiness, that the Orders and Directions of so wise and gracious a Prince, are
committed into the hands of suitable Officers and Ministers, as has been
manifested throughout the whole course and conduct of this Transaction.

Articles of Peace between His Sacred Majesty, CHARLES the II. King of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, etc. and the City and Kingdom of Algiers,
concluded by Thomas Allen Esquire, Admiral of His said Majesty of Great
Britain's Ships in the Mediterranean Seas, etc.
I.THat from this day, and for ever forward, there be a good and firm Peace
between His Sacred Majesty, the King of Great Britain, etc. and the Bassa,
Duan, and Governors of Algiers, and the Dominions thereunto belonging; And the
Ships, Subjects, and People on either party, shall not do or offer any Offense
or Injury to each other, but treat one another with all possible respect and
friendship; And any Ships belonging to the King of Great Britain, etc. Or any
of His Majesty's Subjects may freely come to the Port of Algiers, and buy and
sell as in former times: And also unto any other Port that belongs to the
Government of Algiers, paying the Custom of 10 per Cent. as in former times;
And no man within the Jurisdiction of Algiers shall give the Subjects of His
said Majesty, a bad word, or a bad deed, or a bad action.

II. That all Ships, as well those belonging to His Sacred Majesty, the King of
Great Britain, etc. and any of His Majesty's Subjects, as those belonging to
Algiers, shall freely pass the Seas, and Traffic without any search,
hinderance, or molestation whatsoever.

III. That all Subjects of the King of Great Britain, etc, now Slaves in
Algiers, or any of the Territories thereof, be set at liberty, and delivered
upon paying the price they were first sold for in the Market; And for the time
to come, no Subjects of His Majesty's be bought or sold, or made Slaves of in
Algiers, or its Territories.

IV. That if any Ship of Tunis, Tripoly, or Sally, or any other, do bring any
Ship, Men, or Goods belonging to any of the Subjects of His Majesty, the King
of Great Britain, etc. into Algiers, or any of the Ports thereunto belonging,
the Governors there shall not permit them to be sold within the said
Territories.

V. That any Merchant of the Subjects of the King of Great Britain, etc. dying
in Algiers, or its Territories, his Goods, or Money shall not be seized by the
Bassa, Aga, or any other Minister, but remain with the English Consul.

VI. That the English Consul that lives in Algiers be allowed a place to pray
in, and no man to do him, or any of his said Majesty's Subjects any wrong or
injury in word or deed whatsoever.

VII. That in case any of His said Majesty's Subjects should happen to strike a
Turk, or a Moor, if he be taken, let him be pun^shed, but if he escape, nothing
shall be said to the English Consul, or any other of His said Majesty's
Subjects upon that account.

VIII. That if any Ships of War of His said Majesty's, shall come into Algiers,
or other the Ports of that Government, with any Prize, they may sell and
dispose of it at their own pleasure, without being molested by any, and that
they be not oblieg'd to pay Customs in any sort; And if the said Ships of War
shall want Provision, Victuals, or any other things, they may freely buy it at
the rate in the Market.

IX. That any Ships belonging to the Subjects of His Majesty, the King of Great
Britain, etc. coming into Algiers, or any of the Ports in its Territories,
shall, for such Goods as they sell, pay the dues according to Custom, and the
Goods they sell not, they shall freely carry on board, without paying duties
for the same.

X. That no Shipwreck belonging to His said Majesty, or any of His Subjects,
on the Coast belonging to Algiers, shall become Prize, and that neither the
Goods be forfeited, nor the Men made Slaves, but that the People of Algiers
shall do their best endeavors to save them and their Goods.

XI. That the Consul, or any other Subject of His Sacred Majesty, be not bound
to pay the debts of any other English Man, unless he become Surety.

XII. That no Subject of the King of Great Britain, etc. in matter of
Difference shall be liable unto any other Judgment, but that of the Duan.

XIII. That the Subjects of His said Majesty, in difference among themselves,
shall be subject to no determination, but that of the Consul.

XIV. That no Merchant, nor other Subject of His said Majesty's, being a
Passenger, in, or unto any Port, shall be molested, or meddled with.

And for the better practicing of the second Article, according to the true
intent and meaning thereof, It is agreed, that the Algiers Ships of War meeting
any Merchant Ships, belonging to the Subjects of the King of Great Britain,
etc. not being in any of the Seas appertaining to His Majesty's Dominions, have
liberty to send one single Boat with but two Sitters, more then the common crew
of Rowers; and no more to enter the said Merchant Ship but the two Sitters,
without the express leave of the Commander of the said Merchant Ship; that upon
producing unto them a Pass under the Hand and Seal of the Lord High Admiral of
England, the said Boat do presently depart, and the Merchant Ship to proceed on
his Voyage; and although the Commander of the said Merchant Ship produce no
Pass from the Lord High Admiral of England, yet if the major part of the Ships
Company be Subjects to the King of Great Britain, etc. the said Boat shall
presently depart, and the Merchant Ship proceed freely, and so though there be
Strangers, and their Goods on Board, they shall be free, both they and their
Goods; And any Ship of His Majesty, the King of Great Britain, etc. meeting
with any Ships of Algiers, if the Commander shall produce a Pass firm'd by the
chief Governors of Algiers, and the major part of the Ships Company be Turks,
Moors or Slaves, then the Algier Ship to proceed freely; and though there be
Strangers and their Goods on board, they shall be free, both they and their
Goods.

That presently after the Signing and Sealing these Articles by the Governors,
or chief Authority of the City and Kingdom of Algiers, all Injuries and Damages
sustained on their part shall be quite taken off and forgotten, and this Peace
shall be in full Force and Virtue. And for all Damages and Depredations, that
shall be afterward done and committed by either side before notice can be
given of this Peace, there shall be full satisfaction made, and whatsoever
remains in kind be restored.

That if any Grievances happen on either side, it shall not be lawful to break
the Peace till satisfaction be denied.

Signed and Sealed in the Presence of the great God, October. 30. 1664.
This following Article added 30. October, 1664.
THat the English Consul, upon any Breach or Difference between His most
Excellent Majesty, the King of Great Britain, etc. and the Governors of
Algiers, shall have free liberty, when he pleases, to depart to his own, or
any other Country; And that the English Consul shall be permitted to choose his
own Druggerman; and that when the Consul departs, he shall carry with him all
his Servants and Goods whatsoever, without the least interruption or
hinderance; And further, that he may freely go on board of any Ships in the
Road, and have the liberty of the Country.

The Translate of a Certificate Subsigned by the Governors of Algiers,
acknowledging the Breach of the late Peace betwixt His Majesty of Great
Britain, etc. and the said Governors to have been the act of their own
Subjects.

THese are to certify that we, who have here-under Subsigned, do acknowledge
that the Breach of the Peace between. His most Excellent Majesty, the King of
Great Britain, France and Ireland, etc. And us of Algiers, was committed by our
Subjects; for which we have drowned one, banished another, some others fled to
escape our Justice, and diverse have been imprisoned to give satisfaction in
part to His said most Excellent Majesty.

Signed and Sealed the 30. of October, 1664.

