King CHARLES II. HIS DECLARATION To all His Loving SUBJECTS OF THE KINGDOM of
ENGLAND. Dated from his Court at Breda in Holland The 4/14 of April 1660. And
read in PARLIAMENT, May 1. 1660.

TOGETHER WITH His Majesty's Letter Of the same Date: To his EXCELLENCE The LD.
Genesis Monck, To be communicated to the L. PRESIDENT of the COUNCIL of STATE, And
to the Officers of the Army under his Command.

London, Printed for John Playford at his Shop in the Temple. 1660.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
The DECLARATION.
CHARLES by the grace of God King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the faith,
To all our loving Subjects of what degree or quality soever greeting.
If the general distraction and confusion which is spread over the whole
Kingdom, does not awaken all men to a desire and longing that these wounds
which have so many years together been kept bleeding* may be bound up, all we
can say will be to no purpose, (...) after this long silence, we have thought it
our Duty, to declare how much we desire to contribute thereunto. And that as we
can never give over hope in good time to (...) the Possession of that Right
which God and Nature has made our due. So we do make it our daily ^^^^e to the
Divine Providence, that he will in Compassion to (...) our Subjects (after so
long in ^^^ty Rule (...) us and put us into a quiet and Peaceable Possession,
of that our Right, with as little blood and damage to our people, as is
possible, For do We d^^^^^ more to enjoy what is ours, than that all our
S^^^^^^ may enjoy what by Law is theirs, by a just and (...) administration of
Justice thoughout the Land, and by extending our mercy where it is wanting and
deserved.

And to the end That the fear of punishment may not engage any conscious to
themselves of what is past, to a perseverance in Guilt for the future, by
opposing the quiet and happ^ness of their Country, in the restoration both of
King, Pars and People, to their just ancient and fundamental Rights: We do by
these presents declare, That we do grant a full and gen^ral Pardon, which we
are ready to pass under our great Seal of England, to all our Subjects of what
degree or qualitity soever, who within forty days after the publication
hereof, shall lay hold upon this our grace and favor, and shall by any public
act declare their doing so; And that they return to the Loyalty and Obedience
of good Subjects, excepting only such Persons as shall hereafter be excepted
by Parliament, T^ose only excepted: Let our Subjects how faulty soever, rely
upon the word of a King, solemnly given by this present Declaration, That no
Crime whatsoever committed against us or our Royal Father before the
publication of this, shall ever rise in Judgment, or be brought in question
against any of them, to the least indamagement either in their Lives Liberties
or Estates, or (as far forth lies in our power) so much as to the prejudice of
their Reputation, by any reproach or term of distinction from the rest of our
best Subjects. We desiring and ordaining that henceforward all Notes of
discord, separation and difference of Parties, be utterly abolished among all
our Subjects, whom we invite and conjure to a perfect Union among themselves
under our Protection, for the resettlement of our just Rights and theirs in a
free Parliament* by which upon the word of a king we will be advised.

And because the Passion and uncharitablenes of the times have produced several
opinions in Religion, by which men are engaged in parties and animosities
against each other which when they shall hereafter unite in a freedom of
conversation, will be composed or better understood: We do declare a liberty to
tender Consciences, and that no man shall be disquieted or called in question
for differences of opinion in matters of Religion, which do not disturb the
Peace of the Kingdom; And that we shall be ready to consent to such an Act of
Parliament, as upon mature Deliberation shall be offered to us, for the full
granting that indulgence: And because in the continued distractions of so many
years, and so many great Revolutions, many Grants and Purchases of Estates have
been made too and by many Officers and Soldiers, and others who are now
possessed of the same, and who may be liable to Actions at Law upon several
Titles, We are likewise willing that all such differences, and all things
relating to such Grants Sales and Purchases, shall be determined in Parliament,
which can best provide for the just satisfacton of all men who are concerned.

And we do further declare, That we will ve ready to consent to any Act or Acts
of Parliament to the purposes aforesaid, and for the full satisfaction of all
arrears due to the Officers and Soldiers of the Army, under the Command of
General MONCK: And that they shall be received into our Service upon as good
pay and conditions as they now enjoy.

Given under our sign Manuel and privy signet at our Court at Breda this
fourteenth day of April 1660. In the twelveth year of our Reign.
Received the first of May, 1660.


CHARLES R.
TRusty and Well-beloved, we great you well:
It cannot be believed but that we have been, are, and ever must be as
Solicitous as we can, by all indevours, to improve the Affections of our good
Subjects at home, and to procure the Assistance of our Friends and Allies
abroad, for the Recovery of that Right, (...) by the laws (...); and of which
we have been so long dispossessed by such force, and with those circumstances,
as we do not desire to agravace by any sharp expressions, but rather wish, That
the Memory of what is passed, may ^e buried to the World, that we have more
indevoured to prepare, and to improve the affections of our Subjects at home,
for our Resoration, then to procure assistance from abroad, to invade either o^
our Kingdoms, is as manifest to the World: And we cannot give a b^tter evidence
that we are still of the same mind, then in this Conjuncure, when common Reason
must satisfy all Men, that we cannot be without Assistance from abroad, We
choose rather to send to you, w^o have it in your own power, to prevent that
Ruin and Desolat^^^ War would bring upon the Nation, and to make the whole
Kingdom owe the Peace, Happiness, Security and Glory it shall enjoy, to your
Virtue; and to acknowledge that your Armies have complied with their
Obligations, for which they were first raised, for the Preservation of the
Protestant Religion, the Honor and Dignity of the King, the Privileges of
Parliament, the Liberty and Property of the Subject, and the fundamental Laws
of the Land; and that you have vindicated that Trust, which others most
perfidiously abused and betrayed: How much we desire and resolve to contribute
to those good Ends, will appear to you by our enclosed Declaration, which we
desire you to cause to be published for the Information and Satisfaction ^f all
good Subjects, who do not desire a further effusion of precious Christian
blood, but to have their peace and security founded upon that which can only
suport it; a unity of affections amongst our selves, an equal Administration of
Justice to Men, restoring Parliaments to a full capacity of providing for all
that is amiss, and the Laws of the Land to (...)* You have been your selves
witnesses of so many Revelations, and have had so much Expe^ience, (...) for
any power and authority that is only assumed by passion and appetite, and not
supported by justice, is from providing for the happiness and peace of the
people, or from receiving any obedience from them, without which no Government
can provide for them, that you may very teasonably believe, that God has not
been well pleased with the attempts that have been made, since he has usually
increased the Confusion by giving all the success that has been desired, and
brought that to pass without Effect, which the Designers have proposed, as the
best means to settle and compose the Nation; and therefore we cannot but hope
and believe, that you will concur with u^ in the ^emedy we have applied, which
to humane understanding is only proper for the Ills we all groan under; and
that you will make your selves the Blessed Instruments to bring this Blessing
of Peace and Reconciliation upon King and People, it being the usual Method in
which Divine providence delights it self, to use and sanctify those very
means which ill men design, for the satisfaction of private and particular
Ends and Ambition, and other wicked purposes, to wholesome and public Ends, and
to Establish that Good which is most contrary to the Designers; which is the
greatest Manifestation of Gods peculiar Kindness to a Nation, that can be
given in this world. How far we resolve to preserve your Interests, and reward
your services, we refer to our Declaration; and we hope God will inspire you to
perform your Duty to us, and to your Native Country, whose happiness cannot be
separated from each other.

We have have entrusted our welbeloved Servant Sir John Greenville one of the
Gentlemen of our Bedchamber, to deliver this unto you, and to give us an
Account of your Reception of it, and to desire you in our Name, that it may be
published. And so We bid you farewell.

Given at our Court at Breda this 4/14 of April 1660, In the twelfth year of
our Reign. Received 1. May 1660.



To our trusty and welbeloved General MONCK; to be by him communicated to the
President and Council of State, and to the Officers of the Armies under his
Command.
FINIS.

