C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
WHEREAS this County, in which (out of Our experience of the good Affection
thereof) We have chosen to make Our residence this Winter, is in great danger
to suffer violence, and to receive loss and damage by the Incursions of the
Rebels, who by reason of their number of Dragooners (with which they have
furnished themselves, by seizing of the Horses of any of Our loving Subjects,
without their consent, and to which they are authorized by a late pretended
Ordinance) run up and down into several Counties, pillaging and plundring Our
good Subjects with unheard of Rapine, Insolence, and Inhumanity, whilst Our
Horse, for want of such Assistance in respect of the Lanes, and deep and narrow
ways, cannot prevent those outrages. Though We hope never to be forced to
follow the example of these ill men (who having received such vast Sums of
Money from Our Subjects, and seized all Ours, can yet have no cause for such
Impositions, but their love of Rapine) to lay such burdens upon Our People,
albeit for their preservation, as the Committees in several Counties have
Authority, and are directed to do by that Ordinance, yet We have thought fit to
declare, That it will be an exceeding acceptable Service unto Us, and We shall
take it as a singular Testimony or their affection, and the sense of the Cause,
if they shall at this time send in Horses, Geldings, Mares, or Naggs, to be
used as Dragoon-Horses for Our Service, and the defense of this County: And to
that purpose Our Will and Pleasure is, That this Our Declaration be read in all
Churches and Chapels on Sunday next, both at Morning and Evening Prayer; not
doubting but that every Gentleman, and other substantial Freeholder, and the
Inhabitants of every Parish, by joint consent, will send in such Horses as
aforesaid, with Saddles and Bridles: And whosoever can send in men armed with
Muskets upon those Horses, shall much add to this Service. And Our pleasure
is, That all such who are willing to gratify Us herein, shall bring or send
their Horses on Thursday next, to the sign of the Katherine-Wheel in Oxford,
and deliver them to the hands of Our trusty and welbeloved, Winter Grant
Esquire, Our WaggonMaster General, who shall be there ready to receive them.
And We command the Constable of every Hundred, receiving Information from the
several Petty-Constables within their Hundred, to bring in a Note of the names
of all such Parishes and particular Persons who upon this so visible occasion
shall oblige Us in this kind, and present the same unto Us, with the number of
Horses, Men, and Muskets so sent by them, that We may remember it to their
advantage; and, when it shall please God to enable Us, pay them the true Value,
which We do hereby Promise to do: And such Persons who shall then offer
themselves to serve on the said Horses, shall be then listed and entered into
Pay, as the rest of Our Dragoons are; And We hope the Threats, Menaces, and
Compulsion of the Rebels shall not more work upon Our People for their Supply,
then this gracious desire and earnest entreaty of Ours shall do, in a Case
wherein they, We, and the Public are so nearly concerned.

God save the King.

