A COMMISSION To the Right Honorable RICHARD Lord Viscount RANELAGH AND
OTHERS, To be Commissioners FOR THE MANAGEING OF His Majesty's TREASURY and
REVENUE IN IRELAND.

In the SAVOY, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, 1673.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms of
Charles II
His Majesty King Charles the II. directs this Commission to Richard Lord
Viscount Ranelagh, and eight other principal Commissioners; and in their
respective absence to nine others.
CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France,
and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To Our Right Trusty, and Right
Welbeloved Cousin, Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh; Our Trusty and Welbeloved,
Sir Alexander Bence, and Sir James Hayes, Knights; John Bence, George Dashwod,
Joseph Dean, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, Esquires;
and in the absence of the said Lord Viscount Ranelagh, to Our Trusty and
Welbeloved Robert Sands Esquire, and in the absence of the said Sir Alexander
Bence, to Our Trusty and Welbeloved Thomas Tailor Esquire; and in the absence
of the said Sir James Hayes, to Our Trusty and Welbeloved John Hayes Esquire;
and in the absence of the said John Bence, to Our Trusty and Welbeloved Thomas
Scarth Merchant; and in the absence of the said George Dashwood, to Our Trusty
and Welbeloved Edward Roberts Esquire; and in the absence of the said Joseph
Dean, to Our Trusty and Welbeloved Joseph Dean the younger Gentleman; and in
the absence of the said Robert Huntingdon, to Our Trusty and Welbeloved
Griffith Bodurda Esquire; and in the absence of the said John Stepney, to Our
Trusty and Welbeloved Lancelot Stepney Gentleman; and in the absence of the
said Richard Kingdon, to Our Trusty and Welbeloved John Winkworth Esquire;
Greeting. Recital of a Grant (to Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, and eight
others, of all His Majesty's Revenue in Ireland) Dated. August 4. 1673.
WHEREAS, by an Indenture, bearing date the fourth day of August last past,
before the date of these presents, and made between Our Self of the one part,
and you the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James
Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Dean, Robert Huntingdon, John
Stepney, and Richard Kingdon of the other part; We were Graciously pleased
amongst other things, to Covenant, Grant, and Agree to and with you the said
Richard Lord Visc. Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence,
George Dashwood, Joseph Dean, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Rich.
Kingdon, and every of you, you and every of your Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, that there should be from time to time, during the term in the
said Indenture mentioned, such and so many Commissions issued out under Our
Great Seal of England, and directed to you the said Richard Lord Viscount
Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood,
Joseph Dean, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon; the
survivors, or survivor of you; or the Executors, or Administrators of the
survivor of you, or such other discreet, able, and fit Persons, as you shall
humbly desire (which Commissions so to be issued out, should sufficiently
authorize and empower the Persons therein to be named, to act as our Officers)
as should be found necessary to be done in the managing of, and for the better
and more speedy Levying, Collecting, Sueing for, Recovering and Receiving, or
otherwise Compounding for, and Discharging of all and every our Rents,
Revenues, Profits, Duties, Incomes, certain and casual, ordinary and
extraordinary whatsoever, in the Kingdom of Ireland (not remitted or pardoned,
or otherwise before the Five and twentieth day of December then last past,
granted away and disposed) as well such, as upon, or before the Five and
twentieth day of December then last past, were in arrear, and were then unpaid,
as such as from and after the said time, until the six and twentieth day of
December, which should be in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred
seventy and five, were, or should be, by any matter of Record or otherwise
howsoever, due, owing, or payable to us, or which might, or ought to have been,
or may, before the said Six and twentieth day of December, in the year of our
Lord One thousand six hundred seventy and five, be Taxed, Levied, Collected,
Recovered, Answered for, paid or payable to us, our Heirs or Successors, out of
or for any Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments in Ireland, or all or any the
Estates Real or Personal, of any Person or Persons, Bodies Politic or
Corporate, or otherwise, by reason of any Tax, Assessment, Subsidy,
Impositions, Contract, Covenant, Agreement, Account, Debt, Duty, sum or sums of
Money, matter or thing imposed or made, or issued, or which did or should
arise, or grow due within the said Kingdom of Ireland, before the said six and
twentieth day of December, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred
seventy and five, including the Rents, Duties, and Payments, which should be
due for the time incurred before the said six and twentieth day of December,
One thousand six hundred seventy and five, though the same may be payable, or
Instalments made, or time given for the payment thereof, after that day; and
that all and every the sums of Money then due, or which at any time after the
date of the said Indenture, and before the six and twentieth day of December in
the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred seventy five, should grow due or
payable to us, Our Heirs or Successors, whether for Rent reserved upon the Farm
of the great Branches of Our Revenue in Ireland, or for Arrears, or otherwise
howsoever, should from time to time during the term in the said Indenture
mentioned, answered, and brought into Our Receipt of Exchequer at Dublin, in
such manner as the same had been before that time used to be paid, and would
and ought to have been paid, if the said Indenture had not been made, to the
end, that our Treasure so brought in, and remaining in Our Exchequer there,
might from time to time he issued out from thence, and applied to such Uses,
Intents and Purposes, as in the said Indenture are mentioned, and thereby are
undertaken to be done and performed; and that for the better effecting thereof,
and more orderly and legal proceeding therein, We would forthwith in due form
of Law, Constitute, Authorize, Commissionate and Appoint, the said Richard Lord
Viscount Ranelagh, His Majesty by the said Grant, did covenant to a^^^at the
said Rich. Lord Visc. Ranelagh, Sir Alex. Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence,
and George Dashwood, to Receive and Issue His Majesty's Revenue.
Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, and George Dashwood, to be
our Officers or Commissioners, and to have the sole care and custody of all
Moneys so brought in, and the sole power to receive the said Moneys from time
to time, and give Acquittances and Discharges for the same, and to issue out
the said Moneys, and pay the same to the ends and uses in the said Indenture
mentioned, with such Clauses to be inserted in such Commission as may be
sufficient totally to prohibit and restrain any other Person or Persons, from
acting, or any way intermedling therein, upon any other pretense of authority
whatsoever, during the continuance of the said Undertaking in the said
Indenture mentioned.

AND We were further Graciously pleased, by the said Indenture, to Covenant and
Agree, to and with you the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander
Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, and George Dashwood, that all Orders,
Warrants, Directions, and Commands, which at any time after the date of the
said Indenture, and before the six and twentieth day of December, in the year
of our Lord One thousand six hundred seventy and five, should be made and
signed, touching or concerning the issuing out of any moneys for paying any
part of Our said Revenue, should be so made and signed by the Lord Lieutenant
or other chief Governor or Governors of Ireland for the time being, and be
directed to you the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence,
Sir James Hayes, John Bence, and George Dashwood only, to the intent that you
the said Richard Lord Visc. Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes,
John Bence, and George Dashwood, might wholly apply the said Moneys to the uses
and intents of the said Indenture, and to the execution and performance of the
undertaking in the said Indenture mentioned, as in and by the said Indenture,
amongst diverse other Covenants, Clauses, and Agreements therein contained, may
more plainly appear.

Lord Viscount Ranelagh and his Partners have humbly besought His Majesty to
appoint all the said* artners, and in their respective absence, nine other
persons to be Commissioners of the Treasury and Revenue.
AND, whereas you the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence,
Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Dean, Robert Huntingdon,
John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, have since humbly besought us, that you the
said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, and in your absence the said Robert Sands,
Sir Alexander Bence, and in your absence the said Thomas Tailor, Sir James
Hayes, and in your absence the said John Hayes, John Bence, and in your absence
the said Thomas Scarth, George Dashwood, and in your absence the said Edward
Roberts, Joseph Dean, and in your absence the said Joseph Dean the younger,
Robert Huntingdon, and in your absence the said Griffith Bodurda, John Stepney,
and in your absence the said Lancelott Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, and in
your absence, the said John Winkworth, should have all and every the Powers and
Authorities by us Covenanted in and by the said Indenture, to be by us granted
unto you the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir
James Hayes, John Bence, and George Dashwood.

The Body of the Commission whereby all the nine Partners, and nine others in
their respective absence are appointed Commissioners
NOW therefore Know ye, That We reposing especial Trust and Confidence in your
Abilities, Fidelity, and prudent Circumspection, HAVE Nominated, Constituted
and Appointed, and by these Presents do Nominate, Constitute, and Appoint you
the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, and in your absence, you the said
Robert Sands, Sir Alexander Bence; and in your absence, you the said Thomas
Tailor, Sir James Hayes; and in your absence, you the said John Hayes, John
Bence; and in your absence you the said Thomas Scarth, George Dashwood; and in
your absence you the said Edward Roberts, Joseph Dean; and in your absence, you
the said Joseph Dean the younger, Robert Huntingdon; and in your absence, you
the said Griffith Bodurda, John Stepney; and in your absence, you the said
Lancelot Stepney, and Richard Kingdon; and in your absence, you the said John
Winkworth, to be Our Commissioners accordingly: Power given to the
Commissioners, and every of them or these employed by them, to view, search,
examine, and take Copies of any Records or Writings concerning the premises,
without paying of any Fee for the same.
GIVING, and by these Presents Granting unto you, and every of you, and to all
and every other Person and. Persons employed by you, or any of you, full power
and authority, at all convenient times, and in orderly manner, to view,
inspect, search and examine, all Rolls, Records, Books, Accounts, Papers, and
other Memorials whatsoever, remaining in Our Courts of Exchequer, or in any
other Our Courts of Record, or in the Clerks of our respective Councils
custody, or in any other place, or in the hands of any other Person belonging
to us within Our Realm of England, or Our said Kingdom of Ireland, touching or
concerning the premises, and which may any ways conduce to the finding out of
all such Rents, and other the Premises, as shall be due, owing, and unpaid, as
aforesaid, and to take Copies of the same or any of them, the said Copies to be
made by the respective Officers or Persons in whose custody the same do or
shall remain, or by their Clerks or Servants, without any Fee, or other charge
to be paid for the same. Power to five or more of the Commissioners to meet and
call before them such Persons as they shall judge requisite for the discovery
and recovering of the premises, and any Writing or evidence belonging to His
Majesty concerning the same, and to examine him or them touching the same.
AND further, We do hereby Give and Grant unto you Our said Commissioners
hereby appointed, or any five or more of you, such convenient times and places
as you shall think fit and appoint, full power and authority to meet together,
and to call before you all or any such Person or Persons, as you shall judge
requisite or necessary, in relation to, or concerning the discovery and finding
out and recovering of the Premises, or any of them, so due and unpaid as
aforesaid, and any Writing or Evidence belonging to Us concerning the same, and
to examine him, them, or any of them, To enquire by the oaths of good and
lawful men, or by other lawful means, as well by examining witnesses upon oath,
as otherwise, whereby the truth may be best discovered.
touching or concerning the same, and to enquire, and cause to be enquired by
the Oaths of good and lawful Men, or by any other lawful ways or means, by
which the truth may be best discovered and known, as well by examining
Witnesses upon Oath as otherwise. And if after such search and examination
made, it shall happen, that any Person or Persons who shall be found in Arrear,
If after search or examination any person be found in Arrear, and indebted unto
His Majesty, and shall desire to defend himself by Law, rather then submit to,
or give security for the payment thereof, by Installments, to certify the same
into the Exchequer, and to cause them to be effectually proceeded against
according to Law.
and Indebted unto Us in any sum or sums of Money, for any the Rents, Revenues,
and Profits, or other the Premises before mentioned, shall desire to defend
him or themselves by Law against the Debts and Duties so found to be owing, and
then and there demanded of him, rather then submit to the payment thereof, or
give security for payment of the same by such instalments as shall be offered
to him or them; then, and in such case, Our Will and Pleasure is, that you
forthwith Transmit and Certify the name or names of such Person or Persons not
submitting to such payment, or giving security as aforesaid, into the Court of
Our Exchequer at Dublin, and that you cause him or them to be effectually
proceeded against according to Law: And to the end Our Will and Pleasure may be
the better performed and accomplished, and the Money so due and in Arrear, may
the more speedily and effectually be Recovered, Levied, The chief Governor of
Ireland, and others whom it may concern, are in His Majesty's name, at the
request of the Commissioners, to issue Commissions Writs and Processes (without
any Fee) for recovery and bringing in of His Majesty's Revenue and Debts,
according to the course of the Exchequer, wherein all His Majesty's Officers
and Ministers are to be aiding and assisting.
and paid as aforesaid, OUR FURTHER Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby
Authorize, Command, and Require Our Lord Lieutenant, Justices, or chief
Governor or Governors of Ireland, Our Treasurer, Chancellor, and Barons of Our
Court of Exchequer there, for the time being, and all others whom it shall or
may concern, that they and every of them during the continuance of this Our
Commission in force, at the desire and request of you Our said Commissioners or
any of you, do award, make, and deliver unto you or any of you, without charge
or Fee, all and every such Commission and Commissions of Enquiry, Writ and
Writs, Process and other proceedings whatsoever, in the name of Us, Our Heirs
and Successors, as shall or may be necessary for the more speedy recovery,
bringing in, and Levying of all and every Our said Rents, Revenues, Profits,
and other the Premises, and are agreeable to, and may stand and consist with
the ancient course and practice of Our said Court of Exchequer, heretofore used
for the recovery of Debts due and owing to Us, or any of Our Royal Progenitors
or Predecessors, and that they and every of them, as also all Sheriffs,
Bailiffs, and other Our inferior Officers and Ministers in their several and
respective places, be from time to time aiding and assisting to you Our said
Commissioners, and every of you, in obeying such Precepts, as from time to time
shall be directed to them, and in the execution of the premises as becomes.
AND FURTHER, in pursuance of a Covent in that behalf, in the said Indenture
mentioned, and at the aforesaid humble supplication of you the said Richard
Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence,
George Dashwood, Joseph Dean, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard
Kingdon, and of Our especial Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere motion, in
consideration of the assured Trust and Confidence we repose in you Our said
Commissioners hereby appointed, Power to the Commissioners, or any five or more
of them, whereof one to be always of each division; the whole eighteen being
divided in three divisions, six in a division, to execute and exercise the
Offices and Places of the Treasurer, Receiver-General, and Treasurer at Wars,
from the date hereof, until the 26 of December 1675.
We have Given and Granted, and by these Presents do Give and Grant to you Our
said Commissioners, and to any five or more of you, or which five or more of
you We Will that of you the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir James
Hayes, John Bence, Robert Sands, John Hayes, or Thomas Scarth, there shall be
always one; and of which said five or more of you, We also Will, that of you
the said George Dashwood, Robert Huntingdon, Richard Kingdon, Edward Roberts,
Griffith Bodurda, or John Winkeworth, there shall be always one; AND of which
five or more of you, We likewise Will, that of you the said Sir Alexander
Bence, Joseph Dean, John Stepney, Thomas Tailor, Joseph Dean the younger, or
Lancelot Stepney, there shall be always one full Power and Authority to
exercise and execute the several Places and Offices of Vice-Treasurer, and
General-Receiver of all Our Revenues, Profits and Casualties whatsoever, that
be or shall be due to Us, Our Heirs or Successors, from time to time within Our
said Kingdom of Ireland; and also to exercise and execute the Office and Place
of Treasurer at Wars within Our said Kingdom of Ireland, from the day of the
date of these Presents, until the twenty sixth day of December, which shall be
in the year of Our Lord One thousand six hundred seventy and five, by your
selves, or any such five or more of you as aforesaid, or by the sufficient
Deputy or Deputies of you Our said Commissioners, or of any such five or more
of you as aforesaid, in as full and ample manner, to all intents and purposes
as any Vice-Treasurer, General-Receiver, and Treasurer at Wars, have done or
might do the same; AND whereas the said Lord Viscount Ranelagh, A Clause in
pursuance of a Covenant in the Indenture, dated the 4 of August (71) for
payment of the Vice-Treasurers Fees) for inabling the Commissioners to receive
the Fees due to the Vice-Treasurer, Receiver-general, and Treasurer at Wars,
for the said use.
Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph
Dean, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, have Covenanted
with Us, that you will pay unto the Vice-Treasurer of Ireland for the time
being, during the time or this your undertaking, all the Fees and Perquisites,
due unto and usually received by the Vice-Treasurer. NOW the better to enable
you to pay to Our Vice-Treasurer, General-Receiver, and Treasurer at Wars of
Our said Kingdom of Ireland for the time being, all the said Profits and Fees
so undertaken by you to be paid, and all other Profits, Casualties and Fees,
which Our Vice-Treasurer, Receiver-General, and Treasurer at Wars ought to have
had for all or any Moneys which shall by you or any five or more of you, or
your Deputy or Deputies be paid during this your undertaking, or afterward, by
virtue of, or in pursuance of this your undertaking, if the same had been paid
by Our Vice-Treasurer, General-Receiver, and Treasurer at Wars, of Our said
Kingdom of Ireland for the time being, to the intent, and upon Trust and
Confidence, that you shall pay the same accordingly. We do further Will and
Grant, that during the time aforesaid, and until the said twenty sixth day of
December, One thousand six hundred seventy and five, you Our said Commissioners
hereby appointed, or any such five or more of you as aforesaid, or the
sufficient Deputy or Deputies of you Our said Commissioners, or of such five or
more of you as aforesaid, Do and shall Demand, Take, Receive, and Have all and
singular the Fees, Rights, Privileges, Profits, Perquisites, Commodities,
Advantages, and Casualties whatsoever; unto the said Offices of Vice-Treasurer,
General-Receiver, and Treasurer at Wars, every or any of them, by any ways or
means, by Right belonging or appertaining, and in as large, ample, and
beneficial manner, as any Vice-Treasurer, General-Receiver, or Treasurer at
Wars within Our said Kingdom of Ireland, has or ought to have, had, held,
taken, perceived, received, used, or enjoyed, or unto the said Places or
Offices, every or any of them belonging or appertaining; AND We do also hereby,
upon the Trust aforesaid, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, Grant that it shall
and may be lawful to, and for you Our said Commissioners hereby appointed, or
any such five or more of you as aforesaid, or to the Deputy or Deputies of you
Our said Commissioners, or of any such five or more of you as aforesaid, to
demand take and receive of our loving Subjects, to whom you our said
Commissioners, or any such five or more of you as aforesaid, or the Deputy or
Deputies of you our said Commissioners, or any such five or more of you as
aforesaid, shall deliver and pay any sum or sums of Money, within Our said
Kingdom of Ireland, by virtue or reason of the exercising or executing of the
said Place or Office of Vice-Treasurer, and General-Receiver and Treasurer at
Wars, the Fee or Sum of Sixpence of lawful English Money, for every twenty
shillings of like Money of England, that you Our said Commissioners or any such
five or more of you as aforesaid, or the Deputy or Deputies of you Our said
Commissioners, or any such five or more of you as aforesaid, shall pay to any
of Our Subjects within Our said Kingdom of Ireland, in as large, free, and
ample manner, as any Vice-Treasurer, or General-Receiver of Our said Kingdom of
Ireland, has Demanded, Received, and Taken the same; Power to the
Commissioners, or any five or more of them as aforesaid, to have the custody
of, and to receive and give Acquittances for his Majesty's whole Revenue,
(whereof Entries are to be made with one of the Chamberlains of the Exchequer,
or Clerk of the Pells) and to issue the same to the uses of the said Indenture.
AND We further Will and Grant, that you Our said Commissioners, or any such
five or more of you as aforesaid, or the Deputy or Deputies of you Our said
Commissioners, or any such five or more of you as aforesaid, have the sole Care
and Custody of all Moneys to be paid and payable to Us in the said Indenture
mentioned, and the sole power to receive the said Moneys from time to time, and
to give Acquittances and Discharges for the same, which shall be as sufficient
discharges to the Subjects, paying the said Moneys, as any Acquittances
heretofore given, and commonly called Exchequer Acquittances, have, and ought
to be, to all intents and purposes pleadable in Law and Equity, by all Our
loving Subjects, taking and producing the same, so as the same be entered in the
usual manner with one of the Chamberlains of Our said Exchequer, and the Clerk
of the Pells, and to issue out the said Moneys, and pay the same, The Lord
Angier, and all others are prohibited to act or intermeddle herein on any
pretense whatsoever, during the continuance of the undertaking mentioned in the
said Indenture.
to the ends and uses in the said Indenture mentioned; AND We do hereby
strictly prohibit and restrain Francis Lord Angier, Our Vice-Treasurer,
General-Receiver, and Treasurer at Wars in Our said Kingdom of Ireland, his
Deputy or Deputies, and all and every other Person and Persons from acting, or
any ways intermedling therein, upon any pretense of Commission or Commissions,
or other Authority whatsoever, during the continuance of the said undertaking
in the said Indenture mentioned. All Orders, Warrants, and Directions for the
payment of any Money, to be directed to the said Commissioners, to the end the
same may be wholly applied to the ends and uses of the said Indenture.
AND WE do further Will and Declare Our Royal pleasure to be, That all Orders,
Warrants, Directions, and Commands, which at any time after the date of the
said Indenture, and before the said six and twentieth day of December in the
year of Our Lord One thousand six hundred seventy and five, shall be made and
Signed, touching or concerning the issuing out of any Moneys for paying any
part of Our said Revenue, shall be so Made and Signed by the Lord Lieutenant,
or other chief Governor or Governors of Ireland for the time being, and be
directed unto you Our said Commissioners hereby appointed, or any such five or
more of you as aforesaid, or the Deputy or Deputies of you Our said
Commissioners, or any such five or more of you as aforesaid, only to the intent
that you Our said Commissioners, or any such five or more of you as aforesaid,
or the Deputy or Deputies of you Our said Commissioners, or any such five or
more of you as aforesaid, may wholly apply the said Moneys, to the uses and
intents of the said recited Indenture, and to the execution and performance of
the undertaking therein mentioned. AND OUR FURTHER Will and Pleasure is, The
Commissioners are directed within forty days after the end of every Quarter, to
pay the Fees to the Vice-Treasurer for the time being.
and We do hereby Will and Require you Our said Commissioners hereby appointed,
or any such five or more or you as aforesaid, or the Deputy or Deputies of you
Our said Commissioners, or any such five or more of you as aforesaid, from time
to time, during the continuance of the undertaking in the said recited
Indenture mentioned, quarterly, or within forty days after each quarter, well
and truly to pay, or cause to be paid unto Our Vice-Treasurer of Ireland for
the time being, all and every the usual and accustomed Fees and Profits, for,
and in respect of any sum or sums of Money, by you Our said Commissioners, or
any such five or more of you as aforesaid, or by the Deputy or Deputies of you
Our said Commissioners, The Office of the Receipt, and the lower Rooms of the
New Custom-house at Dublin, for the executing of this Commission are granted to
the Commissioners, and are to be delivered unto them, Fitted and Repaired at
His Majesty's charge. The Commission under the Great Seal, bears date at
Westminster the (...) day of (...) in the 23 year of His Majesty's Reign.
or any such five or more of you as aforesaid, to be issued and paid out as
aforesaid, as Our Vice-Treasurer, General-Receiver, and Treasurer at Wars for
the time being, could, or ought to have received, if such Warrants had been
directed unto, or such payments had been made by him. AND for the more ease and
convenience in the executing of this Our Commission, We do hereby Allow and
Grant unto you, not only the use of the Office of the Receipt, but also of the
lower Rooms of Our New Custom-house at Dublin, which We hereby Require and
Order to be forthwith delivered to you, and be Fitted and Repaired at Our
proper Costs and Charges.

In witness, etc. Witness, etc.

FINIS.

