C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
That the Mouths of all Schismatic and Seditious persons may be stopped,
(who endeavor to bring their Sovereign into hatred with his People, by
scandalizing his Sacred Majesty, with a purpose to alter our Religion, and
introduce Popery) here is published to the view of all the World his Majesty's
solemn Protestation (which he made in the presence of God and the
Congregation, before he received the Blessed Sacrament) at Christs-Church in
Oxford, 1643. which neither adversity nor prosperity can ever make him
violate.

His Majesty's late PROTESTATION, Before his Receiving of the Sacrament.
His MAJESTY being to receive the Sacrament from the hands of the Archbishop
of Armagh, used these public expressions immediately before; He rose up from
His knees, and beckning to the Archbishop for a short forbearance, made this
Protestation. MY Lord, I epsy here many resolved Protestants, who may declare
to the World the Resolution I do now make. I have to the utmost of my power
prepared my Soul to become a Worthy Receiver: And may I so receive comfort by
this Holy Communion, as I do intend the establishment of the true Reformed
Protestant Religion, as it stood in its beauty, in the happy days of Queen
Elizabeth. I bless God, in the midst of the public Distractions, I have
still Liberty to Communicate; And may this Sacrament be my Damnation, if my
Heart do not join with my Lips in this Protestation.


A Prayer for the King, to be frequently and fervently said of all Loyal
Subjects.
O Most gracious and most glorious Lord God, we humbly pray thee, for the
merits of our Lord Jesus Christ, to look down (with much pity and compassion)
upon the sad and suffering Condition of thy Servant; and our Sovereign, the
King, O, let his Life be right dear and precious in thy sight: Lord remember
him and all his Trouble, how he swear unto the Lord, and vowed a Vow unto the
Almighty God of Jacob: O, save and deliver him, according to thy mercy, that
all the world may know that this is thy hand, and that thou, Lord, have done
it: though his enemies curse, yet bless thou; and let them be confounded that
rise up against him, but let thy Servant rejoice: O, be with him in Trouble,
deliver him, and bring him to Honor; satisfy him with long life, and show hun
thy salvation. Remember, Lord, the Reproach that thy Servant has, and vow he
does bear in his Bosom the Rebukes of many people, wherewith thine enemies
have blasphemed thee, and slandred the footsteps of thine Anointed: Wherefore
we beseech thee to comfort him again now, after the time that thou have
afflicted him, and for the years wherein he has suffered adversity; show thy
Servant thy Work, and his Royal Children thy Glory: and the glorious Majesty
of the Lord our God be upon all those that endeavor his re-inthroning: prosper
thou the work of their hands upon them, O prosper thou their handy-worke. O,
satisfy us with this mercy and that soon, so shall we be glad, and rejoice
all the days of our life, and join with our gracious King, in giving praise
to thee, who live and reignest world without end. AMEN.

June 14th
Printed in the Year 1648.


