TWO SPEECHES: THE FIRST, Spoken by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, to the
Commander in chief, that conducted him from Holdenbie toward the ARMY.

Together with a Reply to His Majesty's Speech, by the said Commander.

THE SECOND, By his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, at the head of every
Regiment in the Army, concerning the settling of a firm peace and union between
the Parliament and the Army, for the good of the whole Kingdom.

Also the Soldiers resolution concerning his Majesty, and the bringing of him
from Holdenby to Huntington on Friday last.

Published for general satisfaction to the whole Kingdom.

London, Printed for F. I. June the 8. 1647.

A Copy of a Letter sent from an Officer in the Army, to a friend of his in
London.
Honored Sir,
HAving such a fair opportunity, to express my self, and to represent a
subject of so great weight and concernment, to view and consideration, I
thought it meet and requisite to acquaint you with the affairs in these parts,
being (indeed) the chief currents of the stream, which ebbes and flows at
this present within the bowels of this our native Kingdom, but God grant, that
these channels may receive no more additionall waters, but that the small
brooks, which now begins to force their passage into great Rivers, may be
suddenly effectually stopped, that so the distraction of England may be
happily composed, and the peace and tranquillity of her poor distressed and
languishing people, most unanimously and faithfully settled; but because I will
not deviate too far from my intended lines, nor detract time, with too large a
Prologue, I shall briefly insist upon the main branch, intimating unto you,
that, which is most considerable, especially so much desired by all sorts of
people viz.

On Tuesday last we received intelligence, that a great party of horse were
discovered, betwixt Cambridge and Bedfordshire, and that they had a design for
these parts, which put the Inhabitants hereabouts into a great fear, not
knowing their resolutions and intentions: but within a short time, this
intelligence was confirmed with truth; for upon Thursday morning, news came to
the Mayor of this Town, that a party of horse lately coming from the Army, had
surrounded Holdenby, with a resolution to seize upon the Kings Majesty's
person, to prevent a design (as is said) prejudicial to the Kingdom;
immediately after come one M. Furnace to my house, who affirmed, that they had
entered the House, and repossessed themselves of the King, without any
opposition at all, the soldiers embracing each other, at their first meeting,
some ecchoing these words. God forbid that a sword should be drawn in wrath,
or a musket fired in anger, against those whom we have so often hazarded our
lives withal, and with whom we have obtained so many victories (and fight in
the banner of Jesus Christ.

But now we hear (for certain) that they are advanced from Holdenby toward
New Market in Cambridgeshire, there to side and join with the Army; as they
returned, they left this Town a little wide of the right hand, sounding their
Trumpets, with echoes of triumph: but what their design is, time (we hope)
will bring to light. God grant us a true and lasting peace, and prevent further
bloodshed.

The Resolves and humble Advise of the Council of War, convened at Bury.
Satturday May 29. To your Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, Commander in
chief of the Parliaments Forces, in relation to the Votes of Parliament,
communicated to us by your Excellency, and the desires of our advice thereof.
Humbly shows,

I.
THat the said distraction, and the jealousies occasioned upon the same
proceeding, as we fear, and some effects already appearing do find, may
unhappily produce dangerous disturbances, and tumultuous actings amongst
several parts of the Army, as they now lie dispersed and remote from the Head
quarters, especially amongst those Regiments, whose principal Officers, by
neglecting or disserting their soldiers in their necessary concernments or
just grievances, have disoblieged their soldiers, and lost their interest with
them, in so much as such Officers are forced to withdraw from their charges,
and can scarce with safety come at them, and to prevent the inconveniences or
ill consequences which such disturbed or tumultuous actings might produce
either to the Countries where the Army quarters or to the Kingdom.

We humbly advise your Excellency without delay, to draw the Army unto a
closer posture of quarters, till upon further satisfaction the Army may be
quietly and orderly disbanded.

II.
That upon the same dissatisfaction and jealousy we find an extreme
earnestness, and violent propensity among the Soldiers to a general
Randezvouze and we verily believe, that the first attempt to disband any one
Regiment, before equal satisfaction to all, and assurance against those things
they have cause to fear, will occasion them all to draw together, and
Kandevouze of themselves, as it were upon an Allarm etc.

III.
Since that course of disbanding the Army by piece meal, before the
satisfaction intended be performed equally to the whole, seems something strange
and unusual.

IIII.
That they would be pleased to resume the things voted on Tuesday last, as also
to resume the grievances of the Army, together with the things proposed in the
Narrative from the Officers, and to give satisfaction, or at least some
resolution to each of them, and that they would not think it fit to put that
temtation, those ealousies, and that dishonor upon the Army, as to take it
disbanded in scattered pieces, before satisfaction be equally given to the
whole.

Friday June 4. the rendevouz of the Army was held near Kinsford six miles from
Bury, seven Regiments of Foot, and six of horse, appeared, Col. Whaleys being
before dispatched toward Holdenb^e (by the Generals command.) Upon this days
intelligence that our party of horse had secured his Majesty, the Gen: gave
notice of this to the Commissioners, and has signified the same to both
Houses, desiring to know their further pleasure, concerning the disposing of
the Kings person, also the reasons of the Troopers for fetching the King from
Holdenbie. He has likewise sent them the grounds enclosed in a Letter from the
soldiers to himself for their undertaking the same of themselves: which were
chiefly, that they had intimation of a design, which they were able to make
good, (of some) to surprise him. Col. Graves is discharged from that
employment, and Colonel Whaley in his place. The Gen: went to every Regiment,
and expressed himself with much judgment and moderation, assured the Soldiers
that the Parliament took notice of their civil and fair demeanor, and had
taken a course for satisfying of their arrears, and doubted not but they would
answer their other grievances, advised them to moderation, and to behave
themselves with discretion, etc.

Saturday last news came to the Army, that the Committee of Troopers who had
secured the King, brought his Majesty Friday night to Huntington (as you had
before) the King asked him that commanded in chief among the Troopers for his
Commission, the party replied, his Maj: might look about him and see his
Commission, meaning 500. Troopers on horseback; says the King, indeed your
Commission has as fair a character in the frontespiece as ever I did see,
meaning the propernesse and comeliness of the men, the Troopers being of Cap:
Knights Troop, and other of Sir Robert Pies Regiment, Col. Rositers and Col.
Graves.

Finis

