THE DEMANDS Of his Gracious Majesty The KING OF GREAT BRITAIN, To the grand
Seignior or Emperor of Turkey, sent by the Lord General Montague, with his
Lordships proposals to the Governor of Algier, the Answer thereunto, and the
manner of the Treaty before that great and now conquered City.

With a true Relation of the great and bloody fight between the English and the
Turks, the dividing of his Majesty's Royal Navy into several Squadrons, by the
Victorious Earl of Sandwich, and ever Renowned Sr. John Lawson, the battering
down of half the City, and all the Castle Walls, the dismounting of the Turkish
Cannon, the sinking and burning of 18 great ships, with above a thousand piece
of Ordnance, the great slaughter made by the English fireships, the redeeming
of many hundred poor Captives and Christian slaves, And a true and perfect
Relation of the loss on both sides, with the number killed and taken Prisoners.

London, Printed for G. Horton, 1661.

A Relation of the Victory obtained by the English Fleet against the Turks at
Algeir, under the Conduct of the Earl of Sandwich, as it is confirmed from
France and Holland.
THe Earl of Sandwich Admiral of the English Fleet having made sail to Alicant
in Spain, stayed some few days there, to take in fresh waters and other
necessaries, on the 7th. of August last past, set thence forward again with the
whole Fleet, which being arrived before Algiers with a forrable wind, his
Lordship sent to the Governor of the place to give him notice of his arrival,
desiring that the English Consul with some Deputies might be sent on board of
him, to whom his Lordship would intimate the cause of his coming thither. Those
of Algiers on the 14. sent accordingly their Deputies and the English Consul on
board of the Admiral, desiring to know his Lordships intentions, who after a
short rehearsal to them of the agreement and Peace formerly made betwixt the
Government of England and that of Algiers, wherein it was particularly agreed
that no English ships at Sea should be molested by any men of war, or vessels
of Algier, gave them likewise to understand, that of late the abovementioned
agreement had been in many ways by them violated, navigation disturbed, ships
taken from the Subjects of England, and many an English man made slave by them;
Which agreement, though so highly infringed, his Lordship nevertheless
proffered to be renewed and confirmed by him upon condition, that the
Government of Algiers should be obliged to repair the losses and damages the
English Nation had suffered, and to restore the Ships, Merchandises, and all
English they had made slaves, and henceforth not to molest any English ship, or
to search it, to take away and commodities or people out of them, or, that in
default thereof his Lordship had orders to denounce a war to them.

The Deputies having understood his Lordships desire, promised to make a report
thereof to the Government, and to return their answer without fail on the
fifteenth.

On the 13th. three other Deputies came back to the English Fleet, where a
Council of war being called together, they declared that they thought
themselves not at all obliged to restore to the King of England either ships,
or goods, or slaves, and particularly that the beforementioned agreement by
the death of Cromwell was become void and null, during whose Government they
had not in the least indammaged the English Nation, and should not now have
offered any thing against them, if not the last Admiral of England, who had
agreed with them upon more particular conditions, had voluntarily consented to
the searching of English ships, whom those of Algiers could meet at Sea, and
the taking out of them any goods belonging to other Nations, together with the
People subject to other foreign Princes or States their pretended Enemies;
Common reason therefore did sufficiently dictate, that not only such goods and
persons were lawful prize, but likewise ship and all, for according to the
tenets of their Alcoran they counted all those friends enemies who gave the
least assistance to their enemies, so that they would maintain they had not
violated the Agreement made with Cromwell, but the English themselves, who
countenanced and transported their enemies over Sea to the great prejudice of
those who were to pursue them. Concerning the Admirals threats they did not
greatly value them, adding, that in regard it was against the custom of the
Government of Algiers, that a fleet of men of war should come into their road,
and before their City, to the slighting of the respect due to an ever victorious
Turkish Emperor, it would be proper for the English Admiral to depart thence
with his whole Fleet within three hours, otherwise they in the name of the
Grand Seignior and their Government declared him Enemy.

This insolent Answer was not well relished by his Lordship, nor the Officers
of the Fleet, who resolved to reduce this nest of Pirates (being grown to that
height of pride by their good successes against the Christians) either by fair
or forcible means to reason, and to give satisfaction to the demands of his
Majesty the King of Great Britain.

The Deputies thereupon returned back to the City, but his Lordship not to
loose any time, gave immediately orders for attaining the Enemy, especially for
the firing and ruining of 30 of their best Pyrate ships. His Lordship himself
undertook to batter the Castle with the Cannon of his ship, with 6 others, the
rest were divided in two Squadrons, who were to ply upon the City, to frighten
the People within, as in effect they did; But the wind turning Northward
hindered the resolution taken, viz. to destroy all the Pyrate ships, for the
English against their will and orders were by the wind forced too near the
shore, that they could not manage their ships as they ought, which caused them
for the present to give over the enterprise, receiving no greater hurt then the
disabling of two Frigots, which were sent to Spain to be there repaired. The
wind continued still tempestuous that day and the following, which gave the
Infidels in the City much time and opportunity to put themselves into a better
posture of defense. On the sixteenth at night the wind came fair again, which
no sooner perceived, but the English Admiral gave order for a second attempt,
dividing the Fleet into several Squadrons, with five great fireships, and some
ten or twelve rowing sloopes, full of fireworks and burning materials, to row
under the force of the smoke to the Ships and Galleys of the Enemy, and if
possible, to set them on fire. On the seventeenth in the morning at break of
day, the English Fleet began again to pour broad-sides from all the Ships upon
the Castle, for the wind was so favorable, that all the Frigots each after
another passing and repassing presently fired, which caused the Enemy within to
fire all the Cannon of the Castle at once upon each single Ship, but if more
together to fire but once or twice at them; This plying to and fro of the
English Frigots, and continual firing upon the City, lasted 4. whole hours,
until the Walls were battered all in pieces, and dismounted of all the Cannon
which before endangered the English ships, who had 60. men killed, and five
ships very much torn and disabled. The Castle being thus dismantled, the Fleet
carrying the aforementioned fireships in the midst, set directly upon the
ships of the Infidels, on which having bravely fired of all sides with much
advantage from the wind, 18. Capital Ships of the Enemy were within a few hours
wholly destroyed, which was most formidable to behold, not so much for the
ships sake or the Infidels that were in them, but for the lamentation and
outcry of the Christian slaves who were likewise there, of whom yet 1100. were
saved by the sloopes and boats that went to fish them out of the water, and
more might have been saved, but as the powder within the Turkish Ships took
fire, it gave such a terrible report that it was not possible to come near
them; Besides there 18 Ships three of the best Gallyes are likewise with men
and all burnt and sent into the Air, the rest of the Ships had timely weighed
Anchor and run close ashore, where the Turks had cast up a small Retrenchment
guarded with 28. pieces of Ordnance, to dispute the English their landing. This
Enterprise being after nine hours work happily finished, the Fleet in the
afternoon again began to fire upon the City, and continued so effectually until
the eighteenth at night, that according to the report of a slave that had made
his escape, more then half the Town was battered down, and the People within
extremely much affrighted. The Lord Admiral intended on the 19th. at night to
destroy likewise with his fireships the remainder of the Turkish Ships, or to
fire them with his Cannon, being moreover resolved not to make any agreement
till all the Slaves were set at liberty. The effect whereof, and other
particulars, we may expect by the first convenience.

FINIS.

