His Majesty's GRACIOUS SPEECH, Together with the Lord CHANCELLOR'S, To both
Houses of PARLIAMENT; on Saturday the 29th day of December, 1660. Being the day
of their Dissolution. As also, that of the SPEAKER of the Honorable House of
COMMONS, at the same time.

blazon or coat of arms of the British royal family C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT



LONDON, Printed by JOHN BILL, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
1660.

CUM PRIVILEGIO.

HIS MAJESTY'S Gracious Speech To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, On Saturday the
29 day of December 1660. Upon the Dissolution of the PARLIAMENT.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Will not entertain you with a long discourse; the sum of all I have to say
to you, being but to give you Thanks, very hearty Thanks; and I assure you I
find it a very difficult work to satisfy My Self in My Own expressions of
those Thanks; Perfunctory thanks, Ordinary thanks for Ordinary civilities are
easily given; but when the Heart is as full as Mine is, it is a labor to thank
you: Bou have taken great pains to obliege Me, and therefore it cannot be easy
for me to express the sense I have of it.

I will enlarge no further to you upon this occasion, then to tell you, That
when God brought Me hither, I brought with me an Extraordinary Affection and
Esteem for Parliaments* I need not tell you how much it is improved by your
carriage toward me. You have outdone all the good and oblieging Acts of your
Predecessors toward the Crown; and therefore you cannot but believe My Heart
is exceedingly enlarged with the acknowledgment.

Many former Parliaments have had particular denominations from what they have
done; They have been styled, Learned and Unlearned, and sometimes have had
worse Epithites; I pray let us all Resolve that this be for ever called, The
Healing and the Blessed Parliament.

As I thank you, though not enough, for what you have done, so I have not the
least doubt, by the blessing of God, but when I shall call the next Parliament,
which I shall do as soon as reasonably you can expect or desire, I shall
receive your Thanks for what I have done since I parted with you: For I deal
truly with you, I shall not more propose any one Rule to My Self in My Actions,
and My Councels, then this, What is a Parliament like to think of this Action,
or this Council* And it shall be want of Understanding in Me, if it will not
bear that Test.

I shall conclude with this, which I cannot say too often, nor you too often,
where you go, Tha^ (...) to the miraculous blessing of God Almighty; and
indeed, as an immediate effect of that Blessing, I do impute the good
Disposition and Security we are all in, to the happy Act of Indemnity and
Oblivion; that is the principal Cornerstone which supports this excellent
Building, that creates Kindness in Us to each other; and Confidence is Our
Joint and Common Security. You may be sure, I will not only observe it
Religiously, and inviolably My Self, but also exact the observation of it from
others: And if any person should ever have the boldness to attempt to persuade
Me to the contrary, he will find such an Acceptance from Me, as he would
have, who should persuade Me to burn Magna Charta, cancel all the old Laws, and
to erect a new Government after My Own invention and appetite.

There are many other particulars which I will not trust My Own Memory with,
but will require the Chancellor to say the rest to you.

(After His Majesty had done, the Lord Chancellor said as follows)
My Lords, and you the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of
Commons;
THere cannot be a greater manifestation of an excellent Temper and Harmony of
Affections throughout the Nation, then that the King and his two Houses of
Parliament meet with the same Affections and Cheerfulness, the same Alacrity in
their Countenance at the Dissolution, as when they met at the Convention of
Parliament: It is an unquestionable evidence, that they are exceedingly
satisfied in what they have done toward each other, that they have very well
done all the business they came about: This is now your case, you have so well
satisfied your own Consciences, that you are sure you have satisfied the King's
expectation and His Hope, and the desires and wishes of the Country. It was
very justly observed by you Mr. Speaker, that you have never asked any one
thing of the King, which he has not with all imaginable cheerfulness granted;
and in truth His Majesty does with great comfort acknowledge, that you have
been so far from denying Him any thing He has asked, that He has scarce
wished any thing that you have not granted; And it is no wonder, that having so
fully complied with your obligations, and having so well composed the minds of
the Nation, you are now willing to be relieved from this extraordinary Fatigue
you have submitted so long to, and to return to the consideration of your own
particular Affairs, which you have so long sacrificed to the Public* and this
reasonable wish and desire has brought the King to comply with you, and, which
nothing else could do, to part with you with an equal cheerfulness; and he
makes no doubt, but all succeeding Parliaments will pay you their Thanks for
all you have done, and look upon your Actions and your example with all
possible Approbation and Reverence.

The King and you have given such earnest to each other of your mutual
Affection, you have been so exact and punctual in your proceedings toward each
other, that you have made no promise, no profession to each other, of the
making good and performing of which the world is not witness: You declared at
the Adjournment in September last, your Resolution to settle a noble Revenew on
the Crown* you have done it with all the Circumstances of Affection and
Prudence. The King promised you to establish a Council for Trade, a Council for
the Foreign Plantations, a Commission for composing all difference upon Sales;
all this he did before your coming together, and with very good effect; and you
shall hear that the Proceedings in every one of them are more vigorous and
effectual after your Dissolution; His Majesty then promised you, that he would
give up all his endeavors to compose the unhappy differences in matters of
Religion, and to restore the languishing Church to peace, Unity and Order:
Constantine himself hardly spent so much of his own time in private and
public Conferences to that purpose; His Majesty in private conferred with the
Learned Men, and heard all that could be said upon several Opinions and
Interests apart, and then in the presence of both Parties, himself moderating
in the debates, (and less care and diligence and authority would not have done
the work) and God has so blessed His Labor, and made His Determinations in
that Affair so generally agreeable, that he has received thanks from His
Houses of Parliament, that is, from the whole Kingdom: If after all this, His
Majesty does not reap the full Harvest he expected from those Condescentions;
If some men, by their writing, and by their preachings endeavor to continue
those Breaches, and very rashly and I think unconscientiously keep up the
distinctions, and publicly justify and maintain what has heretofore been
done amiss, and for which the Act of Indemnity was the best defense; I shall
say no more, then that I hope their* want of Modesty and Obedience will cause
them to be disclaimed by all pious and peaceable men, who cannot but be well
contented to see them reduced by Law, to the obedience they owe to Law: And His
Majesty is confident, that this His beloved City, toward which His heart is so
gracious, and so full of Princely Designs to improve their Honor, their Wealth,
and their Beauty, will discountenance all those seditious designs, and by
returning and fixing themselves upon their good old Foundations, make
themselves the great example of Piety, of Loyalty, and of hearty Affection to
the whole Kingdom.

This discourse puts me in mind to say to you, that though the King wonders
much more at the many great things you have done, then that you have left any
thing undone, yet he could have wished, and would have been glad that your
other weighty Affairs had given you time to have published your opinion and
advice in the business of the Militia, that the People after so many disputes
upon that Argument, might have discerned that the King, and His two Houses of
Parliament are as much of the same mind in that, as in all other things, as no
doubt they are: But since that could not be done, you may all assure your
selves, That the King will proceed therein in with all imaginable care and
circumspection, for the ease, and quiet, and security of His People: And as He
did before the last Recess by the unanimous advice of His Privy Council, issue
out His Commissions of Lieutenancy for the settling the Militia in the several
Counties, to prevent any disorders which many apprehended might arise upon the
disbanding the Army; so He will now again recommend it to them to keep
themselves in such a Posture, as may disappoint any seditious designs which are
now on foot; and there cannot be too much circumspection and vigilance to
frustrate those designs. You have heard of many suspected and dangerous persons
which have been lately clapped up; and it was high time to look about: His
Majesty has spent many hours Himself in the examination of this business; and
some of the Principal Officers, who before they came to His Majesty's
Presence, could not be brought to acknowledge any thing, after the King Himself
had spoken to them, confessed, That their spirits were insensibly prevailed
upon, and subdued, and that it was not in their power to conceal their guilt
from Him. They have confessed, That there is a party of the late
Disbanded-Officers and Soldiers, and others, full of discontent and seditious
purposes, and a resolution to attempt the change of the present Government, and
to erect the Republic; they acknowledge that they did purpose to have made
their attempt for the rescue of those Wretches, who were so justly condemned at
Newgate, and so worthily executed; and that Ludlow should then have appeared in
the head of them; that they made themselves sure at the same time, by Parties
and Confederacy to have surprised the Tower of London, and the Castle of
Windsor, but that they found, or at least apprehended, that their design was
discovered; which so broke their spirits, that they concluded they must
acquiesce for the present, and stay till the Army should be disbanded, which
they said was generally debauched, that is, Returned to an honest and fast
obedience to the King; and that it was evident they were betrayed by those who
were most entirely trusted by them; and they were in the right: The King had
notice of all their design, what progress it made, and the night they intended
to surprise the Tower and Windsor, and gave notice to the several Governors;
and so without any noise, that mischief was by God's goodness prevented: They
acknowledge that they have since recovered their Courage and Resolution, and
were about this time to make their full attempt; they have been promised some
considerable Rising in the West under Ludlow, and in the North under others;
but this place was the Scene of greatest hope; they made sure of a Body here, I
think they say of Two thousand five hundred men, with which they resolved in
the first place, to secure (you know what that security is) the Person of the
General, the Duke of Albemarle, with whom they have so much reason to be angry,
and at the same time to possess themselves of Whitehal; You know the method
used in such possessing, Kill, and take Possession; and this insupportable
Calamity God has again deverted from Us; though I must tell you, the poor men
who seem to speak honestly, and upon the impulsion of Conscience, are very far
from being confident, that there will not be some desperate Insurrections and
Attempts in several parts of the Kingdom within a short time, which all
possible care will be taken to prevent; and in truth this very good City so
well requites the Kings abundant Grace and Kindness to it, That not only by
the unwearied Pains and Diligence of the worthy Lord Major, but by the general
temper and constitution of the whole City, the discontented and seditious Party
(which can never be totally extirpated out of such a Metropolis) is like to
receive little encouragement to pursue their desperate Counsels.

The King does not believe that all those persons who at present are
apprehended, and in custody, will be found guilty of this Treason; It is a
vulgar and known Artifice, to corrupt inferior persons, by persuading them,
That better men are engaged in the same enterprise; and the King will make as
much haste as He can to set those at Liberty, against whom the evidence or
suspicion is not too reasonable; in the mean time, they who are in truth
innocent, must confess that the proceeding toward them, has been very natural
and full of Clemency; and no man will wonder, if His Majesty be very desirous
that in this conjuncture, and in order to prevent, or suppress these too
visible distempers and Machinations, His Militia in all places be in good order
and preparation: And you may assure your selves, That in the forming and
conduct of it, He will have so great a care of the ease and quiet of His
People, that if any person trusted by him, shall through want of skill, or want
of temper, satisfy his own passion or appetite, in grieving or vexing his
neighbors, His Majesty will be so sensible of it, that if it can be cured no
other way, His Trust shall be quickly determined, and He is not at all reserved
in giving those Animadversions and Reprehensions when there is occasion; and
His ears will be always open to receive those complaints.

My Lords and Gentlemen, You are now returning to your Countries to receive the
thanks and acknowledgements of your Friends and Neighbors, for the great
things you have done, and to make the burdens you have laid upon them, easy,
by convincing them of the inevitable necessity of their submitting to them; You
will make them see that you have proceeded very far toward the separation, and
even divorce of that Necessity from them, to which they have been so long
married, that they are now restored to that blessed temper of Government, under
which their Ancestors enjoyed so many hundred years, that full measure of
felicity, and the misery of being deprived of which they have so sensibly felt,
that they are now free from those midnight Alarms, with which they have been
terrified, and rise out of their beds at their own healthy hours, without being
saluted with the death of a Husband, a Son, and Friend, miserably killed the
night or the day before, and with such circumstances killed, as improved the
misery beyond the loss it self; this enfranchisement is worth all they pay for
it: Your Lordships will easily recover that estimation and reverence that is
due to your high Condition, by the exercise and practice of that virtue, from
whence your Honors first sprang; the example of your Justice and Piety will
inflame the hearts of the People toward you; and from your practice, they will
make a judgment of the King himself: They know very well, that you are not only
admitted to his Presence, but to his Conversation, and even in a degree to his
Friendship, for you are his great Council; by your Example they will form
their own Manners, and by yours they will make some guess at the King's:
Therefore under that obligation, you will cause your Piety, your Justice, your
Affability, and your Charity to shine as bright as is possible before them.
They are too much in love with England, too partial to it, who believe it the
best Country in the world; there is better earth, and a better air, and a
better, that is, a warmer Sun in other Countries; but we are no more then just,
when we say that England is an endosure of the best People in the world, when
they are well Informed and Instructed; a People in sobriety of Conscience the
most devoted to God Almighty; in the integrity of their affections, the most
dutiful to the King; In their good Manners and Inclinations, most regardful and
loving to the Nobility; no Nobility in Europe so entirely loved by the People;
there may be more awe, and fear, and terror of them, but no such love toward
them as in England. I beseech your Lordships, do not undervalue this love; they
have looked upon your Lordships, and they will look upon your Lordships again,
as the greatest examples and patterns of Duty to the King, as their greatest
Security and Protection from injury and injustice, and for their enjoying
whatsoever is due to them by the Law, and as the most proper Mediators and
Interposers to the King, if by any failer of Justice they should be exposed to
any oppression and violence: And this exercise of your Justice and Kindness
toward them, will make them the more abhor and abominate that parity upon
which a Commonwealth must be founded, because it would extirpate, or suppress,
or deprive them of their beloved Nobility, which are such a support and
security to their full happiness.

And you Gentlemen of the House of Commons, you are now returning to your
Country, laden with a Trust not inferior, weighty, than that you brought from
thence, you came up their Deputies to the King, and he returns you now his
Deputies to them, his Plenipotentiaries, to inform and assure them, that he
thinks himself the happiest, and the greatest Prince of the World, not from the
Situation of His Dominions and the Power of his great Navy, with which he can
visit his Neighbors, and keep them from visiting him, or from the noble Revenue
you have settled upon him, which he will improve with all good Husbandry, but
from being possessed of the Affections and Hearts of such Subjects; that he
does so entirely love them, and depend upon them, that all his Actions and all
his Councels, shall tend to no other end, but to make them happy and
prosperous: that he thinks his Honor and his Interest Principally to consist
in providing for, and advancing the Honor and Interest of the Nation: That you
may have the more credit in what you say, He will not take it unkindly, if you
publish his defects and Infirmities: You may tell them, that He is so confident
in the multitude of His very good and faithful Subjects, that he is very hard
to be persuaded that His few ill and unfaithful Subjects can do Him much harm;
that He so much depends upon the affection of honest men, and their Zeal for
His security, that He is not so sollicitous and vigilant for His own safety as
he ought to be, amidst so many Combinations, of which he is so well informed,
that His Servants, who with grief and anguish importune Him not to take so
little care of his own safety, can obtain no other answer from Him, then what
Caesar heretofore gave to his jealous Friends, Mori se malle quam timeri, or
timere; He will die any death, rather then live in fear of His own Subjects, or
that they should live in fear of him; You may tell them as a great Infirmity,
that a troubled and discontented Countenance so afflicts him, that he would
remove it from them at his own charge, as if he himself were in the fault; and
when he has been informed of any less kind, or jealous thing said amongst
you, as your windores are never so close shut, but that the sound of your words
goes to the several corners of the Town, His Majesty has been heard to say no
more, but, What have I done? I wish that Gentleman and I were acquainted, that
he knew me better. Oh, Gentlemen, you cannot be your selves, nor you cannot
make your Friends too zealous, or too jealous for such a Prince's safety, or
too sollicitous for such a Prince's satisfaction and content, to whom we may
very justly say, as the King of Tire writ to Solomon, Because God has loved
his people, he has made thee King over them: Even His defects and infirmities
are very necessary toward the full measure of our prosperity.

My Lords and Gentlemen, God has enabled us to invert one Argument, which, I
hope, may to a good degree repair the much mischief it has heretofore done: It
has been urged very unreasonably, yet successfully urged in the worst times,
That it was not Faith, but Presumption, to expect that God would restore a
Family, with which he seemed to have a controversy, and had humbled so far;
That he would ever countenance a Party, that he had so much discountenanced,
and almost destroyed. We may now much more reasonably, and therefore I hope as
effectually, press the Miracles that God Almighty has lately wrought for King
and People, as an evidence that he will not again easily forsake them: We may
tell those, who are using all their endeavors to imbroil the Nation in new
troubles, That it is not probable, that a Nation, against which God seemed
these late years to have pronounced his Judgment, in the very language of the
Prophet;

Go ye swift messengers to a Nation scattered and peeled, to a people terrible
from the beginning hitherto, a Nation rooted out and trodden down, whose Land
the Rivers have spoiled: -- The Lord has mingeld a perverse spirit in the
midst thereof.

That he should reduce that perverseness to the greatest meekness and
resignation, that he should withdraw his Judgment from this Nation, and in a
moment restore it to all the happiness it can wish, and to no other end, but to
expose it to the mercy and fury of a few discontented persons, the worst of the
Nation, is not easy to be believed.

We may tell those who still contrive the ruin of the Church, the best, and
the best Reformed Church in the Christian World; Reformed by that Authority,
and with those Circumstances as a Reformation ought to be made, that God would
not so miraculously have snatched this Church as a brand out of the fire; would
not have raised it from the grave, after he had suffered it to be buried so
many years, by the boystrous hands of Profane and Sacrilegious persons, under
its own rubbidge, to expose it again to the same Rapine, Reproach and Impiety:
That Church which delights it self in being called Catholic, was never so near
expiration, never had such a Resurrection, that so small a pittance of Meal and
Oil, should be sufficient to preserve and nourish the poor Widow and her Family
so long, is very little more miraculous then that such a number of pious,
learned, and very aged Bishops, should so many years be preserved, in such
wonderful straights and oppressions, until they should plentifully provide for
their own Succession: That after such a deep Deluge of Sacrilege, Profaness
and Impiety had covered, and to common understanding swallowed it up; that that
Church should again appear above the waters, God be again served in that
Church, and served as he ought to be, and that there should be still some
Revenue left to support and encourage those who serve him; nay, that many of
those who seemed to thirst after that Revenue till they had possessed it,
should conscientiously restore what they had taken away, and become good sons,
and willing Tenants to that Church they had so lately spoiled, may make us all
piously believe, that God Almighty would not have been at the expense and
charge of such a miracle, so manifested himself to us in such a deliverance,
but in the behalf of a Church very acceptable to him, and which shall continue
to the end of the World, and against which the Gates of Hell shall not be able
to prevail.

We may tell those desperate wretches, who yet harbor in their thoughts wicked
designs against the Sacred Person of the King, in order to the compassing their
own imaginations; that God Almighty would not have led Him through so many
Wildernesses of Afflictions of all kinds, conducted Him through so many perils
by Sea, and perils by Land; snatched Him out of the midst of this Kingdom, when
it was not worthy of Him; and when the hands of His Enemies were even upon Him,
when they thought themselves so sure of Him, that they would bid so cheap, and
so vile a price for Him; He would not in that Article have so covered Him with
a Cloud, that He travailed even with some pleasure, and great observation
through the midst of His Enemies; He would not so wonderfully have new modelled
that Army, so inspired their hearts, and the hearts of the whole Nation, with
an honest and impatient longing for the return of their dear Sovereign, and in
the mean time have so exercised Him (which had little less of Providence in it
than the other) with those unnatural, or at least unusual disrespects and
reproaches abroad, that He might have a harmless and an innocent appetite to
His Own Country, and return to His Own People, with a full value, and the
whole unwasted Bulk of His Affections, without being corrupted, or biased by
Extraordinary Foreign Obligations: God Almighty would not have done all this,
but for a Servant whom He will always preserve as the apple of His own Eye,
and always defend from the most secret machinations of His Enemies.

If these Argumentations, Gentlemen, urged with that vivacity as is most
natural to your own gratitude and Affections, recover as many (and it would be
strange if it should not) as have been corrupted by the other Logic, the
hearts of the whole Nation, even to a man, will insensibly be so devoted to the
King, as the only Conservator and Protector of all that is dear and precious to
them, and will be so Zealous to please him, whose greatest pleasure is to see
them pleased, that when they make choice of Persons again to serve in
Parliament, they will not choose such, who they wish should oppose the King,
but therefore choose them, because they have, and because they are like to
serve the King with their whole hearts; and since he desires what is best for
his People, to gratify him in all he desires: This blessed harmony would raise
us to the highest Pinnacle of honor and happiness in this world, a pinnacle
without a point, upon which King and People may securely rest and repose
themselves against all the gusts, and storms and tempests which all the malice
of this world can raise against us, and I am sure you will all contend to be at
the top of this Pinnacle.

I have no more to add, but the words of custom, That the King declares this
present Parliament to be dissolved; and this present Parliament is dissolved.

THE SPEECH WHICH THE SPEAKER of the House of Commons made unto the KING, on
Saturday December 29. 1660, being the Day of their Dissolution.
Most Gracious and Dread Sovereign,
THe Knights, Citizens and Burgesses now assembled in Parliament, being the
Representative Body of Your Commons of England, are as Conduit Pipes or Quils
to convey the Streams of Your Peoples dutiful Affections and humble Desires
into Your Royal Presence; and that being done, they need no other Speaker but
Your Self, for they know Your Skill, and they have had experience of Your Will.
And yet Royal Sir, Though they have no cause to complain, they cannot but take
notice of Your Partiality, for when any thing in point of Right, or but
Convenience has fallen out to be, as we use to say, a measuring Cast, a
disputable Case between Your Self and Your People, without any regard or
respect had unto Your own Right, or the Advantage that might accrue to Your
Self by asserting the same, if the good of Your People has come in competition
with it, You have always cast it against Your Self, and given it in on your
Peoples side.

Royal Sir, Thus to undo Your Self to do Your people good, is not to do as You
would be done unto; and what can we do less, then by way of a grateful
retribution, cheerfully to pay Your Majesty the just Tribute of our dutiful
Obedience unto all Your Royal Commands, and upon all occasions readily to
sacrifice, Se and sua, all that we have, or enjoy, Lives and Fortunes, in the
Service of such an incomparable Sovereign.

But, Royal Sir, It becomes not me to fill Your Majesty's ears with air;
Loquere, ut te videam, is the only Rhetoric the People ought to use to such a
King of kindness, and a Prince so full of good Works; and therefore, as I am
commanded, I must humbly assure Your Majesty, that the many healing expedients
propounded by Your Self in your several most gracious Declarations, have been
the subject matter upon which Your Commons have wrought all this Parliament:
And in the first place, they took into Consideration, the great and growing
charges, which then lay upon your people, for the pay of Your Army and Navy;
and they conceived it necessary; to begin with that part thereof, next at hand,
wherein Your People would receive the most ease, and the greatest security and
satisfaction, which was the disbanding Your Majesty's Forces by Land, and the
paying off five and Twenty of Your Ships then in the Harbor and of no use: And
this led them to the Consideration of such ways and means, as were to be used
to raise Moneys for that purpose: And that for Poll-money being propounded and
passed, some were of opinion, that, that alone would have over-done the Work:
Others having had experience of a former Bill of the same nature, and upon the
like occasion, fearing it might not answer expectation; and being unwilling to
be deceived the second time, especially in such a business as this, wherein a
mistake was like to prove so penal, moved for a further Supply, which after
some Debate was agreed upon, Of a Two months Assessment at Seventy thousand
Pounds a month, and both have not yet fully done the work for which they were
designed, but with the help of two other Bills here in my hand; the one
entitled, An Act for the leavying of the Arrears of the Twelve months
Assessment, commencing the four and twentieth of June 1659, and the Six months
Assessment commencing the Five and twentieth of December 1659. And the other
entitled, An Act for the further Supplying and Explaining certain Defects in
an Act for the speedy Provision of Money for Disbanding and Paying off the
Forces of this Kingdom both by Land and Sea: They hope, this Account will be
fully cleared off at last.

Sir, Your Commons have likewise taken into their Considerations, the Charge of
Your Summer-Fleet, which besides that part thereof Your Majesty is pleased to
take upon Your Self, for Your ordinary Guard of the Seas, will amount unto a
very great sum. And as it is a great Debt, so it is a growing Debt, in a few
Months it doubles. There is a saying, Qui cito dat, bis dat; I am sure it is
most true in this case, Qui cito solvit, bis solvit; To pay this Debt readily,
is the way to pay it but once; and to take time to pay it, is the sure way to
pay it twice: And therefore Your Commons laying aside the sad thoughts of their
long sufferings, and those miserable Devastations and Pressures they have lain
under for many years last past; and looking upon the necessity of Affairs,
which call importunately, and must be answered effectually, has passed another
Bill here in my hand, entitled, An Act for Six Months Assessment, at Seventy
Thousand pounds per Mensem, to begin the First of January, and to be paid in,
the one Moiety thereof before the First of February, and the other Moiety,
being the remaining part, by the First of April next ensuing; which is to be
applied wholly to the paying off the Arrears of Your Majesty's Navy and Army.

I have three other Bills in my hand, which have relation to Your Majesty's
Revenue, and are branches thereof; the One entitled, An Act for the better
Ordering the selling of Wines by Retail, and for preventing abuses in the
Mingling, Corrupting, and Vitiating of Wines, and for settling and limiting the
Prizes of the same: And this Bill is tendered unto Your Majesty, for preventing
all future disputes touching the Legality thereof: For we know it is Your
Majesty's desire, that nothing might be done, by any of Your Officers or
Ministers that Act under You, Sine figura Justitiae, and warranto Legis. An
other is entitled, An Act for erecting and establishing a Post Office: And
this being likewise Legally settled, will be of very great use to all Your
Majesty's People, and especially Your Merchants, for holding Intelligence with
their Correspondents, Factors and Agents in Foreign parts, Litterae sunt
indices animi, and without the safe and speedy dispatch and conveyance of their
Letters, they will never be able to time their business, nor carry on their
Trades to an equal advantage with the Merchants of other Countries. The other
Bill provides for the increasing Your Majesty's ordinary and constant Revenue
by the grant of an Impost to be taken upon Ale, Beer, and other Beveredges
therein particularly mentioned and expressed; To hold to your Majesty for life,
which God long continue* and as it is the desire of your Commons, that your
Majesty might never be necessitated to resort to any extraordinary or
unparliamentary ways and means, for the raising of money upon your People; So
they likewise acknowledge it to be their duties, to support and uphold, to the
utmost of their Powers, the Honor and Grandeur of your Majesty's Royal State
and Dignity.

And for a further evidence of your Commons dutiful affections to your
Majesty's most dear and Royal Person, they have passed another Bill, for the
raising of seventy thousand Pounds for your Majesty's further supply; All which
Bills I am commanded humbly to present your Majesty withal, and to pray your
gracious acceptance thereof, and your Royal assent thereunto

There are other Bills likewise of Public concernment which have passed both
Houses, and do now attend upon your Majesty, waiting for your Royal assent. The
one is Entitled, An Act for the Attainder of several Persons, guilty of the
horrid Murder of his late sacred Majesty, your Royal Father of ever blessed
Memory. There is another Bill Entitled, An Act for Confirmation of Leases and
Grants from Colleges and Hospitals. This will tend much to the quieting of
many men's Estates, that in the late unhappy times were enforced to renew, and
change their Estates much for the worse, were it not for the favor your
Majesty intends them in this Bill.

There is another Bill to prohibit the Exportation of Wool, Wooll-fells,
Fullers Earth, or any other scouring Earths, Woollen Manufactures, besides the
Duties they pay your Majesty for your Customs here at home, have great
impositions laid upon them in foreign parts where they are vented: In the
Low Countries sixteen or seventeen per cent. and in Portugal Twenty per cent at
the least. But those, who for their own private base filthy lucre sake, having
no regard or respect unto the public good, that steal over the Materials of
which those Manufactures are made, pay not one penny either here or there, and
by that means strangers do make those Manufactures of our wool upon such easy
terms, that they can afford and do under-sel your Merchants, which is the
occasion of a double loss. First, to your Majesty in your Customs, and in the
next Place to your people, who are thereby disheartened and discouraged, and in
a short time, if not prevented, will be utterly beaten out of that Ancient
native Staple trade, upon which many thousands of Families do wholly depend for
all their livelihood and subsistence.

There is another Bill entitled, an Act for prohibiting the planting, setting
or sowing of Tobacco in England and Ireland. This Climate is so cold that it
never comes to any maturity or perfection: for we find by experience, though it
be never so well healed, made up with the greatest art and skill that possible
can be, yet it is impossible, after it is made up into the Roll, to keep it and
preserve it from putrefying above three or four months at the most; and
therefore Physicians, even those that love it best, and use it most, conclude
generally, that it is unwholesome for men's bodies: Besides many other great
damages and inconveniences will follow upon it, if it should be permitted. The
abatement of your Majesty's Custom, The destruction of your Plantations
abroad, The discouraging of Navigation, And so consequently the decay of
Shipping, which are the Walls and Bulwarks of your Majesty's Kingdom.

There is another Bill Entitled, an Act for the taking away the Court of Wards
and Liveries, together with tenures in Capite, Knight- Service, tenures and
Purveyances. This Bill Ex re nata may properly be called a Bill of Exchange:
for, as care is therein taken for the case of Your people; So the supply of
that part of your Majesty's Revenue, which formerly came into your Treasury by
your tenures, and for your Purveyances, is thereby likewise fully provided for
by the grant of another imposition to be taken upon Ale, Beer, and other
Liquors, To hold to your Majesty, your Heirs and Successors for ever: And yet
they should not look upon the considerations mentioned in this bill, as a full
compensation and recompense for your Majesty's parting with two such Royal
Prerogatives and ancient flowers of your Crown, if more were not employed then
is expressed. For, Royal Sir, Your Tenures in Capite are not only turned into a
Tenure in Soccage (though that alone will for ever give your Majesty a just
Right and title to the labor of our Ploughs, and the sweat of our brows) But
they are likewise turned into a Tenure in Cord: what your Majesty had before
in your Court of Wards, you will be sure to find it hereafter in the Exchequer
of your peoples hearts The King of Spaines Mines will sooner deceive him, then
this Revenue will fail you: for his Mines have bottomes, but the deeper your
Majesty sinkes your self into the hearts and affections of your people, the
greater you will find your Wealth to be, and the more invincible your Strength.

Royal Sir, We have nothing more to offer or to Ask, but must conclude all our
work this Parliament with an humble and thankful acknowledgement of Gods
infinite Goodness and mercy in Restoring your Majesty to your Royal and
Imperial Crown, Throne and Dignity; And for making you the Restorer of that,
which is dearer unto us then our lives, Our Religion; in which through Gods
blessing and Gracious assistance we are resolved to live and dye. As likewise
for restoring us to our Magna Charta Liberties having taken the charge and care
of them into your own heart, which is our greatest security, and more then a
thousand confirmations

Royal Sir, You have denied us nothing we have asked this Parliament; indeed
you have outdone your Parliament by doing much more for us, then we could
agree amongst our selves to ask, and therefore must needs be a happy
Parliament: This is a healing Parliament, A Reconciling Peacemaking
Parliament, A blessed Parliament, A Parliament, Propter excellentiam, that may
truly be called Parliamentissimum Parliamentum: no man can say, that has made
the most curious search into Books or Records, that there ever was such a
Parliament as this; And its our unspeakable joy and comfort that no man can
say, so long as your Majesty lives, but we may have such another; for you have
set your Royal Heart upon it, to do your people good.

And as we have nothing more to say, so we have nothing more to do, but that
which will be a doing as long as we have a being; The pouring out our souls
unto Almighty God for your Majesty's Long, Long, Long, and most happy, blessed,
Glorious and Prosperous Reign over us.

LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Printer to the KING'S most Excellent MAJESTY,
1660.

At the KINGS Printing House in Blackfriars.


