His Majesty's Most Gracious SPEECH, Together with the Lord Chancellours, TO
THE TWO HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT, On Thursday the 13. of September, 1660.

Die Jovis, 13. September. 1660.
PRinted and Published at the desire of both Houses of Parliament, And With His
Majesty's Allowance.

JOHN BROWN. Cleric. Parliamentorum.



Edinburgh, Reprinted by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close, over against the
Trone Church, 1660.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

His Majesty's most Gracious SPEECH to His two Houses of Parliament, on
Thursday the 13. of September, 1660.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
II My presence here had not been requisite for the passing these many Bills, I
did always intend to see you together before your Adiournment, that I might
again thank you for the many good things you have done for Me and the Kingdom;
and in truth I do thank you more for what you have done for the public, then
what you have done for My own particular, and yet I do thank you too for that
with all My heart: But I confess to you, I do thank you more for the provision
you have made to prevent Free Quarter, during the time the Army shall be
disbanding, which I take to be given for My satisfaction, then I do for the
other present you have made Me for My own particular occasions; and I do
promise you, which is the best way I can take to gratify you, I will not apply
one penny of that money to My own particular occasions, what shift soever I
make, till it is evident to Me, that the public will not stand in need of it;
and if it do, every penny of it shall be disbursed that way; and I dare say, I
shall not be the poorer for it.

I cannot but take notice of one particular Bill I have passed, which may seem
of an extraordinary nature, that concerning the Duke of Somerset, but you all
know it is for an extraordinary Person, who has merited as much of the King My
Father and My self, as a Sub^^^^ (...) am none of those, who think that
Subjects by performing their duties in an extraordinary manner, do not obliege
their Prince to reward them in an extraordinary manner; there can be no danger
from such a Precedent, and I hope no man will envy him, because I have done
what a good Master should do to such a Servant.

My Lords and Gentlemen, I will not deny to you, that I had some inclination,
when I consented, upon your desire, to your Recess, to have made a Session,
which I thought most agreeable to the ancient order of Parliaments, and I hope
you will all ioyn with Me in reducing the proceedings of Parliaments to the
ancient Rules and Orders of Parliaments, the deviation from which, has done us
no good, and I think there were never so many Bills passed together, as I have
this day given My Assent to, without a Session: But upon the Desire and Reasons
given by the House of Commons, for an Adiournment without a Session, I did very
willingly depart from that inclination, and do as willingly give you leave and
direct you that you Adiourn your selves till the sixth day of November, when I
hope you will all meet again, and in the mean time, that you will be all
welcome to your Countries, and do me much Service there.

I have many other particulars to say and recommend to you, in which I cannot
enough trust My own memory, and therefore I shall command the Chancellor to
say the rest to you.

(After His Majesty had ended His Speech, the Lord Chancellor said, as
follows)

My Lords and Gentlemen,
THe King tells you that He has commanded me to say many particulars to you,
and the truth is, He has charged me with so many, that I have great reason to
fear, that I shall stand in much need of His Mercy, for omitting many things He
has given me in command, at least for delivering them in more Diso^^^^ (...)
matters of such moment and importance ought to be to such an Assembly, for
which the King Himself has even a kind of Reverence, as well as an
extraordinary Kindness. I am to mention some things He has done already, and
many things He intends to do during this Recess, that you may see, how well
content soever He is, that you should have Ease, and Pleasure, and Refreshment,
He has designed work enough for Himself.

The King has thanked you for the Provision you have made that there may be no
free Quarter during the time the Army shall be disbanding, and has told you
what He will do with that Money you have given Him, if there should want
wherewithal to disband it; And now I hope you will all believe, that His
Majesty will consent to the bisbanding: He will do so; And yet He does not take
it unkindly at their hands, who have thought that His Majesty would not disband
this Army; It was a sober and a rational Jealousy; No other Prince in Europe
would be willing to disband such an Army; An Army to which Victory is entayled,
and which, humanely speaking, could hardly fail of Conquest whithersoever He
should lead it; And if God had not restored His Majesty to that rare felicity,
as to be without apprehension of danger at home or from abroad, and without any
Ambition of taking from His Neighbors what they are possessed of; Himself
would never disband this Army; an Army whose Order and Discipline, whose
Sobriety and Manners, whose Courage and Success has made it famous and
terrible over the world; An Army of which the King and His two Royal Brothers
may say, as the noble Grecian said of Aeneas,

-- Stetimus tela aspera contra,
Contulimusque manus, experto credit, quantus
In clypeum assurgat, quo turbine torqueat hastam.
They have all three in several Countries found themselves engaged in the midst
of these Troops, in the heat and rage of Battle, and if any common Soldiers
(as no doubt many may) will demand the old Romans privilege for having
encountered Princes single, upon my Conscience, he will find both Favor and
preferment: They have all three observed the Discipline, and felt, and admired,
and loved the Courage of this Army, when they were the worse for it; and I have
seen them (...) a season when there was little else of comfort in (...)
themselves with joy, that the English had done the Great Work, the English had
got the day, and then please themselves with the Imagination what wonders they
should perform in the head of such an Army: And therefore when His Majesty is
so entirely possessed of the Affection and Obedience of this Army, and when it
has merited so much from Him, Can it be believed, or imagined, that He can
without some regrate part with them: No, My Lords and Gentlemen, He will never
part with them, and the only sure way never to part with them, is to Disband
them; Should it be otherwise, they must be exposed to the daily Importunity of
His great Neighbors and Allies; and how could He refuse to lend them His
Troops, of which He has no use Himself? His Majesty knows they are too good
English men, to wish that a standing Army should be kept up in the bowels of
their own Country; that they who did but in Bello, pacis gerere negotium, and
who, whilst an Army, lived l^ke good Husbandmen in the country, and good
Citizens in the City will now become really such, and take delight in the
benefit of that Peace they have so honestly and so wonderfully brought to pass:
The King will part with them, as the most indulgent Parents part with their
Children for their education, and for their preferment; he will prefer them to
disbanding, and prefer them by disbanding, and will always retain such a
kindness for them, and such a memory of the service they have done him, that
both Officers and Soldiers, after they are disbanded, shall always find such
countenance, favor, and reward from His Majesty, that He doubts not, but if He
should have occasion to use their Service, they will again resort to Him with
the same alacrity, as if they had never been disbanded: And if there be any so
ill amongst them (as there can be but very few, if any) who will forfeit that
Favor and Protection they may have from Him by any withstanding His Majesty's
commands, and the full and declared sense of the Kingdom; His Majesty is
confident they will be as odious to their companious, as they can be to any
other honest men.

My Lords and Gentlemen, I am in the next place, by the Kings command, to put
you in mind of the Act of Indemnity, not of any Grants or Concessions or
Releases He made to you in that Act, I have nothing of that in charge; no
Prince has so excellent a memory to forget the Favors he ^oth. But of what He
has done against you in that Act, how you (...) that Act, if you are not very
careful to perform the obligations He has laid upon you in it: the clause I
am to put you in mind of, is this, And to the intent and purpose that all
names and terms of distinction may be like wise put into utter Oblivion, Be it
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or persons,
within the space of three years next ensuing, shall presume maliciously to
call, or allege, or object against any other person or persons any name or
names, or other words of reproach, any way leading to revive the memory of the
late differences, or the occasion thereof, That then every such person, so as
aforesaid offending, shall forfeit, etc. It is no matter for the Penalty, it is
too cheap a one; the King wishes it had been greater, and therefore has by His
just Prerogative (and it is well for us He has such a Prerogative) added
another Penalty more insupportable, even His high Displeasure against all who
shall swerve from this clause in the Act. Give me leave to tell you, That as
any name or names, or other words of reproach are expressly against the letter,
and punishable accordingly, so evil and envious looks, murmuring and
discontented hearts, are as directly against the equity of this Statute, a
direct breach of the Act of Indemnity, and ought to be punished too; and I
believe they may be so. You know Kings are in some sense called Gods, and so
they may in some degree be able to look into men's hearts; and God has given us
a King who can look as far into men's hearts as any Prince alive; and He has
great skill in Physiognomy too, you would wonder what calculations he has made
from thence; and no doubt, if He be provoked by evil looks, to make a further
enquiry into men's hearts, and finds those corrupted with the passions of Envy
and uncharitableness, He will never choose those hearts to trust and rely upon.
He has given us a noble and princely example, by opening and stretching His
arms to all who are worthy to be His Subjects, worthy to be thought English
men, by extending His heart with a pious and grateful joy to find all His
Subjects at once in His arms, and himself in theirs: and shall we fold our arms
toward one another, and contract our hearts with Envy and Malice to each
other, by any sharp memory of what has been unneighbourly or unkindely done
heretofore? What is this but to rebel against the Person of the King, against
the excellent Example and Virtue of the King, against the known Law of the
Land, this blessed Act Oblivion?

My Lords and Gentlemen, The King is a Suitor to you, makes it His suite very
heartily, That you will join with Him in restoring the whole Nation to its
primitive temper and integrity, to its old good manners, its old good humor, and
its old good nature, Good nature, a virtue so peculiar to you, so appropriated
by God Almighty to this Nation, that it can be translated into no other
Language, hardly practiced by any other people, and that you will by your
example, by the candor of your conversation, by your precepts, and by your
practice, and by all your Interest, teach your neighbors and your friends, how
to pay a full obedience to this clause of the Statute, how to learn this
excellent Art of Forgetfulness.

Let them remember, and let us all remember, how ungracious, how indecent, how
ugly, the Insolence, the Fierceness, the Bruitishness of their Enemies appeared
to them; and we may piously and reasonably believe, that Gods indignation
against them, for their want of bowels, for their not being Englishmen, (for
they had the hearts of Pagans and Infidels) sent a Whirlwind in a moment to
blow them out of the world, that is, out of a capacity to do more mischief in
the world, except we practice their vices, and do that our selves which we
pretend to detest them for: Let us not be too much ashamed, as if what has
been done amiss, proceeded from the humor, and the temper, and the nature of
our Nation. The Astrologers have made us a fair excuse, and truly I hope a true
one; all the motions of these last twenty years have been unnatural, and have
proceeded from the evil influence of a malignant Star; and let us not too much
despise the influence of the Stars: And the same Astrologers assure us, that
the malignity of that Star is expired; the good genius of this Kingdom is
become Superior, and has mastered that malignity, and our own good old Stars
govern us again, and their influence is so strong, that with our help, they
will repair in a year what has been decaying in twenty; and they only shall
have no excuse from the Stars, who continue their malignity, and own all the
ill that is past to be their own, by continuing and improving it for the time
to come.

If any body here, or any where else, be too much exalted with what he he has
done, or what he has suffered, and from thence thinks himself warranted to
reproach others, let him remember the story of Nicephorus; it is an excellent
story, and very applicable to such distempers: He was a pious and religious
man, and for his Piety and Religion was condemned to the fire; when he was led
to execution, and when an old Friend who had done him injury enough, fell at
his feet and asked his pardon; the poor man was so elated with the triumph he
was going unto, with the glory of Martyrdom, tthat he refused to be reconciled
unto him; upon which he was disappointed of his end; and for this
uncharitableness, the Spirit of God immediately forsook him, and he apostatized
from the Faith. Let all those who are too proud of having been as they think,
less faulty then other men, and so are unwilling to be reconciled to those who
have offended them, take heed of the Apostasy of Nicephorus, and that those
fumes of Envy and Uncharitableness, and Murmuring, do not so far transport and
intoxicate them, that they fall into those very Crimes, they value themselves
for having hitherto declined.

But, my Lords and Gentlemen, whilst we conspire together, to execute
faithfully this part of the Bill, to put all old names and terms of distinction
into utter Oblivion; let us not find new names and terms to keep up the same,
or a worse distinction: If the old reproaches of Cavalier, and Roundhead, and
Malignant be committed to the Grave; let us not find more significant and
better words, to signify worse things; let not Piety and Godliness grow into
terms of reproach, and distinguish between the Court and the City and the
Country; and let not Piety and Godliness be measured by a morosity in Manners,
an affectation of Gesture, a new mode and tone of Speaking; at least, let not
our Constitutions and Complexions make us be thought of a contrary party; and
because we have not an affected austerity in our looks, that we have not Piety
in our hearts. Very merry men have been very godly men; and if a good
Conscience be a continual Feast, there is no reason but men may be very merry
at it.

You, Mr. Speaker, have this day made a noble Present to the King. Do you think
that if you and your worthy Companions had brought it up with folded Arms,
down-cast looks, with sighs and other instances of desperation, would it not
have been a very melancholic Present? Have not your frank and dutiful
expressions, that chearfulnes and vivacity in your looks, rendered it much more
acceptable, much more valuable: No Prince in Christendom loves a cheerful giver
so well as God Almighty does, and he of all gifts, a cheerful heart; and
therefore I pray, let not a cloudy and disconsolate face be the only, or the
best sign of Piety and Devotion in the heart.

I must ask your pardon for misplacing much of (...) Discourse, which I should
have mentioned, when I came to speak (...) the Ministers Bill; they, I hope,
will endeavor to remove these (...) ^^rks of distinction and reproaches, and
keep their Auditorie (...) ^^^osed upon by such characters and descriptions.
The King has passed this Act very willingly, and done much to the end of this
Act before; yet has willingly admitted you to be sharers and partners with Him
in the Obligation: I may say confidently His Majesty has never denied his
Confirmation to any man in possession, who has asked it: and they have all had
the effect of it, except such, who upon examination and enquiry, appeared not
worthy of it, and such who though they are pardoned, cannot yet think
themselves worthy to be preferred. His Majesty well knows that by this Act he
has gratified and obliged many worthy and pious men, who have contributed much
to his Restoration, and who shall always receive fresh evidence of his
Majesty's favor and kindness, but he is not sure that he may not likewise have
gratified some who did neither contribute to his coming in, nor are yet glad
that he is in; how comes it else to pass, that he receives such frequent
information of seditious Sermons in the City and in the Country, in which all
industry is used to alienate the affections of the people, and to infuse
Jealousies into them of the King and his Government; They talk of introducing
Popery, of evil Counselors, and such other old Calumnies as are pardoned by
this Act of Indemnity.

His Majesty told you when he was last here, what rigor and severity he will
hereafter use, how contrary soever it is to his Nature, in these cases; and
conjured you, My Lords and Gentlemen, to concur with him in this just and
necessary Severity, which I am sure you will do with your utmost vigilance, and
that you will believe that too much ill cannot befall those who do the best
they can to corrupt His Majesty's Nature, and to extinguish His Mercy.

My Lords and Gentlemen, I told you I was to acquaint you with some things his
Majesty intends to do during this Recess, that you may see He will give no
intermission to His own thoughts for the public good, though for a time He
dispences with your assistance.

He does consider the infinite importance the improvement of Trade must be to
this Kingdom, and therefore His Majesty intends forthwith to establish a
Council for Trade, consisting of some principal Merchants of the several
Companies; to which he will add some Gentlemen of quality and experience; and
for their greater honor and encouragement, some of my Lords of His own Privy
Council.

In the next place, His Majesty hopes that by a well settled Peace, and Gods
great blessing upon Him and you, this Nation will in a short time ^^^^^ish to
that degree, that the Land of Canaan did, when Esau found (...) ^^cessary to
part from his brother -- For their riches were (...) that they might dwell
together, and the Land where (...) not bear them, because of their Cattle, We
have been Our Selves very near this Pinnacle of happiness, and the hope of
contemplation that we may be so a gain, disposes the King to be very solicitous
for the improvement and prosperity of His Plantations abroad, where there is
such large room for the Industry and Reception of such who shall desire to go
thither; and therefore his Majesty likewise intends to erect and establish a
Council for those Plantations, in which persons well qualified shall be wholly
intent upon the good and advancement of those Plantations.

There are two other Particulars, which I am commanded to mention, which were
both mentioned and recommended to You by His Majesty in His Declaration from
Breda; The one, for the Confirmation of Sales, or other recompense for
Purchasers; The other, for the composing those differences and distempers in
Religion, which have too much disturbed the Peace of the Kingdom. Two very
weighty particulars, in which His Majesty knows You have spent much time, and
concerning which he should have heard from You before this time, if You had not
met with great difficulties in the disquisition of either.

For the first, His Majesty has not been without much thought upon the
Argument, and has done much toward the accommodation of many particular
persons, and You shall not be at Your Journeys end before his Majesty will put
that business concerning Sales into such a way of Dispatch, that he doubts not
You will find a good progress made in it before Your coming together again,
and I believe the Persons concerned, will be very much to blame; if they
receive not good satisfaction; And some of You who stay in Town, shall be
advised and consulted with in that settlment.

The other, of Religion, is a sad Argument indeed; it is a Consideration that
must make every religious heart to bleed, to see Religion, which should be the
strongest obligation and cement of affection, and brotherly kindeness and
compassion, made now by the perverse wranglings of passionate and froward men,
the ground of all animosity, hatred, malice and revenge: And this unruly and
unmanly passion (which no question the Divine nature exceedingly abhors)
sometimes, and I fear too frequently transports those who are in the right, as
well as those who are in the wrong, and leaves the latter more excusable then
the former, when men who find their manners and dispositions very conformable
in all the necessary obligations of Humane nature, avoid one another
Conversation, and grow first unsociable, and then uncharitable to each other,
because one cannot think as the other does. And from this separation we entitle
God to the patronage of, (...) ^^ncernment in our fancies and distinction, and
purely for his sake (...) ^^her heartily. Its was not so of old, when one of
the most (...) of the Church tells us, That Love and Charity was so signal and
eminent in the Primitive Christians, that it even drew Admiration and Envy from
their Adversaries. Vide (inquiunt) ut invicem se diligunt! Their Adversaries in
that in which they most agreed, in their very persecution of them, had their
Passions and Animosities amongst themselves; they were only Christians, that
loved, and cherished, and comforted, and were ready to die for one another;
Quid nunc illi dicerent Christiani, si nostra viderent tempora? says the
incomparable Grotius: How would they look upon our sharp and virulent
Contentions in the debates of Christian Religion, and the bloody Wars that have
proceeded from those Contentions, whilst every one pretended to all the Marks
which are to attend upon the true Church, except only that which is
inseparable from it, Charity to one another.

My Lords and Gentlemen, This Disquisition has cost the King many a sigh, many
a sad hour, when he has considered the almost irreparable reproach the
Protestant Religion has undergone, from the divisions and distractions which
have been so notorious within this Kingdom. What pains he has taken to compose
them, after several discourses with learned and pious men of different
persuasions, you will shortly see, by a Declaration He will publish upon that
occasion, by which you will see His great indulgence to those who can have any
protection from Conscience to differ with their Brethren. And I hope God will
so bless the candor of His Majesty in the condescentions He makes, that the
Church as well as the State, will return to that unity and unanimity, which
will make both King and People as happy as they can hope to be in this world.

My Lords and Gentlemen, I shall conclude with the Kings hearty thanks to you,
not only for what you have done toward Him, which has been very signal, but
for what you have done toward each other; for the excellent correspondence you
have maintained; for the very seasonable deference and condescension you have
had for each other, which will restore Parliaments to the veneration they ought
to have. And since His Majesty knows, that you all desire to please him, you
have given him ample evidence, that you do so; He has appointed me to give you
a sure Receipt to attain that good end, it is a Receipt of His own prescribing,
and therefore is not like to fail.

Be but pleased your selves, and persuade others to be so; contrive all the
ways imaginable for your own happiness, and you will make Him the best
pleased, and the most happy Prince in the World.

^^NI^

