Charles P. A LETTER SENT From His Highness the Prince of WALES, to His
Majesty's loyal and faithful Subjects within the Realm of England; declaring,
His great and earnest Desires to the City of London, in the behalf of His
Royal Father the KING.

And a Declaration of His proceedings at Sea, against the Earl of Warwick, and
the Resolution of His Seamen touching the Parliaments Navy. With the full
particulars of a bloody Fight at Sea, on Monday last, and the number killed.

Whereunto is annexed,

The Declaration and Votes of both Houses of Parliament, concerning the KING,
in relation to the TREATY.

Printed for G. Lawrenson, and are to be sold near Temple Bar, October. 6. 1648.

PRINCE CHARLES HIS LETTER TO The Right Honorable, the Lord Major, Aldermen,
and Common Council of the City of LONDON.
Right trusty and well-beloved, we greet you well.
WE have and shall endeavor to give satisfaction to the whole Kingdom of
England, in the grounds of our present proceedings. But we think fit
notwithstanding, to make a particular address to you, being extremely desirous
that the City of London should be fully satisfied that our intentions are just
and honorable, for the peace and happiness of all his Majesty's subjects.

And we cannot despair of gaining a belief and confidence with you, when it
shall appear that Our actions and proceedings are conformable to our
professions, and in order to those public ends, and that happy settlement of
the Kingdom, which we have proposed as the chief end of all our endeavors.

And we further think fit to assure you, that we are so far from intending
violence to the persons or goods of any of Our Fathers Subjects of England, or
any other particular advantage therein, that our only aim and end is to procure
a subsistence for the Navy at Sea under Our Command, that thereby we may be
enabled to protect the Ships, Vessels and Goods, and to secure the Trade, not
only of the City of London, but of all other his Majesty's good subjects.

And being for the present utterly unable to provide for so great a charge, as
having been for some years deprived as well of our own estate, as of the
supplies We might have drawn from the bounty of the King Our Royal Father,

We think fit to have recourse to you* desiring you to supply Us with such
necessaries and subsistence, as may tend to the supportment of the Navy now
under Our Command.

And being thus furnished by you in this neces^ity, We shall immediately
discharge all ships of Merchandise which have been stayed by Our Fleet, and
shall carefully hereafter use Our utmost endeavors for protecting the Ships
and Goods, and secure the Trade and Commerce of the said City, and other his
Majesty's Cities, Cinque Ports, and Town, which we conceive to be the only,
proper, and natural employments of his Majesty's Navy; and for which, as for
other reasons, it has always been maintained out of the Customs paid to his
Majesty, out of which, as soon as it shall be in Our power, We shall take care
to have the said sum or sums repaid you. And so desiring a present supply, the
pressing necessities of the Fleet admitting no delay, We bid you heartily
farewell.

Given under our Hand and Seal, aboard the Fleet Royal, in the 24. Year of the
Reign of Our Royal Father the King. Subscribed CHARLES P.


By Letters from the Hague in Holland it is advertized, That the Prince of
Wales, and his council, has had some consultation touching the Earl of
VVarwicks anchoring near the Fleet Royal, and hearing of his Lordships great
proffers to the Fleet, viz. Indemnity and Money, His Highness posted toward
Goree, came aboard the Fleet, and expressed himself in several declaratory
speeches to the Seamen, whose presence, caused great acclamations of joy, and
say they are resolved to live and die with his Highness. As for the L. Admirals
fighting with them, its said, the St^tes do interpose between with 15 fayl,
there is no remedy but those ships must escape to vex the narrow seas: there is
much ado to raise land men, and borrow ships to make a new commotion in
England, but little fruit appears.

A Declaration of the proceedings of a party for the King within the City of
London, and the resolution of the Army touching the same.
THE great insolency of the Royal party within and about the City of London,
occasions much jealousy from the Army; the hatred and malice of the Royalists
being so great, that it over swayes their discretion so much, that they cannot
keep themselves within the bounds of ordinary civility, and discover themselves
by seeking their private revenge; as appears by their late horrid action
executed upon certain Members of the Army near the Strand, who by some of the
bloody Conspirators were most barbarously murdered in their Beds. This
inhumane Design strikes terror to the well-affected party, who being much
perplexed thereat, acquaints the Army therewith; insomuch that some of the
commanders forthwith sends a letter to the City, the effect whereof follows.

We are much startled at the insolency of the traiterous slaves in London, to
kill two Officers of our Army, one in his bed, and the other with a cowardly
stab, and of their intended attempt to pistol our General, besides many
assaults upon Members of Parliament, and their Design to have massacred
fourscore of them.

We do protest, if the Royal slaves continue their insolency, and put uny of
these Designs into execution, we will for every man's life take one hundred of
their owr party, and according to the quality of each massacred person, and
will hang up their heads on spires of steeples, that the world may see the just
judgment of God upon these Rebels and Traitors, which his Majesty confesses are
guilty of all the innocent blood of the four bundred thousand souls that have
perished in this War.

This Letter was thought fit to be published to the view of all persons
whatsoever, whereby all whom it may concern, may take notice of the sense and
resolution of the Army, and their real and candid Desires to prevent the
effusion of blood for the future.

And do further declare, That they look upon the city of London, with a tender
eye and affection, being resolved to engage both life and fortunes, for the
defense and preservation thereof, against all opposition whatsoever.

Further declaring* That it is the resolution and desire of the army, to use
their utmost endeavors for the supporting all those who have adhered to them,
even in the great and perilous times of War, and to act upon such principles,
that may tend to the public safety of this Kingdom.

ON Tuesday October. 3. By an Express from Scotland it was advertized, That the
Royalists of England have been very active in the Kingdom of Denmark; for the
arming of a party against this Kingdom, and after some consultation touching
the present affairs of this Nation, 10000 Arms were designed for them by the
Danes, and shipping appointed to transport t^em into Scotland, who accordingly
arrived in Lies Road, thinking to join with the Scots Royalists, but being
discovered by the Marq. of Argyle, a party were commanded out in several long
Boats, and small Vessels, who soon boarded the Danish ships, seized on all the
Ordnance, arms and ammunition, and secured the ships in the Harbor.

A bloody Fight at Sea.

On Tuesday last, we received intelligence from Kent and Essex, That there has
happened a bloody Fight near Rye, an English Haven town, and garrisoned by the
Parliament, the manner thus. Major Gibbon (the Governor) being alarmed from
an Irishman of War, who had chased three ships belonging to the said Garrison,
immediately manned several long Boats with musketeers and made toward him, and
after a bloody and sharp dispute, rescued the Rye ships, and killed nine of the
Rebels, with the loss of two men

On Wednesday October. 4. Both Houses debated His Maj. Letter, and voted, That
the said Letter is unsatisfactory, declaring, That they will proceed according
to the Propositions, and none other. His Majesty reassumed the Treaty on
Monday, but its hoped that He will concur in matter and form to what the
Parliament desire.

FINIS.

