THE KING OF SCOTS LETTER TO THE STATES of HOLLAND, CONCERNING Their present
Design and Engagement against England: With His Desires touching the same; and
His Resolution to venture Life and Fortune with them.

Also, a Declaration of the Hollanders, for His defense and preservation; the
raising of 40000 fighting men; and a new Commission given to the Lord Admiral
Vantrump, to fight, sink, bur^, and take, all English ships that wears not His
Colors.

London, Printed for George Horton, 1652.

THE KING OF SCOTS LETTER TO THE States of Holland, touching their present
Engagement against the Commonwealth of England; And a Declaration of the
Hollanders for the said King, etc.
Most High and Mighty Lords,
WHereas every Age breeds some exorbitant spirits, who turn the edge of their
own sufficiency, upon whatsoever they can devour in their ambitious
apprehensions, seeking rather a great then a good fame, and holding it the
chiefest honor to be thought the wonder of their Times; which if they attain
unto, ^s but in the cordition of Monsters, that are generally much admired, but
more abhorred. Friendship is of that nature, as it always desires to be
entertained with mutual good Offices: therefore we must not suffer it to grow
cold (by being too long non-resident) for coldness is a degree of deadness.

They that are to make Demands or Requests to their friends, must regard how
the same may stand with the safety of their friends, that their motions and
requests may stand with their honor and surety to accord unto it. Good
purposes as well in Princes, as private men, have many hinderers; therefore,
when the commodities, or discommodities of taking or refusing are once
thoroughly weighed, a speedy resolution is the best to cut off such
inconveniences that delay of time commonly brings.

MY LORDS,

Our desire is, That all your Counsels and Consultations, may abound with
abundanee of alacrity and spirit, in all your procedures, which now lie
floting, in this juncture of time: Indeed, it is great wisdom in Counselors of
State to make haste leisurely: State alterations are best gradual: It is less
danger to anticipate occasion, then to fore slow it; And a practical point of
policy, either in Prince or States, to prepare for war, when they propound for
peace; by reason, That the best Treaty is with a drawn Sword; and the safest
Peace is concluded under a Buckler. In a word, Necessity of fighting, doubles
courage in the soldier; and an impossibility of escape adds spirit to the
coward: And far better it is, to build him a silver bridge to invite him to go,
then Bulworks of earth to necessitate him to stay: As for Our part, upon Our
return from the Diet of the Christian Princes, We shall be willing to expose
Life and Fortune with You, in discussing of Your Rights and Title.

Dated, July 3. 1652.

This Letter, with the enclosed, was sent from one of the Royal Stamp, who
gives out, That the States have renewed and enlarged Vantrumps Commission, to
fight, kill, take, and make prize of any English Vessels whatsoever not having
the K. of Scots Colors. He is to ship the residue of the standing Army and
40000 are said to be listed for a Reserve.

A Declaration of the Hollanders, touching their present Engagement, etc.
WHereas Unity within it self felicifies, and perpetuates; so civil discord
demolishes, and destroys the very being of a Commonwealth; that Body being in
great danger that bleeds inwardly; for long settled humors give foment to the
distemper when it breaks forth, and prolongs the cure when it seeks remedy:
Indeed, it is a perilous weakness in a State to be slow of resolution in the
time of war: To be irresolute in determination, is both the sign and ruin of a
weak State: such affairs attend not time: let the wise states man abhor delay,
and resolve rather what to do, then what to say: slow deliberations in a quick
business are symptoms either of a faint courage, weak forces, or false hearts.
And to the end, that we may declare to the World, a detestation of these
Odiums, let Us endeavor to take from our Country all scruples that may
dis-invite it to a necessity of defense: Whom the fear of slavery necessitates
to fight, the boldness of their Resolution will disadvantage the Assaylants,
and deficilitate their design: sense of Necessity justifies the War, and they
are hopeful in their Arms which have no other hope but in their Arms. It Is our
own case even in this juncture of time; and therefore let Us unanimously
resolve to enter into a firm Union and Protestation, for the defense and
preservation of our liberties and freedom, and to assist each other, with the
hazard of lives, fortunes, and estates, by exposing all that is near and dear
unto us, ^n pursuance thereof: In order whereunto, We the Estates and Lords
Provincial of the Province of Zealand, do here send greeting to all the rest of
the United Provinces, To desire them with one mutual consent to rise as one
man, in the defense and vindication of our National Liberties, and to be aiding
and assisting, both in moneys and provisions, out of the public Banks, and
Treasure-houses, for maintenance of the Navy, raised for the defense and safety
of our ancient Rights, Liberties, and Customs.

Signed, Lord Van-Ers. Lord Schaep. Lord Orphinstrange.


FINIS.

