HIS MAJESTY'S LAST ANSWER To the PAPERS and PROPOSITIONS Of the Commissioners
of Scotland.
I Have considered the several Papers and Propostions delivered to me by you,
and do assure you, that I desire nothing more, then that I may entirely unite
the hearts and affections of all my good Subjects of Scotland to me, and
amongst themselves, as well for the honor, peace, and prosperity of that
Kingdom, as that they may jointly and unanimously assist me in the revenge of
that horrid and impious murder of my Father, and the recovery of my just rights
in my other Dominions, to which they are all equally engaged by the Laws of
God and of that Kingdom: and to the obtaining of such an union, I will consent
to all that in conscience and honor I may, without imposing on my other
Kingdoms; as first I will maintain, confirm and defend the Government
Ecclesiastical and Civil of Scotland as it is settled by Law, and all the
ancient known Laws of that Kingdom, as likewise all such Acts of Parliament as
have been actually consented unto by the King my Father, being personally
present in Parliament, or by his Counselors lawfully authorized by him; and
particularly those Laws concerning the National Covenant, the Confession of
Faith and Presbyteriall Government of that Church. Touching that part of the
League and Covenant which concerns my other Kingdoms of England and Ireland, it
is not in my power justly to take any resolution therein, without the advice of
my respective Parliaments of those Kingdoms, by whose advice and consent only
Laws are there to be made and altered. Neither can I consent to any thing
which shall oppose or disturb the peace lately concluded in Ireland; but J am
very willing to refer the full consideration of the League and Covenant, and
all the other particulars you mentioned as to England, to a free Parliament to
be convened there by my Writ, as soon as the condition of that Kingdom will
permit me so to do, by whose advice J am resolved to govern my self therein. In
the mean time as J am ready to do all that is in my power to the safe and quiet
protection of my people of Scotland under the benefit of the Laws of that
Kingdom, as likewise further to gratify them in all that may really tend to
their welfare, so J shall expect that obedience and duty from them in the
exercise of my regal power, as is due to me by their allegiance, to which they
submitting, and for the burial of all bitterness and animosities which the
former distractions and divisions may have produced, and the better effecting
the happy union before mentioned, I am very willing and desirous to consent to
an Act of Oblivion and indemnity to all persons of what condition soever of
that Kingdom of Scotland, excepting only such persons (if any such there be in
or of that Kingdom) that shall hereafter upon sufficient and due evidence in a
lawful trial be found actually and expressly guilty of that last unparallelled
horrid act of the murder of their late Sovereign. And if it shall appear unto
me that the League and Covenant contains any thing in it not comprised in
those Acts concerning the National Covenant, and Presbyteriall Government of
the Church of Scotland, and necessary to the welfare of the said Church and
Kingdom, without reference to England or Ireland, J shall upon the full settling
of such an Union, and the passing of such an Act of Oblivion as is before
mentioned, apply my self to give full satisfaction therein, passionately
desiring to remove all occasions of misunderstanding between my self and all my
good Subjects of that my Kingdom of Scotland: and what is not plenarily
answered at this time, shall be supplied by an Express which I will dispatch
into Scotland as soon as conveniently I can.

CHARLES R.

June 5 Printed in the Year 1649.


