C. R.

His MAJESTYS Gracious Message to General MONCK, Commander in Chief of his
Majesty's Army in Scotland, and to the Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, etc. sitting
in Council at the City of EDINBURGH.
Right Trusty and well beloved,
HAving received an Overture from several of our Loving Subjects in our Kingdom
of Scotland, wherein is expressed very ample testimonies of their good
affections to our Self, and their Solemn Protestation to endeavor to the
utmost of their power, the establishing Us in the Royal Throne and Dignity of
our Father, to the end that all our loving Subjects may be redeemed from those
horrid outrages, that they are now under, by that sad and destructive
Government of the merciless Sword.

For the satisfaction of all Our loving Subject, we have thought it very
suitable to the duty of Our place, to do Our part to so good a work, in which we
shall not think it below our Kingly Dignity, to Descend to any particular which
may compose and settle the affections of Our meanest Subjects, since we are so
conscious to Our Self of such upright intentions and endeavors, and only of
such which are for the Peace and Happiness of our bleeding Kingdoms; in which
the prosperity of Our Subjects must be included, that we wish the most secret
thought of our heart, were published to their view and examination.

We have several times done all that we could, to manifest the clearness and
uprightness of Our intentions to all our Loving Subjects, as likewise in Our
last Propositions publishd in print by some of our friends in England, Signed
by our Selfat Brussels; wherein we made provision both for all Our loving
Subjects and the Soldiery, so far as might be with safety to Our Self and
Kingdoms.

And now at last, being fully satisfied of your present (we hope successful)
proceedings, in behalf of our Self and our Parliament chosen by our Royal
Father, do from the bottom of our hearts, without fraud, deceit, or any
sinister by end, Declare to you our Trusty and well beloved Subjects, That we
shall be willing, and have already provided for your assistance of our own
Native Countey 15000 horse and foot, being accomodated by the two Christian
Kings, with Arms, Ammunition and all other provision, necessary for the
carrying on so great a work, to establish the Gospel, and settle a true Peace
amongst Our loving Subjects in Our long distracted Kingdoms; Being confident,
and assuring Our Self, that we may put our whole trust in you, and our
honorable Counsel elected by the good people of our Kingdom of Scoland. Not
doub^^ng in the least of your fidelity, though lately we were in great danger
of being ensnared by that unparalled Traitor Sir George Booth and his party,
amongst whom many of our Good friends were treacherously drawn in, by his
Machavelion devises, to their very great detriment, both by imprisonment and
loss of their Estates.

We do further hereby Declare, That whereas some of Our reproachful enemies
have cast upon Us that false aspersion of forsaking the true Protestant
Religion (thinking thereby to make us odious in the eyes of Our Loving Subjects)
and that if we should be established in the Royal Throne of our Father, we
would utterly destroy and exterpa^ the Gospel, with all the good godly people
in Our Kingdoms, and advance the Roman Catholic Religion, We do abhor any
such thoughts, having been from Our infancy nurtured and brought up in the
true, ancient, Catholic and Apostol^ck Faith; in defense whereof (God enabling
us) we shall freely hazard our Lives and fortunes; Not seeking Ou own Interest
so much as the Interest, Rights, Privileges, Laws, Liberties, and Freedoms of
our long enslaved Sub^ects, under the Egyptian bondage of Taxes, Excise,
unusual Customs, Assessements, and Free-quartering of a Mercinary Army, Imposd
on them by tyrannous Usurpers, who have by will and power governed our
Kingdoms, destroying and massacring our Loving Subjects at pleasure; during the
time of our exilement.

We shall now conjure all Our good Subjects (of what degree soever) by all the
Bonds of Love, Duty or Obedience, that are precious to good men, to join with
us for the recovery of the Peace of Our Kingdoms, and for the preservation
thereof, to remove all their doubts and fears, which may interrupt their
affection to our Self, and all their jealousies and apprehensions which may
lessen their charity to each other, And then (if the sins of ou^ Kingdoms have
not prepared an evitable judgment for us all; God will yet make us a great and
more glorious King over a free and happy people, then ever yet were any of Our
Predecessors.

Signed by Our Self at Our Court at Orleance, this nine and twentieth day of
November 1659. C. R.

Printed at Paris, Cum Priviledgio, 1659.


