CR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For Payment of the Duty of Excise, together with the Arrears
thereof.
CHARLES R.

WHereas diverse great Sums of money for Public Use and Concernment, for the
great Affairs of the Kingdom, have been charged upon the Receipts of Excise;
And many and great Arrears, are due and owing thereupon, as well in Our City of
London, as in several of Our Counties, Cities, and Towns Corporate, within Our
Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Our Town and Port of Berwick upon
Tweed, The Collecting and Levying of which has been of late times much
Obstructed, and become very Ineffectual, through the Practices and Contrivments
of Subtle and Disaffected Persons, for their own private Lucre and Gain, And
forasmuch as by an Act of this present Parliament, the Duty of Excise is
contitinued, and the Arrears thereof directed thereby to be paid: We, at the
desire, and by the Advice of Our Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled,
have thought fit, and do by this Our Proclamation, Command, Require, and
Charge, all and every Our loving Subjects, within Our said Kingdom of England,
Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed aforesaid, who are liable to
pay Excise, or from whom any the Arrears thereof are due and unpaid, Speedily
and without Delay, to conform themselves unto the Rules, Regulations, Orders,
and Powers, whereby the aforesaid Duty or Imposition, has been, or ought to be
Levied, not only for paying the same for the Future, as it shall become due;
but also for satisfying all and every the Arrears thereof (Which are Excepted
from Pardon by an Act of this present Parliament, Entitled (An Act of Free and
General Pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion) to the end the Orders and Rules made
for payment thereof, be not eluded; And We do hereby straightly Charge and
Command all Our Justices of the Peace, and other Our Magistrates and Ministers
whatsoever, within this Our said City of London, and the respective Counties,
Cities, and Towns Corporate, to whom is committed the care of seeing such of
the Rules, Orders, and Powers, as are under their Cognizance, executed
vigorously, and diligently, to proceed in putting the same in Execution, to the
end the Obstructions and Defects of Execution, whether in remisness, or
neglect, may be removed, and the aforesaid Duty of Excise, together with the
whole Arrears thereof, may be duly and speedily Levied and Paid in, for the
purposes aforesaid.

And whereas it was Resolved, and Declared by the Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, the sixth of September last, That the Act for continuance
of the Excise, does enable the Commissioners therein named, and their
Sub-commissioners, to Act and proceed according to the Rates, and Rules of the
late pretended Powers; We therefore do hereby more particularly require and
command Our said Justices of Peace, to put in full Execution, the two and
thirtieth Article of an Act so called, And Entitled, An Act for the Speedy
Raising Levying Moneys by way of New-Impost of Excise, made and Published the
fourteenth day of August, One thousand six hundred forty nine: Whereby it is
mentioned to be Enacted, That no Vintner; Inkeeper, Victualler,
Ale-house-keeper, or other Person whatsoever, That Retailes or Sells Ale or
Beer, shall Brew his own Beer or Ale, unless he give security to pay the Excise
thereof; Or otherwise to take all such Beer and Ale as he shall Sell or Utter,
of or from some common Brewer of Ale or Beer, In which case upon due proof
made, (as by the said Article is prescribed) before any one Justice of the
Peace, within the County, City or Town Corporate, where the Party offending
does reside, and dwell, the said Justice of the Peace, has power to Impose and
Levy upon the Party so offending, the several Penalties and Forfeitures by the
said Article limited. Wherefore, We do further hereby straightly Charge, and
Command every such Justice of the Peace (before whom any such Proof shall be
made, or tendered to be made as aforesaid) That he do forthwith without delay,
proceed against the said Party so Offending by hearing and determining the said
Offense, and by the speedy issuing out there Warrants, for Levying and
Executing of the several Penalties and Forfeitures therein Limited, according
as by the said Article is Directed and Required.

And Lastly, We expect Obedience hereunto, from all and every Person and
Persons whom it does, or may concern, as they tender Our Displeasure, and will
answer the contemning of this Our Royal Command, at their utmost Peril.

Given at Our Court as Whitehall the Twenty sixth day of September, in the
Twelfth year of Our Reign.
London, Printed by John Bill, and Christopher Barker Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty. 1660.


