CR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION, Prohibiting the Planting, Setting and Sowing of Tobacco in
England and Ireland, according to an Act of Parliament herein specified.
CHARLES R.

WHereas by an Act of Parliament made in Our late Parliament begun and held at
Westminster in the County of Middlesex, the Five and Twentieth day of April in
the Twelfth year of Our Reign, for and upon the reasons and grounds therein
expressed, it was Enacted by the Authority of the same Parliament, That no
person or persons whatsoever should, or do from and after the First day of
January, in the Year of our Lord One thousand six hundred and sixty, Set,
plant, improve to grow, make or cure any Tobacco either in Seed, plant or
otherwise, in or upon any ground, earth, field, or place within Our Kingdom of
England, Dominion of Wales, Islands of Guernsey or Jersey or Town of Berwick
upon Tweed* or in Our Kingdom of Ireland, under the penalty of the forfeiture
of all such Tobacco, or the value thereof, or of the Sum of Forty shillings for
every Rod or Pole of Ground so planted, set or sown as aforesaid, and so
proportionably for a greater or lesser quantity of ground, One moiety thereof
to Us Our Heirs and Successors, and the other moiety to him or them that shall
sue for the same to be recovered by Bill, Plaint or Information in any Court of
Record, wherein no Essoign, protection or wager in Law shall be allowed: And it
was thereby further enacted, That all Sheriffs, Justices of the peace, Mayors,
Bailiffs, Constables, and every of them, upon information or complaint made
unto them or any of them, by any the Officers of the Customs, or by any other
person or persons whatsoever, that there was any Tobacco set, sown, planted, or
growing within their jurisdictions or precinets contrary to the same Act should
within ten days after such information or complaint cause to be burnt, plucked
up* consumed* or utterly destroyed all such Tobacco so set* sown, planted, or
growing. And it was thereby further enacted, That in case any person or persons
should resist or make forcible opposition against any person or persons in the
due and through execution of the same Act, That every such person or persons
for every such offense should forfeit the sum of Five pounds to be divided and
recovered in manner aforesaid; And in case any person or persons should not pay
the sums of money by them to be paid, by virtue of the same Act, that in every
such case distress should be made and sale thereof, returning the overplus to
the owners; And in case no distress shall be found, that then every such party
should be committed to the common Gaol in the County where such offense should
be committed, there to remain for the space of two months without Bail or
Mainprise. Provided always, and it was thereby enacted, That the same Act nor
any thing contained therein should extend to the hindering of the planting of
Tobacco in any Physick-garden of either University* or in any other private
garden for Physic or Surgery, only so as the quantity so planted exceed not
one half of one pole in any one place or garden, as in and by the same Act it
does and may more fully appear. Now to the end that all Our loving Subjects in
all parts of Our said Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and Dominion of Wales,
and in the said Islands of Guernsey and Jersey, and in our said Town of Berwick
upon Twede, may the better take notice of and more duly observe the said Act,
and not ignorantly offend against the same for the future, We have thought good
to publish and declare the same to all Our loving Subjects by this Our Royal
Proclamation, And do withal likewise signify and declare, that for the future
We shall expect, and do hereby require all dutiful observance thereof, and
ready conformity thereunto, and that not only upon the pains, penalties, and
forfeitures therein expressed, but also of Our high indignation and
displeasure, justly and deservedly to be inflicted upon all those that shall
knowingly and presumptuously offend against so just and reasonable a Law. And
we do hereby straightly charge and command all Our Judges of Assise and
Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer in their several Circuits, and all Our
Justices of Peace in their several and respective Quarter Sessions, that they
give the same Law in charge to the several and respective Iuries in their
several and respective Inquests before them, to the end that the offenses and
offenders against the same, both in the setting, planting, or sowing of
Tobacco, contrary to the true intent and meaning of the same Act, and also all
forcible opposition and resistance made or to be made against any person or
persons in the due execution of the same Act, may be punished according to Law
and the demerit of their offenses in this behalf. And We do further command and
require all Sheriffs, Justices of the peace, Mayors, Bailiffs, Constables, and
all other Our Officers and ministers whatsoever whom the premises shall or may
concern, that they from time to time as occasion shall require, be diligent,
circumspect, and careful in the due execution of the same Act in all things
according to the true intent and meaning thereof, as they will answer the
contrary at their perils.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Twenty ninth day of March, in the
Thirteenth Year of Our Reign, One thousand six hundred sixty one. GOD SAVE THE
KING.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Printer to the KING'S most Excellent MAJESTY,
1661.

At the KING'S Printing House in Blackfriars.


