C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION, Prohibiting all unlawful and Seditious Meetings and
Conventicles under pretense of Religious Worship.
CHARLES R.

ALthough nothing can be more unwelcome unto Us, then the necessity of
restreyning some part of that Liberty which was indulged to tender Consciences
by Our late gracious Declaration; Yet since diverse persons (known by the name
of Anabaptists and Quakers, Fifth-Monarchy-men, or some such like Appellation,
as a mark of distinction and separation) under pretense of serving God, do
daily meet in great numbers in secret places, and at unusual times, by reason
whereof they begin to boast of their multitudes, and to increase in their
confidences, as having frequent opportunities to settle a perfect
correspondency and confederacy between themselves, of which some evil Effects
have already ensued, even to the disturbance of the public Peace by
Insurrection and Murder, for which the Offenders must answer to the Law and
far worse may be still expected, unless some speedy course be taken to prevent
their further growth.

To the intent therefore that none of those persons who have presumed to make
so ill an use of Our indulgence, may be strengthened in such their proceedings
by any general words, or expressions in Our late Declaration, We have thought
fit by these presents to publish and Declare Our Royal Will and Pleasure, That
no Meeting whatsoever of the Persons aforesaid, under pretense of Worshipping
God, shall at any time hereafter be permitted or allowed, unless it be in some
Parochial Church or Chapel in this Realm, or in private houses by the persons
there inhabiting. And that all Meetings and Assemblies whatsoever, in order to
any Spiritual exercise or serving of God by the persons aforesaid, unless in
the places aforesaid, shall be esteemed, and are hereby declared to be unlawful
Assemblies, and shall be prosecuted accordingly, and the persons therein
Assembled shall be proceeded against as persons riotously and unlawfully
Assembled.

And for the better execution of this Our Proclamation, and the prevention of
all illegal and Seditious Meetings, and Conventicles. We do hereby straightly
charge and command all Mayors, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Constables,
Headboroughs, Commanders, and other Our Officers and Ministers whom it may
concern, That they cause diligent search to be made from time to time, in all
and every the places where any such Meetings or Conventicles, as aforesaid,
shall or may be suspected. And that they cause all and every the persons
therein Assembled, to be apprehended and brought before one or more Justices of
the Peace, and to be bound over to appear at the next Sessions within the
respective Precincts, and in the mean time to find Sureties for the good
Behavior, or in default thereof to be committed to the next Gaol.

And further We do Will and Command Our Justices of Peace, That they cause the
Oath of Allegiance to be tendered to every person so brought before them, and
upon his or their refusal, to proceed according as by the Statute made in the
seventh year of the Reign of Our Royal Grandfather of ever blessed memory they
are directed and commanded.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Tenth day of January, One thousand six
hundred and sixty, in the Twelfth Year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Printer to the KING'S most Excellent MAJESTY,
1660.

At the KING'S Printing House in Blackfriars. Jan. 11


