Tudor rose French fleur-de-lis Scottish thistle
Charles R.
TRusty and Wel-beloved, We Greet you well.
In these great and insupportable afflictions and calamities under which the
poor Nation has been so long exercised, and by which it is so near exhausted;
We cannot think of a more Natural and proper Remedy, then to resort to those
for Counsel and Advise, who have seen and observed the first beginning of our
Miseries, the progress from bad to worse, and the mistakes and
mis-understandings which have produced and contributed to inconveniences which
were not intended; and after so many Revolutions, and the observation of what
has attended them, are now trusted by Our good Subjects to repair the Breaches
which are made, and to provide proper Remedies for those Evils, and for the
lasting Peace, Happiness and Security of the Kingdom.

We do assure you upon Our Royal word, that none of our Predecessors have had a
greater esteem of Parliaments, then We have, in our judgment, as well as from
our obligation; We do believe them to be so vital a part of the constitut^on of
the Kingdom, and so necessary for the Government of it, that We well know,
neither Prince, nor people can be in any tolerable degree happy without them;
and therefore you may be confident, that we shall always* look upon their
Councels as the best We can receive, and shall be as tender of their
Privileges, and as careful to preserve and protect them, as of that which is
most near to Our self, and most necessary for Our own preservation.

And as this is our opinion of Parliaments, that their Authority is most
necessary for the Government of the Kingdom, so we are most confident, that you
believe, and find that the preservation of the Kings Authority is as necessary
for the preservation of Parliaments; and that it is not the name, but the right
constitution of them, which can prepare, and apply proper remedies for those
Evils, which are grievous to the People, and which can thereby establish their
peace and security. And therefore we have not the least doubt, but that you
will be as tender in, and as jealous of any thing that may infringe Our Honor,
or impair Our Authority, as of your own Liberty and Property, which is best
preserved, by preserving the other.

How far we have trusted you in this great affair, and how much it is in your
power to restore the Nation to all that it has lost, and to Redeem it from any
Infamy it has undergone, and to make King and People as happy as they ought to
be; you will find by our enclosed Declaration, a Copy of which we have likewise
sent to the House of Peers, and you will easily believe that we would not
voluntarily, and of Our self have reposed so great a trust in you, but upon an
entire confidence that you will not abuse it; and that you will proceed in such
a manner, and with such due consideration of us who have trusted you, that we
shall not be ashamed of declining other assistance (which we have assurance of)
and repairing to you for more natural and proper remedies for the evils we
would be freed from, nor forry that we have bound up our own interest so
entirely, with that of our Subjects, as that we refer it to the same persons to
take care of us who are trusted to provide for them. We look upon you as wise
and dispassionate men, and good Patriots, who will rail up those Banks and
Fences which have been cast down, and who will most reasonably hope, that the
same prosperity will again spring from those Roots from which it has
heretofore and always grown; nor can we apprehend that you will propose any
thing to us, or expect any thing from us, but what we are as ready to give, as
you to receive.

If you desire the advancement and propagation of the Protestant Religion, we
have by our constant profession and practice of it, given sufficient Testimony
to the World, That neither the unkindness of those of the same Faith toward
us, nor the Civilities and Obligations from those of a contrary Profession, (of
both which we have had abundant evidence) could in the least degree startle us,
or make us swerve from it; and nothing can be proposed to manifest our zeal and
affection for it, to which we will not readily consent. And we hope in due time
Our self to propose somewhat to you for the propagation of it, that will
satisfy the World, that we have always made it both our care and our study,
and have enough observed what is most like to bring disadvantage to it.

If you desire Security for those, who in these calamitous times, either
wilfully or weakly have transgressed those bounds which were prescribed, and
have invaded each others Rights, We have left to you to provide for their
security and Indemnity, and in such a way as you shall think just and
reasonable; and by a just computation of what men have done and suffered, as
near as is possible, to take care that all men be satisfied, which is the
surest way to suppress and extirpate all such uncharitableness and animosity as
might hereafter shake and threaten that peace, which for the present might seem
established. If there be a crying sin, for which the Nation may be involved
in the Infamy that attends it, We cannot doubt but that you will be as
sollicitous to Redeem and Vindicate the Nation from that guilt and infamy, as
we can be.

If you desire that reverence and obedience may be paid to the fundamental
Laws of the Land, and that Justice may be equally and impartially administered
to all men, it is that which we desire to be sworn to Our self, and that all
persons in power and authority should be so too.

In a word, there is nothing that you can propose, that may make the Kingdom
happy, which we will not contend with you to compass; and upon this confidence
and assurance, we have thought fit to send you this Declaration, that you may,
as much as is possible, at this distance, see our heart, which when God shall
bring us nearer together (as we hope he will do shortly) will appear to you
very agreeable to what we have professed, and we hope that we have made that
right Christian use of our affliction; and that the observation and experience
we have had in other Countries, has been such, as that we, and we hope all our
Subjects, shall be the better for what we have seen and suffered.

We shall add no more but our Prayers to Almighty GOD, That he will so bless
your Counsels, and direct your endeavors, that his Glory and Worship may be
provided for, and the Peace, Honor, and Happiness of the Nation may be
Established upon those foundations which can best support it; And so we bid you
farewell.

Given at our Court at Breda this 4th / 14. day of April, 1660. in the twelfth
year of our Reign.
Superscribed, To our Trusty and welbeloved, The Speaker of the House of
Commons.

CHARLES R.
TRusty and Welbeloved, We greet you well:
It cannot be believed, but that We have been, are, and ever must be, as
solicitous as We can, by all endeavors to improve the Affections of Our good
Subjects at home, and to procure the assistance of Our Friends and Allies
abroad; for the recovery of that Right, which by the Laws of God and Man, is
unquestionable; and of which We have been so long dispossessed by such force,
and with those circumstances, as We do not desire to aggravate by any sharp
expressions, but rather wish, That the memory of what is passed, may be buried
to the World; that We have more endeavored to prepare, and to improve the
affections of Our Subjects at home, for Our Restoration, then to procure
assistance from abroad, to invade either of Our Kingdoms, is as manifest to the
World: And We cannot give a better evidence, that we are still of the same
mind, then in this conjuncture, when common Reason must satisfy all men, That
We cannot be without assistance from abroad, We choose rather to send to you,
who have it in your own power, to prevent that ruin and desolation which a War
would bring upon the Nation, and to make the whole Kingdom ow the Peace,
Happiness, Security, and Glory it shall enjoy, to your Virtue; and to
acknowledge that your Armies have complied with their Obligations, for which
they were first raised, for the preservation of the Protestant Religion, the
honor and dignity of the King, the privileges of Parliament, the liberty and
property of the Subject, and the Fundamental Laws of the Land; and that you
have vindicated that trust, which others most perfidiously abused and betrayed.
How much We desire and resolve to contribute to those good ends, will appear to
you by our enclosed Declaration, which We desire you to cause to be published
for the Information and Satisfaction of all good Subjects, who do not desire a
further effusion of precious Christian blood, but to have their peace and
security founded upon that which can only support it; an Unity of affections
amongst our selves, an equal Administration of Justice to Men, restoring
Parliaments to a full capacity of providing for all that is amiss, and the Laws
of the Land to their due veneration.

You have been your selves witnesses of so many Revolutions, and have had so
much experience, how far any power and authority that is only assumed by
passion and appetite, and not supported by Justice, is from providing for the
happiness and peace of the people, or from receiving any obedience from them,
without which no Government can provide for them; that you may very reasonably
believe, that God has not been well pleased with the attempts that have been
made, since he has usually increased the Confusion, by giving all the success
that has been desired, and brought that to pass without Effect, which the
Designers have proposed, as the best means to settle and compose the Nation;
and therefore We cannot but hope and believe, that you will concur with Us in
the remedy we have applied, which to humane understanding is only proper for
the Ills we all groan under; and that you will make your selves the blessed
Instruments to bring this blessing of Peace and Reconciliation upon King and
People, it being the usual method in which Divine Providence delights it
self, to use and sanctify those very means which ill men design, for the
satisfaction of private and particular Ends and Ambition, and other wicked
purposes, to wholesome and public Ends, and to Establish that Good which is
most contrary to the Designers; which is the greatest Manifestation of Gods
peculiar Kindness to a Nation, that can be given in this world. How far we
resolve to preserve your Interests, and reward your services, we refer to our
Declaration; and we hope God will inspire you to perform your Duty to Us, and
to your Native Country, whose happiness cannot be separated from each other.

We have entrusted our Wel-beloved Servant Sir John Greenvile one of the
Gentlemen of Our Bedchamber, to deliver this unto you, and to give Us an
account of your Reception of it, and to desire you in Our Name, that it may be
published. And so we bid you farewell.

Given at Our Court at Breda this 14. of April 1660. In the twelfth Year of
Our Reign.
Received 1. May 1660.
To our trusty and wel-beloved General Monck. to be by him communicated to the
President and Council of State, and to the Officers of the Armies under his
Command.
HIS MAJESTY'S DECLARATION
CHARLES REX,
CHARLES, By the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To all our loving Subjects of what Degree or
Quality soever, Greeting.
If the General Distraction and Confusion, which is spread over the whole
Kingdom, does not awaken all men to a Desire, and Longing, that those Wounds
which have so many years together been kept bleeding, may be bound up, all We
can say will be to no purpose: However, after this long silence, We have
thought it our Duty to Declare how much we desire to contribute thereunto; and
that, as We can never give over the hope in good time to obtain the Possession
of that Right, which God and Nature has made Our Due; So We do make it our
daily Suit to the Divine Providence, that He will in Compassion to Us and Our
Subjects, after so long Misery and Sufferings, remit, and put Us into a quiet
and peaceable Possession of that Our Right, with as little Blood, and Damage to
our People as is possible: Nor do We desire more to enjoy what is Ours, then
that all Our Subjects may enjoy what by Law is theirs, by a full and entire
Administration of Justice throughout the Land, and by extending Our Mercy where
it is wanted and deserved.

And to the end that the fear of punishment may not engage any conscious to
themselves of what is past to a perseverance in guilt for the future, by
opposing the quiet and happiness of their Country, in the Restoration both of
King, Peers, and People, to their Just, Ancient and Fundamental Rights, We do
by these presents Declare, That We do grant a Free and General Pardon, which We
are ready upon demand, to pass under Our Great Seal of England, to all Our
Subjects of what Degree or quality soever, who within Forty days after the
publishing hereof, shall lay hold upon this Our Grace and Favor, and shall by
any public Act Declare their doing so, and that they return to the Loyalty and
Obedience of good Subjects; Excepting only such persons as shall hereafter be
excepted by Parliament, those only excepted, let all Our Subjects, how faulty
soever, rely upon the Word of a King, solemnly given by this present
Declaration, That no Crime whatsoever committed against Us or Our Royal Father
before the Publication of this, shall ever rise in judgment, or be brought in
question against any of them, to the least endammagement of them, either in
their Lives, Liberties, or Estates, or (as far forth as lies in Our power) so
much as to the prejudice of their Reputations, by any Reproach or term of
distinction from the rest of Our best Subjects: We desiring and Ordaining that
henceforward all Notes of Discord, Separation, and difference of Parties be
utterly abolished among all Our Subjects, whom We invite and conjure to a
perfect union among themselves, under Our Protection, for the Re-settlement of
our just Rights and theirs, in a Free Parliament, by which, upon the Word of a
King, We will be advised.

And because the passion and uncharitableness of the times have produced
several opinions in Religion, by which men are engaged in Parties and
Animosities against each other, which when they shall hereafter unite in a
freedom of conversation, will be composed, or better understood, We do declare
a Liberty to Tender Consciences, and that no man shall be disquieted, or called
in question for differences of opinion in matter of Religion, which do not
disturb the peace of the Kingdom, and that We shall be ready to consent to such
an Act of Harliament, as upon mature deliberation shall be offered to Us, for
the full granting that Indulgence.

And because in the continued distractions of so many years, and so many and
great Revolutions, many Grants and Purchases of Estates have been made to, and
by many Officers, Soldiers and others, who are now possessed of the same, and
who may be liable to Actions at Law, upon several Titles; We are likewise
willing that all such differences, and all things relating to such Grants,
Sales, and Purchases shall be determined in Parliament, which can best provide
for the just Satisfaction all men who are concerned.

And we do further Declare, That We will be ready to consent to any Act or Acts
of Parliament to the purposes aforesaid, and for the full satisfaction of all
Arrears due to the Officers and Soldiers of the Army under the Command of
General Monck, and that they shall be received into Our Service upon as good
pay and conditions as they now enjoy.

Given under Our Sign Manual, and Privy Signet at our Court at Breda, this 4
th/14: Day of April 1660. in the twelfth year of Our Reign.
Tuesday May 1. 1660.
Resolved upon the question by the Commons Assembled in Parliament (nemine
contradicente)

Resolved, etc. (nemine contradicente)

Will. Jessop Clerk of the Commons House of Parliament.


