royal blazon or coat of arms C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT

By the King. A PROCLAMATION, Prohibiting the seizing of any Persons, or
Searching Houses without Warrant, except in time of Actual Insurrections.
CHARLES R.

WHereas ever since Our arrival into England, We have made it Our great care
and Study to improve the mercies of Almighty God in Our Happy and Miraculous
Restoration, by endeavoring all that lay in Us, to compose and settle the
minds of all Our Subjects: And in order thereunto We did freely give Our Royal
assent to an act of General Pardon and Oblivion (which We are resolved
inviolably on Our part to keep and observe) yet such has been the restless and
perverse disposition of certain unreasonable men disaffected to Our Royal
Person and Government, that they have lately attempted, and actually began the
levying a new War, and the revival (as much as in them lay) of those
differences and divisions which We have so often desired and endeavored to
have buried in perpetual Oblivion: And for the better effecting their malicious
and traitorous purposes, had provided themselves with stores of Arms and other
Warlike Ammunition, and many of them lay privately, and do yet lurk in and
about Our Cities of London and Westminster, watching all opportunities to put
their wicked designs in execution: For preventing whereof, and for the
preservation of Our Peace, We have been necessitated to cause diligent search
to be made for such Arms, and to secure several persons, whom We had good cause
to suspect to be engaged in the said wicked and traitorous designs; Which
nevertheless We desired might be done in so orderly a manner as such an
exigence would bear, and not to the terrifying* disturbance, or injury of any
of Our good Subjects who were lately of the Army under the Duke of Albemarle,
and therein instrumental to Our Happy Restoration, or others, in their
Persons, Estates, or Families.

And We being given to understand, That during those late Commotions, several
persons have been imprisoned by Soldiers and others, their Houses searched,
and their Goods taken away without lawful Authority, And that thereupon
opprobrious words and terms of dissension and discrimination of parties have
been used and given, to Our great disservice, contrary to the before-said Act
of Pardon and Oblivion; and notwithstanding Our Royal Pleasure so often
published and declared to the contrary.

These are therefore strictly to Charge and Command all Officers and Soldiers,
and all other persons whatsoever (unless it be upon inevitable necessity of
sudden and actual Rebellion or Insurrection) to forbear to molest or trouble
any of Our good Subjects, either in their Persons or Estates, and not to
presume to apprehend or secure any person or persons, or seize any Arms
whatsoever, or to search any houses, without a lawful Warrant under the Hand
and Seal of some one or more of the Lords of Our Privy Council, or under the
Hand and Seal of some one or more of Our Lord Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants,
or Justices of the Peace, in their respective Liberties and Precincts, within
the several Counties, Cities, and Towns Corporate, in Our Kingdom of England,
Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed: And We Will that the said
Warrants be always directed to some Constable, or other known Legal Officer;
and that no Soldiers do otherwise interpose or meddle with the execution of
any of the said Warrants, then by aiding and assisting of the said Constable,
or other such known Legal Officer or Officers, as aforesaid: And all Military
Officers and Soldiers are hereby commanded to be aiding and assisting to such
Constable, or other Legal Officers, being by them or any of them thereunto
required: And we do hereby declare, That as well all those who shall hereafter
be so hardy as to offend against this Our Proclamation, shall not only not
receive countenance from Us therein, but shall be left to be proceeded against
according to Our Laws, and incur Our high displeasure, as persons doing their
utmost to bring scandal and contempt upon Our Government.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Seventeenth day of January, in the
Twelfth Year of Our Reign, One thousand six hundred and sixty.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Printer to the KING'S most Excellent MAJESTY,
1660*

At the KING'S Printing House in Blackfriars.


