C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION, For Observation of the Thirtieth day of January as a day of
Fast and Humiliation according to the late Act of Parliament for that purpose.
CHARLES R.

WHereas in Our late Parliament held at Westminster, in the Twelfth year of Our
Reign, The Lords and Commons therein Assembled did show and declare unto Us,
That the execrable murder of Our Royal Father CHARLES the First, of ever
Blessed and Glorious Memory, has been committed by a Party of wretched men,
desperately wicked and hardened in their Impiety, who having first plotted and
contrived the ruin and destruction of this Excellent Monarchy, and with it the
true Reformed Protestant Religion, which had been so long Protected by it, and
flourished under it, found it necessary in order to the carrying on of their
pernicious and traitorous Designs, to throw down all the Bulwarks and Fences of
Law, and to subvert the very being aid constitution of Parliament, That so they
might at last make their way open for my further Attempts upon His Person: And
for the more easy effecting thereof, they did then first seduce some part of
the then Army into a compliance, and then kept the rest in subjection to them,
partly for hope of preferment, and chiefly for fear of losing their Employments
and Arrears, until by these and other more odious Arts and Devices they had
fully strengthened themselves both in Power and Faction; which being done, they
did Declare against all manner of Treaty with the Person of Our Royal Father,
even then when a Treaty by a^vice of both Houses of Parliament was in being,
and did Remonstrate against the Houses of Parliament fr^ such proceedings, and
seized upon the person of Our Royal Father, while the Commissioners were
returned to ^he Houses of Parliament with His Answer. And when his Concessions
had been Voted a ground for Peace seize upon the House of Commons, Seclude and
Imprison some Members, force out others; And there being ^eft but a small
Remnant of their own Creatures (not a tenth part of the whole) did seek to
shelter themselves by this weak pretense, under the name and authority of a
Parliament, and in that name labored to prosec^te what was yet behind, and
unfinished of their long intended Treason and Conspiracy: To that purpose ^^ey
prepared an Ordinance for erecting a prodigious and unheard of Tribunal, which
they called, An High Cour^ of Justice, for Trial of his Majesty, Our most Dear
Father; and having easily procured it to pass their House of Commons, as it
then stood molded, ventured to send it up from thence to the Peers, then
sitting, who totally ejected it; Whereupon their rage and fury increasing, they
presumed to pass it alone as an Act of the Commons, and in the name of the
Commons of England; and having gained the pretense of a Law made by the power
of their own making, pursued it with all possible force and cruelty, until at
last upon the Thirtieth day of Janu^ry, One thousand six hundred forty and
eight, His Sacred Majesty, Our late dear Father, was brought unto (...)
Scaffold, and there publicly murdered before the Gates of His own Royal
Palace. And because by this hor^id Action, the Protestant Religion has
received the greatest wound and reproach, and the people of England the most
insupportable shame and infamy that it is possible for the enemies of God and
the King to bring upon them, whilst the Fanatic rage of a few miscreants (who
were as far from being true Protestants, as they we^e from being true Subjects)
stands imputed by our Adversaries to the whole Nation. They the said Lords and
Commons in Parliament Assembled did therefore renounce, abominate, and protest
against that Impious Fact, the execrable murder and unparalleld Treason
committed against the Sacred Person and Life of Our m^st Royal Father, And did
beseech Us that it might be Declared, And it is by the said Act Declared, That
by the undoubted Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, neither the Peers of the
Realm, nor the Commons, nor both together in Parliament, nor the People
collectively or representatively, nor any other persons whatsoever (...) ever
had, has, or ought to have any coercive power over the Persons of the Kings of
this Realm. And for the better vindication of themselves to posterity: and as a
lasting Monument of their otherwise inexpressible det^tation and abhorrency of
that villainous and abominable Fact, They did further beseech Us that it might
be Enacted; And it is thereby Enacted, That every thirtieth day of January
(unless it should fall out to be on the Lo^ds Day, and then the next day
following) should be for ever thereafter set apart to be kept and observed in
all Our Churches and Chapels of our Kingdoms of England and Ireland, Dominion
of Wales, and Town of Be^wick upon Tweed, and the Isles of Jersey and Guernsey,
and all other Our Dominions, as an anniversary day of Fasting and Humiliation,
to implore the Mercy of God, That neither the guilt of that Sacred and Innocent
Blood, nor those other sins by which God was provoked to deliver up both them
and their King into the hands of cruel and unreasonable men, might at any time
after be visited upon them or their Posterity, as by the said Act amongst other
things at large appears. We being very sensible of the Pious and good
intentions of Our said Dutiful and Loyal Subjects; and holding Our Self obliged
to do Our utmost endeavor that a work so much tending to the honor and
acknowledgement of the infinite Mercies of Our good and gracious God, who has
been pleased not only to restore Us to the Throne of Our Ancestors, from which
We were ^^^g detained, and Our said good Subjects to their Rights and
Liberties, and the Nation to Peace, after a b^^^dy and unnatural war, And
tending to a due acknowledgment of the sins which provoked the Justice of God
far as justly to deliver up these Nations to the many and deplorable Calamities
which proceeded from, and e^^ed that horrid and bloody murder of Our most Dear
Father, Do strictly command, and enjoin all O^^ loving Subjects of what degree,
quality or condition soever, solemnly and humbly to conform themse^^es, and
give obedience to the said Act of Parliament, and to set apart, and observe the
Thirtieth day of January ^^is present year, and so from time to time every
Thirtieth day of January every year, as a day of Fasting and H^miliation for
the purposes in the said Act of Parliament mentioned: And to that end We
command all Arc^^Bishops, Bishops, Parsons, Vicars, Ministers, and other
Ecclesiastical persons in their several charges, accor^^^g to their several
duties to take care hereof, And to cause this Our Proclamation to be yearly
read in all Ch^^ches and Chapels the Sunday before the said Fast is to be
observed. And We strictly command all persons w^^tsoever, for the better
observation of the said Day, to abstain from all servile Works and Business on
that d^^, and meekly and orderly to repair to the Public place for Divine
Worship, to beseech God for his Mercy, a^^ to humble themselves in his sight,
according to the good intention of the said Act. And We declare, That such
persons as shall be faulty herein, shall be esteemed by Us, Contemners and
Infringers of Our Laws an^ Commands, and Profane persons, who wilfully shut
their eyes, both against the Judgments and Mercie^ of Almighty God.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Twenty fifth day of January, in the
Twelfth Year of Our Reign, One thousand six hundred and sixty.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Printer to the KING'S most Excellent MAJESTY,
1660. At the KING'S Printing House in Blackfriars.


