royal blazon or coat of arms C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT

By the King. A PROCLAMATION, Requiring all Cashiered Officers and Soldiers of
the late Army, to depart, and not come within Twenty miles of the Cities of
London and Westminster, until the Twentieth day of May next.
CHARLES R.

WHereas We have been lately informed that many Officers and Soldiers that
were heretofore cashiered and turned out of the late Army (and not disbanded)
being persons of desperate fortunes and designs, do now remain in and about Our
Cities of London and Westminster, and have their daily meetings, and are (of
late) grown so high and confident of effecting some wicked designs, that they
spare not to give out words threatening mischiefs to Our Royal Person, and to
these Our Cities of London and Westminster, at the times of the Solemnities now
approaching; We taking the same into serious consideration, have thought fit,
with the Advice of Our Privy Council, to publish and declare, and do hereby
publish and declare Our Will and Pleasure to be, That all and every person and
persons heretofore Officer or Soldier in the late Army, Cashiered and turned
out, and not Disbanded as aforesaid, which are not under Imprisonment, or other
legal restraint, do on or before the Nineteenth day of this month of April,
depart out of the said Cities of London and Westminster, and the Liberties
thereof; And We do hereby charge and require them, and every of them, not being
under Imprisonment or legal restraint at the time of the publication hereof, to
depart accordingly, and not to return again, nor come within Twenty miles of
the same Our Cities of London and Westminster, or either of them, from that
time until after the Twentieth day of May next ensuing: And herein We shall
expect from all persons concerned, a due and punctual submission and conformity
at their perils, and upon pain of Our high displeasure: Willing and Commanding
all Our Officers and Ministers to apprehend and seize the persons of all such
as shall be found Offenders, by not departing at the time before limited, and
them to bring before the Lords of Our Privy Council, to be further proceeded
against for their contempts, according to Justice.

Given at Our Court at White Hall the 13th day of April, in the Thirteenth year
of Our Reign.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
London, Printed by John Bill, Printer to the KING's most Excellent Majesty,
1661. At the KINGS Printing House in Blackfriars.


