By the King.
A PROCLAMATION, For Quieting the Post-Master-General in the Execution of his
Office.
CHARLES R.

WHereas We have by Our Letters Patents under Our Great Seal, constituted and
appointed Our Trusty and wel-beloved Henry Bishop Esquire Our Post-Master-General,
to perform and execute all and every the powers mentioned in a late Act of
Parliament, touching the erecting and settling an Office of Post-Master-General;
And whereas the secret and indirect conveyance of Letters, by ways unlawful,
and unauthorized, does not only tend to the diminution of Our Revenue, by
lessening the Office of Post-Master-General, but may be a means to promote
Seditious designs, and to disturb the Peace of Our Realm; We have thought fit
therefore by this Our Proclamation, to advertise all and singular Our good
Subjects of their duty, and to require their Obedience accordingly; And we do
hereby strictly prohibit, and forbid all and singular person and persons
whatsoever (other then the said Henry Bishop, his Deputies, Servants, or
Assigns, directly, or indirectly) to do, execute, perform, or intrude
themselves, to have any Employment in or about any thing, which ought to be
done by him the said Henry Bishop, his Deputies, Servants, or Assigns, without
his the said Henry Bishop's Deputation, License or Allowance, upon pain of Our
Displeasure, and such other penalty as may be inflicted upon the Offenders for
contempt of this Our Royal Commandment, and of the said Act of Parliament. And
that the said Henry Bishop, his Deputies, Servants, and Assigns may the better
intend the service and duty of the said Office of Post-Master-General, We do
hereby further Declare Our Royal Will and Pleasure to be, That the said Henry
Bishop, his Deputies, Servants and Assigns, shall be from henceforth freed,
exempted, and discharged, of, and from serving upon all Iuries, Inquests,
Musters, or any other Public Employments or attendances, that may any way
impede, retarde, or prejudice the execution of his or their duty and service in
the said Office; And that he and they shall have and enjoy all such Privileges
as have been formerly granted by any of Our Royal Ancestors, unto the Masters
of their Posts, and servants. And We do further expressly Will and Command by
these presents, all Majors, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Constables, Bailiffs,
all Searchers of Our Ports, and all other Our Officers and Ministers
wheresoever, within their several Jurisdictions and Offices from time to time
to make diligent search for all Males, Bougets, and other carriages of all such
disallowed and unlicenced Carriers and Messengers, or other suspected persons
carrying Pacquets, or Letters, from place to place within Our said Realms and
Dominions, or coming in or going out of this Realm, to or from any other
Kingdoms or Countries, contrary to the tenor of the said Act of Parliament, and
the Rights and Privileges of the Post-Master-General therein declared and
established; and to Seize all and every such Males and Pacquets of Letters
which shall be found in the hands of persons not having lawful Warrant or
Authority from Our Post-Master-General for the time being, to carry the same
and the said Males or Pacquets of Litters, together with the names of the
persons so, as aforesaid, presuming to convey them, immediately to send up, and
certify to Our Privy Council.

Given at the Court at Whitehall, the Sixteenth day of January, in the Twelfth
Year of His Majesty's Reign, One thousand six hundred and sixty.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Printer to the KING's most Excellent MAJESTY,
1660.

At the KING'S Printing House in Blackfriars.


