C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For recalling and prohibiting Seamen from the Services of
Foreign Princes and States.
CHARLES R.

WHereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty has been advertised, that great
numbers of Mariners and other Seafaring men, His Majesty's natural born
Subjects many of them, by occasion of the late disbanding, and some others
before have betaken themselves to the services of Foreign Princes and States,
to the great disservice of his Majesty and their Native Countries; and whereby
his said Majesty and his Realms are unfurnished of men of their sort and
calling, if there shall be cause to use them: Therefore for redress thereof at
present, and preventing the like for the future, The Kings most Excellent
Majesty, by this His Royal Proclamation, with the Advice of the Lords of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, does Will and strictly charge and
command all and singular Masters of Ships, Pilots, Mariners, Seamen,
Shipwrights, and other Seafaring men, whatsoever and wheresoever, being his
Majesty's natural born Subjects, who are in the service of any Foreign Prince
or State, or do serve in any Foreign Ships or Vessels, That forthwith they do
withdraw themselves, and depart from such Foreign services and return home to
their native Countries and lawful Vocations. And further His Majesty does hereby
prohibit and forbid all and singular Masters of Ships, Pilots, Mariners,
Seamen, Shipwrights, and other Seafaring men whatsoever, being his Majesty's
natural born Subjects from entering themselves; And does hereby straightly
charge and command them and every of them from henceforth to forbear to enter
themselves into pay, or otherwise betake themselves to the service of any
Foreign Princes, or States, or to serve in any Foraign Vessel or Ship, without
License had and obtained in that behalf. To all which his Majesty does and will
expect due obedience and conformity; And does hereby publish and declare, That
the Offenders to the contrary shall not only incur his Majesty's just
displeasure, but be proceeded against for their contempt by seizure of their
Goods, Persons, and Estates, wheresoever they shall be found, and otherwise,
according to the utmost severities of Law. And further His Majesty does hereby
authorize and command all and every the Captains, Masters, and other Officers,
serving or employed in any of his Majesty's Ships, or Vessels at Sea, to stop
and make stay of, all and every such Person and Persons, as shall endeavor to
transport or enter themselves into the Service of any Foreign Prince, or
State, contrary to the true intent and meaning of this his Majesty's Royal
Proclamation; And also to seize upon, take and bring away all such Mariners,
Seamen, and other persons aforesaid, as shall be found to be employed or
serving in any Ships or Vessels, of or belonging to any Foreign Prince or
State, or to any Merchant or other person or persons other then to his Majesty
or his Subjects.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the nineteenth day of April, in the
thirteenth Year of Our Reign. GOD SAVE THE KING.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Printer to the KING'S most Excellent MAJESTY,
1661.

At the KING'S Printing House in Blackfriars.


