CR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION, Touching the speedy calling to Account of all such Persons
whose Accounts are excepted in the Act of Oblivion.
CHARLES R.

WHereas in the Act made in the Parliament begun at Westminster the Five and
twentieth day of April in the Twelfth Year of Our Reign (Entitled, An Act of
Free and general Pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion) there is contained an
Exception of the Accounts of Treasures, Receivers, Farmers and Collectors,
other then the Sub-collectors of the several Parishes, Towns and Hamlets
respectively, for their Receipts therein mentioned, who had received or
collected the Duties specified in the said Exception. And whereas Our high
Treasurer of England by Our command has sent out several Warrants or Summons
to diverse Treasurers and other Persons residing in and about London, for
bringing in of their Accounts into the Office of Our Remembrancer in Our
Exchequer, at certain days and times in the said Warrants prefixed, to the end
that all such moneys as have been received, or any ways collected from Our
loving Subjects, and are not pardoned by the said Act of General Pardon, may be
duly accounted for, and answered unto Us, Our Heirs or Successors, and that
the Persons so accompting may have their legal Discharges according to the
course of Our Exchequer. Therefore Our Will and Pleasure is, and We do
straightly charge and command all manner of Persons whatsoever, which have
received or shall receive any Warrants or Summons from Our said high Treasurer,
for bringing in of their Accounts into Our Exchequer, that they bring them in
according to the days and times in the said Warrants expressed. And that all
and every other person accomptable unto Us by virtue of the said Exception in
the said Act of Parliament, and whose Accounts are not thereby pardoned, do
appear in Our Exchequer in the Office of Our Remembrancer, and deliver into the
said Office a perfect Account of all such Sums of money as they have received,
under color of any pretended Acts or Ordinances of Parliament, or otherwise
for the use of the Public, which are not Pardoned as aforesaid; And also an
Account of their Disbursments out of their said Receipts, with their Vouchers
for the same, before the last day of Easter Term next. And forasmuch as the
Accounts of the said Receivers and Collectors cannot be well taken without
perfect Estreats of the Assessments, which every one of them had in charge to
collect; Our will and pleasure is, And We do straightly charge and command all
manner of Persons which have acted as Commissioners, by color of any pretended
Act or Ordinance of Parliament, for the taxing or assessing of any weekly or
monthly Tax or Assessment for the maintenance of the Armies in England or
Ireland, that they and every of them before the end of the first week in Easter
Term next, deliver or send into the Office of Our Remembrancer of Our Exchequer
perfect Duplicates of the Assessments made by virtue of each particular
pretended Act or Ordinance, under the hands of two or more of them, expressing
therein the total sum charged upon each Parish, Hamlet, Ward* Hundred* Lath,
Rape, Wapentake, or any other Division* with the Names, Sirnames and Places of
abode of all such Persons as they appointed to be Receivers or high Collectors
of each particular County, City, Hundred, Lath, Rape, Wapentake, or any other
Division, and what the total sum amounts to, which every Receiver or high
Collector had in charge to collect. And We do hereby further command and
require all manner of Persons which have been Treasurers, Receivers, Farmers,
Collectors or Accomptants, Registers, Register-Accomptants and Comptrollers of
the Receipts and Payments, and all manner of Persons who have in their custody
any Orders or Warrants for receipt of public Moneys not pardoned as aforesaid,
or any Books kept for the Comptrollment of any Receipts or Payments of or for
any Public Moneys not pardoned as aforesaid, that they deliver the same into
the Office of Our Remembrancer in the Exchequer, on or before the first day of
Easter Term next. To all which We require and expect a due observance from all
Persons concerned* upon pain of Our high displeasure, and such further
proceedings against them and penalties as are consonant to Law and Justice.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Twentieth day of March, in the Thirteenth
Year of Our Reign, One thousand six hundred and sixty. GOD SAVE THE KING.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Printer to the KING*S most Excellent MAJESTY,
1660.

At the KING'S Printing House in Blackfriars.


