royal blazon or coat of arms C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT


Charles R.

RIght Trusty and well-beloved, We greet you well. Whereas Our Royal Father of
Blessed Memory, did in the year 1632. Constitute and Establish a Society of
Fishers, and Declared that He was resolved by all good occasions favorably to
assist, and graciously accept the forwardness of all those that should express
their zeal to His Majesty's Service in so general and public an undertaking,
It being then Resolved and Concluded by His Majesty, that it was very honorable
and necessary for this Kingdom. Now that the true managing and most
advantageous prosecution thereof, is by experience discovered by Philip late
Earl of Pembroke and Mountgomery and his Associates, who did cause sundry
Fishing Vessels to be provided and built, which employed many Families in
making of Nets and other provisions (one Vessel employing 20 Families in work)
besides the breeding of Country Youths to be made serviceable Mariners in
short time, as by the Book called The Royal Hering Buss Fishings presented unto
Us does plainly appear. And whereas We are informed that the Nation does abound
with great numbers of poor Families and Vagrants, who for want of employment
are like to perish, unless some speedy care be taken for their Relief: And that
the several Wards and Suburbs of this Our City of London and Hamlets adjacent,
are burdened with multitudes of poor people, not only which are born in the
said places, but such as come out of sundry Countries to seek Relief: For
Redress whereof, We do hereby recommend unto the care of You Our Lord Mayor of
the said City, to advise with each Alderman, and cause his Ward-moote Inquest
to give in a particular of all the poor Inhabitants within his Ward what their
employment is, and how many are without employment, and present the same to the
rest of the Inhabitants in his Ward with a Copy thereof, and excite them to a
free subscription for Raising a stock to buy Hemp and Clapboards to make Hering
Fishing-nets, and barrells for the furnishing and fitting out of one Busse or
Fishing Vessel to belong to the said Ward, which will give all the poor and
Vagrants employment, The said Ward husbanding the same to their best advantage.
The which We shall in like manner recommend to all the Counties, Cities and
Towns within Our Dominions, whereby to make it a National employment for the
general good, and will give all fitting assistance unto the Undertakers for
their encouragement. That so when Provisions shall be made ready and
Storehouses built in Commodious places about the River of Thames, (where
breaches have been made) and the like, in the several Ports, Magazines may be
fitted with Nets, Caske, Salt and all things in readiness, The Busses may all
go forth to Our Island of Sheetland as their Rendezvous to keep together in
their fishing according to certain orders prescribed in the aforesaid Book. And
to take that privilege of the Fishing grounds which belongs to us before all
Nations whatsoever. And so we bid you heartily farewell.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall this 23. day of July, in the Twelfth year of
our Reign. By His Majesty's Command. ED. NICHOLAS.
To Our Right Trusty and well-beloved, the Lord Mayor of Our City of LONDON, to
be Communicated to the Court of Aldermen.
LONDON: Printed for Jane Bourne, at the sounth-entrance of the Royal Exchange.


