By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For the Apprehension of Edmund Ludlow Esquire, commonly called,
Colonel Ludlow.
CHARLES R.

WHEREAS We, by Our Proclamation, bearing date the sixth day of June last past,
taking notice, by the Information of the Lords and Commons in Parliament
Assembled, of the mou horrid and execrable Treason and Murder, committed
against the Person, and against the Life, Crown and Dignity of Our late Royal
Father of Blessed Memory. And that the Persons therein named were deeply guilty
thereof, did thereby command, that all and every of them should, within
Fourteen days next after, personally appear and render themselves, as therein
is appointed, under the pain therein also expressed.

And whereas Edmund Ludlow Esquire, being one of the persons therein named,
did, thereupon, render himself, Nevertheless has, since, escaped from out the
custody of the Sergeant at Arms, attending on the House of Commous, and is
fled, or does obscure himself, to evade the Justice of a Legal Trial.

We therefore have thought fit, by and with the Advice of Our Privy Council, to
publish the same, to all Our Loving Subjects, not doubting of their care and
forwardness in his apprehension. And We do hereby require and command, as well
all and singular Our Judges, Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs,
Constables and Headboroughs, as also the Officers and Ministers of Our Ports,
and other Our Subjects whatsoever, within Our Realms of England, Scotland,
Ireland, or Dominion of Wales, and all other Our Dominions and Territoies, to
be diligent in enquiring and searching for the said Edmund Ludlow, in all
places whatsoever, as well within Liberties as without, whom, if they shall
happen to take, Our further Will and Pleasure is, that they cause him so
apprehended, to be safely carried before the next Justice of the Peace, to the
Place where he shall be arrested, whom We straightly command to commit him to
Prison, and presently inform Us, or Our Privy Council, of his said apprehension.

And We do hereby further Declare and Publish, That if any Person or Persons,
after this Our Proclamation published, shall directly or indirectly, conceal,
harbor, keep, retain or maintain the said Edmund Ludlow, or shall contrive or
connive at any means, whereby he may escape from being taken or arrested, or
shall not use their best endeavors for his apprehension, as well by giving due
advertisement thereof to Our Officers, as by all other good means, We will (as
there is just cause) proceed against them that shall so neglect this Our
commandmnet with all severity.

And lastly, We do Declare, That whosoever shall discover the said Edmund
Ludlow, either within Our Kingdoms of England, Scotland, Ireland or Dominion of
Wales, or in any other Our Dominions and Territories or elsewhere beyond the
Seas, and shall cause him to be apprehended, and brought in as aforesaid, shall
have a Reward of Three hundred Pounds in money, to be paid unto him, in
recompense of such his Service.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the First day of September, 1660. in the
Twelfth year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1660.


