C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION, For Continuing Officers of the Excise, during His Majesty's
Pleasure.
CHARLES R.

WHereas by virtue of an Act Entitled, An Act for the continuing of the Excise
until the Five and Twentieth day of December 1660. the same Receipt was
managed, and the whole Work thereof carried on by certain Commissioners therein
named, called Commissioners for the Grand Excise, and by diverse
Sub-Commissioners, and other their inferior Officers and Ministers not therein
mentioned: And by certain other Commissioners in the said Act also named,
called Commissioners for Appeals and Regulating the Excise, and their inferior
Officers and Ministers.

And whereas part of the said Excise, consisting of certain Impositions upon
Beer, Ale, Cider, Perry, and other Liquors, is by two several Acts of
Parliament passed upon the Four and Twentieth day of this instant Deeember,
granted unto Us, That is to say, one Moiety thereof to Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, as a perpetual Recompense and satisfaction of and for Our Tenures
and Purveyance; And the other Moiety thereof as an Augmentation of Our Revenue
during Our Life. In both which Acts it is referred unto Us to nominate such
Persons as We shall think fit to be Commissioners and Officers for carrying on
of that Service, which the shortness of time, and other Our Weighty Occasions
will not yet give Us Leisure to think of.

To the intent therefore that Our Revenue may not suffer any loss or hindrance
by this delay, We do hereby Publish and Declare Our Royal Will and Pleasure,
That all and every the Persons, who upon the Four and Twentieth day of this
instant December, were Commissioners for the Grand Excise, Sub-Commissioners,
or inferior Officers relating thereunto, or Commissioners for Appeals and
Regulating the Excise, shall be and are hereby Authorized and required to
continue in his and their respective Employments, And are hereby Declared to be
Our Commissioners for the Excise of Beer, Ale, Cider, Perry, and other Liquors,
and our Sub-Commissioners and inferior Officers; and also Our Commissioners for
Appeals and Regulating the Excise, during Our Pleasure. And We do hereby enjoin
them to Act in their several Places and Employments according to the Rules in
the two Acts last mentioned and not otherwise, For which they shall receive
from Us during their respective Employments, like Wages and Salaries as has
been heretofore used and accustomed.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, this Four and Twentieth day of December, One
thousand six hundred and sixty, in the Twelfth Year of Our Reign.
LONDON Printed by John Bill, Printer to the KING'S most Excellent MAJESTY,
1660.

At the KING'S Printing House in Blackfriars.


