A PROCLAMATION Touching the Election Of fit Persons to serve in PARLIAMENT.
By the King.
HAving occasion at this time to deliberate upon diverse great and weighty
Affairs, highly tending to the continuance and further settling of the peaceable
Government and Sasety of this our Kingdom, whereof God has given us the
Charge, We have thought good according to the laudable Custom of our
Progenitors, to crave the Advice and assistance herein of our well affected
Subjects, by calling a Parliament. And though there were no more to be had in
consideration but the present face of Christendom so miserably and dangerously
distracted at this time, besides a number of other great and weighty Affairs
that we are to resolve upon; We have more then sufficient reason to wish and
desire (if ever at any time, especially at this) that the Knights and Burgesses
that shall serve in Parliament, be, according to the old Institutions, chosen
of the gravest, ablest, and best affected minds that maybe found: And therefore
out of our care of the Commom Good, whereof themselves are also participant, We
do hereby admonish all our loving Subjects that have Votes in the Elections,
that choice be made of Persons approved for their sincerity in Religion, and
not of any that is noted either of superstitious blindness one way, or of
turbulent Humors another way, but of such as shall be found zealous and
obedient Children to their Mother Church.

And as to the Knights of Shires, That they cast their eyes upon the worthiest
men of all sorts of Knights and Gentlemen, that are Guides and Lights of their
Countries, of good experience, and great Integrity, men that lead an honest and
exemplary life in their Countries, doing us good service therein; And no
Banckrupts or discontented persons that cannot fish but in troubled waters. And
for the Burgesses, That they make choice of them that best understand the state
of their Countries, Cities or Buroughs: And where such may not be had within
their Corporations, then of other grave and discreet men fit to serve in so
worthy an Assembly. For we may well foresee, how ill effects the bad choice of
unfit men may produce, if the House should be supplied with Banckrupts, and
necessitous persons, that may desire long Parliaments for their private
Protections, or with young and unexperienced men, that are not ripe and mature
for so grave a Counsel; or with men of mean Qualities in themselves, who may
only serve to applaud the Opinion of others on whom they do depend; or yet with
curious and wrangling Lawyers, who may seek reputation by stirring needless
Questions. But we wish all our good Subjects so to understand these our
Admonitions, as that we no way mean to bar them of their lawful Freedom in
Election, according to their Fundamental Laws and laudable Customs of this our
Kingdom, and especially in the times of good and settled Government.

Given at our Court the sixth of November.
LONDON, Printed for M. B. Anno, 1660.


