THE ADVICE OF Charles the Fifth, Emperor of GERMANY, AND KING OF SPAIN, To his
Son Philip the Second; Upon his Resignation of the Crown of SPAIN to his said
Son.

LONDON, Printed for H. Mortlock, at the Sign of the White Heart in
Westminster Hall. 1670.

TO THE READER.
A Long preface to a little book, is a Giants head, on a Pigmies shoulders:
This shall be so short, as not to spend a line in promising brevity. The
following discourse really contains Magnum in parvo; being of small bulk, but
treating of the greatest Subject, Government: to Authorize it, I name the
Author Charles the fifth Emperor of Germany, and King of Spain. That he was a
person of as exalted reason as quality; One Argument pertinent to the matter in
hand shall serve, instar omnium, that in the height of prosperity, and
flourishing in reputation, He resigned his Crowns to enjoy himself.

That the day after his resignation, was the first of his repentance, will
appear to them who weigh the grandeur of his spirit, and actions, a saying of
more sharpness than solid truth; and Calculated to the Meridian of their
thoughts, who admiring Crowns they never possess, make their passions the
measure of other men's Actions; and conclude no man can willingly part with what
they so vehemently desire. But the Genius of Charles having attained these
altitudes others aspire to, as the Ne plus ultra of humane happiness; quitted
them to mount into a higher sphere. The Roman Empire ruined, (as it raised) it
self, and having awed all foreign hostilities into subjection, or alliance;
Employed against it self, the strength and reputation of its Arms; which had
not left in the world an Enemy that deserved the honor, of falling by so vast
a Power. Charles the fifth held it Greater Glory to Conquer himself, than the
Nations he had subdued: and finding no Antagonist worthy his encounter, like
the Roman State, turned his force against himself; but with this difference,
that the Romans by Civil War, destroyed their Empire; Charles by conquering
himself, in vanquishing those ambitious passions which reign over Kings, and
have Emperors their vassals; by retyring from the Throne into an Ermitage,
obtained a Crown more Glorious than that he resigned: having divested himself
of temporal honors, to fit himself for investiture in Caelestial Dignities.

But admitting that saying as true, as it is smart and piquante; and that he
quitted his Crowns, for fear of losing them; it derogates not from the
authority of his discourse, nor diminishes the reputation of his wisdom. For if
he had Cause to fear the loss of his Crowns, it argues greater prudence, by
resignation to make an happy Exit in full felicity; than to outlive his
happiness, by seeing his Scepter wrested out of his hand; and the glorious day
of his splendid triumphs, ending in the dismal Storms of War with his Son, like
a new Phaeton justling his Father out of the throne.

The Discourse is of Government, but presumes not to instruct our Governors;
and thought it may please the humor of the times, where Subjects are more
inquisitive into the duties of Sovereigns, than careful to practice their own,
readier to learn what Princes ought to do, then to perform what Liegemen are
bound to: and like the Scribes and Pharisees in Moses seat, study Law and
policy, to teach others, not themselves. It Is published to do it right, as
worthy of public view, and for public advantage; For it is with men in
society, as with figures in Arithmetique; they receive their value from the
place they stand in: but authority thought it enlarges the influence, does not
change the nature of persons; as the figure that signifies a million, is the
same as when it denotes One; the greatest Kingdom, is but a Society made up of
individuals, as the greatest numbers are composed of the Digits, and the hugest
volumes of the Letters of the Alphabet. The Emperor and his Subjects, being a
grand Corporation, as a Major and Commonalty are a lesser, which resolves into
that of Masters and Families; and they consist of particular persons, whereof
every one is a Corporation in himself; as made up of a mind to govern, and a
body to obey. It Is a maxim in Philosophy Simplicia Compositis priorca: And the
model of Civil Government, was taken from the natural, where the Soul is
Sovereign to direct and command; and the affections and members, are subjects
to obey and execute. Thus private men are Princes; and have a harder Prevince,
than the greatest Sovereigns: for those lusts and passions which are private
men's Subjects, have reigned over Sovereigns, and conquered Conquerors, who
bridled Nations, and governed the greatest Communities.

These are advises to Govern a Kingdom; but by the trick of Mutatis Mutandis,
what was designed only for John at Noke, may be fitted for John at Styles: and
what Charles delivered for a direction to order States, may serve you for
instruction to govern your self.

THE ADVICE OF Charles the Fifth, Emperor of GERMANY, To his Son Philip the
Second, King of Spain: Upon the Resignation of his Hereditary Crowns to his
said Son.
Most dear Son,
NO Jewels appear so glorious as those that embellish the Crowns of Princes:
Sovereignty is the Mistress to which the Greatest Spirits devote their
Services; Making the Universe a Theater of Heroic Actions, to Justify their
Title to the Dignity they Affect. This has made the Regal State an Object of
Veneration or Envy to a^l Inferiors; and given cause to Kings to think the
Earth a Stage too narrow whereon to display the Beams of their Majesty, and the
Prerogatives of that Condition which has no Equal under the Sun. This has
raised Ambition to that height, that Men trample on all Rights, Civil or
Sacred, that obstruct their passage to the Throne: And even divest themselves
of Humanity, in offering violence to the Laws of Nature, that they may with
more security put on and wear the Royal Purple; sacrificing the Lives of
nearest Relations to the Interest of the Crown. Hence it is that the Examples
of Quitting Crowns, and Resigning Scepters, are so rare, that succeeding Ages
entertain the Relation thereof as Fancies, rather than Historical Truths. So
natural to Man is the thirst of Independent Freedom, that the Quitting of that
which all desire to enjoy, seems a Paradox not to be esteemed true in any Case,
but Theirs, who by their incapacity to use that Excellent Privilege, are
unworthy to enjoy it; or by pretending a Voluntary Resignation, think to
palliate their Weakness, and hide their Disability to hold that Scepter, which
if not yielded, would be wrested from them. Like those vain Sophists, who
decried Riches, not out of a real Contempt of them, but because they wanted
them, and knew not how to gain them.

The value of Gifts depends much on the Knowledge or Ignorance of the Donor, in
proportion to which, it rises and falls: The most magnificent Present from the
hand of him that esteems it mean, becomes common, and lays on the Receiver an
Obligation not answerable to the intrinsique value of the Gift, but suitable to
the Estimat of the Giver, which like the Princes Stamp, often makes the same
Piece Current, at a higher and lower Rate: A Wedge of Gold bestowed by an
American, who thinks Glass more precious, deserves only the small
Acknowledgements due for a Present of Glass, not of Gold. What I have said of
the Excellency of the Regal State, infers not an Alteration of my declared
Resolution to Refign my Diadems to you; but that as you shall receive a Gift of
the Greatest Magnitude, it comes from my hand, who perfectly know the
transcendant value of what I give. And that you may see your Obligations to me,
as my Bounty to you, equally superlative; and read my Excess of Kindness for
your Person, and high esteem of your Abilities in the Character of that Love
which has engaged me freely to transfer from my self to you the Supreme
Authority, to which the Greatest Persons in past Ages, have aspired with that
Ardency, and possessed with that Jealousy, that Sons, Fathers, and Brothers
fell Victims to their Passions, for Gaining or Keeping the Throne; though they,
if divested of that Sovereign Dignity, would have redeemed with their own, the
Lives of their Relations.

That no Man Resigns the Royal Power, but for Incapacity to manage, or Fear to
lose it, will be henceforth listed in the Catalogue of Vulgar Errors, upon the
convincing Evidence of my single Instance; who can without Vanity call Europe,
Asia, Afrique and America, to testify my Ability to sway and keep the Scepter
in my hands; having fixed so many recent Trophies of Conduct and Valor in
these parts of the World, that the Antipodes must be searched to find out an
Enemy who may dare to attaque that Person, whose Prudence and Prowess have
gained him the Honor to be ranked amongst the greatest Heroes.

Animals arrived at the years of maturity, are naturally inclined to preserve
their Species by Propagation, and delight in the Productions of their kind: It
is my desire, and will be my greatest pleasure, to see the exercise of these
great Politic Virtues conspicuous in my Actions, continued by you; and to
behold my Qualities and Dignities, as well as my Person, survive my self in you
the Image of my Person, the actual Heir of my Dignities, and emulous Imitator
of my Examples.

The Sun, who in his Meridian -- Chariot guilds the World with glorious Beams,
equally admirable as profitable to the Universe, withdraws at Night to rest in
the Curtains of his beloved Thetis; that Mortals, who prize good things more by
Privation than Fruition of them, may be taught by the Darkness that ensues his
Retirement, to wish for and receive his morning Light with due Respect: I am
now resolved to confine my self to the Privacies of a Religious House, that the
sudden Eclipse of a Person whose Influence has made this Empire and other
States to flourish many years, may cause them to fix their Eyes on you, as the
Rising Sun; and with full Acclamations promise themselves from your good
Government, the continuance of that Happiness they enjoyed under mine: And look
upon you, not as Philip the Son of Charles, but as Charles the Fifth, revived
like a Phoenix out of his own Ashes, to renew the course of his youthful
Triumphs.

That you may answer their Expectations, before I Resign my Crowns into your
hands, I shall give you some Directions which you are to esteem as highly as
these Diadems, which have derived their Majestique Luster on my Head, from the
Rules you shall receive, more than from those Orient Diamonds that adorn them.

It Is not my Intention to mind you here of those Duties of Piety to God,
Temperance, and Magnanimity in your Actions, and Justice to your Subjects;
which are the Basis of Thrones, and Pillars of Sovereignty: For that I am
satisfied by your Practice, that you have heartily embraced those Excellent
Principles of your Education: And that whether you converse with the prese^nt
or past Ages, you cannot want frequent Admonitions by Men or Books, to urge the
exercise of those Fundamental Virtues. My Design is, to commend to your
Observation some Rules and Maxims which my Experience, as Emperor and King of
Spain, has confirmed useful in the Government of those States I shall Resign
into your Hands.

When you consider the numerous Dominions you are to succeed in, in Spain,
Flanders, Italy and Germany; with the different Constitutions and Inclinations
of the People, the variety of their Laws and Politic Interests, you will
presently conclude, That great Governments are great Burdens; and the
Prerogatives you enjoy above other Princes, are but Intimations and Marks of
greater Cares and weightier Duties incumbent on you. The Cares of a Pilot are
circumscribed within the narrow Compass of the Ship he guides; but those of an
Admiral extend to the whole Fleet: The vigilance of other Princes, like the
single States they Rule, is short and narrow; yours must be proportionable to
your Dominions, dilated from East to West, and reach even to a New World. But
that you may not be discouraged at the Troubles that attend your Greatness,
Remember that as your Government is more Weighty and Large, so will your Glory
be; which will run parallel with your Cares, and make you Renowned in those
Remote Regions where the Names of other Princes are never heard of.

To advise a Great Prince to be content with the Dominions he is born to, may
seem absurd to them who judge Contentment a private Virtue only, and extol an
Insatiable Ambition as the greatest Glory of a King. But those Rules of Justice
that prohibit Injuries between private Men, do so much the more oblige Princes
not to violate the Rights of their weaker Neighbors, as the Consequences of
their Actions are more generally fatal, involving not Families only, but
Nations in Common Ruin; And as Princes, who are the Fountains, ought also to
be the Examples of Justice to other Men. Besides, I look on the Empire as
swelled to that Bulk, that to add to it, were to cram meat into a full
Stomach, which will not nourish the Body, but oppress the Concoctive Faculty,
and render it incapable to digest the Aliment it had received before. Sure I
am, it will be more acceptable with God, and pleasing to men, for you to
preserve the Grandeur of your Estates by good Government, than by a wild
Ambition of New Conquests, to hazard your Hereditary Crowns.

The Life of a Prince is like the Body of the Sun, which draws the Eyes of all
Mortals toward him, and is as conspicuous as the Rays of Light: To think the
bad Actions of a Prince can escape discovery, is to believe the Sunbeams
invisible. It Is beneath your Dignity to do any thing that may fear the Censure,
or not abide the Test of the whole World. And when you reflect upon the
Jurisdiction of Princes, that it extends only to the Hands and Tongues, but
reaches not the Thoughts and Conceptions of their Subjects, which are exempt
from Earthly Powers, and triable in that Court only where the Gods of the Earth
stand at the Bar to account for their Actions, it will appear that though the
bad Actions of a Prince may escape the Lash of his Subjects Tongues, and the
violence of Revenge, they will be certainly Arraigned, Sentenced, and Condemned
in their private Thoughts, which fear not the Rigor of Humane Laws, nor the
Treacherous Malice of Informers. And the Sentences pronounced there, will be
readily executed, when a fit occasion promises Indemnity; and with so much the
more eagerness and virulency as their former fear to express their Grievances
was great: Like hidden Fires, that burst forth in more violent Eruptions. The
end of this Discourse, is, to persuade you to such a Comportment as becomes
your Dignity, and may satisfy your People that they are happy under your
Conduct, by the Protection and Security they receive from your Care and
Vigilance, in recompense of those Duties of Subjection and Obedience they pay
you. This will beget an entire Confidence on their part in your Prudence and
Goodness, and establish your Throne in the Hearts and Affections of your
People. And though it be much controverted whether Princes are more secure in
the Love or Fear of their People, I commend it to you as my sense, That the
security of Government depends more on the Love than Fear of the Subject: And
take it as my Advice to choose the way of sweetness and Clemency to make your
Throne durable, rather than that of Violence and Rigor, to render your self
more absolute; but withal to entail the hatred of the People on your Posterity.
How fatal it has been to Princes to press their People with excessive
severities, appears by those Examples, where the Tyranny of the Old, forces
the People to entertain thoughts of New Masters; who are never wanting to
invite them to Disloyalty, by Promises of Ease and better Usage: And the
People, willing to believe what they passionately wish, are easily persuaded to
change that Condition than which they think none can be worse.

It is a vain Opinion, That the Security of Governors consists in the Poverty
or Slavery of their People, whom you must divest of Humanity, before you can
render them senseless of those Pressures and Miseries that attend a needy and
servile Condition; nor is it possible for men under Pressures and Miseries, not
to desire Ease and Happiness. And how frequent opportunities a Politic Body
may have to attain their desires in this kind, is sufficiently illustrated by
the hatred that attends Tyranny, the natural itch of Innovation, and Subtleties
of Ambitious Men, who never fail to improve all occasions to raise their
Fortunes on the Ruins of their Superiors.

It is the happiness of Princes, that the things which naturally procure the
Love of the People, are also most worthy the practice of the Prince: And that
it is their Interest to exercise those Virtues which they are obliged to
embrace for their Native Beauty and Excellency, though Naked and Destitute of
Foreign Advantages. What can more become a Prince, than the Religious
observance of Faith, Continence, and Justice? And what can more endear him in
the Affections of his People, than the practice of these Virtues, which will
infallibly beget an entire Confidence in his Goodness, a hearty Kindness and
Love for his Government, and a sincere Veneration and Reverent Regard for his
Person and State: Faith in your proceedings, and keeping your Word, will gain
Credit to your Promises at home and abroad; and the respects due to a Generous
and Noble Prince, whose Word has some resemblance with that of God, which
never deceives them that rely on it. Continence will make your Person
venerable; and besides the influence of your good Example will convince your
People of the excellency of your Virtue, who being above the power of Law, are
a Law to your self; and by a voluntary Election and generous Inclination to
Goodness, can keep within due bounds that unruly Passion which has left a
stain on the Names of the greatest Monarchs, and the Severity of Laws and Rigor
of Punishments cannot regulate in meaner men; whom you can then freely reprove
of those Vices, which if guilty your self, you could not without Blushing
rebuke in others. Your Justice will fill your Dominions with Men of Worth and
Merit, who seeing the Way to Honors and Preserments open only through the
Temple of Virtue, will become Votaries to Goodness, that they may receive from
your Justice the Rewards due to excellent Actions, and escape those Punishments
and Disgraces your just Severity inflicts on Vice and Wickedness. These Virtues
will implant in your Subjects Minds such Esteem for your Person, and Opinion of
your Goodness, that when any miscarriage in Government happens by Injustice, or
otherwise, they will impute it to the failings of your Ministers; Judging it as
impossible for you to deviate from your Justice and Goodness, as the Sun to
vary his constant Course.

The Affairs of Princes are divided between Peace and War, which have their
particular Ways and distinct Rules of Management, and afford Occasions for the
Exercise of different Virtues: It is the prudence of a Prince to make the one
subservient to the other; and in the Sunshine of Peace to provide for the
Storms of War, which is a time of Expense, as the other is of Gain: Both have
proper and peculiar Arts, wherein the dexterity of a Prince is much seen, in
using both to best advantage. And as the best end of War, is Peace; so a wise
Prince in the Securities of a deep Peace, has War in prospect.

The certain Charge that attends the Conduct of great States, is so vast, and
the Emergencies that may require extraordinary Expense, so frequent and
various, that Frugality and good Husbandry justly claim an honorable place in
the Quire of Royal Virtues, it being impossible to act those great things that
become a Prince, and make Thrones Renowned, without a stock of money to supply
their Occasions; the provision whereof, as it denominates a Prince frugal and
prudent, so it strikes terror into his Enemies, procures respect from his
Allies, reverencee from his Subjects, and lies in readiness to serve his Glory:
Whereas Contempt is the inseparable Companion of Poverty, though sitting in a
Throne, and adorned with a Diadem.

The first step to make your self rich, is to make your People so; and that
your Treasure may be full, endeavor that theirs may abound and overflow. Let
it be your principal care to secure their Traffic, and protect them in their
Commerce. This, besides the advantage of your Exchequer by your Customs, will
win you the Affections of your People, whom nothing pleases more than the
increase of Wealth, which makes them esteem him the best Prince under whom they
thrive most. The improvement of their Estates is a sensible benefit and effect
of your Protection, and an Argument so convincing and demonstrative of good
Government, that they yield a voluntary and cheerful obedience to that Regiment
from which they derive such real and palpable advantages; and will esteem it a
Privilege, not a Burden, to obey. When you are thus become Master of their
hearts, you may at a pinch command their Purses, who cannot but hold themselves
obliged in good Nature and Interest, to part with a pittance to supply his
Necessities, to whose Care and Protection they owe their Abundance; and may
expect an increase of their store, by the Continuance of his Favor, as their
denial may incline him by remissness and neglect of their Concerns, to expose
what they profess to hazard and danger; and dash all hopes of future
improvement.

It will be a singular means to gain Esteem and Love from your People, if you
make Provision of Necessaries against times of Dearth; And by affording them at
reasonable Rates for Relief of their Wants, it will appear to them that you
prefer public Satisfaction before your private Benefit: And the Reputation of
your prudent Foresight and Care for their Good, will implant in them a solid
Love for your Person, and Esteem for your Conduct, than which nothing can be of
more advantage in the Course of your Affairs. No Benefits leave so deep
impressions as those that come seasonably for Relief of Necessities; which
being a clear Evidence of your Love to your Subjects, will beget a reciprocal
Love from them. It Is vain to think a Grieved People can be Courted to forget
their Miseries by Sports and Pastimes, or fooled out of the memory of their
Sufferings, into Affection to their Oppressors, by Shows and Spectacles, which
may for a moment please the fancy; but work not any other Effects than merely
superficial, as light and empty, as vain and transitory, as their Causes: The
Bonds of Policy are real and ponderous, and Subjection a serious thing, which
affects so deeply the Hearts of Men, that nothing but the sensible Effects of a
viligant Protection, derived to them by solid Advantages from their superiors,
can make them love those Chains which Nature abhors.

And since the Necessities of State may often force you to press your People to
extraordinary Supplies, by Taxes and Impositions; you are to consider that the
power of a Prince depends upon his Peoples Conformity to his Directions, and
uniform assent to serve and honor him. And inasmuch as nothing touches them
more nearly in their Estates and Fortunes (the Blood of the People) than the
Exaction of New Aids, that Golden Mean which is the best Rule of Humane
Actions, is to be observed accurately in these Affairs: And you are to take
special heed not to strain the strings of your Power too high, to prevent those
Jars and Discords that usually disorder the whole harmony of Government on
these occasions. And though in this advice I may seem to contradict my own
practice, having often burdened my People with Taxes and Impositions; I have
this to justify my Assertions, that I never took that Course, but forced by
indispensable necessities of my Wars, nor made use of it but against my Will;
and that I never had encouragement from the effects it wrought in my Peoples
Hearts to reiterate the practice.

To give you some Directions in a matter of so great moment; I observe that
Moneys are drawn by Princes from their Subjects two ways, voluntary and
compulsive: I call that voluntary, when the Subject does, as by Contract,
receive quid pro quo from his Sovereign, in some particular Benefit, for the
Money he pays; as in the sale of Offices, farming of Lands, etc. Compulsive,
when no particular recompense is made by the Prince for what he receives, and
the Subjects Money exacted from him: for though in truth, when Taxes and
Impositions are raised to serve Public Necessities, and employed accordingly,
the Prince is but the Peoples Steward, to dispose of their Aids for their
benefit, wherein they receive the recompense of their Supplies: Yet these
Benefits being commonly remote, general, and diffusive, pass as it were
invisible and unperceived, by the particular Members of the Body politic, who
are little affected with any Advantage, but what sensibly accrues to them in
their private Concerns. This is the reason why this later seems so harsh, and
the other pleasant to the People; and may incline you to use this, rather than
that. The Court of Rome may encourage all Princes studious of their profit, to
establish the sale of Offices, as a great Help to fill their Treasures; which
is clearly proved by the experience of the Papacy: for be the Church never so
poor in the Vacancy of the Sea, the succeeding Pope never fails to furnish
himself abundantly in the very entrance of his reign by this single means of
the sale of Offices.

That other way of Supply by Taxes and Impositions, is not so odious, but by
dextrous management, discreet Officers, and presidents of other Countries under
heavier Burdens, it may be practiced without inconvenience. But it will concern
the Prince by easy Access, kind Reception, satisfactory Answers, and obliging
Carriage, and by making out the Necessities that occasion this Grievance, to
sweeten the Affections of the people into a Belief that he has not taken this
course willingly, but compelled by urgent Occurents of State, and for the
defense or other advantage of his Subjects. And in levying these Impositions,
whether temporary or perpetual, have a watchful Eye on your Officers, lest by
Exactions and Violences they add to the Peoples miseries, and render them less
able to furnish you another time.

Never impose high Customs on those things which are imported or exported to
serve the Necessities of the place; for in that case the moderate Custom makes
the greater vent, and proves more advantageous than heavy Impositions, which
discourage Trade, and not only deprive the place of Necessaries for
subsistence, but stop the sale of those Superfluities it can spare, by the thin
resort of foreign Merchants, where Great Customs devour the Gains of those
that Traffic. To impose high Customs on foreign Superfluities imported, is
not only just, in making them that affect those Novelties pay dear for their
Fancies, but in deterring others from the vanity of expending on those Trifles
the Moneys that may be otherwise better employed.

Allow convenient time for payment of your Taxes, and let them be gathered by
ordinary Officers, not new Commissioners, whose violence commonly exasperates
the people to the danger of the State. In a word, choose rather to pawn or sell
part of your Revenue to supply your Occasions, than by increasing the peoples
Burdens, to force them to a desire of Change. And when Necessity leaves no
other way open, consider the nature of the places you Tax, what they can best
furnish you withal; as Spain, with Money; Germany, Men; Italy, both Money and
Men. Sometimes ingratiate your self with the people by a voluntary Remission of
part of the Assessments; and let all matters of Grace flow to them immediately
from your self, and refer to your Ministers what is harsh and odious. Above
all, see that what is so dearly purchased with the peoples groans and your
danger, be brought to your Purse, and not diverted to the private profit of
your Officers. Keep Credit with the Merchants, protect them in their Trade, and
secure their Commerce; especially those of Genoa, whose Loans you will find
useful in many Emergencies, which may require quicker supplies than can be
raised by the ordinary ways of Tax and Impositions.

The absolute necessity of an able Council, is evidently gathered from the
impossibility of dispatching the Affairs of State, by a single person, though
of prodigious Abilities: And that several Princes of dissolute Lives, and weak
Capacities, have reigned with honor to the State, and to the satisfaction of
their people, merely by the prudence and faithfulness of their Ministers; to
whom the greatest Princes owe most of their Glory, as the Atlas's of their
Government, on whose shoulders they are triumphantly carried through the
Difficulties of Policy, into the Temples of Immortal Honor.

Your Wisdom cannot appear in any thing more, than in the choice of fit persons
to serve you in your weighty Affairs, by Counsel and Execution. And the better
to guide your Election, think no man worthy employment under you, but such
whose Wisdom enables them to discharge their Trust to best advantage, and
secure them from those Inconveniences wherein men are involved by Ignorance
and Imprudence. And lest passion or interest should incline them to employ
their Talents to your prejudice; and study their own, more than your Interest
and Honor: Your next care must be, That their Wisdom be attended with a
generous Faithfulness to discharge their Trust, entire Love for your Person,
and a virtuous Disposition, without which, it will be impossible to give the
people satisfaction, when the scandalous Lives of your Ministers shall give
them cause to suspect all their Actions, and to presage nothing but Ruin to
the State from their Conduct who cannot govern themselves. It Is an excellent
Secret, and one of the prime Mysteries in the Art of Government, for a Prince
incapable to manage Affairs of State, to cover his Defects by employing men of
Excellent Abilities, well-disposed, and faithful to his Crown. The Glory of
their Actions redounds to the Prince; and the people, never curious to enquire
from what hand they receive their Happiness, rest so well satified with the
Effect, that they care not to pry into the Cause, but applaud him an Excellent
Prince, under whom they enjoy peace and plenty, though perhaps he contributes
little to the Felicity they live in.

The Advantages of Honor and Profit that attend the service of Princes,
attract multitudes to seek and press for employment; but you are to remember
that most of these men come to serve their ambitious and covetous Humors, not
the Interest and Honor of the State. But as I will not condemn all that catch
at employment, and offer their services, so I advise you to think your best
diligence well laid out, to find men in all places of your Dominions, fit to
serve you; and having found them, to esteem your Treasures of Wealth and Honor
never better expended than in encouraging such men by ample Rewards, and
obliging them more strictly to your person and interest: The rather, for that
the World affords numbers of excellent persons, who in private Fortunes have
princely Spirits, elevated to that pitch, that they admire not Riches or
Honors, but prefer the Liberty of an obscure Retirement, before the splendid
Servitude of high Employments. Yet these men, when drawn forth to appear on the
Theater of State, have acted their parts with singular Dexterity, incomparable
Integrity, and admired Courage. And settle it for a Maxim, That in matters of
importance, a prudent and courageous Counselor may promote your designs by his
sound Advice, more than Legions of Soldiers, and whole Mountains of Treasure.
And you may observe that the greatest Princes in all Ages have made choice of,
and been served by the ablest Ministers; whereof Caesar, the greatest Prince in
my Judgment, for Peace and War, that ever appeared on the Stage of the World,
is a sufficient Instance; No Age having produced a Prince equal to him, or a
Princes Ministers comparable to those he employed. The Reason is obvious, Like
will to like: And a gallant Prince presently discovers the Weakness of a
Minister, and slights him; as a weak Prince comprehends not the Excellencies,
and therefore seldom uses the Service of an able Officer.

It Is useful and necessary to observe the Genius of your Officers, and fit them
with Employments suitable to their Inclinations and particular Excellencies:
For a Minister who may perform Excellent Services to your Crown in Spain, if
employed in Italy may prejudice your Affairs there, which are to be carried on
with other Maxims, and managed by persons of tempers different from your
Spanish Ministers. In the choice of Generals and Captains of Armies, this Rule
is of singular benefit, which may appear by that eminent Example of Hannibal,
inferior to none in Conduct or Success in Land-Wars, but most unhappy in Naval
Engagements: So rare a thing is a man absolutely wise, that can at all times,
in all places, and on all occasions, merit the praise of a dextrous Minister.

Lest the date of your Happiness expire with the Lives of your able
Counselors, fail not to train up others for your service, in the lifetime and
under the tuition of your greatest Ministers, to be a Nursery of gallant
persons, whose eminent Abilities and worthy Actions, may perpetuate the
Felicity of your Estates. Take the Romans for your Example, who to prevent the
Inconvenience might ensue the leaving the stress of their great Affairs, to
rely and depend on the Life of a single person, in all their Armies made
provision of several able Commanders assigned to succeed in the Office of
General, in case of misadventure to the person actually officiating the Chief
Charge.

Never hazard matters of Importance in a time of danger, upon their management,
who were never employed in Affairs of equal weight: In which Cases you are to
prefer the experience of your Ancient, before the Humors of your younger
Counselors.

It Is a common Observation that young men are generally bold and credulous, as
old men fearful and suspicious; therefore in the choice of Counselors, respect
chiefly the middle Age, as a mean between those Extremes: But rely most on
their Advice, who have given proof of their sufficiency in dangerous occasions,
and are grown gray with the Cares of Government; whose Experience may tune the
dissonant Humors of jarring Councils to a perfect Harmony: But think not I
exclude young or old men from your Councils, for the Common Observation like
General Rules has its exceptions in many Instances of young men of ripe
Understandings, and old ones of flourishing Wits and warm Courage. I rather
commend to your imitation that Roman Medley where the heat of young men was
tempered by the cool and staid prudence of gray-heads, and the quintessence of
both concurred in men of middle Age, who partaking of the vigorous Heat of the
former, and sober Wisdom of the latter, were excellent both for Counsel and
Execution, and together made up the Body of a Roman Senate.

The Ancient Greeks, in four famous Examples, have intimated to us four special
means to attain Wisdom.

The first by Experience: Expressed in the Story of Agamemnon and Menelaus,
represented as persons grown wise by variety of Business, and Observations
gathered out of frequent Audiences, Treaties, and Consultations.

The second is by Histories and Memories, which in small Volumns comprehending
the Transactions of many Ages, afford Instructions useful in Occurrences of the
present Times, and furnish the Reader with Examples of all sorts, discovering
not only the miscarriages of former Times, but the Causes of them; and showing
those Rocks on which unskilful Pilots have split the Ship of State, direct the
diligent Observer to steer his Course into a safe Port. This we have figured in
Solon and Socrates.

The third by Travel into foreign Countries to mark the variety of Laws, of
Policy, which may be useful in Occurrences at home, represented in Ulysses.

The fourth in Nestor, by long Life, where one Lesson learnt yearly, swells at
last to a System of Wisdom. When all these concur in one person, they make his
person reverend, and his Counsels Oracles.

Nor will it be unsafe to rely on their Advice, who have joined Historical to
Experimental Wisdom: And though the length of time supposed necessary to attain
these several sorts of Wisdom, seem to exclude young men from being Masters of
any of them, yet a young Prince may soon attain them all, by frequent converse
by the Eminent in every kind, and discreet use of their Counsels.

The second qualification of a Minister, is, That he be a Good Man: Where the
exquisit Arts of Hypocrisy, those invisible Deceits and Labyrinths in the
hearts of Men, have made it almost impossible to pronounce a right Sentence
without long and accurate Observation of their Actions: for Actions may be good
in Substance and Effect, yet not denominate the Agent a Good Man, because they
may be done with a bad intent, or ill designs, or by accident, or may proceed
from a wavering mind, not out of Love to Virtue, but to serve its Interest, or
gratify it self with more ease and security in some corrupt Lust, or vicious
Practice; to promote which, the same person will by and by act things quite
contrary to the good now done. He only deserves the Title of a Good Man, who
having well weighed the Pleasures and Profits that court men to Vice, makes a
deliberate Election, and gives the preference to Virtuous Courses, being
satisfied he has an absolute Obligation to Truth and Goodness, divested of all
Secular advantages: Acts well, out of a Generous Principle, That it is his Duty
to do so, and improves this Principle by constant Practice into an habitual
Goodness: This is that fixed immovable Man, that (...), who must cease to be,
before he can deviate from the Rules of Virtue. Prefer this qualification in
your Minister, before Riches, Favor, and all the Goods of Fortune; which if
they want, let them be furnished by you, in reward of their Services; the
rather, for that the meaner his Fortune was whom your Bounty exalts, the
stronger will the Obligation be, and his gratitude greater. That favor is most
acceptable, which is proper and agreeable to the humor of him on whom it is
bestowed: Therefore you are to dispense your Bounties in Honors, Profits, and
Pleasures, as most suitable to their various Inclinations. And let not your
Favorites or Officers deprive you of any part of that Gratitude which is due
to your Bounty, which they will certainly do, if your favors flow not
immediately from your self, but are got upon their motion and entreaty, or
conferred by their hands.

Scorn to be so much your Favorites or Domestics Servant, as to confine your
self always to their Advice in what concerns your Family or Person, but use
your Liberty to take Counsel, where your Reason suggests the best may be had;
and prefer the Considerations of Wisdom and Virtue, not only to those of
Riches and Honor, but the nearest Relations of Domestics, or Favorites, not
commended by the same qualities to your special respect.

Cherish Emulation in your Ministers, by giving assured Hopes of Nobler Rewards
to the better desert, but take heed this Emulation between them proceed not to
Jealousy, and perpetual Dislikes, as very prejudicial to your service in the
Clashings of their Counsels and Actions, and in the envy that attends the
Preferment of the most Meritorious, which involves the Inferior in perpetual
Discontents, and engages him to level all his Designs more to cross and lessen
the others Authority, and traduce his Services, than to promote your Interest.

It Is a common Error in Princes of great Parts not to consult with, or to
neglect the Advice of their ablest Ministers, lest these should claim a share
in the Glory of their Actions, and rob them of part of that Honor which they
would entirely enjoy: For since the Advice of Counselors depends so much on
the Resolution of the Prince, what reason is there, but that the Prince may
justly assume the entire Glory of the Action, though proceeding from his
Ministers Advice; which, if not actuated by the Prince, had remained a formless
imperfect Embryon, without Beauty or Efficacy? As the Architect carries the
Honor of the Edifice, though the Model was framed with the Advice of a
Labourer. Besides, you may make great advantage of sounding the opinion of your
Counselors, without imparting to them the Secret of your Designs.

What is said of Counselors, will be of use in your choice of Governors of
Provinces, Towns, and Places of strength. I will add only this, That I hold
it most secure for the Prince to grant such Offices for some short time only,
to prevent the danger of making Parties, and carrying on disloyal Designs;
which the Opportunities of a long continuance in Office may tempt ambitious
Spirits to. Nor can frequent Changes of this kind displease the People, who are
naturally addicted to Novelty, and apt to nauseate things accustomed, though
never so Good.

Easy Access, and free Audience, are great Obligations to the Commons;
especially when you apply Remedies to the Grievances they complain of; and by
the same means you will gain great Knowledge and Experience in business, and an
insight into a thousand Designs, which otherwise you had never heard of.

The like, and many other good effects will attend the Progresses you are to
make into the several parts of your Dominions; but take heed the frequency of
them render them not contemptible, nor the Charge burdensome to your Subjects.
As they must not be too long intermitted, lest hope of impunity move your
Deputies and Magistrates to oppress the People, and their hopes of Relief from
the presence of their Prince, be extinguished.

Receive Petitions courteously, hear patiently, express Compassions to those in
misery, and endeavor that none may depart unsatisfied from your presence. See
that the Power of Great Ones weigh not down the Right of the Poor. And in
giving of Judgment, respect not for the time, the good or ill report of the
Persons, but the merits of the Cause. Confer Offices of Judicature on Persons
of Learning and Integrity. And to engage them to discharge their Duties well,
give them cause to believe that the first step to higher Dignities, is to
behave themselves well in the lower.

Conscience and Charity oblige to a special regard of Churches, Orphans,
Widows, Prisoners, Captives, and all Persons in misery and necessity; fail not
to relieve them with expedition in their Causes. And settle it in your mind as
an undoubted Truth, That God, who judges all without respect of Persons, has
declared himself propense and ready to hear the Cries of the Distressed, and
will certainly punish those Kings and States, where such Causes are slighted,
or sacrificed to Power or Affection: Which I could clear to you by Examples in
the compass of my Experience; but that your Piety and Tenderness of Conscience
make it superfluous to add more on this point.

The like expedition is to be used in the Causes of Merchants and other men,
who lose more by spending time in attending the tedious and chargable formality
of Courts, than the matters in difference amount to in value.

Dispatch in person what Causes you can, the rest refer to your Officers; to
whom you are for expedition to assign severally their proper Tasks.

In capital matters, temper Severity with Lenity, and incline rather to absolve
a suspected Criminal, than condemn an Innocent Person, but let not your Lenity
be so excessive, as to encourage Offenders. Weigh seriously the circumstances
of Persons, Times, and Places; and hold not your self so obliged to the strict
observance of the dead Letters of your Laws, but that on just grounds you may
dispense with the Rigor of those punishments they inflict. Frame your
Proceedings by the Lesbian Rule, pliable to the variety of Circumstances; for
then only the people have just cause to complain that Justice is not equally
administered against Criminals, when they see the same Crime in several persons
unequally punished, but cannot discern any Reason of the diversity.

However, have such respect to the majesty of your Laws, that the power of
Dispensation may remain in your self incommunicable to any, but by special
Commission on weighty Occurrences: And in these Cases, Governors of States are
the best Judges to moderate Laws, who see those Reasons to incline them, which
pass the Knowledge, and exceed the Capacity of ordinary Advocates: But be sure
this moderation arise out of a Right in Equity, not Error in Affection.

Let no Service done you pass unrewarded; at least in good words, which may
beget an expectation of real Benefit, when time serves. Be not curious to
inquire into the private Actions of your Subjects, but let it satisfy you that
they live conformable to your Laws, without scandal and manifest offense to the
majesty of your Government. Leave secret faults to his Judgment who searches
the heart, and sees all things: What reason is there our hands should execute,
where the Eye cannot pierce. Beware of prejudicate Opinions, and ever reserve
an Ear for the other side in matters of complaint: Encourage not undue
Practices by too much Facility, nor discourage just Addresses by a Rigor that
may preclude all expectation of Reason from you of your proceedings.

Never pass sentence in Choler, or any other perturbation, lest you give just
Cause, as Philip of Macedon, of Appeal from your self, blinded with Passion, to
your self seeing with the Eye of Reason.

Let the Guards of your Person be so kept about you, that it may appear done
more to set forth the majesty of Government, than out of any necessity to
secure your Life.

To use Princely Garments sometimes, begets Reverence for your Person, and
strikes Awe into the Multitude; but generally to wear a plain Habit fitted to
the Mode of the Country, procures much love; the Subject being much pleased to
observe in their Prince a careless contempt of those Complements in which
others vainly place their principal felicity: Observe the like Rule in your
Diet; neither incurring hatred from the people by Excess and Profuseness; nor
Contempt, by sinking too near the condition of a Subject.

To conclude this point, the time of Peace is most fit for adorning Cities,
repairing Highways and Bridges, making Rivers Navigable, building Churches,
Hospitals, Guild-Halls, reforming Abuses in Religion, visiting Universities,
Colleges, and Courts of Justice, Education of Orphans, Marriage of poor Maids,
Redemption of Prisoners, and other Works of public Benefit, which will oblige
the People to Love and Thankfulness, remain Monuments to Posterity of your
Goodness, and happy Reign, and crown you with Eternal Glory.

As the Tempests and Storms of blustering Winter, do by natural Revolution
succeed the serene and calm Summer Season; So the tranquillity of the securest
Peace, does by the Politic Vicissitude and Circulation of Affairs, end in the
Troubles of War, by a necessity immutable as the Laws of Nature. But my present
Business is not to demonstrate the Truth of this Sepeculation, but to direct
your Conduct in Military Business, by Rules approved by my long experience in
several Wars of greatest importance.

The Skill of a Pilot is not seen in the Halcyon Days of fair Weather, when a
rude Seaman in a Cock-Boat can lead a Dance for a whole Fleet to sport securely
on the smiling Ocean; but when the angry Marine Gods in a scornful defiance,
swelling their huge Waves unto the Clouds, threaten to throw back those Waters
into the face of Jove, which he had showred down to make a disdained Addition
to the liquid Element. The Ship of State is easily guided in Times of Peace,
when all Discontents are hushed into an entire Obedience to the Laws, and no
Disturbance nor Contention appears, but what arises out of Men's Emulation to
conform to their Princes Wills: To steer an even and steady Course to your
desired Port, through the Audacious Tumults of Popular Insurrections
confronting your Authority, the violences of Foreign Enemies, who attaque your
Power; as it will try your Prudence and Courage, so it is always attended with
the Glory due to an excellent Conduct, and will crown your Head with the
Immortal Laurels of a Triumphant Conqueror.

Directions are so much the more necessary for the Affairs of War, than Peace,
as the accidents of War are more various and unexpected, the Conduct thereof
more uncertain, and subject to alteration on all sudden Occurrences; and the
Errors irrecoverable, or not to be redeemed without much Damage and
Inconvenience: Nor can a Prince give better proof of his Virtue and Goodness,
than by Moderation in time of War, when Custom seems to tolerate, and Power
tempts him to all licentiousness, when Ambition prompts him to break through
the Spider Web of Legal Bonds, and scorn any Rule of his Desires or Actions,
but the Dictates of his Will; And his Sword promises security against the weak
opposition of the tame Arts and unarmed Rights of Peace.

As the Majesty of your Empire will certainly expose you to the Envy of
Christian States, the Jealousy of the Turk, and the Enmity of both; So it will
render War a matter not of Convenience only, to purge your Dominions of those
superfluous humors that may molest, and corrupt Members which may destroy so
great a Body, but of absolute necessity for your Interest, that you may never
be unprovided of powerful Forces and expert Commanders, to serve your designs
of enlarging your Empire, and to secure you against all Attempts os Foreign
Power, and rebellious Subjects, to which so great and divided a Dominion as
yours, is as subject by the various Humors, Inclinations, and Interests of its
Members, and the busy Arts of your Neighbors, as the Region of the Air to
storms and tempests, by the bustling violences of Winds and Vapors. Besides,
there is just cause to fear that the disuse of Arms, will no less weaken and
corrupt the Body Politic, than want of motion the Elemental Substances: And
it will be very difficult to bring them back to endure patiently the Hardships
of War, who have drunk deep of the delicious Nectar of Ease and Rest, and
enjoyed the soft Pleasures of Peace, or to keep them within the Bounds of Civil
Laws, who have been long used to the Licentiousness of War: For as Martial
Discipline seems too rigid and severe to those, so the Experience of several
great Monarchies has confirmed, that the Threats of Humane Edicts cannot
deterr them from pursuing their Lusts in despite of Laws, the first Principle
of whose Profession, is, Not to fear; and whose Conversation with Death the
King of Terrors, has made the Loss of Life so familiar and contemptible, that
like them who by constant use of Poisons, have exempted themselves from the
fatal effects thereof; Those Capital Punishments which appear to others as
Bug-bears to fright them from transgressing the Limits of their Duties, have no
operation on their tougher Constitutions, who having often exposed their Lives
to utmost perils, merely to serve the interests of their Leader, will not
scruple to hazard them to please themselves.

The Jealousy of his Equals, the emulous ambition of his potent Officers, and
the suspicious Capricchio's of inferior Subjects, oblige a Prince to be always
on his Guard with his Sword in Hand, to prevent those Injuries which unprovided
Security will invite them to offer him. And to complete your Glory in matters
of War, five things are chiefly requisite; Armies, Forts, Garrisons,
Provisions, and Knowledge of the Nature of Places, and Humors of the
Inhabitants.

It was the Custom of the Romans in the height of their Power, and is now the
Turkish Custom to bring prodigious numbers of men into the field: but the great
Victories the Romans obtained before with small numbers against vast multitudes
of the barbarous Nations, And the Conquest of Asia by those few Troops which
made up Alexanders Army, do clearly demonstrate that huge Bodies of Armed men
are more for show than service; more fit for ostentation, as Marks of Power,
than requisite to bring Enterprises to effect; which they obstruct more by
their confused multitudes, than they promote by their seeming strength;
Experience having taught us, That the greater part were Spectators only, not
Actors in the Battle. This has induced me to concur with the Modern Captains
in their opinion, That thirty thousand Foot and four thousand Horse, or
thereabouts, may stand for a complete Army, without Excess or Defect, as a
Number requisite to serve the Designs of a Prince, and sufficient for the
greatest Undertakings, easier disciplined, paid, and provided for, than greater
Bodies, most agreeable to the Modern Art of War. And as the Victories obtained
by such reasonable Forces are more honorable, so in truth it is rare to see a
place so free from Ditches, Rivers, Woods, Lakes, Mountains, and other
Impediments, as to be capable of a greater Number in Battle Array.

Besides, We see that the Turk lays the stress of his Battles, and builds the
Glory of his Victories, not on those infinite multitudes which swell his Camp,
but on the Valor and Experience of those few Regiments of Janissaries that
attend him, as Caesar placed more confidence in his tenth Legion than in all
the rest of his Army, though the far greater Number and no mean Soldiers. And
as Caesar notwithstanding the detriment by Battle and other Accidents, did by
constant supplies preserve that Legion always entire, so must a Prince take
care by new forces to make up the number of those Companies which the fate of
War, the necessity of Garrisons, or other Occasions, shall withdraw from his
Army, which must be maintained in the full number we have prescribed. And
supplies of new men may be rationally thought to increase the Gallantry of an
Army, in that their want of experience makes them run more boldly into those
dangers which the tried Soldier cunningly declines, or meets with caution.

Next the proportion of your Army, the Discipline of your Camp claims your
diligence: And herein be sure to establish such Rules that the Principles of
Religion and Justice, may flourish there, that your Soldiers may pay the Duty
they owe to God, who is Lord of Hosts, and to themselves in a virtuous and
honest Life, which must be attended with obedience and due respect to their
General and all subordinate Officers: To effect this, encourage the Dutiful by
Rewards and Honors, and punish the Stubborn and Contumacious by Disgraces and
Rigorous Corrections. Stifle Mutinies in the Birth by sharp Executions, as the
best means to make impressions in Soldiers hearts, whom Rhetorique makes more
insolent. Soldiers, as other men, have times of leisure and vacation from the
Exercises of the Camp; therefore to prevent the entrance of Sloth and Idleness,
it is the Generals part to invent such Divertisements as may by constant
employment secure them from those Vices, and withal render Military Engagements
more familiar, and so less formidable to them. The duty of a Soldier is to
obey willingly, and execute readily the Commands of his Officer: And that of a
Commander is to act with Courage, Discretion, and Faithfulness, to win them to
a prompt obedience by Good Words, (as Caesar called them Fellow Soldiers) and
by care of their Persons, Relations, Credit, and Interest, which will oblige
them upon occasion to humble Acknowledgements and real Gratitude.

When you have thus settled the proportion and Discipline of your Army, you
cannot rationally presume of success in your enterprises, without good Rules
and Orders for fight; which though they vary in this of War, as in other Arts,
according to the different circumstances of Action; yet Maxims grounded on
Reason and Experience will fit a man to use all occasions to best advantage: I
have often observed a great disorder in the Modern Discipline, and had an
earnest desire to redress it, which will appear to you by my large Collection
of Notes to that purpose; but could never obtain leisure from my Great
Employments to perfect my Design, which may deserve the Pains of so great a
Prince as you to complete: The disorder is, That our Battles and Squadrons are
marshalled in a direct Line, every particular Man, and the Ranks in general
standing directly behind one another; so that it is impossible for the first to
retreat without disturbance to the next Ranks: And thus the full strength and
effect of the Army, depends on the three or four first Ranks of the Battle. My
design was, to find out a method whereby the first Rank being forced to retire
might not bear upon the second, nor the second upon the third; but that the
hinder Ranks might without disorder or disturbance readily step forward into
the place of the wearied men, and at once relieve them and engage the Enemy; so
that no inconvenience may befall the Army upon the Retreat of the first Ranks;
which I look as the chief Perfection of the Roman Discipline. To effect this,
my project was, to divide the Vantguard-Battel and Rereguard into three
Squadrons, one to another side in a Triangular Form; the first to represent
the point, the other two the sides; for being thus dis-joyned and severed by
Art, it were easy to bring forward the second to fight, without disturbing the
first; and the third, without disordering the other two: Whereby, besides other
Advantages, the fortune of the Field will be thrice attempted in one Encounter.
And from this rough draught of the Design, you may proceed to an exact Method
how these Squadrons being sub-divided into smaller, may relieve one another
with like Advantage, which Experience must perfect.

Another Error in the Modern Discipline, is, That the best Soldiers are put
in the first Ranks; whereby it comes to pass that if these begin to shrink and
give back, the rest by their example do the like, as if it were their Duty to
imitate their Betters even in bad Actions; which has been the Ruin not only
of Companies and Regiments, but entire Armies: And herein the Romans are worthy
imitation, who placed in the Front those they called Hastati, or Pikemen,
consisting of young men of greatest strength and courage, mixed with a third
part of old Soldiers, to temper the heat, and direct the valor of the Youth;
in the second Squadron, called Principes, were two parts of old experienced
Soldiers, and a third of young: The third called Triarii, was entirely made up
of the most expert and courageous in the Army. By this excellent Order it came
to pass, that not only the first onset of the Roman Army being made by the
warm Blood and emulous Courage of their choicest Youth, was violent and
impetuous, and their Defense vigorous against the most brisk Assaults; but that
if at any time they gave back or were repulsed, the second Squadron was ready
to sustain the shock with greater Bravery; and upon their Retreat, the Triarii
succeeded to maintain the fight, with assured hopes of Victory, to beat off
those Enemies who could not but be extremely weakened by the Valor of the
Hastati, and expert Courage of the Principes. This Order I approve of, as of
greatest use. And though the high Reputation of the Roman Arms may by their
great and long success in War, justify the imitation of their Discipline
without further Reason; yet it is obvious to every Eye on what solid Grounds of
Prudence this Order was established, and that of the Greek Phalanges marshalled
in direct Lines rejected by the Romans, who though they received the Rudiments
of War from the Greeks, became greater Proficients in the Art than their
Teachers; making themselves Masters of the one and the other, by conquering
Greece with those Arms the use whereof they derived from the Grecians. Another
Argument for Collateral Squadrons, is, That the Phalanges or Ranks marshalled
in a direct Line, are subject to greater Execution by the Enemies Artillery,
which scours all that stands before it in a strait Line. Besides many other
Observations which you will find scattered in my Notes for your direction in
this and other points of War.

Nothing can render your Name more Illustrious than the Glory of perfecting
this project for the better ordering of Forces in Battle. But let not your
Employments at Land, make you forget that the Sea is part of your Dominion:
Provide stores of all necessary Implements for Fleets; Let your Vessels be well
rigged, manned, and employed in the service of the State, and augmented to that
number that may be sufficient to serve your Designs, without depending upon
your Neighbors or Subjects. And never admit any Vessel into the List of your
Fleets, but such only wherein you have propriety: For private men are so wedded
to their particular Interest, that upon the appearance of danger their study is
to preserve their Vessels, though to the Ruin of the State.

Cause your Forts to be often viewed, their works frequently surveyed, and see
them repaired and improved where requisite; and the Stores filled with all
necessaries. Provide faithful, expert and courageous Governors, and trusty
Soldiers: The Accidents of Death, Sickness, and loss of men, will prompt you
to exceed in number, rather than fall short; but make choice of such as may
give you cause, with the Romans, to rely more on the Valor of your Soldiers,
than the strength of the place, though never so well fortified by Art and
Nature. Let your Forts on the Frontier be few but strong. When you are
assaulted, rather meet your Enemy bravely in the Field, than coop your self up
in a Garrison. When you are the Aggressor, choose to annoy the Enemy by Forts
and Sconces raised for that purpose; and not with intolerable expense of Moneys
and Time, and loss of Men, to sit down before his places of strength, which
seldom recompense your pains in the taking. In erecting Forts take your Model
from the nature of the place, and apply your Industry to make the whole
proportionable to the parts, and the parts to the whole. And though no place
can be impregnable, make yours of that strength that may deprive the Enemy of
hopes to take them without a tedious siege, great loss of men, vast expense,
and other disadvantages that attend those difficult Enterprises.

The Provisions of War are Victuals, Artillery, Ammunition, Supplies, and Coin;
which are then sufficient when the quantity seems to maintain an Army in a
capacity to perform any Martial Attempt; which had my weighty Occasions
permitted, I had reduced to a certainty. My project was, to raise a Gallant
Army composed of Flemins, Germans, Spaniards, and Italians, to be kept in
constant exercise against the Turk and Christian Princes whom Danger or
Interest should oblige me to engage with. For their Maintenance I designed to
capitulate with them, That all Booties belonging to the adverse State, as
Artillery, Ammunition, etc. should be entirely mine and my Successors, and all
private Spoils to be distributed among the Soldiers; yet so, as to oblige them
at reasonable Rates to sell to an Officer to be appointed to that purpose; such
Garments, Victuals, and other things of that nature, as were not necessary for
present use, which should be stored up by him, and sold again to the Soldier
upon occasion with some profit to me. This had been of great convenience to me,
but more to the Soldier, in having at hand all Necessaries to supply his
wants, at cheaper Rates than he could expect to receive them from those who
follow the Camp to raise their fortunes, and make unreasonable Gains by
excessive Prices.

This done, my intention was, to constitute an Officer to receive and secure
such Moneys or Goods as the Soldier upon apprehension of any dangerous
Service, or other consideration, should deposit with him; and to be answerable
for the same to the Soldier, his heirs and assigns with allowance of a
reasonable gain at so much per cent. for the use, with Provision that the goods
of such as died without Heirs, should according to the course of the Civil Law,
belong to the Chamber of the Prince, and the like Constitution for such as
departed intestate: and what Soldier in the Army, whether private or in
Commission, would not prefer the securing of his Goods, where he, his Heirs or
Assigns should certainly receive them, before the exposing them to the hazard
of Loss by the Enemy, and other Accidents? And to defray the charge of Carriage
requisite for such things, allowance should have been made by the Soldier out
of the Gains to come to him from the Use. This Course will be of great
Advantage to the Prince, who may make considerable profit of the Moneys
remaining in the hands of his Officers on this Account, to supply his Occasions
for payment of his Army, and other necessary Charges, without injury to to the
Proprietors: And besides this, it will secure the dependence of the Army upon
him, the things deposited being good Pledges of their Loyalty, and serve as an
inexhaustible Mine of Treasure, by the Moneys and Goods of those that die
without heirs and Intestate, or forfeit them by Disloyalty.

Notwithstanding the received Opinion that Moneys are the Sinews of War, you
may believe it on my Experience, that it conduces much to the strength of an
Army well appointed in all other things, but is far less necessary than good
Discipline, Courage, Experience, and other Conditions requisite in well-ordered
Troops, and indeed of no efficacy in point of War where these are wanting.
Therefore think your self more obliged to provide able Leaders, expert
Soldiers, and good Orders for your Forces, than Moneys; the reason is, That
such an Army under the Conduct of a valiant and prudent General, can never want
means to maintain it self by Pillage and Victuals, to be gained even in the
heart of their Enemies Country. And though Provisions may be sometimes scant,
the bare Promises of Pay and Rewards from a Prince in Reputation with his Army
for Power to perform, and for keeping his Word, will keep them in heart in the
greatest Difficulties. It Is true, the nature of War is such, whether offensive
or defensive, and the Charge so excessive, that without some help 'twere
impossible for a Prince to bear it; but the Courses intimated before, and the
Booty of rich Towns and Cities to be gained by Sieges or Stratagems, will
render it tolerable and easy: And it must be your Care to make the War
contribute to the maintenance of it self, by employing your Forces in Actions
attentended with Profit as well as Honor, and declining all useless and
unprofitable Enterprises.

Mortality and other Accidents common to Man, make it impossible for an Army to
subsist long entire in the same State without Supplies; in order to which, you
are to cause frequent Musters to be made in all Places of your Dominion, fit to
yield Supplies of men, and Registers to be kept of all the Youth able to bear
Arms, where it may be done without apparent danger to the State by Tumult and
Insurrection. And as your old Soldiers must be preserved from Sloth by
constant Exercises, so must the Youth that is to supply the Camp, be trained by
sufficient Leaders, for the Service of the War. In your choice, prefer those
who are naturally addicted to Arms; and amongst them, chiefly those who have
Lands, Goods, or Relations to secure their Loyalty to your Crown, and implant
in them a greater fear of shame or punishment, than can be expected from them
who carry all their Interests in their Persons, and have nothing to care for
but their own safety: But never press any man upon whom the subsistence of a
Family depends, but such only who may be spared without great inconvenience,
whom you are to encourage with hopes of Honor and Profit by the War.

The Dominions you succeed in, are so many and populous, that they will easily
furnish you with means to raise and maintain a potent Army according to the
Rules I have showed; And if you keep good Correspondence, and preserve the
Amity established between Us and our Allies of the House of Austria, you will,
besides the Flemish, Italian, and the Spanish Nations, have the Germans at your
Devotion, who are a mighty and a brave People; and make your self formidable to
the greatest Powers on Earth: Whereas if you be at Discord with your Kinsmen of
that House, it will impair your Authority, encourage your Enemies, weaken your
Power, and cool the Affections of your ancient Friends. Above all, have due
regard, and express extraordinary respect for your Cousin the King of Bohemia,
as a person of so much worth, that the greatest Empires are too narrow for the
exercise of his Excellent Virtues. And observe it as a Maxim, That though
matter of unkindness may sometimes fall out between the nearest Relations; yet
more good may be hoped from the Love that springs out of Consanguinity, than
the fairest pretenses of Amity from a Stranger: And that it is more glorious to
preserve the Good Will and Friendship of your Kindred, by yiedling to them in
some things to end differences, than by Arms to force Strangers to a Compliance
with your Will.

To conclude this point of training Youth, please their Humor, and encourage
their love to War by Privileges of wearing Weapons, and exemption from the
burdens of Civil Offices, etc.

Study an exact knowledge of the situation and nature of all places under your
Government, wherein their abundance consists, and where their defects; supply
these, and use the other as a means to establish Amity between the several
Members of your Empire, making the Abundance of one part to fill up the Defects
of the other: Cause Plots to be drawn of all their Places of strength,
Mountains, Rivers, etc. That by resorting to your Map, you may upon occasion
order matters with more certainty.

Think it worth your pains to inquire not only into the Humors and
Dispositions, but the Interests, Alliances, and Factions of your potent
Subjects, for the Balance of Authority remaining in your Hand, you may easily
make that side most weighty and considerable that is best affected to your
service, and prevent all disorders that may ensue upon their engagements in
Parties against one another.

If any of your Countries stand in danger of a Confining Enemy, secure them
from injury by your providence. And when you have an exact account of their
Inclinations, Power, Alliances, Interests, Wants, Stores, Customs, Affections,
Commodities, Incommodities, and Dependancies, use all to your best advantage:
Then consider the State and Power of those you esteem your Friends, or stand
Neuters in the Quarrel: Weigh well the Persons, Places, Times, Natures,
Customs, Neighbors, Officers, Adherents, and other siderations incident to the
Affairs of your Foes and Friends. For nothing conduces more to a happy Victory,
than a perfect knowledge of your own and your Enemies Abilities, and a prudent
use of that Knowledge. Be sure you never quarrel a great Potentate for relief
of such whose weakness will rather endanger than assist your Crown, unless it
appear that their Ruin may turn to your Inconvenience.

In War, who spends most, makes least waste: Never engage in a Quarrel but on
just Grounds, and with prudent forecast of the Event; but when engaged, assure
your self it is never safe to dally or delay. Make Provision ever in the best
time, and of more than may seem necessary, for the loss in the overplus can be
but small; and though it were great, can bear no proportion with the danger of
of hazarding the greatest undertakings by want or scarcity: Victory is the mark
of the Art Military, and requires in the beginning Wisdom, Diligence, and
Vigilance; in the pursuit, Courage, and Perseverance: Rather assault first,
than stay till you are set upon, and lose the advantages of making War in your
Enemies Country: If your Enemy prevent you herein, make Good your Defense, and
by all means endeavor by diversion to force him to retreat. Repose not the
whole confidence of success in your Armies at Land, nor Fleets at Sea, which
are subject to great uncertainties, as the Waves that bear them; but think
Prudence and Courage the best means for Victory; and remember that at Sea
commonly the greater Number prevails Caeteris Paribus. But for your further
Instructions in matter of War, I refer you to my Notes, which will afford you
Rules for all Occasions. And now I shall apply my discourse to the Enemies you
are to grapple with, that you may perceive my sense of their several
Conditions, and your Conduct in your Wars against them.

The Turk is your greatest and most certain Enemy, both on the Account of
Religion, which you are to prefer before all other Interests; and that the
violent Constitution of his Tyrannical Government keeps him always on his
Guard, to secure his Power against sudden Attempts; and so his Forces are ever
in readiness to be poured where hope of success invites him, who desires no
other Cause of Quarrel. When I consider the long course of Danubius, and the
great Champaign of Hungary, the situation of Vienna, and Neighborhood of
Germany, with the Power of the Neighbors on the one side, and the desert
Condition of the Borders on the other, I am induced to believe that he will
wave the prosecution of his Conquests there for the present, and bend his
Forces against the Islands, and your States in Italy, which he will assault
before he breaks with Venice; the reason is, That if he fall on the Venetian
first, he may expect greater Opposition by such Auxiliary Forces as you may
send in their Aid; but need not fear the Venetians engagement against him in
your Quarrel in a time of peace with them, as well for that all Republiques,
whether Aristocratical or Democratical, flattering themselves with hopes of a
perpetual subsistence, do naturally decline all hazardous Undertakings;
especially when the Tranquillity they enjoy, and dangers of Action, represent
every Alteration for the worse. Besides the plausible pretext of keeping their
Faith inviolable, and the necessary dependence of the Venetian on the Ottoman
Empire in point of Traffic; and the reasons they have of being satisfied with
their new Acquest of the Isle of Candy from the Turk.

The Turkish Empire has its period, but known only to God; and it is in vain to
expect his Fall by Miracles from Heaven, which must be effected by sound
Policies and strength of Armed Men. The poor effects Experience has showed of
an Universal League and Combination of Christians against the Turks, afford you
this Rule, That while men manage the Affairs of the World, they will often
sacrifice the best Cause and nearest Concerns of true Interest, to Humors and
Passions; whereof you have a pregnant instance in the behavior of the French
King on a causless Jealousy in the matter in hand. This makes me conclude it a
common Error that the excessive Power of the Ottoman is to be humbled rather
by the United Forces of several Princes, who cannot but have several Designs
and several Interests, than by the strength of one mighty Potentate, whose
Designs are like his Person, single and entire, and his Interest one and the
same. This great Work seems reserved for you, as the greatest Prince of the
Christian Profession; and with the Aid of your Allies of the House of Austria,
of sufficient Ability to encounter that Pagan Giant; but not without a serious
Consideration of the most proper means to attain your ends, by such ways as
sound experimental Wisdom shall direct.

And first what War is most available against him, Defensive or Offensive, by
Prevention or by Diversion? As for Defensive War, nothing but pure Necessity
can justify the choice of it; being the most unprofitable, uncomfortable, and
dangerous, as that wherein we do but expose and lay our selves open to the
injuries of Hostility, to the manifest consumption of our strength, and to the
apparent danger of our whole Interest, without hope of Restitution of Loss, or
Reparation of Damages.

The impossibility of making the Preparations requisite for an Offensive War,
without the knowledge of the Turk, and finding him on his guard, may dissuade
you from that course; as the multitude of Forces he maintains in constant pay,
and always in readiness, anticipates all Designs to molest him, by preventive
Wars, or by way of Diversion; so that my Advice is, To avoid the simple kinds
of War, and to resolve on a mixed, Defensive in appearance, but Offensive in
act; which if wisely managed, may by degrees of Prevention and Diversion, be at
length converted into a pure Offensive; which must be effected more by slights
and stratagems, than plain force, against this potent Enemy: And to his purpose
you will find frequent Opportunities by the Troubles and Encombrances of his
other Wars, his Losses, and the Disorders of his Camp, and the Discord about
the succession of the Empire. But rely chiefly on the favor of God, which is
partly procured by the use of means approved by humane Discretion, as conducing
most to the ends we aim at; and therefore you are to preserve the Affections of
your Allies of the House of Austria, to your Person and Interest. And as the
state of their Affairs cannot but oblige them to a strict Correspondence and
Amity with you for the better Achievement of their Enterprises; so you are to
believe that to maintain Friendship and Good Intelligence with them, will not
only strengthen your Interest in general, but is of absolute necessity in order
to Success against the Turk.

Account that your best time of war with the Ottoman, when he is engaged with
some potent Enemy else where, or perplexed with dangers and seditions,
discontents or factions at home: But if the Condition of your Affairs cannot
conveniently allow the expectation of these opportunities, when your
preparations have given him the Alarm, and drawn his forces into the field,
make use of shifts and delays to frustrate his designs by declining
engagement, and putting upon him the loss of the whole expense of that Campagn:
And the next year take the advantage of his security, want of preparation and
disability to appear on the sudden in complete equipage: And be sure to march
forward with all expedition, that you may fortify your new Conquests, and be
in a capacity to maintain them against him by a resolute defense before he
advances to stop your course: and dispose your affairs, so that when he begins
to disband and draw off into his quarters, you may be ready to fall on: And by
renewing the war, put him on the necessity of continuing his vast Armies in
pay, (which he can by no means endure long,) or reduce his Army to so mean a
proportion, as may give you assured hopes of victory.

No place is fitter for the seat of the war, than in some parts of Hungary
remote from Danubius; for besides the narrowness of several passages extremely
incommodious for the huge bodies of his Cavalry, He will be destitute of those
Conveniences which the River affords for that immence baggage, and cumbersome
train usually attending his Camp, whereof you may make excellent use to the
benefit of your, and prejudice, if not ruin of his designs. And to that
purpose, I again Commend to you a good Correspondence with your Uncle the King
of the Romans, to whom you are to Grant and offer all Aids of men or money to
keep the balance even, till you find an opportunity to appear in the field.

The Turk relies entirely on the number and strength of his men: And your way
to defeat him being by stratagem; be careful to draw him into straight and
narrow places, where he cannot for want of room make use of his whole power.
And may be pinched for defect of Carriages, and necessary provisions. In
Engagements and Conflicts, provide Stout Companies of Foot to annoy his horse;
who being generally without Armor, are soon routed by the strong impressions
of a Gallant infantry. It Is a point of the Turkish discipline, to reserve the
Janissaries for the last onset and recourse to victory: And if a choice
sequadron be picked out to engage them, from the beginning to the end of the
battle; the unexpectedness of the stratagem will surprise, and much disorder
the Janissaries, and abate the courage of the rest of their Army, who are never
out of hopes of victory, till the Janissaries are engaged and repulsed. By this
policy Hannibal gained several victories against the Romans: And to it the
Romans owe theirs over the Latins. Use all endeavors to invite the people to
Rebellion against him, by good usage, immunities, exemptions; or by building
rampires and forts fit for defense and offense; wherein you will find excellent
instructions in my memorialls for speed and cheapness, and in the work their
best use when perfected, to subdue the forces of a great estate; whereof
Caesar's actions in France are an instance, as related in the Commentaries: And
you may esteem the least declination of the Ottoman power, a great advantage to
your affairs, by the opportunity it affords his suppressed subjects to
endeavor the recovery of their lost liberties, which his tyranical government
makes them willing to embrace, when invited by a fit occasion.

The solid strength of the Kingdom of France receives addition of power by the
willingness of other Princes, (and especially the Italians) jealous of our
forces, to Assist that Crown against us: threfore let us consider next the best
way of making war upon the French. Had they known to improve the taking of
Casab, or Revolt of Sienna to the best advantage, we had felt e're this by dear
experience, how much the Italians are inclined to novelty; and the great
benefit the French may obtain with inconsiderable charge in the wars of Italy:
For though it cannot be doubted, but that the Government of the French, if
possessed of those places we hold in Italy, would in a short time become more
offensive and insupportable to the inhabitants, than ours: yet such is their
itch of change, so great their jealousies of our forces in Milan, Naples, and
Sicily that they throw open their Arms to receive any that promises to restore
their liberty, which they think lost in the fetters of our power, in the places
I have named. But it is your happiness, that by assaulting that King in his own
dominions (which you can easily do) you will infallibly force him to recall
his forces from Italy, to defend France: And gladly employ them to quench the
fire kendled in his own house, whom he had commanded to burn yours. It has
been their maxim long, not to leave an Enemy behind them: it must be yours to
winn, and fortify some place of importance in their passage to Italy, which
may either stop their farther march, or at least entertain their forces so
long, till yours be in readiness to receive them by defense, or stop them by
diversion.

To this end, it was my design to build two or three forts between Turine and
the Alps, of that Art and strength, that might deter the French from attempting
Italy that way, by the difficulty of reducing those places to their obedience
at so great distance from their Country: But this (as other designs) was
prevented by my employments else where: So that I propose it only, as worthy
your consideration, and hasten to give you brief rules for your wars in France.

That King may be assaulted in his own Country two ways, by taking some strong
places upon the frontiers, or by entering the heart of his Dominions with a
complete Army, and making your self Master of the field. But the strength of
his Towns and Castles on the borders, the vast expense, and tedious
difficulties of Sieges, the constant charge and great Garrisons requisite to
maintain and preserve them in your obedience, when taken; and the opportunities
given him to Muster his forces, and make defense, before you can probably
reduce the place you attaque; may induce you to wave that course, and embrace
the latter: and the rather, for that you have the convenience of Arming a great
deal sooner than he; And thrust your forces into the bowels of his Kingdom,
before he can be in readiness to come into the field: And that his Country
abounds so much with Victuals and other provision, that an Army cannot want in
so great plenty: And needs only use its power to maintain it self by the spoils
of the enemy. You cannot expect by one Assault, to break the force of so
compact a Body as the Kingdom of France; but think that expedition well made,
wherein you become Master of a Limb, and bring some small part to your
obedience; if you make good your ground, and retain firmly what you gain by
peicemeal, every step you make advances you further toward the Conquest of the
whole. This was Caesar's method in subduing that Nation. When you have once got
footing there, a thousand opportunities from the distraction of that state, by
their divisions and animocities in matter of Religion, the ambition of the
great ones, and other accidents, will present themselves for improvement of
your interest. The Sun though he moves insensibly, does compass the world in 24
hours. And common sense informs, you that the smallest particle taken from the
lesser quantity, and added to the greater, Augements the one, and diminishes
the other: which I mind you of, that you may not be discouraged, though you
cannot on the sudden overcome this Kingdom; but persevere in the prosecution of
your design upon this Assurance, that by gaining the parts, you will at last
Master the whole.

If the French Kings motions give you cause to believe, that by the advantage
of the season, and forwardness of the Country, he may enter Italy some months
before your Army can arrive in France; Make show of early, and great
preparations against France, to march thither as soon as the season of the year
will permit: And by this stratagem you will oblige him to use those forces for
defense at home, which he designed for foreign Conquests: So jealous is he of
that Kingdom; So contrary is it to the Maxims of his Policy, to leave his
frontiers unguarded with an Army, when threatened with hostility from abroad, or
to expose his Kingdom to an invation, in the absence of any considerable part
of his forces.

When you have resolved on either of these courses of war with France, take
heed of wavering from your choice, as a thing most distructive to your affairs:
and avoid it as a Rock showed you by a Pilot, whose ship was split thereon. I
entered France toward Landrecy, with full purpose to have advanced into the
heart of the Kingdom, before the Swissers arrived to their aid, but the
altering of this resolution in my stay, to winn some Towns on the frontiers
(which detained me longer than I expected, being deluded by the facility of
reducing the first I attaiqued,) gave the King time enough to provide strength
sufficient to encounter me; and proved so fatal in the consequence, that I was
constrained by plain force to retire, and yield to conditions, which (to be
free with you) served only for a Color of retreat, without any advantage to my
affairs.

Pursue your victories in France effectually, and with diligence: And having
forced them to seek Ayds from abroad, fall on them afresh before the
Auxiliaries Arive: And when the success answers not your expectation, repair
your forces, and hold them so long in play, till the season of the year make
them despair of any advantage to be made in Italy by your retreat: Rely not on
the multitude, but choice of your men; and prefer a gallant, though small Army,
before a numerous: and against France make special povision of strong Companys
of foot to encounter their horse.

I will reiterate my advice against siting down with your forces before any
place of strength that may require a long siege, unless invited by
correspondence within, or some other particular advantage, that gives assured
hopes of dispatch: and that not only for the reasons given before, but that it
is a matter of extreme difficulty, to maintain an Army long at a siege, where
convenient room is not made for the Convoys. My randezvous a Marseilles,
frustrated my design against Provence, and opened the eyes of the French King
to spy his advantage, by diversion in Turine; where he made war with security,
forced me to retreat with great danger, gained credit with the States of Italy
by the action, and had hazarded all the estates you hold there, had he known as
well to use, as perform his undertakings.

The difficulty of recruiting your Armies in Italy by supplies from Spain, when
requisite, upon any misadventure; and the propensity of those States to Revolt
from you, must incline you by assaulting France, to prevent that King from
casting his thoughts to disturb you in Italy; rather than to be on the
disadvantage of an after gain, in expelling him from thence: And assure your
self, that States, and especially the Italian, have no affection but for their
interest, and will stick to you, to their own prejudice or danger, but will be
ready upon the least appearance of your declining, to espouse the quarrel of
the prevailing party, and follow the fortune of the Conqueror. Bend all your
force to recover Sienna, that other States may by that example, perceive and
fear the danger of slighting your Authority, and intermedling with strangers,
to the prejudice of your affairs: And that you may by that means cut of the
Correspondence between France and Italy.

Get perfect information of the affections, humors and interests of the
persons in greatest favor and credit with the French King, and the competitors
for great offices, and use the best means to gain the strongest parties to your
devotion; as the necessary and most excellent instruments to promote your
designs. In alliances and treaties, Esteem the removal of the French from
Piedmont, above millions of Crowns in Dower, or the most ample conditions in a
league: And endeavor earnestly to induce them to a desuetude from Arms, and a
forgetfulness of military exercise. And when an opportunity is offered to your
advantage, lose it not: As to Piedmont I will repeat my advice for recovery of
it; and believe it from my experience, to be of more importance to your
affairs, than if on the Flemish side you had bereaft the French King of a third
part of his Kingdom.

Your interest in Italy, is the main Artery by which the pulse of all your
power beats: And wherein lies the greatest mystery of your Policy: therefore
must your eyes be ever open that way, even to Jealousy: To preserve it the
better, Use all devotion and kindness to the Pope and Apostlick See; Be
courteous to all the Cardinals, Bishops, Prelates and other members of the
Court, and ever ready to defend them, and the Catholic profession. In the
Elections of Popes, when all the competitors are worthy of the dignity; Strive
not to advance one before the other: And never use any means indirect,
unlawful or unchristian, to prefer your friends or creatures to the Chair; but
look upon it as a sacred action to be left as the election of Mathias in the
tent, to the disposal of the Holy Ghost. The expression of due respects
attended, with the consideration of your Dominions situate in the midst of
Italy, and other means in your power, as King of so many Countries, and Patron
of so many great Ecclesiastical benefices, will infallibly procure you the
friendship of the greatest, and make the best amongst them dependants upon you,
without loss or hinderance to Princes of your quality, though the Pope were
elected by the votes of that party, who declared for another. But let me enjoin
you to prefer always the universal good of Christendom before your private
benefit, though the Examples of others seem to invert the Counsel I give you.
As the Dominions of the Church, are the center of Italy; So, if Sienna were
recovered, they would be surrounded with your Territories to the greater
convenience for your designs, and most commodious for an influence over the
Court of Rome: If men of Piety sit in the Chair, they will in a religious
tenderness of promoting Charity among Christians, both court and desire your
love: if the Popes be worldly minded, and study more their pleasures and
interest, then the duties of their office, (which God forbid) they will be glad
to preserve his friendship, whom they dare not displease. Stick not to power
the treasure of your bounties on that Court, in obliging the Cardinals,
Bishops, and other Prelates, by dignities and preferments in your several
Dominions; but especially them who are most intimate with the Pope, as most
useful in matters of grace and favor to be obtained from the Holy-Chair:
though you are to rely most on the Justice and equity of your Demands, and the
affection of his Holiness.

The impressions of religion are so deep in the hearts of men, that nothing can
prejudice your affairs more, than to leave in their minds an opinion of your
being disaffected to the Ministers of God: therefore if necessity force you to
break with the Pope, be sure to clear your self from the imputation of the
rupture, by making it appear, that the cause of unkindness proceeded not from
you, but from the other side: And that the course you take is not voluntary,
but upon indispensable obligations of security and self preservation. In
matters relating to a General Council, conform your self to the determinations
of the Holy-Chair; and whatever happens, let the world still perceive your
Religion is unchangeable.

As to the Venetians, you are sure of Peace with them, while you think fit not
to break the league; by reason of their fearfullness to engage in war, though
no assistance is to be expected from them for the reasons I have showed. And
that jealousy, and apprehensions of ill from the increase of power, will have
greater influence in their counsels, than any other considerations. Their long
neglect of military discipline, and disuse of Arms, their letting slip so many
brave opportunities, the distractions of this age afforded them to Aggrandize
their estate, may invite you to assault them; and their custom of making
advantage of their weak neighbors miseries, may in a manner justify it. A
slothful disposition and moderate prosperity, have inclined them to presume,
their greatness may be maintained by ordinances of peace and sober rules of the
Long robe. But if you set upon them briskly, and pursue your first impression
with Celerity to prevent their banding with other Princes; their unskilfullness
in war, the weakness of their state, and the confusions that will certainly
attend their fear of your Arms, will give you opportunity to compass some great
exploit before they awake out of sleep, or resolve what to spend, what friends
to trust, what Leaders to employ, or resume their old discipline for war. The
convenience they have to attaque you in Naples, and the inclinations of that
people, to prefer their mild, and more civil Government, and kind usage of the
inhabitants, before yours; will oblige you to get the start of them by carrying
the war to their doors, and prevent their attempts against your Dominions, by
forceing them to provide for defense of their own: Let it be your care to power
your forces into the center of their state as the way to make your self master
of the field, it being impossible for them to put Garrisons into their places
of strength, which they will first secure, and at the same time to keep the
field: And in the mean while the defect of Garrisons, Leaders provisions or
fortifications, the factions and particular discontents of persons interessed,
will certainly afford you the occasion, to possess your self of some of their
places of stength; which will be a good step to your further progress,
especially if by your Princely and Gracious deportment, you encourage others to
submit to your obedience, by granting the Burghers, Captains and Soldiers
reasonable Articles, and so good conditions, that they will have no just cause
to complain of the change of Masters. When you are Master of the field, all
places that are not strong will presently fall into your hands; which will
force them into the field to endeavor the stopping of your prevailing Arms by
battle, wherein the greatness of your strength, and expert skill of your
Soldiers, may give you assured hopes of victory over their new trained troops
and raw Companies.

Let no pretense of friendship, or professions of affection from any Prince of
Italy, move you to permit him to aggrandize his state; but be persuaded by my
advice, to keep them all within their due bounds, upon this infallible Ground,
that they are true only to their interest, and will no further adhere to you,
then while it is for their turn, but will appear against you, upon any probable
hope to better their fortune. The divisions, and partialities of Italy, make it
a matter of great difficulty for you to preserve in your obedience the States
you enjoy there, their designs, and most ardent desires, being bent to
establish a Duke at Millain; and a King at Naples, which may hold of no
superior, but reign Sovereign and Independent, as the means to weaken your
encroaching power, and to free themselves from foreign servitude: And because
they may upon all occasions treat on even terms, with such petty Princes; and
that the bonds of a common interest, which is the surest obligation, would
engage a King of Naples, and a Duke of Milan, in a foreign league of
Friendship with them, against foreign force, as involved in the like danger,
with other States of Italy, of being oppressed from abroad; whereas the
inequallity between them and you, is such that they neither dare engage in a
war against you, for fear of losing the remains of their liberty, and making
their estates victims to your wrath; nor enter into a league, to add strength
to your power, which they desire to see weakened, and increase your Authority,
whereof they are already jealous. The Pope and Venetians are great promoters
of the project I have told you; but the remedy is obvious to prevent their
designs: for if you maintain your reputation, by a constant Activity in Arms,
hold good intelligence in every State; Employ able Ministers to the Court of
Rome; make use of the divisions and factions of those Princes to your
advantage, prevent combinations amongst them, to your prejudice; keep out the
French King from Italy; and when the waters are troubled discreetly use the
Goldenhook, you may conclude your affairs safe on that side.

These observations most dear Son I leave with you, as Rules for your conduct
in Peace and War; And though the circumstances of things may vary, yet the
reason of my advice, remaining the same, will be useful for direction in most
occurrences of State. And now by the duty and gratitude you owe me your Father,
your Prince and Benefactor, I charge you strictly, and constantly to observe
with Reverence, the Laws of God and conscience, to regard them as the control
of your reasonings, and Rules of indispensable obligation in all your actions,
that no design, no act, no stratagem can be just or worthy a Prince but what is
consonant to them: And amidst the Majestic Glories of a mighty Prince, forget
not your self to be a man, and that the prerogative of your Crowns exempts you
from the jurisdiction of those tribunals, where bribery may corrupt, affections
blind, ignorance mislead, fear overawe, or impotence frustrate the judgment
given, to reserve your cause to the dreadful examination and sentence of that
Judge, who is Justice it self, and cannot be deceived; who for the sins of
Princes gives their dominions to whom he pleases, without other respects to
their Crowns, than to aggravate their offense in abusing the privileges of
their State, to the contempt of his Justice and presuming to commit such
trangressions against his Laws, which they would not permit to be done by their
Subjects against theirs. And remember you are to account to a Judge, from whom
there is no appeal, who inflicts heaviest punishments on wicked Princes, as
immediate offenders against his Majesty, and therefore most fit to be made
examples of Just Severity; as Good Kings are the immediate objects of his care
and providence, partake most of his bounty and favors, and are in affection no
less then in dignity, nearer to God than other mortals.

FINIS.

