The Oppressed man's second Outcry FOR JUSTICE, To every individual Member of
Parliament Against the unparalled Corruptions, and most cruel Oppression,
Tyranny, and incomparable Injustice exercised by the Commissioners for
Compounding sitting at Haberdashers Hall London,

Upon Cornet Christopher Cheesman, late Agent for Sequestrations in the County
of Berks, the Author hereof;

Who most humbly implores the assistance of the worthy Members and good
Patriots of this honorable Council and Commonwealth, and that some one or more
would move effectually to have his Petition and Appeal (delivered in to the
hands of Mr. Speaker, Feb. 24. last, against the said Commissioners) read, and
justice done according to the truth thereof.

This being his fifth application to this Honorable Council for Justice
against them, and above two years of his most cruel oppression by reason of
them, occasioned by his faithful discharge of Trust reposed in him by
Parliament, and under a most solemn OATH.

Deuteronomy. 1.16. I charged your Judges the same time, saying, Hear the
Controversies betwixt your brethren, and judge righteous judgment between
every man and his brother. Ye shall have no respect of persons in judgment,
but shall hear the small as well as the great. Ye shall not fear the face of
man: for the judgment is Gods.

1 Kings 8.32, That thou may condemn the wicked, to bring his wickedness
upon his own head, and justify the righteous, to give him according to his
righteousness.

Ye shall seek judgment among your selves, and know what is good, and not
cause the oppressed to cry out for the violence of the mighty. For has not the
Lord showed thee, O man, what is good, and what he requires of thee? surely to
do justice, and love mercy. And, Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto
you, even so do unto them.

Matthew. 7.12. Mal. 8. Job 35.9. and 34.4. Printed at London, 1652.

Right honorable Senators.
WOuld God I had not just cause to cry out for Justice in this extreme manner
as I have been constrained to do, many mouths together, and yet am not heard;
yea, though I have cried aloud, there is no judgment: which is a thing so
contrary to Religion, Conscience good Nature, and the Honor of men professing
Principles of God and goodness, that I am very much astonished to think of it;
and that a Parliament, the Representative Body of a Nation, which has so
abominated things of so unworthy a nature, with Declarations to the world of
their resolutions against such things, and yet should by the craft of any men
whatsoever be kept from hearing such doleful Outcries and Complaints, and not
to vouchsafe an enquiry into the matter; to see whether it be according to the
cry thereof yea or no. I am sure ye may learn so much from the pure, holy, and
just God, in the case of Sodom. Yea, though I have accused several sorts of men
with crimes of a very high nature, even breach of OATH against the great God,
and Unfaithfulness to men; offenses against which I am sure you have declared
in words to the Nation, with the greatest indignation, zeal and detestation of
any Council that ever sat upon the face of the earth: and yet for you to
suffer such evils to go unpunished, and such complainers and cryers out for
Justice against persons of such desperate principles, to go continually empty
away, will prove of very sad consequence. And for a man and his family to be
ground even unto death, for the faithful discharge of Trust reposed in him by
Parliament, in the very time of Parliament sitting by most cruel oppressive men
exercising an Arbitrary power, and can obtain no relief, nor have any manner of
justice against them, presageth no good to this Nation.

Oh what just cause have we to cry out with the Prophet, We looked for
judgment, but behold oppression; for righteousness, but behold a cry.
Judgment is far from us, neither does righteousness come near us. Judgment is
turned backward, and justice stands afar off. Truth is fallen in the streets,
and equity cannot enter. Yea, truth fails; and he that refraineth from evil,
makes himself a prey. Oh the experiences we have of these things! See we not
evil men encouraged in their evil ways, and the good discouraged in the ways of
equity? Know we not that transgression daily multiplies, and evils enumerate,
for want of the execution of impartial Justice? Did not all Israel fear
Solomon, because they saw that the wisdom of God was in him to do justice? and
yet will not you do justice, that ye may be feared also?

Oh the insolence and violence of corrupt and unfaithful men! how merciless are
they, because the Powers frown upon such who in sincerity of heart, for public
ends discover their perfidious and abominable actings! Oh what Powers do they
unite, to destroy such who are faithful in their generation! Good Lord! how
long will thou suffer the Powers to be a terror to good works, and the
encouragement of evil! You did once cry out your selves, how grievous a curse
it would be, if God in judgment should suffer the Power of this Nation to be
made use of against it self. ( Book 1. Declar. p. 213.) But Oh how much greater
would the curse be, and more heavy judgment to this Nation, for the Sword of
Justice to be made use of contrary to the end appointed by the wise God and
Governor of the world!

There was a time when ye much complained of the late King's discountenance of
honest men. ( Book 1. Declar. p. 8, 9, 10.) Judges were turned out of their
places, for refusing to go against their Oaths and Consciences; others so
awed, that they durst not do their duties? Lawyers were checked for being
faithful to their Clients: Sollicitors and Attorneys were threatened, and some
punished, for following lawful Suits; by which means, all the approaches to
Justice were interrupted and forecluded, whereby the common Justice of the
Nation was much endangered, not only by opening ways of employment in places
of Trust and Power, to men of weak parts, but giving occasion to Bribery,
Extortion, and Pa^tiality. Honest men were so far from being employed in any
Place of Trust and Power, that they were neglected, discountenanced, and upon
all occasions injured and oppressed.

O worthy Patriots! are not such evils to be as much abhorred now as then? And
are they not as destructive to Humane society now as then? Will not liberty
given men to exercise Arbitrary power as surely bring destruction upon you and
all that take part with you, as upon the late King and his adherents? If the
audaciousness of men employed by you be such, that they dare, even under your
noses, in the time of your sitting, to trample upon and contemn all your Laws,
and break your OATH, and, as it were in defiance of you and your Authority,
admit of no other guide then their own Wills, What can be expected, but utter
ruin and desolation? The Law (said M. Pym) puts a difference betwixt good and
evil, betwixt just and unjust. Take away the Law, and all things will fall into
confusion; every man will become a Law unto himself: which, in the depraved
condition of Humane nature, must needs produce many great enormities: Lust will
become a law, and Envy will become a law, Covetousness and Ambition will
become laws; and what dictates, what decisions such Laws will produce, may
easily be discerned. And it may as easily be discerned, of what desperate
Principles such men are, who dare upon all occasions make use of the name of
their God, to bring about their evil designs; and what the effects thereof
will be. And is it not as clear, that BATEMAN, JENINGS, and RVSDEN had Laws to
walk by? See else your Declarations, Ordinances, Orders, Instructions, and
OATHS, from time to time, since 1643.

April. 1. you said it was most agreeable to common Justice, that the
Sequestrations should be converted and applied toward the supportation of the
great charges of the Commonwealth, and for easing the good people therein. And
if any person whatsoever ( Aug. 19. 1643.) should wittingly or willingly
conceal any the Sequestrations, That then he should forfeit treble the value
thereof. Committees and Sequestrators were strictly commanded to use their best
care and diligence in managing the said estates. ( Nov. 18. 1643.) And in all
particulars to guide themselves by the Ordinances of Parliament. Complaints by
you were made, that the unfaithful acting of Sequestrators and Committees was
very prejudicial and disserviceable to the Commonwealth: for remedy whereof,
you imposed on them an OATH, to prevent the like in time to come. ( May 27,
1644.) And all Committees and Sollicitors for Sequestrations, were to return a
List of all estates that were or had been under Sequestration, to Goldsmiths
Hall London. (Nov. 10. 1646. And to whom the said estates were let with the
value of them before the Wars: that such estates should be let at the utmost
improved yearly value that any man would give for the same. ( December. 8. 1646.)
That all Leases and Grants at under-value, should be void. And for better
regulating Sequestrations, and reforming and preventing abuses therein, you did
Ordain, that all Sollicitors should send up to the Treasurers at Guild Hall
London, a true and perfect Inventory of all personal estates by them
sequestered, with an exact Particular of all annual Rents, Profits, and Fines
arising or issuing of all Houses and Lands. ( Aug. 6. 1648) You did again (for
the better regulating reforming, and preventing of abuses and miscarriages in
the managing the said Sequestrations) ordain, ( Aug. 25. 1648.) that every
person or persons employed, or to be employed, should take the Oath prescribed
by your Ordinance of May 27. 1643. And if any should be found negligent, or not
perform their duties (as you then feared too many would not) you did then
ordain, that Capt. William Stevenson should be authorized to bring all such
persons to answer their contempt of Parliamentary authority, and to receive
condign punishment according to their demerits. And yet further to manifest
your disapprobation of the Sequestrators negligent managing the Sequestrations
in the several Counties, and your own resolutions and desires to improve the
same to the advantage of the Commonwealth, in order to abatement of some of the
Taxes therein) did settle the same in the hands of the Commissioners (for
compounding with Delinquents) and Subcommissioners in the several Counties of
England; and did engage every person employed in or about Sequestrations, under
a most solemn OATH, prescribed by your Act of April 15. 1650. to put your Act
of Jan. 29. 1649. in execution, with all Orders, Ordinances, and Instructions
of Parliament, for the right managing thereof.

And truly, had not I seriously believed that you did really intend those you
employed should have guided themselves by your Laws and Instructions, I would
never have run my self upon so desperate a Rock, in asserting and vindicating
your power and Authority, which has proved very destructive to my self and
family; and yet you will not do me right against those capital offenders I have
so often complained of to this honorable Council: which is contrary to your
engagements against such offenders, and promises of encouragement to
well-doers. I very well remember your resolutions once, to inflict exemplary
punishment upon all such, according to their demerits, as should be found
refractory and disobedient unto your commands made known to them; and that you
would use all means to bring such to a legal Trial for such their offenses. (
Book 1. Decl. p. 696.) And you did faithfully promise and engage also, that
such persons which perform their duties to the Public, should be protected and
secured, in their persons, liberties, and estates, by Authority of Parliament:
and this you would faithfully perform, according to your former engagements, as
you then said, ( Book 1. Decl. p. 377.) You promised very solemnly also, that
you would be willing and ready upon all occasions, to assist and protect all
those that were employed in the Service of the Commonwealth in the Battle of
Edgehill, with your lives and fortunes, to the utmost of your power; and
ordered the same to be recorded in Parliament. ( Book 1. Decl. p. 744.) It Is
now above ten years since ye made this promise; which I have a right to in
particular. Neither was I faithful to this honorable Council and Commonwealth
there only, but have so continued ever since, and never brake my engagements,
nor have I been found disobedient to your commands: therefore I now expect
assistance from this honorable Council, according to your promises and solemn
engagements, not only at that time, but many times since. And I hope you will
do me Justice, otherwise I see nothing but destruction attending me and my
family: a very evil requital for my faithfulness, and a bad example to others:
for if such abominable things be suffered, what can be expected, but the
filling the whole Nation with Bribery, Extortion, Partiality, Perjury, and all
manner of oppression and cruelty? For if most cruel oppression must be the
portion of him which complains of such offenses or offenders, Who will then
complain, or who will be honest amongst men? Nay, who dares to be honest, when
he shall see another stripped and whipped out of his livelihood for so being? But
my case is such at this time: I am most cruelly oppressed by unreasonable men,
who have feloniously broken the Laws of this Nation and robbed me of my
livelihood, and also endeavor to take away my good name; and all for being
faithful to what you had engaged me by OATH; and yet to obtain no manner of
Justice against them, nor the least encouragement from this honorable Council
who employed me, being the Supreme Authority, is a very sad thing to me and my
family, and of a very dangerous nature to the Public. And that all your
Promises, Protestations, solemn OATHS and Imprecations, with your most
transcendent, Declarations to the world on the behalf of Justice and
Righteousness, should no more be regarded, is a fearful judgment, and a most
grievous curse upon this Nation. And for you to make so much ado about making
Laws, and prescribing Rules to walk by under several OATHS, to prevent Fraud
and Cozenage, and yet not to hear complaints against such, is most incredible
to any who shall only read your Declarations.

But further, may it please this honorable Council, because I would not, if it
be possible, any more trouble you with such extraordinary and unusual
Complaints and Outcries, the original hereof being the unparalleled
corruptions and wilful contempt of THO. BATEMAN, EDW. JENINGS, and JOHN RVSDEN,
late Sub-commissioners for Sequestrations in the County of Berks, being
authorized thereunto by your Act of Jan. 25. 1649. who had engaged themselves
under your most solemn OATH, prescribed by your Act of April 15. 1650. yet
notwithstanding, though they had held up their hands, and sworn by the Name of
the eternal God, to walk according to your Laws and Instructions, they
presently turned their backs upon all, as if they had neither feared God, nor
reverenced man. Upon which, (about the beginning of November, 1650.) I, in as
Christian like manner as possible I could conceive of, repaired to Haberdashers
Hall, and in private acquainted the Commissioners for Compounding with the
same. They presently pretended a great deal of good will toward me, saying
they had heard so much as I then told them, by others; and further, that the
Parliament would consider such men as I for our faithfulness. But after they
had paused a little upon the business, they told me I must produce witness: and
so they put me upon an expensive way of prosecution, about four months
together, before they would suffer the business to come to a hearing. And then
they acquitted the said Sub-commissioners, notwithstanding I had produced 7
Witnesses against them; who did also make it appear by Oath upon Record, that
the said Subcommissioners were guilty of what I accused them with.
Nevertheless, the Commissioners for Compounding sent them home to their Trust
which they had so much abused, but turned me out of mine.

And withal, the better to carry on their design, they sent one Gardner to be
Agent to the said Subcommissioners. After which, they went on in their old way
of deceit about ten months without any alteration, as if, in defiance of the
Parliament, or any that did prosecute them they would confirm all they had
done. But I being still in prosecution of the business against them, did, upon
the first of January last, bring the business to another hearing: upon which
day, I produced the evidence of above 40 Witnesses more. And though it then
appeared, by the testimony of above 70 Witnesses that they damnified the
Commonwealth above 1500 l. per an. yet would they not dismiss them in open
Court to the terror of evil doers, as they ought to have done, but deferred it
till another day, and then did it in private. All which implies a grand
Confederacy between the Commissioners and Subcommissioners; and indeed, must
needs render the Parliament unto the world as a mere cipher, and both the
Commissioners and Subcommissioners to be Lords Paramount unto them; neither
would they restore me to my employment, but continue the said Gardner to this
day: and they were so far from giving me reparations, that they would not give
me money expended. So that although at first (as many can witness) honest,
religious conscientious godly men, was the character I gave of them; time and
woeful experience makes me confess my mistake, and has taught me to say, That
they are more cruel then murderers, and more ungentile then common thieves.

Leaving the consideration hereof to the consideration of this honorable
Council, I remain, expecting justice.

Christopher Cheesman.


