A MANIFESTO Of the most SERENE PRINCE CHARLES LODWICK Count Palatin of the
Rhin, and Vicar of the Holy Empire, Containing his ancient and Patromoniall
Right to the said Vicarship within the Circles of the Rhin, Suabland, and the
Franconian Territories.

Wherein there are diverse reflections upon the Aurea Bulla and the fundamental
Laws of the Empire.

Concordat cum originali in latin I du pont

Fiat Justicia, et ruat caelum,
Multo magis Imperium.
LONDON Printed for Richard Lownds at the white Lion, near the little North
door of Paul's, 1657.

The Manifesto of the most gracious Prince Charles Lodwick Count Palatin of the
Rhin, and Vicar of the holy Empire;
Containing an Abridgement of the Reasons for his Right to the Vicarship of the
Empire, within the Circle of the Rhin, of Swabland, and the Franconian Right.
IT would without doubt be superfluous to make a Discourse extend too long to
demonstrat, that the Vicarship of the Empire within the Circle of the Rhin, of
Swabland, and Franconian territory, appertains by the decease of the Emperor
Ferdinand the 3, unto the most gracious Prince Charles Loduick, Elector of the
holy Empire, etc.

In regard it is a Right which the Testimony of all Historians, the constitution
of the Golden Bull, the Letters and Patents of Emperors, the inveterat Custom
and Examples of his Ancestors, the last Instrument of Peace concluded at
Munster, and Osnabrug, and in a word, the Public knowledge, and fundamental
Laws of the Empire do put him in possession of; In so much that it is
supervacaneous to seek for proofs or reasons to maintain the truth of it; Now
those proofs are warrants so well known, and so clear that we need not turn
over many Books, or consult with the Archives of the Palatin Chancery, or to
allege the authority of Authors whereof they are full, to this purpose, there
being documents, and rules so evident in the point, that there cannot be more
holy, and more authentic for this purpose in all the world.

Notwithstanding in regard there is nothing so inviolable, and sacred either by
its own authority and right, but it may be controverted, It is just to satisfy
the ignorance of some, the curiosity of others, and the public interest herin,
which we shall do in few lines.

To which effect we must mark at the first entrance that which was sufficiently
proved elsewhere, and made free from doubt to all those that have any knowledge
of History in times past, that this dignity of the Vicarship of the Empire was
acquired by the ancient Count Palatins of the Rhin time out of mind Vigore
Praefecturae Praetorii, Maioratus, domus et palatii Comitatus Palatini, as
Counts and Maires of the palace, whose rank and dignity are too well known to
be expressd at large in this place. And it is no wonder that this so eminent
charge, giving them the prime rank, and principal authority in the Court of
their masters, with the general intendency of their affairs, and of justice,
and that by virtue of this rank, and this authority they were establishd either
in their absence or by decease in the administration, and regency of the
Empire; hence it proceeded that they had the Vicarship of the Empire which was
establishd in the house of the Count Palatins of the Rhin.

In the second place this Right was acquired by the Count Palatins of the Rhin
not in paper or parchment only, but it was put in practice and exercisd by a
great number of them before the creation of the Electors, and a great while
before the constitution of the golden bull, which is evident by the example of
Conradus after the death of Henry, and of Lewis after the death of the Emperor
Rodulphus the first, and of Rodolp father in law to Charles the fourth, and of
Robert the elder, all Count Palatins of the Rhin. Moreover the Emperor Lewis
of Bavaria in his constitution publishd at Frankfort in the year 1339. to show
at one time the ancientnes, as well as the practice of this Right, speaks in
these terms upon this subject, Quod longa et probata consuetudine inconcusse a
Majorum observatione retro observata vacant Imperio jus administrandi Imperii
jura, feuda conferendi et caetera negotia disponendi Palatino Rheni debeatur,
viz. that by long and approved custom observed constantly by our Ancesters,
the right of administering the Empire in the vacancy, the letting of leases,
conferring of fees, and the disposing of all other affairs is due unto the
Count Palatin of the Rhin.

In the third place this Right has bin authentiquely confirmed to the Count
Palatins of the Rhin by the golden Bull made by the Emperor Charles the
fourth, which serves for a Rule and fundamental law of the Empire, wherein
having first treated of the duty, and dignity of the Electors in general, it
is formally, and in express terms specified in the 5 title called de jure
Comitis Palatini, et Saxoniae Ducis, Quoties insuper, ut praemittitur, sacrum
vacare continget Imperium, Illustris Comes Palatinus Rheni, sacri Imperii
Archidapifer ad manus futuri Regis Romanorum in partibus Rheni, et Sueviae, et
in jure Franconico, ratione Principatus, ceu Comitatus Palatini privilegio esse
debeat Provisor Imperii, cum potestate Iudicia exercendi etc. which is to say,
whenever it shall happen, as 'twas said before, that the holy Empire shall be
vacant, the Illustrious Count Palatin of the Rhin, Archsewer of the Roman
Empire, in the place of the King of the Romans, by privilege ought to be Regent
or Vicar of the Empire, within the Circles of the Rhin, of Suabland, and of the
Franconian Right, by virtue of the Principality or County Palatin of the Rhin,
with power to execute judgments etc.

In the fourth place in the golden Bull of the Emperor Sigismund it is
specified, Electores, et Comites Palatinos diuturna temporum praescriptione
inconcusse habuisse Uicariatum Imperii, and possedisse legitime, viz. that the
Electors, and Counts Palatins by long prescription of time had constantly the
Vicarship of the Empire, and legally possessd it; It appears also by the
letters and patents of the succeeding Emperors until Ferdinand the second, as
also by the examples of Robert, Lewis, Frederique the victorious, Philip,
Lewis, Otho, Henry, John Casimer, and Frederique the fifth his now Elector at
Highnesses Father Charles Lewis, the said Counts Palatins of the Rhin since
the time of the golden Bull, and following the customs of their Ancesters have
bin confirmd in this privilege in the knowledge and sight of the Empire, and
exercised the said office without any contest.

In the first place by the Instrument of peace concluded at Ofnabrug, and
Munster, his electorat Highness Charles Lodwick having bin formally put, and
reentred in the possession of the Palatinat of the Rhin, with all and evry of
his Rights, royalties, Prerogatives and privileges which appertain unto him, all
which the Counts Palatins of the Rhin enjoyd before the last war of Bohemia, and
having in order thereunto receavd the investiture in the year 1652 of the
Emperor Ferdinand lately dead in the same terms, It follows, that, without
any matter of doubt, he was restord thereby to the possession of the right of
the Vicarship which is an inseparable dependency of the Palatinat of the Rhin,
which cannot be questioned with the least appearance of ju^tice, and without the
violation, and manifest breach of all that may be called sacred, or authentical
in the Empire.

And although in the same instrument of peace the Electorall dignity of the
Counts Palatins of the Rhin as also the upper Palatinat with the County of Cham
has bin transported to the house of Bavaria, with all the royalties, Rights
and privileges thereof, and that by virtue of this Transport the Elector of
Bavaria pretends by his patents to have right to the Vicarship, There is none
but may see by the reasons and authorities that shall be alleged the small
foundation which such pretensions have, and consequently what consideration is
to be had in this rancounter.

It is therefore to be observd, first, that not alleging any other proof for his
pretnded Right to the Vicarship but the said Instrument of peace, he does
witness himself thereby that this Right does naturally belong unto the Counts
Palatins of the Rhin, and not to the Dukes of Bavaria, and that no special
exclusion, or any formal concession whatsoever is able to deprive the one, or
establish the other in any such right.

In the second place, It Is not said in that Instrument of peace, that all the
rights and prerogratives of the Electors, and Counts Palatin of the Rhin are
transported to the house of Bavaria, so that he may draw any consequence thence
to this purpose, but only such Rights that are annexd to the Electoral dignity
alone, whereof he can make no advantage for his present pretension.

In the third place, It is not sufficient only to allege in gegeneral terms,
and attribut to himself the Investiture of so Eminent, and considerable a
Dignity, but an express and solemn exclusion should have bin usd (as it is in
other articles of lesser consequence) to deprive a House of the possession of a
Right of this nature which has bin appertaining unto it so many Ages by a
peaceable and entire possession, confirmd by so many public and authentic
Acts, and fortified by so many examples: Nor can he assume to himself that
Right without a manifest contravention and breach of the Treaty, or Instrument
of peace which makes no mention thereof at all, and which does reestablish his
Electorat Highness Charles Lodwick in the Rights and privileges which the
County or principality of the Rhin can claym from his Ancestors.

In the fourth place, It it is not only by the said Instrument of peace, and
the vigor of the general Amnestia, which annuls all matters passd, that his
Electoral Highness claymes a continuance of this Right, but also by the
express Investiture of diverse Rights which his Electorall Highness receavd from
the late Emperor Frederique the third, which rights draw their original and
source only from the dignity of the Vicarship of the Empire, as Jus succedendi
in bona liberorum ex illegitima coitione naterum; Jus capiendi, et sibi ad
dicendi in proprietatem, and servitutem eos qui sine dominio et lare aberrant
etc.

(...) ny, as the title does intimate, and as it is treated in the text it self,
which has bin ill translated into Dutch, and against the tenor of the express
terms of the original.

Furthermore, It is to be considered, that as this dignity of Vicarship of the
Empire, has been appropriated to the Counts Palatin of the Rhin, by virtue only
of the Principality or the County, so the same Office of Vicarship appertains
to the Dukes of Saxony, within the rights and territories ot Saxony, not in
regard of the electoral dignity, sed ratione cujusdam Palatinatus in Saxonia,
and praefecturae etiam Palatii veteris, in regard of a Palatinate that he had
in Saxony, and a superintendency he had in the old Imperial Palace, as diverse
Annals, and Historians bear witness. Besides, although there were diverse other
Palatins in the Empire; Yet all the world knows there were Arch-Palatines by
whom they were governd, amongst whom the Count Palatin of the Rhin, and the
Duke of Saxony had the first rank, and were as it were their heads and
Directors.

In fine, it is not said in the Bulla Aurea byvertu of the Duchy of Bavaria, nor
of the Electorat, but of the County Palatin whereunto this right was annexed,
as being the prime and fairest part of the Country, and the nearest and most
convenient to exercise the said Office within the precincts of the Franconian
territories, as the Archbishop of Mentz has the first rank among the German
Prelates, by reason of the situation of his Country.

On other side, to invalidat these reasons, or show that the dependence of the
Vicarship is upon the Electoral dignity, it avayles little to allege either the
text of the Dutch translation of the Golden Bull (which is ill translated as
has bin formerly said) and against the express terms of the original, or to
have recours in this particular to the Arrchidapifer, or Archsewership, which
is given to the said Count Palatin in the said Bull, or to that of Elector,
which is added in other Imperial constitutions to the Count Palatin of the
Rhin, together with the Vicarship; for these are too feeble exceptions, and too
gross subtilties to prevail in this business, having such weak reflections;
In regard that neither the one nor the the other are found inserted in an infinite
number of Acts which have passed, relating to the Vicarship of the Count
Palatin.

But above all, there is none so unfurnished with judgment but may plainly see
that this title of Elector is given to distinguish them from Cade^s or younger
brothers of the same house, not as a word of disposition or connection, as the
Schools speak, but purely and simply, as terms of Enuntiation. But speaking of
the right of the Counts Palatin of the Rhin, the possessory titles are added,
whereof the principal is yet conserved; nor can it be pretended that this
addition can bring with it the least prejudice touching the source and
dependency of their Right to the Vicarship of the Empire; Insomuch that it would
be absurd to infer any thing thence to prejudice their just title in this
point.

And as the Elector of Bavaria cannot make a Boukler of this Instrument of
peace for the establishment of his imaginary Right with the least pretext, or
color of Justice, but rather clean contrary he does thereby overthrow the very
ground of his pretensions, so much less may he rely upon any Imperial
concession, which may favor him to this effect.

First, he cannot advantage himself of any that could have bin granted him
before the last peace, and during the wars, to this purpose, because it was cut
off, and formally annulled by the Instrument of peace in Artic. Pal: cassatis
iis quae in contrarium acta sunt, etc.

In the second place, he cannot understand thereby the letter of Investiture
granted to the Duke Maximilian his father during the wars in the year 1638.
where among other things there is express mention made of the Investiture of
the Vicarship, because it was entirely dashed; first by the Article
fore-alleged of the Instrument of peace, where it is said, Collatis iis, etc.

Secondly by the expedition of another Letter of investiture, whereof there
happning no death of Vassal or Lord, there was no need, had not the first bin
totally annulled.

Thirdly, by the promise which his sacred Imperial Majesty had given unto his
Electoral H^g^nesse, as well by word of mouth, as by writing, or to insert
Clausulam Cassatoriam within the new letter of Investiture of the Elector of
Bavaria, or to give the said Elector Palatin Rescriptum Cassatorium.

In the third place, which doubtless ought to be specially observed, that his
sacred Imperial Majesty within the new Letters of Investiture which he gave to
the Elector of Bavaria, in the year 1652. there ^s not only no mention made of
the Vicarship bu^ there is not a word inserted, that the Elector Max^milian of
Bavaria was formerly invested therein by any preceding Letter of Investiture
which he had until his happy death. But on the contrary for an evidence in
favor of the Elector Palatin it is said in generral, that the Elector of Bavaria
ought to be invested with the Electoral dignity, and the upper County Palatin,
as the Instrument has it expressly, as it may be seen in a coppie of the said
letter of Investiture, which his sacred Imperial Majesty a little before his
death, and namely the tenth of March 1637. did graciously communicate unto the
Elector Palatin.

In so much than all the instances and prayers of the Elector of Bavaria proud
not only unprofitable for to cause the Vicarship to be incerted in the said
Letter of Investiture, but also is Imperial Majesty writ again the same time
unto the Elector Palatin, that he ^new very well the advice, and remonstrances
that were presented unto him touching this matter, which he did put in mature
deliberation, and in effect had such regard thereof, that he causd that new
letter of Investiture which was accorded to the Elector of Bavaria to be
restraind, and limited, as the transcript thereof bears witness.

Out of the r^as^ns before allegd it is easy to infer that the authentical and
privilegd Right which is confirmd without contradiction to his Electorall
Highness the Palatin of the Rhin, could not be taken away from him by any
particular concession before or after the said Treaty in any way what^o^v^r to
his prejudice.

To conclude, without extending this discourse furth^r, or use any farr-fetchd
proofs upon a matter so clear and evident, since his Highness the Elector
Palatin Prince Charles Lodwick, is reinvested with the charge of the Vicarship
by virtue of the County Palatin of the Rh^n, as a prerogrative inseparably
annexd thereunto, acquired by his Ancestors so many Ages passed, confirmd by a
special previlege in the Aurea Bulla which serves as a fundamental law to the
Empire, authorizd by so many Charters, and particular diplomataes of the
Emperors, and Kings of the Romans, In a word, by an Immemorial observance, and
public Right so long a tract of time, and particularly by the last Instrument
of peace at Munster, and Osnabrug, And the Empire being now vacant, his
Electorall Highness has undertaken and does take upon him the provision, and
the Administration of the Empire within the circles of the Rhin, of Swabland,
and the Franconian territories, not doubting but he will be acknowledgd
accordingly, and maintaind in a peaceable and entire possession of his Right;
Therefore as his Electoral Highness does promise favorable audience to all the
world, and to administer justice, and right to evry one, so that none shall
have any cause of complaint; so he pretends to reserve expressly all the ways,
and lawful means that shall conduce to the defense of his Right, against all
such that shall attempt to disturb him in the exercise thereof, or make any
hindrance of his Administration.

Made at Heidelburg under the Seal of his Electorall Highness Palatin, the the
first of May 1657.
FINIS.

