His MAJESTY THE King of Swedens LETTER TO THE STATES GENERAL OF THE UNITED
PROVINCES.

Printed Anno Domini 1675.

His Majesty the King of Sweden's Letter to the States General of the United
Provinces.
WE CHARLES by the Grace of God King of Sweden, etc. To the High and Mighty
Lords, the States General of the United Province.

High and Mighty, how great have been the Friendships, and how considerable the
Alliances, which have always past between Our Kingdom and the United Provinces,
no person can be ignorant of, that shall have reflected upon the memorable
Monuments of their preservation; For the Faith, by which they are maintained,
is most plain and unsuspected to all men, and the signal constancy is equally
known, by which they have continued so long unmoved. The transmission of this
Faith, together with the Inheritance of Our Kingdom, We have taken so to heart,
that we are resolved, as well to discharge our selves in point of affection to
our Friends and Allies, as to follow the footsteps of our Predecessors in other
Actions of Honor and Glory. Wherefore we have always taken especial care, not
only to stand firm to that ancient Tie, but also to make it yet stricter, by
the addition of New Obligations; which being evident to all that shall
consider, how readily we our selves have either given the occasion of
strengthening our Leagues by a still closer Union, or accepted of it, when it
presented it self; we make no question, but when you your selves shall reflect
upon the many Advantages in these conjuncture of affairs, which we have
neglected, together with the tedious troubles and difficulties, which we have
willingly undergone, in order to the welfare of you, our good Friends and
Allies; You will find no place to doubt of our fidelity toward you: while we
had these things under consideration, and were contriving, how we might join
Counsels with you, both for the restoring of a General Peace, and for the
securing of it, when restored, and even promising to our selves with great joy,
the hopes of seeing that Peace spedily effected, and your Affairs by the
blessing of Almighty God happily composed: We were surprised to understand,
that instead of the friendly inclinations, which we expected from you, you were
even at that time upon consultations of War, and come already to a resolution
of Levying of Forces, and employing them against Us; and that only for this
reason, that, since the Elector of Brandenburgh, contrary to the hopes he had
given us, by a Treaty lately concluded with us, (whose only Scope is the quiet
of the Empire) and not regarding of that Instrument of Peace, in the Guarranty
whereof we are likewise concerned; and so not adjusting his proportion of
Forces, by Rates, with the other Members of the Empire, in order to a Common
defense, but by sending a distinct and formed Army, has taken such violent
Counsels, as are neither agreeable to the procuring of the pretended Peace, nor
indeed safe to us, in regard that they increase those evils the Empire has so
long labored under, and endanger those Interests, which we have a just right
unto, by Virtue of the Treaty of Westphalia; we upon the consideration
aforesaid, have been necessiated not to omit or neglect any of those things,
which we are obliged to by the Guarranty of the said Treaty of Westphalia, or
by the consideration of our proper security. And this is a matter of such a
quality, as, whether we consider our good affections toward you, or our own
indefagitable endeavors, for the procuring of a Public Peace, we cannot yet
but be exceedingly moved at; little expecting, that we, who have so firmly
adhered to the ancient friendship between Our Kingdom, and Your State, and ever
preserved it inviolably, and in preference to all other considerations
whatsoever: We, who have been ever ready to oblige your Commonwealth with all
offices of kindness; and ever professed to do whatsoever might conduce to the
strengthening of our mutual Alliance, should come at last to be treated by you,
not as Confederates, but as Enemies: In which matter, whether you have requited
us well or ill, We Appeal to your own Justice. Nor can the pains, which we have
impartially taken, for the restoring of Peace to the World, and to You, seem to
merit at your hands, that any such Counsels should find place with you, as may
endanger either our Security, or the diminution of our Honor and Safety. That
passage of yours is indeed praiseworthy, where you profess your care of your
Alliances and Confederates; But while you persuade others by your own Example,
that mutual Faith is not to be broken; you must also needs determine it to be
unjust, that others should therefore Arm against us, because we neither can,
nor will be wanting to our Confederate, or to the Treaty, to which we are
Sworn. Nor is indeed our Treaty with the most Serene and most Potent King of
France, so qualified, as that it may be called a New one, or such as owes its
right and force to the present Commotions only, but stands upon such
foundations, as are much antecedent in time and date to the War, in which you
are now involved, and requires the same care from us, upon occasion even of the
present state of Affairs, which had been as much our concern, although the War
had not happened between the Most Christian King, and you; which has thus
unhappily brought so many Princes and States of Europe into mutual effusion of
blood. And truly if the Obligations of Oaths in Treaties, may pass for any
security to the Allies, it is to be hoped, you will esteem your selves engaged,
so to understand the cause of your other Confederates, that at the same time
you take care, it be not to our prejudice, since we, who have merited nothing
of this nature from you, are likewise in Alliance with you, and have Treaties
between us ancient, and frequently renewed: Neither are we so transported with
a blind desire of War, as to design the destruction of your Confederate, but
only intent upon a timely obviating and preventing the dangers we are exposed
to, by his Preparations, so far as is necessary for our own Safety. But if you
pursue other Counsels, it will be in effect, not so much to stand to your
Treaty, or undertake the defense of your Confederate, as to countenance his
dangerous proceedings against us, which so much as to suspect in you, will not
consist with the unfeigned and sincere affection, we have ever paid you. And as
the matter in question between Us, and the Elector of Branderburgh, is wholly
remote from what concerns your State, regarding only the quiet of Germany, and
looking wholly that way, to wit, that the Treaty of Westphalia be not totaly
trampled upon, and its Articles vilified and despised; So that we must appear,
to have rather desired the Peace of the Empire, than defended it; So neither
can our Arming give You any just cause of offense, since the pure necessity of
looking to Our selves has obliged Us to this Preparation. For, there is no War
intened upon You, which even then for Your Safty sake We declined, when the bad
condition of Your Affairs, and the just confidence of Our Success might have
invited Us thereunto: Nor besides that can there be any damage or danger
apprehended by You, form Our Preparations, which might divert the Assistance of
Your Confederates, and that may hasten Your destruction, or obstruct the
Recovery of what You have Lost; For it has pleased the Divine Bounty, so to
dispose of You, that standing now upon Your own legs again, the accession of
other helps will not be needful, for the recovery or preservation of Your
Commonwealth; much less those helps, which must bring danger to the Treaty of
Westphalia, (which will be likewise Your own Intrest to preserve inviolable) in
the subvertion of so many States of the Empire, whose Houses lie buried in the
ruins of the War, and in the sighs and tears of so many miserable and
perishing persons. In contemplation wherefore of all these things We cannot
doubt, but your selves will determine, that to employ your Arms against Us,
cannot be just because not neccessary; and therefore the more unexcusable,
since all hopes of Peace being taken away (which began now to appear again)
without any present enforcing danger, a door is opened for a new War, whereof
no man living can foretell the end. But above all other mischiefs, that will
probably ensue upon this War, how dreadful will the consideration be, of those
terrible Assaults of the Ott^man Fury, upon that ancient Bulwark of
Christendom, the Kingdom of Poland, and the forsaken State of the Christian
Intrest, while the Christian Princes and Commonwealths are engaged in mutal
rage and destruction, then which nothing can be more welcome to Turkish
Tyranny, or more conducing to the Imposition of that Yoke upon the Christian
Name? But it is now in Your power, to provide for the divisions of Christendom,
and the concerns of Your Confederate by a remedy more gentle and safe, then can
be found in the continuation of the present Ware, or the addition of a fresh
one, which is no other, then your Resolution to persuade him by a Friendly
Admonition, not to pursue his present design, but to incline to better
Counsels, and by a speedy Peace to out off and remove all impediments, and
arising difficulties. And that you may be the better assured of our peaceful
intentions, we most solemnly protest unto you, that as it is a matter of great
grief unto us, that the Elector of Brandenburgh should have too hastily
embraced such Counsels, as are neither consistent with the Treaty made with us,
not the sincere affection we have always borne unto him, and to the Peace and
the care of the promotion thereof, which he pretended to undertake in a common
concern with us, so likewise, as soon as the Elector either of his own accord,
or by persuasion, and the interposition of your good Offices, shall be moved to
retire with his Army, and shall proceed to such Counsels, as shall not
obstruct, but saciliate the publik quiate; and that we shall perceive a
sufficient provision to be made for the Peace of Westphalia, and for our own
Safety, which depends upon its true and faithful observance and warranty, that
we will then meet him withal the readyness imaginable, in recorning to our
former mutual confidence, and will immediately withdraw our Forces out of all
such the Elector's Territories, as they have had Orders to march into: we will
take care so to act, as that it may be visible to the whole World, that in the
employing of our Armies we are not governed by any desires of bringing on one
Ware by another, or of asisting such endeavors, to oppose the Peace, and
design the oppression of others, much less to intend by, the seizure and
possession of any place belonging to the Elector, the Empire, or any other
whatsoever; but do purely look to the promotion of Peace, and the defense of
our own just Rights and Alliances. We hope also, that this assurance and Faith
which we give you, for the truth and fidelity of our Zeal to the Peace, may be
sufficient for your reliance and satisfaction, and may produce such effects, as
shall let You see Your selves that there is no just cause for the drawing Your
Forces upon Us, but that You will apply Your selves to such considerations and
measures, as may evidence those generous and frequen^ Protestations of Your
good inclinations to Peace, and confirm Our hopes, of finding Your proceedings
eaqual and proportionable to the good affections, We have for your selves, and
all Your concerns.

But if it should happen otherwise, which God forbid, We shall bear Our selves
upon the Justice that is on Our side, being most confident, that Our Cause and
good intentions will have together with the Divine Assistance all the Success
that can be desired, and the favor and encouragement of all the Lovers of
Peace and Justice. In the mean time, We have not receded in the least from the
Resolution We have always owned, of living amicably with You, nor shall We be
found, to have remitted any thing of the desire We have always entertained of
preserving the Public and Common Tranquillity, and of contending with You only
by such arguments of Friendship and good will that it may be a question,
whether We are more ready, or You more inclined to such endeavors and methods,
as may prove effectual for the lengthning and preserving of Our mutual
Frindship, and the continuation of it to posterity. All which Our Extraordinary
Ambassador and Chancellor of Our Court, the Noble and Right-trusty Edward
Ehrensteen, Hereditary Lord of Forsbygard, etc. having Orders to express more
at large, We refur our selves to him, and so concluding these presents, We most
heartily recommend You to Almighty God, the Author of Peace, wishing You all
happiness and prosperity. Dated, etc. the 5th. of December, 1674.

Your good Friend and Confederate, CHARLES. H. HOGHUSEN.


