THE LAMB Contending with the LION.

By Christopher Chisman, a Free Commoner of England* who was unjustly
apprehended (contrary to the Law,) and detained prisoner in White Hall 18.
days, without any crime laid to his charge, as in this ensuing discourse is
further manifested.

Whereunto is annexed a Letter sent by the foresaid Cornet Chisman, to the
Lievt. Genesis Cromwell: with his Answer thereunto.

Romans 2.1. Therefore thou art in-excusable O man, whosoever thou art, that
Judge: for wherein thou judge another thou condemnest thy self, for thou
that judge do the same things.

Verse. 3. And think thou this O man, that judge them which do such things,
and do the same, that thou shall escape the judgment of God.

Printed by the same Authority which caused the Army to oppose the Parliament,
in the year 1649.

An Epistle to all Impartial and Un-byassed people of England, who desire to
live within the bounds of Law and Reason, and would not have their ears bored
through, to become slaves for ever to the lusts of any man whatsoever.
MY earnest desire is, that all such rational people of this my Native Country,
would condole with me, the deplorable condition of this our bleeding Nation; as
also, how sad it is with all the honest true-hearted Englishmen, whose ends
first in war, were not for the captivating any particular party, otherwise than
in order to Justice: for my part, I confess I have faithfully served my Country
for seven years past, under the command of the Parliament, against the late
King and his Evil Council (and truly it may well be said so, for I believe the
man of himself would (...) have ruined himself) neither did my self, with
diverse others, the fight any otherwise, than to accomplish impartial Justice,
which were the only engagements the Parliament laid upon us to carry us forth
to fight against tyranie in the late King; and truly, had the King bin
contented to have lived within the bounds of Law; he might have lived till now:
It follows, if arbytrariness took off the Kings head, the next man tracing
his steps, should alight at the same Harbor.

And I know there is no honest man that ever had any thoughts of fighting
against Persons, but Principles of injustice and unrighteous actings of men;
which in the very height thereof, the Parliament and Army had no other
Sanctuary to fly to, but their Vows and Protestations, what they would do if
God would but deliver them from their enemies; imprecating the wrath and
vengeance of heaven and earth to fall upon them, if they did not distribute
impartial Justice amongst the people. In which Declaration they positively
declare, they are fully resolved to maintain, and shall and will preserve and
keep the fundamental Laws of this Nation, for and concerning the preservation
of the lives, proprieties and liberties of the people, with all things incident
thereunto.

Did not these declared Principles raise an Army of conscientious men, who
according to sound judgment, in Conscience took up Arms for the wel-being of
the Nation? and did not many thousand upon that account bring in their plate,
with their bodkins and spoons, who want bread now for want of a settlement in
the Nation? And did not the mighty God prompt the spirits of people to these
things, to the end we should not live like the Heathen, without Laws, and
boundaries; but, that as we profess our selves to be regulated by that word of
truth, so we may really be what we seem to be? The Religion of the great Ones
of our Age, is a mere shadow, and all their pulpit-pratling is nothing; They
are only Wolves in Sheeps-clothing; they are Devils transformed into Angels of
light: but pure Religion and undefiled, is to visit the fatherless and widow,
and to keep our selves unspoted of the world; which the great Professors of our
times will not do I am sure; for they add house to house, land to land, nay
thousands to ten thousands; whiles the poor of the Kingdom are ready to starve:
yea, those usurpers of the name of Christians, who have sat in Council, and
cut off the heads of men for Tyranie, exercise more tyranie over the people
than they: witness the chiefest of all formal Professors in England, viz.
Lieut. Genesis Cromwell, who most ^mpudently committed an higher act of Tyranie
(all things consider^d) than our late King, in the very place where he sat in
judgment against the late King, and the others, who died also for tyranical
^ctions: So that it is apparent, that the Lieut. Genesis is condemned ^oth by M.
Solicitor Saint-John, and M. Pym in their speeches ^n Parliament, against the
Earl of Strafford, for says the first, Arbytrariness does make a man (or
Nation) as miserable as man or ^aw could make him: How miserable it will make
the Lieut. Genesis ^ will leave for future times to determinate; and experience
teach^th us the truth of M. Pyms words, that Arbytrariness is the semi^ary of
all evil, which causes distempers, and the consumption of ^ivil wars; for says
he, when Envy, Lust, Covetousness, and Am^ition becomes Laws, it is the cause
of all Cruelties, Blood, and ^onfusion, and is justly to be laid upon the
unjust; and this is that ^ will live and die in, for I am the same both for my
Country and my ^lf which I first engaged for; and truly, I were not fit to
live, if I ^ould prove my self such an hypocrite, as to pretend to fight for
ju^^ce seven years, devouring my native Country, and eating up the ^ead of the
hungry, for so we were forced to do, many of us having ^t above six weeks pay
in a year to maintain horse and man, and af^r seven years war, and hard service
in blood, suffering hunger and ^ld, which thousands of us have done, being very
willing to possess the promised good things, both from the Parliament and the
Army, especially the Army in their glorious Declaration of June 14. 1647. p.
40, 41. wherein they express their dislike of Arbytrariness in any person or
persons whatsoever, declaring it to all the world, that to carry on a testimony
against the injustice and unrighteousnes of men, is one of the witnesses of God
in the world. Now I say, that to fight in the field against Arbytrariness, and
to suffer it reign in the very place of the Civil Magistracy, is but to cheat
and cozen our Native Countrymen, who have labored hard to maintain all that
are in public employment, therefore I shall quit my self of all the misery
that is like to come upon the land of our Nativity, unless justice take place;
and I do humbly crave justice against M. Oliver Cromwell Lieut. Genesis to the
English Forces, and if I cannot have justice, I shall conclude, that either the
Parliament dare not, or will not do me justice; which if they dare not, I am
heartily sorry for it, and would be willing to lose my life in gaining their
freedom: if they will not, then from the knowledge I have of their
Declarations, Protestations, and Imprecations, I shall be forced to believe
that they are perjured men: and according to M. John Cook their Solicitor
General in King Charles his case stated, and is most true, That in condemning
the King for Tyranie, they have already past sentence against themselves for
Tyranie, when ever they are found in the path thereof. Therefore oh house of
Parliament, do justice, and save your selves and the Nation: And, oh all you
true-hearted people of England, be wise, and do justice upon all the Achans,
send them after the late King, and then stick close to the Agreement put forth
by our friends ^n the Tower, That we may not see the land of our Nativity
utterly wasted, and our wives and children destroyed before our faces, but that
we may compose differences: and in so doing, ws shall render our selves unto
the world, to be a wise people.

Thine and the Nations to serve in love, Christopher Chisman.

A Narrative of the illegal and unjust proceedings of Lieut. Genesis Cromwell, and
the Court Martial, to Cornet Chisman.
DEar Countrymen, and Fellow Commonners: The Law of God, the Law of Nature, and
the fundamental Laws of our Native Country, are the strongest engagements which
binds together all true-hearted English men, and is that threefold cord which
is not easily broken, and is appointed by the wisdom of him who rules all the
world, to be for the well-being thereof, as the pillar of fire before the
Israelites with the path they walked in, and the cloud behind them; all which
made a perfect Guard for their well-being whiles they were passing through the
turbulent sea, So our gracious God has provided for us in this our Native
Country, from one age to another, such wholesome Laws by which we are to be
governed, that so no man should walk by an unlimitted Power.

If we look back to no farther time then the third year of the reign of the
late King, which was the worst of our age, till since, yet then were we
refreshed with the grant of our Petition of Right; in which there is so much
safety provided for the People.

But since that, we have had an other opportunity put into our hands, and being
very willing to get out of bonds; as also being instigated by those who call
themselves the Ministers of Christ, to go forth, and fight for a more perfect
freedom; telling us that the reward of our labors should be impartial Justice,
and righteousness among men: and in order thereunto, there has been much
precious Blood and Treasure wasted, almost to the ruin and desolation of this
the Land of our Nativity.

But instead thereof we find nothing but cruelty and oppression: Men professing
the highest principles of Justice, as in words, but their actions demonstrate
the contrary, which I am able to clear to all unbiased people in the world, who
will not willingly prostrate themselves slaves, to men whose Law is their
Wills: And therefore my dear friends and Country men, there being an
opportunity put into my hands, wherein I must either stoop to Tyranny, and so
betray my own with the Nations Liberties, or else give testimony to the World of
my faithfulness to principles of Justice and righteousness amongst men:
which has carried forth the un-interested people of all ages to contend with
the Princes of this world, for their Native Liberties and Freedoms which the
most sacred Majesty of heaven and earth has bestowed on them as their
inheritance and birthright, for their comfortable and well being whilst they
are upon the face of the Earth.

I shall give you a true Narrative of the most cruel actings of men in
Authority, both toward poor Capt. Bray, and my self; after our faithful
service to this poor bleeding Nation.

He was first taken from his Troop about the 20 of March, 1648. there being no
cause showed for it, only the pleasure of the General: he desiring very
earnestly of the General that he would do him Justice, and that he would not
take away his Troop before the business was decided before a Council: but the
General not admitting of it, Capt. Bray told him that then he must appeal to
the Parliament: which accordingly he did, and presented an humble claim of
Justice, to the supreme Authority of the Nation, the Commons assembled in
Parliament, against Thomas Lord Fairfax, the which being debated in the House
of Parliament, they presently committed Capt. Bray to the Castle of Windsor,
there to continue during pleasure: which was about the beginning of March,
1649. and there he has continued till this very day, without a penny of
allowance: though it be well known that Capt. Bray has been very free in his
expenses for the public good, in this time of war, even to his utter
impoverishment: besides the keeping of his Troop together for the service of
the State, all the last winter, which was at least an hundred pounds damage,
with the loss of at least forty pounds in Horses, by reason of his being so
unjustly taken from his Troop, without any satisfaction, which after the
spending of his Estate in the Parliaments service, to be cast into prison for
only desiring Justice, and there to ly without any thing allowed him for his
subsistence, which is nothing else but to starve him in a prison, did not some
merciful people contribute toward his subsistence.

My self comm^ng accidentally by Windsor, the 22. of May last, with a great
deal of difficulty at last came to the sight of him, who desired me very
earnestly to carry his third Appeal for Justice, to the Parliament House,
wherein was expressed four things; viz.

1. That he might either have a fair and Legal trial. Or else,

2. To be discharged from his most cruel and close imprisonment, where he is
kept from the society of Friends. Or,

3. That he might have an allowance for his subsistence, suitable to what his
employment and faithfulness has been in the service of the Common W^al. Or,

4. That if neither of these might be allowed him, then his desire was, that
they would allow him a considerable sum of his own Arrears, due to him for his
almost seven years service in the Commonweal, whilst he is their causeless
Captive and Prisoner.

And accordingly, to his desire, I took my journey from Windsor, to London;
and Saturday the 26 of May last, I addressed my self to the Speaker of the
Parliament: and coming to the Parliament door, I met with the Sergeant at
Arms, to whom I imparted the substance of my business, which I had to the
Speaker: So the Gentleman told me that he would give me direction to go to the
Speaker, and accordingly went along with me, through the House of Commons, up
into the Committee-Chamber, where the Speaker was (it being about eight or nine
of the clock, and before the House sat) I presented Capt. Brayes Letter, with
his Appeal enclosed, which the Speaker received; and read the Letter, with part
of the Appeal; and said he was sorry for Capt. Bray. I answered him, that I
knew Capt. Bray had been a faithful man to the Nation, and that he had never
falsified his trust to that Honorable House: but that he was under very great
oppressions, and did desire Justice. And I told him that it was my desire that
impartial Justice should take place; and if Capt. Bray did deserve to be
hanged, let him be hanged. The Speaker answered me, That Capt. Bray talked
altogether of Justice and Righteousness to be within his own breast. Sir,
(said I,) his Appeal to this House demonstrates the contrary. But he said so to
me said the Speaker. Its true Sir, (said I,) if Righteousness and Justice were
not in your own breast, how could you determine any cause that comes before
you? It is truth, said the Speaker. Then Sir (said I) it is to be expected in
this House as in the gross. So he asked me what my name was? I told him
Chisman; and that I had been Capt. Brayes Cornet. He answered very lovingly,
and told me that he would do what he could in the business; and that he would
propose it to the House. So I gave him hearty thanks, and took my leave of him.

I came forth, and waited (at the door, and in Westminster Hall,) till the
House did rise, at which time I being walking in the Hall, the Speaker coming
by with his Guard, I went to him, and asked him whether he had done any thing
for Capt. Bray? He answered me No.

I presently looked about toward my left hand, and espied the Lievt. General,
who said to me is your name Chisman? Yes Sir: (said I.) Take him Guard, (said
he) speaking with a very violent Voice: and accordingly the Guard of
Halberdeers came running very greedily like so many Lions to their prey,
pulling and punching of me: I gave them very fair words, beseeching them as
Gentlemen not to punch me, for I would go willingly with them: but the Lievt.
General being close by, cried out very vehemently, Do punch him, punch him on.
The Speaker being very near so that neither my self nor the Guard, could go any
further, so that it was very clear to me that what Cromwell did, was merely in
malice, that he should command his Soldiers to punch me forward, when neither
they nor I could go any further. The Speaker being got into his Coach, they
returned back through the Hall into the Old Palace yard, where we met with the
other part of the Company, and then marched away to white Hall: and then I was
committed to the Lievt. Generals Marshal to his own Regiment, where I was
continued from Saturday the 26 of May, till Tuesday the 5 of June, on which day
the Lievt. Generals Marshal delivered me up to the Marshal General, and there I
remained till Monday the 11. of this instant June, 1649. in all 17. days in
the common Goal, without a bed; and nothing laid to my charge.

But I should have told you that the Lievt. General (about two hours after I
was committed) sent a Captain of the Army to me, who took me out as if he would
carry me to the Lord President, inquiring of me what I was committed for? I
told him I did not know, only I did conjecture, (meaning the delivering of
Capt. Brayes Appeal,) and I thought that it was a truth, for as much as that I
did not know so much as any color for any thing else. And when he heard me
say so, he answered me No, that was not the cause: but it was for breaking of
Col. Reynolds Regiment of Horse. I told him No, that could not be the cause. So
when he had been at the Lord Presidents, and spoke two or three words to him,
for he had left me at the door with a foot Soldier, and the Marshals man. So
when he came forth, we returned back to White Hall, and then he told me, that I
must continue there till monday two of the clock, at which time the Council of
State would sit; when monday came, there was no order for the Marshal to bring
me before the Council of State; but when the Marshal saw the Lieut. Genesis leave
the Council, and was going away, he ran after him, and told him, that he had
one Cornet Chisman under his charge, committed by his Honor, he made him answer,
that he should wait upon the Council of State, to to see what their pleasures
would be; my keeper returning me this answer, I took my pen, and writ a note to
the Council, and it was delivered to the Lord President, he returned me this
answer, that the next day I should be called, and accordingly so I was, four or
five times before I was carried over by my keeper: the Sergeant at Arms came
to enquire whether I was come or no, and when he understood I was at the door,
he came forth and asked the Marshal whether he had any accusation against me?
the Marshal made answer, no, he had nothing against me; so the Sergeant
returned in again, and a while after he came forth, and enquired of the Marshal
whether he knew one Capt. Chaplain or no? for he thought he should be a
witness; the Marshal told him no, so he went in again, and soon after came
forth, and bid the Ma^shal return with me till the next day, then I returned
back to my prison, and there continued, still adhering to my first thoughts
wherefore I was imprisoned; and my Marshal hearing me tell my friend the same,
he said no that is not the cause of your imprisonment, but it is for breaking
Col. Reynolds Regiment of Horse; by which I did understand that the Lieut. Genesis
had fixed it wholly upon that, which did much amaze me, that such a thing which
never was, should cause so strange an operation upon the Lieut. Gen, as in such
a sury to apprehend me, giving his soldiers order to abuse me. But this
aspersion held about four or five days, and vanished, so I heard no more of
it. The next supposed crime was, that I had said something against the
Parliament and Council of State, which was told me by some who waited at the
Council door, and this continued four or five days longer. The next was, that
I was apprehended for one of the chief in the late mutiny of the Army, and this
was affirmd to me by the Marshal General, he told me he heard so, and that I
was active in Col. Harrisons and Commissary General Iretons Regiments;
moreover, he heard that I was so dangerous a fellow, that he thought I should
be sent away to Peter-house. This crime, or rather slander, continued till
monday the 11. of this instant June, at which time I was guarded forth of my
prison before the Court Marshal, They had nothing to say to me, only they
asked me what I did at Windsor the last time I was there: I told them, that as
I had known them formerly, and did judge many of them to be honest Gentlemen,
and therefore I would speak something for the satisfaction of them and my self,
but Gentlemen, to answer to your questions, I will not, knowing it to be the
greatest breach of my liberty that possibly can be, therefore I shall not
answer to any such thing; but I must needs tell you, that I was forced out of
Arms by Col. Raynolds about two months since, with the rest of the Troop I did
belong to, my Capt. being aforehand cast into prison; so I took my leave of
the Regiment at Banbury, and went directly into Hampshire, where I continued
two or three days with my wife, and then came for London, where I continued
almost a month, and so returned into Hampshire again, and stayed there three
days longer, and then came for London. But Col. Backster told me, that I had
not answered to the question, and that it was but a little one, and I might
easily answer it, I desired him to forbear to ask me such questions, for I
would answer none; Then Col. Hewson asked me, whether I had not bin at Windsor
with one Capt. Brayfield, a Capt. of his Regiment, and whether I had not
feasted him and some of his Regiment, for he was sure the Capt. had told him so
much, and he would know of me whether I had or no; I answered, if I had, I
would not tell him of it, then Col, Backster asked me, whether I did not know
of a lying pamphlet that was forth, in which there were many lies as to the
matter of my imprisonment; I answered that as to answer any thing as in order
from the Court, I would not, neither did I know what ly were in that book,
nevertheless to impart to them the truth and manner of my being apprehended, I
was very free they should understand the truth of it, and I must needs tell y^u
that I was most unjustly and tyranically apprehended, and have bin kept in
prison 17. days, and never came within a bed, and that the gr^atest part of
the time I had no better lodging than a board and a narrow b^nch to ly upon,
which has much endangered my health; So looking about me, told them, that it
was very strange to me, that they had not witnesses all that time, but must
examine me upon interrogatories: Then there was one of the Court answered, that
the Army had bin out of Town, and they had bin very busy, and had not so much
liberty: then there stood up one of their society, whom I perceived to stand
more for persons than for Justice, of which sort there are too many both in
Army and elsewhere (the which this poor bleeding Nation has had woeful
experience of) So this creature made a speech, and told the Court, that he
desired them to take notice of my words, for says he, though it cannot be
proved that he was in this last mutiny, yet said he, you may know by his speech
that he is one of them, and deserves the sentence of the Court for what he
has spoken here, for he has taxed a man whom we love entirely, a man who is
honorable in our sight, I know who he means (says he) its the second man in
our Army; nay (said he) he is so impudent and bold, that he is not ashamed to
tell this Court even to our faces, that he is a Tyrant; So when he held his
peace, I answered, Gentlemen, I confess had I taxed the meanest man in the
Nation falsely, I had deserved to be sentenced to purpose, but I must needs tell
you, if so be the greatest man in the Nation walk so toward me, he must bear
his burden; and truly Gentlemen, you may remember ir was a grand blemish
formerly in our Kings, and the great burden that was laid upon them, that in
their wrath they would take a man by the shoulder, and say, Take him away, hang
him, without any visible Authority of the Nation; but the Lieut. Genesis did
command his Soldiers to abuse me, and in effect, to murder me, for he bade
them punch me, and punching a man with halberds will easily murder any man, for
the soldiers had halberds, if they had punctually observed the Lieut. Genesis
command; so they bade me hold my peace, and no more of that, meaning the
comparing the Lieut. Genesis actions to our former Kings: Then there stepped up
another of the Court, and said, Gentlemen, I have known this man formerly, and
I believe he is one of that party (though I would not make parties, yet) I know
he is of that party, for he has bin with Capt. Bray, and is one of his party:
yes Sir (said I was his Cornet till I was forced out of Arms, and that Capt.
Bray was taken from his Troop, and cast into prison. So the Court desired that
man to hold his peace. Then Col. Backster asked me whether I did not bring some
papers from Windsor to London? I told him, that though as in Order from the
Court I would not Answer one word to any such thing, yet I would rehearse to
them what I had already published to all I knew, and was willing they should
know also: and truly Gentlemen (said I) with a great deal of difficulty I
obtained the sight of Capt. Bray, and finding him in a very sad condition
(which was a great shame that such a man as he who had bin so faithful to this
Nation, should now ly in a prison and perish) he desired me to carry his third
Appeal for Justice, and deliver it to the Speaker of the Parliament; and
accordingly I did, and had some words with the Speaker, who did approve of it
very well, and he told me, that he would do his endeavor, and that he would
propose it to the House; and truly, if he had bin minded to have committed me,
he might have done it; But he had no power said Col. Backster. Sir (said I) he
might if he would, for I was walking at the Parliament door, and in
Westminster Hall, till the House did rise: But (said Col. Backster) you could
not be found, for you were everywhere sought for. I answered, that could not
be, for I spoke to the Speaker when he came out of the House, and asked him
whether he had done any thing for Capt. Bray, he answered, No, and then his
Guard of Halbardeers were with him, and if he would have committed me he might:
So there was no answer made but commanded me forth of doors, where I continued
almost half an hour, and then was called in again, and the Judge Advocate said
unto me, M. Chisman, the Court has ordered your enlargement upon Bayl; I
paused a little upon it, and taking notice of their overruling power by the
Sword, it being in vain for me to contend, as also how exceedingly my health
was endangered, by reason of the ill accommodation I had in the prison, caused
me to accept of their proffer; then they told me, that they did assure me they
would draw up my Charge so soon as possibly they could, which should not be
long; So I took my leave of them, and stayed two days and two nights, before I
could get my Bond made by the Judge Advocate; In which time they had sought out
far and near for some Accusation against me, and after all, they sent a letter
to Colonel Harrison, to know how I behaved my self when I was in his Regiment;
and when there was nothing to be found, they let me forth upon M. Stephen
Sprats coming in bonds for me, to appear at the Court Martial of his
Excellency the Lord General, to be held at the Headquarters, upon Monday
morning next, and so from Court day to Court day, to hear the Judgment of the
said Court, concerning a Charge exhibited against me.

So upon Monday the eighteenth of this instant June, I appeared at the Court
Martial, and desired the Clerk to acquaint the Court with it. So after I had
waited there a little while, I met with the Marshal General, and told him, I
was come according to my engagement; he said, he would acquaint the Court with
it; then I went to a friends house, and so returned back; But the Court being
risen, I went to the Clerk, and asked him whether the Court had done any thing
as to my business, he told me yes, the Court had ordered my discharge, and that
I should have my bond in, and accordingly I had.

And so the Lord be merciful to us, and keep ut from such Courts of Justice,
which will take no wrong, nor do no right.

Christopher Chisman.

The Copy of a Letter, sent to the Lievt. Genesis Cromwell:
Sir,
IF it may please your Honor to vouchsafe the reading of these few lines,
(though I confess you as far exceed me in this Earthly Glory, as does the Sun
in his brightest hue exceed the most dim and weakest Star): your Honor will (I
hope) be satisfied in what I express at this time: For which end I beseech you
Sir consider seriously what was the cause we first engaged in this unhappy War;
(and so we may call it, because it has produced no better effect, as yet, but
only disatisfaction to all parties) was it not impartial Justice, which we
first undertook? and was it not for declaring for that, your Honor was first
gained? How did all the People of God esteem of you whilst you kept close to
principles of Justice and Righteousness? Your Name was as precious ointment
poured forth where ever you were spoken of, so long as you did value the favor
of God, and the countenance of his People to be more worth than all the Honor
and riches of this World.

I beseech you Sir consider of these things before it be too late, and you
wrong your self, with all that have owned you; for I see all people begin to
leave you: and I fear you will (like the late King) leave an odium upon your
posterity, unless you return to your former professed Principles of Impartial
Justice and Righteousness; which are the witnesses of God upon earth.

I pray you Sir, call to mind your cruel apprehending of me the 26. of May
last, when as I was passing quietly about my employments, in Westminster Hall,
taking me by the shoulder with a great deal of violence, commanding your
Soldiers to take hold of me, as if I had been the veriest Rogue in the World:
And when the violence of your Soldiers caused me to complain, I desired them
to use me civilly, and that they would not punch me, assuring them I would go
willingly with them: your self being near called out to the Soldiers very
earnestly, saying, Punch him on, Punch him; which was in effect no less than
to command them to murder me: (for the punching with Halberts will easily
murder a man, had they observed your commands according to the manner of your
expression, which would have caused the most rational man in the world to judge
of me to be no other than one who would have even destroyed the Nation at a
blow, (as those in the Powder Plot) and so deserved to have my brains knocked
out, wheresoever I were met in the Streets: and not only so in your exposing me
to death, by your injunctions upon your Soldiers to do their pleasure upon me.

But afterward committing me to Prison, and there to let me ly eighteen days,
without coming into a bed: my lodging being for the greatest part a narrow
board to ly upon, in a common Prison, among all so^ts af malefactors.

And besides this, I was most unjustly forced out of Arms, by Col. Reynolds,
without satisfaction, notwithstanding my having been seven months without pay,
of which time I was Cornet to Capt. Bray, from the 12 of December, 1648. till
the 10 of April 1649. having the late King under my charge two miles from Hurst
Castle, and might have made a price of him, as the times were then, had I not
been faithful to my Trust: and yet never received one penny of pay for the
time I was Cornet.

These, with other hard measure which I have received since this War, as being
once in your Honors own Troop, about 14. or 15. weeks, and never received a
penny of Pay, with the expense of 20. pounds; and then turned out as a
Supernumerary, without a penny of Pay, and after all this to be so ill
requited, as to be cast into a Prison, and there to ly eighteen days, without
any thing laid to my charge; and at last to be brought before a Court, and
there to be examined upon things I never knew of, without witnesses, or any
thing they knew to lay to my charge.

I beseech your Honor consider how unjust these things are, contrary to all
Declarations of Parliament, and Engagements of the Army, the Laws of God, of
Nature, and against the Laws of the Nation; in which I assure you (though I
entreat you as a friend, yea as a Christian, in the bonds of Love, to do me
Justice, yet) I know Justice Commands.

Sir, I cannot pass by such palpable Violations of the Laws and Liberties of
my Native Country: And I do protest in the presence of the Eternal God, the
impartial and righteous Judge, who has laid as great engagements upon me to
prosecute you for this unparaleld murdering of the Laws and Liberties of this
my Native Country, as ever I could be engaged for the prosecuting of the Law
upon any whomsoever he should be that should murder my Father or Mother: yea, I
am more deeply engaged to prosecute the former than the latter.

I beseech you Sir consider of these things, and lay them to heart, that so you
may be instrumental for the good of this poor Nation.

Sir, God having thus drawn forth my heart, to write the Truth plainly to you:
and if it be not hid from your eyes, I shall receive a seasonable Answer; if
not, I am engaged to prosecute: but I should rejoice to see the contrary: Till
which time, and ever, I leave you to be disposed of by him in whom my soul
delights. And am really

Yours to serve in the bonds of Love, till death, if you are for impartial
Justice and Righteousness, in this the Nation. Christopher Chisman.

I beseech you Sir, Let not the greatness of your self, and the meannesse of
me, be any prejudice to Justice. For my part, I think he is but the shadow of a
Man, and no Man, whatsoever he be, that has engaged in the late War, and now
is afraid to demand Justice against any whomsoever he be. Sir, I am really what
I was, and what I first propounded in War, I own still: I fear the face of no
man, in order to Iustiee; It was for injustice I fought so long against the
late King: I will die rather than I will live a slave. Therefore I pray you
(Sir) seriously consider what you have done: You its no dishonor for a great
man to be taxed in order to Justice.

Sir I am yours to live and die with you for Justice in this my Native Country.
Christopher Chisman.

POSTSCRIPT.
DEar Friends, and Countrymen, I having been so violently apprehended, and cast
into Prison, and kept there eighteen days, without any Authority from the
Nation, or for any fault I had committed, (as in my Narrative, and Letter is
manifested:) and finding the same evil disposition in those men who rule over
us, to do the like to any of the Free Commoners of England, I was extremely
bound in Conscience to my Native Countrymen, as in their behalf to demand
satisfaction of the Lievt. General Cromwell, for the unparalleld force and
violence which he had committed upon the Laws and Liberties of my Native
Country: as also in so doing, for the particular wrong he had done to me: and
accordingly I drew up the foregoing Letter, according to Truth, (though in a
very plain form) hoping that the Lievt. Genesis had not been so bad as was
reported: and on Friday the 22 of June last, I sent my Wife and a Friend (with
her) with the Letter, who accordingly presented it into the Lievt. Generals own
hands. On Monday the 25. of June, I went my self to the Lievt. Genesis and after
waiting there part of the day, I met with him walking in the Garden, who (when
I had done my duty to him) was pleased to give me the liberty of speech: after
which, I told his Honor that I had manifested my grievances in a Letter by my
Wife, who had delivered it into his Honors hands two days before. He answered
me that he had not read it. Then I desired his Honor to give me satisfaction
for the wrong he had done me, in the violent appreh^nding of me, on the 26. of
May last, as I was quietly passing about my employments, in Westminster Hall,
whereby I am rendered to the People as a most notorious Rogue. He answered, that
for what he had done he was glad. Which answer did take off my hopes of ever
seeing him do any good for the Nation, unless God do convince him of his
error, when as he should sin against such apparent light, both of the Laws of
God, and of Nature, against the known Laws of the Nation, and against the many
Declarations, Vows, and Improcations which he has made in Parliament, that
the wrath and vengeance of Heaven and Earth, may fall upon his and their heads,
if they did not maintain the fundamental Laws of the Nation. Yea, and his, with
the Armies Declariton, the 14. of June, from the Army to the Parliament, page
45. in these words, And more particularly, we cannot but desire that all such
as are imprisoned for any pretended misdemeanour, may be put into a speedy way
for a just Hearing and Trial: and such as shall appear to have been unjustly
and unduly imprisoned may (with their Liberties) have some reasonable
satisfaction according to their sufferings, and the demerits of their opposers.

And in their Declaration from Reading, the 18 of July, they call the
Parliaments committing of men not to be according to the regular course of Law;
and that if upon a Legal Trial it shall appear they are wrongfully or unduly
imprisoned, they may have reparations according to their sufferings.

But all the^e Engagements are nothing to the Lievt. Genesis and truly if the
Parliament do not question these m^n, I believe they will fall with infamy,
both they and their Posterity.

The Lievt. Genesis would not give me satisfaction: but after a great deal ^f
discourse to no purpose, he would have me Petition the L. Fairfax, telling me
that he was to go for Ireland, and that if I would engage my self to be an
honest man, and se^k the Peace of the Army, I should see what he would do for
me. I answered him, that I knew not the man that c^uld tax me with any
misdemeanour; or that I had ever been a disturber of the Nation. Nay, (said he)
if it be so, do what you will. So we parted.

Now I do once more earnestly crave Justice against Mr Oliver Cromwell, Lievt.
Genesis of the English Forces: he is one of the Achans that trouble the Peace of
Israel; and if the Parliament send him to Ireland, they will be guilty in the
letting escape a man of blood; Therefore be wise, and send for him back (if he
be gone; and execute Justice on him, for murdering of the Laws and Liberties of
our Native Country.

As for the Council of War, I shall leave them: for by their carriage to me
they do divulge to the World, that they intend to do justice upon all, but for
none: for though I tax Cromwell with tyranny, and that I had been 18. days in
Prison, and did wonder they should call me before them, having neither
Witness, nor any thing to lay to my charge: yet these unjust men (the Council
of War) would thrust me out, without any satisfaction, or making good their
Religious Resolutions, June 14. in these words, That we may be no longer the
dissatisfaction of our Friends, as to the compleatment of the Liberties and
Peace of the Nation; which is that blessing of God, then which (of all Worldly
things) nothing is more dear unto us, or more precious in our thoughts: we
having hitherto thought all our present enjoyments whether Life or Livelihood,
or nearest relations, a price but sufficient to the purchase of so rich a
blessing: that we and all the Freeborn People of this Nation, may sit down in
quiet under our Vines, and under the glorious administration of Justice and
Righteousness, and in full possession of those fundamental Rights and
Liberties, without which we can have little hopes (as to humane consideration)
to enjoy either any comforts of Life, or so much as Life it self, but at the
pleasures of some men, ruling merely according to their wills and power.

I beseech you take notice of these men, what Conscience they make of their
ways, that dare take the Name of the impartial and just God, in their mouths,
and walk so contrary; when as they pretend sitting in Council to do Justice:
and I know that they profess themselves Christians, and ought not to have
respect of persons, (in Judgment.) But it appears to me, that they sit there
to purge the Earth, that there may be no wicked upon the face thereof, but
themselves.

Therefore I would advise these man (with all speed) to cause the Declaration
of the 14 of June, 1648. with all other their honest Declarations, to be burnt
by the hand of the common Hangman, b^ing the great obstructions to the ways
of wickedness; so that for the time to come, neither my self nor any other may
cudgel them with t^eir own weapons.

By me Christopher Chisman.


