Political and Military OBSERVATIONS, REMARKS AND MAXIMS, OF Charles V. Late
Duke of LORRAIN, General of the Emperor's Forces. From a Manuscript left by
him, and never Printed before.

Justum bellum quibus necessarium, and pia arma quibus nulla nisi in armis
relinquitur Spes.

Tit. Live. hist. l. 9. London, Printed for J. Jones at the Dolphin and Crown in
S. Paul's Churchyard, and W. Hawes at the Rose in Ludgate Street. 1699.

TO THE Right Honorable ARNOLD JUST, Earl of Albemarle, Viscount of Berry,
Baron of Keppel and Ashford, Master of his Majesty's. Wardrobe, General of the
Swissers, and Major General of the Horse in the Service of the States General
of the United Provinces.
My Lord,
NOT only the Persons of Princes, but the greatest Monuments of their Glory,
have perished, excepting their good Works, and wise Sayings, which Fame has
handed to Posterity from one Age to another.

Thus are come to light the Papers of Charles the V. late Duke of Lorrain,
General of the Emperor's Forces Writ by him. I, thought it Injustice to confine
them amongst my Papers, therefore have adventured to give his Thoughts an
English Dress, they were never Printed till now. This Country, where he was a
Stranger, is the first Place in which they see light; where having need of a
Noble Protector, I took the Liberty to present your Lordship with the
Translation in Manuscript, and thereby had recourse to your Lordship's Favor,
that this Illustrious Stranger's Spare-hours might find that shelter and
Countenance, which his great Character calls for.

This Prince was so active, that he could never find leisure to be idle, even
in his Retirements from Affairs he would have some Subject to employ himself.
It is observable that the noblest Works of the Creation are most Active:
Activity was so innate to him, that the Sun might as well stand still, or the
Sea cease from its Motion, as this Prince desist from giving himself Employment.

You will find, my Lord, that Variety that may divert; they being Miscellanies
that give more delight, than a continued Series of Matter. These will be
acceptable to many, especially to such who to this day, make his Actions the
Subject of their Conversations.

His Notions and Maxims carry Worth in them, so may deserve your Lordship's
Protection, they need no Encomiums. And though some may not have the like
Apprehensions of this Prince's Works, yet it may suffice, that he was a
Soldier, and that they dropped from the Pen of a Prince.

The Scotch History tells us, That one of their Kings, while confined, did
scratch with his Nails the History of our Savior's Passion on the Wall; which
rough Draught being done by Princely Hands, was more preferrable, than what
might have been done of that kind by the most celebrated Masters.

He was not only valued for his Illustrious Birth, as being of the best Blood
of Christendom, but reverenced for his great Qualities, for which his Person
was had in so great Esteem, and entitled to double Honor; for he was not only
born a Prince, but was also an experienced Captain. Such was his Conduct and
Perfections, that each were so many Immortalizers of his Fame; and, with the
old Hero's, he has scattered his Trophies in the Fields of Victory, of whom
Fame has mustered Catalogues, and with them he has filled the World with
Applause; so that the Chronicles are so many standing Records to his and their
Glory: For the Exploits of War have something of more splendor in them, than
those of Peace.

These retired Thoughts, which his Memory has regist'red from Observation and
Practice, are given to the Public, as I found them, to change their Form,
would have been presumptuous. The Courage, Civility and Humanity, that appeared
in the course of his Life, discover themselves here in this Treatise. In his
own Country, they need no Protection; his Fame being so celebrated, though his
Conceptions are Strangers there. As his Person fled for refuge to Germany, so
his Works do now to your Lordship for Sanctuary from the ill Usage of a
Censorious and inhospitable World; though his Actions are so many Monuments of
his Fame, yet they need your noble Protection; which I am the more encouraged
to supplicate, in that you will find many Things not unknown to your early
Experience. And though Things have daily improved since his Time, yet here are
never dying Observations, that will be ever of Use in all Ages.

My Lord.
You are one of those from whom this Age expects great Things; for you did
early promise so much, which makes that, the Eyes of all are upon you, who with
me wish, that Fortune may always smile upon you: That as you have advanced in
the Temple of Honor, so you may in Favor with God and our great King, to the
Good of the Nation, the Honor of your Ancient and Illustrious Family, and the
great Joy of,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble, and most obedient Servant, Rupert Beck.


TO THE READER.
THis Work is of that Nature, that generous desires may thereby be ingendered
in the Reader. The Subject is Peace and War, Civil and Foreign, with
Observations according to the Nature of the Subject. Here are also Maxims drawn
from Experience.

Each may here find what is required in their different Stations, from the
General to the Common Soldier, who through a generous Emulation may raise his
Fortune.

Here are Precepts for Peace and War, amongst which are several Things, that
speak our Prince displeased, and in a complaining Tone of some hard Usage,
which he thought he had received from a Great Monarch, between whom there was
some Misunderstanding. Without doing wrong to his Memoirs, I could not omit his
Expressions; but some Grains of allowance may be had to the Circumstances he
labored under, having to do with so Potent a Neighbor, That not only our
Author, but even all Europe has been alarmed at the great Progress his Arms
have made. And to speak the Truth, Great has been the Advantage that the House
of France has had from this their present Monarch's so long Reign; who, to do
him justice, were he not a King, yet is he Great in his own Person, and
wonderfully qualifyed to sit at the Helm of Empire, being so much Master of the
Art of Reigning.

By the Observations that are found here, all Persons, in whatever Province
they move in, may find that which will affect them, so as to be fearless in
War, happy in Peace, and to reign in the Hearts of Friends and Enemies: And to
be loved, honored, and feared, so that they may say with M. Aurelius, That
where Virtue has acquired the Love and Affections of the Subjects, that there
can be no want of Men or Treasure.

To conclude, the whole here may be seen, how to act in Peace and War, so that
in Adversity or Prosperity they may neither presume, nor despair.

Political and Military Observations, Remarks, AND MAXIMS, OF CHARLES V. Late
Duke of Lorrain, etc.
PEace is that tranquil, and sedate State, where all things did breath gently,
lived quietly, and moved in an harmonious Order; till it was interrupted by
Lucifer, when he rebelled against his Maker, and seduced Man; and as he lost
Heaven for himself, so he occasioned Man to be turned out of his primitive
peaceable Condition, who, by siding with the Seducer, did intail misery on his
Posterity, who were made Slaves before they knew what Liberty was.

Thus Adam entailed on his Posterity, to be exercised with all manner of Evils;
so that Happiness seems but a Shadow, an airy, imaginary Nothing, which while
we think we grasp, it scapes us. These are the sad Effects of inherent
Corruption, from whence came all the Dissensions private, and public, that
justle out Peace at Home, and Abroad, with God, and with Man; so that never any
Country could boast of being exempted from this sad Fate, but sooner or later
has had the turn of the Wheel from Peace to War, which by intervals have
succeeded each other: This is the Subject on which I will make some Reflections
in their Order. And first

Of Peace.
WHich is one of the Sovereign Blessings of this Life, as being the Treasury of
temporal Felicities, and is as Youth to Age, Light to Darkness, and as Health
is in opposition to Sickness: It is the Heavenly Blessing, and was our
Savior's last Legacy, my Peace I give unto you. The Angels could not find a
better Wish for Mankind in their Anthem to the Shepherds, than that of Peace,
which is the Calm in opposition to Tempest, and order to Confusion, and is the
Summer that makes every thing Flourish. This Sovereign Blessing, where it is
extended, spreads its Wings not only over particular Persons, but even whole
Nations are Influenced so by it, that their Rivers Flow with Milk and Honey;
and through its bonds of Concord, and Union, People and Countries are kept and
linked together in Amity; and every thing where it Reigns is thereby increased
so, that each may enjoy themselves, and their Families under the Shadow of
their own Vine, and Reap the benefit of their Labors, and so Live on the
Fatness of the Earth, by which they are Nourished and Maintained; whereas War
is the Consumer and Destroyer of all. Peace is so Valuable, that Triumphs are
not to be compared to it, which though it were an unjust one, yet is it more
desirable than a just War; so that they who have two Dwellings, would part with
one to procure it, that thereby they may Live in quiet. This Peace is a
Blessing never valued till gone: It is like harmony in Music, the Disturbers
of which, ought to be Cut off as Enemies to Mankind, and numbered amongst the
Wicked, whose Death is the safety of the Good. No Treasure can be better
employed than for its Preservation; such only desire not Peace, that would
profit by Fishing in troubled Waters: It makes small things increase, when by
discord Men are hurried and precipitated to the greatest Destruction.

They deserve Censure that involve themselves in an uncertain War in
expectation of an uncertain Good; by changing Peace for War, in expectation of
a common Good, they expose to Misery all that are Embarked in it with them.
This is turning our backs against our own Happiness, and opening a Door to
Destruction. But such is Man's unhappy transitory State, that there is nothing
so desirable but time may find a cause to dislike it; nor is any so in Health,
nor so Strong, but they may expect a change: There is not such a preservative
in Nature that can banish Corruption, but it will grow in the Body politic as
well as in the Humane; so that one Hour has sometimes produced great
alterations: Therefore as the one has its Prescriptions for Health, so has
the other its Preservative which is Religion; wherefore it is here recommended,
as the best bottom, to establish the Health and Peace of the Commonweal; for
where Religion does Reign, there good Government and Peace is likliest to
Flourish.

Though there be no fence against Vicissitudes, yet a well-constituted
Government may conduce much to prevent alterations, whether in respect of its

Ecclesiastical, Civil, or Mililitary State. All which have a natural
Dependence on each other; and though Religion be out of the Province of a
Soldier, yet shall I adventure to Speak my Thoughts of its use, as being so
necessary an ingredient to obtain the desired End, viz. good Government.

Religion is the foundation of a Commonwealth, without which, a Government
cannot Subsist, but will fall to Decay; there can be no surer sign of its
Ruin, than when it is Contemned: It is the true and well-tempered Cement that
links, unites and binds together, and ought to be the first thing that should
be imbibed by Men. Without Religion, there can be no settled Government
Established, which may sufficiently evidence its Necessity.

Therefore those that intend to be obeyed, must before all things prefer the
settling Religion in their Country, as being that which has the greatest
influence upon the Spirits of the People to charm them to Submission; It is a
holy Policy to make Men stoop to the Magistrates, and is the Bridle, and a
Restriction even to Heathens, who are more Zealous Observers of their Laws, and
more obedient, which may same Christian Rulers as well as People. It may not be
a Digression to observe here, That though a Prince may dissent in matters of
Religion from his Sujects, yet Prudence requires of him, for his and their
interest, to suffer the Religion of the Country; for Men's Conscience are gently
to be let, not driven and imposed on. The little Foxes that spoil the Vineyard
are to be taken, not destroyed, Arguments, and good Examples are better Nets to
take the Multitude, than Fire and Faggots; the imposing on Men's Consciences is
a sort of Tyranny, and a vain attempting to scale Heaven by wordly Ladders. But
where a Prince is bigoted by his Levites, he is carried away even to the
eclipsing and unmanning of his Person, by whose Instigations he becomes a
Tyrant over Consciences, and is an Usurper of God's Prerogative, who will only
Reign there. A Prince ought not to be possessed with the Spirit of Persecution,
as being not at all becoming his Character: For there is no Religion that has
not those that would not Sacrifice their all in testimony of the Truth, of what
they profess; and though they differ, yet they all agree in this, that their
Scope and ultimate End is Heaven; neither is it material whether we go one way,
or the other, so we get but thither. To show a Traveller the best and safest
way to his Journey's end, is not to use Compulsion or Blows; but with Humanity
and Gentleness, and by well-wishing Motives, showing the advantages of the one,
and the dangers, and inconveniences of the other, and rest there, without being
so anxiously concerned that any particular Sentiments be followed above the
rest. Also it may be an inducement to consider, That the Toleration of Religion
is a great benefit to trading Countries. If you disturb the Bees, they will
leave of carrying in Wax and Honey, and betake themselves to another Place,
where they may do it with more safety. Thus, as by not suffering Liberty, many
flourishing Countries have been Impoverished and Depopulated; so, on the other
hand, Liberty is the Inricher and Incourager of Nations, and the Increaser of
Wealth, and number of People, in which consists a Prince's Riches, as well as
Safety.

And to speak as a Man of the World unacquainted with tender Sentiments for
Piety that Duty requires, who beholds all Religions a like, and looks upon them
to be no more than a jolly Invention, contrived to muzzle the Subjects, and
keep them in Awe, yet ought he not to slight those sacred Artifices, though his
Conscience may not move, yet let Policy induce him. For it is a Prince's
Worldly, as well as Spiritual interest to be moderete in injoyning his
Sentiments in matters of Religion; and if he thinks that Religion is
prejudicial to his Prerogative, yet let him at least retain the shadow of it,
and consider that external Holiness procures awful Regards, and that it is both
an inward and outward Charmer. Therefore let a Country always have such
Spiritual Leaders as are true, and not pretended Chaplains to the Prince of
Peace; such Torches as are saving Lights, not Firebrands, whose Tempers are
mild and soft, and whose Breathings are pacificatory.

A good Government is a good foundation for Peace, which is likeliest to
flourish, where Reason and Religion Reigns; it requires no less Prudence to
preserve Peace, than Valor to obtain it. That Country is likliest to be best
preserved, where the Prince knows how to Govern, and the People to Obey: That
place is Happiest where the Subject fears to offend, without which restraint,
Commonwealths would prove but so many unweildly ungovernable Bodies. In order
to a well constituted State, two things are required, viz.

Rewards and Punishments.
WIthout a due Distribution of which, according to the Merit or Demerits of the
Persons concerned, Virtue will flag, and Vice predominate. That Prince who
Rewads nothing, Purchases nothing: Where Valor and Merit meets not with due
encouragements, Men will be unwilling to attempt notwithstanding all their
Courage; for it is certain, that Benefits well bestowed establish a Kingdom,
when Services unrewarded unhinge it: For as Wisdom and Courage begets
admiration in a Prince, so Veracity, Courtesy, and Liberality do stir up and
awaken the Subjects Affections.

Also Princes and Magistrates should encourage noble Actions, Arts and
Inventions, and promote Trade, as being the true means to enrich the People.
Thus the Princes and Subjects Interest should be the same, without by respects;
the Princes good being the Peoples, and the Peoples the Princes.

He Reigns best that Reigns as he ought, and though placed alost in the seat of
Soveraignity, yet should he condescend, and take cognizance, and look down on
the Humble and Oppressed; the redressing whose Grievances is as much his Honor
as Safety. His Ear should be always open to the Cries of Complainants, to
deliver them from the rapine of Oppressors, and his Heart full of Compassion;
lending one Hand to support, and the other to avenge their Injuries. It is a
most unhapy thing for a Prince, when the People are always upon the complaining
Key; he must needs be in a perpetual Anxiety and Fear, and constantly upon the
Tenters, seeking ways to secure himself. For God has been so Merciful to
Mankind, that nothing is safe for a Prince, but what is Honest and Just; whose
Security depends on his good Government, by which means Glory is acquired, and
his worldly Interest secured: When on the contrary, from Evil conduct accrue
Disgrace and Shame, and thereby all is exposed to Ruin. It is very justly,
that good or evil Managements are attributed to the Prince; he being the Soul
to the Body, from whom the rest of the Members receive Light and Vigor, or as
the Spring that gives Motions to the rest of the Work.

In order to Reign Peaceably and Honorably, with security to both Prince and
People; there must be a strict Hand of Justice Maintained: For where that is
Obstructed there necessarily follows a depravation of Manners, and a justling
out of Faith, Honor and Morality; by which a Door is opened to Licentiousness;
to prevent which Trajanus's Example is a great expedient, who would make choice
of none to sit at the Helm, but the Wise, Prudent and Good; nor would he place
in Military Employments any, but such as were experienced, and of known Courage
and Conduct: Even his Courtiers had the Character of being Modest, Debonair and
Courteous.

But it is too Common to have such put in Places of Trust as are Unfit; the
Observation of which caused Caligula to propose the making his Horse
Burgermaster of Rome; alleging, That so beautiful a Beast might as well become
that Station, as some of those placed there; and would be a less detriment to
the Public, whose Faults they need not fear would hurt the Citizens. A modest
Reproof, and an Advertisement for time to come, to make choice of more fit
Instruments, than that of Men that act like Beasts. Experience has shown in
all Ages, how fatal the Choice of unfit Instruments has been to the common
Good, of which the Avarice of those that have had the disposal of Places was
the occasion: For as they have purchased at a dear Rate, and came in without
consideration of personal Merit; so they sell Offices by retail: Thus Money is
the Qualification, and the greatest Ignorants may thus be preferred before Men
of desert: But great Good accrues to that Government where useful Instruments
are chosen, whose Business shall be to promote the public Good, in opposition
to Flatterers, such who are unbyassed, whose Fidelity neither promises, nor
Threats can unhinge. But where those Caterpillars, called Flatterers, bear
sway, no Good can be expected; much better it is to fall amongst ravenous
Birds, than into the Clutches of such Harpies: It may be said of some, as it
was said of Caesar, that he governed the World, but that Fostina governed him;
so Flatterers, when they have gained an ascendant over the Prince, that though
he governs the People, yet they overruled him. It was Pope Pius II.'s complaint
on his Deathbed, when his Sycophants gave him hopes of Recovery, that the
misery that attended Princes was great, since they could not hear Truth from
those about them, though at a time when the Knowledge of it was most useful.
These flattering Hypocrites are the Plagues of Princes Courts, and with Justice
deserve the Epithet, as having no Religion but Self-interest, and worship for
God their Mammon, to whom they are more faithful than to their Sovereign. It is
to that Idol, and to Greatness, that they pay Adoration, nor will they Know any
other Deity, but they make them their ultimate End. How do Princes hereby make
themselves contemptible? And are exposed to the censure of being pusillanimous
for being thus led at pleasure; which speaks their want of Courage as well as a
Deficiency of other Regal and Princely Qualifications; which occasions that
Remisness, and Lenity by which they are exposed to be cheated: It is also an
inlet to Irregularities, that gives an occasion to think as if they feared to
do Justice, lest they offend thereby their Parasites; thus not only the injured
Subject suffers, but also the Prince in the Opinion of his Subjects.

It is also very essential to the Preservation of the Peace, and Prosperity of
a People, that Princes be their example of good, as being their Looking-glass,
whose Examples are Precepts, whether good or evil; which work more upon the
Vulgar than National Laws. Therefore they should be bright and shining Lights,
to lead the way to Virtue; the same should be all those they entrust with
Power, without which they will be but so many Ignes fatui, that lead the
Ignorant a-stray; where Virtue is not the Standard, there Commonwealths are
made the feat of Vice, which might have been the stage of Virtue.

It is the Stay of a Commonwealth, that the Magistate knows to use his
Authority; for the Eyes of each are on him as a public Dial that regulates
adjacent Clocks; so Subjects steer their Actions according to their Morals; and
though there may be Reasons for repealing and changing Laws, yet while they
stand in force, they should not be suffered to be broken, that it give not
occasion to have them contemned; and so become of no more effect, than so many
Scare-crows with which those Birds, whom they should banish, become familiar
even to perch upon the Head of what before was their terror; having by
experience learned, That they are no more than toothless Bugbears. It is not
sufficient to have wholesome Laws, but they must be put in practice to restrain
the Disorderly. For there are a sort of restless Men never satifyed, no not
even with their own Choice, such who like the Rainbow always oppose the Sun Be
the Government what it will, they are for contradiction still, aspiring after
what they enjoy not. These are the eternal Exclaimers against all reigning
Establishments, and are the Diseases in a Commonwealth, which, as gangrened
Members, ought to be removed, or cut off for the good of the Body. They are the
Vermin, Excrements, and Nusances, of whom Nature should discharge itself as of
a common grievance; following the president of that Prince who, would have that
Horse killed, whose fiery Temper gave disquiet to his Camerades. With more
Reason, factious Men ought to be examplarily punished, as being the more
dangerous sort of Brutes, whose restless Tempers would be of worse consequence
were they suffered to take Root, therefore should be early mowed down, or nipt
in their Bud: Or at least their Sting should be taken from them, that their
Poison may not swell that Part they would affect. Lenity in a Prince on such
Occasions, may be of ill consequence to the Public; and as Tyranny may be
fatal, so may Lenity be the ruin of a Government: And though a Prince may not
find it necessary to see, nor hear all he may see, or hear, and that Prudence
will, that he dissemble the Knowledge of many Things; yet there is a time that
Justice must take Place, That evil may be restrained, but so as to prevent
Despair; lest the Exasperated finding all hopes excluded should awaken Revenge
to the desperately overturning all before them: For as Oppression weakens the
Government, so that Prince loses his Reputation, when he retains no more of
the Regal Qualities than the name, and pomp of State, that outward appearence
gives him. Where a Prince is loved, feared and obeyed, there the Government
thriveth and Florishes; for in Union consists the Strenght of the Body
Politic, who as our Bodies are composed of several Parts, each having assigned
them their different Offices for the good of the Whole, to which order they all
submit and agrees; so that if one Part or Member is offended, the other
participates, and are not angry at each others Acts: But if a foreign Power
wound an Eye, tread on a Toe, or hurt a Finger, the whole Body shall be
affected so, as to discover each their Resentments. How will the Eye show its
anger, the Nose shrink, the Mouth exclaim, and the Hands fly to the assistance
of the grieved Part? The Feet, even the whole Body, according to the danger,
take the alarm. Thus each Part sympathises, in the common Good or Evil that
relate to the whole: Thus each one should be concerned for the common Good of
that Republic of which they are Members. It is observable, That amongst
irrational Creatures, there is not found that discord as amongst Men; they do
not devour and destroy those of their own kind, in which Men are worse than the
worst of Brutes; for they tear and devour each other, in which their Shame they
glory.

For the promoting this Union, the Prince should be circumspect, patient, and
quick in dispatches, showing his Power and Justice to some, and his Humanity
and lenity to others, and not fly out when Things answer not the proposed Ends,
but to be armed against Disappointments: For no Ship, though steered by a
skillful Pilot, will in bad Weather always answer the Helm.

Therefore since every Country has its mixtures of good and bad, such Caution
ought to be taken, as to connive at what cannot be helped; and seem not to see,
when seeing may eclipse Authority if not exercised. It was our Savior's Advice
in the parable, That the Tares should not be rooted out, lest it indamaged the
Wheat. Therefore Prudence would rather yield to Fate, and shut the Eye and Ear,
and bend rather than hazard breaking. The Emblem of Hercules his boisterous
managing the Rudder till it broke, may be of use to show how the Steersman may
spoil the Ship's sailing for the want of a prudent compliance; and yielding to
the circumstances of times, is the interest both of Prince, and People.
Machiavel tells us, That he who cannot dissemble knows not how to reign; not
that Insincerity and Hypocrisy is proposed to be the Standard for the Prince to
walk by: But here is intended such a Compliance only as may consist with
Honor, and the Peoples Interest. There is an honorable Condescension, or
yielding, till a fitter Opportunity may offer it self. Princes sometimes deal
with their Subjects as with Children, whose weaknesses are born with, till can
be got from them that hurtful Play-thing, they so passionately cry after.

Neither should a Prince heap riches to the unease of his People; let them
shear, but not flea their Sheep. Where is the Honor to have a beggarly
Subjects? As he is the Head of the Body, he ought to have a Regard, that they
that represent his Authority, do not abuse it by wounding the Feet; for when
they are infeebled what shall support the whole? To prevent which, Covetousness
is to be discouraged; for a Prince is never so rich as when he has his Peoples
Hearts, then he needs not question their Purses. The public Interest is to
have none placed in Authority, but such as are deserving; none should be
empowered for favor nor affection; and when the Prince has made a fit choice,
they should have due encouragements to answer the Character they bear in the
Government; That to support their Grandeur, want may not tempt to take Bribes.
But where Virtue is found, there suitable Rewards ought to be given according
to the Character born; that the Salary and liberality may be spurs to Virtue,
as their Princes favors are encouragements: There is no greater balk to
Emulators, than to see Recompenses wrong placed on the Heads of the
Undeserving: It is a great encouragement when a Prince shall of himself make
Observations of the fidelity of his Subjects. To accumulate riches on the Rich,
because they are such, is like carrying Water to the Rhine, or Gold to Peru.
But Wisdom will direct when and where to place Favors proportionable to the
Character of the giver and Person to whom the Largess is made, that exceptions
may not be taken that merit was not recompensed, and that regard was rather had
to Favor, and By-respects, than to Desert; which is not only a shame to the
giver, but a Discouragement to such that have deserved well. Thus regard is to
be had both how, and to whom, as well as what, gifts are disposed of: For such
may liberalities be, That the giver may be impoverished, and instead of gaining
Friends may draw upon himself Enmity; so that even those to whom he has been
liberal to save their Stakes may join with Exclaimers, and turn to ridicule
that bounty shown them; and that Gift they called liberality, when they
received it, shall with the common Vogue be styled a profuse wasting that
Treasure, that might have been preserved for better purposes: Such lavishings
merit rather the Name of Squanderings than Liberalities, and in a Prince, as
condemnable as Covetousness: But where liberality is guided with prudence, it
redounds to the benefit of both Prince and People.

It is also conducible to the public welfare that proper Instruments for
council be chosen, such as are wife and faithful, in whom Covetousness does not
predominate; for where that reigns no good can be expected, as being the
Gangrene of the mind, that eats out Love, Duty, and Honor; therefore should
have no more a Place at the Helm than Pride, or Envy: Also such ought to be
removed as shall not from a peak and spite, in opposition to an others sense,
seek out Reasons to overthrow the best advice given, and that because it was
not first proposed by themselves. Where there is passion there is bandying, and
clashing with Words; and no good success can be expected from these, no more
than from those that can not see, but with such Spectacles as are handed to
them at the Board by some leading Oracle, without further weighing matters;
being wholly Biased by the Opinion they conceive of their Friends Parts,
though many times the wisest may not always be in the right. There are also
some that see no farther than that Counsel they take upon trust: These are
Ecchos, while others are for fetching Reasons a far off, in order to the
effecting what is proposed, overlooking more easy methods at hand. These know
not how to approve any thing, that carries not some thing of extraordinary in
it. But none are more dangerous at the Council Board than these that wait to
catch at the Prince's Sense, which they are sure right or wrong to approve, and
make his Thoughts Theirs. These Flatterers ate not sufferable in that station
where none but the unbiassed and sincere should take Place, and not Sycophants.
But there are few Princes whose Courts swarm not whith these; also who have not
their particular Achitophels, yet will not believe they are so influenced. But
a too over-weeing Opinion of any, how acute soever, may befatal. But there are
others so opinionative of their own Sense, that they will call a Council only
for fomality sake; though at the same time they resolve to take no Measures,
but what their own Judgment dictates: Methinks I hear such say, with Xerxes, I
called you that I might not seem to follow my own Advice, but it is rather to
injoin your obedience than ask Counsel. There are also some that, with St.
Peter, after the act is over, are for consulting, and with him crying out,
Shall 1 draw? When before he had cut of Malchus's Ear, but none are so wise but
may need advice; for in the multitude of Counselors there is safety. For
Strength, Riches, and Diligence do not always succeed, but it is by Counsel?
and Prudence, that great things are compassed. Such Persons therefore should be
made use of, as are skilled in the Nature and Distemper of the Body Politic;
such that like true Physicians of State may prevent Weeds from taking root,
that the public Peace be not destroyed; such as can foresee State-Diseases by
their Symptoms, before they become incurable otherwise than by violent
Remedies. Such as are of Frederic the Third's Stamp and Approbation, who valued
those Counselors most, that feared God more than himself, who had for end, the
Peace and Welfare of his Empire. There is no greater safety for a Prince, than
to have the Government stored with such: Then will he be obeyed, and Peace
secured; which Peace, how desirable in it self soever it may be; yet it has
attending it Pride, Idleness, and Danger: For under a long Peace, Princes and
Subjects become secure, and Effeminacy, Lust, and Prodigality creep in; so that
even the most disciplined Armies lying still may degenerate, and like the best
of Horses pampered; and through want of exercise, do loose their good
Qualities. Nothing contributes to ruin a Nation, like lust, and Pleasure: When
Princes grow potent under a long Peace, they usually confide in their Strength,
and are tempted to unjust Enterprises, whose sinister Effects fail not to
follow sooner, or later.

Thus far of Peace, how it may be kept at home against the Snakes of their own
Bosom, which may prevent War from abroad; yet something may be spoken in
particular of Peace, as it relates to neighboring Princes.

He that will live in Peace with his powerful Neighbors especially, must
suffer, and not take every thing in the worst Sense; but give a grateful Twine
to that, which at another Time, and under other Circumstances, might be called
an Injury; therefore all Occasions of Contentions are cautiously to be avoided.
Also he that will enjoy Peace with his Neighbors, must always be prepared for
War: The Hedgehog is ever armed against his Enemies, and there are few. Animals
that carry not their offensive and defensive weapon about them: As the Ox his
Horn, the Bear his Tooth, and the Lion his Paw.

The prudent Prince will lay up Treasures against the time of need, by such
insensible Methods, that the People be not oppressed, and that occasion of
Discontent be not given, and that what shall be accumulated, be not wasted by
worthless Persons, not misimployed in fruitless, and unprofitable Contrivances;
but regard is to be had, that all Opportunities be improved: Loose no time, was
great Caesar's Motto, for delays are dangerous; and as Health, and fair
Weather, are succeeded by Sickness and Storms; so War succeeds Peace. Solomon
tells us, of a time for every Thing; therefore when Peace gives leisure, store
your Magazines with warlike Munitions, that nothing be wanting upon a Surprise.
It is the Security of a State, always to have an Eye on War, in time of Peace.
Keep therefore a Nursery of Officers of Known personal Merit: It is the unhappy
Fate of many deserving, to be laid aside in Peace, as if never more to be
needed; and like Stoves in Summer, are not regarded. But though the Sun shines
now, yet stormy Weather is to be expected, and a regard ought to be had to past
Deserts. Also an Inspection ought to be made into the Condition of the standing
Forces, that there be no imposing false Musters: A minute Account should be had
of them, as also of the Stores, and that from time to time aview be made, also
trials, and draughts should be frequent, the better to know what is to be
relied on. Thus to preserve Peace at home and abroad, is to be always ready,
and by the help of able Ministers, Inconveniences may be forseen, and
approaching Dangers prevented, by administering Suitable Remedies answerable to
the present Pressures

Also in peaceable Times to fortify Places, may secure the Country from Wars
at home and abroad; the Reputation of being armed, may prevent both. It is
strange how. Men are diffident of God, yet dare confide in sinful Men; and by a
Remisness in that kind, give Opportunities to their Countries Ruin. It is the
simplicity of the Lamb, or Goose, that lets them fall into the Wolf and Fox's
Paws. The Tortoise, diffident of a foreign Shelter, carries her House, by Sea
and Land, wherein she places her safety. It is not in our Days as in Noah's,
Ark where Men and Beasts could sociably Live and trust each others; he that
never trusts, stands on a Guard, and is not easily deceived. It is observable,
That Peace lasts no longer than it consists with the Aspirers Interest. There
are some restless Spirits that will not be quiet till beaten into good Manners,
to the unease of their unhappy Subjects. But we must not only consider Peace as
a long enjoyed Rest, where there has been for many Years no Hostilities, but
as it immediately succeeds War; and show, how after both sides are wearied by
War, the usual Methods of procuring it, are by the project of Treaties.

Of Treaties, and Negotiations of Peace.
TO manage which, such proper Instruments are to be chosen, such as are well
acquainted with their Neighbors Interest as well as their own; and also with
the Genius of those they have to treat with. If it be a powerful State that
holds the Rod over you, then a Confederacy of neighboring Princes is necessary
to prevent being swallowed up a prey to Ambition. There are some Ministers so
well versed in politic Strokes, and Conter-pates to know how to turn and wind
matters, that they shall gain more by Treaties, than Conquerors shall effect by
Feats of Arms. Many times Peace has retrieved those Advantages, which the
Sword had lost: But in Treaties Clergymen are the worst choice; who, like evil
Spirits, ought to be conjured out of the circle of Negotiations, and from
having a share in managing the Civil Government, lest they confound all
measures of Peace: For they make the worst Statesmen, who though they have the
Voices of Doves, and have nothing less than Peace in their Mouths; yet they
bear Stings in their Tails; they come with Olive-branches in their Beaks, but
Experience has taught that wherever they come to sit at the Helm, they
occasion Discord and Confusion.

Many times to serve a turn, Sham Treaties are set on Foot to gain time, where
much is offered, though little intended more than delusory Amusements to
compass By-ends; of these blinds, the prudent Plenipotentiary is watchful, lest
instead of a Cordial, he meet with a purgative Potion. All State-engines ought
to be considered, as so many Buyers of Wares, who to compass their desired
Commodities, seldom speak as they think; but this our Statesman, being
acquainted with the Interest of each Power, and the Politics by which they
steer their course, will know how to turn the Mill that way, that may best
answer that Quarter the Wind sits in. Lesser Potentates should Act with potent
Neighbors circumspectly; especially when they have to do with such whose
Maxims are, That their Princes ought not to be Slaves to their Word; and that
Truth and Sincerity are but vulgar Virtues: It is those that are to be
suspected, let their manner of acting appear never so frank and oepn: For such
can stteer their course by all Winds, and will scruple at no means, how
illegitimate soever, to compass their Designs of crushing others, and clothing
themselves with their Dominions. These are they, whose Ambition has no Bounds,
but what necessity compels them too; against whom, as Common Enemies to
Property, all adjacent Potentates should arm and unite, to support each others
Interest. Nothing can be more uneasy, than when a Prince, or State, is placed
between two Emulators for Empire; to carry even betwixt them, and to give
jealousy to neither, is a hard Game to play; and those so concerned run a
Hazard of being ground in pieces between such Rocks. It is therefore requisite
to be always in good Intelligence with those they may have occasion to use as
Confederates, or Mediators, that the power of over-growing Greatness may be
balanced; that they may not, after the example of greater Fishes, devour the
lesser fry of States, that lie in their way; which, if suffered, may be of ill
consequence to such, as stand by as Spectators; lest their turn be next to put
on that Yoke they suffer their Neighbors to be yoked with. It is surely the
common Interest of Princes, to be jealous of Incroachers and Encroachments;
being evil Presidents that in time may affect themselves as well as their
Neighbors, who by stopping that current they serve themselves. If two Powers,
Emulators for Empire, should jar and justle each other; then it is the common
Interest to let them clash and contend to their weakening, provided standing
Spectators lay not a Foundation for future Breaches. Such surely was the
reserved Policy of Innocent X. when desired to mediate a Peace betwixt two
Contenders for Empire, gave Cardinal Panzirolo to remark out of his Window, two
Porters fighting, whom he would not suffer to be parted till they thought fit
to leave off themselves; saying, Thus will the contending Princes do, when
wearied, they will leave off without a Mediator.

Amongst the many Cautions to those that treat, something might be said of the
Interest of such lesser States as have contests with Neighbors of their own
Rank, who ought to avoid janglings, so as their Differences arise not to an
open Rupture. Some proper Mediator therefore ought to be found, to accommodate
Differences; so as the Honor of each may be preserved: For if the Contest
arise to Hostility, it may prove of fatal consequence to both, and give
occasion for a predominant Power to profit by the Difference, and annex them
both to his Dominions; and serve them as the Bird of prey in the Fable did the
Frog and Mouse, who seized of both. Neither should lesser States call a
superior to be an Assistant, least he serve himself, and not the Proprietor; of
which History has on Record various Examples, of those that made ill use of
such Opportunities, and instead of serving the Interest of those that called
them as Assistants, they made themselves Masters. Therefore it is best to avoid
all Occasions of difference, and not be obstinate to wreak a Spite, but to
accept of such Terms as may be obtained, and suffer the loss of a part rather
than expose the whole.

But there are sometimes such Peaces proposed, that an open War is more
desirable, and less to be feared. Neither can Peace founded on unjust
Conditions be long-lived; which are like ill cured wounds that fester and prove
the Patients greater Disease.

Neither is a new reconciled Enemy to be trusted, especially if he has been
the Aggressor; for such seldom pardon the Injuries they have done themselves;
because they believe they can not be forgiven. Let the Fox cover himself never
so artificially with a Lamb's Skin, yet the wary will dread him. Neither let
any Inducement charm the Sword into its Scabbard, nor persuade to a too early
disbanding Forces: That Shepherd deserves Censure, that will hearken to the
Wolf to send away his Dogs.

Having said something of Peace at Home, and of preserving it by necessary
Cautions with neighboring Potentates, and of security by Treaties, the desired
hope; and though occasionally something has been hinted at about making
Leagues, yet it may be necessary to make further some addition on the same
Subject.

Of Leagues.
ALthough Alliances are good yet those are to be pitied that stand in need of
them; and should consider with whom Leagues Offensive, and Defensive are made.
Unequal Powers in affinity may be of ill Consequence; for the weaker Lies at
the mercy of the stronger, and is tempted to seek redress from another Power
capable to protect him: For Confederates have diverse Faces; it is their Tails
only that are twisted together. When the Sheep become the Lions Associates,
their Skins usually pay for it; for between Unequals there can be no equal
Confederacy. The Great have great Designs, the Lesser such as are suitable to
their different Stations; one gives, the other takes. Disparity makes the
unwilling unwillingly condescending, and as with the dividing the Spoil got in
hunting, in a common Confederacy of the Beasts, the Lion will claim so many
Parts and pretended Rights, that he will leave his Companions to stand by as
Spectators, silently to dispense with their Rights, and suffer their
irremediable Losses, without discovering the least Resentment. For what can be
alleged, when the Character of a King, Merit and Prowess is pleaded, and after
that of his Will not to be controlled? What can his modest Companions do less
than make a Virtue of necessity, and suffer their Rights to be disposed of, how
unjustly soever Ravished from them? Thus the powerful profits to the loss of
the weaker Competitor. This comes by being tied to the Interest of a Potent
Allye; who instead of a Helper finds a Master, such will know no Partners.
Therefore it is of ill consequence for lesser Powers to be reduced to join with
the Stronger; though it may sut a present occasion. Alliances with such
Confederates contribute to Augment that Power, that when time serves, may be
made use of, to inslave themselves: For when such Confederates have secured
their ends, what can they expect more than that Fate, that Polyphemus gave
Ulysses, of being Devoured the last?

Another Inconveniency annexed to lesser Powers, when embarked in League with a
more powerful, is that, whenever the same greatness comes to justle, and
contend as Competitor with another of equal might; then the lesser by Virtue of
the Confederacy, is exposed to all the Streights and Desolations, that attend
Hostilities. And if the formidable Power suffers, and bends under the Weight of
the Adversaries Arms, what less can be expected, than to be Sunk, and Buried in
his Ruins? Therefore a prudent Diffidence is to be had of all Compacts, wherein
Safety is Exposed. It is true, that to prevent foreseen Evils, necessity does
sometimes oblige to Embrace for Allye a more powerful Party; and when a
Prince's Word is once Engaged; it is confessed, That it is very Disingenuous,
not to say worse, to break Covenants Solemnly Stipulated; but that is not here
the Question: For as they can not be justified, so shall I not wholly Condemn
the Breaking those Leagues, which incroaching Confederates have Necessitated:
For there may be such Reasons drawn from Self-preservation, and the hard
Termsimposed, that though the breach of Oaths can not be justified; yet they
may admit of a most favorable Construction: For Oppression and necessity may
extort such Terms, that the Prince would Sin against his Person and Subjects,
should he inviolably keep them, so that though the making them at first was an
evil; yet the breaking of them seems a less, than that of their keeping: So
that although the breaking sinful Oaths may not be Scrupled; yet the making any
Illegitimate ones is to be Condemned; as being that which with Honor and
Justice can not be Maintained.

It may be observable, That those with whom Leagues are made, ought to be such,
that we may be assured they are Friends, that in distress will be a reciprocal
Help, and not be Biassed by Fear or Lucre. A true Friend, like Blood, springs
forth as soon as the Wound is made. It is observed, That Swine, when they hear
their Follows cry, will fly to their assistance in Danger: Therefore the Lion
would make no League but with that Herd, that in Necessity is so faithful.
Leagues are never so likely to be Religiously observed, as when made with such,
as are not too much superior in Power; they are nice Things, and though a
Remedy against Danger; yet themselves are a Danger, though present
Circumstances sometimes call for them. In such Junctures, the Prince is to arm
himself with Caution, that he repent not, and seek to break Compacts so
solemnly exchanged. But God ought to be consulted; for if he ties not the knot,
the bond of Peace will soon be unloosed.

Of War.
AS Peace vanishes, so War takes Place, each follows the Heels of the other;
as the one sets, the other overspreads the Horizon; and as Darkness succeeds
Light, so War succeeds Peace.

Amongst the many infinite perfections God discovered of himself to Man, that
of Immutatability is only peculiar to the Deity; since no created Beings, how
excellent soever in their Nature, but were made liable to change, and left to a
possibility of falling from that State in which they were placed. Thus Lucifer
from a glorious Angel became a Devil; it is matter of Astonishment, That in
Heaven, where he was placed in the highest Orb of Happiness and Peace; that he
could not be content, but must rebel against his Maker. It is matter of
Wonder, That even Heaven, where the God of Peace reigns, should not be exempt
from Rebellion, and since the Fall, it seems, as if Opposition were the very
Essence of all created Beings. How are the Elements in Hostility? How does the
Earth quake? The Sea roar? the Air thunder, and the Brutes wage War against
each other? The Greater devouring the Lesser. And no wonder, That Men are drawn
in, having such Prompters as the Devil, and their own perverse Natures, that
they can not without jarring, live in neither City, nor Neighborhood. How
early did this Enmity show it self? For, even in the Womb, Jacob and Esau
struggled for Mastery, and when born, what fewds were there betwixt these two
Twins in their Father's Family? That, not agreeing, they were forced to be
separated, till lenghth of Time had worn out their Animosities. Also a Father
and Son, David and Absalon; a Kingdom could not contain them, but one must
Rival the other for Empire: And which is more, Cain and Abel, though they had
the World betwixt them; yet was their Discord Fatal. Thus Satan as from the
beginning, so to this Day, he persists in fomenting Dissensions; setting Man
against Man, Family against Family, and Nation against Nation; putting all into
Confusion by Broils and Wars; through which Riches are exchanged for Poverty,
and Sorrows are introduced in lieu of those Delights that accompany Peace; who
as it is the Health of a State, and a Nourisher and Incourager of Arts; so is
War its Sickness, and the Discouragement of Ingenuities: For in the midst of
Noise and Hurry, none can expect suitable returns of Virtue, where Dissoluteness
seems to be let loose, to make way for Pride, Strife and Contentions, and where
every one labors to make his Neighbor his Prey. Thus where War is, there
Misery overflows, like an impetuous Torrent, carrying away even to the very
marks of Prosperity that Peace had formerly left its Inhabitants.

There are two kinds of War, viz. Civil, and Foreign.
CIVIL War is usually the Daughter of a bigoted Zeal for a public Good, and
feigned Liberty and Property; it is from intestine Broils that proceeds
Irreverence and Disobedience, and through the depravetness of Nature and
manners justice, Majesty and Laws are trodden under Foot to make way for Spoil,
and setting up some private Interest; or to wreak some conceived spite: Such
are like those Fishers that find advantage by casting their Nets in troubled
Waters. Intestine Heats, if not timely quenched, may prove the Destruction of
Empires, and are worse than foreign Wars. And as Diseases within the Body, are
more to be feared than remoter Griefs; so Civil War is attended with more
sinister Effects, than that from Enemies abroad; for where the Bowels of a
State are disaffected, there the Father is against his Son, and every Man's
Sword against his Fellow; and as a House divided cannot stand; so the Ruin of
that State may be expected, where one Member wounds the other, to the Hurt of
the Whole. These Wars, called Civil, are the most Uncivil; for then is laid
aside all respect and consideration, with reference to Affinity, Consanguinity
or Friendship; for Friend knows not his Friend, nor Relation Relation, neither
does the Son know his Father, nor Servant his Master, no more than the Subject
knows his Prince. Thus States and Commonwealths have their Diseases as well as
Men. It is the wise Physician's part, to find out its Cause; for when known,
the Malady is half cured: And as Purging and Bleeding is requisite to full
Bodies, where Blood abounds, and ill Humors are grown to a ferment; so
Phlebotomy in a State, is necessary when Malcontents are risen up, and become
the Disease of the Place, so as to affect the Body Politic. Let the Evil
proceed from what cause soever, it matters not; neineither is it material from
what quarter the Wind Blows, if it indangers the House. Therefore let the
Discord proceed from what Cause or Persons soever; whether from a foreign
designing Power or from Poverty, Oppression or Idleness, or from the popularity
of some particular indeared One to the People, as Absalom was in his time; all
which being so many Rock's or Shelves, the Pilot, who sits at the Helm, ought
to steer his Ship so as to avoid the threatened Danger; and though he has
formerly escaped, yet is he not to rest secure; for though every Vapor may not
turn to a Storm, yet it is good that the Ship's Tackling be ready to weather
the Tempest, that she may be safely steered into the Harbor of Peace.

Civil War ordinarily has these following Pretenses; as Religion which is of
great weight to influence a bigoted Commonalty, an invasion of Properties,
which annexed to the former, will go a great way to unhinge all. Thus if Laws
be broken, Privileges infringed, and Subjects oppressed, whether by Taxes, or
by the Irregularity of Soldiers. Also when Persons of no merit are empowered,
any Thing will serve malcontents to exclaim and take occasion to gratify their
Spite; though the secret Cause of their Inveterateness proceeds from their not
being preferred, and that their imaginary Merit is not answered: But whatever
the inducements may be, they are but a wild sort of Executors of Justice, who
taking pet at the World, will choose rather to revenge themselves on themselves,
than not gratify their Humor; but these hereby involve also the ignorant
Commonalty, that like Tinder are subject to take Fire; such, rather than sit
still, under those Bounds that Providence has prescribed them, will run the
hazard of their own Destruction.

Also Princes Austerity to their Subjects may be a means to bring on
themselves, as well as People, many Evils. The same may be said of private
Fewds in great Families, that they are the Forerunners of Tumults in a State;
especially when they arise to that height, as to form themselves into
disorderly Assemblies, from such Sparks are often kindled Civil Dissensions.
Likewise want of Bread may be an occasion; for nothing makes more desperate
than a Dearth, and the more, if there be no prospect of a Remedy.

The Remedies of Civil War may in some measure be effected; when its Causes are
known, then suitable ways may be found to appease the incensed Ones. If the
imperious Humor of the Prince be occasion, then let him change his Conduct;
for such may be the churlish Austerity of a Master, that his Dogs may be so
incensed, as to show their Teeth, and Snarl, though they may not always Bite:
Soft Words, and a debonaire Carriage, cost nothing. Had Rehoboam practiced this
Rule, he had not lost Ten Tribes; but if any public Ministers abuse the Power
they are entrusted with, then let them be removed, and made, public Examples
to deter others. Does penury, and want of Bread, cause Exclaimers, and
Hurricanes are thereby raised amongst the People? Then let Monopolisers of
Provisions be obliged to bring forth their Stores, and Sell at a regulated
Price; for private Interest should give way to the public Good. In order to
which let Husbandry, Mechanics, and Merchants be encouraged; and suffer not
Money to lodge in a few Hands, but find ways to make it Circulate, lest it be
said, That Want reigns where Riches abound.

Commonwealths are composed of two sorts of People, Nobility and Commonalty,
under which general Heads are several Classes of Men. The latter is a great
Body, slow of Motion; therefore as a spur to quicken them, the Nobility is
necessary; not only to excite, but also to steer them in their right Biass, for
the Example of the Nobility does wonderfully influence those more heavy Masses,
and by a sort of Sympathy infuses in them new Spirits, and gives Courage to
undertake, and execute generous Enterprises: For the Nobility wanting Numbers
can not effect, what necessity might require from more numerous Bodies. Thus
Nature has wisely ordered each degree of Men to be necessary to the other,
that reciprocally they might be the stay and support of the Body Politic,
without which Union it could not subsist.

It is the Wisdom of those that sit at the Helm to use means to keep up that
noble Heat, with which the Multitude may be inspired, and not suffer their
laudable Resolutions to cool; in order to which, hopes of future Recompenses
are the great Engines of use on all occasions: For let Hopes dye, and you may
bid farewell to Successes, and conclude that both will sink together; for Hope
is the life of Enterprises, it sets all Wheels on going, even from the crowned
Head to the Dunghill; each have their Aims and Ends with which they flatter
themselves into an imaginary Happiness, though they never live to see it
compassed.

But as has been before hinted on an other occasion, That as all humane Bodies
are subject to vicious Humors, so the Body Politic has its Diseases and
Tumors, which ought to be redressed by a timely prevention: For amongst the
Nobility, of whom more reasonably might be expected fidelity from their Birth
and Education, are found those that are drawn away, though they possess the
Prince's Favor, or at least enjoy his Presence, to which by their Quality they
are entitled unto, that one would think might be sufficient to steer them in
the right way. But unhappy for them, and also for the Government, where such
Disorders happen, for these prove the most dangerous Tools of Mischief, and the
more, in that their Education has given them acquired Qualifications by which
they are capacitated to be more effectually good, or evil Instruments: But let
the Cause of Discontent be what it will however justifyable in the prepossessed
Apprehensions of such disaffected Ones, that is not here the subject, but to
show how to quench, and exstinguish those Firebrarnds, and Ringleaders to
mischief.

The first Remedy therefore proposed is, That the discontented Party by fair
means be drawn to their Duty and Allegiance, from a true apprehension of their
own Interest, with that of their Countries; in order to which, Reasons may be
taken with respect to the one, and the other, and that by some proper In
strument such honorable Satisfaction might be proposed as may consist with the
Prince's Character of Sovereign, when he treats with his Subjects.

But if fair Means fail, and that the Offenders are inexorable, then eclipse
that supposed Merit, by which the Head of the Faction is boyed up in the
Vulgar's Opinion: To promote which, insinuate Fears and Jealousies, that the
fervor with which the Tumult is excited to Sedition, may be cooled; to compass
which, let the Prince have in his Eye such, whose known desert has not made
them the Subject of the Peoples envy; such, whose Integrity and Faithfullness,
annexed with their Experience in military Affairs, may carry on awful fear, and
veneration for their Person.

Also David's Policy may be of use, by sending a Hushai to countermine their
Achitophels, that by Intelligence, and a Diffidence insinuated, the Enemy may
be weakened, and divided into Factions; on such Occasions not only Policy, but
Money may be a proper Bait: For what can not Gold effect? What has it not done
in such Cases? It is as Oil to the Wheel, that makes all Things Easy; opens
Closet-doors, discloses Secrets, imposes Silence, or makes the Priests Mouth
Speak; it inflames Zeal, creates Friends, and makes those that were Enemies,
such, as they would sacrifice all to carry on that Interest, which before was
their Aversion: So wonderful is the operation of this Metal, that it blinds
the Eyes of the Seeing, and opens those that before could not discern; and
makes the difficultest Enterprises easy by removing all Obstacles.

But when all Means fail, and that suppressing Sedition is the Question, then
let a Door timely be opened to those that by Repentance shall come in, and take
hold of Pardon; which, when proposed, ought most Religiously to be observed:
Offenders are not to be abandoned to Despair; that makes those the inveteratest
Enemies, which, by prudent Management, might have become useful Friends. Let
not Machiavel's Assertion be countenanced, That to the end Designs may not be
abortive, it is necessary to be perfectly Wicked: But since Princes and
Subjects are Mortal, why should their Passions be immortal? Neither is it good
to penetrate too far into the Nature of Offenses, especially when the Sore is
spreading. But as Corruptions increase, and ways found to evade the Law, so
should Justice be awakened to the exstinguishing of growing Evils.

Of Foreign War.
FOreign War is a less Evil, and a generouser Contention than the Civil, which
may be reduced to that of Offensive, and Defensive.

The Offensive is either Unjust, or Just. The occasions taken for an Unjust War
are sometimes so trivial, as may rather be lamented than inquired into, and so
with reason is called Offensive.

Of Unjust, Offensive War.
THe Opinion, that Right consists in that we are stronger than our Neighbors,
or that God takes the strongest Part, is a Tenent to be abhorred: For he is a
Supporter of justice, and the giver of Victory; which may be reasonablier
expected, when Justice and Necessity compel to take Arms for Refuge. Having
Self-preservation, and Peace for End, success may better be expected; but they
have reason to be jealous of their good Fortune, when Ambition and Covetousness
set them on work.

This Unjust, Offensive War is the legitimate offspring of Pride and Ambition,
and managed by such who are Scourges in God's Hands by whose means Countries
are depopulated, and Devastations made. Such are Beasoms in God's Hands, with
which he sweeps Nations. This sort of War is, in its Nature, offensive to
Mankind, whose Undertaker seems to design the Destruction of his Species.

This is the most unnatural of Enterprises, and looks as if Men had forgot they
were Men, and that they had divested themselves of their Understanding and
Humanity; and were become more cruel, each to other, than irrational Brutes are
to those of their own Sort, who wage not War, one kind against those of the
same. The Lion ordinarily tears not the Lion, nor the Tiger and Wolf those of
their kind; they assemble not in Herds, and form not destructive Projects by
gathering Parties against Parties. Also our Lord gives us to believe, That
though the Devils are Enemies to Mankind, yet that they are not divided amongst
themselves; for if so, their Kingdom could not stand.

Is it not Folly and Frenzy to seek Occasions to be a Plague to the Age, and
an Instrument of torment to others? To effect which, they will run through all
Hazards by Sea and Land, and for Uncertainties court Death and Destruction; and
with so much fierceness imbark others with themselves, to endeavor the Ruin of
those they neither hate, nor know: As it is with every hired Soldier that
invades the Persons and Properties of such who never gave him offense. Thus
these mercenary Champions contribute, as far as in them lies, to the promoting
the Disorder and sad Effects of such Debordements, even to which themselves
they bear their share. Those mercenary Ones, who regard not the Justice of a
Cause, but fight for the empty Name of being Valourous, and the inconsiderable
recompenses intailed on them, rather deserve to be styled Madmen, who give
themselves up a Prey to the Sword, and hazard for trifles their All to the
Mercy of incensed Ones; who will have no consideration to reduce such, either
to their first Nothing, or to render them useless by loss of Members, which is
more deplorable than Death it self: And this to serve the passion of an
ambitious One in an unjust Cause; and perhaps such an one, who neither knows,
nor cares, for their Persons, farther than to obtain his End; nor would
Scruple, when occasion offered, to serve himself of their dead Bodies, as a
Pedestal to heighten his Stature to take the farther view.

But when God, and Reason, calls for the Defense of their Country, Prince, and
Properties, then to dye, or suffer, in such a cause, is honorable, and a Duty
incumbent on the Subject. It is deplorable, the sad Reflections that may be
made of the Effects incident to Wars; which in themselves are sufficient to
deter the Promoters of unjust Ones. The hardening themselves against such
Considerations are Aggravations of their Crimes; for from that time they are
launched from the Shore of Peace, they also involve themselves, and others,
into a Sea of Troubles, with whose angry Waves they wrestle, and are tossed,
and hurried by the Wind of Fortune into a Gulf of Misery; which has a Mouth
wide like Hell, and refuses no Comers, but Preyes mostly on the Valiant, and
such as are fittest for noble Achievements: The most robust and daring, and
those likliest to live, are more immediately its Objects; and like the Lion,
the King of Beasts, disdains a mean Prey, and as he spares none, but crushes
all that come under his Paws. So this King of Terrors, when riding in Triumph
on his Chariot of War, then the impotent, the base, the Coward, are not so
immediately the Object of his lure, as the bold and daring, such as with
courage can look Death in the Face; thus like the generous Hawk, he takes his
flight on the noblest Quarry.

But such is the misery incident to Man, that sometimes God suffers in an Age a
Scourge to arise, who being given up to a boundless Ambition, is unsatiable
even to the ravishing his Neighbor's Properties; which after he calls his, and
that for no juster reason than that such was his pleasure; and after an
illegitimate Possession, claims a right to adjacent Places by virtue of their
Reunion. Thus some Men's desires are boundless like the Ocean, and as the Grave
are never satisfied; for presuming on their Power and Strength, they insult
their Neighbors. But where is the generosity: To seek occasions of Contest
where none is given, and that on frivolous, and often on no pretext surprise
the disarmed, or at least upon such a disarity of Force as makes them no proper
Objects for a generous Undertaker? But such run the Hazard of this Censure,
That as the lesser Hectors, where, they have an advantage, will, on every
slight Occasion, quarrel, and draw; and wanting matter for Contest, will rake
it out of nothing. Thus the greater to serve their turn wage War, and tell the
reason afterward. But so abstruse are the Inducements for their irregular
Proceedings, that even Oedipus himself, how clear-sighted soever, had he been
living, could not have discovered whence, nor why were such Hostilities; yet
such are the Parasitical Humors of many, that after a success obtained, they
will sing the Encomiums of Praises of those whom they know have dishonored
God, and done the Devil's Business.

Thus unwarrantable Actions take a new Name, and bury that of Usurpation in the
Bowels of Victory, that it seems as if Success and Right were indissolvably
knit together. Thus the Glory of overcoming, or being overcome, denominates the
Enterprise good or evil; and, accordnig to the common acceptance of things,
Fame Echoes forth Praise or Dispraise. Thus little Robberies are called
Thefts, while those great ones of Principalities and Countries are styled
Conquests, and Heroic Actions. Thus Usurpation changes its Name, and the
Usurper is become the lawful Prince; whose fortunate Success is adored by the
gazing World, while the Sufferer is despised and contemned. Thus the small Fry
in the Seas is made the prey to greater Fishes, and the lesser Fowl to Birds of
prey. Thus powerful Princes imboldened by their strength like Wolves, seize on
their Neighbors Flocks, and hug themselves with this impious Maxim, That
wicked Enterprises change their Nature with their Names, and become Virtues,
when attended with Success. Thus is he exalted to pride himself whose Blood
boiling in a high Ferment of Glory, is imboldened to farther Insolences though
he runs the hazard of Eternal Vengeance; for the all-powerful is not tied to
Means, but with the Usurper's own Weapons, whetted to Destroy his Neighbors,
he may thereby himself be made a Victim, and the measure he meated to others,
may be accumulated on him.

But what can we expect, when the Reflections of a Superior Vengeance will not
take Place, that any more inferior Consideration should be available? Or that
he should be induced to moderation, from any Reason drawn from his Honor, that
is eclipsed by oppressing such who have not might to Subsist, but under the
shelter of a more Auspicious Wing. But it is not thus amongst irrational
Animals; for the generous Lion disdains to make the Mouse his prey; nor will
the Eagle catch Flies.

Of Just Offensive War.
IT may be presumed that none will undertake such Enterprises, unless
well-provided with necessary Requisites; it concerns not less such who have a
legal Reason to begin a Just Offensive War, than those who want that Title to
justify their Actions, especially since Honor, Reason, and Justice alarm them
to action.

It may be with justice denominated Offensive, yet not from the same Reason
that the Unjust War is so called; for in this War Justice is implied, and is a
Right that the Prince does himself, and his People, who is supposed to be the
Sufferer of wrong, either from omission of right expected, or from a Commission
of wrong done. Thus, though cause be given for a Just Offensive War, yet before
imbarking therein, let the reasons of the undertaking be scrutinously looked
into, and not take fire at every alarm, though there may be Amusements, and
that Returns of just Demands may be dilatory and delusory, and Encroachments
may be made on various Pretenses, and that Words in Treaties may be wrested:
Also such may Circumstances of Time and Place be, as to furnish matter for
Contest; all which the Prudent Prince will not immediately resent, and take the
alarm at every disgust, but rather by moderation Calm Heats, using means to
reconcile Misunderstandings, giving right Ideas of Things by placing matters
indispute in their true Light; for the events of War are like casts at Hazard,
where the Dice commonly runs contrary to expectation, in which Fate has a
greater share than Reason: Though the Enterprise may be plausible, and easy at
first Undertaking, yet there will be found Difficulties, and the End uncertain,
if not Fatal; and oftentimes the Victor has occasion to say with Pyrrhus, when
he had vanquished the Roman Forces, to those that congratulated his Success,
That their Transports of Joy ought to be moderated by Silence, since such
another Victory would have undone him. Thus it may happen, that the Conqueror
profits not by his Conquest: Those are surely most unhappy Undertakings, where
neither Party can promise themselves to profit by their Enterprises; but that
there is an indubitable necessity, that both must be Losers; as it happens in
all warlike Undertakings; there being never Tears wanting in the greatest
Solemnities of Triumphs. The Armor is soon put on, the City is soon in a
Flame, but the Remedies of Conflagration are not easily effected; and Fortune,
who is inconstant, is never so eminently such, as in her dispensing her
Laurels. Princes may be said to be like Fishers, who angle for a Prize, though
they use the golden Hook, yet sometimes they not only miss the Prey, but even
Bait-hook, and all are often lost; so that though the Gainer of the Bait has
dearly purchased the swallowing that Morsel, yet has the Angler little Cause
of Triumph; and many times gazing Spectators have seen their Heads crowned with
unexpected Trophies and Honor, whom they expected should have been made
Victims. It is very disingenuous not to say worse, on every slight Occasion, to
place the welfare of the Subject on the Sword's Point. But some, like
Gamesters, that have so itching an humor for Play, that rather than stand out,
will hazard all.

It is not prudent, at all Times, to begin a just War, especially when the Evil
that accrues by it, is greater than the Good that can be expected from a
reasonable Compliance. Let soft and healing means be used with such honorable
Condescensions, as may consist with the Prince's Character. But if Necessity
compels, and that Reason and Justice countenance his Cause, then let Diligence
and Vigilance be awakened, to prosecute effectually what shall be begun. For
since nothing less than Fire and Sword will be available, use them as the last
Remedy to procure that Peace, which fair means could not effect. Which having
first essayed may give occasion with more reason to expect a a prosperous
Success. By which we see how the use of Arms is necessary, and that the
Military Profession ought to be honored, and encouraged; but however laudable
it is in itself, yet such ill use has been made of it, as to give occasion for
the unthinking Multitude to exclaim against it, as one of the Plagues of
Mankind, and as a Science hatched in Hell for the Destruction of Humane
Society. But as the best of Food turns to ill Humors when it lights upon a
vicious and a disaffected Stomach: So the military Profession may be misused;
and as skill and Weapons in the Hands of Robbers are hurtful and destructive,
but commendable, when lodged with the honest Traveller, who imploys them to
defend his Person, and Effects.

Thus the Military Art, and its Professors, recommend themselves to the World
as the stay of Lives, Laws, Liberties and Properties. There is no Profession so
honorable as the Military, nor more useful in its Place, when managed by a
prudent Conduct. It is noble in its Cause when legitimate, as also in its
Execution, by which its Professors are innobled, and capacitated for the
highest Honors; so that thereby they are adorned with Purples, and many times
their Merit recompensed with Crowns and Scepters. Even from private Sentinels
some have raised themselves to the highest pitch of Preferment, and by their
Virtue and Prowess have commanded such, whom before themselves have obeyed. No
Characters of Men whatsoever, deserve more from the Hands of their Prince, not
only in respect of their present Use, but also in regard of the Antiquity of
their Profession. For we read of Hostilities before Learning had polished,
refined, and dignified Men; for after the Person of their Sovereign, they are
the noblest, and the more in this respect, That the Prince prides himself in
the glorious Epithet of being styled a Soldier; and it is the Prince's
peculiar Province, to innoble and recompense Valor, by Military Honors. Also
in many respects, they exceed the learned Heads, however crowned with Bays: For
they are not only the preservers of Laws and Religion, and the Protectors of
Persons and Properties; but that Country, where the Military Art is
encouraged, becomes a Nursery of all Sciences, and under their Wing, Trade
Florishes, and Riches increase, to the Honor and Strength of that State and
Government, where that Profession is kept on Foot; but where it lies dormant, a
Door is opened to the first Ambititious One, that shall find himself at leisure
to insult their Security.

Of Defensive War.
HItherto War has been our Subject, so far as regards the offensive Part,
whether Just, or Unjust; in the latter the Innocent is assaulted, and reduced
to defend himself. It is time now to give some Hints, with reference to the
Defensive Part of War, where Self-preservation calls for the Vindication of
invaded Rights of the Innocents, who are therein passive, and by an impulse of
Fate hurried on to defend themselves; like those harmless Clients, who fly to
the Law for refuge from their litigious, vexatious Neighbors. It is from this
verbal War, that the more bloody one, made by Fire and Sword, may have derived
its Name; and as a Metaphor, drawn from defending the Cause, has taken its
name of a Defensive War, when the assaulted is necessitated to arm in his own
Defense against the Aggressor.

It is Natural to all sublunary Creatures, animated with Life, to seek their
Preservation; and God has imprinted it in the very Nature of irrational
Animals to preserve themselves from an invading Foe, and for that end has
furnished each with suitable Weapons: Some have their Horns, some are taught the
use of the Heel, others have their Teeth and Claws for Weapons; even the very
Reptiles and Insects have their Stings, which they use when provoked.

Since Self-defence is a Dictate of Nature amongst irrational Creatures; so it
is in Man, even the Laws of Nations will that Force be repelled by Force: Yet
some are of Opinion, That Self-defence is but a Faculty, and not properly
termed a War; but we will not stick at the Name, but leave it as inserted, and
call the Faculty of Self-defence to be a waging War. And as Fencers, where the
one attacks, and the other paryeth, yet both are styled Fencers, and the
Exercise is called Fencing. So those that wage a War offensive, and they that
defend themselves, are reciprocal Wagers of War.

It is not to be questioned, but a Prince may take Arms to defend his own and
Peoples Rights; for God, Man, and Reason, calls him to it, and are Incouragers
of Self-preservation, and to have recourse to Extremities. When nothing else
will prevail, then the Offender must be Offended, and Force must repel Force.
Yet though it be concluded reasonable, and a Duty incumbent upon each to defend
themselves; nevertheless God has endued Man with Wisdom, by which greater
Things have been effected than by Force; for Prudence finds many ways to wind
it self out of Trouble, and suts Remedies to the Circumstances then occurring.
To give particular Observations for each case, is impossible since intervening
Affairs can only direct, for New Accidents require New Counsel. But there are
Methods always of use, as Beacons to direct Travelers. Amongst the general
Heads of Advices observe, That when you find you shall unavoidably be attacked,
and that all Means for accommodation avail not, then begin the Game yourself,
and by way of prevention, if possible, assault your Enemy; for the surest
Defense, is Offense. Thus hurting, and being hurt, are near Neighbors. Besides
what Measures Prudence may have directed, try also (even in the time of Action)
what Money will do; part with it rather than with more Essentials. Let the
Sheep be Shorn rather than part with their Skins; the Fruits of the Earth, and
Money, are easilier retrieved, than Liberties and Patrimonies. And though
Ambition may not be charmed down by Money, yet through the Means of Favorites,
a Change has many Times been compassed: Therefore Plough with the Aspirers
Heifers; for though the Ambitious one disdain, Golden Showers, yet he may be
overcome by a Dalila, or some Favorite.

Use therefore Gold as being an Engine of great use; it is a most Sovereign
Mistress that makes the Blind See, and gives Strength to the Weak, and Feet and
Wings to the Slow. By it Peace is sometimes purchased, and it is the cause of
much Good, and much Evil; it is the Spring that sets all Wheels on going, from
the Prince to the meanest of his People.

The Prince therefore should not want this so admirable a Cordial suitable to
all the Grievances incident to a languishing and threatened State, and is the
best Bullwark to fence off approaching Evils; whether Famine, Fire, or Sword;
it is so desirable, that the Business of Mankind in all Ages has been to
acquire it. How has it penetrated Rocks, Stony Hearts, melted Metals; and
without other Key, has caused to fly open the strongest Gates to pay it
homage, though tied upon an Ass's Back?

If the Tempest cannot be diverted by Gold, then see what Stores and Provisions
have been laid up. Lose no Time, it is an advantage to be soonest in the Field;
and if there be no want of Money, Counsel, nor other Requisites, then he that
gives the first Blow, being so provided, is liklier to renew his Stroke; than
those whom a Surprise has brought into disorder. Thus meet danger, else it
will find you out, and give Reputation to your Courage and Strength; and may be
of use to bring the Enemy to consider, That a War built on Injustice may
endanger his own Ruin. But let not him who values himself for Might, Situation,
Numbers, Riches, and past Successes, be too assured; for Success does not
always serve the same Master, for sometimes it has happened that Victory has
waited on those, whose Forces were Inferior to the Assailant, whose numerous
Multitudes threatened to Swallow all before them; yet as the small Sands stop
the Career of the raging Seas, and set bounds to its proud and insulting Waves,
That so far they shall go and no farther, so should all bordering concerned
Ones, nay even all Europe, endeavor to chain up the never-satisfied Lion with
prey, that thereby he may be confined to his due Bounds: But some presume that
Fortune will always favor their Purposes, so they continue Plagues in their
Age.

But when neither Money, prudent Measures, nor Force can rescue from Ruin, then
the Giant must be let alone, and other Requisites used to calm that Heat: For
when Courage is not available, a prudent Shelter from approaching Danger may be
commendable, and ought not to be styled Cowardice; for though Virtue be most
demonstrated by wrestling with the greatest Difficulties, and that Courage is
ready to frame Ideas, That all Dangers are less, than what their Fears suggest
them to be, whose false Images have often fetched Disasters from far, even to
cause Armies to Fly when none Pursued; yet it is Fool-hardiness to run
precipitately into them, rather than seek a timely Remedy answerable to
Circumstances, as by calling in Succors; which, if failing, then the Generous
will choose rather to dye gloriously, than tamely lie down to be inslaved;
better it is to dye free by hazarding all in trusting Providence, than to be
trodden under Foot. The All-powerfull is not tied to Strength, or Numbers, but
can place the Laurel on the Head of the weakest. And though Supplies be
wanting, and that they exceed in number of Men, yet they may not in number of
Soldiers: For a good Cause, and Courage, answers all Defects. As Almanzor, Son
of an Arabian King, told his Father, That no Weapon was too short for a Man of
Courage; since what it wanted in Length, it might be supplied by Valor, and
stretching forth the Arm.

And though Expectations may not immediately be answered, yet the Generous will
persevere in magnanimous Resolutions to the last, and not prescribe a time for
Deliverance; for he who is the Protector of the oppressed, usually takes the
Opportunity to deliver, when Extremity calls loudest. For there is no Fire, how
great soever, but may be either quenched, or an entire Conflagration prevented:
Few Wounds but find Plasters proper for their Sore. Besides, Time wonderfully
changes the Face of Things, and makes our very Passions alter, that that which
once was the Object of our Hate may in time become that of Love, or at least
Indifferency; even the Persons of the Assailants are not immortal, though their
Passions may appear so.

Thus Hopes should bear up the Courage of the Generous, what either is or may
be in prospect, any thing rather than despair; imagine that the Assailant, or
his Animosity may dye, or his Passion for Empire cease, or that some unforeseen
Accident may turn the Scales; for though Towns, Cities, and Countries may
suffer, be Stormed, and Taken, yet they can not carry them away; and Time may
either see them rendered, or retaken.

Neither is it morally impossible, but that even the Conquerours may be
Conquered by those they oppresed; for the greatest Things are many times
brought about by small Accidents: There needs but the want of Water, or a too
great Inundation of the same, to change the face of things; for when God will
deliver a People, his Methods are usually attended with surprising
Circumstances, the better to show that his Finger operated therein. Yet let not
the expectation of some surprising Deliverance, render secure, but be armed for
Accidents, and use all probable means. However averse Fortune may appear to be,
yet keep Courage awake, and persevere patiently: For there is nothing more
inconstant than the events of War; the knowlegde of which, may be improved so,
as in Prosperity never to be secure, nor in Adversity to sink. But hope still,
and be diligent, and active as fire, and with the Eagle quick-sighted, Argus
like, looking every way; and, as if possessed of Briareus's many Arms, bestir
your self to frustrate all Enterprises.

The Foresight of events is necessary, and prevents many Evils, for by
seasonable notices, Places are fortifyed, and Peoples Effects secured. This may
detect the Imprudence of those, who through a parsimonious Principle of sparing
lie still, as the unconcerned Object of Prey to those, who are upon no other
score an Enemy, than that their Ambition and Power makes them such. It concerns
all who are Neighbors to such a Danger, to stand on their Guard, and to
strengthen themselves by joint Confederacy, against a common Oppressor, who
has given the World occasion to know, he will never want Pretenses to offend,
if thereby he may cloth himself with the Spoil of others; who is never in the
wrong, nor yet true to his Promises; and will never want insnaring ways to
involve the Unwary; who like the Fox, or Wolf are for making all a Prey they
can Surprise. Therefore by Union, and Counsel strengthen each other; for
sometimes Counsel answers the want of Force. Being thus armed by Resolution, go
on and Prosper; for that is the best Armor of Proof.

Upon all occasions where Hostile Actions are necessary, as many useful Hands
are to be secured as possible; but let few Heads be privy to what shall be the
Enterprise. Affairs of War ought to be deliberated by many, but the Results
known to few. When all lies at Stake, as Life, Liberty and Safety, then it is
high time to stand up for them; especially having to do with One, who regards
not such trifles as Honor, and Conscience; and looks upon Justice, and the
keeping Promises, to be plebeian Virtues, offensive to a squeemish Conscience,
and a stop to the Career of accummulating Provinces, as so many Annexes to his
Territories; but how far it consists with Justice, that is never made the
Question.

Thus it appears reasonable, that in time of Peace, Forces should be
maintained, and Disciplined; who ought not to be considered by the Inhabitants,
as their Disease; but rather as those in whom consists their Safety and
Happiness: For a competent number of standing Forces, kept in due order;
instead of giving Jealousies, and being a Terror, ought to be considered as
the Bullwarks of the Country; and as the great Encouragement to Industry. For
what Courage can the Husbandman have to Plough and Sow, or the Merchant to
venture his Stock, to Traffic, when they know not who shall reap the Fruit of
their Industry? Thus under God the Soldier is the Subjects shelter, from Fears
at home, and from Enemies abroad; by whose means Trade Florishes, and the Age
is Crowned with Plenty. By what has been said, it appears, That a standing
Army kept in good Order and Discipline, may be a promoter of Justice, and the
Protector of the Sovereign's Authority; by which he bears the Character of
God's Vicegerent on Earth.

My spare Hours, have given me occasion to speak of Peace and War, which I
intended for the private use of my Successors, who are not in Election tomeet
with a favorabler Reception from the World, than my Predecessors, and self have
had. I hope my Neighboring Princes, from the same Inducement, may find Reason
to join in Confederacy, against formidable Incroachers; in after Ages, as well
as in these our times, which will strengthen this received rule, That from
others Harms, and past Dangers; it is wisdom to take Warning: And most certain
it is, That in the Union of lesser Powers consists their Strength. For though
War, like some Physic is never to be Administered, but upon unavoidable
Occasions; yet it is necessary to Bridle the exorbitant Desires of the
Ambitious, and to preserve Peace. Thus War though a necessary Evil, yet has
this Good in it; in that it protects the Weak from threatened Violence, secures
Justice to each Proprietor. Thus taking up Arms, may be sometimes a most
necessary Refuge; when by Tyrannical Inundations the Prince is Insulted.

I might here have concluded, but having observed the frailty of Peace when
Unarmed; and that security is a temptation for Insulters to profit by their
lying so exposed: Therefore the use of Arms, is of absolute Necessity, even in
time of Peace, and that the Military Art be encouraged. For which Reason, I
shall further add some thing with reference to Military Professors, and will
decipher the Qualifications requisite in each of its Members; for as the
Military Employment exceeds all others, so its Professors deserve the greatest
Honors and Encouragements. There is no Virtue in Civil Society that heaps so
much Glory on the Heads of those it adorns, as that of the Military, and
Experience has taught Men to know, That it is necessary to have an established
Policy, with suitable Encouragements answerable to the great Undertakings of
military Men; that according to the different Spheres they move in, they may
have suitable Returns, without which few would be found to court so dangerous a
Mistress, that cannot be obtained but by wading through Blood, Sweat, and
Labor, whose Rivals for Honor never flourish so gloriously, nor ride in
Triumph so pompously, as in the midst of Fire and Smoke. To proced, let some
thing be first said of the Infantry in general, and after, of each of their
Stations in particular.

Of the use of Infantry.
THe Foot is useful in all Places, though rough, narrow, or straight Passages,
whether Hilly, Rocky, or Boggy Grounds, and is of less charge in raising and
keeping; and its Stores lie in less room, and require fewer Carriages, and are
easilier disposed of, and secured, than Forage. When the Foot is well
Disciplined, and in good Heart, they will maintain their Ground against the
Horse, and are best in Combat, Sieges, and Ambushes, and will bear the brunt of
the Day, with more Obstinacy; and though they are not so expeditious in gaining
Victory, nor so useful in pursuing; yet they are not so soon vanquished, but
will stand the hottest Brunts longer, and endure Fatigues, with Resolution and
Patience; when the Horseman cannot be Master of his own Intentions, if hurryed
away by these strong-headed Animals, to the dishonor of their Riders, and many
times loss of Victory. In the Infantry are more Preferments, and is the
readiest way to the highest Military Honors.

Of the Common Soldier.
HE is the Stock upon which all Cions are ingrafted, where the Product
sometimes exceeds its Parent, who from thence have risen to the highest Degrees
of Honor; even Princes have honored that Station, either by shouldering the
Musket, or trailing the Pike.

The Common Soldier ought to be young and vigourous, of a healthy Constitution
able to endure Fatigues; such who have been inured to Labor and Hardships are
most desirable; the Climates that they are born under, may contribute much to
endure Hardships; for more are killed for not being able to suffer Fatigues,
than have lost their Lives by the Sword. His Stature should be rather tall than
little; his Limbs clean and strong; his Feet good, and of a nimble and active
Body; cleanly in his Person Cloths and Arms; well Shod, and careful of his
Necessaries, That he may encounter Want, with the longest. He must not hazard
at Play, what he has, lest it becomes another's Propriety, and so be tempted
to irregular Ways, to supply his Wants; which may expose him to suffer military
Discipline. Thus the bravest in a Heard have been untimely cut off, as Examples
to others, which but for evil Presidents, has been desired, that they might
have been spared.

Also Wine and Women, are the bane of an Army, and unfit the Soldier for Duty;
the first bereaves him of Senses, and the second of Strength, and both are
Triflers away of time, and Obstructions to Advancement.

The Character of a Soldier is, That he have Courage as to dare Look Death and
Danger, in the Face. One who is armed with Resolution, either to vanquish, or
Dye. It has been observed, That some Men, who have Courage in the Field, will
fight like Heroes in a Crowd, when animated by numbers; yet will want that
mettle in private Quarrels. It were to be desired, our Soldier were of that
rugged Mould, not to suffer Affront, nor give occasion for Quarrels; but when
insulted over, then let him only right himself by generous Repulses, thereby he
gains esteem, and shuts the Door against after Broils and, Quarrels.

His Character is accomplished if he Knows to carry himself debonairly to his
Equals, obediently and humbly to his Superiors, and can give Instances of his
Humanity to all.

He is haughty to the Proud and Insolent: With his Enemies stout and valiant;
but is meek and gentle, and affable, when Time, Persons, and Place call for it.

He is also vigilant, and a strict Observer of his Duty, fearing to be
surprised, either by his Superiors or Enemies, and never questions why, or
what are the Reasons; but with an implicit Obedience, without murmuring,
discharges those Commands injoined him.

He will keep his Arms in good order, and readiness; and, with the many good
Qualities requisite, he is endued with Patience, a most necessary Ingredient in
a Soldier; so that Money is not more useful, to supply the Necessities of the
Poor, nor Wisdom to answer the Defects of Folly, than Patience and Perseverence
is, in the course of a Military Life; for by this Virtue the greatest
Difficulties are overcome.

Of the Corporal.
HE is promoted to that Station, from that of the Common Soldier; so ought to
have his Qualifications, with improvements; as he exceeds him in Ttrust
reposed; so he ought to go beyond him, in Diligence and Capacity. That he may
the better discipline the private Sentinels, and keep, Peace he is to give
information of Things to his Superiors, and carry the List of such as are to
mount the Guard. It is he that distributes Ammunition, and Provision, and
provides necessary Fire and Candle, and gives the Word handed to him; and in a
particular manner his Duty is, to be acquainted with the Persons, and merit of
each Particular, that he may place them accordingly.

The Trust reposed in a Corporal, is of that consequence, That on his Fidelity,
depends the Security of those Avenues where he is placed; for to have corpse de
gardes surprised, is of that importance, that sometimes it has occasioned the
Destruction of an Army.

Of the Sergeant.
HE is one chosen by the Captain, from amongst the best of his Men, for known
Fidelity, Experience, Courage, and Diligence; he is the Corporal's Elder
Brother, whose Place differs in this, That he Hands to him his Instructions,
and gives out those Ammunitions and Provisions designed, and with the Corporal,
takes cognizance of the merit of each particular Person; and their Lodging, and
Necessities, of which an Inspection ought to be taken, as also into their
Behavior; to assign Quarters, which he is to visit from time to time. The Care
of the Company lies on him; he is the Captain's Eyes and Ears, by whom he
receives Information of both Sick and Well, and other necessary Circumstances.
In short, the Sergeant ought to be brave and stout every where, Night and Day,
moving, walking the Rounds, visiting Sentinels; and, when upon Duty, he is to
be personally present with the Superior Officers, at the opening, and shutting
of the Gates.

Of the Ensign.
IT is a Post for a Gentleman; he ought to be endued with Sentiments of Honor
for his Country, and Person. He should be Young, a Man of Courage, well made,
with a good Presence. His Duty is, to carry the Colors where commanded, and
choose rather to part with his Life, than with them. In the absence of his
Captain, and Lieutenant, his Duty is the same with theirs, whose Instructions
being in common these do refer.

Of the Lieutenant.
IN the Captain's Absence, he is his Representative; so requires all his
Qualifications, their Duties being the same. He disciplineth the Men, has
regard that the Sergeants discharge their Duty. The Care of the Company lies
in a great measure on him; therefore he should be Prudent, and a Man of
Courage, as well as of Experience: For if the Captain falls in Combat, he
leaves the rear to the next Sergeant, to take his Sword and Post, at the Head
of the Company. It is his great Interest to keep a good Intelligence with his
Captain; being the way to Prefrement.

Of the Captain.
HE should be a Person of Honor, Courage, and Experience; prudent in Matters,
neither too rough, nor too indulgent, that he incur neither Hatred, nor
Contempt. He ought to be informed of his Men's Names, and of their merit, and
should know their Necessities. He marches at the Head of his Company, and leads
them on and off in Action, and he is to know the Quantity of Arms, Time when,
and Place where, and all other Circumstances, according to the Nature of the
Occasion Also he should be skilled in Fortifications.

This Post is the usual Step, by which the greatest military Honors are
ascended; therefore he ought to be a Man of worth, such as shall disdain the
consulting his own Ease at a time when his Men are incommoded; he should be
qualifyed with Wisdom, carrying always a Face of Prosperity, even in the midst
of Discouragements, that none be disheartened. He should have a Spirit above
mean Things, as that of making advantage of his Men by false Musters; but with
the Centurion in the Gospel, keep his Company complete; it being upon Record to
his Honor, that he had a Hundred Men. By which it appears, as if there had
been no False Musters in those Days. Also to assist his Men by little Advances,
may keep them from Irregularities, and gain their Love. He should be ambitious
of honorable Undertakings, and not encourage by his Example any excess, but
punish Drinking, and the Quarrelsome, with all Makers of Parties; Theft and the
Seditious, are to be discouraged, or cut off for Example, by a solemn and
public Execution. Small Faults need not be observed, and when such as you
would spare are guilty, so that the Eye cannot be shut, without incurring the
Censure of being partial, then Severity is to be used, answerable to the Nature
of the Crime without respect of Persons; and as a Parent, who, though he may
have a secret tendency to some of his Children, above the rest; yet he wisely
conceals it, and with Caution incourages all, and disobliges none.

Of the Major.
HIs Character is in common with other Commissionated Officers, viz. That he
have Courage, and be qualifyed with Knowledge; and that he be diligent, and
active; for in the Major's Power is included that of all the Officers in the
Regiment, which gives him authority over the Captains, and other inferior
Officers, as well as Soldiers, in Garrisons, Villages, and in the Field. If
there be not a Major in the Garrison; then he receives the Word, and directions
from the Governor, as to Hours, Place and Quarters, which he communicates to
the Sergeants, the same as if in Villages, or in the Field, whose Duty, and
Instructions vary, according to the disposedness of Places, and the time when,
whether of Danger, or otherwise. He appoints detatchments, and Places for
Rendezvous, and marks out their Incampments, and hands to the Officers their
Orders, before whom he is to be at their assigned Quarters, where he detatches
corpse de Gardes, and appoints Places for Sentinels. His Orders are not to be
altered but by himself as being the ordinary Conduit for conveighing them,
either from the General, or his Colonel. He should discourage useless Persons,
and see the Regiment march in due order, and that thy keep their Ranks, and
carry their Arms, except weary, or sick; for whose relief, his care is, That
carriages be provided to follow, that such as lag behind may be received. It is
also his place to give out Provisions to each Company their Dividend, and to
answer the necessity of the Sick, by suitable supplies of Food, Physic, and
Shelter.

In Sieges he advertises the Officers of his Regiment when to mount the Guard,
and Trenches, and commands the bringing off and on Laborers; he keeps a List
of the Men, and takes Cognizance of the Officer's Baggage. He is obliged to be
every where, and so for Expedition's-sake rides; he should be often with his
Superior Officers to receive Instructions. He sets Prizes on what Sutlers
bring in the Camp, and provides for their safe Conduct, and that they may not
want he does encourage their being paid.

His Business consists more in giving Orders, than in executing Exploits; and
though the practical part be requisite, yet a through Knowledge of the Theory is
of absolute Necessity.

Of the Colonel.
HE is supposed to have eminently all the Qualifications of a brave Captain,
who has gone through those Degrees of Command, which have capacitated him for
that Post, lest a conscienciousness of Demerit occasion his envying of more
experienced Commanders that act under him. He is to attack, and defend, and
lead his Regiment to engage, to make Retreats and Intrenchments; he relieves
Posts, visits Works, causes Orders to be observed, and has the Care of the
wounded Officers. He has Power to arrest, and suspend those in Commission
under him. He should be of an attractive and obliging Comportment to gain Love,
and to preserve his Esteem he must act with Bravery, Courage, and Prudence, and
be ever armed with Foresight.

Of the Major General.
HE is to the Army in a great Character that which a private Major is in a
Regiment; he ought to have the General's Ear, and to be ready to receive, and
with Expedition to convey Orders received.

Of the Field-Marshal.
IT is of absolute Necessity that he that moves in this Post should be a Person
of Worth, Honor, and Experience, since good or evil Accidents may happen, or
be prevented, according to his managing his Orders received from the General:
He appoints Guards, Convoys, Parties and Marches, and distributes his
Instructions amongst the Majors. He should be informed of the Country through
which the March is intended; the Care of lodging the Army lies on him, where he
is to be the first and last mounted: This is so necessary and painful a Post,
that in all Armies accordingly as they are numerous an Augmentation of them is
required, they being an Ease to the General, who are to see Orders kept, and
Justice administered. As the Majors and other Officers Care are of those lesser
Bodies under their Command, so the Field-Marshal's Care is required of the
whole Army; so that Experience and Conduct seems as necessary to one in this
Post, as to that of the Lieutenant-Generals.

He is also the Protector of Sutlers, the Moderator of Rates, that the one may
be encouraged to bring Supplies, and yet the Soldier not oppressed. He orders
the Marches of Foot and Horse, their Quarters, and their Form of Battle,
according to the then disposal of Things in reference to Place, Time, and
numbers of Horse and Foot, the better to prevent what Evil may happen, or to
make the best of the worst of Accidents. This Place of Field-Marshal is exposed
to Envy, and Censure, so is a Station of more Honor and Care, than
Satisfaction.

Of the Lieutenant General.
THis Post, and the Generals, and Field-Marshals, have so great an Affinity,
that there is requisite the same Capacity, Experience and Qualifications; for
what the General commands, the other executes, and that sometimes in separate
Bodies, and on several Occasions, as with Flying Camps, at Sieges, Attacks, and
with Detachments and Convoys. The General as the Spring does cause the Motion
of all the Wheels, the principal of which are the Lieutenant-Generals, so
should be Persons of tried Fidelity, Courage, and Ability. Their Numbers are
uncertain, they act according to the General's Orders, which they hand to
others, as in relation to Marches, assigning Incampments, Decampments, ordering
Engagements, commanding Retreats and Pursuits; therefore Foresight, Prudence,
Courage, Knowledge, and a presence of Mind in the greatest Hurry, are their
requisite Qualifications.

OF THE CAVALRY.
HORSE is so requisite in an Army, that good Success in a great measure depends
thereon, for all Places are first possessed by them, and those that exceed in
their Numbers are likeliest to become Masters of the Field; for by them
Garrisons are victualled, the Army provided with Forage, Convoys, Parties, and
Quarters beaten up, surprised, and sometimes carried away: By the Horse it is
that the Enemy is streightened, the Country ravaged, and harrassed by
Incursions. There is not an Enterprise of Hazard and Difficulty where the Horse
is not concerned; by their means Designs are compassed, facilitated, and
expedited.

The Horse being so necessary, so many of them are to be had as may answer the
proportion of your Foot, as well as that of the Enemies. According to whose
different Characters and Usefulnesses they are ordered, whether as Cuirassiers,
Light Horse, Dragoons, Croates, or Heydukes. By these Passes are seized,
Blocades made, and Contributions raised, Marches expedited, Pursuits and
Surprises given; in the expeditious executing of which they are more necessary,
and exceed the Foot, whose slow Motions are often Impediments, and cause
Disappointments, while the Horse by their quick and long Marches are the great
Advantage, though attended with Inconveniences, as being a greater Care and
Charge.

Of the Trooper.
THis Post, though the lowest, yet from thence some have ascended to the
highest Degree of Honor in Military Imploys; and as the same Soil produces
Grain of several sorts, so the Bush and the Palm has the same Origin, for
Virtue is not always found in elevated Fortunes, nor will that Illustrious DAME
be confined to Palaces, but the Country Cottage does sometimes afford the
World Heroes, who from their Clods of Earth, their Ploughs and Spades, have
ascended to the height of Honor.

These Considerations ought to quicken those in the most inferior Station to
be Emulators of those Ensamples of Virtue gone before them, and encourage
themselves with Hopes, that by a patient persevering in Well-doing, treading in
their Steps, having Encouragements with Opportunities, they may justly aspire
at that Honor and Glory, that others before them have compassed.

But as his Mind should be aspiring, and qualified with Courage and Bravery,
being undaunted, fearing nothing but Shame; and as his Inside is adorned with
generous Virtues, so his Outside should also have that of a comely Presence,
strong and manly, rather tall than little, and used to the Fatigues of riding;
not such as are taken from Towns or Cities, where, by an effeminate Life, they
are made tender, and unfit for the Hardships of a Camp. He should be young in
Years, from Twenty to Forty; for Nature gives such Impressions to Age, that ill
Habits are not easily rectified; but an old Trooper is a useful Member if grown
so under Service, whose Skill in Horsemanship need not be questioned, which
Knowledge all should at first bring with them. As the choice of the Man is
made, so should also the Horse in some measure correspond; who should neither
be young nor old, but strong-set, well-limbed, and not of a great heavy make,
yet large, and full chested, short, and strongly coupled and jointed, of clean
Limbs, and good Feet, such as will stand Fire: It is in Germany where Horses
fit for Military Service most abound nor will any stand Fire like them.

As the Horseman is to be under the Command of his Superior, so he ought to
have the Command of his Horse, that neither Gun nor Drum shall disorder nor
make him break his Rank. Our Trooper should be as careful of his Horse, as of
himself, and by being diligent, careful and obedient to Order, fearing his
Captain more than his Enemy, he may come to attain to that Preferment that his
Merit calls for.

Of the Brigadier, or Corporal.
THE Captain singles him out from among the eldest of the Troopers, as judging
him best qualified and experienced; he is to the Horse, what a Corporal or
Sergeant is to the Foot; in the Quartermaster's Absence he supplieth his Place.
To discharge his Duty well he must be no Stranger to Writing: It is from him
that the Captain expects an Account of all Omissions and Disorders, with a List
of the Horse and Men, and of the Condition they are in. When upon Duty, by the
Major's Order, he sets the Vedetes, whom he directs; to prevent Remisness he
often visits, and in due time relieves them. It is his Province to instruct the
Troopers, also what Forage and Provisions are handed to him from the
Quartermaster, he distributes.

Of the Quartermaster.
HE is as a Steward to the Troop, so should be prudent, intelligent and
faithful, being entrusted with their Subsistence. Courage, Resolution and
Diligence, ought to be his Qualifications; from him is expected a particular
List of the Men's Names, and Places from whence they are, with whom he is to
reckon, pay, and discount. He sets down the Orders given him by his Officers,
and visits the Men's Quarters and Stables, and does see that all be in Order
from the Horseman to the least of his Accouterments, that from the Bridle to a
Girth there be nothing wanting. The Ammunition also is his Care, which he
distributes, whether in the Field or Garrisons, and takes Care that their
Quarters be ready before their arrival. He is to be at the Captains Quarters
Morning and Evening, to carry the Orders he has received from his Major. He
commands Detachments, and conducts them to their Place of Rendezvous.

His great Business is to see that the Troopers live in their Quarters in good
order, and that Complaints be silenced, and Grievances redressed.

Thus by keeping good Quarter, and assigning Quarters, he has given him the
Name of Quartermaster.

Of the Cornet.
THis Post is the first Step to Honor, being expensive is fit only for such as
have Estates, or are Gentlemen. This Station is not so troublesome as
honorable, and should be filled up by a Man of Quality, as his first Essay;
and if he has before made a Campaign as a Volunteer, he is the fitter for this
Post: But though Favor should have introduced him, yet if his Inclination were
the moving Cause, Success may be expected; for where generous Sentiments do put
upon quest for Glory, there Obedience will become easy, and he will readily
execute his Superiour's Orders, and will set all his good Qualifications on
work to compass his desired end.

There is in a natural Propensity to a desired Object an occult quality that
leads Soul, Body, and all its Faculties, like a Torrent with Impetuosity to it,
so that when Military Honor is the Thing aimed at, from thence may reasonably
be expected great Things.

It is the Cornet's Duty to carry the Standard when the Troop marches, as at
Musters, at the Guards, and in Battle he is to bear it himself, and Death
should rather be his Choice, than part with that Badge of Honor, since his
Personal Reputation, and that of his Troop, depends thereon. If at any time he
suffers it to be carried, it ought to be by one of the stoutest, and comeliest
in the Troop. In the Lieutenans's Absence he commands. He is to show submissive
Respects to his Superiors, and to carry himself obligingly to all; for to make
Friends, and to have no Enemies, is the way to Preferment.

Of the Lieutenant.
HE is the Captain's Substitute, in whose Absence he has the Care of the
Troop, so should have Courage, Experience and Prudence to know how to act in
his place. He gives Information of Omissions or Commissions, and of all that
relates to the Troop. To make the better Inspection he visits the Men, and
views their Horses, and recommends to them the care of their Arms as well as
Horses, and should carry himself so as to be loved and feared. The Brigadier
and Quartermaster are to be encouraged and countenanced by him in performing
their Duty, that nothing be suffered to be amiss.

Of the Captain of Horse.
With the Qualification of Courage and Conduct, he is to have Experience in
his own, and others Business; he leads his Troop where commanded, and
accordingly gives Orders to those under him; he instructs, and leads his Men
on, and off, and takes Care they be well mounted, and armed, that all be in
good order. He discourages Debauchery as the Weakener of Purse and Body, and
the inlet to Pilfering and Effeminacy; to prevent which, hard Duty and frequent
Exercises may be conducing. The good Captain will therefore himself see that
his Men be duly exercised, that upon any sudden occasion they may be fit to be
drawn out for Service* He will encourage Well doers, and give public Marks of
Favor to provoke Emulators to make themselves worthy of the like, by which
means he will gain Love, especially when his Men perceive that they are
personally by Name taken notice of. Our Captain, if endued with a generous
Soul, does influence those about him to give him Respect and Esteem; for whose
Heart would not run after him that values Virtue and Honor more, than all the
World besides, even than Life it self, which he regards not when the Public
Interest and his Reputation is the Question?

It is not to be doubted but he that moves in this Station, has by long
Service and Personal Merit attained this Post, where before having learned to
obey, he knows the better to command, and upon all Occasions how to behave
himself whether under good or bad Events, so as that he will not give
opportunity, nor suffer any to be let slip, but will take hold of all
Occasions, and give the Enemies none.

Being thus qualified he will be feared, and obeyed, which in Military Affairs
is of absolute necessity; for though some Injunctions may seem to be but of
small moment, and that their Non-observance may appear to be a Matter of no
Consequence, yet little Omissions often prove fatal; therefore all Orders
should be punctually observed,

Of the Colonel of Horse.
IT is expected he be a Man of Honor, Merit and Experience; if he has
formerly commanded in the Foot Service, he is the fitter for this Station. He
leads the Regiment to Action whether in the Van, Rear-guard, or main Body; and
if Merit has introduced him, then he marches with the more assurance. His
great Care should be, that all under his Command discharge their Duty, that
nothing be wrongs, but that his Prince be well served, and that Things be so
carried, that his Honor may not suffer any Reflection, therefore he will have
the Men often drawn up, exercised, and mustered, and will rather have
Supernumeraries, than that his Numbers should not be complete.

It is the Honor of a Colonel that it should be so; it is his Credit to have
his Regiment well Manned, mounted and armed; some would choose rather to
retrench from their own Property, than suffer any defect in their Power to
redress: Which honorable Pride is not prejudicial to their particular
Interest; for when the time of disbanding comes, those Regiments are likeliest
to be retained, where each Man looks like an Officer, and each Officer like a
General Commander; and upon a View they will have not only honorable Encomiums
from their Prince, but in likelihood will be of those that shall be retained
when other Regiments shall be broken. Thus by making others do their Duty, he
discharges his own, and thereby deserves the Name of Colonel.

Of the Major General of Horse.
IT is highly conducible for the good of the Army, that those in this Post be
qualified, for the executive part depends on him, which is the more difficult
from intervening Accidents, change of Place, and from Reports; therefore good
Sense, Courage and Conduct, should not be wanting, for the receiving and giving
Orders is his Province, and upon good Grounds he gives Information of all
Proceedings even to small Accidents; all which, to prevent Mistakes, should be
set down in writing.

Thus the Major General must join with Force Wisdom, and with his Courage
Skill, and couple the Foxes Tail and Lyon's Skin together.

Of the Lieutenant General of Horse.
HE should be a Person cut out by Nature for great Things, one whose Experience
and Judgment should be such, that all Things may be easy to him, who being
versed in every Man's Duty, and having Courage, is placed thereby above being
in a Hurry though in the midst of Confusion; then it is that Judgment may be of
greater use than the Sword.

When Persons are elevated to this Station, if they have Personal Merit their
Authority will be much more advanced, than if Birth, Quality, or Eldership had
preferred them. Persons thus qualified are deservedly styled the Generals Eyes
and Hands, for they do act as Occasion and Prudence requires, as well in
reference to offend, as defend, or to secure the Camp, and answer Supplies. His
Care is awake Night and Day for Camp and Quarters, to surprise or prevent
Surprises, which being regularly performed whatever the Success may be, yet he
loses no Honor; and though Envy speaks well of none, yet his Courtesy,
Affability and Humanity to all, with Generosity and seasonable Liberality,
accompanied with a free and an open Table, will conquer even Malice it self,
and make the most malevolent join in Ecchoing forth the Commendations of this
our Captain, who in this shows himself great, in that he acts and lives like
himself, as well in Quality as Merit.

Of the General.
IT may be said, That he is not only one of ten thousand, but even sometimes
the one of more than a hundred thousand; and so deserving he may be, as to be
more worth than many thousands of the rest. Such was the Voice of the People in
David's time, they very well knew that the Body must suffer in common with
their Head, therefore their Care was in a particular manner to preserve that,
as the Means on which their Preservation depended. As he is the greatest so he
ought to be the most excellent in all Heroic Qualifications, and Noble by
Birth. Though this Post may be conferred as a Recompense to Virtue and Merit,
where noble Birth is not, yet this Place is best adorned when filled by a
Person of Honor, and one that is born great, whose Quality shall give him a
Reputation, which when therewith endued with Virtue, Experience, Conduct,
Liberality, and Affability, and these accompanied with an awful Majestic Mean,
he shall thereby influence Love and Fear in all concerned with him. As he is
the greatest so he ought to be the most deserving, which Desert will set a
Luster on all his Commands and Actions. This eminent Post in which he moves,
makes all good and evil Successes to be most remarkably his, and as the Honor,
so the Faults lie at his door. There are few Faults, but the Consequences of
them are small in comparison of those committed in Military Affairs; for where
an Army is routed, and thousands cut down, Countries and Towns pillaged,
destroyed and burnt, besides the dishonor of a shameful Flight, and sneaking
into Holes and Corners, whilst the Enemy rides in Triumph over Bag and Baggage,
and the Honor and Reputation of the Conquered, which sinister Accident is
attended with so many Discouragements, that the Lost and Dishonor is seldom or
never retrieved, except Despair gives new wings to Action.

But when Success follows our Hero at the Heels how honorable is it in
particular to himself, and how useful to his Prince, and Country, which gives
occasion for his being registered in History, where Posterity finds him a
Monument of Fame left on Record for future Ages to imitate. In short, as his
Faults are irreparable, and cause Sadnesses, Sorrows, Tears and Lamentations,
Miseries and Slaveries; so the contrary gives Joy even to Transports, and fills
the Mouths of each with Acclamations, and Expressions of Praise; and whereas
the one has Death and Desolations writ in the Countenance, so the other has
painted Joy and Gladness, to which every Motion of their Bodies are so many
Contributes to express it.

Thus it appears requisite, That the General be not only great as to his Birth,
but also as to his Personal Merit; and to say all, a Soldier, who with these
Qualifications if attended with Success, will have his Head crowned with
Honor. But if Fortune prove unconstant, then the most reasonable Attempts will
be condemned, though he may deserve by his Conduct more Honor than the
Conqueror. But why speak I of Fortune, as if Providence did not predominate
over Human Affairs? This Fortune is no more than a Chimera, the Idol of Fools,
for though Success be attributed to her, yet it is God that gives the Victory;
it is not always, to the Wise, nor the Strong, nor yet to Numbers, to whom
Success is given, God reserves to himself the disposal of Victory that none
might boast. But single Instances of God's Power are not to be relied on; for
though he has been pleased to give Victory by disproportionable Means, as that
one should kill a thousand, and a few put ten thousand to Flight, yet in our
Days we have no Reason to expect such Miracles, but rather Deliverances, by a
course of means which God himself has appointed, and recommended by his
Examples to Mankind, not suffering his own Armies (among whom he had set up his
Standard) to enter upon Action in their promised Land, till they were become a
Multitude; and we may as well expect Health and length of Days, without Food
and Physic, as Preservation in War without necessary Preservatives; among
which Preservatives, the wise General deserves the first Place, as being the
chief Means, if qualified, and for those other Necessaries required they must
be had in readiness in time; thus being well supplied, and armed, and the Duty
wisely and faithfully discharged, the Success must be left to God.

Since Military Means are so necessary, and that the General is the Head,
therefore he is supposed to have Qualifications to fit him for Action, and to
command People, and Countries at home and abroad, and that he have a Tincture
of Literature and Arts, that he be not imposed on by bold Recommenders of
Trifles* Also to be provident and liberal, are requisite Qualifications. He
should be a Prince in his Temper, yet sparing where Reason calls for it, not
believing himself lessened by taking Cognizance of the minutest Things relating
to good Husbandry, that Stores be not wasted: The preventing Spoil and Havoc
is as much the Province of a General, as those more sublime Actions of Battles,
Sieges and Surprises; by good Husbandry, and a provident Care, Multitudes may
be preserved from Want and sinister Accidents. Also the General, with his other
Acquirements, should know the Country where the Seat of War may be carried on,
therefore in time of Peace Rural Recreations, as Hunting and Hawking, may
inform his Knowledge; by which means he may be acquainted with Enclosures,
Uneavenness of Ground, the Champion Country, Marches, Roads, narrow Passages,
the Knowledge of which is useful to all Military Men. To be an accomplished
Captain is obtained by great Labor and Industry; and though they may be born
Soldiers, yet Experience is not attained but by Care and Application, as
appears by the great Work he has to do; on which depends his Care in reference
to

Incampments, or Lodgings, Marches, Engagements, Sieges, which are a mixture of
Incamping and Engaging.
All which fall to be spoken of in the next Place in their Order. And First

Of Incampments or Lodgings, of which there are three sorts.
THE First is when an Army is on the Wing, waiting every moment for Orders to
march.

The Second is when an Army has surrounded a Place in order to a Siege.

The Third Incampment is when the Army is in Apprehensions of an Enemy, and so
obliged to regulate its Motions with Caution; then where Nature is found
defective, Art should supply by casting up proper Works for Security.

To which end he is to have in his Eye not only the Place where he is to
Incamp, or Lodge, but also to consider the number of his Enemies with reference
to his own, and to regulate his Motions to Offend and Defend; so that in
Incampments or Lodgments he must have a regard to the Situation of Ground,
whether Mountainous, Champion, or replenished with Villages: It is not always
in the choice of a General to incamp where he desires, but is necessitated to
take such Measures as present Circumstances will permit, though he aims at the
being Master of rising Grounds, and to have the Benefit of Water and Wood, and
if possible of all narrow Accesses situated near him, and accordingly he causes
Intrenchments. A Champion Country is much more to be desired, than to have the
Army dispersed in Villages, being more healthful, and less exposed to
Incursions and Surprises, and thereby better capacitated through the means of
Intrenchments, to Offend and Defend. Also Incampments should be chosen for the
Convenience of conveying Supplies; for Obstructions on such Occasions have
caused the Ruin of great Bodies, and occasioned unseasonable Decampments, and
so given that Victory to those, which otherwise might have least expected it,
had the Passages been open and free.

Of Marches.
HERE is Secrecy required, whether it be to surprise an Army, a Party, or
Place, or that it be to prevent being surprised in Marching, to which Speed,
Diligence and Secrecy is recommended; for the being outdone, or the out-doing
an Enemy in Marches, may prove the unhinging of Affairs for that Campaign to
the one or the other, and sometimes proves the loss of advanced Troops, or of
the Rear; and many ill Consequences attend such whose Unhappiness it has been
to be surprised. All Marches are regulated according to the Country, either in
order of Battle, or in different Bodies; and if they cannot come to their
appointed Place by several Ways to lodge in one Body, then they are to lodge as
they march, for sometimes Rivers and Hills, with other Inconveniences of
Ground, may cause a greater Compass to be made, than desired, so no express
Rules can be given: Therefore Care is to be had in Marching for the
Preservation of the Men, and Safety of the Artillery and Carriages, and to be
armed against any Accident. It may be sometimes advisable to take different
Roads; and if Decampments are made in the sight of the Enemy, then secure the
Out-Quarters to prevent being surprised; and though the Enemy were distant, yet
Caution and Diligence is to be used according to the Nature of the way the Army
marches as if he were at hand; for the manner of Marches varies according to
the Places through which they are to pass, with respect to the Enemies
distance, and number of Carriages, no Rules can be given, such are the numerous
intervening Accidents; though some have laid down Methods for all sorts of
Marches, yet none can be tied up to them, so that they are increased or
diminished as may best answer the ends of securing the whole. Also by Marches
and Counter-marches, there may accrue to the General as much Honor, as if he
had gained a Victory, for an Enemy may thereby be baffled without Fighting.

Of Engagements.
THE Gain or Loss of a Battle is of the greatest Consequence, and is attended
with such various Circumstances, that it is hard to say any thing where so many
Accidents may change the Scene, and call for new Methods.

Engagements are not to be undertaken without the greatest Consideration, and
that there be a Necessity drawn from Reason to defend or assault; the wise
Captain will be always armed against Accidents, and if possible will secure
such Ground as may best suit his Number of Horse and Foot, with the Advantages
of being Master of Rivers, Woods, narrow Passes, rising Grounds; and if the
Wind and Sun will favor the Cause, it is so much the better. He will also have
regard to the manner and form of Battle, and to the times of Ingagings whether
by Night or Day, good or bad Weather, and that with respect to the Place; also
the Numbers and Condition of the Enemy, with their manner of Practice.

But seeing nothing contributes more to a Conquest than Stratagems, therefore
good Intelligence is necessary, and Spies useful, that Discoveries may be made
of their Affairs and Motions, as the manner of their Incampments, their
Numbers, Intentions, Supplies; also setting active Spirits a-work to disperse
Reports and promote Disorders, may be necessary: No Money is better employed
than what is spent on Spies and Guides, for by their Intelligence Measures are
taken; and accordingly Horse and Foot are disposed so that they may best
succor each other: To effect which, a Foresight and Presence of Mind, with an
Eye every where, is requisite to regulate Affairs for the Benefit and Security
of the Army, which ought more to be regarded than to offend an Enemy by
destructive Measures; a Fault of which some great Men have been guilty, not
caring so they did but attain their Ends how dearly it was purchased, nor how
many perished, so the Victory were but obtained.

What need more be said than that, whether there be occasion for retiring or
pursuing, there is always required Virtue, Industry and Courage, never to
appear but with such Resolution as may give Hopes though in the midst of
Despair? A regard also is to be had to the Pursurers, and Pursued, of the
Captives and Wounded, as well Enemies as Friends, for Mercy and good Quarters
should ever be the Portion of the Unhappy.

After the Engagement is over, Thanks should be returned by both Parties; for
the greatest Sufferers may find Matter of Thanks, that Things are not worse,
and that they are left Monuments of Mercy at a time when Death reigned so, that
perhaps there mighc not have been left living sufficient to bury their Dead,
which makes the return of Praise more reasonable in those that remain living.

As to Sieges, they are a mixture of Incamping and Engaging.
TOWNS as well as Persons have a Fate that hangs over them; for as there is
none which first or last have not been more or less besieged with Humane
Infirmities incident to them, so there are few Towns that ever escaped the Fate
of being besieged, though Time may have worn out the Memory thereof. Such
Designs ought to be carried on with Secrecy, and feigned Marches and
Counter-marches, amusing the Enemy by giving a Jealousy to adjacent Places, as
if the Storm were to fall on them each in particular, that through
Incertainties, not knowing where the Storm will fall, they may be obliged to
divide their Forces, which may give opportunity to surprise the Enemy, when
they shall not know where to send Supplies. After having secured the Avenues,
then with Diligence proceed to Action, for the sudden setting down before a
Place gives Terror; which being invirioned, then Egress and Regress is to be
prevented, and the Camp is to be secured by Lines of Circumvallation and
Countervallation, which are a Shelter from the Enemies Sallies, and from
Attacks from without. Also Provisions are to be secured coming to the Camp,
which cannot well be effected if the Besiegers be not Masters of the Field.

Early Information is to be had of the Situation of the Place, how Manned, and
stored, and of its various sort of Works and Avenues, with the manner how the
Ground and Rivers lie, that Approaches may be Regular, and the Enemies
prevented being relieved; that Heights be secured that the Camp be not annoyed.
Also Portable Bridges are to be provided for passing Rivers, and to facilitate
Communication. The chief Commander being versed in the Inginier's Business, can
the better satisfy himself in all Advances made, whether of Approaches,
Lodgments and Works, of what Nature soever. As to Mines, though necessary, yet
are they to be suspe^cted, for Countermines make them perilous, and often prove
the Grave of those who designed them for their Enemies Destruction. That Labor
in that kind may not be lost, Care ought to be taken to dispose them so, that
instead of being a Service, they may not prove a Prejudice to the Enterpriser.
In all respects Precaution is necessary, whether it be to carry on a vigorous
Siege, or a lingering one by Blocade.

Believing our Commander accomplished, and that his Merit, not Character of
Great only placed him in that Station of Trust, and that he has more essential
Virtues to recommend him than barely his Birth, so needs no Intimations as to
Particulars, for Methods daily vary according to Place and Times, new Meastures
are taken, so that express Directions cannot be given. And every Age improves,
and new Discoveries are made, that what may be advisable at this Day, may be
laid aside in time to come; general Ideas are only here given. What follows to
be spoke of is of defending Places when attacked.

Of defending Places.
THERE is no Place impregnable; for as was replied by a Warlike Prince, to one
who boasted of the Strength of a Fortified Town, That he never questioned
Success if open at the top. Delays may be made, and by Courage and Resolution
Time may be prolonged; but when an Army comes armed with Resolution and
Strength, the strongest Place at last must yield; though many times Providence
has frustrated Intentions from the lateness of the Year, the coldness or
wetness of the Season, and from unforeseen Wants or surprising Accidents.
Necessity has taught Men the Art of Fortification, to supply the defects of
Nature by additional Works, which Art has from Time to Time improved; and
though no Place can be made impregnable, yet Fortified Garrisons are Hindrances
to the progress of an Enemy.

Seeing Bulworks are thus necessary to Frontiers, and rubs in an Enemies way,
which amuse while Time is gained: Therefore Fortified Places should be timely
supplied with Necessaries, and such Governors as have Qualifications for their
Trust, of known Fidelity and Merit. Favor and Affection ought not to take
place in such Cases; a Sovereign may be deceived by a Favourite's
Recommendation, who for Money, or Affection to his Friends, may introduce unfit
Objects, who as they bought their Trust with Money, may sell the Place for the
same Metal; sometimes a Mule laden with Gold has taken such Fortresses, that
have been reckoned amongst the number of impregnable ones. The Sovereign's own
Experience of the Governor ought to take place, he should be induced therefrom
to make his Choice, for without Treachery Garrisons are sufficiently exposed to
Accidents; the Men may be wearied, spent, and sick, through over hard Duty.
Also Magazines may be blown up, and Want may reign, that Friends within may
become a part of the Danger, as well as the Enemies from without.

Another Inconveniency is that Princes are often deceived, and made believe
that Places are better stored than they really are; therefore Inspection should
be made, that what is intended as a Garranty against unforeseen Accidents, may
not be employed in Luxury and Oftentation; for such is the Prodigality of some,
and Covetousness of others in Trust, that to gratify their Vice they will
rather have full Bags, than see their Prince's Magazines well stored; and care
not, though the Soldiers be clothed with Rags, and beg for that Bread that
their detained Pay would have given them. But some will choose rather profusely
to spend, than supply the Wants of these miserable ones. It is not only Money
that is aimed at, but they exhaust the very Stores, and Powder, and that on
Saint's Days, and at other times of Jollities also, without regarding the
Consequence to have Magazines emptied, whether through Covetousness, Vanity or
Zeal, for some Tutelar Saint. But they hope the evil Day may not come in their
time.

To prolong a Siege Outworks are necessary to keep the Enemy at a distance, in
which one Man is sufficient to answer ten without. There should be a sufficient
Strength of Horse and Foot, and proportionably Stores for both, with Requisits
to make new Works, and for repairing Breaches. Let frequent Sallies be made,
but by a few; it is better than with great Numbers, for it prevents Disorders
in retiring. A few resolute Men in two Hours may destroy, what great Numbers
cannot repair in many Days. They should be frequent, and at uncertain Hours; if
vigorously carried on, they may keep the Enemy at a distance. All
Fortifications without, and Provisions within, should be timely effected, that
the Enemy may find the Place provided, and in good order. Let the useful
Inhabitants be employed, and the useless sent away; have a Scrutiny made into
all Stores, and let Care be taken that nothing be concealed nor imbezel'd; that
the Soldiery be spared from working, alloting them their Hours of Rest, with
Encouragements to attack or defend their Works and Breaches.

When a Governor has done all possible, and that no Succors comes, and that
the Garrison is straightened, and no appearance how to prevent falling into the
Enemy's Hands, having discharged his Trust, it is then his Duty timely to
capitulate, as much as it was before to maintain the Place; after which he may
with Honor appear before his Prince, from whom he deserves Encomiums for his
Fidelity and good Conduct, and for his timely saving himself, and those that
remained with him by a timely Rendition, reserving himself and them for better
Fortune, than to be exposed to be sacrificed in a Storm by the Enemy.

Faults in War are irreparable, for the Commander has but that moment of
Action to manage, which if let slip, or is mis-implied is not retrievable,
therefore he is concerned to consider what sort of People he has to do with,
that accordingly he may arm himself with Resolution. There are some of such hot
fiery Spirits, that to stand their first Brunt requires great Resolution, which
Ardency being allayed, are much easilier managed. Such Furioso's meeting with
Discouragements become so unspirited, that they often with their Courage lose
the Honor of the Day; such can hardly if ever be got to rally again; while
others more obstinate will weather their Difficulties, whose Courage increases
by opposition, and will maintain their Ground, or sell every Inch at a dear
Rate.

Some Nations have signalized themselves in making brave Attacks, falling on
with Vigor and Gallantry; and others by a persevering Obstinacy have shown
their Courage standing like Rocks, and bearing the Shock and Storms of the
Assailants. As some have the Reputation for taking Places, so others have
signalized themselves in defending them. Also there are those which are very
expeditious in making Incursions and Inroads, of incredible lengths. Some make
speedy Conquests, but let them go as soon; like the Northern People, who have
overrun Nations, yet never established any Empire; they were great
Enterprisers, but their Government like a Morning-Dew soon vanished, and like
Thunder and Lightning they gave Terror and Amazement, but was of no continuance.

Of the Artillery, and the Officers belonging thereunto.
ARtillery in an Army is a great Contributer to Victory, though a Cumber and a
Charge, that formerly the World was not acquainted with; but now is become so
essential to the carrying on a War, that no Victory can be expected where it is
not; therefore great Provisions are made of Guns and Powder, whose Invention
surely was borrowed from Lightning and Thunder, both having the same effects to
give Terror and to do Mischief; but their Noise animates the Spirits of those
engaged in Action.

The Charge is great, for many are the Materials of which an Artillery is
composed; for besides Guns of all sizes, with Powder and Ball, there are
Mortars, Petards, Bombs, Grenadoes, and other Ingines of Destruction, with
Combustibles for Fireworks; all which require Carriages that have their
Drivers, and Artificers at hand, as Gunners, Smiths, Carpenters, etc. Also
Instruments for breaking Ground, raising Batteries, making Trenches and Mines,
etc. And with the number of Necessaries, there must be found Pontons, Ladders,
etc. that whatever Accident arrives, there may ber nothing wanting. Also for
Subsistence there must be Grain of all sorts for Horse and Men, with Mills, and
Ovens; all which, when together, swells to so great a Bulk, that this Warlike
Retinue alone looks like an Army, and is under the Conduct

Of the General of the Artillery.
WHO ought to be a Man of Quality, having Experience of the particular Offices
and Business of every one under his Command, and to know what is necessary for
the undertaking any Enterprise, whether in the Field, or at Sieges, among the
rest that of the Duty of the Ingenier, therefore he should be versed in the
Mathematics, the better to judge of the Merit of those in that Post; whether
they have Courage as to dare expose themselves; and also in Arts, if able to
improve Fortifications, to mend Faults, and to make a true Judgment of Heights,
Depths and Distances, and to point accordingly to the best: Advantage; also how
to make Approaches and Lodgments, and to place and raise Batteries, and with
safety advance his Works.

It is the General of the Artillery's Care that none be in Posts, but such as
are capable to discharge them; as also, that there be no want of necessary
Munitions of War, nor Provisions of any sort; that Stores be not imbezel'd nor
decayed, but that timely Recruits be made in all Particulars.

Of Provisions.
WIthout Provisions great Bodies cannot be kept together, who are a continual
Consumption of Stores, whose particular numbers ought to be well known, and
additional Allowances made, lest there be a falling short. That there may be no
Waste, there is a Purveyor appointed who procures also Supplies, and appoints
proper Places for Stores, with the times when they are to be delivered out; and
that he see there be a proportionable number of Bakers, who with all the other
Officers relating all the Stores, are under the Command of a

Commissary-General.
WHO ought to be a Man of Authority, not covetous, but faithful, vigilant, and
skilled in buying and choosing the best, and disposing all to the best
Advantage, for the Good, Ease, and Convenience of the Army; and that what is
procured may be conveyed under safe Convoy: This Care is the more necessary, in
that the Welfare of an Army depends thereon; for Want destroys more than
Fatigues, or ranged Battles. Therefore Supplies are made before the Army march;
and all Things are to be regulated, that there be no occasion for Complaint.

The ill managing this Trust may ruin the hopefullest Enterprise; the Thoughts
of finding Supplies on the Place are not to be relied on, but he is to arm
himself for the worst, for the Enemy may have either carried of or destroyed
the Effects. Therefore Magazines are to be dispersed for the best Advantage for
the recaption of Stores, of which there should be provided beforehand in the
Camp a competent Provision for a certain time, that Disappointments may not
bring Disorder. Therefore Supplies should never move without strong Convoys,
who should have their Marches appointed at uncertain times. Also Inspection is
to be taken that there be no Abuses from the Keepers, nor Deliverers of Stores,
nor from Sutlers, and that such as are found Offenders in that kind be made
public Examples.

Of the Baggage
AS the Artillery is a cumbersome Body, so we may say of the Baggage that it is
a very troublesome Equipage, which in some Places exceeds more than in others,
and that from the Negligence of those that should see Abuses regulated, by
reducing the Bulk to a less Compass.; to effect which, each Soldier with his
Arms and Budget should carry some Days Provisions with him, for those most
inured to Fatigue are the likeliest to obtain Victory; for it is observable,
that as those who can keep fresh Troops for Action to the last, so those that
can weather Want, and endure Labor longest, are likeliest to obtain the
Victory. But where Idleness reigns, so that every Soldier must have his
Onhanger, what can be expected from such slothful Companions? Therefore that
loose Gang that follows Camps should be discouraged, for from these it is that
Effeminacy, Want, and Diseases, are ingender'd. But seeing there is so great
Trouble to preserve this so cumbersome Luggage, and that when lost is attended
with so much Dishonor, and is so prejudicial, bringing such irremediable
Disorders, therefore it is advisable, that the Baggage be reduced to as small a
Retinue as possible.

Of the Master of the Wagons.
HIS Business is to take charge of all Carriages, to order their Marches, to
see them quartered, and supplied with Necessaries for Horse and Man. He should
have under his Command Persons skilled in the Roads, and in driving with such a
number of Artificers as may answer any Misadventure that may happen in the way.

He ought to have been brought up to driving, and himself to understand the
Roads through which he is to pass. His Business is to take daily Inspection
into his Crew, and timely to supply Defects of both Man and Horse, and that all
be kept in good order.

Of the Subservients to the Army; as Aides de Camp, Chaplains, Physicians,
Surgeons, Provosts, Guides, Spies.
Of Aides de Camp.
THIS is a Post for a Gentleman, whose Business is to attend the General. He is
as an honorable Messenger that carries his Orders, which are not to be
questioned. It is requisite that he have Courage, Wit, and Fidelity, which with
the Annex of Prudence, by improving himself and being faithful, he may procure
his Advancement.

Of Chaplains.
THEY are Spiritual Guides to regulate the Immoralities. As there are Directors
for the disciplining and using Arms; so each Regiment should have its Chaplain
to direct them in Principles, and Conduct of good Manners. He ought to be a Man
of good Example, one that carries in his Front the Character of Virtue, that
his very Presence should be an Awe, and a Restraint to Licentiousness.

Of Physicians, Apothecaries and Surgeons.
THEY are that to the Body which the Priest is to the Soul; for the Health of
both they are consulted, with this difference, the one gives his Moral Lectures
in Health, as well as Sickness, while the others Business is only when Sick or
Wounded, then they make Applications, and apply their Remedies. Each Regiment
should have of these a competent number, as so many Supplements of Health, that
none be neglected; that it be not said, That more die for want of Skill, Means,
and due Attendance, than by Sword or Shot. These Functions are honorable, and
useful, and require suitable Encouragements; under which Head it may be no
Digression to say, That it is the Phisician's Duty to have an Inspection into
the Medicines, that he see they be good, and of Quantities sufficient to answer
all Contingencies.

Of Spies and Guides.
THEY are so necessary that without them the General would be, in the dark, as
to what Measures he should take in reference to he Enemy. There ought to be
many of both sorts, each a Stranger to the other; and as one gives Information
of the Country, its Ways and Passes, so the other does of the Enemies Motions,
and Actings, and what is intended; these ought to be encouraged, but their
Intelligence should not much be relied on, for sometimes false Informations and
sham Intentions are spread abroad to amuse; and though among so great a number
of Informers some may be unfaithful, yet Truth may be picked out, and Use may
be made of their different Informations; what Money is spent on these Occasions
should never be regreted.

Of the General-Provost.
IN the Army he is the Minister of Justice, by him Vice is restrained, and the
Irregular kept in order: He is both the Informer, and Punisher of Offenses; it
is in his Province to regulate the Prices of Goods. He ought to be of an even
Temper, unbyassed, and one that dares do right without respect of Persons.

Of an Army.
IT is a confused Chaos of armed Hirelings, a moving World, whole Business is
to destroy; it is their Trade, and the Work which Nature seems to have cut them
out for. This their so boisterous Employment has qualified them with
unpolished Minds, as well as with rough Bodies, with which they are capacitated
to assault, defend, and pursue; to carry on which Work there is requisite, with
their Strength, personal Courage and Valor.

This unwieldy Bulk is a most unsatiable, ravenous Animal composed of Horse and
Foot, under the Command and Conduct of a Chief, by whose Care it is supported
by the Use of Gold and Silver, with Provisions for the Mouth, and War, without
which Helps this great Bulk would soon melt and dwindle to nothing. Therefore
the General's Care is to pay, and feed them, and to find them Action. But
though they call them Men of Mettle, yet their Substance is neither Brass,
Iron, nor Steel, for their Nature calls for a wherewith to support them
answerable to their Stations, whether Foot or Horse, without which Courage will
droop, and their Spirits will sink, and die with their hopes. But it is not
sufficient to care for the Subsistence of this unwieldy Body; for it must be
made useful by Discipline, and to keep it in order, Justice must be exercised,
without which Confusion will follow: Which leads us to the next Head, viz.

Military Discipline.
DIscipline is the Ligament that binds great Bodies and Societies, so that they
hang together and become Corporate; the World could not continue without
Discipline, it being in the Body-Politick as Nerves and Sinews are in the
Body-Natural, that makes Bones, Joints and Limbs hang together, and thereby
useful to the whole Man.

If Discipline in Civil Society is necessary, it will appear much more in
reference to Armies, where are assembled such numbers of the Dregs of Mankind,
many of them being such that it seems as if the Places where they lived had
spued them out as Nusances, even as the Stomach does that which offends it; for
Armies are the common Receptacle of all sorts, by which Ages from time to time
are purged from their so vicious Humors. It may therefore then be asserted,
That to such a Body that is composed of so many loose Corn and Chaff, (though
there may be some good Grain among them, yet seeing that the other makes the
most numerous part) it is necessary there should be appointed a rigorous
Discipline, without which instead of being useful they would become the Plague,
and Ruin of that Country and Place that raised them for their Safety. Therefore
Military Laws should be kept up, that Virtue may be encouraged and recompensed,
and Offenders find examplary Punishments; to prevent which Grievance, let the
Soldiers be kept in Action, and be inured to the daily Practice of Military
Exercises, as the several Motions of their Bodies, the Use of their Arms; which
should be practiced by Horse and Foot, as being essentially conducible to
Victory.

It is of absolute Necessity that Soldiers be inured to Labor, for there by
Health is preserved, and Money not only spared, but gotten; let therefore their
idle Hours be filled up by Labor, whether in Fortifications or other Work; it
is good in Peace or War to keep them employed, thereby Wants may be supplied,
and by often using their Arms they are kept from Rust: Also the Soldier by
Labor and Exercise, is preserved from many Evils and Irregularities, and
sinful Shifts. By Industry not only Corporal Punishments are prevented, but
even Death it self; for when Men are given up to Idleness, it exposes them to
Shame and Extremity. But Labor is a bitter Root, though it bear happy Fruit, and
has Salutary Effects, for Victory is more likely to be the Lot of the
Laborious, than the Effeminate and Idle; the former has a right to it from
Merit, it being the Portion of the Diligent and Industrious.

But to proceed further, the inducing Causes why such great Bodies are gathered
together, are either from Necessity, Ambition, Honor, or Lucre, and some
through hopes thereby to live uncontrolled licentiously, to bridle such, and
that Necessities may be supplied, and Opportunities given to gratify Emulators
of Honor, and that Virtue may not be unrecompensed, nor Vice unpunished.
Therefore it is that Military Laws are made, and Obedience injoined, and a
severe Discipline established, which cannot be infringed without the Offenders
sinning against himself, and his own Interest, nor can any thing, go well
without an observance to Order; for on that Hinge Obedience, it is that all the
parts of that great Body do move, without which nothing can be effected, and
for want of which all would go to Ruin and Confusion.

The Benefits of a Military Discipline consist in this, in that it injoins the
observation of Laws, prevents Disorder, gives Honor and Recompenses compences
to the Deserving. By the Terror of Punishments inflicted on Offenders it is
that they are made to fear, by which means many are saved from Shame and
Punishments; even Death has thereby been prevented, for Fear, Shame and Death,
are Barricades that prevent committing many Evils. But it is not reasonable
that those who have listed themselves, and receive their Prince's Pay, should
be obedient and conformable to Orders, especially since thereby they are
entitled to those Advantages and Encouragements assigned as Recompenses to
Virtue; therefore it is but just that those Punishments, they draw on
themselves by transgressing, should be their Portion for their Demerits.

But there are not wanting those, who are possessed with this Opinion, That in
Camps the Laws lie dormant, as if the Sons of Mars and Morality, were
incompatible: They allege, That Armies, for the generality, are composed of
the Lees of the People, such whom the Civil Government has cast off as useless
Members, and ungovernable: But this their Reason shows a greater necessity
for having an established Government to restrain the Vicious, that of useless
they may become profitable Instruments, that what the Civil Law could not
effect, the Military might produce: Some like Trees in good Ground are
fruitless, but when transplanted (though to a more hungry Soil) become more
beneficial to their Proprietors.

But in so mixed a Multitude there are always some found, who have had a
Tincture of a generous Education, and are such as will despise sordid
Presidents. Herein is the Use of Military Discipline, in that it restrains the
Evil from bad Acts, and preserves the Good from a Degeneracy. Let it not seem
to be a Digression to inveigh against that crying Evil, Swearing, that reigns
among the Soldiery, and is one of the roaring Crimes in this Age, and calls for
Vengeance: It were well if the Officers would by Example refrain this so
unprofitable a Vice, which is the less excusable in not having those
Inducements that attend other Sins, as Pleasure or Profit. But in Swearing
there is neither Honor nor Advantage, nor can there be expected less than some
tremendous Judgment for defying Heaven, and calling for Confusion to themselves
and others, and that upon every triffling occasion. What shall we say? the
Murderer gratifies his Revenge, the Adulterer his Lust, the Robber his
Covetousness; but the Swearer and Curser sell their Souls at the cheapest rate
of all other Sinners.

But to proceed; since Armies are the common Receptacle of Libertines, and the
Place (in the Opinion of most) where Vice rides in Triumph, therefore to
rectify Disorders, a severe Discipline is set on foot to punish Vice, and
encourage Virtue; for every one has a natural Propensity to desire Good to
himself, and to be preserved from Hurt, who being informed of proposed Rewards
for generous Actions, and that a good Demeanor is the way to obtain Honor and
Profit, and that thereby the Door is shut against Penal Inflictions; and as
Transgressors meet with due Punishments, so Virtue finds its Rewards, Thus by
these Reflections they encourage themselves in doing well, and hereby the
Licentious in Armies are restrained, and Recompenses made Inciters to
Obedience. Therefore such as do well have Marks of Honor assigned them, and
that with more Reason, when the Pay bears no proportion with the Service
performed, and for considerable Nothings they venture their Lives: Therefore
that Prince that recompenses not Courage shown on perilous Occasions, may be
said to have neither Ears, Eyes, nor Ingenuity; much more those that refuse to
give them their ordinary Pay, but instead of Praise and Money, recompense these
unhappy ones with Hunger and Want, having served their turns, send them away
with discouraging Disappointments. Such Disrespects to Merit, may discourage
courage their future exposing themselves. Also others, when they hear of such
ill Usage, will never consent to list themselves, unless drawn in, for who will
fetter themselves to such Masters?

Those deserve the Epithet of Fools, who for the transitory Pleasures found in
committing Evil, expose themselves to Justice; though in Obedience to Laws,
particular Criminals may be punished with Regret, yet Military Chastisements
must be executed without by respect, that others thereby may be deterred from
Evil.

Every Man has a natural Propensity by which he is biased to his desired
Object, whether Good or Evil, so accordingly deserves Rewards or Punishments,
as the predominating Passion shall lead them; for to do Good or Evil are
separate Acts of the Mind, and are as opposite one to the other, as that of
looking up or down. It is thus accordingly to the Choice made, that Punishments
or Rewards are intailed, though inflicted sometimes very unwillingly; yet as
thePhysician orders Physic to recover Health, and to preserve Life, so
Military Punishments, according to the Nature of the Fault, ought to be
appointed for Chastisements, not Slaughters, in managing the which not only the
Nature of the Offense, but the Circumstances of the Person are to be
considered; for with some Shame or a private Reprimand, will have a greater
Influence to reform some, than more severe Corrections with others. But some
are so hardened, that they are incorrigible, such are only fit to be made
public Examples; to spare some sort of Offenders would be a Sin against the
Public, and a showing Mercy to such as ought to be made Monuments of Terror,
which may be a President of fatal Consequence to the Public; for unseasonable
Mercies may be reckoned sinful Gommiserations, which may occasion Repentance
when the Evil is past being retrieved. Peace and War have hitherto been our
Subject, let us now say something of that which participates of both, and is
neither which is that called a Truce.

Of a Truce.
A Truce is a Respite, or a Cessation of Arms limited for a certain Time, and
for diverse Ends, as to bury the Dead, or in order to Peace, etc. Some call it a
Camp-Peace, or the Armies Holy Day, where Hostilities cease, though the War
does not. A Truce between Turks and Christians differs only in length of Time,
and is in effect a Peace, though it carries not the Name.

But with whom soever it is made, it ought to be religiously observed, though
it is best to make no Truce at all, it being but to grant a breathing time to
an Enemy that is weary, and desires leisure to recruit Strength, to pursue the
War with more Vigor. Truce is neither Peace nor War, but participates of both,
and is as the Intervals between Night and Morning, and Day and Night, so it may
be called the dawning of the Day, if a Peace succeeds. A Truce has commonly a
Pretense to be in order to a Peace, and to promote it is proposed, though
little less is intended than to be a Stratagem to circumvent. Also Experience
has shown, That Fighting by Stratagems has often had Success, when open Force
could not prevail. Thus a Cessation of Arms has been fatal to those, who by
open Force were thought invincible; these Intervals between Peace and War are
not so desirable, could they be avoided, since thereby no Peace is obtained,
nor yet is Hostility suffered. This space of time between Peace and War is more
vexatious and uneasy than War it self, so that even Extremities are more to be
desired, than dilatory Truces,

I question whether it be not better to fall down right, than to hang in
suspense? To go on with Resolution is better than to make a stop, since a Pause
may not be less dangerous than a Fall; and those that seek a Cessation do give
occasion to suspect they are in a miserable Condition, when reduced to that
Necessity that they can suffer neither Peace nor War.

In Offensive and Defensive War are two opposite Parties; but there is a third
sort that espouses neither Interest, but stand by as Spectators, who are called
Neuters.

Of Neutrality.
THOSE who will be Neuters will find Reasons to countenance their Neutrality.
Some are influenced from private, and some from public Motives. Also Ambition
makes some Neuters, and Coveteousness others, and there are those that from
Necessity are so; and some are for blowing the Coals, and cause Clashings
between Neighbors, that with the Frog and Mouse they may by the Bird of Prey
be seized on with more Ease, and so reap the End designed of profiting by their
difference, when wearied with Fighting. Thus, as is said, Coveteousness also
may promote Neutrality, having for end to monopolize to themselves an
uninterrupted Commerce, while their Neighbors are imbroiled; for which Reason
it may be said, That they feed and profit by their Neighbor's Hurt.

It is a most unhappy Case when Necessity compels to a Neutrality, that like
Janus they are forced to carry two Faces. It is hard to be reduced not to know
on which Crutch to rest. They are very unhappy who through Necessity are
obliged to a Neutrality, for thereby they run a hazard to lose all, through on
over-desire to keep all Parties, that instead of securing a Friend they intail
on themselves a certain Enemy, and become the Object of the Victor's next
Conquest. The Case is truly to be lamented when obliged to this hazardous Fate,
either to sink or swim with one of the contending Parties, or else to be
exposed to be crushed for standing by Spectator, instead of being useful to
facilitate the Conqueror's end. It may in some Cases be said, That those that
are not against us are for us; yet it is not always so taken, for Occasions for
Quarrel are usually grounded from denying seasonable Assistances.

And the Truth is, Neuters are seldom counted otherwise than Enemies to both
Parties, since for not siding with neither Party they are sure to have one for
Enemy; though their Condition at present is sweet, yet like the Book given to
eat was luscious in the Mouth, but proved bitter in the Belly; yet however
evenly Neuters may carry it, there will be always secretly something of an
Inclination to one side more than to the other.

It is to be confessed that sometimes a Prince is obliged in point of Honor to
stand still, and not assist those whom, according to his Inclinations, he may
be biased to appear in their Favor; and such may be the Case, that Honor and
Gratitude has tied his Hands so, that he cannot but stand Neuter.

It concerns those who find themselves thus hampered to carry evenly, and to
use Prudence and Temper in so ticklish an Affair, waving all secret Tendencies
that may be had to one more than to the other, that things be so managed that
each Party be satisfied, and please themselves with this Belief, that if
biased on any side, it is of theirs.

To hinder Neutrality is as impossible, as it is for some to avoid the Shame
and Danger they incur thereby. There are also such that desire to stand
Spectators, that they may the better see which way the Game will go: There are
those that will condemn with an artificial Grimace the Rupture made, censuring
the one as well as the other, as wanting Foresight and Moderation, though it
may be themselves have been the secret Incendiaries: Such Reflections surely
were the Cause that the Romans would never allow any to be Neuters, but they
must either make themselves declared Friends, or be proclaimed public Enemies.

It is confessed that those that are Neuters, while in that State, seem to have
the Advantage of the upper and nether Springs to enrich themselves, while
their Neighbors are exhausting each other; but to hold the Scale so even
requires Art, and may be of great Advantage, if they can perform officious
Favors that are allowable to one, yet inoffensive to another, and so obliging
in Deportment to both, that may give occasion to say, these are the Neuters,
that neither lose their Friends, nor procure to themselves Enemies.

Of GERMANY; its Strength and Power.
GErmany is a vast Body composed of many Provinces, and replenished with a
Warlike, Strong-bodied People: It lies in the Heart of Europe, and looks upon
the rest of his Neighbors with Disdain, as so many lopped off Members, and
Vpstart Powers, its Haughtiness will not allow a Corrival; though its Fate be
such, that it has for Emulator France, between whom great Contest has been
for Empire, they being the two most transcendent Powers of Europe, who give
Peace or War to their Neighbors, and are the two Corrivals for Empire, who for
Ages have had Contests to the alarming all Europe, who were glad to take their
Measures according to their Rise, or Fall, ever laboring to support the
sinking State of the Decliner.

Had Germany the same Advantage that attends France, of being under one
absolute Sovereign, it needed only its own Strength to support its Grandeur;
but where there are many Heads, there the Feet are uneasy; neither can that
Country be rich, where the Commonality is kept at under; which Grievance, if
remedied in Germany, that Country would be richer, and the People more easy* It
is to be wished, That the Condition of those who labor under such
Difficulties, were made more tolerable.

In times past Germany was the Romans Terror, but since the Seat of Empire has
been transferred to that Warlike People, who are the Bulwork of Europe, and the
Turks Dread, who but for them might long since have overrun all Europe.

Did this great Continent know how its Strength consists in the Union of its
Parts, it would be no less a Terror to Europe, than if under one Sovereign; for
Germany has all the Advantages for War within it self, beyond any Nation in
the World; what in respect of its great Numbers of Men, Arms, and Horse, with
their long Experience from many Ages, and natural Disposition to War, that even
Nature seems to have cut them out for that purpose, having given them strong
brawny Bodies capable to endure Hardships; who are also bold, courageous, and
fearless in Danger. Cornelius Tacitus tells us in his 13th Book, Tat no Nation
exceeds the Germans in Warlike Exploits, and downright Honesty. They are Lovers
of Honor, and have had since many Ages, the Character of a most Noble and
Heroic People. They were Rome's Plague, and gave that Mistress of the World
more Disquiet for many Centuries than the Carthagenians, or any other of her
Enemies.

They have within themselves the Sinews of War, viz. Mines of Gold and Silver,
and other Minerals, with all necessary Munitions for Men and Horse. And what is
most admirable is, That notwithstanding their many Discouragements, yet they
persist unweariedly in supporting their Miseries, even for thirty Years
together, and that in their own Bowels; which had they been united, they might
with much more Advantage to themselves have directed their Strength against
their common Enemy the Turk, or his Confederate, though the latter be the more
formidable for Situation, Strength and Discipline. And though upon
extraordinary Occasions they have called to their Assistance the Northern
Crowns, who for that Reason may be styled the Germans little Tartars, yet
probably that they were called to Assistance, was more Policy, than Necessity.
For it is not only the Commonalty of Germany, but the Nobility, and their
Princes also, have at all times been renowned for War, having never wanted
occasion to signalize themselves, either through the Differences that arose
among themselves, or from what Work was cut out for them by these two
formidable Powers the Turk and France, between whom they are seated; the latter
following his Ancestor's Steps, who ever opposed the Austrian Family, as having
a Jealousy of its Greatness, so used Means to foment a Suspicion of the Growth
of that Power, lest it should swallow all like a common Inundation; for which
end, to keep it under, Leagues were contracted with the Turks. Thus did Francis
the French King enter into League with Solomon, and under pretense to save
himself, he pleaded Necessity, seeing that the Netherlands, Spain, and part of
Italy, became so many Members of its Greatness, which were the Pretenses with
which he varnished over his so unchristian-like Policy of joining with
Infidels, to shelter himself from a supposed Danger; however, it is this
Confederacy, and the Fears thereof, that have restrained Germany from putting
in execution those great Designs it had framed.

Also Henry the Son of the said Francis followed the same Methods, who by such
Leagues endeavored to divert the German Arms. And this present King, though
for a different end, does the same; for he knows that to keep his Subject's
active Spirits busied abroad, is the way to prevent their looking for Matter to
work on at home; for his Subjects being numerous and poor, and the Nobility
many, he finds ways to give them Employment, and by keeping them low, their
Fortunes depend on their Sword, and the King's Favor, who having in his Hands
the absolute Government of Persons, and disposal of Estates, he is capacitated
thereby arbitrarily to take such Measures as may best answer his Ends; and
having these Advantages above his Neighbors, it is no wonder that his
Dominions and Power is increased as it is at this Day, which has given him
occasion to let the World know the Native and Intrinsic Strength of France,
which till this King's Reign was not known, no not to it self.

But what Satisfaction and Honor can oppressed Subjects have to see their
number of Slaves is increased? Can Conquests be due, where Acquests are made by
Breach of Faith? Surely those Countries that are taken illegitimately, ought to
have another Name given them than that of Conquests. It may be said of some,
That they are to Europe, what Hannibal was once said to be to Rome, and Scipio
to Carthage, that they were their Hammer, and Scourge.

It is to be lamented, That Christians cannot be content with those Boundaries
that God and Nature seems to have assigned them, but they must make
Encroachments. Is not the Turk an Enemy sufficient to bandy against? but that
there must be found out Pretenses to cloak ambitious Ends, to join in
Confederacy with him. It were to be desired rather, that all Christian Powers
would join as One against that so common Enemy the Turk, of whom it may be said
with much more Justice what was spoke of Antony, That he delighted to Mangle,
Murder, and Wallow in the Blood of Innocents. How can Christian Princes so
long endure that Power to reign, that holds their Christian Brethren in the
Chains of Servitude? Would France join in this so good a Work, or at least
stand Neuter, the Controversy would soon be decided; but that great Prince is
so intent on the accumulating Trophies of Honor, and aggrandizing his Fame and
Dominions, that there seems not room left for any other Thoughts to take place,
than what tends to the gratifying that his so aspiring a Passion for Glory.

MAXIMS.
NOne without just Provocation, and Reasons drawn from a good Cause, should
enter into open Hostility.

To seek Peace by War, is like Angling for Fish with a golden Hook.

When-Ambition is the Foundation of War, Success may be doubted.

Those necessitated to defend themselves, may more reasonably expect Success
than the Aggressor.

Hasty Enterprises are repented of at leisure.

A General has not only to contend with Men, but with Contingencies, as Want,
Hunger, and Discontent, which are Enemies hardly to be vanquished.

It is safer to build on prudent Measures, than on Fortune.

He that hazards least, plays the safest Game.

It is better to defend a Country by Justice, than to conquer one by Force.

By Circumspection in Peace the Disasters of War may be escaped.

The noblest Conquest is where Love and good Offices obtain the Victory.

He conquers that does good Offices, and those are vanquished which receive
them.

He that defends his Country by the Sword deserves Honor, but he that
maintains it in Peace deserves more.

Good Counsel and Intelligence is sometimes of more use than Arms.

War seldom answers the proposed end.

Purchase Peace with Money, rather than acquire it by a long War.

An Enemy is not to be contemned.

The Conqueror ought not to refuse Proposals of Peace.

Enemies ought not to be slighted, though few in number.

Contempt had of an Enemies Strength or Merit, should not cause Security.

Though an Enemy be weak in Power, yet is he not to be undervalued, for an
animated Atome may incommode the stoutest Man.

A desperate Enemy is not easily beaten.

Enemies in Despair are to be feared, though they are inferior in number.

Necessity has no Law; when compelled to Action to stand deliberating then is
out of doors, there being only a Presence of Mind required, which being backed
with Resolution, the Undaunted, in the midst of Discouragements, does dare
boldly aspire to Victory.

Disgrace is augmented if overcome by a lessened Enemy, and no Honor is gained
by such a Victory; therefore despise not an Adversary, least you increase your
Shame if overcome by him, or lose that Honor which might have been gained by
Conquest; which are necessary Consequences.

Know an Enemy before thou despise him.

He that fears not an Enemy knows not what War is.

Prudence is necessary in undertaking, and Resolution in execution.

Preparations secure a lasting Peace, and make way for Victory.

Never use Arms where you can conquer with Money.

Overcome your Enemy by Policy rather than Fight.

When an Enemy cannot be opposed, then tolerable Conditions of Peace are
welcome.

To penetrate the Designs of an Enemy is a Mark of a piercing Capacity, but to
conceal our own is to excel in Prudence.

Wise Parlies do sometimes more than armed Forces.

He that will not hear Reason is not fit to reign.

That Prince deserves to reign long, whose good Actions exceed his Works.

He that has no Friend, cannot be said to reign.

Vice make Princes odious, when the meanest Man is made honorable by Virtue.

Those that excel not in Virtue, deserve not to command.

Good Actions recommend more than Riches.

Examples of Virtue are of greater efficacy than Instructions.

A good Opinion is of more use than Riches.

He that will be esteemed must always do well.

A Kingdom may be thought invincible, when Immoralities are banished.

A Prince ought to be armed against all Accidents.

One may begin a War, but the Victorious only can end it.

A prudent Jealousy is a commendable Qualification, the excess is of ill
consequence.

That Prince may do what he pleases, when he wills nothing but what he ought.

That Prince that compasses his ends by Treaty, deserves more Honor than he
that overcomes by Battle.

Where a Prince has lost his Authority, there Obedience cannot be expected.

Revenge is not laudable in a Chief, and often is the cause of fatal
Consequences.

A good Prince makes good Subjects.

A Friend in an Enemies Council, is more advantageous than thousands in the
Field.

All Contests, like Cockatrices Eggs, are to be crushed in the Shell.

Opprobrious Words may incense, but not beat an Enemy.

Let a Door be open for a desperate Enemy to enter, either by Composition or
Quarter.

Severity as well as Clemency are prejudicial, and may excite Rebellion.

Enemies are not to be insulted, nor triumphed over.

Let your Enemies arming cause you to arm.

Use as Friends those you would make yours, for Fire and Sword does but quicken
Resistance.

Some profit by Differences fomented among Neighboring Princes.

Small Shrubs by bending weather a Storm, when great sturdy Oaks are torn up by
the Roots.

There is neither Prudence nor Profit in being of too open a Conduct.

Great Souls, like Rocks, are immovable.

There is no Policy in having more Enemies than one at once.

Expose not to hazard more than what cannot be avoided.

Right Intelligence is requisite, as well in reference to ones own, as the
Enemies Strength.

Set a good Face on a bad Matter, in the greatest Exigencies show Courage and
Constancy.

To be first ready is advantageous.

Ambition and Coveteousness break Leagues and awaken War.

Fortune sporteth it self in making great little, and little great.

To boast over an Enemy is insulting, and provokes to Insurrection.

Where Want reigns, no Discipline is observed.

The Commonalty is more prompt to Rebellion, than Battle; and apter to Talk,
than Fight.

It is the Bane of Armies when Quality, and not Merit, are the Foundation of
Preferment.

Trust not where you have been deceived.

It is needless to declare War against those prone to it from former Successes.

Breakers of honest Confederacies deserve Censure.

He is in the wrong that gives the Cause of War, not he that seeks Redress.

Delays in Danger are the Mother of ensuing Evils.

Failings of Superiors make them in the Eyes of Inferiors contemptible.

Well-weigh'd Counsel seldom fails.

There is a happy Minute more worth, than all the Policies of War.

Fortune is no where so inconstant, as in War.

One Hours Distaster may overthrow the Honor gotten, and ruin future
Expectations.

Faults in War are irreparable.

Though Money be the Sinews of War, yet by Science, Prudence, and Personal
Valor, Victory is obtained.

Success is not to be expected where Money is scant, and Enemies abound.

He that gets by Conquest does much, but he that can keep what he has gotten
does more.

Numbers are little available where Fear reigns.

The Captain's end should be Glory, not to be a Scourge, seeking by Conquest to
build up, not to confound.

Those that are unfaithful to their own Interest, will not be true to another.

Awe makes Tyrants obeyed, and Love Sovereigns.

Many Things are lost for not being attempted.

Courage and Courtesy are great Ornaments to a Captain.

As Rewards are necessary, so are Chastisements.

A Captain ought to be diligent, watchful, and of a resolute Spirit; wise to
command, liberal to reward, and valiant to defend.

Happy is that Country where Men of Merit are not discouraged, and where
Favors are not ill placed.

It is Valor's Badge neither to fear, nor to be too confident.

Fortune never waits on the Fearful.

Fear stifles generous Undertakings in their birth.

Fear is honorable when it proceeds not from a personal Concern, but for the
welfare of the whole.

Tameness in Officers is a Discouragement, and causes Deserters.

Nothing unarms a People like Effeminacy, Lust, Pleasure, and Idleness.

Fortune and Prudence are usually Companions.

He that is feared by many, has reason to fear many.

He hurts the Good that spares the Ill*

Though a Wound may be cured, yet the Scar remains.

No Danger is overcome without Danger.

Despair sets on edge Courage, and makes Cowards valiant, and spirits them in
Combat.

The Effects of Despair are surprising, and have the same product which true
Courage has in others.

Great Souls are capable of great Things; and if Power be annexed, then may be
reasonably expected great Performances.

The Soldier should not only be daring, and bold, but have also a Faculty of
contriving; for Invention is as necessary as Valor.

It is not safe to Disband Forces, while the Enemies are on foot.

When an Enemy is secure, then attack him.

Let the Intelligence of your Enemies Motions be at hand, though they be far off.

Early inure an Army to Hardships, before Necessity reduces them to it.

Let Courage increase with Danger; for by losing the one, you hazard all.

It is necessary in Officers to have a natural Propensity to great Actions.

To stand the Enemies first Fury is the way to overcome.

Fortresses should be Nurseries to undisciplined Soldiers.

The more Enemies the more Honor.

Cowards have Lions Mouths, but Hearts like Hares.

A prudent Retreat is as honorable as a Victory.

Spend not time in Plunder till the Work is done.

The Generous will not be discouraged, though their Merit meets not with due
Applause.

He deserves not the Name of Victor, that conquers basely.

Generosity is never so commendable, as when exercised toward an Enemy.

Victory moderated by Prudence, is splendid and safe.

The falling on the Spoil has often been the Bane of Armies.

To be sedate in a Hurry, and calm in Confusion, to preserve a Presence of Mind
in the greatest Exigencies, are necessary Requisits in a General.

Disciplined Soldiers, without good Officers, will not answer the end.

Temerity is seldom successful; but upon necessity Boldness exceeds Counsel.

Encounter not Enemies in their height of Fury.

Those have gained Honor from the want of Courage in an Adversary, that else
would have had Disgrace.

Ill use is made of Victory when none is spared.

Old Veteran Troops ought not to be chosen for desperate Enterprises, but young
Years, and boiling Youth, who have no Thought but that of Success and Glory.

He that has most Courage is least cruel.

Private Men should have public Marks of Honor, as a President to incite
others to desire that their Heads may be crowned with such Laurels.

There may be as great Cruelty in sparing all, as to spare none.

Victory should not thirst after Blood, nor be cruel to obtain it.

What Power and Policy cannot bring about, Gold may effect.

The Question ought rather to be where the Enemies are, than how many, least it
give to think that Fear, rather than Valor, made the Query.

The Sword dispatches quickly, but Fear strikes down like Thunder.

He is soonest hurt, who fears most.

Great Souls, in glorious Enterprises, have no sense of Danger.

The more Danger the more Glory.

The Foundation of Military Knowledge should be laid even from Youth.

The time for Battle is, when Men are most spirited for Action.

An Army kept idle degenerates, and are troublesome Guests where quartered.

Never be confident of Victory, nor yet despair of Success.

Intestine Animosities ruin the greatest Bodies.

Aim at Numbers, but trust not in them.

Courage makes all Enterprises easy.

Delays may turn the Scales, so that the Conqueror may become the Conquered.

It is an unprofitable Victory that is obtained by the Ruin of ones own Country.

That Victory is not perfect where the Heart is not made Captive as well as the
Body.

To overcome by Clemency is more honorable, than to subdue by the Sword.

Courage is shown more in the choice to die free, than to suffer a languishing
Captivity in an Enemies Country.

An unlimited Power is of great use to capacitate the General to do great
Things, which he that waits for Orders cannot effect.

There is Encouragement to attempt a Siege, when the Governor is known to be
capable of being corrupted.

The Knowledge of a Garrisons being over-stored, may as soon draw on a Siege,
as when its Wants are discovered.

Palliate Disgraces, and call Flights Retreats.

Let Spies be rather your Enemies Subjects than your own.

Spies are the Generals Ferrets which are gained by Money, and preserved by
Hope.

Fortified Places, Armies and Fleets, are vain Things, when God lends not a
Hand.

Perjury calls for Judgment, but more eminently when found in Princes.

He that can turn Revenge into Mercy, and Hatred into Love, is Praiseworthy.

A mean spirited Prince is rather the Object of Contempt than Fear.

Religion is the usual Cloak for Rebellion.

Furious Spirits are seldom appeased by soft Words, nor Submissions.

It is best for Princes to judge only according to Equity, to do nothing but
what is expedient, and labor not so much to show their Authority, as their
Justice.

Vindicative Spirits are their own Tormenters.

No Game is too great for Lookers on, say Neuters.

Greatness and Care are Twins.

Sovereigns are Judges here, yet they are judged themselves, and arraigned at
the Tribunal of every private Man's Censure.

Though Sovereigns are Gods on Earth, yet they see and hear with others Eyes,
and Ears, and are obliged accordingly to take Measures.

The Wise proceed to Action with Caution, but the Unexperienced are rash in
their Enterprises.

Sometimes Temerity is of more Use, and a greater Advantage, than more prudent
Measures.

The General's Staff is an Ornament, but it loads as well as it adorns.

The Enemies Quarters are easilier beat up and surprised, when their Distances
have made them secure.

Let Ambushes be a Secret, least the being circumvented make designed for the
place of Victory.

The Wise never wonder, nor are surprised, for nothing happens to them, but
what they expected, and are armed for its reception.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by John Jones, at the Dolphin and Crown in Saint
Paul's Churchyard.
POpery, Superstition, Ignorance and Knavery, very unjustly by a Letter in the
General pretended; but as far as was Charged, very fully proved upon the
Dissenters that were concerned in the Surey Imposter. By Zach. Tailor.

The Surey Impostor: Being an Answer to a late Fanatical Pamphlet, entitled,
The Surey Demoniack. By Zach. Tailor, A. M. and One of the King's Preachers for
the County- Palatine of Lancaster.

A Sermon of Good Works. Preached at Feckenham, in the County of Worcester, on
Thursday in Whitsun-week, May 17, 1697. at the Yearly Meeting of the Feofees,
appointed by Sir Thomas Cooks Baronet, to manage the Charity given by him, for
Educating and Providing for Twelve poor Children there, and for Maintaining a
Schoolmaster to Instruct them in Learning and Piety. By John Jepthcott, D. D.
Prebendary of Worcester, and Rector of All Saints in the Burrought of Evesham.

A View of the Dissertation upon the Epistles of Phalaris, Themistocles, etc.
Lately published by the Reveren'd Dr. Bentley. Also of the Examination of that
Dissertation by the Honorable Mr. Boil. In order to the Manifesting the
Incertitude of Heathen Chronology.

Eight Chirurgical Treatises, on these following Heads, viz. 1. of Tumors. 2.
Of Ulcers. 3. Of Diseases of the Anus. 4. Of the King's Evil. 5. Of Wounds. 6.
Of Gunshot Wounds. 7. Of Fractures and Luxations. Of the Lues Venera. By
Richard Wiseman, Serjeant-Chirurgeon to King Charles the Second. The Third
Edition. Fol.

The General History of England, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, from the
earliest Accounts of Time, to the Reign of his present Majesty King William
III. Taken from the most ancient Records, Manuscripts, and printed Historians,
with Memorials of the most eminent Persons in Church and State; as also, the
Foundations of the most noted Monasteries and both Universities. Vol. I. By
James Tyrrell, Esquire Fol.

Treatises upon several Subjects, viz. Reason and Religion, or the Grounds and
Measures of Devotion. Reflections upon the Conduct of Humane Life. The Charge
of Schism continued. Two Treatises concerning Divine Light. Spiritual Counsel,
or, the Father's Advice to his Children. Written by John Norris, M. A. Rector
of Bemerton near Sarum. Octavo.

Practical Discourses upon several Divine Subjects, viz. Of Religious Discourse
in common Conversation. Of the Fear of Death. Concerning the Extent of Christ's
Satisfaction. Concerning practical Atheism. Of walking by Faith. Concerning
Charity to the Poor. Concerning the right Use of the World. Concerning the
successive Vanity of Humane Life. -- An Admonition concerning two late Books,
called, A Discourse of the Love of God. Vol. IV. Written by John Norris, M. A.
Rector of Bemerton near Sarum. Octavo.

Ars Chirurgica, or a Compendium of the Theory and Practice of Chyrurgery, in
Seven Books. Containing, 1. The Instruments and Operations of the Art. 2. The
Removal of Defilements. 3. The Cure of Tumors. 4. The Cure of Wounds. 5. The
Cure of Ulcers. 6. The Cure of Fractures. 7. The Cure of Dislocations. Showing
the Names, Causes, Signs, Differences, Prognostics, and various Intentions of
Curing all kind of Chirurgick Diseases, from Head to Foot, happening to Humane
Bodies. To which is added, Pharmacopoeia Chyrurgica, or, The Medical Store, in
Latin and English; which contains an absolute Set of choice Preparations or
Medicaments, fitted for the complete and universal Practice both of Physic and
Chyrurgery. The whole Work Galenically and Chymically performed; the like yet
never published in any Language whatsoever. By William Salmon, M. D. living at
the Great House by Black-Friers-Stairs, London. Octavo.

Poems upon several Occasions. By Daniel Baker, M. A. sometimes of Gonvil and
Caius College in Cambridge. Octavo.

Reformed Devotions in Meditations, Hymns and Petitions, for every Day in the
Week, and every Holiday in the Year. Divided into Two Parts. The Fourth
Edition, Corrected. Twelves.

The present State of the Universe, or and Account of 1. The Rise, Births,
Names, Matches, Children, and near Allies of all the present chief Princes of
the World. 2. Their Coats of Arms, Motto's, Devices, Liveries, Religions and
Languages. 3. The Names of their chief Towns, with some Computations of the
Houses and Inhabitants, their chief Seats of Pleasure, and other remarkable
Things in their Dominions. 4. Their Revenues, Power and Strength. Also and
Account of Commonwealths, relating to the same Heads. The Second Edition much
amended and enlarged, with the Addition of the Styles or Titles of the several
Potentates and Republics. Twelves.

Political and Military Observations, Remarks, and Maxims; of Charles V. late
Duke of Lorrain, General of the Emperor's Forces; never Printed before, Octavo.

Archaeologiae Graecae, or the Antiquities of Greece. Volume the Second,
containing 1. The Military Affairs of the Grecians. 2. Some of their Military
Customs. By John Potter, M. A. and Fellow of Lincoln-College, Oxon. Octavo.

History of Portugal, from the first Ages of the World, to the late great
Revolution under King John IV. in the Year, 1640. Written in Spanish by Emanuel
de Fasia y Sousa, Knight of the Order of Christ; Translated and Continued down
to this present Year, School. By Captain John Stevens.

Books printed for William Haws, at the Rose in Ludgate Street.
A Short Discourse upon the Doctrine of our Baptismal Covenant, being an
Exposition upon the Preliminary Questions and Answers of our Church-Catechism,
proper to be read by all young Persons, in order to their understanding the
whole Frame and Tenor of the Christian Religion, and to their being duly
prepared for Confirmation; with Devotions preparatory to that Apostolic and
useful Ordinance. By Thomas Bray, D. D. The Second Edition.

The great Law of Consideration, or a Discourse wherein the Nature and
Usefulness, and absolute Necessity of Consideration, in order to a truly
serious and religious Life, is laid open. The Seventh Edition, Corrected and
Amended. By Anthony Horneck, D. D. late Prebendary of Westminster, Minister of
the Savoy, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

FINIS.

