A RELATION, Of the LIFE OF CHRISTINA Queen of Sweden: WITH Her Resignation of
the Crown, Voyage to Bruxels, and Journey to Rome.


Whereunto is added, Her Genius.

Translated out of French, by I. H.

LONDON, Printed by J. C. for Henry Fletcher, at the three Gilt Cups; and Nath.
Heathcoate, at the Acorne, near the West End of Paul's. 1656.

To the Reader.
STrange have been the Revolutions produced in our Age; and so frequent, as may
beget admiration in the most Grave and Wise. But amongst others, this of
Christina of Sweden is transcendent. That great Queen had worthily obtained the
repute of being not so great and glorious, as wise and virtuous: the rays of
her glory were so resplendent upon her People, at her first appearing, that the
loss of her renowned father Gustavus, that bright Star, was little perceived,
by reason of the sweet influences cast from the more refulgent brightness of
this rising Sun. But a Sunshine-morning proves not always a fair day: nor did
this Luminary long continue her luster, but became obscured and darkened by
certain foggie vapors exhaled by herself. To speak plainly, Pigmentelli and
others frequenting that Court, insinuated themselves into the Queens favor and
familiarity, whereby they got opportunity to instill into her such counsels as
were the natural products of their own base hearts; which she embracing became
quite changed; and her Court, which was formerly a School of Virtue, was now a
Nursery of Vice, which having once found an inlet, rushed in like an
overflowing Inundation, drowning the plants, and even washing away the seeds of
Virtue, that had been sowed and sprung therein. In a word, Vice, that had been
rarely seen in that Court, became now a constant guest, and found entertainment
both at bed and board.

The ensuing Discourse gives you an ample account of this Princess, both while
in her glory, and after her eclipse; being written by one of her Domestics,
who was privy to her most secret practices, both in Sweden, and also through
Germany to Hamburgh, where she gave him and the rest that accompanied her
(except some few) the go-by, leaving them to shift for themselves in a strange
Country, (for so it was to most of them) without any consideration or provision
on her part.

Never was the World so gulled in their opinions of any one person, as of this
Princess, who whilst she was esteemed the Phoenix of the Age, became insensibly
a prodigious monster; and from a Lady of great renown, she is become a Lady
Errant, seeking Adventures in strange Lands.

A brief RELATION of the Life of CHRISTINA Queen of Sweden.
ALl Europe (not to speak of the other parts of the earth) has doubtless heard
of the Resignation of CHRISTINA Queen of Sweden. The Ignorant, who are but
little versed in Policy, have looked on it, as a Prodigy of Virtue, and an
action full of Generosity: but the Learned and Politic have taken it, as the
highest Folly, which could ere fall into a woman's head; and who is best
informed of the affairs and state of the Kingdom of Swedland, does publish it
with a loud voice, for a famous Bankrupt, she would make to her Creditors. The
less judicious have believed, that the Swedes being weary of her Government,
for the most part disorderly, she has been (as it were) secretly forced, to
divest her self willingly of the Kingdom, to prevent with prudence what might
befall some other way. But the wisest, who know the light and inconstant humor
of that Princess, say boldly, that she has done it through levity, and out of
a whimsey; having always been carried thus, in whatsoever she has done. I omit
purposely many speeches, I have heard upon this subject, in Denmark, Germany,
the Low Countries, and even in Swedland; because I see no motives strong
enough, to make me believe them.

That Princess was cried up, the first years of her Reign, amongst all Nations
in Europe; and truly with reason: for in those days she might justly be
called, The most Religious, Just, and Virtuous Princess in the world. She was
familiar and beneficial to all, very charitable to the needy, and most
officious to any, to whom she might either do, or procure any good. But a
monster, France had brought forth against her custom, being gone to lurk in the
Caves, Forests and Rocks, which the Goths left of old, to breathe the air of
France and Italy, did so skilfully win her heart, yea possessed it, that all
the time he stayed there, he handled her at his pleasure, and for his own
profit; but to the grief and discontent of all the world, yea of the chief of
the Kingdom, who weary with the impertinencies of a man of nothing, did twice
or thrice attempt upon his life. That man being without Religion and Piety,
impressed all his false opinions on the mind of the Queen, whom thus in a
short time he did make like himself; and she was in a moment so strangely
changed, that she was no more like herself. She did indeed bear still the name
of Great CHRISTINA, but she had no more her virtues. She did before, eat for
the most part in public, where they used to discourse of some fine matters,
wherein all her Court did with admiration partake of the knowledge and subtilty
of that Princess's wit; who by those means was reverenced and cherished by all
men. But this foolish Statesman, quite contrary to that commendable practice,
stole her from her Courtiers, to possess her alone, and entertain her Royal
mind, with Jests and ridiculous Sports; so that her Counselors, and the great
men of the Kingdom, could hardly see her, and seldom speak to her. By her
privacie with that base fellow, she began to lose much of the good opinion, her
Subjects had of her; and her assiduity with him did so eloign the most zealous
of her Courtiers, that her Court did appear like a Desert or Solitude, to what
it was before.

The imprudence or impudence of that mercenary stranger, did not only affront
the chief of the Kingdom, and even those who were most in the Queens favor,
but did also molest her domestics; injuring them one after another, rather by
Fancy then Reason. And this he did, to make ostentation of the power, he had
acquired upon the mind of CHRISTINA, which he caused to act according to the
strange motion of his irregular passions; and into which he might easily
inspire love or hatred, with their effects, in the behalf, or to the prejudice
of whom he pleased.

That Imprudence and Impudence grew at last to that height, that being judged
intolerable, some did resolve and endeavor to murder him. This will appear
somewhat violent and bloody, to calm or still humors: but it is fit, one man
should die for all: and when all such wicked and abominable persons should be
cut off, the rest would fare better, and live with more content. This base and
fearful heart, which has never done any thing which either were generous, or
appeared as such, seeing himself pursued in good earnest, was forced to think
on his retreat, for which he made an advantageous provision; carrying out of
the Kingdom, whether in Coin or Plate, to the value of an hundred thousand
Crowns, and more. And it is a strange thing, that stout Nation had not a man,
who would pursue this infamous Fugitive, to wash in his foul blood so many
crimes, wherewith he had defiled that Court. Providence would not have it so.
His absence did indeed give some respite to many men, and did sweeten their
bitterness: but he had spread too violent a Poison in the Queens mind, and had
left there too strong impressions of evil, to permit that the Court should
recover its former state; it being the nature of that Princess, never to be
constant, but in those things, which have blasted her fame. Doubtless many of
those, who saw those disorders, will easily imagine, of whom I speak: But to
satisfy all the world, and that no man persuade himself, I have invented this,
I do ingenuously confess, that the Picture I have now drawn of a Monster, of a
mercenary and impudent fellow, of a man of nothing, of a base heart, and, in a
word, of an Atheist, is that of Bourdelot, who, like a great Mastiff, eats this
day the bread of the poor, and sucks the blood of the Crucifix; having obtained
an Abbey of the King of France, by the urgent intercession of CHRISTINA, who
took so much to heart the getting of that Benefice, (which Rome, informed of
Bourdelot's ill qualities, had refused him) that she ceased not her
importunities to the Court of France, till she saw her Dagon sit in the Temple
of God. This Monster then being shamefully expelled out of Swedland, the Queen
has since constantly showed her self such, as he did leave her, that is, a
Lady without Religion, Piety, Virtue, and Fidelity; dissolute in her life, and
libertine in her speeches; a cheat, slanderer, and jeerer; and of whom one
might truly say, She had nothing Royal, but the Kingdom. Who will not wonder at
so strange and prodigious a change? Who will not say, That Queen is fallen from
an eminent state to a low condition? But you, brave Sweds, will you not weep,
to see the flower of your Kingdom so much withered, your Amarantha so much
changed; and your Princess, who has been long the wonder of this Age, the glory
of her Sex, and the subject of the whole worlds admiration, be now the May Game
of all Nations? To see your Queen, who heretofore was cherished and esteemed by
all in general, now become their byword and laughing stock? Yes, all your eyes
should now be turned into as many springs of tears, to weep perpetually such a
fatal downfall, if divine providence, which would not forsake your Kingdom, had
not raised you a religious, wise, virtuous, valiant, and all-generous King, who
may worthily govern you all his life, as you may in reason expect from his fair
beginnings. And you, ingenious French, will you not sigh and groan, that your
Benefactrix has her hands shut to do you good, and can no more bestow her
Bounties upon you: that she who has so dearly cherished your Nation, for your
Poets, Musicians and Dancers, and chiefly for your Gallantry, is now seeking
her best delights amongst your most cruel enemies: and finally, that she, who
did formerly protect you, has now forsaken you? Yet I persuade my self, that
being of late accustomed to be ill used by that Princess, you will soon dry
your tears, and it will better become you to leave the Gothish Land for yours:
you are not welcome there, but much envied; quit it then with, or after me: I
left there many of my friends and acquaintance in that resolution.

But let us return to our Princess, who in truth was for a long time, as I have
said, very pious and religious: but since, she has been seen doubting, whether
there be a God and a Providence, and denying Heaven and Hell, Saints and
Devils, Judgment and Resurrection, and so consequently the Souls Immortality.
Concerning Christ's Incarnation, it is but a Fiction in her opinion. Who has not
frequented her Court, will hardly believe this: but who has been there during
her Reign, will not give me the lie. She has often made Speeches in full
Assemblies, which sufficiently showed her sense. I am witness of it, and can
pass for an irrefragable one before those who know me. A man of probity, and
whose profession permits him not to lie, chiefly in such an occasion, has told
me in private, that he had diverse times entertained the Queen three or four
hours, about the existence of a Deity, and concerning a Providence, which
governs all things in the world; wherein he had found her very wavering, and
making use of all the strongest Arguments which Libertines have forged, to
oppose those Truths. Yet there is some probability, that what that Princess
did in those strange Disputes, was rather to show her fine wit, then out of a
design to overthrow those Truths so well established in the world, that none
but Fools will oppose them; since natural lights are sufficient in those, who
have the right use of Reason, to give them the knowledge thereof. Hers are too
bright and great, to permit her to doubt of those high Mysteries: and I am
charitably persuaded, that 'twas rather to exercise her wit and rare knowledge,
as Schoolmen put theirs forth, in the very beginning of their Theology,
disputing whether there be a God, who is the object of that noble Science; then
by any belief or opinion, which be criminal before God, or injurious unto his
existence. Yet it must be confessed, that our Princess has been obsetv'd, to
call so often those high things in question, so ready to speak against them,
and so loose in all such discourses, that thence many did suspect her to be ill
grounded in her Religion: and she was often heard say after a Sermon, that she
did know less then before: and where her Priests or Ministers took exception at
her, yea preached against her, chiefly because there was a room full of naked
Pictures appointed to pray, praise, read, preach, (they were Pictures
representing the Creation of our first parents, a little too much to the life)
she did reply, that they showed well their ignorance thereby, not to know that
Adam and Eve were both created stark naked; and that it was lawful, to make
their pictures in the same fashion, as they came out of the hands of God; and
that the Idea's of a Painter were not more criminal then his. It Is very true,
she has lost much of her good name, in the opinion of all pious and modest
souls, since Bourdelot's infernal acquaintance with her, by her licentious
liberty, in making her most delightful and familiar conferences of lascivious
speeches, tales or stories full of obscenity, in whose relation she takes most
pleasure, and will absolutely that every thing be called by its own name,
without any disguise, or that seasoning and grain of salt, which modesty
inspires to all its professors, and persons well educated.

One of my friends, who upon his admission into her Service, was used to
entertain her both often and long, observing that her mind was delighted with
such kind of tales, did abundantly furnish her with them: yet because there
were some of his narrations, which did sometimes require more modest
expressions, then the genuine or natural, chiefly before a Royal Majesty, and
in a maids presence; as she saw him going about his circumlocutions, and
seeking civil terms, she would boldly speak out the words, though they were
never so filthy; many of which he has specified to me, which modesty forbids
me to write here. Judge of her Religion, by her ranging up and down the world
without a Minister; preferring her health, (for whose preservation she has a
Physician) to her souls salvation, for which those Ministers are instruments,
appointed by God. She made a show to retain one, who did wait on her as far as
Halmstat, upon the frontiers of Denmark, where she did dismiss him. Another was
offered her at Hamburgh, whom she made a show to accept, though the event
declared, she had no mind to him. And indeed, such persons had been but as
thorns in her feet: for, having a design to profess Popery, the Ministers of
the Gospel were no fit attendants on her. It Is evident, that long before, she
took no delight in all their Functions: for, as many persons can testify, as
well as I, she had at Church so little Religion and Zeal, that her countenance
showed enough, what spirit possessed her. She used to sit in a Chair of Purple
Velvet, and lean her head and arms on another; questionless building (after the
Proverb) fine Castles in the air: and if the Minister, through his zeal to his
Charge, or for the merit of his Theme or Subject, did preach and pray a little
too long, for the devotion of the Queen and all such lukewarm souls, her
custom was, to recreate her weary attention, (if yet she had any at all) in
playing with two little Spaniels, which are always with her; or prattling with
some of her creatures, if any was then near. I have sometimes seen her make
such a noise with her Fan on her Chair, that if the Priest had had respect and
complaisance enough, to give something to her humor, he had taken those signs
of impatience, as silent commands to make a quick end: but he was no whit the
shorter; either because he kept his old custom, or that he would break or bend
her impatient disposition, and use her to more piety, attention, modesty, in
the celebration of Divine Mysteries, and so in the sweet exercise of Christian
Religion: which yet could take no effect on her Mind, so strong and lasting are
Bourdelot's impressions on her, and so deep all the roots, which the seed of
Impiety and Dissolution, he sowed in her heart, has taken there, that no
amendment can be expected from her.

That inconstant Humor has continued with her, even in strange Countries, and
namely at Hamburgh, where we saw her at Church, hearing the Word of God, with
so little reverence and attention, and so much impatience, that thereby many
men, who went to see her through curiosity, were confirmed in the ill Opinion,
they had before conceived of her, by diverse Reports made of her, before her
Arrival. Even some of her Swedish Priests, having Observed so little Zeal in
their Princess, told me before my departure, out of that cold Country, That
they feared very much, she would fondly embrace the Superstitions of Papists,
since she slighted so visibly the Religion she was bred in, and loved not the
other, which is known by the name of the Reformed Churches, having frequently
said, She had rather become a Papist, than of the Reformed Religion; meaning by
this, those of Geneva's Confession, from whom she had a mighty Aversion; either
because she was not well informed of her Doctrine and Purity, or that the
Lutheran, in which she has been bred, comes somewhat nearer the Roman, chiefly
in Ceremonies.

But it is enough of her Religion, (which is now lost, if ever she had
sincerely any) let us a little Examine her Carriage, in her Wanderings, or
Voyages. It was thought convenient, That after she had waited on the Queen her
Mother, whose ordinary abode is at Niukupin, she should go to Oeland, which is
a very pleasant Isle, that she had reserved for her self, and did before belong
to his Royal Highness, who does now Reign over the Sweds, a Nation (though
glorious) yet too little for his Merits and aspiring Valor. Thence she was to
pass by Sea into Pomerania, to see the Lands and Goods, which were Assigned for
her Appannage or Provision, by her own Agreement: The King gave Order that
Seven Great Ships should be prepared for her Transportation, under the Command
of Marshal Wrangle; and that the Governor of Oeland should have in readiness
whatsoever was fit to entertain her Royally, as it became his and her Majesty:
But having made a show to go thither, yea, being gone that way a whole day, she
did resolve to go by Land, and to cross all Denmark, which she did, habited
like a Cavalier, with a red Scarf after the Spanish mode, and thus entered
Hamburgh incognito, and went to Lodge in the House of a Jew, a Physician by
Profession, slighting that which the Magistrates had designed for her. That
Action much amazed both the Senate, whose Honorable Reception and
Entertainment she refused; and the Priests of the Town, who enflamed with the
Zeal of God's House, could not forbear to speak in Public against her, for her
Ridiculous and Scandalous Choice of the House of a man, who is by Profession, a
sworn Enemy of Jesus Christ. Yet this Meting, for all that, appeared to be
somewhat too hard; and the wiser sort thought, That something should have been
allowed to the condition of a Queen, and that Excuses should be made for her.
But she replied for her self, That Jesus Christ had all his lifetime conversed
with the Jews; That himself was come of their Seed; and that he had preferred
their Company to the Company of all other Nations. Now judge ye your selves of
this Answer. When she went out of Hamburgh, it was at an unseasonable hour, to
wit, at 4 or 5 a Clock in the Morning, at the outgoing of a Feast, whereat the
Land-grave of Hesse had Royally entertained her, without taking her leave
either of the Senate, or of the Magistrates: whereat every one was extremely
surprised. In her Train she being Fifth, or Sixth her self, followed on her
Voyage toward the United Provinces, without being accompanied with any Woman,
or Maidservant: having left her two Hollands-Women (that had served her a long
enough time, and which she had brought from Sweden with her) at Hamburgh,
without giving them any Recompense, as she had likewise done to her Footmen
and Coach-men: committing her self wholly to the guidance of Seigneur
Esteenberg, of whom she made choice above all in her Court, as of the most
brutish and irrational man; and having given the Charge of the Master of her
Household, or Steward, to Silver-Crona, whose name full of Silver, smells rankly
of her Goldsmith.

She continued her manner of acting in the United Provinces, as she had begun
it in Denmark, and Hamburgh. She entered these Countries also, without making
her self known, sleighting the Preparations that the Lords the States General
of the United Provinces, had made for an Honorable Reception of her: and in
such manner passed through their Towns, until she came to give her self up into
the hands of the Spaniards.

But her contentment here could not be full, since her good friend Pigmentelli
is not here, who is the man, that has taken the place of Bourdelot, and who
did entirely possess her, all the time of his Negotiation in Sweden: for whom
she made Feasts, Balls, Walks, and public Rejoycings. And it is not without
Reason, that many persons suspected, That it was this man, that made her aborse
that monstrous Design, to quit the Crown; which she says she had conceived a
long enough time before, in her Letter that she wrote to Monsieur Chanut,
Ambassador for the King of France, toward the States General of the
Low Countries. It was he only, that did eat oft'nest with her, that accompanied
her in all her Walks, that entertained her at night until 3 or 4 a Clock after
midnight; and lastly, who was her Achates, or inseparable Companion, and who
did no less all her business, than his Predecessor Bourdelot. It is a great
change, To come out of the hands of a Frenchman, to fall into the arms of a
Spaniard, that has had so great a power over her mind, as to obliege her, and
make her say to the Ambassador of Portugal, That she acknowledged not his
Master, as King of that Country, but only as Duke of Bregance. Other Ministers
of State have been little better used of her. For there is none of them all,
from one end to the other, that has not been neglected: which also made them
take that resolution, to banish themselves from the Court, whither they went no
more, than their Master's Affairs called them to it. I must not forget that
famous Ball, which the Queen made Dance for the farewell to her dearest
Confident; whereof she would bear a part, and represent therein the person of
the Woman-Fool, or Pratling-Houswise. Whilst she was Apparelling her self, she
took a fair Diamond from off her finger, and gave it to Pigmentelli to keep it
for her: which, so soon as she had on her Apparel, he offered to render her
again. But she replied, That she had never used to take that again, which she
had once given. The Stone was esteemed at 30 or 40 thousand Livers. But what
shall we say of that Embassage Extraordinary, which she sent to his Catholic
Majesty, only to thank him, that he had sent her so gallant a man, as
Pigmentelli?

If these great Persons, which she has called to her at diverse times, had been
somewhat others than they were, without doubt they had been both better
received, and more honorably used. Monsieur Naudeus, not being able longer to
suffer the Disorders and Looseness of that Court, wherein the Muses were no
more honored, saw himself constrained to banish himself from it, of his own
accord; and did prefer a voluntary Exile, to an abode so little favorable to
men of Learning, whom that Princess had loved for some time; but after that
Bourdelot had put that high gallantry into her head, there was no more to do
for them: And all the fair appearances, that she had shown them, were nothing
but made countenances, or rather a remainder as it were of her first Opinions.
I call them all to witness, if there be found any one of them, that has been
either fully, or reasonably satisfied, except one, or two, who knew well how to
take their time.

Monsieur Bouchard, whose Virtue and Knowledge render him worthy of eternal
Memory, was used like a Pedant in that Court. The Queen often complained, That
he had but very little gallantry in him: and when some represented to her, That
gallantry agreed not well with the Profession he made; she answered, that she
made but very little esteem of a man, that knew nothing but how to read on a
Book; and that for being informed in some words of Arabic, her approbation was
not thereby to be gained: As if Monsieur Bouchard had ever cared much for it.
This he well witnessed, When the Queen advertising him of the Design she had to
quit the Crown, and demise the Administration of the Kingdom, to retire her
self into a Solitude, in the company of some knowing men, of the Number of whom
she wished, That he would be one: He did not so much as once to Answer her
Letter. And his silence ought not to be reputed other than very reasonable;
since he did well in it; and the issue has made it be seen, that she was full
of Hypocrisy, and that what the Queen was doing in the Business, was nothing
but Deceit, for disguising the Design she had, of running a course of
Light-houswifery. But let us suppose that the thing was, as she described it;
yet Monsieur Bouchard had Reason to be silent, having been worse used, than can
be well imagined; in that they left him to a lodging for the space of six
weeks, before they made so much as a show to visit him: And that he was very
ill rewarded, after the pains he had taken to come to Sweden, only to satisfy
the Queens desire.

The good Counsels that this Princess gave, and the lesson that she taught to
the deceased Monsieur de Saumaise his little Son, is a thing very pleasant to
hear. Most people know, That after the death of this great man, whose Memory
the Queen honored with a Funeral-Oration, which she made a Professor of the
University of Vpsal make; she wrote a fine Letter to the Lady, his Widow,
wherein she set forth her purpose of Educating her Son, that was the only
Child, of all that Monsieur de Saumaise had, appointed to Studies. The Mother,
to discharge her self of this, as well as of her elder Sons, sent him into
Sweden: to whom this Princess, when he came to do his Reverence unto her, and
to Kiss her Hand, represented, that she would not that he were only knowing, as
was his Father; but that she moreover desired, that he were a very gallant
spirit, and learned with much care the Fashion, wherewith to govern himself at
Court: that a Gentleman ought to make as much Profession of Gallantry at the
least, as of Letters. This fine Lesson read unto a young Boy, subject as yet
unto the Rod, and to Correction, made so great an impression in his mind, that
after that, he was heard to speak of little else, but of going to visit the
Ladies of the Court, and of Vaulting and Dancing. This good Princess did take
so great a care of him, that she suffered him to stay all the time he was in
Sweden, in a Victualling-house, so ill appointed, that he looked rather like a
Beggar, than a Gentleman's Son of good Birth. And to ascend back again from the
Son to the Father, it is true, that this Personage seems to have been better
used, than any other man of Letters: and yet for all that, he departed out of
Sweden discontented enough; whereof I profess that I knew not the Reasons. Yet
I have seen of his Letters in Sweden, written to some of his Friends, which
said, That he repented him in some sort, that he had deserved the approbation
of the Queen, seeing she was so easy to give it to Persons, that were
altogether unworthy. But I know well, that so he has been spoken of in that
Court, for a Sir John, whose Wife wore the Breeches.

Vossius and Heinsius, if they will tell the truth, have no great cause, to be
the best contented with her, of the world. Vossius has had all the pains, that
can be imagined, to make himself to be paid off that which he had laid out for
the Queen, in buying of diverse Books, which he had done for her. And Heinsius
is yet to sue for what is due to him, for the like cause, and moreover for the
Services that he did her Majesty. Judge by this, if men of Learning be in any
great real esteem with her. Without doubt, had they been less knowing, and more
gallant, that their business had been better carried through, according to the
Example of Bourdelot, whom the Queen has given her Pass to, as the
excellentest and first amongst men in the world. And I can assure you thus
much, that he could not speak congruous Latin. I have seen a Note written with
his own hand, to a Bishop that had been chased out of his Country for Religion,
and that did implore her Majesty's assistance by his intercession: In which
Note, within the compass of 4 or 5 lines, which it did contain, I found Three
or Four Soloecisms and Barbarisms: And the sense of the whole so confused, that
there was need to go to a Wizard, for to have it made plain. This Note is yet
in the hands of a man unblamable, that is in Sweden; at least, if he be not
come out of it since my self: the which without doubt he keeps, to put it in
the Vatican, or in the Kings Library at Paris, for an Authentic Witness of the
profound knowledge of Bourdelot, who to the Queen of Sweden vaunted, and
chanted so much, because he could make some sorry ryming French verses, though
neither that, but imperfectly enough. If it be possible for me to get a Copy of
this Note, I shall impart it to the Public, with some other Memorials, that I
expect from Sweden; whereby you shall know, whether Bourdelot be so great a
man, as the Queen has made him pass for; and whether he had reason to censure
all the great men that went to Sweden, and the Latin Poesies of Monsieur
Maurus (whose knowledge is known, chiefly in all the Countries of the Lords the
Estates General of the United Provinces) wherein he found, that the word
Posteri, was not good Latin, but that he should have said, Posteritas;
whereunto the Queen applauded, because Bourdelot had said it. It is surely a
matter of Astonishment, why a Princess so well furnished with Light of
Knowledge, suffered her self so strongly to be blinded by this infamous fellow:
which even the meanest of the Commons in Sweden having observed, they persuaded
themselves that he had a familiar Spirit; and that he used Charms to bewitch
her Mind: I have heard it said by many, whilst I was in Sweden. And when I
attempted to put this conceit out of their heads, as being a Flout, or as a
Dull conceit; I found them so deeply persuaded of it, that my attempt was
without effect.

But what shall we say of the horrible injustice that this Princess has done
to her Creditors? When I look upon it, I tremble; and think that those, who
have taken her demising the Crown as a famous playing the Bankrupt, had some
reason for it. It is seen, (I am a witness of it) that there be some Merchants
of Jewels, from whom she had taken up Goods, from some for Ten, from others for
Twenty, and from some for Thirty thousand Livres, to whom she has delayed
payment to be made, for Six, for Ten, and for Fifteen months beyond the time,
yea, two years, and in the end went her way, leaving Tickets, that will be paid
ad Calendas Graecas, that is, never. Is it not a matter of astonishment, and
which cries for vengeance to God, that these poor people have been forced to
leave off their lawful occasions and business, and to consume their Livelihood,
in attendance for their own in a strange Country, where the expenses are great;
and, at last, to see themselves left empty handed? But be not at all astonished
at this: Bourdelot's Maxim, which the Queen has exactly followed, was this:
That Kings might dispose of the goods of private men, as they pleased. But
whence has he drawn this false doctrine? Without doubt, from the bottom of his
black and base soul. I have seen some of these Merchants with all possible
earnestness desire their Jewels back again, since they saw themselves out of
hope to be paid: but they were in the hands of a Princess, that had a heart
rather to give them away to others, then ever to render them to their right
owners. This was not for want of information of the wrong was done these men:
for she was sufficiently advertised thereof, by Petitions and Requests which
they presented to her; all which she received from them, and read them upon her
pierced Chair, and then wiped her hinder parts with them.

But what Justice can be expected from that person, that does not right to her
self? Look a little on her carriage in the Economy of her house. Her
Intendant, to whom she sent all her Creditors, was a man that could neither
read, nor write, except only his name, which he learned to scribble a little
time since. He was a Tailor by trade, and was called Master John; whose Needle
and Shears this Princess has changed to a Sword, he being made a Nobleman;
and has given him the name of Lion Crona: but truly he carries the likeness of
a Monkey, rather then of a Lion. This illustrious Blade knew so well how to
govern the Queens mind, that she committed to him the Intendancie and Economy
of her whole house: who following his Mistress's Genius, he studied, in the
midst of his Ignorance, to deceive the world; and made himself so knowing in
that Art, that there was none, but such as had no business with him, that have
escaped his Knaveries. He began to enrich himself, by the Voyage he made into
France, for the provisions of the Queens Coronation; from whence having brought
an heap of the worst Stuffs, he made Merchandise of them in Sweden after this
manner: When the Queen gave commission to her domestics, or others, to make
them Clothes, Mr. John directed them to the Merchant with whom he had entrusted
his Magazine; so a^ by this means they were constrained at last to go to him,
who gave them wares of the value of 50 Crowns, for 100; which they entered into
Recognizance to pay him for: which change was not over disadvantageous to him.

To pass from the Intendant, to the Vallets of; her Chamber, who in in their
own kind governed also the Queen: they were personages worthy to be known. One
of them was called du Piquet, a Frenchman by Nation, who was the most infamous
Pimp in the world; and his wife had been kept in prison at Bruxels or Antwerp,
for her infamous tricks. The other of them was called Alexander, an Italian
born, who they say drew his illustrious extraction from a very renowned Cobbler.
And both these were called, The Queens Piggs; whom she made Noblemen, though
they had never been remarkable for any thing, but Infamy and Baseness. If it
was, because they had served her, there were an hundred others, who have had
that honor, and who did it more honorably, and with more faithfulness, and
more glory. See here how this Princess kept the laws of Justice in all her
carriage.

Ask, if you please, the Gentlemen of her Chamber, and her Maids of Honor; you
shall find, that in a moment she quitted her self of them all, and of her
Pages also, without so much as paying them their allowances; to say nothing of
Recompense, which is no more to be found near her.

Speak but a little to the Secretary of her Commands, who served her eighteen
months with an incredible diligence and fidelity, and who caused more to be
writ in his time to the Queen, and to Kings, and to all the Princes of Europe,
than all his predecessors had done: He will tell you, that she was ingrate to
him, in this, that she left him not a sous, although he made all the petty
expenses of the Cabinet, himself.

It is not long time since she had made a Neapolitan Gentleman come from Rome,
and had written to Madam the Duchess of Aiguillon, that he should not repent
for having come to her service; because she knew not only how to acknowledge
the services that any did her, but also to recompense them, even to their good
wills that they should testify to have for her. But all these fair words were
without any real effect, and were but wind, that is dissipated; or as smoke,
that vanishes: and they left this poor Gentleman (though he was of very good
birth) amongst the troop of those that were miserable.

But what ridiculous entertainment did she give that French Gentleman, that
brought to her the little young Monsieur de Saumaize, who for some reason, that
I will not here mention, voluntarily banished himself out of France, and from
his own house; and who had undertaken that sorry condition, either to
acknowledge the obligations that he had to the deceased Monsieur de Saumaize,
or that he was persuaded, that this Princess, being a great Queen, he might
hope to receive from her all manner of satisfaction, when she should be
informed of his worth and valor? we saw him neglected in Sweden, as much, or
more then any other; and she suffered him to go his way, without giving him any
thing at all, as an acknowledgement of the pains he had taken for her, and the
care he had taken of that little child. Is not here a brave way of knowing how
to recompense so far, as to reach even the good will that any had toward her?

I cannot omit the mentioning of the injustice that was done to a Valet of the
Barderob, called by the name of du Plessis, a Frenchman by Nation; who for
having made himself too watchful toward his Mistresses service (who thereby
perhaps was hindered of her night-practices with Pigmentelli) caused him one
evening to be beaten by her Footmen, disguised in gray clothes: which he got
of her, in recompense of all his services done her, and his great diligence. A
brave fashion, surely, of acknowledging her servants!

I omit many others; as, the Governor of her Pages, called La Selle, who
having a twofold charge in the Queens house, carried himself therein with a
behavior so wise, and so discreet, that her self confessed, that she had
nothing to say against him; whose merit therefore made him be chosen for his
Highness the Prince Atolf, to accompany him in his travels: who yet was no
better used by her, than others. He is come out of Sweden, full of Honors
indeed, but very empty of money, at least, for any that he had from the Queen.
A great Princess indeed, and worthy that persons of honor and quality should
serve her!

But before we lay aside the Pen, for a farewell, let us speak a little to our
French Musicians. When the Count Magnus de la Guard was sent Ambassador to the
most Christian King of France, by her Majesty of Sweden; he gave commandment
for the choice of a Company or Set of Violins or Musicians; to whom, by
contract signed with his hand, he promised conditions very reasonable. These
poor people engaged themselves for their voyage into Sweden, where at the
beginning they were used favorably enough; whether it was, that the Queen is
much pleased with new things; or, that she found the harmony of the French
Violins was better and more charming than that of Viels, or Swedish Timbrels:
But that lasted no long time; and at this day they are in such misery, that
there be some of them, who are indebted for all their expenses since their
wages dried up, so that it was not possible for them, by any solicitations or
pursuits they made, to get any part of that which was so authentically promised
them. The Queen danced in the Balls and Ballets, to the cadence of their
Violins, until she withdrew behind the Theater; from whence none of them could
see her return, to furnish them with Strings; so that I think they may now hang
up their Instruments on a hook. But why did not you, as those gelded Italians
did, who desired leave to be gone, as soon as they wanted money; and were
stuffed up with Rheums and Flegms, when their purses were empty? Your
gentleness has marred you; and you have seen, that for having too much
slackned of that which was your due, your Instruments are unset.

Doubtless, those that read what I write, will hardly believe it. But let him
believe it that will, I am fully assured, that such as have seen the estate of
the Court of Sweden, or have been truly informed thereof, will know I speak
less thereof than what may be said: and I would bring nothing hither, I have
not seen my self. When I shall have received the Memorials that I am promised
out of Sweden, I shall impart them to the Public, to undeceive it in many
things. I hope to receive them by some Frenchman, of whom that Country now
disburdens her self by little and little, and who were well shaken when I came
away. You may have patience, if you please, till that time; when you may know
something more private and particular of Queen Christina: or if not, take this
further account at present. She going toward Bruxels, was met on her way four
miles from that City, by the Archduke Leopoldus, and many Gallants of his
Court; by whom she was conducted to the said Duke's Palace, where she was
entertained with Plays, Balls, Feasts, and all Gallantry imaginable. She was
Royally feasted by the Earl of Fuensaldagne, who (for that end) sent Letters to
several Cities and Towns in the Low Countries, for Rarity and Variety: to the
City of Gant, for Veal; to Bruges, for Capons; to Antwerp, for Fish; to Mons,
for Mutton; to Ardine, for Venison; to Lille and Torney, for Poultry of all
sorts. These presented themselves by troops, to welcome her to Bruxels. But
nothing could be more pleasing to her, then the sweet company of Pigmentelli;
who was complacent not only in respect of his person, but also in regard of the
stately presents sent from his Master the King of Spain, who conceived no small
joy at the reception of that Royal Convert into his Dominions. Thus she deluded
Time with variety of Delights, until the Duke's departure to the Army; whom she
presented with a Gallant Horse, sumptuously accoutred with Gold and Diamonds to
a very great value. In September she departed thence, bending her course for
Italy, with a very numerous Train; posting it through the Country after her
wonted manner; having also a long Tail of Jesuits and Friars, which she
trailed after her to Inspruck in Tirol, the residence of the Grand Duke of that
Country; where her entertainment was extraordinary, and where all the Nobility
and Gentry in the Country were by the Duke summoned to appear, in all their
Pomp, to attend the solemn and actual Apostatization of this wretched Queen;
which was performed thus: She was led by the Archduke to the Franciscan Church,
(attended by a numerous company) where she was seated under a Canopie on the
left hand, before the high Altar: below her, toward the right hand, were the
Archduke and his Lady: over against them, Pigmentelli the Spanish Ambassador,
in a Chair by himself. The Quire was hung with Crimson-Velvet, and the ground
covered with Red Serge. Holsteinus the Popes Nuntio stood on the right side of
the Altar, and spoke thus: That Pope Alexander the Seventh having understood
that Christina Queen of Sweden had an intent to put her self into the bosom of
the Church, had sent his Letters to testify his approbation of her desires,
and his readiness to receive her with his Apostolical benediction: therefore he
was there to know whether it was true or no. To which she answered in the
Affirmative, Then Holsteinus desired, That in testimony of the truth thereof,
she would make profession of the Roman Faith, and swear to keep it, on the
holy Evangelists: which she did, and kissed the Book. Immediately on this, a
Chair was set for Holsteinus to sit in, and a Cushion laid at his feet, on
which the Queen kneeled: and then he making the sign of the Cross over her
head, and embracing her shoulders, gave her Absolution from all the sins she
had committed. Then were certain short Prayers said (or rather sung) in Latin,
for her: after which, high Mass was sung; and then a Priest made a Sermon in
Dutch, wherein he exhorted her to forget her People, Country, and Fathers
house, and to stick close to that profession she had taken up. Afterward, Te
Deum was sung with excellent Voices, and Instruments of all sorts, and Drums,
(which I never saw before in a Church.) All was concluded with the discharge of
Ordnance, and other demonstrations of great joy. At night, the Archduke
entertained her with a Mask, and Dancing. Here she tarried not long, but
departed toward Italy. In her way she took Bologne, where she was met by the
Popes Legate, who was sent to congratulate her arrival. From thence she went to
Lauretto, where she offered up a Crown and Scepter to the Idol of the place.
Here she showed great external devotion, which she performed with many
Ceremonies. Nothing remained now, but that she cast her self into the Arms of
the Pope; to which purpose, she addressed her self toward Rome, where great
preparation was made for her reception: but she, to show her great humility,
sent a Letter beforehand to that holy Father, praying that all such
Preparations might be moderated. At her arrival, she was admitted on her knees
to kiss the hands and feet of the Pope. Having now lodged her at Rome, I leave
her there; wishing she would seriously ruminate on those words of our Savior,
He (or she) that denies me before men, him (or her) will I deny before my
Father which is in heaven; whereby she might become sensible of her follies,
and find favor at last with that God, whom she has greatly offended by this
her abominable Apostacy and Backsliding.

The GENIUS of CHRISTINA Queen of Sweden.
MARS, whom the common opinion makes the Crafts-master of Gallant Spirits, and
whom Astrologians openly proclaim to preside at the births of great men, having
adopted for his son the Illustrious Gustavus of Sweden; in consideration of his
extraordinary generosity of mind, Resolved that the adoption he had made of
this great King, should be ratified in the Common Counsel of the gods, that it
might be the more authentic: and at the same time obtained of that Supreme
Senate, that deliberation might be had about a Successor to him, that might not
degenerate from him in any of his high qualities. The terms made use of by
Mars, to oblige the first of all the gods to convocate this Assembly of
deities, were uttered thus:

Greatest of the gods, you that are the dispenser of happiness and of
misfortune in humane affairs; you, that establish Thrones, and overturn them
when you please; Vouchsafe to cast your eyes upon the happiness of Sweden, unto
which I have given one of the greatest Monarchs that this day reigns over men,
and whose Generosity constrains me to avouch him for my Son: Do me the favor,
that the choice I have made of so great a King, may be accepted of by the whole
Court of heaven. The gods are too just, not to second so equitable a purpose.
It will be enough, that you, from your Sovereign Authority, call together the
Assembly; in which I would wish, that moreover deliberation be had for a
Successor to Grand Gustavus, that may be a perfect imitator of his rare Virtues.

Jupiter having approved of the two Heads of Mars his request, dispatched
Mercury presently, to call together the Assembly of all the principal gods; to
every one of whom he went, in their several quarters, and intimated to them the
Orders of Jupiter; which imported, That every one of them should be present in
the place of their extraordinary Assemblies, within eight days; there to
deliberate of a business of great importance, that concerned the happiness of
one of the greatest Kingdoms in Europe. The time that Jupiter gave for the
assembling of the gods, served Mars to assure himself of some of the most
powerful of them, whom he solicited with so much favor, that, in the end, he
brought to his devotion all whom he believed could be most useful to him in
this business. The time being expired, such gods as had no lawful impediment,
obeyed the Orders without failing, that Mercury had imparted unto them from
Jupiter: and the Assembly was found to consist of Saturn, Minerva, Venus,
Mercury, and Jupiter himself, who was the president thereof. He having declared
the reasons of this their extraordinary convocating, ordered Mars to utter what
he had to say: who spoke after this manner:

Ye just gods, that watch incessantly over the government of mortal men; you,
who are always equally ready to recompense virtue, and to punish vice: Give, of
your good favor, attention to one of the justest requests that can ever be
presented to you. Sweden (which at this day contains three of the most ancient
Kingdoms of Europe) is in possession of one of the greatest Princes of the
world: His high virtues, without contradiction, cast more luster abroad, than
the flowers of his Crown: His courage equals that of Caesar, and of Alexander:
His designs are full of Generosity, that make him to be admired of all Europe,
and render him formidable to all the Nations that it contains; and are
irreproveable witnesses, that he is the bravest Spirit that can be found. Since
therefore, by the irrevocable disposal of the Destinies, I exercise the
dominion over all great Courages; and that never any has been seen, that
surpassed this of Gustavus the Great; I make authentic declaration, in
presence of all your Deities, that I have adopted him for my son; desiring
further from your justice, that ye will be pleased to confirm the election that
I have made. And because the condition of mortal men permits them not always to
live upon earth, I supplicate this august Assembly, that here it may be
deliberated, how to give him such a Successor, as may make him live again
amongst men, (when himself shall be placed amongst the gods) by an express
imitation of all his rare perfections, which render him the object of
admiration to all the world. All heads fit to bear Crowns, are in truth
productions that come immediately from heaven: they bear on their brow the
character of Divinity; they are our Images upon earth, and our Lieutenants, by
whom we reign visibly over men. But great Kings, such as Gustavus, are
Demigods amongst men, who want nothing but Immortality, to be perfect Deities.
And our glory is interested to perpetuate the seed of these great Heroes on the
earth, that men may adore our power in him, that we give to them; that they may
be constrained to confess, that the gods are just and bountiful, to set over
them such powers, as are so accomplished; and that they may be in a continual
posture of sending up the veneration that they have to their Masters, so as it
redound to the adoration they owe unto the gods.

The whole Assembly touched with the discourse that Mars made thereto, and
chiefly with the favorable Memorials that he gave them of the illustrious
qualities of the Great Gustavus; all the gods interessed themselves with some
heat, in a business that they judged very important, and whereof everyone by
himself alone desired to carry away the honor. There was not one, that
approved not of the election which he had made, and did not subscribe it with
joy: which having taken back again from the hands of the gods, he put it in his
pocket. Jupiter thanked him for the care he had taken to cultivate great
personages; and exhorted him to continue the same, that so the authority of the
gods might always flourish upon earth: and lastly, he prayed the Assembly, that
they would deliberate upon the second point declared in the request of Mars.
Here Saturn, with his wrinkled brow, and gravity that looked toward the grave,
in quality of the ancientest of the company, took upon him to speak, and
represented to the Assembly, That it was he that had the dominion over all cold
Climates; and that Reason required, that he alone, with Mars, should take the
care to give Sweden a Successor after Gustavus, which was one of the principal
Countries upon which he had influence. But this Proposal was found so
ridiculous, that all the Assembly opposed it openly: and Minerva not being able
longer to keep silence, spoke after this manner:

It is not possible that the heaven should form a production resembling the
Great Gustavus, if but only one deity should be employed in the bringing forth
thereof. Saturn, that would have the glory of it to himself alone, has not
activity enough to do it. And no one of us, that have our different and
distinct perfections, can collect all those excellent qualities that are
requisite to one that should succeed Gustavus. Therefore I think it very
equitable, that some number of this Assembly, and no one alone, be deputed to
take pains in this business. And to prevent all contestations that may ensue
upon this Deputation, it were necessary that the Lot should decide it; or else,
that each of us submit himself to the determination of Jupiter herein. But
Jupiter excused himself very discreetly, fearing that he might procure the
indignation of some of the gods against himself, should he prefer either of
them before others: so that the Assembly resolved with one accord to use the
first Expedient. So the Lot being cast, it fell upon Minerva, Venus, Mars, and
Mercury: of whom Jupiter and Saturn having taken their leave, they withdrew
themselves to their own places, to give way to the other to use their
endeavors peaceably in an affair of so great importance.

The first point that was agitated amongst them, was, to determine of what sex
the Successor of Gustavus should be, seeing the number of gods and goddesses
deputed to the work, was equal. After some dispute on both sides, Minerva and
Venus carried it, rather by a benevolent concession of the two gods, than by
strength of reason; because Minerva had done Mercury some pleasure but few days
before; and Venus also had done Mars a secret favor, during the eight days of
respite before the coming together of the Assembly. This being concluded, it
was readily agreed further, That Venus should fashion her body at her
discretion; Minerva should give her an inclination to the Sciences; Mars, an
humor Generous and Martial; and Mercury should indue her with his lightness
and inconstancy of nature. And of the mixture of the influences of these four
deities, as of the concourse of the four Elements, it was, that Christina the
Great, the daughter of Gustavus the Great, was made up.

And in truth, he that will reflect upon the most remarkable passages of her
life, shall see in her a marvelous disposition to the knowledge of all things
worthy; much of Generosity, and a Lightness incredible. Minerva had the first
years of her life; Venus drew her off at last from her profound meditations and
studies, and set her on a height of Gallantry: Mercury taking his turn, to show
his power, made her cast her self down from a Throne, to take her walks about
the world. But Mars has always had the Ascendent during the whole course of
her life, to this present: for it must be confessed, that whether she gave her
self to study, or to Divertisements, or to Walks, that in all things she
showed her self a very generous Queen. During her under-age, she was observed
to take pleasure in all the Exercises that might beseem the perfection of a
Princess: and that with such towardliness, that thereby she gave ground of very
great and extraordinary hopes concerning her. So soon as her Wit was somewhat
ripened, that she saw her self capable of the knowledge of gallant things, she
ceased not to take pains for the acquiring a perfect knowledge therein. She
sought out for the greatest men in Europe, to satisfy this her natural
greediness that she had after all kind of Knowledge. This Princess has been
seen, in the coldest days of Winter, in that cold Country, to rise by four of
the clock in the morning, to have communion with the Muses in her Cabinet;
where she stayed commonly until nine, when she was to prepare for her appearing
in public, and to the Council of her Kingdom, where she showed an admirable
depth of wit, by the ready and subtle resolutions that she gave upon all sorts
of affairs that were there proposed. The Divertisements that she loved best,
were, to be conversant with knowing personages, and with them to commune about
some point of learning. Her ordinary Entertainments were very different from
such as for the most part are used in Courts, especially in any Court whereof a
woman is the head. Her poorest entertainment was as good, as the profoundest
studies of the greatest Doctor of the Sorbonne could have given: and one would
easily have believed, to hear this Princess utter so many excellent things,
that she had had secret communication with some Goddess, that inspired her with
such high knowledge: yea, I persuade my self, that she might easily have gained
the same opinion of her self, amongst that gross-witted people of Sweden, as
the Ceremonious Pompilius had amongst the people of Rome, before they were
polished, and whilst they yet slept in the rudeness of such persons as inhabit
Forests and Mountains. The extraordinary assiduity, wherewith she gave her self
to the reading of all books of greatest worth, so replenished her mind with
sparkling light, that in one hour she uttered more choice and rare sayings,
then is ordinarily done in a whole year, in the most famous University of
Europe; and one moment of her discourse gave more instruction, than an hundred
lessons taken from the greatest Doctor of Salamanca. Has any ever seen a
Princess possess the knowledge of nine or ten Tongues, as she does? If History
vaunteth of Queen Elizabeth so much, that she could hold discourse in good
French with the French Ambassador, in perfect Castilian with the Ambassador
of Spain, and in very refined Tuscan with the Princes of Italy: what praises
shall be recorded in favor of the Great Christina, who can hold discourse
almost with all the Nations in Europe, in their own Languages? History can
never speak so well of this Princess, as she speaks of it; whereof she has an
admirable knowledge. She has learned all the Sciences that are called Humane,
with so much perfection, that there is no Author, Greek or Latin, yea even the
most difficult Poets, which she does not expound with a marvelous facility. The
Mathematics, Philosophy Natural and Moral, have not escaped her knowledge;
which she has carried along even unto Theology, whereof I have heard her
discourse with an incredible subtilty. Behold, what the Genius of the Great
Christina has been, under the Empire of Minerva! to whom Venus succeeded.

This gentle Goddess, that had but sorrily acted her part in the formation of
the body of this Princess, she being but poorly furnished with those
accommodations requisite to the beauty of a woman, (for she is little, and
crooked, having a hollow bending on one side, that spoils the grace of her
walking) would yet have it to be seen, that this body, so poorly fashioned, was
sufficiently capable of the highest sort of Gallantries: and after Christina
had abandoned the Muses, she was observed to delight her self in Dancing and
Balls, wherein she had always the better. Such discourses as were most
dissolute, pleased her best; and wanton postures liked her better by far, than
a modest behavior. Great men for Learning (as Bouchard and Naudaeus) were in
no more esteem with her, because they were not more gallant than became them;
and their demeanor was accounted by her ridiculous, because they were too
serious, and too modest. I have heard her tell such tales, as modesty will not
permit me to commit to writing: and I know an Ecclesiastical person of high
degree, with whom I had contracted a very strict amity in Sweden, that has
recreated her an hundred times, by telling her such stories as the most
dissolute woman would hardly have born. Out of this high strain of Gallantry,
or rather Dissoluteness, whereof she made a public profession, she stepped into
impiety; and those fair lights that she had acquired by study, and which
before had served to regulate her manners, furnished her now with reasons and
arguments to fight against the sacred Mysteries of Christian Religion. She has
not only been seen to doubt of that sacred Mystery of the Incarnation, but
even also to mock at it; and to say, in imitation of Leo the tenth of the House
of Medici, That Fable of Christ is very profitable for the Roman Kitchen. She
spoke not of Divine Providence, but under the term of Destiny, after the manner
of Profane Authors.

Her chief Maxims were, 1. That we ought to love God, as the fountain of all
good; but that we should not fear him at all: because it were a ridiculous
thing, to fear a Being that is essentially good, and is incapable of evil. But
that we ought to fear evil men, that can hurt us a thousand ways, and which are
the only devils, whereof the common people have so strong a belief. 2. That a
right-set mind should never either repent, or pardon; because repentance and
pardon are always accompanied with unmanliness, or base-mindedness. That indeed
a person ought always to consult upon that which he takes in hand; but that he
should take an irrevocable resolution to follow it, and never change. 3. That
the most particular and self-ended opinions, are the best, and soundest; and
that that which men at this day call Religion, is nothing but a poor illusion
of men, wherewith the most part are pleased to deceive themselves. For what
likelihood is there, that a Belief that blinds a man, and forbids all
reasoning against it, should be true? What reason is there to believe that,
which one cannot comprehend; yea, and to impose an obligation on us to believe
it? This is all one, as to desire a man to put out his eyes, that he may see
the better; and to put him in such a condition, as that thereby ye may be able
to persuade him to the greatest absurdities in the world. And that from hence,
the many Sects are found scattered over the earth, are but so many pure
dotages, and fond imaginations of some men, who have been desirous to make
themselves famous, in declaring themselves the heads of some parties: whereat
she wondered nothing, because there is no conceit or opinion so ridiculous,
that has not its followers. 4. That the Doctrine of Plato of the universal
soul of the world, could not be confuted, but with false Reasons: and that she
could not persuade her self of the immortality of the soul, but by making it go
and return into its own principle again; which is this universal soul, whereof
our soul makes a part. 5. That Moses has been as great an Impostor, as he was
a good Wit. For she could convince of falsehood the pretended Miraculous passage
of the Israelites through the Red Sea: forasmuch as Numenius, Prefect of
Antiochus, making War against the Persians, had got a famous Victory over those
Persians in the same place, at such a time, and in the same manner as Moses did
over Pharaoh; to wit, by observation of the flux and reflux of the Arabian Gulf.


I could say more, if her self did not publish it by all her thoughts, which
are now known to the greater part of Europe; and if I had not some horror to
set them down in writing.

Mercury seeing that this libertine humor, and with such a bent carried to all
Gallantry, was too deeply rooted in her heart, and that she as easily followed
it to Recreations, as she had done before to Studies; thought it to his
purpose, to associate himself with Venus; who was very well pleased with his
company. So they strove each with other, which of them should make her the most
Prattling Light-houswife, or most inconstant. But notwithstanding this, Queen
Christina has been noted for a long time, even from her Cradle, to be
naturally of a very wavering mind; and that Mercury also had the dominion over
her humor from her very infancy: But only I begin to show his Kingdom (to
keep my order in what I write) since that change (almost unheard of) that has
been made in the person of Christina, when of a Sovereign she made her self a
Subject; and preferred a vagabond and wandering life, to the glory and
magnificence of a Throne. To say the truth, this thought had possessed her
mind more than four or five years, before she put it in execution; and it had
been blamed by some great men, that had used their endeavor to dissuade her
from it. Monsieur Chanut Ambassador of France, Monsieur Saumaize, and Monsieur
Spanheim, did their endeavor to divert her from this purpose, which they
judged would turn to her disadvantage. But it was in vain. For the desire she
had to see foreign Countries, and the new world, carried her away from the
wise counsels of those persons of quality. And so much power had Novelty and
Change over her spirits, that she turned her self to all sorts of objects, just
as a Weathercock is turned about at the pleasure of every wind. The last that
came to her Court, were always most welcome, and most made of for a time, and
received all imaginable testimonies of Amity; but yet without any effect, for
the most part. For this lightness of mind in her, caused her to follow a kind
of Deceitfulness, of so fine a thread, that one could hardly take it up, or
perceive it, but in a long process of time, and after one had taken a great
deal of pains in her service, and expended much money, and then found himself
far from being recompensed for his service, or satisfied for his disbursements.
The neediness of a thousand persons, that she has employed, to satisfy her
fantastical humors, cries with a loud voice for vengeance in the presence of
God, who, one may judge, according to appearance, has left this Princess to a
Reprobate-sense; and given her goodly lights, that she should not see at all;
and exposed her to the laughter of all Europe, to satisfy, in part, his own
justice. Since her fall, from which it is too probable she will never rise
again, she has committed so many kinds of Extravagancies, that she has made
her self the Fable of all the world. A little written Piece, which one of my
friends communicated to me, and which I believe to be common, describes them
well enough; which may suffice to give any one an account of them, that desire
to be informed concerning them. It is said, that even at this day, amidst the
Spanish Gravity, she shows so much levity, that the Venerable Fathers of the
Society of Jesus, have much ado, with all their wit, to know the temper of so
Motley a Genius, that assumes more shapes and postures, than ever Proteus
himself did: They have so much ado, to know of what Religion she is, that they
that make it their only business to decide the points of Faith, cannot tell
what to make of hers: They are in doubt also, what to think of her Sex, because
sometimes they see her in men's apparel, and sometimes in women's; and for the
most part, they see her in such a fashion as partakes of both, as if she were
an Hermaphrodite. These great men (the Jesuits) that at this day have the
ascendent over the minds of so many Princes, have not been able as yet to
discover, with what Byas this Princess must be handled. They find her
discourse admirable; and so it is indeed; and beyond whatsoever one can
imagine. Her cogitations are exceedingly raised above what is common; she has
a fountain of Wit inexhaustible; a strong Reason, a charming Discourse; a
deportment as familiar as sweet: but with all this, they are constrained to
confess, that they do not yet know Christina, that changes her Affections as
often as she changes her Smock, and that loves and hates almost both at one
instant. When I look upon the disgrace sustained by Count Magnus de la Guard,
wherein he fell with her, at that time when one would have thought that all
should have smiled upon him, and when there was neither appearance, nor reason,
that he should have been removed from the Court, I flatter my self, that I know
the Genius of the Queen somewhat near, after a particular study of her, and the
most serious reflections that I made upon so many several matters that came to
pass during the time of my sojourning at Vpsal. And this has encouraged me to
set down my thoughts, concerning which, I can answer any with truth, that they
are free from passion, however they may seem not to be very favorable to this
Princess: But yet they are more favorable than they may seem to be: for I
proclaim with a loud voice, that I hold Christina for the most extraordinary
person of the world; for the clearest-sighted and most knowing Queen, that has
ever appeared upon the earth: That her Discourse is adorable, answerable to her
Wit; That she understands her self well enough, to take up and know great
spirits, and great men; and last, That she is capable of the fairest and most
extraordinary achievements, that ever have been done by any Heroical spirits
in Antiquity. But if I say, that she makes but little account of Christian
Religion; that she has a Faith very particular to her self; that she is a
Deceiver, and inconstant: there is none of those, that ever had the honor to
have frequented her Court, that does not fully accord with me, and is not
constrained to confess, that my conceptions of her do her no wrong. But if any
accuse me of too little respect to a head that wore a Crown, to speak thereof
with such liberty; I answer, that I owe her no such respect; but, to follow her
own Maxims, I owe her rather the contrary, (although in truth I dare say, that
I bear her no hatred) than any such respect: I was neither born her Subject,
nor her Slave; she never did me any good, although she was bound to have done
it: And all the obligation that ever I had to her, that I remember, was, that
she received me favorably, when I had first the honor to kiss her hand; and
that I deserved to obtain her approbation, if I may believe the report that one
made to me thereof, that had ordinary communication with her. But I have
learned, long since, to slight the approbation of four sorts of persons: that
is to say, Of an Ignorant, because he is incapable of understanding the value
of a thing; Of a Flatterer, because he applaudeth for his own ends; Of a
Deceiver, because ordinarily his thoughts are disguised; and, Of a light and
unconstant person, because the esteem that such a one makes of any thing, is
bred rather by Fancy and Humor, than from Reason.

To say that Christina is either ignorant, or a Flatterer, it cannot perhaps be
affirmed with truth: but to believe that she is a Deceiver, and Inconstant, one
will thereby do her no wrong. It must be confessed, for all this, that this
Princess, amidst all her capricious and fantastical humors, and amidst her
Gallantries, when she gave greatest attendance on her books, has been carried
all along with an humor extraordinarily Martial, and full of Bravery.

Minerva had sometime the command of her mind: Venus possessed it afterward;
and some do affirm, that she possesses it as yet. Mercury, that had possessed
himself of her from her Cradle, yet made no such great show of his power, as
since he made her throw her self down from a Throne. But Mars has at all times
governed the humor of Christina, which has not failed to drain all Sweden, to
furnish the inbred greediness that she has, to give to others.

Indeed, under the Reign of Minerva, she has expressed such Liberalities, as
were worthy of a Queen; and that to all great Personages that were sent for by
her, or that came to Sweden otherwise, upon particular occasions of their own.
Monsieur de la Tuillerie, Chanut, and Saumaize, may inform you of this.

Under the Reign of Venus, he Largesses were not lessened; whereof Bourdelot
and Pigmentelli can tell you.

And under Mercury, she gave the rarest Present that can be given from one to
another. Speak but to the King of Sweden that reigns at this day, and he will
confess, that it is by the Grace of God, and the Liberality of Christina, that
he sits upon the Throne. The Medals coined at the time of his Coronation, speak
it publicly: on the one side whereof, there is an arm holding a Crown, with
this Inscription under it; [FROM GOD, AND FROM CHRISTINA.] And even yet, now
she has divested her self of her Kingdom, she uses such profuseness, as
cannot but be the effects of a generous mind.

Such persons as have had experience of her all her lifetime, report that she
showed this liberal nature in a remarkable manner, even from her Cradle: and I
believe with some reason, that it will continue with her to her Tomb.

The Badge and Motto of that Order of Knighthood that she instituted, sets
forth unto us a great bravery of her Spirit, which makes her even pretend to
qualities that she possesses not at all. She gave it the name of the Order of
the Amaranth, or Flower-Gentle, with this Device or Motto, [Semper idem.] All
men know, that this Flower fades not at all; and accordingly the Device
abovesaid does perfectly well express its immortal nature: and this is the
Badge of her Order of Knighthood. But all men know as well, that know her, that
there is nothing so changeable as Christina; and that this invention does very
little resemble her humor; the which notwithstanding she would thereby have
had to pass current, for the most equitable and constant that ever was seen.
She borrowed this Device from the now-deceased Cardinal Richlieu, in whom every
thing was splendid and illustrious: but the application that she made of it,
was her own invention: not intending thereby to blaze abroad the virtues of the
Amaranth, but the constancy of her own spirit, which she would have had to be
believed thereby, more immovable then a Rock: but it was far otherwise, as
has been said.

Man's apparel that she now wears, and which she had before used sometime in
Sweden, where she went clothed almost like a Cavalier, are the tokens of an
inclination that she has, to change her sex into a more perfect: and although
she be in truth a woman, and so known to the world; yet she uses the postures
and fashions of men, and will be fingering her Mustaches, as though she had
some, when indeed she has none: thus desiring to express her strong ambition
to be what she is not, and to be believed to be indeed so.

And though all these conceits be but ridiculous, yet they represent to us some
traces of a gallant soul, and a brave spirit, that would rather have been the
inhabitant of a man's body, than of a woman's, because that sex is much raised
above the other, and more proper for brave undertakings: that other having
been, as it seems, designed by Nature to more low employments, and such as are
meanest in humane society. But Great Christina raising her self above her
female condition, puts her self into such postures and garbs, as may imitate
and resemble such actions as are proper to men.

She can ride admirably, and spur an horse with such dexterity, as if she had
been therein exercised some whole years in an Academy. She travels with a man's
Periwig; her Hat garnished with a great Plume of Feathers, a Red Scarf, after
the Spanish Fashion; and they write from Bruxels, that she has ordered Arms to
be made her, wherewith she will head the Catholic Army, and go and confront
the Marshall de Turenne.

Must we not confess, that amidst all these Follies, there is a great deal of
Bravery? Since this Genius of hers, ceases not in them all, to form designs to
it self, that are above and beyond it.

If this Pourtraict that I have made, seems to any to be too severe, let them
pardon my disposition, which is always to speak the truth, where I think it is
to the purpose. But to prevent all censures that more quick-sighted persons
than my self may give upon this Piece, I here submit to them with all my heart:
and when they shall give reasons strong enough, to inspire me with other
thoughts than those which I have concerning the Genius of Christina; I shall
embrace them very willingly. It is not (as I have already confessed) that I
have not a greater esteem of her, than one can well imagine: but forasmuch as I
have spoken both evil and good of her, I think I have spoken nothing but truth,
thorowout: and the place wherein I write it, is such, that it permits me to
speak the truth.

FINIS.

