The Catholic HIERARCHY: OR, The Divine Right of a SACRED DOMINION IN CHURCH
AND CONSCIENCE, Truly Stated, Asserted, and Pleaded.

Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey
Magistrates, and to be ready to every good work, Tit. 3.1. Give none offense to
Jews nor Gentiles, or to the Church of God, 1 Cor. 10.32. The spirit of a man
is the candle of the Lord, searching all the inward parts of the belly, Prove.
20.27. LONDON: Printed for Sam. Crouch, at the Princes Arms in Popes-head-Alley
in Cornhil; and Tho. Fox, at the Angel in Westminster Hall. 1681.

TO A WORTHY GENTLEMAN.
SIR,
WHen the minds of men are blinded with Interest and Error, or vitiated with
Prejudice and Partiality, the wonted manner of opposing Truth is fortiter
calumniari, being not able any longer to defend themselves (by subtle
Sophistry, and cunning Evasions) from the convincing evidence and demonstration
thereof. Hence it must be either stigmatized with terms of Opprobry and
Contempt, or its right names exposed, by a proverbial and malicious abuse, to
the scorn and derision of the Ignorant and unstable Vulgar, most easily (by
artificial pious Fraud) inspired with a fond Opinion; and through the
enchantment of that Opinion, transported into a furious Zeal for or against
such things as they never weighed in any balances of right Reason, or duly
examined the goodness or evil of; and hence are carried this way, or that way,
as designing men shall lead them, or as the wind of Popularity raises the
swelling Surges of boundless Passions and Affections, verifying the Saying of
the old Poet, (...)
(...).
Menand. Opinion, more than Truth, impression makes
On the Vulgar, and as more persuasive takes.


And truly, Sir, among good words, perverted from the right meaning, and
abused to Reproach, none have been more than those two which the Author of this
small Treatise has dignified his Title Page with. A Catholic in our days is
become as contemptible as a Puritan formerly, or a Phanatick now; whenas every
good Christian is really a Catholic, and does approve himself so in his
Principles and Practice, is a Member of the Catholic Church, hopes to be saved
by the common, i. e. the Catholic Faith; exercises Catholic Holiness in his
life and conversation, holding a Catholic Communion with all visible
Catholics. And this is the Christian that is likeliest to contribute most to
the healing the manifold heart and Church-divisions among us.

And as for Hierarchy, it is well known how our Age has delivered it up to the
infamous usage of scurrilous Tongues and Pens, notwithstanding its venerable
and never-enough to be admired significancy, that the very naming it calls for
Reverence and Devotion; yea, its very letters and syllables will be a Monument
of Renown, maugre all the designs of ill-minded men, to abandon the Churches
glory, and to convert all Ecelesiastical Decency and Order into a confused
Chaos of fantastical Imaginations, or a miscelany of private Humors and
Interests. And do men know what Hierarchy is, that speak so irreverently of it?
is it not a Sacred Jurisdiction? and where is it seated and exercised? is it
not in the Church and Conscience, seats of its dominion so sacred, that no
Secular Power can aspire unto, without the highest usurpation? And there is no
true Church and sound Conscience, in which the Hierarchy does not exert its
power, and is not as freely submitted unto with all due homage and obedience.
And whatever some licentious Protestants may pretend to, and raise so much dust
of contention about, or of whatever Churches, of unquoth names and worse
natures, they profess themselves Members; if ever they intend to be saved, they
must (notwithstanding all their religious Huffs) at last be found Members of
the Catholic Church, and be subjected to the Catholic Hierarchy thereof: And
till this professed subjection become more universal among Christians, Religion
will still be splitting on the Rocks of Faction, Schism, and Phanaticism.

Sir, you will find the principal design of those few sheets submitted to
your judgment, is to recommend this Panacaea, or Catholic Remedy, for the
sound healing of of our morbid Church, which seems to labor under some Disease
not unlike the Microcosmick Scorbet, being (according to the account of late
Physicians) a complication of all Distempers, or transforming it self
Symptomatically into the shapes of all diseases of the Body natural. Without
doubt, our Remedy being prepared, and applied S. Artem Spiritualem, may
contribute toward the recovery of our thrice-honoured, but languishing Mother,
more than all the essential or golden purging Spirit of Cochlear in London can
do to the restoring of one Scorbutic body: neither is it prepared in every
Elaboratory. He says there is one at Westminster can do more toward it than
any in England besides. He tells me also of one admirable Virtue, that it does
wonderfully pacify the disquieted Archeus of a Body Politic; and if it be so,
I will assure you it is to be preferred beyond all compare: for the plain truth
of it is, the old Remedies of purging and bleeding do but scurvily agree with
it, and it is very apt to Relapses after those rugged Medicines, as we find by
sore experience.

Sir, my Friend has taken some pains, out of love to his Country, to clear up
the nature, and demonstrate the necessity of a Catholic Hierarchy; though you
must not expect to find that word often mentioned, the Vulgar being so apt to
start at it as a hard and dangerous word, pregnant with a Pope. Sir, I had not
obtained leave of my Friend to present these Papers to your view, but upon
condition that I would apologize on his behalf, for the plainness of his Style,
saying, that he is naturally a stranger to the smooth dresses or high strains
of Rhetoric; and indeed it is my judgment that the plain truth, especially when
it acts polemically, requires it not, but is usually delighted in a garb most
like it self; and thereby is rendered most acceptable to every good man and
solid judgment. He likewise humbly desires, that you will deliberately read,
and not suddenly censure any thing as dissonant to truth, till you have duly
weighed it in it self, as in its dependencies and suppositions on which it is
built.

Sir, to conclude, I humbly crave pardon for the trouble I have given you,
though I am fully satisfied the subject will not be unpleasant to you, whom I
know to be an Ecclesiastical Adeptus, In respect of your Catholic spirit,
superlative love to the Church, and singular devotion toward the Hierarchy.
That you may long live, and continue in the same mind and practice, and many
follow your worthy Example, is the devout Prayer of,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, Catholicus Verus.

The CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. OF a Twofold Jurisdiction which a Christian by the Law of Christ is
subjected unto. Chap. 2. Of a Legislative and Executive Power. Chap. 3. Of
Christ's immediate Legislative Power. Chap. 4. Of Christ's mediate Legislative
Power. Chap. 5. Concerning the nature of Conscience. Chap. 6. Concerning the
dominion of Conscience. Chap. 7. Of the strong and weak Christian. Chap. 8. Of
Scandals, and their natures. Chap. 9. Of Necessities and Indifferencies. Chap.
10. Certain Propositions concerning Necessities and Indifferencies. Chap. 11.
Of Christian Liberty. Chap. 12. The first Question handled about things
indifferent. Chap. 13. Of the Power of the Church in things indifferent. Chap.
14. A Digression concerning Subordination of Pastors in the Church. Chap. 15.
Of Magistrates power in matters of Religion. Chap. 16. Of the use of the
Magistrates Sword in the execution of Ecclesiastical Justice. Chap. 17. Of the
limits of the Magistratical power in matters of Religion. Chap. 18. Of a
Christians duty in case of humane Laws in matters religiously indifferent.
Chap. 19. Of Humane Constitutions in the Worship of God besides the Word. Chap.
20. Of the united Power Legislative of Church and State. Chap. 21. Of Decency
and Order. Chap. 22. Of Imposition of Ceremonies. Chap. 23. Of Obligation to a
Form of Prayer.
ERRATA.
PAge 12. line 3. for when he by his Law, read when man by his Law. P. 13. l 3.
for immediately, r. mediately. Ibid. l. 30. for (...), r. (...). Ibid. l. 31.
for (...), r. (...). P. 24. l. 9. for obedience, r. such obedience. Ibid. l.
26. for Masters, r. Master. P. 25. l. 37. dele The in the most certainly. P.
35. l. 13. dele They. P. 36. l. 4. for our, r. your. P. 44. l. for just and
equal, r. justly charged. P. 45. l. 3. dele thereof. P. 48. l. 20. for (...),
r. (...). P. 53. l. 27. for duty, r. guilt. Ibid. l. 12. for in religious
service, r. religious service. P. 85. l. 24. for etc. r. and. Ibid. l. 39. for
Co-ordination, r. Subordination. P. 88. l. 35. for Nation, r. Nations. P. 93.
l. 8. for by Assemblies, r. assembled. P. 100. l. 21. r. unlawful in the
Worship of God. P. 112. l. 33 dele therefore that. P. 114. l. 16. r. and sound
in his principles. P. 125. l. 19. r. of what has been said is. Ibid. l. ult.
for consequentially, r. consequential. P. 128. l. 11. for thught, r. taught. P.
140. l. 2. for and Christ has, r. and has Christ. P. 152. l. 17. for profane
use of them, r. profane manner.
CHAP. I. Of the Twofold Jurisdiction which a Christian by the Law of Christ is
subjected unto.
1. THat there is such a thing as Christian Liberty, none pretending to a true
information in the Doctrine of the Gospel of Christ, I suppose, will deny;
neither need I make it my present task for to prove. But the great Contest for
many Ages has been, about the true Nature and Extent of this Liberty: Some
stretching the bounds thereof larger than Christ ever did, intrenching on Civil
and Moral Laws; opening thereby a gap to Licentiousness, and the violation of
the bonds of Humane Societies, in Magistratical Rule and Government. Others
curtalizing and abridging the said Liberty, not allowing it those lawful
extents allotted thereto by Christ; audaciously depriving his poor Members of
many Gospel-Priviledges and Advantages, granted them by Charter from the
Supreme King and Lawgiver. Civil and Antichristian Powers still making it their
business to spy out this Liberty, and their great design to bring them into
Bondage.

2. Calvin observes, Duplex esse Regimen in Homine; alterum Spirituale, quo
Conscientia ad pietatem and cultum divinum instituitur: alterum Politicum, quo
ad Humanitatis and Civilitatis officia, quae inter homines servanda sunt, homo
eruditur, Jurisdictio Spiritualis and Temporalis. i. e. There is in Man a
twofold Government; the one Spiritual, whereby the Conscience is instructed
unto Piety and the Worship of God: The other Political, whereby a man is taught
the Duties of Humanity and Civility, which are to be observed between man and
man, a spiritual Jurisdiction and a temporal. Which Observation has Moral
foundation, and an Evangelical ratification; the whole of a Christian being
comprehended under these two Heads of Duty (charged upon us by the Old and New
Testament,) toward God and toward our Neighbor. On the first of which Christ
has, by his peculiar Legislative Power over his Church, established the whole
Economy thereof: On the latter he has chiefly raised the edifices of Civil
States and Humane Societies, where he has allowed a latitude of Legislative
Power unto the Sons of men, as unto his Delegates and Substitutes in earthly
Rule and Government. Unto both of these Jurisdictions he has laid on man a
firm Obligation, by planting his Moral Light in Conscience; so that he cannot
start from either of these Duties, without starting from himself, as our first
Parents did in their Transgression; and all others, in putting forth the poison
of that original blot in actual sins of Omission or Commission; all which are
but irregularities, or nonconformities to this Moral obligation laid on
Conscience, either manifestly so, or easily reducible thereunto. For whatever
is a trespass against the revealed Will of God, for Duty in Moral Obedience, or
instituted Worship, is a sin; not but that Instituted Worship is fundamentally
Moral Obedience, but is therefore in some sense distinguished from it, (the
serving of God according to his own appointment, being the principal part of
the Moral Law) because God has, according to the several states of his Church,
altered the mode and manner of his Worship, as he has thought it best in his
Wisdom, and as has bin most suitable to the several ages and states of his
Church; which alterable or altered Circumstances, being the product of Christ's
Prerogative alone, are called his Instituted Worship.

3. Hence both these Jurisdictions are Primarily and Morally subjected to the
King of Kings; he orders, disposes of, and rules in the Kingdoms of men, as
well as in his Church and hearts of men: yea, by ruling Heart and Conscience,
as well as by disposing Providence, he rules Civil States, and subordinate
Societies; but the manifest difference is here, that God's political Rule in
the Kingdoms of the Earth, and humane States, is more remote and mediate: but
that of Church and Conscience being Spiritual, is more proximate and immediate.
He only gives general Laws to Civil Societies, and leaves a limited Legislative
Power, as to particular, collateral, and incident cases, to humane Governors,
substituted providentially by him. To these he leaves the immediate
administration of Rule and Government, as to an Executive Power altogether, and
as to a Legislative Power in a great measure; but has reserved the immediate
administration of Rule in his Spiritual Dominions, to himself alone, as to
Legislation in his Church, and both Legislation and Execution as to Conscience.

4. These two Modes or Degrees of Administration, must not be confounded
together: Man must have no greater share in Rule and Government, than God has
deputed him to; he is not to rob Christ of one jot of that Glory, which he has
reserved to himself, under any pretense whatever; neither does Christ permit,
that by a plea of being under his more spiritual and immediate Jurisdiction, we
should exempt ourselves from the equal Laws and Jurisdiction of man; for by
Christ's Laws all his Members are firmly bound upon both accounts: Give unto
Caesar the things that are Cesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods. Fear
God, Honor the King.

5. Lest we should be mistaken in the true nature of either of these, it is
needful that they be both distinctly spoken unto; first of Christ's immediate
Jurisdiction, and then of his more mediate, called Regimen Politicum vel
Temporale, to which a Christian is subjected; the other Spirituale. But to make
way to them, we shall speak briefly first to the nature of the two
Administrations of Power, that will be so often mentioned, Legislative and
Executive.

CHAP. II. Of Legislative and Executive Power.
1. DIvine Power is exerted, either in giving being, which is Creation; or
disposing of that being, suitable to the ends of Creation, and that is
Providence: This latter consists in Preservation or Gubernation of created
Beings to their respective ends. The latter of which being a ruling of the
Creature by certain Laws, according to the Will of God the Creator, is either
Legislative or Executive.

2. A Legislative Power is a Power of making and giving a Law. To compose and
draw up a Law is not enough, (...), Potestas Legislativa, vel Legislatio, Romans
9.4. (...), Legislator, Jam. 4.12.

(...); Leges sancire, Act. and accipitur Pas. Heb. 7.11. and cap. 8.6.


though with the greatest exactness, and holding proportion with the ends
designed; yet here the glorious Wisdom of God is most resplendent: but to give
a Law, is to stamp an authoritative obliging Impression upon it, whereby it
ties up the Subject to Duty, and upon his failure unavoidably lays him under
guilt.

3. A Legislative Power is either Sovereign and Unlimited, or Subordinate and
Limited. A Sovereign unlimited Legislative Power, is a Power in making and
giving a Law, (pro placito vel arbitrio Legislatoris) both for the matter and
manner of it. In this there is nothing but Placitum Legislatoris, which gives
him any Limitation; he does whatever he will, in constituting the nature and
parts of this Law, and ordaining the Subjects to it, and how far obliged by it:
So that here the Legislators Will and Pleasure, is a Law unto himself, and
nothing else. Hence it must be supposed that this Lawgiver must have as much
Power over the Subject, as it is possible for a Creator to have over a Creature;
else he cannot put him under what Law and Limits of Obligation he pleases: And
thence it is that this Lawgiver must not be accountable to any other for his
doings, he is Supreme to all, Subordinate to none; renders no account of his
matters, and therefore most irresistible: So as none can demand an account of
him, nor none can oppose him; he has strength to impose this Law where he sees
good. For those Laws are very insignificant, that have not some kind of
imposing force going along with them, to fasten on the inward man a Conscience
of Duty; or on the outward man, by respect to Rewards or Punishments.

4. Hence he must be most wife, to will such a Law as is most suitable to his
own nature, and agreeing to that way of Government which is determined by
himself, as to the created nature of the Subject to be governed: And that it
may be so, it is requisite he should be most good; and that not only in
himself, but relatively so; i. e. to have the greatest obligation to distribute
Bounty and Goodness to his Subjects, of which there can be none greater, than
of the Creator to the works of his own hands: Neither must this Distribution
flow from any other than a Fountain of freedom and liberty to act more or less
this way or another, as he shall please, for the manifestation of his
fore-determined Glory. And then lastly, which way soever the glory of this best
being, Legislative, Executive, or other, be demonstrated on the Subject (so
much at his disposal) it must needs be granted, that this is the best and
wisest way for the manifestation of that Glory fore-intended in the disposal of
the Creature: His will and pleasure being certainly the most exquisite and
absolute prime Rule of all goodness; therefore, as it is unquestionably the
most absurd and irrational presumption in man, to assume to himself, or lay the
least pretended claim to this Supremacy or Sovereignty of Law-giving; so it may
not be attributed in the least to any but God alone, the first, absolutest,
wisest, best, and most independent Being.

5. A Legislative Power may be also such as is limited by, and subordinated to
the will of a superior Legislator; and therefore the power of such an one is
not of himself and primitive, but derived from some other: Neither is it
bounded by his own Pleasure, but by that of another, to whom he is accountable;
because he himself is liable to a Law, which Law he may transgress, in giving
such Laws to his Subjects, which he is not commissionated by his Superior
Lawgiver to give; and Ergo must not make Laws Pro arbitrio sine limitibus, his
arbitrium being received from another, and the bounds allotted it, as to all
Jus agendi pro beneplacito; he may act indifferently this way, or that way, in
such a compass; but if he pass the Line of his Circumference, he becomes a
transgressing Ruler. He sins against his Superior, and wrongs his Subject.

6. Hence (this subordinate Legislator thus trangressing) the Subject being
conscious and clearly convinced thereof, he is disobliged from all active
obedience unto any such usurping or transgressing Laws. A Christian's first and
greatest obligation being to the Supreme and Soverain Power, as a Citizen in a
Town-corporate is first bound in obedience to his Prince, before he is to the
Mayor or Bailiff of the Town. An Officer substitute by the Prince, and
removable at his pleasure, (it is not so in natural and contracted Relations)
knowing his obedience to the King, will sufficiently justify his non
submission to the will of the Mayor.

7. Again, the Subject is obliged to obey the Laws which the inferior
Lawgiver makes lawfully, ( i. e. according to his deputation) not Simpliciter
and gratia illius, but primarily and most properly for the sake of the supreme
Lawgiver whose Substitute and Representative he is, Romans 13.1, 4. 1 Pet. 2.13.
and they are so far to be obeyed, but no farther to be owned as lawful
Governors.

8. Thus much of a Legislative Power in general. An Executive Power is a Power
of putting in Execution a Law made, or the practical Application thereof
according to the manifested will and intendment of the Lawgiver. Therefore the
power of Execution is always a secundary and derived Power, in respect of the
Power of Legislation; because it supposes a Law made, and the will of the
Lawgiver to put it in practice; which Will is the ground of Execution, but is
not actually begun till the promulgation, and a positive injunction binding
unto practice: and is completed either in performing acts of obedience, and
receiving the Law-encouragements; (this is chiefly on the part of the Subject;)
or in case of disobedience, by executing the vindicative part of the Law, which
belongs to the substituted Executioners to do, and the Subject to submit unto.
So that all Laws are satisfied in obedience, and giving the stated reward
thereunto; which satisfaction, Ergo, partly depends on the Subject, partly on
the Ruler executing; or they are dissatisfied in disobedience, and therefore
righting themselves in executing the minatory part on Offenders. Hence all Laws
are capable of being satisfied or fulfilled, as to their whole intent and
purpose, one of these ways, in Active or Passive Obedience on the part of the
Subject; and the faithful discharge of the executive Power by Governors in the
due distribution of rewards and punishments.

10. Hence Executive Power is Obediential or Judicial. Obediential is an
executive ability in the Subject bound; for by his obedience unto the Law, he
executes and fulfills the will of the Lawgiver, most properly as to the first
intentions; for the first end of the Law, and design of its Maker, is actual
Obedience, and both in the Command and Penalty annexed. And in this sense the
meanest Subject does put in execution the Law of his Soverain, at l^^st in
administration of commutative Justice toward the Magistrate, in rendering him
his own, as well as toward his Fellow Subjects, in doing justice to them.

11. Judicial executive Power is when the Lawgiver or his Substitutes, judging
of Obedience or Disobedience, as to matter of fact, do judicially determine the
same, by and according to the true intent and meaning of the Law; and finding
Obedience, distribute the due rewards and encouragements thereunto; and judging
of Disobedience omissive or commissive, do inflict all penalties in such cases
by the Law provided: The faithful discharge of which Trust, belongs to
Governors, and is rightly called Distributive Justice.

CHAP. III. Of Christ's immediate Legislative Power.
1. THough Christ be King of Kings and Lord of Lords, in respect of all the
Rulers and Principalities in the world visible and invisible, yet there is a
special Dominion reserved to himself, as peculiar in many respects, so in this,
that he has not committed the management thereof to others in juridical
affairs, in two respects, viz. in Legislation and in Deputation of executive
Ministers. This is a Diamond in the Crown of his Prerogative as Mediator and
sole head of Conscience and Church, which he purchased and cleansed with his
Blood.

2. That unlimited Supreme Power which is every where ascribed to God, is
Christ's; not only as God the second person in the Godhead, but as Mediator
God-man, constituted by the Father Head over the Church, and over all things to
the Church; see Ephesians. 1.21, 22. Matthew. 28, etc. Ergo, he exerts this power not
only as Creator, but as Mediator, and as such a Legislative power belongs to
him, not only properly and primarily, as being the political Head of his
Church; but secundarily (for its sake) he exerts such a Power over all
Societies in the world: and having this supreme Legislation in his hands, he
can make what Laws he please, and substitute others to what Law-making-power he
pleases to entrust them with, or determine how far in that kind they may act
at their discretion or arbitrament. So that Christ rules his Kingdoms either
by his own immediate Legislative administration, or mediately by inferior
limited Lawgivers; he rules by himself, or by others.

3. His immediate rule is especially to be considered as more General or more
Special, as he is Creator, or as he is Redeemer. God as Creator of all natural
Agents, he only can command his Creature what it must do in order to those
ends for which it was created; and this government of natural Agents, is in a
sense of a Spiritual nature, proceeding in a spiritual manner from a glorious
Spirit for spiritual ends, viz. the glory of Gods Soverainty, Power, Wisdom,
Goodness, etc. all the Creation praising him, and ascribing Glory and Honor
unto the Lamb; which Glory is subordinated to that which shines forth more
resplendidly in his Church; and he disposing all things in order to his
advancement therein to the highest honor and dignity, this Government of
Christ may be said to be a spiritual Rule and Government.

4. This General Government may be considered, as he rules intelligible or
non-intelligible Creatures; these he rules by the Instincts of Nature, (which
may be and are called his Statutes and Ordinances) which are no other than the
impression of the Will of him that made them: As in a Watch, or any piece of
curious Mechanism, the mind of the Workman is plainly read in all the parts
thereof. He rules intelligible natural Agents, such as Angels and Men, by
higher Laws. What the Law of Angels is, we shall not discuss now, nor
determine; but that they are Governed by a Law, I doubt not but may be proved,
both from the sin of them that fell, and otherwise; for where there is no Law,
there is no Transgression. The Law ruling Men, as rational Agents, is a Law of
Manners, ruling all humane motions that are cum electione; for some natural
motions in man are per necessitatem Naturae, as the running of the Blood in the
Veins, etc. but these are under the Gubernation of natural Instinct. And as God
fastens his Law of Nature by instinct on the unintelligible Agents; so on
Agents per electionem, he fixes his Moral Law by Natural Conscience, which is
a kind of rational moral Instinct, whereby the very Gentiles that have not the
written Law, are in a great measure convinced of the nature of it, and their
Duty in obedience thereunto, Romans 2.13, 14. and in this sense he enlightneth
every man that comes into the world, Joh. 1. and from this Law of moral Light
closing with natural Conscience, arises accusation or excusation, according to
the obedience or disobedience yielded thereto, whereby Christ in a manner rules
in all men, at least laying a claim to his right of Dominion, so much disowned
and rejected by the prevailing Law of sin; and this may be ascribed to Christ's
spiritual rule, it being his peculiar Prerogative to govern in Conscience; and
notwithstanding sins rebellion in all natural men, yet Christ there retains his
seat of Judicature, and as he judges and condemns now, so he will by the
same Law prove them unexcusable at the last day.

5. The more special immediate jurisdiction of Christ, is his most proper
spiritual, mediatorly administration of rule toward his purchased ones; and
this is twofold, in or over persons particularly, or in and over bodies
politic. In and over particular persons his Throne is the same ( viz.
Conscience) in the regenerate and unregenerate, only he rules these legally,
and the other evangelically; these by a Law of Fear, them by a Law of Love:
merely natural men, by a dispensation of the Covenant of Works; Believers, by a
dispensation of the Covenant of Grace: And here the light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ rules in a Christians Heart, and the Conscience according to
rule acquits or condemns. Neither is the true regulating force of the Moral Law
any way extinct, but the terrifying embondaging nature of it removed, or at
least abated, any remainder of which is called the Spirit of Bondage; neither
is there therefore two Laws in a Believer, Moral and Evangelical; but the Moral
Law is evangeliz'd to him by his new relation to Christ, the Curse being taken
away due to the sinner, and he coming under another obligation to an
obediential conformity to the Law, viz. the greatest ties of love and
thankfulness; and hence his Obedience is called New Obedience.

6. Another part of his special and immediate Government consists in his giving
Laws to his Church Militant, and deputation of Ministers for execution thereof;
and therefore he is called The Head of his Church, Ephesians. 1.22. Hence his
Apostles and Prophets durst not teach any thing but what they had immediately
from him either by word or tradition, Matthew. 28. and we may boldly assert, as
James 4.12. there is but one Lawgiver; and though it be so plain and
indisputable a truth, yet because men of corrupt minds, by practice and
argument, have made it their great aim to rob Christ of this Prerogative; we
shall make it the principal part of the ensuing Discourse to illustrate and
confirm this position against all humane Usurpations.

7. Christ's immediate Government of his Church Militant, is not to be
understood as if he had not appointed the executive administration to be by
Pastors and other Officers deputed by himself, as appears from 1 Cor. 12.28.
Ephesians. 4.11, 12. but the meaning is, that it is immediate, these two manner of
ways. 1. In that he has not authorized or commissionated any such Officers or
Governors on earth, who may compose and enact new Laws for the disciplining of
his Church in the order and manner of his instituted Worship; his own Laws here
are only binding. 2. In that all Church Officers receive their executive power
from Christ immediately (nullo Papa aut Episcopo mediante) neither have any of
them any power of deputation or substitution of others to execute that Office
or Power committed to themselves by Christ. And herein lies the opposition
between Christ's immediate reign in his Church, and his mediate in the Kingdoms
of men; and for this, amongst other differences which Amesius makes between the
Magistratical and Ministerial jurisdiction, he says, Magistratus
jurisdictionem habet cum Imperio, atque adeo (si summus sit) justa ratione
possit leges condere and abolere, atque jurisdictionem aliis mandare. Sed
Ministri Ecclesiastici in sese considerati, sunt mandatorii meri, qui proprii
nihil habent, sed quiequid legitime agunt, id omne vice Christi mandantis
agunt, atque adeo neque leges possunt far, neque aliis mandare potestatem
illam quam acceperunt, Medul. lib. 2. cap. 17. 48.

8. The chief of our assertion about the immediate Government of Christ
concerns his Legislative power, that wherever he governs in this manner, he
has reserved the Law-giving-power to himself, as his peculiar Prerogative as
to natural Agents. Who can give and prescribe Laws, for such orderly and
natural direction of them to their several places and ends, but the Creator
alone? Who can give Ordinances to the Sun, Moon, and Stars; set a bound to the
Seas; command the former and latter Rain; appoint the vicissitudes of Day and
Night, Summer and Winter, Spring and Autumn? etc. and would not such a Creature
be justly chargeable with the greatest folly and presumption, that should
pretend to such a Power? and therefore God challenges Job on this account, Job
38. As for Conscience, all are witnesses that will deal but impartially in the
acknowledgment of the truth, that there is nothing lays a true obligation
thereon, but a Divine Law; neither do Humane Laws any farther bind Conscience,
than they are dependent upon, or reducible unto some Divine Law; and therefore
all true obedience to them is for the Lords sake. As for the Church, he always
prescribed what Law and Rule he would have the affairs thereof managed by. The
Church of the Jews had her Laws from Christ, though under a more legal and
typical Dispensation, executed in the ministration of Moses, and of other
Ministers of his own appointment in that Levitical Economy. So in the New
Testament he sent forth his Ministers to teach only such Laws and Orders of
his House as he himself had instituted and appointed; and he is complete in
that respect in his House, which in some respect is more properly his, (the Old
Testament-Church being called Moses's house) because the will of Christ is here
more plainly and fully dispensed, and administered more immediately; Christ
acting there by the ministration of Moses, for the delivery of Levitical Laws,
and for constituting and ruling the Body Politic of his Church: but in the
latter days of the Gospel, God spoke to us by his Son Christ immediately
himself, delivering the order and manner of the Gospel Church when he was here
on earth; and after his Ascension, by his Spirit inspiring his Apostles and
such as were extraordinarily qualified in the primitive times, since which he
has managed that Government by his ordinary Ministers, acting according to the
Rules and Prescripts left behind him in his holy Word.

CHAP. IIII. Of Christ's Mediate Legislative Power.
1. HAving somewhat treated of the immediate Jurisdiction of Christ, it is
needful to speak a little of his Mediate, viz. how far he rules Bodies Politic
by the mediation of man, or has committed a power of law-making and executing
unto him; and to show that man's power cannot be indefinite and unlimited, but
derivative and limited: and for the illustrating hereof, we are to examine
whence man has his Civil Power, and how far it extends.

2. All Civil Powers have their just Authority from Christ the King of Kings,
the Head of all Principalities, Powers, Body Politics, Societies, as is
manifested by the following Scriptures and such others, Prove. 8.15, 16. Dan.
4.25. Romans 13.1, 2, 4. wherefore it is the manifest will of Christ, 1. That
there should be Civil Government in the world. 2. That the personal possession
of it be received by the all-disposing Providence of God. 3. That it is an
Ordinance and appointment of Christ, that such execute distributive Justice for
the encouragement of Well-doers, and discouragement of Evildoers. 4. That in
the faithful discharge of this trust, they are Gods Ministers attending his
work.

3. As the King of Kings has given Magistrates their power, so he has set
them their bounds of Government, insomuch that they be not Plenipotentiary, but
are liable to the Law of the supreme Lawgiver; which they may transgress, in
respect either of the Laws themselves, or of persons subjected to them. In
respect of the Laws two ways, in Law-making, or Executing. In Law-making these
ways. 1. When they presume to enact such Laws, as directly cross any of
Christ's Laws, either the Law of Nature, to enjoin unnatural things; or when he
by his Law shall contradict the Moral Law, or any Appendix thereunto. Or
lastly, control the Laws of Christ for the Economy of his Church, i. e. in
making any Laws to obstruct the execution of Christ's Laws, according to his
revealed Will. 2. He may transgress in Law-making, by entrenching on the
Legislative Prerogative of Christ, either in respect of Moral Obedience, or
Instituted Worship, or any Forms or Rites thereto belonging. 3. In failing to
Enact such useful and necessary Laws, as are needful and requisite for the
right ordering or management of the Commonweal, or particular Subjects under
his Dominion. He may fail and transgress in Law Executing, either in a slack or
careless execution of good Laws, or undue application of them, or partial
distribution of Justice by them, all which is Injustitia: or he may fail in too
vigorous and extreme prosecution, and so be guilty of Summum Jus, which since
the Fall is Maxima Injuria, because there is no allowance or abatement for the
natural failings and weaknesses of the Subjects obeying.

. 4. As he is liable to transgress as to Laws, so also as to persons; 1. By a
partial Execution of Justice, with respect of persons. 2. In pressing the power
of his Law further on persons than Christ ever permitted, as in endeavoring to
impose on Conscience, and bring it into thraldom, by forcing men to ambiguous
Oaths, Declarations, or Subscriptions. 3. When he uses his Power for the
obstructing and hindering the Members of Christ in the use of those
Privileges, or lawful Liberties, granted them by Christ himself.

5. Whence it appears, That the Civil Magistrates Jurisdiction is limited to
the Civil State, and to all persons and things considered in a Civil capacity.
And thus far he has Power over the persons of Christians, and particular
Churches whilst Militant; so far as they are persons and Societies laying claim
to Civil Rights and Privileges, or capable of doing or receiving wrong and
injury, being men subject to Passions and Failures with the rest of Mankind. A
Christian is subjected (as has been said) to a twofold Jurisdiction, Internal
and External: Internal respects the Jurisdiction of Conscience, or God's ruling
man by it; and here is an impossibility of any third persons interposing
between God and us. The External Regiment to which a Christian is subjected is
Political, and that by God's Ordination is twofold; viz. Of the Body Civilly
Politic, and Spiritually or Ecclesiastically Politic; this is subjected
immediately to the Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Gubernation of Christ alone;
the other i^mediately under the Rule of the Civil Magistrate. Now the contest
between these two Polities, has been the Original of most of the Trouble in
the Christian World. Since Christ's presence here on Earth, it has always been
man's presumptuous Ambition to sit in his Throne, more or less. Sometimes
Secular Dignities assuming to themselves Legislation in matters of Divine
Worship, whence has arose so great Persecutions from Magistrates; because
Christ's Followers refused to betray or deliver his Prerogative into their
hands, and judged themselves bound to obey God rather than man. Again,
sometimes usurping Officers in the Church, pretending to a derived Power from
Christ, have assumed the place of Christ himself, in and over his Church,
justling him (as much as in them lay) out of his Throne; hence has arose the
Antichristian Usurpation, tyrannizing not only over Bodies Politic, but over
Conscience it self: and (as a just Judgment on Civil Powers, which will not
kiss the Son, but break his bonds, and abuse his Churches and Members) have bin
permitted by Christ to set their feet on the necks of Kings and Governors of
the Earth; the intolerable burden the Earth groans under, and has done for
many Ages: and were they but removed each into its proper sphere, i. e. were
but the Churches of Christ eased of Civil Usurpations in some Nations and
Commonwealths, from Ecclesiastical in other, and Conscience delivered from the
rapes, wrongs and injuries insolently offered to it from both, the Christian
World would become such a Paradise of Felicity, that scarce yet has bin since
the Infancy of the Gospel Church; and without such reducement of the World to
the due Liberties of Church and State, we cannot enjoy that worldly Felicity
which a good man is capable of.

(...),
(...).
Menand. A good man aiming at Felicity,
Would either dye, or at his home live free.
CHAP. V. Concerning the Nature of Conscience.
1. Having thus far briefly enquired concerning the Jurisdictions a Christian
is bound in Duty to submit unto, viz. Christ's, and Caesar's; and though he is
conscientiously to subject himself unto both, yet Christ's Authority is to be
preferred, and he is to have his due in the first place; because all others who
derive all just and rightful Authority from him, are limited by him, and must
give an account unto him: Therefore we say with the Psalmist, Give unto the
Lord, O ye mighty; give unto the Lord the Glory due unto his Name. And as
commanded by Christ, Seek first the Kingdom of God and the righteousness
thereof, etc.

2. The first thing then here to be done, is to vindicate the Sovereignty of
Christ, both in the persons of particular Christians, and in Ecclesiastic
Bodies Politic, in both which he has reserved the Legislative Power to
himself, and never yet committed it to any other. And first of his Power in
Conscience; and that it may the more clearly appear, that Christ only rules in
Conscience, it is needful we a little explain the Nature of Conscience, and
then proceed to prove, that the Jurisdiction of it belongs to Christ alone

3. Conscience taken strictly (secundum notationem nominis) is a Knowledge
together; i. e. A man's knowledge of himself and his actions, together with
another who knows the same with him; or as some think, the knowledge of his
Actions, together with the Rule by which they ought to be squared and directed;
which knowledge must be placed in the Understanding of a rational Creature. Mr.
Perkins says, It Is a part of the Understanding. I had rather say, it is Modus
Intellectus; for the Understanding acts per totum, non per parts. This is that
Spirit of a man, which knows the things that are in a man, 1 Cor. 2.11. But
it is not all kind of Intelligence, but some only in particular. 1. Not a
Theoretick Knowledge, but a Practick; and therefore always referring to some
Action, or Omission. And 2. It is not referred to another man's affairs, but his
own whose it is. And lastly, it is not a mere apprehension or suspicion, but a
knowledge, always at least of the fact, and often determines by the Rule known
of the Legality of the fact, and so passes Judgment, and thence is called
Judicium; but sometimes Conscience is doubtful here, and thence it is called a
weak, doubtful, and scrupulous Conscience.

4. It may be therefore thus described: Conscientia est modus Intellectus
Judicialis practicus. Conscience is the Understandings Judicial manner of
proceeding concerning our selves and actions. A man in Conscience, as God's
Substitute or Deputy, sits in Judgment upon himself; first inquires as Jury of
the matter of fact, whereof according to Self-evidence, he is found Guilty or
Not-guilty, and according to the Law manifested, is acquitted or condemned.
This Judgment of Conscience may be considered in the power and act; a man may
have a Conscience-power, which does not exert and put forth act; as a Man in
Infancy or in Sleep; Ergo, it may be called Potestas intellectiva, Intellectual
Power reducible into act. Again, Intellectual Power is either Intuitiva vel
ratiocinativa; that is, the intuitive, which is the Vision or Understanding of
a Truth Axiomatically, or in the Abstract. Ratiocinativa, which is looking on
several Truths compared together, and one Truth being laid by another by way of
Collation, produces a third Truth, which we call a Conclusion or Inference.
The first and general truth that comes to the knowledge, is the Law of God,
which is brought to us by the light of Nature, or by the Word of God; which way
soever it comes, it is enough to give it a throne in Conscience, that it be
certainly known to be God's Law. Nextly, that our actions are laid by this
Rule, or brought before this Judgment Seat; which two being solemnly brought
together, a third necessary Truth or Judgment according to truth, does result,
and is accordingly pronounced; the certainty of which depends on the certainty
of the Premises, or at least the exact and just comparing them together. The
Understanding thus behaving it self, puts on the nature of actual Conscience,
or Conscience in act, bringing the habitual or potential Conscience into acts
in this manner, either concerning a man's state or actions. Concerning a man's
state, The Soul that sins shall die: I have sinned, Ergo. Or concerning his
particular actions: He that commits Idolatry or Adultery, etc. breaks
God's Law; but I have committed such and such an act which is so, Ergo,

5. Hence Conscience ruled by Christ's Prerogative, is the practical reasoning
Understanding, (or Modus intellectus practicus) in man, whereby a judgment may
be passed concerning a man's self by himself, according to his apprehension of
the revealed Judgment and Will of God; its divine Authority that rules in man's
Heart, as to the approbation or condemnation of himself or actions. The
Conscience of the very blind Heathens admit of no other power to acquit or
condemn in this kind, but either the convincing light of the moral Law written
in them, or some supposed false Divine light which by reason of the blindness
of their Hearts seduceth them to false Worship and Idolatry.

6. The method of Conscience his acting is thus; first, there is the general
undoubted truth known or assented to as such; and it is either that which is
really so, or supposedly so only, and not so really; if it be the latter, it is
the main foundation of an erring Conscience. It is the prospect of some
apprehended Divine Truth or other, Moral, Levitical, or Evangelical, which
obliges us to acts of Obedience; and this Law-obligation laid by God on man,
is called (...), i. e. the Proposition of a practical Syllogism made by
Conscience. 2. There is the Application of this Truth to our selves, either as
to our state or particular actions, according to our own knowledge, (together
with God's) to judge of our Conformity or Nonconformity to the said
Law-obligation, and therefore concerning the goodness or evil of our Actions:
and here we take the Candle of the Lord in our hands to search out and examine
our condition and actions, in relation to good or evil; and herein does the
chief nature of Conscience consist: because it is a submitting ourselves and
actions to the judgment of God's Law, and is therefore the Assumption of this
practical Syllogism, and is called (...), and is an Index, Record, Testimony,
Witness. 3. There is the Crisis, Inference, or Conclusion necessarily deduced
from the Premises, and this is called the Judgment passed upon our state or
actions. Thus we have the whole Syllogism which the understanding makes in
this way of acting. The Proposition is de Jure; the Assumption de Facto: the
Conclusion is either a justification of person or action, or it is a
condemnation of any of them found guilty.

7. The Synteresis is the light of Truth contained in the Law (N^etice recepta)
sive practicum Axioma cum assensu intellectivo perceptum; A light received into
the understanding with assent thereunto, or acknowledgment thereof as such. A
Law may be understood as to the matter of it, but not believed as a Truth; it
may be known as a Truth, but not owned as a Law; yea, it may be acknowledged as
a Law, but not yielded to as divine and authoritative enough to bind to
Obedience; yea, it may be owned as a Law of God binding some people, and at
some times, but not ourselves, or at all times. But unless the Truth taken for
a Law be thus circumstantiated, and so received by us, it has not force enough
upon Conscience, as a Law binding to Obedience. So that Synteresis differs but
ratione from the Law itself; for it is the Law of God understood and yielded to
as obliging unto practice, and it is not only the Law in its Letter and first
Principles, in its Original positive nature; but in its aptitude to particular
Cases, and in its just Inferences and Consequences deducible from generals
thereof, all practical Truths pleading Divine Authority, justly obliging us to
belief.

8. That which stirs up the Understanding to compare Conditions and Actions
with the divine Law in the assumption by a practical enquiry, is a certain
obligation which this Law-light has the Heart of man under, that it does by a
kind of natural instinct act in the manner above-rehearsed; which obligation
is a necessity laid on the Understanding of owning and assenting to every known
Law of God, and thereby to make a practical disquisition and judgment
accordingly. The reason of this obligation lies much in the necessity of the
object: And first the natural inclination the Understanding has to every known
truth as such: but this is not all; for truth that obliges to credence from
the evidence of it, obliges not to Practice and Obedience, having not a
sufficient authority from whence it comes, or not laying on us a necessity of
obeying, and therefore it must bind as a Law-truth, challenging its ends by
promises of rewards, or threats of punishment. Again, it is from a principle of
self-love and preservation. Seeing our selves liable to a Law, and such a Law
that can do us good or hurt, we are bound by this first principle of nature to
make an impartial enquiry into our conformity, that we may be satisfied of our
own safety and danger, every one being desirous in this case to know the worst
of himself. Moreover, seeing that all Law that binds is backed with sufficient
power to put it into vigorous and impartial execution; and that which prevails
so much with Conscience, is the Lawgivers absolute power to save and destroy.
He can punish the whole man, Body and Soul, which no humane Power can: So that
the Penalty being great, and the power of the Lawgiver infinite, it must needs
lay the Conscience under a very strict bond of enquiry. Likewise if we
consider, that it is not only a sufficient power for Execution, but an
unlimited power of law-making, wherein his Soverainty does chiefly consist;
which Soverainty, as it is most supreme, so it is most just and good; and
therefore this obliges, because God can make what Law he will, and he cannot
will to make any Law that is not fit for his Creature to obey. Hence his Laws
have always a necessary innate goodness in them, because they flow from him who
is primarily, absolutely, and independently good, Ergo must be, cannot but be,
holy, just, and good Laws. Wherefore the impression of the goodness of a Divine
Law is firmly fixed on man's natural Conscience; however corruption may attempt
the blotting it out it cannot totally do it; but those who are renewed by
Grace, must needs see anotherguess luster in it, seeing not only Divine
goodness stamped on God's Law, but Gospel-goodness: Not only the suitableness
of his Commands to his Creature, but to a sinner, viz. the love of God so
evidenced in giving and requiring his Law in such a way of Grace and
compassion, that it engages them in the highest measure to Obedience, yea, new
Obedience, and their Consciences to a diligent and narrow disquisition thereof
accordingly. Lastly, there is an innate reverence unto Divinity, which the
Creator has placed in the Heart of man, whereby the Law of God has more
command than any Laws in the world besides; because there can be no greater
distance than between the Creator and the Creature; and Creation, or giving us
being, is such an obligation as none but a Creator can lay upon the Creature;
and consequently our greatest good either in being or well-being, is certainly
hazzarded by the displeasure of our Creator. Thus much of the practical
propositions of Conscience, from which of necessity follows the particular
Conclusion, as has been said.

9. It remains to speak something of the diversities of Conscience, which
admits of no difference from Divine Law simply considered, but from the
Information or Illumination which the Understanding receives more or less
therefrom. The less enlightened Conscience, is either the mere natural
Conscience illuminated only by the Light of Nature without a written Law, such
as the Apostle speaks of, Romans 2. Or the legal Conscience, though enlightened by
the written Law, yet tasting nothing of Gospel-freedom and delivery by Jesus
Christ, and therefore in bondage to Moses, and not yet subjected to the
mediatorly Authority of Christ in Justification, Sanctification, or rules of
spiritual walk. The more enlightened Conscience, is that which has received
Gospel Light, and subjected thereunto from a true sense of the love of God in
Christ, has submitted his self and ways to the guidance and conduct thereof in
his whole progress to Life and Salvation. The Conscience admits also of Magis
and Minus: the more evangelically enlightened Conscience is that which is firmly
ratified and confirmed in Gospel Truths, and a due application thereof by Faith
for comfort and practice; and this is a firm stable Conscience, and of such an
one is rightly said that he is a strong Christian, one that is rightly informed
in his Duties and Privileges by the Law of Christ. The less
Evangelically-enlightned Conscience is one that has but a small information in
the Mind and Will of Christ, has a sincere faith, but little knowledge, is
not so well acquainted with the rules of Gospel-obedience, nor with his
Privileges purchased by Jesus Christ; and hence arises a doubting and
scrupulous Conscience: a doubting Conscience or Opinans is in respect chiefly
of the will and mind of Christ, is not fully resolved concerning it, and
therefore at best acts but from Opinion, is unsettled, and unresolved, whether
the Light directs him this way, or that way; and therefore is unstable in all
such ways, is not carried on with a Plerophory and full resolution to persist;
and this may be according to some Truths and Duties, but not according to
others. A Christian may be strong in respect of some Truths, but weak in
respect of others; so that the same Conscience may be strong or weak, as it is
clearly informed in some things, and darkly in others; yea, it may be weak at
one time, and strong at another, as it receives more or less Light. A
scrupulous Conscience is chiefly in respect of action, concerning which he is
needlessly and frivolously doubtful, and therefore fearful and starting upon all
occasions.

10. Thus far of the differences of Conscience, taken from Synteresis; briefly
a few words of its differences also from Syneidesis. Conscience may be
distinguished from Syneidesis, into a good or a bad Conscience. The good
Conscience is that which makes a diligent, just, and impartial enquiry into our
condition and actions, by a due application of them to the Rule or Law-light
received by us. An evil Conscience, is such an one as from its enslavery to a
lust does not perform its duty aright toward the Law of God or ourselves, but
is either sloathful, and will not take pains to search and examine our Hearts
and ways: Or it is partial, and will be more strict in some respects, and less
in others of the same weight and concernment. Or it is fallacious, and deals
not plainly and fully concerning the matter of fact, but mincingly and
equivocally, feigning it to be better than it is in substance or circumstance:
or it is stupid and blockish, not valuing the weight of the Law, or inspecting
the nature of the Action. It may be also troublesomely evil (as well as
negligently, etc.) when it brings in too aggravating a Testimony, in accusing
beyond the nature of the Transgression, representing the matter of fact more
heinous and heavy than it ought to be represented. Such a Conscience may be
Honest bona, but Moleste mala.

11. Lastly, we distinguish Conscience from the Crisis or Conclusion; and it is
either just or unjust. Just, when it denounces Sentence according to the true
intent of the Law, and the true nature of the Fact, whereby it proves to be
justly peaceable, or justly troublesome and tormenting to us; and when it
acquits, is pacate bona. Or it is Unjust, when the Sentence is pronounced
otherwise than the premises do require; and when it thus acquits, it is pacate
mala; And when it thus condemns, leading many to the very brink of Despair, it
is Inique and crudeliter mala. The former is often a bribed Conscience,
captivated and carried away with the favor of some base beloved Lust and
Affection, and a brutish blind heathenish Conscience, Jud. 10.2 Pet. 2.12. Joh.
8.44. Or a judicially seared Conscience, such as is spoken of 1 Timothy 4.10. If
it be inique mala, injuriously and cruelly evil, it will condemn where Christ
has acquitted; and this usually from too much embondagement to the Law, which
may be for a time in Saints and true Believers, and is called the Spirit of
bondage, Romans 8. A just peaceable Conscience makes a happy man. A just,
tormenting, or condemning Conscience, makes a miserable man.

(...),
(...), Antiph.
(...);
(...). Eurip.
The greatest Pleasure he has got,
That on his Conscience has no spot.
What sore disease Orestes thee has pressed?
It Is wounded Conscience sure within thy breast.
CHAP. VI. Concerning the Dominion of Conscience.
THus far of the nature of Conscience, next of the Dominion and Regiment, who
it is that has the immediate Rule and Government of it. I shall show therefore
that the Government of Conscience is the peculiar prerogative of God alone, and
that it is Usurpation for any to enter into that Jurisdiction, and the highest
presumption to attempt it, it belonging to none other by right, nor possible
for any other to attain: There being none able effectually to enjoin Conscience
to do its duty in making judicial trials of our persons and actions but God
alone: If at any time Satan or humane Authority set Conscience on work, it is in
nomine Dei, and sub praetextu divinae Authoritatis. And all humane Laws
conscientiously obeyed; are obeyed for the Lords sake, such obedience being
commanded of God.

2. That it is Gods only Prerogative to rule in Conscience, does appear by many
reasons. 1. God only knows the Heart and Conscience, and therefore is only
able to give a Law to it, and rule in it; if the one be his prerogative above
men and Angels, the other must be also. 2. It Is in Gods power only to inflict
punishment on Conscience in case of transgression. Men may punish the outward
man, but cannot touch the inward man. Conscience is not within the reach of his
stroke; and they pretend in vain to a power of Law-making, who cannot execute
it on the Subject for whom it is made. 3. The Conscience is accountable to none
but God, it being his immediate Substitute in man; he is Creator of it, and he
never subjected it to any Law but for his sake; all sin as such is against God,
and no trangression of humane Law becomes morally a sin, but by its relation
some way or other to Gods Law, by virtue of some of his general or particular
Precepts or Commissions. 4. There is nothing but the most universal or chiefest
good or evil can oblige Conscience to Obedience, or deter from Disobedience;
which none can make us partakers of, or sufferers under, but God alone. Men's
Stipitulations are never more than temporal Rewards and Punishments; these
Conscience does not, will not, it is not in the nature of it to stoop to them:
The concerns of Conscience are principally fixed on the Spiritual and Eternal
Estate, which none but the God of Spirits can bereave it of. Again, as God
only can lay down the first Rules of Truth and Error to the Understanding, so
he determines good and evil as a rule of the Will, and limitation of man in his
Election, suitable to the nature of a free Agent, having an arbitrary Power
over the Arbitrium of man's will, as well as over other things: For as he has
created the Will, so he has determinated the Object that is most adequate to
it, and not only in genere boni, but in specie moralis boni; Ergo God is the
proper and immediate Ruler of the Understanding and Will of man in genere
morali: Likewise no trangression of the Laws of man brings any
truely-enlightned Conscience under guilt without consulting the Mind and Will
of God. A Childs not doing a Parents command, is not a sin, (as such) neither
will it lay the Conscience under guilt, any farther than it is a transgression
of Gods Law, i. e. disobedience to them in those things that God has enjoined
obedience in. Childrens obedience to Parents is in the Lord, so Subjects to
Magistates; for both Parents and Magistrates do sometimes command such things,
that it is a virtue, and not a vice, in Children or Subjects not to obey, so
that their refusal be accompanied with all submission, reverence, and modesty
toward their Superiors. No man has a moral Legislative power over another;
but all men in respect of moral Laws, at least fundamentally understood, are
liable and subject to the same King and Governor; and to his Tribunal will
every Conscience appeal before it will lie under true guilt, whatever the
judgment of man is: And though men may torment or kill the outward man, and
vex the Spirits because of temporal Sufferings, yet the Conscience will stand
or fall only by the Judgment of God. I may add also, upon what authority we
receive a truth of a Spiritual nature, so as to believe it by the same
authority only, shall we suffer if we disobey it? but Conscience believes no
spiritual truth but upon Gods authority; Ergo it is by his authority only that
we shall suffer in Conscience; and this is the reason that when men would
impose their usurpations, they still bring a blind along with them, viz. a
pretense to God's Authority. Thus the Pope and his imitators in spiritual
things, as also Secular Powers, will endeavor (by casting a noose upon
Conscience as it stands in relation unto God) to make it serve their politic
and carnal ends, by tying men up by Oaths indefinite to all their lawless Laws
and Constitutions in Church and State. Lastly, by the same authority, and no
other, by which men shall be judged at last, by the same is Conscience ruled
now. Those that shall be judged by the Light of Nature, have God ruling and
judging in them by the Light of Nature only; so those that shall be judged by
the written Law, and by the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

3. Now lest there should be any mistake of our true meaning about this
Dominion of Conscience, let us take notice of a few distinctions concerning
Conscience. Conscience is to be considered according to its internal and its
external acting. Its internal acting, is its believing, assenting, concurring,
judging between fact and fact; or, disbelieving, dissenting, condemning, etc.
and these are those that are Actus eliciti; and they are not (without doubt)
under any humane Law or Power in the world, either to force them where they are
not, or to obstruct them where they are. As men may not presume to do it by any
external compulsion, so there is an impossibility in the nature of the thing,
that it can never be accomplished. It Is only God's Prerogative to charge us to
believe under a penalty, and the light of Truth carries demonstration with it
to challenge our assent, and call forth our understanding to a free acting,
unless we be inveloped in the darkness of corrupt nature, or captivated in
slavery to any Lusts. Neither is it in the power of man to remove this vail;
it is God only by the light of Truth, working by its prevailing evidence, and
the mighty operation of the divine Spirit, which way it pleases, that can
effect this. Hence he that makes a penal Law, that this or that thing is a
truth, and to be believed by me, to be assented and consented unto, and does
endeavor to compel me to such a belief and assent by the threats and
punishments of this Law, does usurp a power that was never given unto him by
God, neither was ever practicable to effect the end pretended to.

4. Secondly, There are external acts, (Actus imperati) of Conscience, as
professing, subscribing, declaring, doing; but these are not properly acts of
Conscience, but from Conscience, as they ought to be under the Rule and
Dominion and direction of Conscience, and will come to be duly considered in
this place, whether any man may be thus compelled by any subordinate Power; and
doubtless there is none that can compel a man to act from Conscience, no more
than he can compel him to understand or will what he pleases: for though the
acts are external, and may be compelled de facto, and in some cases de jure,
the principle of good or evil actions, viz. from Conscience, cannot be
compelled: the relation it has to Conscience is internal; as if a man be
brought and forced upon his Knees before an Idol, etc. it is no formal act of
Conscience, for that still resists and opposes the action; though it is
improperly called a forcing of Conscience, when a man is thus forced to an
action against his Conscience: Indeed he is forcibly induced through fear, or
sense of some evil, to do or omit something against his light and conviction;
and the choice is also free, he being attended with such circumstances; yet it
is said to be compelled, because the argument of a Penalty to be incurred upon
refusal, is very strong to reach flesh, to prevent the suffering of which, the
Will is carried away to choose that as a comparative good, which the enlightened
Understanding allows not as lawful, nor the Will as absolutely good; and this
is that compulsion of Conscience which is most usually found in the world. And
here it will be enquired whether any Subordinate power can lawfully compel us
to such imperate acts? Ans. 1. I say men may make and execute de jure, such a
Law as many cannot in conscience submit unto by way of active obedience, so
that it be really such as the great Lawgiver has allowed them to make, and it
be agreeable to the rules and limits of power committed to their charge, and
the reason of refusal be the weakness, and ignorance, or prejudice of the
Subject, or else no Laws could be made or executed in the world; for one or
other that should obey, would be pretending Conscience against it: and here the
Subject is to submit either actively, if after sufficient illumination he
finds the goodness and justness of the Lawgiver. If he does not, he is to
refuse to act, if he is persuaded it is utterly unlawful; but if it be
doubtfully so, he is to suspend his acts till he is better informed, and
patiently submit to the Magistrates will and pleasure in the Penalty-execution:
but if any Power endeavor to enforce obedience, that no Power enacting may
lawfully do, and require us and force us with penalties, it is questionless very
great Usurpation. We must also consider the matter about which this compulsion
may be conceived to be. No Magistrate may compel to any thing against
Conscience, quatenus such, Scil. under the formality and notion of being
against Conscience, that were the greatest Tyranny in the world. Or we may
understand it of compelling under the notion of Truth, and so a Faith must be
enforced, which no man is capable of accomplishing this way. Or, Thirdly, under
the notion of Duty, not respecting how the Consciences of persons stand
affected in relation to it on whom it is urged: And thus the Magistrate may
compel to the doing of good, or avoiding of evil, by penal Edicts, though
accidentally it may be against the Consciences of some on whom it is imposed;
for the Magistrate being not a competent Judge of men's Consciences, he cannot
make other men's Consciences the rule of his Laws and Executions, but the will
of the Lord, whose Ministers he is, and the good of the Commonweal that is
committed to his trust. The Magistrate is not to command or forbid any thing
under the formality of being with or against Conscience; but he supposing that
the Consciences of his Subjects are convinced, being sufficiently pre-informed,
may command any thing to be done or forborne, according to that latitude of Rule
and Government which he has received from the Lord whose Minister he is; for
the right knowledge whereof, he ought sincerely and impartially to consult the
Word of God and his own Conscience, and so to take the measures of his own Duty
and Actions: Neither is his Conscience the Standard to his Subjects; for every
one must give an account of himself to God; the Magistrate for himself, as a
Magistrate; and the Subject for himself, as such; and therefore the Conscience
of the Magistrate does not bind the Subject to active obedience, though his
relation to him as such binds him to Subjection, which is abundantly showed in
his quiet and peaceable submitting himself to the Law-penalty, if he cannot
satisfy himself that the Magistrate acts in his place according to the
revealed Mind and Will of God in such cases provided; which cases also are
always to be of a civil and politic nature, for here he has power compulsory
of the outward man mandatory, or prohibitory though the Conscience of the
Subject is or may be pretended to be against it.

5. And now that all cause of exception may be removed on all hands, it will be
requisite more explicitly to show how far a Christians Conscience has to do
with humane Authority; and we grant that humane Authority in civil and politic
affairs is an Ordinance of God. 2. That if the Law be just and equitable, a
Christian is bound in Conscience to yield positive active obedience, not only
for wrath, i. e. fear of threat and punishment, but for Conscience sake,
because the Law of God obliges us to obedience to all the just Laws of men,
civil Government being his appointment as much as Oeconomical; but it is not
man's Law that nextly and immediately binds Conscience to obedience, but Gods,
and man's Law binds only by virtue of, and for the sake of Gods. Hence a man
that breaks the just Laws of man, sins against God, and, eo nomine, wrongs his
Conscience. As on the other hand, he that obeys an unjust Law of man, i. e. a
Law no way warrantable by the revealed will of God, breaks Gods Law; and if his
Conscience tell him so, he sins against his Conscience, which always aggravates
any sin against God. Hence, if at any time he has to do with any such Law, he
ought rather to run the hazard of man's displeasure than Gods. God is to be
obeyed rather than man, if one must be disobeyed; and obeying God indemnifies
Conscience from the guilt of sin in our disobeying of man in the same act. So
if a Law of man lies before us, which we doubt concerning the lawfulness of, we
are here at least to suspend active obedience while we seek for further
information; for whether the thing in it self be sin or no, it is not so much to
us at present, as whether we are satisfied of the nature of it, and know what
it is by the light of Truth shining in our Hearts: it will amount to sin in us
to do a doubtful action, if the Apostles Doctrine be true: But if the Precepts
of men be found upon the best examination to be contrary to God's, a
Christian's Conscience is the most certainly disobliged, his duty lies plain
before him. God's Law is to be observed; and hence it is that some can joyfully
suffer all wrongs from the hands of men in the case of refusal of active
obedience unto their Laws, because they are persuaded either from a
truely-enlightned Conscience, or from an erring; (which is binding as to
present action; for a man must walk by that light he has, or by none at all)
that such refusal of active Obedience, and the sufferings of theirs, is
agreeable to the revealed mind of God, and therefore most justifiable at God's
and Man's Tribunal.

6. Here will fall in a great enquiry, That although it be true that all Humane
Power, both Legislative and Executive, be limited by a superior Power, yet
there is but few that have the felicity of keeping within prescribed bounds, or
having such Subjects that will not be excepting against the Laws of their
Superiors, as not agreeable to God's Laws; and this they will make the Plea for
their disobedience. Both Superiors and Inferiors will plead Conscience,
though never so unrighteously: what should be done in this case? Unto this
Allegation many things may be said; for it is sufficiently known, that though
every Law primarily requires active Obedience, yet upon a Transgression it is
satisfied with the due execution of the Penalty; but for the future expects
active Obedience: and a reiterated refusal of Obedience, the Law looks upon as
presumptuous; and is really so, if this continuation at enmity with the Law be
voluntary, and deliberate, after sufficient Information and Conviction; And if
this refusal be conjoined with resistance, it is no better than Rebellion,
which we explode as unwarrantable for a Christian. About Presumption we
distinguish, there is that which is really so, and that which is only called
so by an unjust Law and mistaking Judge. Persisting in refusal of obedience
after conviction of our duty, is presumption, and a sin against God, whoever
the Lawmakers is. But if such persistance be justified by the light of God's
Law in Conscience, it is not a presumptuous sin, or any sin at all against God,
however man may term it a presumptuous breach of his Law: for a conscientious
Christian can no more obey an unrighteous Law after suffering than before.

7. In all cases of voluntary deliberate refusal of active Obedience to a Law,
there is, and must needs be, a wrong done to the Lawgiver or Subject. To the
Lawgiver, if his Power, Law, and Ends be good, and they not answered; for the
first end of every Law is, and ought to be active Obedience, as beforesaid; the
Law of God first obliging us so to the just Laws of man; and the end of the
execution of punishment is for the reducing the sufferers to active Obedience,
and the exemplary restraint of others from Disobedience. Hence it follows, that
a deliberate, resolved, and constant undergoing of Suffering in this way of
refusal, is a practical charging the Magistrate with the highest Usurpation and
Tyranny in imposing Laws of that nature; and therefore the greatest disparaging
testimony born against his Law, a great reputation (in the judgment of the
world) to the Cause pleaded for, let it be truth or error, and the most
exemplary disappointment of the Magistrates Law-making ends, whereby others are
greatly emboldened to the same kind of refusal.

8. In all cases where Magistrates abuse their Power, they do a wrong to the
supreme Judge, in going beyond his Commission, and intrenching on his
Prerogative, and do apparent injury to the Subject. 1. In that an inferior
subordinate Lawgiver has bereaved him by a Law of those just Liberties and
Privileges granted to him by the Charter of his supreme Lawgiver. 2. In
afflicting and grieving his Subject, by imposing an unjust Law, and causing him
to suffer by it, when he pleads exemption by a Law in full force, and a
discharge from a higher Court, and is praiseworthy for the said refusal, not to
be condemned, no nor reproached as an evil doer, or presumptuous for his
permanency in non-obedience. 3. In laying his Subject under a necessity of
continued and reiterated sufferings, he being obliged in Conscience (or else to
answer the default at a higher Tribunal) constantly to persist in his refusal
to yield such Obedience, though he is to pass under renewed and reiterated
penalties; for a man to return to obedience after a deliberate suffering, is a
visible practical condemnation of himself for his former refusal, which would
greatly reflect on his honor both as a man or a Christian, unless by the
access of further light he finds his Conscience did err, and so be convinced
of his duty; then it becomes him both as a man and Christian to retract:
Humanum est errare, beluinum in errore persistere.

9. Now seeing such inevitable wrong lights somewhere in cases of these
deliberate refusals, it will be enquired who or what must determine to the
satisfaction of each party, both standing highly on their Justification? To
which I answer, An actual reconciliation is utterly impossible, rebus sic
stantibus, because it will be as the greater overswaying earthly power will
have it (Deo permittente) on the commanding part; his Will will carry it; Sic
volo, Sic jubeo, etc. and the Subject is liable to error on his part, in
Rashness, Stubbornness, Wilfulness, Singularity, etc. But if both parties do
(notwithstanding all Imperfections and Frailties attending) endeavor to
approve themselves to the King of Kings, there is a determination which to each
party must satisfactorily bind, and is thus manifest. 1. Both are bound to the
supreme Lawgiver; the one to make just and equal Laws, and righteously to
distribute them; the other to a free deliberate active obedience thereunto;
both or either of which failing in their duty, shall be judged by the supreme
Lawgiver according to the respective Laws whereby they are bound to the said
duties. 2. So long as darkness and corruption attends the minds of men, there
will be different apprehensions concerning the Duties and Practices they are to
walk in, according to the degrees of Light received; there will never be a
perfect agreement; neither is any one man's Conscience a Standard to another to
walk by, no further than there is a concurrent emanation of convincing light
from the truth to both; the Conscience of the Magistrate, as such, is no
binding rule to the Subject, neither ought the Conscience of the Subject to be
swallowed up in the Magistrates, and thereby seduced to an implicit Faith.
Every man is to see with his own Eyes, to believe with his own Faith, and act
to the satisfaction of his own Conscience, using all means for the right
information of his own Mind and Understanding in the Will of God for his
walking. Whatever men say of a Public Conscience, and that commands of
Superiors are enough to indemnifie Inferiors in all active Obedience thereto,
though the Laws be evil: The Word of God knows no such thing, neither will any
man that is acquainted with conscientious walking in the approvement of himself
to God in all his ways and actions, ever give credence to any of those wild
assertions; neither did I ever see any probable Argument produced to enforce
those Sentiments on the minds of rational men, much less on such as have their
Senses exercised in the knowledge of Truth. 4. Hence it will follow, that the
present Conscience or practical Understanding impartially fixed, must be the
only Expositor of Law and Duty, by which every one is bound to walk in his
respective place that God has set him in, whether Magistrate or Subject:
whether a man be in a public or private capacity, he is to be accountable to
God for all his absolute and relative duties, he shall not be judged for either
of them by another man's Conscience. The Spirit of a man is the Candle of the
Lord, etc. to this determination must the Lawgiver stand as to the
righteousness or unrighteousness of his Law, and the Subject as to his active
or passive obedience: And here we speak not by what measures Children in nonage
and Fools are from infirmity of nature necessitated to walk, but of such as
have the due use of reason and understanding; neither can it be helped if some
men will surrender themselves and Consciences (from slothfulness, interest, or
flattery) to be slaves to men, they shall sufficiently smart for it here, and
severely answer for it hereafter. But if any plead that men of Reason,
Understanding, Judgment, and Conscience, ought to quit and abandon all light
and dominion of their own Consciences, (being inferiors) and be at the
disposition wholly of their Superiors; this we say can have no ground in
Nature, Politics, or Beligion. It Is just as if all Subjects were bound to
pluck out their Eyes, and see only by their Governor's. A Child is to obey
his Parent, but it is in the Lord; he is not bound to obey him in unlawful
things, and so a Servant his Master: If such obey their Superiors in such
things as the Law of God makes unlawful, in so doing they must needs disobey
God. Now it is most absurd to think that Gods Law should require it is own
violation; if this Command (Children, obey your Parents) be taken without
limitation, and the Parent commands the Child to commit Idolatry, or to steal,
and the Child by that Precept is bound to active Obedience, then God's Law
here overthrows it self: for by yielding obedience to one Precept, another is
necessarily broken. We have Joseph's practice (and Scriptural commands) to
justify us in this Assertion.

10. Moreover, if Conscience is to determine (after the best information that
we can have) between God and us, as to our present practice, much more it is to
determine in case of difference between subordinate Lawgivers and us. Though
there is a difference in the determination, ( i. e. supposing it be God's Law,
his authority to make such a Law is not to be disputed by the Creature; but the
question or case of Conscience is usually of the meaning and extent of his Law,
as to variety of practices referrable thereunto: Whereas man's Law may be
disputed whether he may de jure, by virtue of his Commission from God, make and
enjoin such a Law) yet the Argument holds good, that in case of doubt about
Practice, and Dispute between God and us, if he requires us to be regulated by
the verdict of Conscience enlightened from the Word, then much more in such
cases of dispute betwixt Man and us: and although we may sin in obeying the
dictates of an erring Conscience, (guided by the Word of God misunderstood) yet
that sin (after our impartial endeavors for information) appearing to us to be
a Duty, (though it cease not therefore to be a sin in its own nature) it
would be a greater sin in us to disobey the Dictate of the present supposedly
enlightened Conscience, because it must be ranked amongst the sins against Light
and Conscience; whereas now the Act is but a sin of ignorance at worst. Again,
God will at the last day judge according to the Verdict of Conscience rightly
informed; If our Conscience condemn us, God is greater, etc. 1 John Romans 2. but
if our present Conscience be erring, either as to the meaning or nature of the
Law or Fact, and brings in an impartial Verdict, according as it has found
upon its best information and enquiry; but not true (as after it appears)
according to Law or Fact, its duty is to pass again and again upon the same
inquisition, till it speaks as it shall speak before Gods Tribunal: So the last
Verdict (called present Conscience) stands binding to us, till by further light
in the Law, or Evidence concerning the Fact, another be brought more agreeable
to Law and Justice. And if upon frequent and impartial search, the same return
be still made (after earnest and sincere seeking of God to discover our
errors) it is a great confirmation unto us that it is truth that has been
spoken; and that we should greatly sin against God to swerve from it, what ever
the Edicts and Precepts of men say to the contrary. Magna est vis Conscientiae
in utramque partem, ut neque timeant qui nihil commiserint, and poenam semper
ante occulos versari putent qui peccaverint. Cic. Orat. pro Milione.

(...). Sophoc. Egregious Witness Conscience To good men is of innocence.

CHAP. VII. Of Strong and Weak Christians, and how far they are obliged to
submit to each other.
1. HAving evidenced that the Jurisdiction of Conscience belongs to the Lord
Christ as his peculiar Prerogative, it follows that doubting, weak, scrupulous
Consciences may challenge this privilege, as well as the knowing, confirmed,
strong Consciences; and neither the weak subjected to the strong, nor the
strong to the weak. And because the Spirit of God has distinguished Christians
according to their Consciences into strong and weak, and showed how they ought
to walk in love toward each other under one and the same Lawgiver and Law,
though diversely apprehended (especially as to some circumstances and
consequences thereof) by them; and that they ought not to judge, justle, wrong,
and despise each other: It will be very requisite in this Conscience-abusing
age to speak something distinctly on this subject.

2. The whole revealed will of Christ for the Government of his militant
Kingdom, and management of all affairs therein, as to public Ecclesiastical
concernments, so to all particular Duties, Relations and Behaviors
conscientiously to be performed to God and man, is fully and sufficiently
manifest under the notions of things necessary and indifferent; under which two
Heads all Christian Duties positive and negative are comprehended: Although
there is a supposition of a third, (because of our blindness, ignorance, and
weakness of Judgment and Affections, as to a clear discerning and determining
between Gospel-necessities and indifferences how stated by Christ) and that is
of dubious controverted matters between Church and Church, Christian and
Christian, whether they be absolutely enjoined or prohibited, or indifferently
lawful and unlawful, called by the Apostle (...).

3. This supposed Third causes a distinction of two sorts, or rather degrees
of Believers, both one in Christ the Head, and in conscientious ender respect
to his Glory. The one is the weak, scrupulous doubtful Christian, not so fully
informed in the revealed will of Christ for his walking; but because of his
great love to Christ, and tender respect to his Glory, is very zealous thereof,
and suspicious of himself and his ways; and it may be doubts and questions many
things which are not doubted of, nor need not by the strong, because they are
clearly enough revealed; but the weak, by reason of the great darkness of his
Understanding, is at a loss about them; such are called (...), i. e. he wants
that due light and information that the Conscience ought to have in the truths
of the Gospel, especially of such as are usually of a more disputable nature,
(so Beza and Piscator Fides hoc loco declarat Christiandm ipsam Doctrinant in
qua sit adhuc aliquis rudu ac proin^e discrimen ciborum and dierum, nondum in
elligit Christi beneficio puisse sublarum, Bez. Fides hic significat de usu
rerum indifferentium per synecdoch. generis.
) to distinguish between things necessary and indifferent, but accounts some
things indifferent which are necessary, and some necessary which are
indifferent, and therefore does not rightly distinguish between his duty and
liberty. The stronger Believer is he who has a clearer and fuller discerning
of the mind and will of Christ revealed, touching things absolutely or
relatively necessary by the Law of Christ, and things left in indifferency; and
this is the Christian that has least doubt and scruple in Conscience, Circa
agenda and non agenda, necessario agenda and indifferenter, and therefore of
licita and non licita, and has that plerophory of Judgment spoken of Romans
14.13.

4. The Apostle in that Chapter, and elsewhere, does fully show the difference
between these Believers; the one sort are (...), weak in Faith. The other sort
are (...), strong, and confirmed in Principles, Knowledge, and Judgment: All
indeed have some Knowledge which have any Faith of a true nature, (...), all
have knowledge, 1 Cor. 8.1. but all have not such a degree of Knowledge as to
denominate them strong, (...), v. 7. this eminent knowledge is not in all;
therefore some are weaker in Faith and Conscience, and therefore have not a
good judgment of discretion, or of determination of doubtful points to which
he is not to be taken by other Christians; for he having a zeal to the honor
of God, (...) is rendered by Steph. Certamen, and disceptatio by the Vulgar, to
which Beza adheres; but by Erasmi^s D^ judicaiio, whom Grotius and Hammond
follow, and seems to me to be most genuine: For though (...) is sometimes taken
for Doubting, yet it is oftener taken for Discerning and Judging; and besides,
(...) the Noun is elsewhere still taken in this sense of Discerning, 1 Cor.
12.10. Heb. 5.14.
and but little knowledge, is superstitiously observant of many things, which
the strong looks not upon himself at all obliged in conscience to. The Apostle
gives an instance, v. 2. One believes that he may eat all things, another
that, is weak eats Herbs, i. e. the strong knows his liberty, that Christ
has not confined him in so narrow a compass for the sober and convenient use
of any creature-comfort; whereas the weak he looks upon himself bound to
Ceremonies to observe many things, as to meats, drinks, days, etc. and this was
the great dispute between the Professors in the Apostles times, whether all the
Jewish Observations were abolished or not by Christ: The strong Professors
said, they were (according to Peter's Vision;) the weak said they were yet to
be observed. And as there were weak Jewish Christians, so there were weak
Gentiles Professors, who did eat (...), 1 Cor. 8.7. which does eat with
Conscience ( i. e. of respect) toward the Idol: this is illustrated v. 10. for
the weak seeing the strong eat things sacrificed to Idols, or sitting in the
Idol-Temple, he says the Conscience of the weak (...) edified to eat things
sacrificed unto Idols as such: Whereas the strong has no such respect at all,
but the poor indiscreet weak Believer judges so, and therefore encourages
himself in his own Superstition; he walks by a dimmer light, therefore his
Conscience is more apt to be defiled. The stronger has a greater degree of
light and knowledge, and therefore is not so apt to trip and stumble in the way
that he walks, his Conscience is more clean and free from pollution. The
Apostle, Heb. 5.14. opposes these two sorts of Believers as Children and grown
men, v. 13. every one that uses Milk is unskilful in the word of
Righteousness; for he is a Babe, v. 14. but strong meat belongs to them that
are of full age, ( i. e. have attained a measure of skill and understanding in
the word of Righteousness) even those that by reason of use have their senses
exercised to discern (the word is (...)) both good and evil; to determine
between things truly lawful and unlawful. The weak walks by a dimmer light,
either by his own opinion, or tradition of his Predecessors, or by the example
or opinion of others; and therefore more apt to fall upon such actings whereby
his Conscience is wronged and defiled, by doing such things as absolutely, or
circumstantially prove sin unto him; he is as a Candle newly lighted, a bruised
Reed, a smoking Flax, soon extinguished, or having at best but a smoaky dim
light that none can walk by, and he himself is confused by in his Christian
conversation: he is called a Babe that has very tender Bones and Sinews, which
are soon wrenched and put out of Joint; hence depends sometimes, on the
guidance of others which he takes to be stronger than himself, and it may be
casts himself on the judgment of the blind, and so they fall both together:
And sometimes presumes to go by his own strength further than he is able,
whereby he is precipitated into many inconveniences, difficulties, and dangers.

5. These two sorts of Believers differing only in strength, are both the same
in Specie, (as a Child and grown man) having both Faith, v. 1. both received
by Christ, v. 3. and Christ died for them, v. 15. both walking conscientiously
according to their light toward God. The Apostle's great care, is to warn them
both to be very wary and circumspect how they walk toward each other,
according to those degrees of light which they have received, with all charity
and wisdom: That which he insists most on (in this Chapter of Romans 14.) is
charitable walking. 1. He would not have them walk at a distance one with
another, but the strong to receive the weak to communion without making
doubtful things the terms of it; [(...)] the Sir. Arah. and Aethiop. render in
the sense of Helping, date manum, adjuvate, sublevate; but that is the signif.
of (...), as is plain where it is used; and this word by the opinion of the best
Interpreters is fitter rendered by assumite, receive, viz. into your society,
and so used most frequently in the New Testament, Matthew. 16.22. Act. 17.5. chapter
18.26. Philem. 12 and 17. So for taking meat, Act. 27.33, 34, 36.
receive them, but not to the judgment of controversal points or disputable
matters ((...) signifies Reasonings or disputings, and so ought in most places
where it is used to be rendered; and though it is often rendered thoughts, yet
there it is to be understood of arguing and reasoning thoughts) such the Apostle
would not have them received to; i. e. he would not have your or their (...) or
judgment of disputable points to be the terms of your receiving of them:
Whatever your opinion or theirs is in these matters, receive them, say not that
they must be of this or that judgment and practice in these things, or else
they are not to be of your communion; the strong (or he that reputes himself
so, whether he be so or no, the rule of charity for the strong, is to receive
him that he reputes weak) is to receive the weak as Christ has, v. 4. (...) is
used there for Christ's receiving. As Christ receives them with all love,
tenderness, and condescension, so ought every stronger Believer not to hurry
and worry them beyond their strength of Knowledge and Judgment, by rigorous
proceedings of Magisterial injunctions and compulsions; but carry them as
Lambs, and gently lead them (as God Isai. 40.11. does) by the illuminations of
the Word, in the exercise of much patience and forbearance toward them,
condescending in all things possible for their good and edification, Romans
14.19. in whatever he may not offend Christ, he ought rather to please his
Brother than himself. As for Example, one that calls himself the strong, (it
may be he is Magistrate or Minister, and by his place ought to be so) says it
would be much more contentment to him, if one of his Subjects or Hearers would
yield to conform to some few little things which he affirms to be but
indifferent in themselves, etc. and the Subject and Parishioner says, No, to
obey you is Will Worship. God's own Ordinances are but little indifferent
things in themselves, but by virtue of his Commands they become great and
weighty; so your Commands about small indifferences makes them great and
weighty to my Conscience: And therefore I desire to be excused in coming up to
any such Commands; lay aside these, and I am willing to enjoy the benefit of
your Communion. Suppose them to be meats, gestures, or Garments, etc. I say, he
ought much rather to lay aside the pressing of this or that indifferent thing,
for the communion with, and edification of, his poor Brother: But for him to
retain his resolution of pressing this (as he calls it, indifferent action) on
the Conscience and practice of his Brother, not admitting any other terms of
communion, and upon his refusal to call him Heretic, Schismatic, Rebel, etc.
can be accounted nothing less than deliberately and studiously to lay a
Stumbling Block in his Brothers way for him to fall over; (at least in the true
sense of falling) and then when he is down, to beat him and trample upon him.
Secondly, In this charitable walking the Apostle says, after they are in
communion there ought not to be judging or despising each other, Romans 14.10.
The weak they are very apt to judge the strong for taking too much power upon
himself, or liberty to himself; and to say he walks not according to his Light;
and that his actions are not agreeable to the rule of the Gospel; that he is a
scandal to Religion, etc. when indeed it may be he uses but that lawful
liberty in indifferent things which Christ has granted him, and the other
understands not. Such judging as this is ought not to be in the weak; and
remarkable it is, that the judging part is put upon the weaker side: the weak
Christian is usually the most censorious, and many live with such weakness as
this, almost all their days. But the strong is also apt to trespass on the rule
of Charity in despising his weak Brother, i. e. he that is strong in gifts and
parts, or in respect of place and dignity, and advantages in the world; he is
apt to think slightly of him, and to speak so, and call him a simple froward
Fanatic, a man humoursome, and a contentious Fellow; a weak-brain'd Coxcomb,
one that makes Conscience and Preciseness only a pretense to carry on
rebellious Designs against Church and State; and though he pretend Conscience
so much in some few things, yet he will play the Hypocrite and lie fast enough
in others. To such an one the Apostle says (...), and take such an one out of
the huff of his Pride and Passion, he cannot but acknowledge that this person
which he has thus much contemned and despised is one truly fearing God,
though he has many weaknesses and incongruities attending of him. Thirdly,
Another piece of Charity is to help, succor, and assist one another in the
bearing any evil of affliction, coming out of any evil of sin, and attaining
any good desired, Romans 15.1. We that are strong ought to bear the infirmities
of the weak; to put our Shoulders under the burden, (...), not to aggravate
their weakness, and lay greater burden upon them, but to help them with
comforts under afflictions, resolutions in doubts, good counsel for their
recovery when they are under sin and guilt, and not please your selves, our
pride, corrupt passions and affections: as self must be denied in following
Christ, so in associating with his Members.

6. We have spoken of the Charity the Apostle requires in the walking of strong
and weak toward one another; it remains to add something concerning the rules
of Wisdom whereby they are to walk. 1. The Strong is not to do any indifferent
action which he foresees may be a real sinning offense unto his Brother, Romans
14.19, 20, 21. It Is of the greatest transgression of the rule of Charity in the
Apostles sense; and therefore it is wisdom for the Strong to choose such times
and circumstances for the use of indifferent things, as may not scandalize the
weak, and give him occasion either sinningly to judge him, or embolden him to
imitate him in an action which his own Conscience cannot bear; for that meat
which the Strong can eat without conscience of the Idol, the Weak cannot:
Therefore some things must be wisely avoided by a Christian for the sake of
another man's Conscience in matters of indifferencies, though he finds no
reason for it in his own. I need make no farther proof of this than that full
place, 1 Cor. 8.10. 1 Cor. 10.27, 28, 29. Here the judgment of discretion must
be managed by the rules of Expediency, All things that are lawful are not
expedient; and if it be a sin against Christian Charity and Wisdom to do that
action that may really scandalize a weak Brother, it is much more a
transgression of a heinous nature to impose this action, and compel the Weak to
the doing of it. 2. The wisdom of the Weak should be, to be so far from judging
and condemning the Strong, as rather to suspect his own Judgment, and lay
aside Pride, Prejudice, and Partiality, and sincerely endeavor after more
light, believing still that it is most probable that a Christian that has more
Knowledge, Experience, Gifts, and Parts and Advantages, may know much more than
himself; and though he cannot reach Light enough to see so far as to practice
with him, yet at least to believe that his stronger Brother has walked
according to the best of his light and knowledge in that thing, when he sees no
eminent moral swaying reason to the contrary. And though the Conscience or
Example of the Strong is not the rule that the Weak must walk by, unless it is
manifest to the Weak that the Strong walks agreeable to the Mind or Example of
Christ: It Is not any man's Place, Dignity, Learning, Piety, barely and
absolutely considered, that renders him a Standard and Rule of Christian
walking; yet he is to learn so much pious Wisdom, as to remember all those
relations that he stands to him by, and to violate none of them upon this
account, and rather come to him as a Scholar, than as a Master to teach him, or
Judge to condemn him. It were great folly in a man that is blind, or has but
one Eye, to condemn all men for Cheats and Knaves that have two Eyes and
stronger sighted than themselves. Besides, it is most agreeable to the rules of
equity, that the strong man should be allowed the same liberty as to his own
practice, which the weak challenges, viz. of walking by the light of his own
Conscience, be it more or less than another; though I confess, if there be any
bar of Liberty in indifferent things in the Law of Christ, it is on the part of
the Strong; i. e. of him that has the overruling, governing, or exemplary
power over others, for the sake of the Weak: for that is an undoubted Law of
Christ, that the Strong, or he that thinks or pretends himself so to be, may
not do an indifferent action with offense unto the Weak. And whereas the Strong
may object and say, that the Weak is as much bound to conform to an indifferent
thing for the sake of the Strong, as the Strong to forbear it for the sake of
the Weak; I (...) there can be no sin in forbearing an indifferent act to (...)
upon it as such, when there is unavoidable sin in doing it (...) that esteems
it in his Conscience so to be; so that the reason is not the same in this kind
for the Strong and Weak. The Weak cannot walk with the Strong in all matters of
indifferency, but the Strong may with the Weak by receiving of them, as the
Apostle says, without the consideration of those differences; because the Weak
should sin in doing a thing absolutely indifferent which he judges unlawful;
but the Strong doubting not the indifferency, can never think that he sins in
forbearing it, and therefore should prize his Brothers communion before
pleasing himself in such actions.

7. The sum of all is this, that notwithstanding the real disproportion (or
supposed) between the Strong and Weak, and the disputes in the world who is
one, and who is the other, the will of Christ is, that they should walk
brotherty and inoffensively toward each other, each one as strong and weak; as
strong, in respect of his Wisdom and Charity; as weak, in respect of his
Humility; Teachableness, and Suspicion of himself, Every one esteeming another
better than himself; for the same Christian may be strong and weak; strong in
the knowledge and experience of some Truths, and in respect of some
Temptations, weak in his apprehension and judgment of others; strong at one
time, and weak at another: And besides, attending infirmities must be
considered on both parts; for it cannot be but sometimes it will fall out, that
the Weak will manifest his weakness, by Peevishness, Prejudice, Passion, or
Bewraying his manifest ignorance, for which the Strong is not to despise him or
reject him, but rather help him under this burden, and endeavor to win him
nearer unto him by a spirit of forbearance and meekness; for men in manifest
weaknesses are to be pitied and supported, not to be insulted over and trampled
upon. So the Strong will sometimes show his strength (though it be his sin, and
therefore a weakness relatively) in doing actions indifferent to himself, and
it may be knows not, or considers not, that they are sinning offenses unto his
weak Brother; and then for his own vindication, with too great a proportion of
height and vehemence, next door to Pride and Passion, (too often the things
themselves) manageth his case for the satisfaction or conviction of the Weak,
the good effect whereof is lost by reason of the attending corruption. Here
prevailing Grace in the Weak will turn the scales, and make him appear the
Strong, if he suppress the (...) in himself of judging his Brother, and carry
(...) him in an eminent measure of love and humility in the ^anifestation of
his apprehended just exceptions against any of his Brothers ways or actions,
and putting the most favorable and candid interpretation upon them that by the
rules of Charity in his apprehension they will bear.

8. How contrary then is the walking of some unto this Rule? when the Strong
will bind up the Weak by humane Laws to do all those actions (that to him are
indifferent) under pain of non-communion, or other penalties, when he regards
no more the strength of the Child that he is to walk with, as that it must run
as fast as himself, or rather drive it before him, not considering the weakness
of his parts manifestly wronged, and the great hazard of his life: how unlike
he is to God in this, and how contrary he acts to his revealed will, let the
impartial judge. On the other hand, when the Weak, at least in knowledge, if
not in power, will bind up the hands of the Strong by some Law humane, under
pain of inevitable bodily Sufferings, or Censures public or private, to deny
his own Light and Liberty, and come down to his Darkness and Bondage; it is as
when a blind man will not be satisfied unless all other men's Eyes be put out
too; and the lame, till other men's Legs be broken. This is Tyranny on both
hands; Christ never substituted one Christian as such a Lawgiver unto another
in Spirituals: and they that pretend to it as strong, to give Law to the weak;
or as weak, to give Law to limit and bind up the strong, they are so far from
the Rules of the Gospel, that whatever their profession is of Faith in the
greater or lesser measure, I fear it will hardly be found in the smallest
portion in either of them; and therefore from this consideration will arise a
necessary distinction between the strong or weak sincere Believer, and between
the strong and weak hypocritical or pretended Believer.

9. What has been hitherto spoken mostly concerns the supposed strong or weak
sincere Christian; we shall speak a word of the Hypocritical pretenders of both
sorts. The hypocritically Strong, is he that apprehends himself to be so, and
from spiritual Pride and corrupt Interest, puts on a pharisaical Vizard,
whereby he would persuade others that he is so; one that thinks he knows
much, and knows nothing as he ought to know, 1 Cor. 8.2. and he so thinks of
himself, as that he is puffed up, v. 1. And again the Apostle says, Not he
that commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord commends, 1 Cor.
10.19. his knowledge is not of the right stamp, it is separated from undoubted
concomitants of sanctified Knowledge, Charity, Humility, and spiritual Wisdom,
and instead thereof he manifests himself with ostentation, Lords it
tyrannically over the Consciences of others, be they strong or weak; despising
and contemning them in all their doubts, rather desiring to confound them with
difficulties, and impose on them by compulsions, than any way to inform their
Judgments, or to win them to his society by condescension and meekness.

10. The weak Hypocritical Professor little differs from the former, not in
kind, but in degree only; for a Hypocrite is but so still, be he weak or
strong; i. e. have more or less parts or advantages to hide and conceal
himself, and set off himself to the world; but he differs from the supposed
strong Christian, in that he has but little knowledge, a few gifts and parts,
and is not able to manage his affairs to so much advantage for the deceiving of
others, but yet pretends highly to Conscience, and the purest ways of holiness,
and pleads himself to be weak only for a Bulwark for himself to defend his
Errors, Singularity and Censoriousness of others, against all the instructions
and admonitions, whatever forcible arguments and reasons they bring with them:
He will still say, truly this is his weak judgment, and that he is but of a
mean capacity, and cannot understand what you have to say for his information
and conviction; and if you make him understand, he will still hold his
Conclusion, though his Premises be manifested to be never so weak.

11. The sincere ought to have a watchful eye upon these Professors,
endeavoring to discover them, for at first they cannot, and therefore are
called Hypocrites, because they can obscure and conceal themselves from man for
a while; and when they are not known, the sincere is bound to carry himself
toward them by the same rules as he does to those that are equally sincere
with himself: but when he is once discovered, he has no reason then to carry
himself toward him as toward a sincere, but as toward a false-hearted
Professor. But we should be very wary of judging men Hypocrites; it is the
greatest censure in the world upon a Professor; there must be very great
evidence for it before we can conclude it so: for Hypocrisy is properly in the
eye of none but God; and though Christ (who knew men throughout) called them as
they were, I question whether his Example may be followed in this, by the best
men on earth. But we may have great grounds of suspicion of this by their
fruits, and accordingly we are to be directed in our carriage toward them by
the Word of God, and we have our Savior's behavior to the Pharisees, whether
strong or weak, for our example, so far as imitable by us. Our Savior would
never gratify that sort of men, whatever shape they appeared under, either of
weak or strong; and notwithstanding all their glosing pretentions, our Savior
tells them, their Hearts were rotten and their ends wicked; and by two eminent
characters of this nature he discovers them to the world. 1. That they were
mighty zealous for some small circumstantial matters in Religion, and professed
Enemies to the purer and more weighty part wherein the power of Godliness lay,
Faith, Justice, Charity, etc. 2. That they cried up Humane Laws, Traditions and
Constitutions in the worship of God, above the Laws and Institutions of God
himself. The carriage of Paul also in this kind is very remarkable, that he
would not ( Gal. 2.3, 4, 5.) yield to the circumcision of Titus, it being
sought for by false Brethren that would have compelled it, and endeavored to
betray the Churches liberty, and bring them into bondage; to whom (he says) we
gave no place by subjection, (i. e. yielding to their imposition) no not for an
hour, that the truth of the Gospel (i. e. true Gospel-liberty) might continue
with you; whereas before he yielded to the Circumcision of Timothy to gratify
the weak real Believers. Whence it plainly follows, that whoever they be that
endeavor to enthral our Consciences and Practices, though in matters in
themselves indifferent, are not to be yielded to as weak, nor subjected to as
strong, but rejected as false Brethren. 2. The strong sincere Christian is not
to violate any positive Law of Christ that he is in his Conscience persuaded
of, to gratify the weak, or any persons whatever, Inferiors, Superiors, or
Equals; all the concession must be only in matters in themselves indifferent;
neither should the weak offer violence to his Conscience in any thing to please
the strongest and wisest Christian in the world.

CHAP. VIII. Of Scandals.
1. HAving spoken of the strong and weak Christian, and how they should walk
one toward another inoffensively, it will be necessary to understand a little
the nature and kind of offenses which the Gospel gives us so frequent and
strict warning to take heed of. The Apostles great inference (from the advice
that he had given to the Strong and weak) was by way of advice, Romans 14.13. Let
us not therefoee judge one another any more, but judge this rather, (i. e.
determine) that no man put a stumbling block or an occasion to fall in his
Brothers way. (...), and (...), inter se differunt, sed non semper: (...)
leviorem offensam significat, qua^ tamen aliquis non corruat, ut supra, 11.11.
(...) vero graviorem declarat, ex qua^ quispiam prolapsus claudicet. Beza and
most Interpreters go this way, but Estius, who says, Non disting, inter
offendiculum and scandalum, sicut inter lapidem offensionis and petram
scandali, Romans 9.33. nam hujusmodi repetitiones ad inculcationem eyusdem rei
Scripturis familiares sunt. Estius.
There is two words used, but both seem to intend the same thing, though some
make them differ in degree. A Scandal is any impediment or obstruction that
lies in a man's way, over which he may stumble or fall: So that we take a
Stumbling Block or occasion of falling for the same thing, any thing that does
grieve, trouble, distract, or turn aside, carries the nature of a scandal with
it, and those we must distinguish according to degrees: There are the greater
and more dangerous, that hazard falling; and there are those of a lesser
nature, that hazard stumbling only. They differ only in degree, or in respect
that they have to our state or particular actions and concerns. Some of more
dangerous consequence, and some of less. Some are more easily removed out of
the way, some more permanent and lasting. As if there be any difference in
those expressions, a stone of stumbling, and rock of offense, it lies in that
the offending Stone is easily put aside, but the Rock is immovable.

2. Offenses are said also to be either such as are given and not taken; and in
this sense some places must be taken, as Matthew. 16.23. when Christ said to
Peter, (...), Thou art an offense to me, in endeavoring by thy advice and evil
counsel to turn me out of the course of exercising my Mediators office: Not
that Christ was stumbled, but there was such a thing in the nature of Peter's
advice, in relation to Christ's work that he had to do. Some offenses are taken
and not given; i. e. it is not in the nature of them to be offenses, but by
reason of the corruptions of men by their abuse of the greatest good, it often
becomes a scandal to them; so Christ himself was a scandal to the Jews, and a
Rock of scandal, as well as a Stone of stumbling, Romans 9.33. 1 Cor. 1.23. How
many, when he went preaching about, were scandalized at him and at his
Doctrine, Matthew. 11.6. chapter 15.12. chapter 26.31. This is a supposed scandal to him
that is offended. Thus the doing of the most justifiable action may undergo the
disreputation of an offense, when men will either perversely call good evil, or
interpret it as evilly intended, or by reason of ignorance and weakness of
judgment judge it so: and thus Christ himself, and no marvel if the best of
his Members be not a scandal many times in their most commendable ways of
walking, unto the men of the world, yea unto many weaker Believers, their
liberty becomes a Stumbling Block to the weak, 1 Cor. 8.9. and a man's good is
blasphemed, or evil spoken of, Romans 14.16. there are many that will be offended
captiously and deliberately, and they are the profane men of the world that
call Christ Beelzebub, and his Disciples no better, or the pharisaical
Professors. The Disciples told Christ, Know thou not that the Pharisees were
offended when they heard these sayings, Matthew. 15.12. Christ answers, That
every plant that his Father had not planted should be rooted up: Let them
alone, they are blind, etc. therefore, no marvel if they bark at the Sun, etc.
These unjust and unreasonable offence-takers are the greatest offence-givers,
who do truly offend Gods Children in all senses more than the profane world:
so Joh. 6.60, 61.

3. An offense given, is when a man or thing has an innate just ground of
scandal, by relation to the moral Law, and is no other than sin or sinful per
se and in se, whatever other men's opinion of it be; and therefore works
objectively upon others by way of stumbling and scandalizing; and they are two
sorts on whom it operates this way: Either those that behold this action with
approbation; and they stumble, or rather fall, in the worst manner thereby; for
they thereby are encouraged to fall into sin, or to remain in sin, by reason of
it, because of the great inducements that they take up from the person
committing it, his Holiness, Wisdom, Authority, Age, etc. or those that behold
it are grieved at it, and at the person offending, so as to censure his Person
or Religion, and provoked by some ways or means to manifest their great
disgust, not only to the person offending, but even to the world. Hence I
distinguish Offenses into Grieving and Sinning, or Grief-causing offenses, or
Sin-causing offenses.

4. Of the grieving Offense first; and it is that which tends to the afflicting
and troubling the Minds, Hearts, and Consciences of the Faithful in their
Christian course; and the offending party either wrongs and injures by acts of
violence and oppression, whereby he grieves the oppressed; or else he does and
persists in such actions as the offended judge unlawful: And therefore from
true principles of the love of God and his Brother, and the hatred of sin, he
is much grieved, and walks heavily to see his Brother walk disorderly, and
complains of this block laid in the way of his Charity and Christian Communion,
Romans 14.15. If thy Brother be grieved ((...)) with thy meat, thou walk not
charitably.

5. There be two sorts of grieving Offenses. 1. All absolutely unlawful actions
that are seen by the offended party to be sins by Christ's Law, and these he is
bound by Christ's Law to be offended at, and at the persons committing them, as
not only sinners against God, but against the Members of Christ; and such
offenders are the profane men of the world or Pharisaical Professors, Matthew.
13.41. chap. 18.7. the world is full of these offenses, and miserable and woeful
by reason of them. 2. All actions that though they are lawful in themselves,
yet circumstantially respected according to time and place, they have an
unexpediency, and therefore carry an offensiveness with them, or they become
offenses by the sinister interpretation of the offended, and then are not
justly taken: all things indeed are pure, but it is evil for that man that
eats with offense, Romans 14.20. and though the offense may be but a reputed or
supposed one ( v. 14.) by the offended party, yet it may be really given by the
offending party, and the offense be unjustly taken as to the thing or action,
yet it may be just and equal as to the party offending, who is as well
acquainted with the weakness of his Brother, as the indifferency of the action.

6. The sinning offense is such a thing or action in one man, that becomes an
occasion of sin in another, whether it work upon him by way of Example, Advice,
Compulsion, etc. if it force or allure him into sin, it is a scandal, and of the
grossest and most heinous nature; and a man is offended here many times, when
he is pleased as to the carnal part, as he always seems to be when they close
with him by way of encouragement, because sinning is most properly spiritual
stumbling and falling, and those things that occasion it are metaphorically
called Traps, Gins, Snares, Stumbling Blocks, in Scripturephrase; and in that
sense is (...) most frequently used. This Scandal, or occasion of falling into
sin, is diversely taken; it is sometimes ascribed unto Gods judicial proceeding
with the sons of men, when he lays such Providence before them which he knows
will become a scandal by reason of their corruptions, viz. of further more
visible and exemplary sinning unto them, Ezeek. 3.20. Jer. 6.21. in this sense
Christ became a sinning scandal unto a great part of the world: To the Jews, a
Stumbling Block, and to the Greeks, Foolishness. The sufferings and falls of
Gods people, intended for the humbling, proving, and doing good unto them, have
their bardning effects upon the wicked: The same Sunbeams harden the Clay, and
soften the Wax; Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis. Many
Creature Comforts used by some for nourishment and comfort of life, become no
better than Poison unto others by their intemperate and sinful abuse of them,
and are called a Snare, Trap, Gin, Scandal, Romans 11.9. It Is attributed to any
subtle enticement or insinuation to the commitment of sin, either of our own
inherent Lusts and Affections, James 1. and in this sense the right Eye, or
Hand is said to scandalize us, Matthew. 5.29. and 18.9. Mark 9.47. Or it is taken
for another's insinuations or allurements to sin, by Words or Actions, by Words
and Persuasions; that of Peter to our Savior, Matthew. 16.23. By alluring
Actions and Practices: so Balac laid a Scandal before the Children of Israel,
Rev. 2.14. Moreover, it is attributed to any thing sinfully hurtful, or as a
fruit of sin, noxious unto man, especially all sinful incorrigible men; all
which scandals Christ's Angels shall gather out at the end thereof, Matthew.
13.41. But the use of the word mostly in our sense, is such a kind of
Stumbling Block as one Brother may put in another's way; or more largely, such
a kind of Stumbling Block as is an occasion of sinning to any of Christ's
Members. 1. Such as is laid by the malicious World and Pharisees, who are
plotting and contriving entrappers of Gods people, like Balaam and Balack, and
rejoice over them as Enemies when they have brought any of those little ones
into sin; our Savior's Woe belongs to them, Matthew. 18.6. 2. When one Believer
offends another, the strong doing an action (to him indifferent) whereby the
weak by misunderstanding becomes seduced to, and entrapped, or established in
sin.

7. There are these ways whereby the indifferent act of the Strong becomes a
sinning scandal unto the Weak. 1. When it encourages the Weak to an implicit
Faith, taken upon the practice of the Strong ( i. e. of one eminent for Grace,
Gifts, Exemplary sufferings, or places of dignity and trust) to do those things
which he doubts to be lawful and warrantable by the Word of God, and then this
weak Believer (...) is condemned in Conscience (not absolutely damned, as some
understand the use of that ambiguous word in the translation) the reason added
is demonstration enough, because whatever is not of Faith is sin, and all sin
condemns by a concomitant or subsequent guilt attending. 2. When the actions of
the strong, lawful in his performance of them, is a confirmation of the weak in
his unlawful practice of the same thing, as in the Apostles instance of eating
things sacrificed to Idols: The strong eats it as other meat, without any
conscience of, or respect to the Idol; but the weak is confirmed in his
idolatrous or superstitious use of it, 1 Cor. 8.4. and the same thing being but
an indifferent lawful action to one; is Superstition or Idolatry to the other,
eating with some respect to the Idol, or with a Conscience checking upon that
consideration; and so their Conscience being weak is defiled ( i. e. becomes
accusing of sin, and therefore polluted with guilt, Heb. 10.12.) but meat
commends us not to God, v. 8. i. e. an indifferent thing in it self, we are
never the worse for it, provided no sinful circumstances do attend it; but take
heed lest your meat ( i. e. an indifferent thing) and your liberty in the use
of it, become not a scandal, i. e. an occasion of sin to the weak: For if any
that is weak see thee which have knowledge sit at meat in an Idol-temple, (and
think that thy carriage be with some civil or religious respect) shall not such
a man's Conscience be emboldened? ((...)) or edified? i. e. confirmed in his
Judgment and practice in eating such things. If he that is weak see thee use
an indifferent action (such as bowing, kneeling, etc.) in the service of
Idolatry or Superstition, will it not embolden him to the like practices? i. e.
either encourage him to venture on a practice which he was afraid before was
sin, or embolden him confidently to persevere in that practice which he went on
in before with a doubting or scrupling Conscience; so that by thy knowledge (
i. e. by the occasion or example of it) shall thy weak Brother perish, so far
as he is concerned in thy actions, (for whom Christ died) and so far as thou
know, he being fallen into, or confirmed in sin by thy means; and when ye
sin so against the Brethren, and wound their weak Consciences, you sin against
Christ. The Apostle enlarges further and very plainly upon this point, 1 Cor.
10.23. to the 9th, etc. which I shall not detain the reader upon, but only
refer him to distinct reading and consideration of the Text; and shall conclude
this point with that eminent place of John the Apostle, 1 Epist. chapter 2.10. He
that loves his Brother abides in the Light, ( i. e. the truth of the Gospel)
and there is no occasion of Stumbling (the word is (...)) in him; that is, no
active scandal, i. e. he gives no occasion of falling unto his Brother; and
there is no passive scandal, he is so far enlightened and informed in the truth,
that he does not easily take offense at his Brothers actions, so as to start
from the truth, or walk in any ways of sin or error; neither is he soon
offended and prejudiced at his Brothers person or profession, as to start from
the communion of either. But he that hates his Brother (i. e. has little
regard to the welfare of his Brothers Soul) is in darkness, and walks in
darkness, and knows not whither he goes, because darkness has blinded his
Eyes; Ergo, will both stumble and fall, and lay Stumbling Blocks and Scandals
in the way of others, that they may fall also.

CHAP. IX. Of Necessities and Indifferences.
1. IN the next place, it will follow to consider the things wherein the
Consciences of the strong and weak are mostly concerned, about the doing or not
doing of which, Scandals and Offenses do arise amongst Christians; and those
are things necessary and indifferent.

2. The things wherein Conscience is bound to doing or avoiding by some Law,
are things necessary; and if by Christ's Law, they are religiously necessary;
if by Man's Law, they are civilly necessary; if by the Law of Nature, then
naturally necessary: all things whatever antecedaneous to a Law, are in a
possibility to necessity or indifferency; those things that are doubted of,
(supposing them under a Law, or relating to it) not appearing to us whether
necessary or indifferent, are scruples; and these are not so much in the nature
of the thing, as in Conscience.

3. An indifferent thing is generally known by this description, Est medium
quod ita se habet ad duo extrema, ut non magis ad unum quam ad alterum
inclinat: It Is a middle thing that respects both extremes alike: as that which
is indifferent in respect of Morality, (...), Sine discrimine aut differentia^,
b. e. ratione boni and mali determinati ul^a lege.
it is in it self neither morally good, nor morally evil; it is as it were the
middle of a Line that leaves so much on both sides, Est bonum and malum
physicum morale civil.
that it is equally separated from both, in that as it is not the one, so it is
not the other; and though good and evil are properly opposita per se sine ullo
medio, vel adversa, (for there is nothing in the world but is good or evil in
some respect or other) but because moral or civil good or evil is additional
after the determinations of Nature, in genere suo, by some further Law: there
are some things or actions not concerned in the said Laws, which things
therefore can have no moral or civil goodness or evil in them, but remain
adiaphorus; and so in this consideration necessary, good, and evil, and
indifferent, are disparata, and not contraria; those things or actions which
directly fall under the Law by positive Command or Prohibition, are said to be
absolute good and evil, though it is but secundum quid, viz. properly in
relation to the Law; and those things or actions which are not directly
concerned in the Law, but only circumstantially, (indifferent in themselves)
those are relatively necessary, and respectively only good or evil.

4. Though Good, and Evil, and Indifferent, are disparata, yet Necessary and
Indifferent are adversa, and there is no medium betwixt them; for all things in
the world are or may be ranked under these two Heads, in respect of any Law of
God or man whatsoever: For either they are concerned in the Law, or not; if
they be concerned, they receive a relative constituted good or evil from the
said Law; if not concerned as to Command or Prohibition, they remain
indifferent, and their indifferency also must be respective, as to this or that
Law; for a thing may be indifferent and unconcerned as to one Law, when it is
concerned in and made necessary by another Law.

5. By Laws of Nature in distinction from morality, I understand more than
meram artem Physicam; here must be understood the rules of all Arts, which are
as so many Laws to direct every thing, in its various respects, unto its right
end; and all conformities and agreement of the things, or respects to the said
rules in (...), is good; and all Irregularities and Falsities are evil: though
bonum and malum is most proper in the moral acceptance, yet we must allow it
to be in other Arts besides Divinity; in Logic there is good and evil
consequence, reasoning, etc. verum and bomem, though they be morally
contra-distinct, yet they are in Logic convertible terms; so there is the
(...) of every Art, which is its veritas leading to its right end, and this is
the bonitas thereof. There is also a necessity in them, and Necessarium, quando
semper verum est, nec falsum esse potest, when the Axiom affirmed is always
true, and never can be false; to this is opposed a contingency, which indeed is
a medium between Truth and Falsehood, as Indifferency is between Good and Evil,
and is an Axiomatical indifferency properly, as the other is moral; and those
things that are contingent are indifferently concerned in the rules of Art to
Truth or Falsehood. Sic vera sunt ut aliquando falsa esse possunt, and sic falsa
ut aliquando vera esse possunt.

6. All Necessities respecting Conscience and religious practice, are moral,
and have their good and evil determined by a moral Law; and these are of two
sorts, Absolute, or Relative; Absolute, when the principal substance of the
thing or action is determined as to good or evil, the moral Law looks directly
upon it; the duty is called perfectum officium, (...), a perfect or absolute
throughout Duty. A Relative necessity is, when an indifferent thing (in itself)
by a circumstantial respect to another thing, falls under some Law, and becomes
good by way of expediency, or evil by way of non-expediency; it is called
commune, (...), or medium off cium, quod cur factum sit ratio probabilis reddi
potest, Cic. off. (...), 1 Cor. 10.23. an indifferency may become a necessity
per accidens, pro hic and nunc, and this is an expediency, or non-expediency,
which cannot be properly a medium between a necessary thing and indifferent,
because every moral expediency is necessary in genere boni moralis, pro hic and
nunc, though not pro semper and ubique.

7. Things have a Necessity of nature in them, when they are so ordained of God
the Creator of all things, that they should be, or do this or that to the
completing their being or welbeing, in order to the accomplishment of that end
for which he first introduced them; and his command unto them (the proper
catholic rule of every art) so to be and do, is the law of nature which all
natural agents under the conduct of respective Arts and Sciences do receive,
viz. what they should be, what they should do, and to what end they should
tend; all which are undispensable (rebus secundum natucam aut regulas artis,
positis) and unalterable by any but God alone; and they are his Ordinances for
the rule of Sun, Moon, and Stars, etc. given by God, and cannot depart from
before him, Jer. 31.35, 36. (...) if these Statutes be removed from before me;
hence all Creatures and things should according to their first constitution,
have kept their regular Motions to the best ends Supreme and Subordinate; and
so all good, though since the breaking in of the Curse upon the Creature for
man's moral transgression, there is entered thousands of natural evils into the
world, so that nature has swerved from its primitive course in many things,
and run in the crooked channels of disorder and confusion. Hence natural
indifferencies are such natural Actions, Modes, and Tendencies of the created
beings, which may be or not be without any prejudice to the common course of
nature, without any destruction to the esse, been esse, or last end of the
Creature. As a man may be Tall, or Short, Fat, or Lean; of a fair or black
Complexion: So a Sheep, black, or white. It may Rain or be fair Weather on this
or that day. The fuel of Fire may be Hay, Straw, Coal, or Wood: The Eye may
look on this or that Object: The Understanding contemplate this or that truth:
The Will choose this or that good; and infinite other varieties that nature
sports itself in, without any distraction, or so much as wrong to the
necessities of nature, or breach of any of the Laws or Rules thereof.

8. Things or Actions are politically necessary, or indifferent, when they
become necessary by subjection to some Law of Polity, or indifferent by being
void of limitation by that Law. Political Necessities and Indifferences are
either Civil or Ecclesiastical: Civilly necessary are either when the things or
actions themselves have an innate tendency to the order of civil Societies, or
the exercise of distributive or commutative justice, flowing from the influence
of the moral Law diffusing itself through all natural Consciences, and becoming
the very Veins and Sinews of Societies; or when according to the discretion or
prudential arbitrament of the civil Magistrate (agreeing to the constitution of
the Government) a civil Law is enacted, where it binds, is civilly necessary,
and that which it leaves unbound is civilly indifferent, and neither good nor
evil in respect of that Law. Unto this Head may be referred Oeconomical
necessities and indifferences, of which we may have some such analogical
understanding which I shall not now stay upon.

9. Some things and actions fall under a spiritual political consideration, and
are Ecclesiastical, pertaining to instituted Worshp, to the Government and
Discipline of Christ's Body-politick, which is his Church, and these are
Levitical or Evangelical. Levitically necessary, where such things which were
commanded by the Ceremonial Law, the revealed Will of God for the order and
manner of his instituted worship in the Jewish Church under the Pedagogy of
Moses. Levitically indifferent, where those things that were left undetermined
by the ceremonial Law, might be lawfully done or not be done according to
discretion.

10. Things or actions Evangelically Ecclesiastical are also necessary or
indifferent. Necessary, when they have a determination of political good or
evil laid on them by the Law of Christ, for the management of the affairs of
his Church under the Gospel. Things in respect to the Church-constitutions are
also indifferent, when they are not declared by the Law of Christ to be of any
necessary concernment to the being or well-being of the Ecclesiastical Polity.
All Ecclesiastical Institutions are founded on the Moral Law, but are
distinguished from the Moral Precepts by the name of Instituted Worship;
because God ordained the Moral Law to be a rule of Obedience under all the ages
of his Church; but Christ has reserved to himself the prerogative of altering
instituted Worship at his pleasure, as it shall appear to his wisdom to be more
agreeable to those several ages and great ends that he designs the attaining
of, by the Economy of his Church Militant in the world; and the great and
principal change that he thought good to make, was when he changed his
Church Discipline from Oeconomical to National, and from National in one
Nation, to particular Congregations in all Nations whither his Gospel should be
dispersed. This last change of instituted Worship we are under, and it stands
constituted by the Laws of his own promulgation by himself immediately when
here on earth, and by his Apostles after his Ascension inspired with his
Spirit, extraordinarily commissionated by his Authority. From under this last
Ecclesiastical Constitution we must not, we dare not start till his second
coming, the date of its continuance being fixed by himself.

CHAP. X. Some plain Propositions concerning things Necessary and Indifferent.
1. HAving thus briefly described and unfolded all sorts of Necessities and
Indifferences requisite to our purpose, and ranked them to several Heads, that
we might not be mistaken in the following Discourse when we speak of any of
them distinct from the other; We judge it now convenient in the first place,
before we come to argue the matter in controversy, to lay down a few general
Propositions to the intelligent Reader, whereby the nature of these things will
further and more clearly appear.

1. No created beings or actions had any thing of moral necessity or
indifferency antecedent to a moral Law: for where there is no Law, things
cannot respect it as good or evil; and if the two extremes cannot be without a
Law, neither can the middle be in respect to the said Law; and if some things
are not made morally good or evil by commanding or forbidding, other things
cannot be morally indifferent as to good or evil.

2. Though things have no indifferency antecedaneous to a Law, and without
respect thereto, yet they have a possibility of necessary goodness, evil, or
indifferency; and those things that are good or evil by one Law, may be left
indifferent by another, and vice versa.

3. The same Law that ordains things or actions necessarily good or evil, does
exclusive and implicit determine things indifferent in reference to its self;
for such things as are neither commanded or forbidden, are neither good or
evil, and therefore may be done or not done without sin, being indifferent.

4. There is none can loose or absolve from a binding Law, but he that has the
Legislative power, or one superior to him; men may by alteration of Statutes,
change their necessities into indifferences, and vice versa; or God by his
supremacy may do this in man's Laws, but no man can abolish God's Laws, or make
new ones of the same kind by changing things that he has left indifferent
into necessities, it is his Prerogative only.

5. All appearances of things to be what they really are not, by the several
respects they have to the Law they are under, are errors and hallucinations of
the Understanding; for good sometimes appears evil, and evil good; necessary
things indifferent, and indifferent things necessary: And though our walking
must be and can be but according to the illumination of our Understanding, yet
does not our Judgment or Consciences alter the true respect that things have
in themselves.

6. All religious actions, as such, practically circumstantiated, whether moral
or ceremonial, are good or evil, and cannot be called indifferent, unless in an
abstract consideration from all religious respects.

7. Absolute good and evil are not of the same extent with lawful and unlawful;
for an indifferent action is lawful which has no determination by a Law to
good or evil, because not only the Precept, but even the permission of the Law
makes a licitum, but it is only the Prohibition that makes it unlawful. Hence
indifferent things are not media inter Licita and illicita, for they are
contradicentia, and indifferent things are licita, and upon that account
referred to the Law, and confirms that indifferent things cannot be said to be
so but in reference to some Law, lawfulness being an essential property of an
indifferent thing.

8. To say that an indifferent thing is a mean between commanded and forbidden,
is all one as to say it is a mean between good and evil; for there is nothing
good or evil, but by virtue of something carrying the force of a Law in it,
that by a Command or Prohibition puts the nature of good or evil upon it
correspondent to the said Law: As the Law of the Creation makes things
naturally good or evil, the Law moral makes them morally so, etc. and that
which is prohibited as not answering the ends of the one or other, is
necessarily evil. That which is commanded as answering the ends, and requisite,
is good necessarily. That which in itself may or may not answer, and is not
absolutely commanded or forbidden, is neither good nor evil, (in respect of
that Law, though it may be in respect of another) and therefore indifferent.

CHAP. XI. Concerning Christian Liberty.
1. UPon the true stating of Necessities and Indifferences depends the right
understanding of Christian Liberty: concerning the genuine meaning and extent
thereof, it is needful that something be subjoyned.

That there is such a thing as Christian Liberty, many places in the New
Testament will evince: we shall briefly explain how the word (...) is taken. 1.
For freedom from the impurities of sin, because the ways of sin are bondage; so
the Word of God directing to holiness, is called the Law of Liberty, Jam. 1.25.
chapter 2.12. 2. Sometimes taken for Liberty or freedom from the Curse due to sin,
or lying upon the Creature for it in its effects, Romans 8.21. 3. It Is taken for
Freedom from the darkness of, and bondage to the Mosaical Vail of Ceremonies, 1
Cor. 3.17. 4. For a free use of indifferent things (...), 2 Cor. 3.17. Gal.
2.4. In all places I find Liberty has a respect to some Law whereby men are
bound either under duty, or unto punishment. We are freed from the punishment
of the moral Law by Christ, but not from duties required by it, Gal. 5.1. It is
a freedom purchased for us, Christ having satisfied the Law in respect of (...)
1. It Is taken for a Liberty from sins dominion, which is a transgression of the
Law, Romans 6.18, 22. Joh. 8.32. 2. It Is opposed to the bondage of expectation of
Justification by the works of the Law, Gal. 4.22, to the 30. Romans 7.3. Now
Christian Liberty as it respects indifferent things, it flows from the Law of
Christ two ways, either by way of release from the bondage of some Law, by the
repeal of it, as of the Ceremonial Law, which consisted in many observations of
Days, Meats, Habits, and many Rites and Ceremonies, and is liberatio; or by
allowing us and entrusting us with a Latitude in the use of many things,
notwithstanding all supervening Laws and impositions, and therefore this is
that Liberty which we are commanded by Christ to maintain, Gal. 5.1, 2, 3. we
are to take heed that we be not entangled again in the Yoke of bondage; that
place is comprehensive of all the Liberty purchased for us by Christ, in
respect of the moral and all ceremonial Laws; and so far as we have a Liberty
by Gospel-charter, we are to stand fast in it, avoiding all re-intanglements of
Conscience by the Children of men, that spy out our lawful Liberties, and would
deprive us of them; Ye are bought with a price, be ye not the servants of men,
1 Cor. 7.23. which place must be understood in religious service, such as is
done in obedience to the immediate commands of Christ, as appears v. 22, and
24. for Christ does not prohibit service to men in Domestic and Civil affairs,
but a flavery to the wills of men in the matters of Religion and instituted
Worship; be ye not time-servers or men-servers: So that by Christ's Law we are
bound to refuse homage to men's Usurpations in matters of Religion.

2. As what Christ's Law to us determines (for our practice) to good and evil
in all things and actions comprehended under that Law is definite; so what he
has not there determined some way or other, either explicitly or implicitly,
is indefinite, and a Christian has therein his Liberty to do or to forbear
without sin, as in such matters as relate to religious observations in Meats,
Drinks, Days, and Circumstances attending instituted Worship, not commanded or
forbidden by Christ, but are left by Christ to our Liberty to do or not to do
by the judgment of discretion, as it has most tendency to the glory of God
and edification of our selves and others: As for example; to sit or stand in
hearing the Word, to kneel or stand, or lie prostrate in Prayer; for a man to
turn his face to the East or West, or wear this or that Color in the Worship
of God, etc. thousands of instances may be given. We speak not here of natural,
civil, or moral Liberty; there is no doubt but a Christian as a man may claim as
much of that as another, and has as much Law-obligation as to precepts of
practice; but the matter under debate is what the Evangelical Liberty of a
Christian is in the transaction of the affairs of Christ's Kingdom.

3. A Christian's Liberty is not a boundless and lawless Liberty in those
things wherein he is most free, but has its special limits and bounds set unto
it by Christ, in certain Rules and Precepts generally prescribed by him, to
which all his actions may be reduced, either as to the substance of them, and
so fall directly under that Law; or to the general circumstances, and so are
subject more remotely. Hence there are no actions that a Christian does of
religious concernment, that are completely indifferent, but has aliquatenus
rationem boni aut mali.

4. The Spirit of God (if I mistake not) sets a double bound to Christian
Liberty, viz. Moral and Evangelical. 1. Moral, in that Christ's Law allows none
the liberty of committing moral transgressions; it owns, ratifies, and confirms
all moral Precepts, Prohibitions, or Permissions, and none may use Christian
Liberty as occasion of licentiousness, Gal. 5.13. 1 Pet. 2.16. 2. The
Evangelical bound to Liberty in matters left by Christ indifferent, is
Expediency, by which a thing that is substantially indifferent may be
relatively and circumstantially necessary, pro hic and nunc, and becomes bonum
aut malum contingens aut respectivum, and that is medium officium, (...), when
a thing lawful in itself becomes unlawful: the rule is plain, 1 Cor. 10.23, 28,
29. therefore, 1. All actions, and therefore indifferent, must be directed to
the great and general moral end of Gods Glory, 1 Cor. 10.31. Romans 14.6. a man
may eat or drink, or wear this or that thing indifferently, so that it be to
God's glory; keep a day, or not keep it; choose this or that time to pray in for
the same ends. And hence Election is to be made of indifferencies according to
their more or less tendency or aptness to accomplish that great end. 2. A
second end, but subordinate, in expediency to be respected, is edification of
our selves or others, 1 Cor. 10.23. and that which respects neither of these
ends with at least some tendency, is religiously vain, as wearing one color
more than another religiously in the worship of God, and in one part of worship
more than another; what does this conduce to edification, by which way, if any,
it should be sublimed to God's glory? and to bring vain oblations to God in his
worship, is abominable to him in all ages of the Church.

5. God has not by Laws determined particularly all the cases of a Christians
Conversation, but left many to the management of the judgment of discretion by
the rules of expediency, which is a skill of discerning between good and evil,
Heb. 5.12. and between good and better. Discretion is the highest pitch of
practical Judgment, which although it be guided by general rules for attaining
the great end, yet it takes its particular measures very much from former
experiences, and the sight of various circumstances and occurrences, and
accordingly it judges what may be more or less expedient in all actions; and
though in themselves they are indifferently referrable this way or that way,
yet by that time they are reduced into practice by a Christian's spiritual
Reason and Discretion, acting from senses exercised, Heb. 5.12. there is
manifest good or evil at least relative discovered in them, or at least put
upon them by the said general ends and rules of walking.

6. As strength appears most in the management of a man's self according to the
rules and observances of discretion, so weakness in the failure hereof is most
discoverable; and by an accumulation of these little failures, a Christian does
exceedingly miscarry, and Profession becomes very much disparaged.

7. Hence indifferent actions may become offending, grieving, and scandalizing
unto others, by reason of some external accident, temporal or local respect,
and so may be unlawful by the rules of expediency; for that which certainly is
not expedient, is unlawful, though degrees are to be admitted in this case.

8. As the scandalizing others is a mischief that makes an indifferent action
unexpedient, so also the betraying our own Liberty. Paul in his acting kept a
watchful eye here: when he found that some designed by an indifferent thing to
bring him into bondage, he gave not the least place to them, as in the matter
of the Circumcision of Titus, Gal. 2.3, 4. We are to stand fast in our Liberty,
and not to be enthralled in bondage, though it be but by the doing an action in
itself adiaphorous.

9. Whatever is not of Faith is sin, and the necessity of every action or
forbearance must appear to every man's Conscience, that he may do or forbear
believingly in all religious concernments; therefore all absolute necessities
must be bound on his Conscience by the knowledge of some Law positively
commanding or forbidding. And all relative necessities (i. e. indifferencies
circumstantial) must arrive at Conscience with their Expediencies, which must
be the balance of Election in things equally good in themselves; their
comparative goodness, must be respective, or evil must make some appearance to
the judgment of discretion; and a Christians freedom in the exercise of the
said judgment according to the several cases he meets withal, is his Liberty,
which Christ has purchased, and a Christian cannot be deprived of jure by any
Exotic Law.

10. Where things are absolutely indifferent, and there is no apparent
respective difference between adiaphorous things, it is a Christians liberty to
take the one or the other, he sins not against any rules of Expedience in
taking either; for both are lawful and expedient enough: neither do I know why
any additional Law should make him a Transgressor in choosing or refusing of
either in matters of Religion; for an action or thing may be equally lawful and
expedient morally, which for some other reasons may not, arising from Nature,
his own inclinations, or some other small attending circumstances, of which it
may not be fit to give an account to any humane Authority as the Transgressor
of any Law.

11. As particular persons by the rules of Expediency may judge of things
indifferent to prefer one before another according to their respect, to know
precepts, or to choose one before another arbitrarily, where there is no
difference in compared respects: So particular Churches and Congregations have
the liberty of using their judgment of discretion in matters of indifferency,
and are to walk by rules of Expediency, for Time, Place, and external
Accommodations, but cannot make any binding Law to themselves or others;
because those things are alterable in their circumstances, and therefore cannot
be determined but pro hic and nunc, and must be liable still to no other
judgment than that of Discretion: Those things that Christ has left under it,
cannot by humane Laws be removed from it; therefore indifferent things may be
agreed on by common consent in Congregations, or by the Officers thereof,
according as the expediency or convenience appears unto them, and for so long,
and no longer. Hence they cannot undergo the Title or Denomination of a Law,
but only of prudential Rules, which have no binding reason for observation,
but the continuance of the agreeing circumstances; as it may be judged most
convenient by the Church to assemble at such an hour, so long as the days are
of such a length; but when that circumstance alters, then it may be more
convenient at another. Many such instances may be given, and no Church can walk
comfortably as long as any Authority undertakes to prohibit them of this
liberty of their Prudentials in all such matters of circumstance and alterable
appendixes to the worship of God.

CHAP. XII. Wherein is handled the first Question about things Indifferent.
1. THe first Question that seems to offer itself to be so, this: Whether a
religious Gospel-Indifferency cease to be so, when any thing is positively
and certainly determined as to its practice by humane Authority? Explic. By
religious Gospel-Indifferency, I understand, as beforementioned, any thing or
action which circumstantially adheres to the worship of God, and may be used or
omitted, or altered, according to the judgment of discretion, without any
transgression of a Law of Christ. Again, this we acknowledge, that a thing may
be determined as to Expediency by a Society or lawful Authority, but not
imposed as a standing and binding Law; but being commended by the judgments of
many concurring, conscientiously studious of the mind and will of Christ, it
carries the more force along with it, to persuade us at least to present
acting, till by further and greater illumination we be otherwise inclined. Nay
if any thing be determined by those that are in Authority, and proposed as
their judgment according to their light received, not Magisterially, but
Demonstratively only, convincingly enough as to the Expediency, it carries
with it the force of a Law unto Conscience, (not of man, but of God, man being
a Candlestick only to hold forth that Light) and binds it to submit thereunto.
But otherwise, if men in authority undertake to make a Law that a thing (in
itself by Christ's Law left indifferent, i. e. to Christian discretion to do or
omit) shall become an absolute necessity, or an expedient necessity, and
according to their will and opinion bind Inferiors to the constant practice
of this by a penalty: We affirm that a religious Gospel-Indifferency
(notwithstanding all humane authoritative determination changing it into a
necessity) keeps its pristine indifferency, and remains the same to a
Christians Conscience and practice. The proof of this Assertion follows.

2. Argum. 1. That power that can change Gospel-indifferencies into
Gospel-necessities, can also change Gospel-necessities into
Gospel-indifferencies; but no humane Authority can do the latter, Ergo, not the
former. The Assumption will not be denied by any Protestant, it being a
presumption of the highest nature for humane authority to pretend to dispense
with or null any of the manifest Laws of Christ. The Major is also evident,
because it must be an Authority of the same kind to make and null a Law of the
same kind. If it be said a humane authority may make a Gospel-indifferency
necessary, genere civili, the Answer falls far short; for we speak of Laws of
the same kind, having equal force upon the Conscience: for a Civil Legislative
power can as well null any Law of a civil nature only, as it can make it. So
if Man could make Moral Laws, he might as well null those which he has made,
or dispense with them at pleasure, as make new. We must always allow a
Sovereign Prerogative to Supreme Lawgivers in any kind, as to promulgate, so
to abrogate or dispense with their own Laws at pleasure: And if it be said that
those Laws that man makes concerning the use of indifferent things necessarily
in the worship of Christ, are civil only, being only for decency, splendour,
etc. I reply, that it cannot be so in the nature of them; for it is the respect
and end of a thing that gives it its specifical denomination, when it has none
such absolutely considered: that which respects and aims at the Gospel Worship
of Christ, or pretends so to do, is or should be a part of Gospel Worship; as
kneeling is an indifferent gesture; a man may kneel when he does other things
besides acts of Worship; or according to the Law of Christ, he may kneel, or
stand, or use another posture in Worship: but when this or that gesture is
applied to Worship, it is religious by its Respect, Use, and Application, but
still of an indifferent nature under the Laws of Christ, till by some binding
Law the Conscience becomes bound up to the use of it in this or that part of
Worship. Now he that undertakes to bind Conscience here, undertakes to make a
Law for Christ, and to entrench upon the Prerogative of Christ; and that such
that make such Laws do claim such a power, is manifest, because they make
obedience unto such Laws necessary by virtue of a Law of Christ: Let every Soul
be subject to the higher power.

3. Argum. 2. If the nature of an Evangelical Indifferency may be changed jure
into an Evangelical Necessity, by any power besides Christ's, then it must be
because it is Evangelically evil, that this or that should remain indifferent
which Christ has left so, or at least better for the honor of Christ and good
of his Church, that it should become a necessity (i. e. a commanded good, or
prohibited evil) than indifferent, to be disposed by the discretion of
particular Churches or Christians; but there is no true Evangelical
Indifferency that has such a reason for the change of it into a necessity;
Ergo, the reason of the Consequence is this, because whatever is altered by a
Law, is supposed to be altered from worse to better; and what is altered by a
Law for Christ, is or should be made more for the honor of Christ, and
therefore far better than it was before; but it cannot be supposed that any
thing that this wise Lawgiver left in indifferency to practice or omit
according to the judgment of discretion, should be more for his honor if it
were converted into a necessity by a Law; for to say so, would be a high
impeachment of the wisdom of Christ, as it is of a King and Parliament, when
any shall presume to say they have not made such Laws as are needful to be
made, and have left the Subject under a greater liberty than is for the good of
the Commonweal, or honor of the King. To say so therefore is to make a double
reflection on Christ: First, that his Laws are defective, for the accomplishment
of those ends for which they were established, and that the liberty granted by
Christ unto his Members in indifferent things, has too great a latitude to be
consistent with that exact Gospel Worship which we should honor him by. And if
it be said, that which Christ has left Evangelically indifferent may be
unlawful in respect of other Laws, we say that all the true jus of other Laws
must be founded on Christ's; and his is precedaneous to them, and therefore as
in authority or practice it must take place before them. Moreover, we say, that
Christ has not so ill established Christian Liberty, as that thereby we are
licensed to violate any natural or civil bonds.

4. Argum. 3. That which by Christ's Authority has left a Character impressed
on Conscience, cannot by any authority be abrogated without removal of the said
Character; but as the Laws, so the Liberty by Gospel-Charter granted by Christ,
has left such a Character impressed indelibly on Conscience, as cannot be
removed by any other Authority, therefore Christian Liberty cannot be
abrogated, etc. Ergo, a religious Gospel-indifferency cannot be taken away or
cease by the determination of mere humane Laws, i. e. humane Laws that Christ
never allowed man to make.

The Major is evident, in that the revealed will of Christ when it shines into
the Heart, fixes an indelible Character upon Conscience for positive
obedience, and also as to indifferent things; for he that knows not one by the
Law, knows not the other, nor can never tell when he sins and when he does not;
and if any other could interpose and make a Law to bind Conscience sub reatu
by new Laws, or release it by new Liberties, either to make additional
Characters, or delete Christ's, Christian Religion would thereby become no
other than an undigested heap of uncertainties and confusions. It Is true,
Characters are sometimes removed from Conscience, as in case of Justification
of a sinner by Faith, Romans 8. So in case of an erring Conscience (that
supposes this to be his duty which is not, and that to be indifferent which is
necessary) all error when entertained lays hold on Conscience, Sub pretextu
authoritatis Christi, under pretense of Christ's Authority, and so do all
humane usurping Laws when they insinuate themselves into Conscience; and when
by a farther informing light the Error is expelled from the Judgment and
Conscience, the Authority of Christ still remains expelling the Error, which
no humane Authority could do, and confirming the Conscience in the truth,
maugre all the opposition of any humane power: so that where Christ's Laws has
once prevailed so far as to fix his Authority there, it was never known (that
whatever men's external practices or conformities were) that ever any humane
Power could blot out the Characters of Christ's Prerogative, and fix another
Supremacy there; for that is but a vain Law in religious things, that cannot
bind the Conscience under guilt in case of transgression: I shall never
conscienciously observe that for my duty, the omission of which does not make
me conscious of a Transgression. As to the Minor, that the liberty granted by
Christ leaves a Character on Conscience as well as the Laws of Christ, is
manifest, 1. Because Laws are the bounds of Liberty, and one must be known and
acted as well as the other, as has been said before. 2. Because their liberty
is not the will of Christ permissive only, but in some measure positive, i. e.
so far as that Christians should walk in it, he having but two paths to walk
in, either of positively directed obedience, or of Liberty under the judgment
of discretion regulated by the rules of Expediency; for either in matters of
instituted Worship Christ has by a manifestation of his will, limited our
Actions, or has left Churches and Christians in the Equilibrio of indifferency
to poise themselves according to Conscience-Light, as to respective
differencies by discretion, and where there is an equality to choose pro
arbitrio: Again, our assurance is not only negative, but positive, that it is
Christ's will that we should maintain our liberty in Religious things, stand
fast in that liberty, etc. Neither can any take it away without intruding on
Conscience, and entrenching on his Prerogative, which for us to yield to were
to betray his Crown and Scepter.

5. Argum. 4. Hence if such a Law be made, it ought not to be made, and ergo
the thing retains its pristine nature. That Law which directly puts a Christian
on a necessity of sinning in obeying it, ought not to be made; but a Law that
changes Evangelical indifferencies into necessities, does directly put a
Christian on a necessity of sinning if he obeys; Ergo, it ought not to be made.
That the Major may be universal, I add, (directly) because many good Laws are
occasions of sinning indirectly; but when the Law requires such obedience which
in the very substance of it is sin, because the obedience directly aimed at is
the formal reason of the Law, such a Law must needs be sinful. The Minor does
thus appear; because such a Law binds a man up in obedience to it in one part
of the indifferency, whereas that part of the indifferency, according to
Christ's rules of expediency, may be unlawful to be done, and then the humane
Law and the said Gospel-rules contradict one another, Expediencies altering
daily as to attending circumstances; at some times it is lawful to do that thing
which at another is more agreeable to the honor of Christ, and the good of
others to avoid. As for Example: the Apostle reckons eating this or that sort
of meat sold in the Shambles as an indifferent thing, if I make no question
whether it be Jewishly unclean, or Heathenishly sacrificed to Idols, 1 Cor.
10.25, 27. but if I am enforced by Law to eat this or that sort of meat in the
Shambles which is sacrificed to Idols, I am necessitated to sin, 1. I offend my
Brother that makes this Law, confirming him in sin, for the sake of whose
Conscience I ought by the Apostles rule to forbear this act, and therefore sin
against all such as idolatrously eat this sacrificed meat: For what can tell me
more plainly than the Law, that this or that meat by its attending
circumstances is sacrificed to Idols? Again, to hear the Word of God in this or
that public place, is an indifferency; to hear it to my edification as near as
possible, is the Precept of Christ: but if I am bound by a humane Law to hear
always in my own Parish Church, and thereby debarred of my liberty of hearing
there where I can most profit; and whereas the Parish-minister is ignorant,
profane, or erroneous, whom to hear constantly must needs be sin to me, I am
certainly by this Law put upon a necessity of sinning in yielding active
obedience unto it.

6. Argum. 5. That Indifferencies of a Gospel-nature cannot be altered from
their nature by any subsequent Law of man, thus appears. To change religious
Indifferencies into Necessities, is to make a Law for Christ's Worship that
Christ never made, nor gave any man power to make; but none may make a Law for
the Worship of Christ which he never made, nor empowered any to make; Ergo, the
Major is without doubt: if the indifferency confessed be in the worship of God,
then when it is by any Law made necessary, it is still in the worship of God, and
being appointed so by a Law, becomes instituted Worship: by a Law which Christ
never made. The Minor appears, in that none may do so, i. e. institute Worship
or circumstances of Worship by a Law that is not Christ's. 1. It Is his
Prerogative to exercise a Legislative power in his Church. 2. Christ knows
only how he will be worshipped, and it must be founded on his revealed will,
which is our Law. 3. None might add to his Laws under the Old Testament, Deuteronomy.
4.1, 2. much less under the New, where there is less of Ceremony and
Circumstances, Rev.

CHAP. XIII. Of the power of the Church in matters indifferent.
1. WHen we come to discuss the power of the Church, it is very requisite to
unfold the meaning of the word Church, there being no word under which lies
more Amphibology. Many understand a Church a material building, or place of
meeting for the worship of God, being consecrated and set apart for that use:
and for the Propriety and Antiquity of this usage and acceptance of Ecclesia,
learned Mr. Mead very much contends. We shall not stay upon this sense, because
none that will oppose us in the present controversy will insist upon this
sense so far as to say that the Legislative Power is to be found here.

A Church is also in other senses spoken of: Some say, every Nation where
Christian Religion is owned by ruling Authority, and by the generality of the
people professed, is a Church. Some call a Province a Church, a Diocese a
Church, a Parish a Church; so that it is more or less extended, and
comprehensive; and it is usually the sense of Protestants that assert a Churches
Legislative Authority in matters indifferent. Others say there is no national
Churches under the Gospel, though there be Churches in every Nation; and that
properly there are no particular Churches, but such who freely and voluntarily
combine together in bonds of Society for the worshipping of God according to
his revealed will, and walk accordingly. Various are the Sentiments and
Disputes about a Church and the nature of it, the consideration of which will
not be so much our concern at this time.

But there is another way of the usage of Church, wherein there is greater
ambiguity, which is very much to the matter in hand that we rightly understand
it, viz, the emphatical use of the word, The Church; so many men's Writings and
Argumentations being filled and confounded with it now a days, that who can
tell what they mean by The Church? The Romanists say, the Church has
determined this or that; and when we enquire what that Church is, they say the
Catholic Church, which being rightly understood, is the true meaning of the
Church according to that rule, Aequivocum per se positum, stat pro famosiori
significato, the Emphasis putting the word upon the highest and largest
signification; but when we come to a farther disquision of their meaning, they
tell us, the Church of Rome is the Church, and all others that dissent or
separate from the Church of Rome, are not the Church, or of the true Catholic
Church. Many Protestants also that speak of the Church, do not understand the
Church of Rome, or the Catholic Church, but some particular National Church,
viz. of France, England, Spain, etc. but when we enquire what this Church is,
they will tell us, it is the body of the Clergy, met together in a Convocation
by a few Representatives, to make Laws and Canons, and Ecclesiastical
Constitutions; the executive power whereof is in the Bishops and their Courts;
so that when these few men have made Laws, or exercise Ecclesiastical power,
compose Forms of Prayer, or establish Ceremonies at their pleasure, they say
the Church did it. These two sorts of men make use of this great commanding
Word the Church: and by this equivocal term, sounding so loud of an
uncontrollable Prerogative, they suggest unto poor well-meaning people on the
one side, that all that the Pope and the Church of Rome does; on the other
hand, that all that the Bishops and their Courts do, is done by the Church, as
if it were the whole Universal visible Church. It is not my present task here
to enquire what is the true meaning of the Church according to the
Scripture-acceptation, or the most true Logical notion thereof, whether it be a
Genus, or an Integrum, or totum Aggregativum. I shall only in the ensuing
Discourse apply my self to the most rectified sense of those that do defend the
Legislative Authority of the Church, and if they will not start from all right
Reason, and Rules of Logic, their sense must be, That the Catholic Militant
Church is The Church, (whether it may be Organical according to
Scripture-constitution, we argue not now) constituted of Subordinate parts,
first National, (or if you please Patriarchal before that of National) made up
of Provincial, Provincial of Diocesan, Diocesan of Parochial: and this ought to
be the sincere meaning of The Church, without prevarication in the sense of
those beforementioned.

2. Now the main thing in Debate between the Assertors of the Churches
Authority, and the Dissentors from it, is, Whether the Church may exercise such
a Power, as may change Indifferencies in the Worship of God, into Necessities?
Which we hold in the Negative, and say, That Christ has never granted such
Power unto the Church; he has granted an Executive Power unto his Church, but
never a Legislative Power; for all lawful power that any Church has, it must
have it from the Lord Jesus Christ, who has all power given unto him in Heaven
and Earth, and is the peculiar King of his Church, and has taken care for the
right Ordering and Governance of it in all things necessary as to Salvation, so
to Order and Discipline. And therefore what is not derived from the Lord Jesus
Christ, cannot be allowed to be lawfully exercised. It Is true, if it could be
showed where Christ ever granted it by his Charter to his Church, that in some
particular concerns she might exert a Legislative Power, the dispute would soon
be ended; but no such Charter could ever be shown.

3. If any such Power be granted by Christ, it must be granted to the Catholic
Church Militant, or to particular subordinate Churches; but it is not granted to
either of them, Ergo. Not to the Universal Church, because it is not organized
with Officers capable of a Catholic Rule; unless we will (upon false
supposition) allow the Popish Constitution, or something like it: As for
Ecumenical Councils, we see what insuperable difficulties have attended the
calling of them in all Ages, the just grounds of Exceptions in many things, of
the Determination of doubtful cases in Doctrine, and in almost all they have
done in their pretenses to a Law-making Power, in matters of Church Order and
Discipline. We have not any ground to believe that Christ has entrusted any
Officers of his Church with a Catholic Power since the Apostes days; and such
as have pretended to it, have always bin opposed by the purest and most
reformed part of the Church: and whatever men's attempts be, or may be, they
will never find a Catholic Ecclesiastcal Power here on Earth (without a new
manifestation of the Son of Man) which can exercise such a power of changing
Indifferencies into Necessities by a Law, wherein the Minds and Consciences of
particular Churches and Christians will or may rest satisfied, to submit unto,
in active Obedience. It Is as irrational to affirm, that Christ has committed
such a power to particular Churches, i. e. of making binding Laws Sub poena for
other Churches, or for their own Members, or Churches subordinate to them: not
for other coordinate Churches, will they say, Christ never gave coordinate
Churehes a coercive Power one over another, for then all would aspire to Rule,
and none be Ruled, for the power would belong to one as well as another. And if
any say (as the Papists do) that Christ has advanced one Church in Dignity and
Jurisdiction over all the rest, let them prove it to the conviction of any
intelligent Christian, and they will do more than the Papists have done, ever
since their pretense thereunto. But it will be pleaded by the Protestant party,
that Christ has entrusted every particular Church with this power, whereby it
may determine of indifferent things of her own practice. To which we answer, 1.
That Christ has given no Legislative Power to any Church. 2. A Judgment of
Discretion to walk by the Rules of Expediency, is no more to be denied to
particular Churches, than to particular Christians. But for all this Judgment
of Discretion, Indifferencies loose not their nature, (though they may be
necessary pro hic or nunc, in these or those circumstances) and are and must
stand capable of daily Alterations, as the case shall require; and a particular
Church may determine of this or that part of the Indifferency, as most
expedient; and so long as the Reasons thereof last, it may be in some measure
binding unto particular men's consciences; but the Reasons ceasing, the
continuance of the Canon in force in foro Ecclesiae, will bind no man's
Conscience; yea, every one will complain of it as a needless Imposition:
neither will any noble-minded Christian be a Servant to the Wills and Humors
of Man, or sell the Birthright (the Liberty that Christ has purchased) for
Pins and Points; neither is it a sufficient Rule for Discretion to walk by,
because the Church commands, and gives no Reason from the Law of Christ for it.
Besides, What Church has this power committed to them? a Parish, a Diocese, a
Province? No, 'twill not be granted of either of them. The great Assertors of
this Power will say, That it belongs to every National Church to make Laws in
matters of Indifferency, and so ordain their own Ceremonies. This is an
Assertion that introduces a whole herd of Absurdities with it; For first, What
is the great end pretended of such Laws, but the making of Uniformity in the
Church? What is more destructive to it than this, that every particular Church
should be Independent, and make Laws within themselves? whereas one will ordain
Ceremonies of one kind, and another of another, and there will be as many
sorts of Ceremonies as there are particular Churches: Is not this the great
exception against the Dissenters from Prelatical Churches, that the particular
Pastors of each Congregation set up for themselves, and Exercise Jurisdiction
within themselves, without dependence upon any Superior Power? There is no
avoiding it upon this Hypothesis, but National Churches must be reckoned
Independent Churches. 2. Did Christ commit any such power to any such Churches
on Earth? 3. Again, If National Churches may exert such a power, then they may
make binding Laws to all Subordinate Churches, viz. Provincial, Diocesan,
Parochial; and if so, then for this Reason, because they are more comprehensive
Churches, including the less: Then by the same Reason, the most comprehensive
Church, viz. the Catholic, should give Laws to the National, and for a greater
and more eminent end, viz. to promote an Uniformity Catholic; for if a
National Uniformity be so splendid, and so much conducing to the been esse of
the Church, then a Catholic much more.

4. Argum. 3. To make a Law contrary to the revealed Will of Christ, is
unlawful and Sinful; But for the Church by a Law to change Indifferencies into
Necessities, is to make a Law contrary to the revealed Will of Christ; Ergo.
The Major is granted: for these Lawmakers, say they, do not by their Laws
establish any thing contrary to the revealed Will of Christ; for has he any
where forbidden such Ceremonies? We proceed therefore to the proof of the
Minor. If all Necessities in the Worship of Christ be made so by Christ's Will
revealed, and all Indifferencies become such, because they are not restrained
under Christ's Law; then they are so, because Christ would have them to be so:
For a Christian can take no measure of Indifferencies, but by the Law of
Christ; for he cannot know them but by knowing the Law binding unto Necessities
by Commands or Prohibitions. So that Indifferencies are made so by the revealed
Will of Christ, as well as Necessities; and the same Law that makes the one
thing a Necessity, makes another an Indifferency; and Christ in his Wisdom
sees it best for his Gospel Church, that it should be so: and he that
undertakes to make these indifferent things necessary, enters upon a high
presumption, no less than the altering the moral Nature of a thing, constituted
by the revealed Will of Christ; and what is this less than making Laws contrary
to the said Will of Christ? That is only necessary in the Worship of Christ,
which he has made so, and that indifferent which he has left so by his Will;
an Indifference in his Worship is no other than something not necessary in his
Worship, for there is no medium, they are adversa. Therefore he that wills
something to be necessary, which Christ willed not necessary, does will
something contrary to the Will of Christ, by all Rules of Logic and right
Reason in the world. I know it will be answered, That they do not alter the
nature of the thing, it remains as it was; but this or that determination for
practice is to be obeyed when it is commanded; as the Father commands a Child
to take up a Pin, it is an indifferent thing to take it up or let it alone; but
because of the Fathers command he is bound to do it. Ans. It Is true, because
there is a command of Christ, that enjoins the Child's Obedience in all lawful
things, and therefore upon the Fathers command it becomes necessary that the
child yield Obedience; but this is but a command for one particular action, and
therefore under Expediency: If the Father should make a Law, that one child
should pick straws all his days, and another play at pushpin, such Laws would
become null in the nature of them: but there is nothing more absurd, than to
affirm that they alter not the nature of the thing; for what can alter it more,
than to lay it under a Law? when a thing was indifferent unto practice before,
to make it necessary as to practice; when it was lawful before, to make it
unlawful. We have showed that Necessities and Indifferencies are but relative
in respect of the Law; and he makes a Law, that gives things contrary relations
and respects to what they had before, alters the nature of the thing as much as
a Law can, and makes one Law contrary to another. Men do but trifle, that plead
that things are not made necessary in the Worship of God, when the practice of
them are enjoined under the greatest Church-penalties, (what is greater than
Excommunication?) yea, pecuniary Mulcts, Imprisonments, Deprivations, etc. yea,
and Offenders against the Laws persecuted with greater rigor, than those who
live in the constant and open Transgression of Moral and Gospel-Precepts.

5. I may take another very plain medium to prove the Minor; thus: He that
makes a thing unlawful, either to be done or left undone, which Christ has
made lawful by his Law, does that which is contrary to the Word of God; but he
that changes Indifferencies into Necessities does so. There is nothing more
plain than the Major: for to make a thing unlawful, etc. Lawful and unlawful
being contradicentia, and he that by a new Law renders that unlawful for my
practice, which Christ's Law has rendered lawful, does a thing e Regione,
contrary to the Law of Christ: For the Minor, its as evident, for by the Law of
Christ, the indifferent action was lawful for me to do or omit, as to eat such
a sort of Meat, or keep such a day, or wear such a garment; but there is a new
Law of the Church comes, which now makes it unlawful for me, either to do or
not to do those things; for he that makes a Law binding always to the practice
of either part of the indifferency, makes the other part unlawful, which
antecedaneous to this Law was lawful. Now the Church of Christ cannot make that
unlawful, which he has made lawful; for they may as well make that lawful to
do or omit. Again, If the Church may make that unlawful which he has made
lawful, then she may take away the Relative Goodness that is in any part of an
indifferent action, by the Rules of Expediency, and stamp upon it a positive
evil; which is contrary to what Christ has done, etc. Again, Nothing can be
Ecclesiastically and therefore Religiously unlawful, which is not made
Ecclesiastically and Religiously Evil; and nothing can be so Jure, but by the
Will of Christ, no more than any thing can be Ecclesiastically good and
necessary without the said revealed Will of Christ.

6. Argum. 4. The Church is not capable of a Law-making Power, Ergo. I prove it
thus; He that cannot jure or de facto annex a Punishment in some measure
correspondent to the nature of the Offense that will be committed against that
Law, cannot make such a Law; as if a Corporation under the King makes a Law to
hang or burn in the hand for some Offense, which they have no power to do, then
that is null. The Major is very plain. But the Church cannot de facto, or at
least de jure, Execute such penalties as are correspondent to her Laws; for
they being Ecclesiastical, are of a Spiritual nature, belonging to the Worship
of God: and therefore the Lawmaker will still have the first stroke of his Law
fall upon Conscience, by binding it under guilt: where was ever any truly
enlightened Conscience ever bound under guilt for transgressing a mere
Church-Law in matters of Ceremony? Secondly, They cannot de Jure annex and
execute the Penalties of Exclusion from communion; as Christ never made a mere
Ceremony the condition of communion, so he never threatened the Non-observation
with Non-communion: Let any Precept or any Instance be given of this nature,
that any suffered Church Censures under the New Testament, for Non-observation
of a Ceremonial Law. Thirdly, As for other Penalties, which we call Secular, as
Whipping, Imprisoning, Fining, Confiscating, we know the Church has nothing to
do with them; they were never in the power of the Church, nor never will be.

7. Argum. 5. That Law which directly and unavoidably hinders much good, and
causes much evil in the obediential Subjection thereto, ought not to be made
by the Church; but to change religious Indifferencies in the worship of God,
into Necessities, does so: Ergo. The Major is undeniable; for though a good
action may per accidens hinder some other good, and cause some evil, yet it
does not so directly, and in its true constituted nature; but good actions
produce good effects, as evil actions evil. So the Tree is known by its Fruits.
The Minor, that such a change works such ill effects is thus proved. 1. Because
it hinders the most expedient use of an action left by Christ indifferent, to
be determined by the Judgment of Discretion; whereas the Expediency by
Christ's prescript, may lie in the contrary part of the action wherein a
goodness is placed by the Churches Law, and an evil placed in that part of the
action wherein there is a goodness by Christ's. So that the Churches Law cannot
have universal Obedience yielded to it without sin, because when Christ's
expediency falls on the part contrary to the Law, it will be sin to obey the
Church; As for Example, It Is an indifferent thing which way we turn our Faces
in the worship of God, East, West, North, or South; the Church makes a Law the
Minister must turn his Face toward the East, in such a part of Worship, this
hinders the expedient use of that posture. 1. It hinders from turning that way
which is most for Edification, and causes the Minister to turn his back to the
people, which is very unexpedient. It may confirm a Jew, Pagan, or Papist in
their Superstitious Observances, to observe us to do thus de industria, out of
a strict observation, and therefore then unexpedient. 2. It hinders much Good,
because it frustrates Christ's Ends in the management of Religious and
Ecclesiastical Affairs. For Christ manageth all those by Necessities and
Indifferencies, in willing and requiring a necessary Obedience to his positive
Laws, and an indifferent use of indifferent things, according to the Rules of
Expediency and Judgment of Discretion: And this proceeding in Spiritual
affairs, is that which is most conducing to the Glory of his Name, and the
Beauty of his Church. How great a presumption is it in any Church to attempt
the altering this course of Government, which Christ the Head has settled, and
frustrate his ends in Necessities and Indifferencies, by causing those things
which he has made necessary to become indifferencies, and what he has made
indifferent to be done necessarily; and hindering that conscientious, discreet,
occasional use, which he has determined and required, as most conducing to his
own Glory, and the good of his Body the Church?

8. Now whereas the End of exercising this Juridical Power (so much pleaded for
in the late Centuries of the Church) is Unity and Uniformity; without doubt,
this principally and primarily belongs to the Catholic Church, that the whole
visible Body of Christ may be one and the same in Discipline and Ceremonies.
For if it be so desirous, and to be maintained with such a great curiosity and
exactness of Ceremony in a particular Church, how much rather ought it to be in
the Catholic; a Catholic Good being much more desirable, and of far greater
concernment than a particular Good? But as we have showed, that there is no
such Catholic Power in the Catholic visible Church practicable, so it is easy
to make manifest, that a Catholic Uniformity in matters of Indifferency, will
never be attained among Churches, or particular Christians; nor never was
intended by the Lord Jesus Christ, any more than that all his Members should
wear the same Clothes, or dwell in the same shaped Houses; for had it been
necessary that there should have been no difference in indifferent things, but
all should have gone the same way in the use of them, and none varied according
to the judgment of Discretion: then Christ would have made it necessary, and
then indeed all those things would have been Necessities, and there would have
been no Indifferencies at all; but we see that Christ designed it for the
Benefit and Edification of his Church, that there should be Varieties in the
use of Indifferencies; and so far from the disparagement of it (as some men
would have it) that it is as conducible to the Splendor and Beauty of his
Workmanship, as the Variety of complexions and dispositions of Men to the old
Creation. Now for men to place the Uniformity of the Church in those things
that Christ never placed it in, is no small reflection on his Wisdom and
Prerogative; for nothing carries more Evidence with it, than that those things
that he left indifferent, he intended neither Conscience or Church should be
determined ad unum in, by any, in matters of Worship; but that they should be
varied at the discretions of particular Churches and Christians, and that such
variety should be of advantage to Edification, and not that it should be
bespattered with the foul names of Faction and Schism, when such use their
Liberty in this kind.

9. But suppose such a thing had any probability to be the mind of Christ: Was
it ever attained, or is it attainable, that there should be an Uniformity in
the use of Indifferencies, that all Churches and particular Christians had the
same Sentiments, and went the same way in the use of indifferent things; or is
it possible to bring men to it? Or if they were brought to it, what advantage
would accrue? Would it not prove a great disadvantage? But some men plead, That
some indifferent things should be made necessary, as the very terms of
Communion, and in conformity unto these should consist Uniformity. To which I
answer; 1. That this is but a humane Project. 2. That if Christ had approved
such a way (he being the Author of Peace in his Church, and not of confusion)
he would have allotted it, and told us what the Indifferencies should be, and
who should have had a deputation to make them Necessities and Conditions of
Communion for Uniformity. But 3ly. He has appointed Ordinances enough of this
nature, and chosen out those things himself wherein the Uniformity of his
Church should consist, the Word, Sacraments and Prayer; and all Churches that
do walk in these according to Gospel-Rules, are Uniform, have Ceremonies
enough, and have no need of setting a new Mint on work.

10. And suppose that such a thing were attainable, that there were an
agreement in the whole Catholic Church about some little External Ceremonies,
what they should be, and how used; Would this abundantly answer the nature and
end of a right Uniformity in the Church? Would it cure all Schisms, or prevent
them? Would it keep the minds of men in a due proportion to each others? Would
it maintain Purity of Doctrine and Worship, and expel all Pollutions and
Corruptions in both? I say, Nothing less. For we see by daily Experience, it
does not do this in those Churches where it is most zealously pursued: if we
look but into the Church of Rome, and into Protestant-Prelatick Churches, we
see what great Errors and Heresies in Doctrine, and Corruptions in Worship do
abound, accompanied with irreconcilable Differences, and irreparable Breaches
of communion in the highest and weightiest matters wherein it is concerned;
notwithstanding the common consent and agreement in the stress that they lay
upon those small and trifling observances, and not on aberrations from sound
Doctrine, or defection from purity in that Worship which Christ himself has
instituted, which are to be bewailed as the great Schisms in the Church,
notwithstanding all External Conformities.

11. But we must enquire out a better way of settling Uniformity in the Church,
more agreeing to the mind of Christ, and practicable in the nature of it; and
therefore zealously to be pursued by all that love the Name and Kingdom of
Jesus Christ; and that is, That all Churches walk by the same rule of the
revealed Will of Christ, and subject themselves to his Laws and Government;
that they be uniform in all that he has made necessary to be believed and
practiced, as in all things necessary to Salvation, and a Christians
edification in matters of Communion, as in the word, Sacraments, Prayer,
singing Psalms, etc. by all these, in worshipping God in the Spirit, and not to
trouble and distract their walk, and interrupt their Worship, with the
Newfangled, Multifarious, Brainsick Laws of Men, in instituted Worship, nor
placing Uniformity in a heap of huskie, nauseous Ceremonies. For the Rule being
one, and the Lawgiver one, all the true Churches of Christ will agree in
substance, submitting to one King, and conforming to one sort of Laws; and
though there may be some small differences in their Interpretation of those
Laws determining things necessary, and the Exercise of discretion in things
Expedient, because of dubious and difficult circumstances attending; yet all
agree in the main things required by Christ, for the way of Salvation, and the
main conditions of Communion. And it is not to be doubted, but that a Christian
professing people, gathered together in the Name of Christ, enjoying the
Ministry of the Word and Sacraments in purity, are a Church of Christ, and
uniform with all the Churches of Christ, without any distinction by this or
that Name of Singularity, or any Ceremonial Appendixes.

12. And whereas it is pretended, that a full and free Conformity in Ceremonies
would be the only cure of all our Differences and Divisions; Let all Ages
witness, if any will but impartially enquire what has been the Grand Cause of
all the Factions, Breaches, Divisions and Schisms in the Church, yea and
Ecclesiastical Persecutions ever since the Primitive Times, it will be found to
be the Usurpation of this aforesaid Legislative Power of Christ, by some or
other; and still all the excuse that is made for it is, that they assume this
Power only in matters of Indifferency: and what pretense can any make to a
Legislative Power in things necessary already determined by Christ to one part?
there is no place for a Law in such things, unless it be to ratify or to null
the Law; so that what Legislative Power is exercised of this kind, must be in
matters of Indifferency only, i. e. which are so in relation to Christ's Law
antecedently to man's Law; but by the supervening of such a Church-Law, it
becomes in kind Ecclesiastically necessary, it being enjoined as to practice
under Penalties annexed: and it is no new thing with some sort of men to call
necessary things indifferent, and indifferent necessary; and thereby take
occasion to justify their presumptions, when they make Laws even abrogatory to
the known Laws of Christ: And if weak Brethren (as they are apt in derision to
call them) either take any just exceptions against them pleading their
Liberties, or it may be from a mistaking judgment, are apt to call indifferent
things necessary, and therefore out of tenderness of Conscience refuse to yield
acts of Obedience; they are so far from having compassion on their tenderness,
that they exact the said Law-penalty with greater violence and rigor, than
they do any (that does directly concern the Glory of Christ) established by
himself.

13. The greatest Plea that I know can be made for matters of this kind, is
the power that Ecumenical Councils have taken upon them, especially in the
Primitive Times, even in the Apostle days, and in the first, second, and third
Centuries of the Church especially. To which I answer; First, If the Foundation
of this Authority lie in Ecumenical Councels, let never any of these
Church-Statutes be made and imposed on the world but by them, and let not every
particular National Independent Church take upon her to make Penal Laws, and
gull the World into a submission to her Authority, by her saying she is The
Church; as if she were the Catholic Church and Mother Church. Secondly, I
question whether there were ever any true Ecumenical Council at all: much may
be said against the best that is pleaded for since the Apostles days; and it is
easy to prove that Assembly at Jerusalem, held by the Apostles and Brethren to
be none, in the sense intended; which is, that the chief Officers and
Representatives of every particular Church in the World meet together, with a
determinating Power in matters of Doctrine, and with a binding Legislative
Power in matters of Discipline and Ceremony. Now it will appear, that that
Assembly was not so (though there were more reason for its being so, than for
any other Assembly being so) neither ever was there any Assembly so empowered in
the world of that nature.

14. That that Assembly Acts 15.28. was no Ecumenical Council, is easy to
judge, for there were but the Representatives of two Churches, Jerusalem and
Antioch; and they of Antioch came to ask counsel, and to be resolved, in matter
of doubt, of the Apostles residing most of them at present in Jerusalem. 2. The
case in question was argued in foro Ecclesiae particularis, and the Apostles
making the mind of Christ manifest to that Church, have the consent of the
Brethren to their determination, and sent it forth in and with the Authority of
the Holy Ghost. 3. The Apostles and Church of Jerusalem changed no
Indifferencies into Necessities; but enquired after, and found out the Will of
Christ concerning the present Infant-state of the Gospel Church, in some matter
of things necessary of two sorts; some Absolutely and Morally so, others
expediently so for that time. First, Absolutely such, as Abstinence from
Fornication, and things offered to Idols. Secondly, Respectively only, and that
in the behalf of the believing Jews, coming lately from that Pedagogy, that
they might not be scandalized or grieved at the freedom of the Gentiles; and
therefore that the Gentiles should then abstain from things strangled and
Blood: Now no sound Interpeter will say, that this Canon was binding to the
Church semper and ubique; but in behalf only of th Jews, who could not so
easily at present be brought off from the whole of Judaisme; and it is likely by
this concession the Apostles got off the Jewish Believers from many Ceremonious
Observations which they stood upon besides, or at least abated their edge
toward them. And therefore the Decree was but as to a necessary Expediency for
a time, which the Apostle Paul fully explicates, who was well acquainted with
the Mind of Christ, and the Judgments of the Apostles, Elders and Brethren, in
these matters.

15. As we have little evidence for an Ecumenical Council exercising a
Legislative Jurisdiction in the Church, so we have as little ground for such
sorts of Officers as are contended for in the Church, of which such Councils
(as they are pleaded for) should principally consist, which are Patriarchs,
Metropolitans, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests; and there being not such Officers
in the Church by Christ's Institution, there is no such Power to be exercised
in the said way and manner of Legislation, neither may they jure proceed so far
as to Execution of any Laws established by Christ, being not lawfully
commissionated with a Gospel-power. If this Assertion be proved, I doubt not
but it will be granted, that there is no Legislation to be exercised in the
Church, the present Assertors whereof challenging this Power only on the behalf
of the said Officers. I lay down two things by way of proof; 1. That there is
no such Officers to be found (in the Gospel of our Lord and Savior) as a Pope,
a Patriarch, a Metropolitan, an Archbishop, a Diocesan Bishop, a Parish Priest,
no Dean, Prebends, Canons, etc. the Scriptures are altogether strangers to all
those Ecclesiastical creatures; Christ and his Apostles knew nothing of them
but prophetically in the foresight of the rise of the Kingdom of Antichrist. In
this Point I should deal with two sorts of men, the Papists and the
Protestants. As for the Papists, the case has been fully managed over and over
against them, that there is no such Supreme Officer in or over the Catholic
Church, as the Pope; and if there be no such Monarchical Substitute of Jesus
Christ here on Earth, it will appear that all the rest will fall to the ground.
Therefore as to them I shall not actum agere; my principal part will be with
the Protestants, that do assert such Officers in the Church, and yet deny the
Popes Supremacy. To whom I say in the second place, and anon shall prove, that
there cannot be any such Officers (as abovementioned) in the Church, without a
Supreme Pastor; those Pastors being Subordinate Pastors of Subordinate
Churches. And that this Question may be cleared to every rational Protestant,
that is not fanatically blinded with Pride, Ignorance and Interest, I shall
crave leave of my Reader, in a short Digression, to handle this Question,
Whether a Subordination of Pastors in the Church, does not necessarily infer a
Supreme Pastor.

CHAP. XIV. A Digression concerning the Subordination of Pastors.
1. AMong the many Difficulties and inevitable Rocks that the Protestant
Prelacy is necessitated upon, (by casting off the Headship of the Ecumenical
Pastor) not only in asserting, but exerting their Episcopal Jurisdiction, or
Pastoral Power, in the Legislation and Execution Ecclesiastical pretended unto;
I thought it not amiss to debate one main Question, wherein some part of the
greatest stress of difficulty in that kind does consist, and that is this;

Whether the asserting the Subordination of Pastors in the Church, does not by
all good consequence infer the Supremacy of an Ecumenical, or Universal
Pastor? We understand the word, Church, here, as before explained, i. e. when
we say (The Church) by way of eminency, we understand not (or should not at
least) any Individual, Parochial, Diocesan, Provincial, National,
Congregational, or Classical Church, but the Universal Church comprehensive of
all these, and enfolding them, as the outmost skin of an Onion involves all the
other subordinately one within another. By an Ecumenical Pastor is meant a
Pastor of the highest degree here on Earth, related in his Pastoral charge to
the whole visible Church, by whatsoever Names, Titles, or Dignities he is
known, and is a Bishop in the highest pre-eminence of Ecclesiastical Rule and
Jurisdiction here on Earth, from whom there can be no Appeal to any Earthly
Bishop or Governor; and this is the Militant Pastor of the Church-Catholick
Militant, to which (according to their supposition of Subordinated Pastors, all
the other Degrees and Orders must be subjected. By [Subordination] is meant the
substituting or subjecting one under another; the terms of which is the
Supreme, Highest, and most Universal on one side, and the most particular
Priest or Pastor on the other. The Question being stated, and the Terms
explained, the Truth will by necessary Consequence appear on the Affirmative
part, that Subordination of Pastors in the Church, does necessarily infer^ the
Supremacy of an Ecumenical Pastor or Bishop. And I prove it thus:

2. There is the same Political Reason for an Universal Pastor, or Supreme Head
on Earth over all other Pastors and Churches, that there is for any Subordinate
Pastor that has other Pastors subjected unto him. Instance in a Diocesan
Bishop, ruling his Parish Priests, or Parochial Pastors (if they may be allowed
any higher title than the Bishops Curates) the chief end of the said Bishop
being Jurisdiction, Determination of Ecclesiastical Causes, Regulation and
Ordination of his Clergy, Unity, Order, Uniformity, etc. By the same political
Reason, though in a higher Sphere of Government, is an Archbishop, or
Provincial Pastor, required for regulation of Bishops of Diocesses committed to
his charge, maintaining the Unity of the Provincial Church, Order and
Uniformity therein, that every weak giddy-headed Bishop may not govern after
the Fancies of his own brain; but that every one should be (notwithstanding all
their Lordlike Grandeur) accountable to the Archbishop, for any
maladministration of Government, or neglect of charge committed to their
care. The reason holds good in like sort for a National Pastor, the
Metropolitan, Primate, or Patriarch; that the whole National Church consisting
of Provinces, divided into Diocesses, and they into Parishes, be maintained
Uniform in Worship, and United under one National Ecclesiastical Head and
Governor, to whom the supreme Administration of Pastoral Function in the
Church National should belong, as to oversee nextly and more immediately the
Provincial Pastors and Churches; and more remotely, all other Pastors and
Churches in the Nation, that there be no Divisions, Schisms, Heresies,
Contempts, disorderly Conversation, irregular proceedings among Pastors and
People, but an harmonious concatenation from the highest to the lowest, to whom
and his Commission-courts all Appeals from Inferior Provincials and Diocesans
may be made. The Subordination of Pastors thus far allowed and granted, an
Universal Pastor must be inferred by unavoidable consequence. For as yet there
is the like necessity of uniting National Churches, in one Universal Church
under one Catholic Pastor, as was for uniting Provincial Churches in a Nation,
and subjecting them to a National Pastor or Primate, or subjecting Diocesses
and their respective Bishops to an Archbishop, or Provincial Pastor, and sic
deineeps. For by how much the more universal the Church is, by so much the more
universal the Pastoral Charge and Jurisdiction must be: And as the National is
to the Universal Visible Church, so the National Pastor to the Catholic
Pastor, by a Mathematical Proportion. And the like ground of relation as is
betwixt a National Pastor and a National Church, consisting nextly of
Provinces, is also betwixt an Ecumenical Pastor and an Ecumenical Church
consisting nextly of Nations. And if Unity, Uniformity, and regular
Administration of Church Government be indispensably necessary in a National
Church, and the care of these things to be committed primarily and principally
to a National Pastor; how much more is it necessary in the Catholic Church,
constituted and made up of National Churches nextly, the care of which to be
committed to an Ecumenical Pastor? And if the Schism of a Province or Diocese
be of so dangerous consequence, to a National Church; of how much more
dangerous will the Schism of a National from the Catholic Church be?

3. Secondly, I prove that they that maintain the Government of the Church by
Bishops, Archbishops and Primates, must also own an Universal Visible Pastor,
from the nature of the Catholic Visible Church. 1. It must be either an
organized or unorganized Body, and made up of parts similares only; the latter
will not be owned by such Assertors, by reason of the gross Absurdities,
tending to Separation and Phanaticisme, that must necessarily be inferred on
such a concession. If they say, it is an Organized Body, which is most suitable
to the Grandeur and Splendor of Mother Church, that she should be made up of
the most curious texture, and the most proportionate adaptation of parts; it is
by no means to be supposed, that a visible Body, eminent in all other parts,
should be Corpus vivum animatum, and yet want a Visible Head; an Invisible
Headship to a visible, organized, living Body, cannot be in this sense allowed,
nor a Secular Headship to this Spiritual Body. But more of this anon. Again,
The Catholic Church must be such, either quatenus Integrum, or quatnus Genus:
it cannot have any other due Logical consideration, though to adapt words to
some novel apprehensions, we speak of totum aggregatum, and totum
comprehensivum, both of which are reducible to the other Terms. I shall prove
that both these acceptations of a Catholic Church do of necessity enforce an
Universal Visible Pastor. 1. As Catholicum integrum, and quatenus tale, is to
be considered as divisible, or divided into parts, and according to that Nation
of Subordination, the greater parts into the next lesser, and them into lesser
or least of all; wherefore the Catholic Visible Church is divided into
National Churches, as the next and greatest constituting parts, National into
Provincials, Provincial into Diocesan, and they into Parochial; if there be a
Subordination of Pastors in the Church, it is according to the fubordination of
the integral parts of the said Church. For in Division and Subdivision of
parts, there must be a continuance till we come to minimum quod sic on the
descending part, and maximum quod sic in the ascending part. But there can be
no such Subordination of Pastors, according to the Subordination of Membra
totius, without an Universal Pastor; Ergo. For as there is the same Reason of
the Catholic to the National Church, (respectu saltem integrationis) which is
of the National to the Provincial, and thence downward: So there is the same
reason for an Ecumenical Pastor to the National, as of the National to the
Provincial, or that to the Diocesan Pastor. As the National is the totum in
respect of the Provinces, and as such has a Pastor; so it is but an Integral
part in respect of the Catholic Church, which by the same reason is to have a
Pastor, else this concatenation by Subordination will be headless, and visibly
deficient in the polity of its Uniform Constitution, for pretended
establishment of Uniformity. Now if they plead that the Catholic Church is but
totum aggregatum; Ergo National Churches are coordinate, hence individual,
thenceforward for their defense they must plead for Independency, and it will
be coincident with the notion of Congregational Churches. But how inconsistent
these Principles are, to deny a Subordination of National Churches and Pastors
to a Catholic Church and Pastor, when they allow and maintain a Subordination
of Churches and Pastors within the National, and utterly disown an Independency
of Pastors of particular Congregations on superior Pastors and Churches.

If the Catholic Church be understood to be Genus Generalissimum divisible
into Species, the same Inference will accrue; for the Subordination stands
thus: the National is subalternum Genus, the Provincial subalterna Species, the
Diocesan Species specialissima (according to some Logic) but Species
specialior (according to others,) and Parochial Churches Species specialissima;
after this consideration the Argument stands thus: If a Pastor is to be set
over a Church subalterni Generis, because it comprehends Churches under it as
Species, by the same reason a Pastor is to be set over the Catholic
comprehending also its Species, viz. National Churches. For though the National
Church be related to the provincial as Genus, it is related to the Catholic as
Species. But because according to the best Logical and Theological Notions, the
application of Genus does not well suit to the nature of the Catholic Church,
it being more properly a totum Integrale, I stay not on this part of the
Argument.

4. Argum. 3. I Argue from the nature of Subordination, which always supposes
a Supremum and Infimum; a Supreme higher than which is none, and a Lowest lower
than which is none; otherwise it would be unlimited. And if in the Church there
be a Subordination of Pastors, then as there is a Lowest, viz. a Parish Priest,
so there must be also a Supreme Pastor for the highest Round of the Ladder,
viz. an Ecumenical Pastor: For as every Subordination is to be continued to a
ne plus ultra, so Subordination of Pastors must be continued to the largest
acceptance of a Church on Earth, for the maintaining Unity and Uniformity of
the National Churches, which are next in constitution to the Catholic. If it
be said, that Christ is the only Pastor of the universal Church; It will be
granted that he is Pastor of the Church in the most Catholic acceptance, as
it comprehends the Church visible and invisible; but for the visible Church, he
leaves it perfect, as to parts, with a visible Head, as well as other parts
visible: for it must be ejusdem naturae cum caeteris membris, and how can
visible Uniformity be attained in the Catholic Church, but by a government of
a visible Pastor, who visibly rules all Churches, and in whom they are all
politically knit together, as in a Central or rather Circumferential Knot?
Besides, if a National Pastor be Supreme among Pastors, next under Christ, then
it follows that this Subordination terminates at least in a co-ordination of
Pastors; and if so, it is because there is a co-ordination of Churches: and if
one sort of Churches, and Pastors of particular Churches, are coordinate next
under Christ the Head, why are not all? And why may not a Schismatical
Provincial or Diocesan use the like plea to throw off the jurisdiction of the
National; or why may not particular Parochial Assemblies and their Pastors,
argue on the same grounds their Co-ordination and freedom from Subordination to
any Pastor besides Christ alone? So that this National Co-ordination of
Pastors, in the highest Ecclesiastical Supremacy, is the making a hundred Popes
instead of one, and laying the foundation of Independency unavoidably to all
judicious understandings. The sum of this whole Argument is, That there can be
no plausible reason given why the Subordination of visible Pastors should not
extend as far as visible Churches; and if Christ has set Orb within Orb,
Church within Church, and every one its Planet to rule it for the maintaining
Order, Uniformity, etc. why should the Supreme Planetary Orb be without a
Planet?

5. Arg. 4. The necessity of this inference is further proved from the
derivation or original of Pastoral power: every Pastor receives his Pastoral
power from Christ, mediately or immediately. If Subordinate Pastors, they
receive their power mediately; then mediante populo vel Superiori quodam. The
Assertors of Prelacy will never grant a derivation of power from Christ
mediante populo; for that were to fall into the Congregational way. If they say
they receive their power through the hands of some Superior, it must be by
some Ecclesiastical or Civil Officers; if by some Ecclesiastical, then through
some Pastor or Pastors, and they either coordinate, or of some superior Rank
and Dignity. They will not say they receive their power from coordinate
Pastors; for that were to fall on the Rock of Presbytery: therefore they must
say, and do say, That every ordinary Protestant Priest receives his power from
Christ, thorough the hands of some superior Pastor not coordinate; and then
we must needs find out the derivation of that superior power from one above
him in Order and Dignity, and at last must needs arrive at Peter's Chair and
his Successors, who first received this power from Christ; and so it is handed
down through his respective subordinate Officers, to those of the lowest rank
and degree. For if the Parish Priest receive his Office from the Diocesan, then
he from the Provincial, and he from the Primate, and he from the Ecumenical.
If they the Primates receive their power mediately by the hands of some others
besides the Ecumenical Pastor, it must be from the coordinate power of some
National Pastor or Pastors; and consequently it will infer a Presbytery of
Primates, which may prove of as ill and more dangerous Aspect on the Church
Catholic, than the Presbyterian Assembly on the Church National; or it must be
that he receive his Dignity from the Suffrage of his inferior Clergy. Then it
follows, that a Metropolitan is invested with power in a meaner and more
despicable way than a Diocesan or Parish Priest.

6. To avoid splitting on the Romish Church, they find another way of deriving
their power from Christ; and that is, by the Civil Magistrate, without the
Church, as it is practically at least granted. To which I say, That although he
is or may be a Member of the Church, yet quatenus a Magistrate he is a Member
of another State, and therefore in an Office extrinsecal to the Church; and
hence cannot extend Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to the Church, nor invest an
Officer in the Church (which is Christ's dominion) with Office, Power
Legislative or Executive; the Civil and Ecclesiastical States being distinct
from each other as they are such. Moreover, for an Officer in Christ's state to
derive his power from Earthly Potentates, is to subject the Kingdom of Christ,
as such, to the Kingdoms of men, and make it subordinate thereto in those
things which Christ has reserved to himself, as his Prerogative. Again, if
Church Officers, as such, must be invested with power from Secular Princes, the
Church must stand or fall, as to its right and orderly manner of Government, at
the will and disposition of Princes: Whence Christ's Economy will seem not
complete in it self, but lame, deficient, and headless, in that it must be
beholding to an Exotic Power for its principal Officers and Rulers; and Christ
was wanting in not providing for the due governance of his Church under
heathenish or heretical Magistrates; yea, such Magistrates would undoubtedly
establish Church Officers ejusdem farinae with themselves: And besides, it
would follow, that the Primitive Churches, after our Savior's ascension, could
have no due derivation of Church Power unto it for some Ages, for want of
Christian Magistrates, the grand Mediums of Conveyance. There is also as much
reason that Civil Officers should be at the disposition of the Church, as that
Church Officers should be at the disposition of the State: And the Ecumenical
Bishop may upon as good grounds claim a power of enthroning Emperors, as the
other claim an Ecclesiastical power of setting a Head over the Church, Christ
having made Church and State Coordinate. Lastly, if Ecclesiastical Officers
derive their power from Civil Authority, as their visible Church-head, sure the
Vitals and the whole Animation must needs be Secular; much like the Beast
spoken of, Rev. 13.4.

7. Arg. 5. I argue from the chief ends of Subordination of Pastors in the
Church. It Is to redress Heresy, or male Administration of discipline, that
there may be place for Appeals, in case of Injustice, determination of
Controversies, etc. Now what end would there be of Appeals, if there should not
be some Pastor supreme to all the rest, from whom there could be no Appeal? And
it is necessary there be still room for Appeal, till a man comes to the Church
in its greatest Unity and Superiority; and there is Mother Church in her
Grandeur, Ecclesia in Cathedra: if the resort be made for Appeal, or resolution
of difficult cases to the Church in her Pastoral multiplicity, there will be
such variety of Judgments and Interests, that there will be no final
determination, but ye may hear the Catholic body speaking one thing in its
Catholic Pastor and Head: for if you will know a man's mind and determination
of any thing, you will go to the Head, not to the Arms or Legs; and what you
have by Signs from them, you know is by the influence of the Head. So if we
will know the mind of the Church in its ultimate Results and Determination,
you must not go to a Diocesan, Primate, etc. of France, etc. England, etc.
where you will have but a partial or weak resolution, not having a Catholic
Interest, Intilligence, Influence, and Concernment; but we must go to the Body,
speaking in the Head, who has a common Concern and Fellow-feeling with the
least Finger or Toe complaining or appealing to it.

8. Hence see the reason why the attribute of Infallibility is ascribed to the
Church, thus speaking in its Head or Supreme Pastor. 1. Because of his
universal Relation and Interest; and therefore speaks infallibly the sense of
the whole, or of any particular part; as the Head feels and cannot be deceived
in declaring the pain of the Toe, and can most infallibly, of all the members,
prescribe a Remedy. 2. It Is most probable that he that has his authority by
immediate conveyance from Jesus Christ, should have also the most immediate
discovery of his Mind and Will: so that the infallibility of an Ecumenical
Pastor is founded on the Principles of Episcopal government, viz. subordination
of Pastors in the Church; for if in all our Appeals from Pastor to Pastor, from
Church to Church, for determination in matters of controversy, and resolution
in points of weight and difficulty, we do at last arrive at as fallible a
Church and Pastor as at first, to what purpose is all our Appeals? And if it be
granted that a Bishop is less fallible than a Parish Priest, and an Archbishop
less fallible than a Bishop, and a Primate than an Archbishop, then upon this
account only it must be that he has a greater share by his place in the
common interest of the Body, by the comprehensiveness of his power and
relation, and being farther removed by his dignity from particular small
interests and private passions; and therefore more likely to be more impartial,
universal, and less fallible in his judgment, than other his inferior and more
limited Pastors: And Ergo, upon the same reason it will follow, that an
Ecumenical Bishop is least of all fallible; not but that St. Peter and his
Successors may err, and have, but that as Supreme Head in the most Catholic
capacity, he is ( comparatively to all other Pastors subordinate) infallible.
And it is the greatest reason, that he that has the greatest Charge, should
have the best understanding to know how to manage it: And to what purpose is it
for us to seek after further light by going to those that the Church has
further entrusted, if they be not holier, wiser, and juster men than our
selves; yea, than all their inferior Officers? And what is it we aim at most
in such Enquiries? is it Fallibility, or Infallibility? Would any one in his
best wits be deceived? and would the Church deceive any, but use the best ways
and means for enlightening men's Understandings, and reducing them from darkness
and error?

9. Arg. 6. I argue from the nature of the Church, in which this Subordination
is required. That Church must be understood to be the universal visible Church,
and not any particular Church. 1. From the usual acceptance of Church in the
like sense, when we say, The Church, with an Emphasis. 2. There is no more
reason the Church should be understood of one kind of particular Church more
than another; a Provincial Church or Diocesan may be called the Church, by way
of eminency, as well as the National: and if there be more reason because the
National is comprehensive of them, then much more that the Catholic should be
understood by it, because it comprehends Nationals, and is most comprehensive
of all Churches on Earth. So that it will unavoidably follow, that if there be
a Subordination of Pastors in the Church, it is in the Catholic Church; and
the more large the Church is, the more extensive is the power of the Pastor:
and the most comprehensive Church has a supreme Pastor to the Pastors of all
other Churches subordinate to it.

Obj. But the universal Church Visible, is not Organical; and therefore not
capable of an Ecumenical Pastor. Answ. It is Organical; for it is made up
(according to our present Phainomena of a Church) of visible, organized or
organical parts comprehending each other; and therefore must needs have a
visible organical Head, principium sensus and motus, animating all the parts in
their respective Subordinations and Relations. It Is absurd to say, that the
hand organized with fingers and joints, the feet with toes and all its parts,
and so of the other members, that these united in one body make not up an
organized body, and have not one Head common to the totum, to communicate
respective vigor to each of these members. So to say that in the Church there
is National Churches organized, etc. so Provincial, etc. Diocesan organized,
and not that the universal Church visible is organized with, and influenced by
a visible Head, is most absurd. Again, there is the same and greater reason
upon the forementioned grounds, for the Organization of the Catholic Church,
than for the organizing of a National, Provincial, or of any of the inferior
Subordinate Churches: for if Order, and Uniformity, and due administration of
Government cannot be maintained in one* but by Organization, how can they by
any other means be obtained in the other? And if Order, Uniformity, etc. be not
only comely and beautiful, but most necessary to the well-being of a National
Church, and that the more, because it is so comprehensive of other Churches
subordinated to it, how much more requisite is it to the well-being of the
Catholic Church, which comprehends National and all others?

10. Arg. 7. That this Catholic Headship is inseparable from a co-ordination
of Pastors in the Church, may be evinced from these following Necessities. 1. A
necessity of a Catholic judgment of Schism. 2. Of a Catholic interpretation
of Scripture, it being not of private interpretation. 3. Of a Catholic
determination of Decencies and Order. 4. A Catholic composure of the Prayers
of the Church. 5. A Catholic Canonization of Saints. 6. A Catholic convention
or call of Ecumenical Councils.

11. The first Necessity is for a Catholic judgment of Schism: for if it be
not determined by a Catholic judgment, these absurdities will follow: 1.
National Churches may be Schismatical, and no competent judge of them, it being
not fit that one National Church should judge another, they being coordinate,
equally concerned, of equal authority, latitude, and fallibility: Neither may a
Provincial be judge of National Schism, they being subordinate to the National,
and included in it; for they are bound up in the determination of the National,
and is accountable to it: and if it declares against the National, as guilty of
Schism, and upon that account separates from it, she shall be judged as
Schismatical from the National; and so Schism will be committed on Schism, and
none healed. 2. If there be no Catholic determination of Schism, there can be
no Catholic punishment of Schism from the Catholic Church; for the punishment
must be preceded by a Law-determination. And hence, if a National Church be
Schismatical from the Catholic, it cannot receive any Catholic punishment;
and it will follow, that such a sin may be committed in the Church, on which
she is not capable to inflict a punishment in any measure proportionate to it.
3. If a National Church has power to judge of the Schism of a Provincial
Church, and a Provincial Church of the Schism of a Diocesan, and a Diocesan of
the Schism of a Parochial, then by the same reason may the Catholic Church
judge of the Schism of a National Church; otherwise Schisms will be equally
multiplied with National Churches, and no redress to be made of them. 4. If
there be not a Catholic determination of Schism, all Churches will not be
agreed about Schism: so that whilst there is a perpetual controversy in the
Church what Schism is, and what is not, Schism perpetually remains, and false
judgment still passed upon some Churches: these calling that a Schismatical
Church, which is not so; others owning another Church as not Schismatical,
which is really so. All which tends to a necessary and unavoidable confusion,
for want of a Catholic determination; whereas if it may determine by its
visible Head, all those Controversies would be ended: for if the members of the
Body complain one of another, the whole Body must determine the matter by the
Head, where there is a concurrence of all parts for the good of the whole.

12. Secondly. From the necessity of a Catholic determination of dubious
places of Scripture. This can be done by none but the Church Catholic on
Earth: (for no Scripture being of private interpretation, where shall such an
interpretation be found that is not private,) but in such as is of the
Catholic Church, where the concurrent judgment and faith of all Churches may
be heard? 2 Pet. 1.20. the word is (...), of private Solution, i. e. not of
particular persons, or Churches private Solution, but such as is universal and
commonly received by all Churches and Christians, according to the analogy of
faith. Now where can this be found and rested in as Catholic, unless it be in
the visible universal Head? and if it be said that a National Church may
positively determine in this kind, then why not a Provincial as well, the one
being a subordinate Church as well as the other? But if the Decree be only
National, as many various interpretations and senses may be put on a place of
Scripture, as there are Nations; which will lay an ample foundation for variety
of Sects, Schisms, Heresies, etc. Whereas if all National Churches were bound
to one Catholic determination, there must needs therehence ensue the admirable
effect of Uniformity in Doctrine and Practice; all Churches believing as the
Universal Church believes, and that as the Head does. Besides, if it be of such
dangerous consequence for Christians, as private persons, to put their
interpretation on Scripture, in laying the foundation of variety of Sects,
Schisms, Heresies, etc. how much more dangerous for particular Churches,
because the determination of a Church reaches further, and is more attended
unto, and more become seduced and leavened with error thereby, if it be
erroneous? Hence, to believe as the Catholic Church believes, has more
concern in it than those imagine, that endeavor to blast it with the ridicle
of the Colliers Faith; for it is not as the National Church believes, but as the
Catholic Church believes: Neither is it an implicit Faith in any things but
controversal and dubious matters, above ordinary scrutiny and vulgar capacity;
and therein we had better rest satisfied in Catholic Authority, than run the
risk of adhering to the Opinion of private persons and Churches; which must be
done also by an implicit Faith: and who is likely to have the most unerring
Spirit, a Church or particular Person? and if a Church, the most Catholic is
the most unerring.

13. Thirdly. From the Necessity of a Catholic determination of Decency and
Order. That is decent, which by the Universality is reputed and judged so; for
one Country does usually call that decent, which others repute undecent. And
there are no Protestant Prelates but have, do, and will say, That Christ has
left it to the Church to determine all matters of Decency and Order; and it is
absurd to say, that this or that Church may do it, when no such is the Church
eminently. When it is said, the Church determines Decencies, What Church is
that? Is it a Parish Church? Nay then Parish-Churches should rule Diocesan by a
Law. Again, if Diocesan Churches should have power to determine their
Decencies, either Provincials must be subject to some one Diocesan, which might
regulate all the rest, or else Diocesan Churches would differ so much in their
decencies, that there would be no Uniformity in the Provincial Church. And if
Provincials might determine each one its Decencies and Order, it must needs
break Uniformity in National Churches. But I know where the Protestant Prelate
will be; he will say presently, it is the National Church that he means, when he
speaks of the Churches determination of Decency and Order. To which I reply,
that he may with as good ground say, that he means a Parish Church; and that by
giving this power to a National Church, he gives a greater advantage to Schism,
and lays a greater bar against Uniformity: For the more comprehensive the
Church is, in which the Schism is, the greater it is; and the more uniform the
Schismatical Church is, of the more dangerous consequence it is to the
Catholic Church. In vain do men plead for Uniformity in the Church, who in
asserting the principles of Uniformity in a National Church, do thereby
extirpate Uniformity in the Catholic; for National Uniformity unless it be
Catholic, is but Uniformity in a Schism. For if every National Church may
determine of Decency and Order, there will be as great a diversity, if not
contrariety, in several Churches affairs, as in the affairs of several States,
one Nation determining that Ceremony to be decent, which another determines to
be undecent, absurd, and disorderly; and so Churches will be as diverse in their
Fashions, as English, Dutch, Spaniard, etc. And there will be no end of
Ceremonies and newfangled Garbs in the Church, if a Nation may of themselves,
and when they will, constitute, ordain, and appoint them at their pleasure,
alter and null old Ceremonies, and invent new; and shall have as great
difficulty, intricacy, and multiplicity of Church-Laws, as State-Laws, if at
every Convocation Decency, and Order may be determined.

14. From the necessity of a Catholic composure of Church-Prayers: the more
private and singular the conception of Church-prayers are, the more
Schismatical: And diverse Liturgies in one and the same National Church may not
be allowed, neither that every Province and Diocese compose their own Liturgy,
as being a matter of dangerous consequence to the National Church. How then
comes it to pass, that our National Church may compose its own Liturgy distinct
from another; Is not this of as dangerous consequence to the Catholic Church?
And is it not more conducing to the Peace, Beauty, Uniformity and Honor of the
Church, to have a Catholic Liturgy? Whereas otherwise every Nation will be
setting up the price of their own prayers above others; whence arises
heart-burning, Divisions, and Schisms National, in the Catholic Church: were
it not much better that all Nations should bring their Liturgies, and lay them
down at the feet of Mother Church, and submit them to her Judgment in the
Supreme Head, from whose blessed hands she may receive one of such Catholic
composure, that might produce a perfect Harmony in the affections and petitions
of all the Churches in the world, in good assurance of a Catholic Amen
attending the conclusion of all? Besides, if a National prayer be more
available than a Provincial or Diocesan, Why should not a Catholic
Churchprayer be most of all available?

15. Fifthly. The necessity of a Catholic Canonization of Saints. For
supposing the Necessity of the Observation of Saints days, (as the Protestant
Prelates zealously assert) it is requisite to enquire, who or what Church
Canonized the Saints which are already honored with Saintship Titular, and
Days devoted to their remembrance; and who dedicated and consecrated Churches
on the same account, was it not the Catholic Church, by her Catholic Pastors?
If every Church (suppose National) should have the like liberty to canonize
Saints at their pleasure, all the days in the Year, yea in an Age, would be
little enough for All Hollan-tide; And if the observation must be Anniversary,
there would be a necessity of robbing Peter to pay Paul, which would be doing
evil, that good may come of it; it being as great a sin to rob Peter of his
fishing-nets, as to rob Paul of his cloak and parchments. Besides, this
Absurdity would fall in, that one Nation would canonize that for a Saint, which
another would anathematize to the Devil; As for Example, Michaelmas-day is
devoted to St. Michael the Archangel, which Feast was instituted by Felix the
Third, the 48th Ecumenical Bishop. Now the Church of England has presumed to
alter this Title and Institution, making it a Festival to St. Michael and all
Angels; which has these gross Absurdities in it. 1. That St. Michael is
greatly detracted from, in that all other Angels are introduced as sharers in
the Solemnity of the day; and all Angels may be understood of Bad, as well as
Good, so that the Devils hereby become Canonized Saints. Now whereas it may be
alleged, that there be some Saints-days not of Catholic Observation, but only
National, as St. Denis for France, St. George for England, St. Taffy or Wales,
and St. Patrick for Ireland, it bears no weight against us; for the
Canonization is Catholic, and questionless the Observation ought to be so
also: though there is a more peculiar and more proper Remembrance and Honor
due from those Nations, to which the Saints are appropriate; which peculiar
Homage is enjoined by the Church catholic. Moreover, it is meet that so solemn
a matter should be ratified by Catholic Authority, as the canonizing a Saint,
and instituting a Festival day to be sacred to his Remembrance; because the
Catholic Church, as she will be most impartial and wise in such appointments,
so her Authority will make deeper impressions on the minds of men, to oblige
them to the conscientious observance: whereas particular Nations are liable to
Error and Partiality, each one being apt to be biased by proper Interests,
and to prefer the products of their own Soil. Besides the gross Schism that it
causes in the Catholic Church, dividing the Churches in their Prayers at the
same time, when one Nation shall observe that day to one Saint, and another to
another, and a third to none at all. Whereas nothing is more honorable and
necessary than Uniformity in this kind, That as all say the same Prayers, they
should do it at the same Hours canonically appointed, use the same Ceremonies,
observe the same Holidays; and such as are Anniversary should at least be of,
Catholic Appointment: And though some Saint-days are more appropriate to one
Nation than to another, by reason of the relation of this or that Saint to this
or that Nation in particular, by Nativity, by Heroic Actions, or Meritorious
Sufferings therein, yet is it not meet that all Churches should rejoice and
keep Holy Day with one that rejoices? If the Rule of rejoicing with them that
rejoice reach particular Christians, then much more Churches. And how can an
Englishman but be mightily ravished with an holy Sympathy, to see a Welshman
(zealously affected with the honor of St. Taffy) strutting up and down with a
green feather in his Cap? can he forbear the plucking up all the Leeks in his
Garden, and calling all the Fiddlers in the Town about him? And is it not fit,
that St. Thomas a Becket's day should be honorably observed by all other
Churches, as well as England, who engaged in and suffered for the common
Catholic Cause opposed in this Church? If the Devoted day be peculiar to a
Nation, as an Anniversary Memorial of some great Deliverance supposed, it is fit
it should have its Sanction from the Catholic Church; otherwise National
Churches may run into absurd and Schismatical Observation of days, under such
pretenses, to the great Scandal and Injury of the Catholic Church; as for
instance, the Fifth of November, a day Annually observed by a National Church,
to the great Scandal and Blemish of the Catholic Church and Ecumenical
Pastor, in the sense of the Romanists.

16. But some I hear will be ready to say, in order to these necessary
establishments, there will be no need of a Catholic Pastor, they may be done
well enough by Ecumenical Councils. To which I reply, That then the Church
acts not as a Body Politic subordinately knit together, but as totum
aggregatum, or as an Assembly of Independent Pastors by way of Association;
whence many Absurdities will follow. 1. That all the convened Pastors, of what
Order or Degree soever, are coordinate at least in the power pleaded for, and
a Primate or Patriarch's Vote is no more than a Diocesan's. 2. That the Church,
in the utmost resolution of its power, is but Aristocratical, which undermines
Episcopal Principles. 3. If because matters of greatest concern in the
Catholic Church are managed by an Ecumenical Council, therefore there needs
no Ecumenical Pastor; then by the same reason, all matters of the greatest
concern in a National Church, being handled in a National Synod, there should
be no need or use of a Primate; and sic deinceps to Provinces and Diocesses,
and so all Church Power would consequently become coordinate in the hands of
particular Pastors. 4. What course could be taken in the Intervals of Councils
for the Churches Government in its Catholic state? 5. Divisions and Schisms
have and will follow hereupon in the Church; for suppose the Council be equally
divided in their voting about Scripture- Interpretation, Tradition, Ceremonies,
or Decencies, who shall determine in such case? 6. Suppose the lesser part
divide from and declare against the greater and its proceedings, What Supreme
Power is there Authoritatively to conclude them, Ecclesiastically to admonish
and reduce the Erring part? 7. Ecumenical Councils cannot easily and presently
be convened, in case of emergent Church-difficulties, as in the sudden
Defection of a National Church or Pastor to Schism or Heresy, in the starting
up of new Sects, Canonization of new Saints, etc. An Error may spread itself
soon over a whole Nation, before such a Council can be called, and any remedy
applied. 8. It is needful every Church do exercise its power in an unity, and
not in a multiplicity; therefore there are National, Provincial, and Diocesan
Pastors. Therefore there should be a Catholic Pastor to the Church catholic,
for the avoiding the like Rocks and Precipices that other Churches would split
upon, if they had not their particular Heads and Pastors.

17. Sixthly. We argue from the Necessity of calling and convening of
Ecclesiastical Councils. In whose power is it to call an Ecumenical Council,
if there be no Ecumenical Pastor in the Church? For first, the Assemblies of
every Church are to be convened only by the Pastor of the said Church; as in a
Diocese, Who can authoritatively convene the Clergy, but the Bishop of the
Diocese? In a Province, Who can convene the Diocesan Bishops, but the
Archbishop? In a Nation, Who has power Ecclesiastically to convene a National
Synod, besides the Metropolitan or Patriarch? so in the Catholic Church, who
has power Ecclesiastically to convene an Oecumenicul Council, but the
Ecumenical Pastor? It being a Pastoral charge to convene or dismiss
Church Assemblies, and it is done by an Office-power. Object. Supreme
Magistrates may call Ecumenical Councils. Answ. They cannot by any
Ecclesiastical Right; for considered as such, they cannot exercise any Pastoral
Office. And an Ecumenical Council being the most eminent Church-Assembly, it
is not to be convened in a more irregular or exotic way, than the inferior
Assemblies of Subordinate Churches. 2. It is not in the capacity of any one, or
few Supreme Magistrates, to convene an Ecumenical Council; because no
Magistrate can by any civil Authority, much less by any Ecclesiastical, (of
which he has none) call forth the Bishops of another Nation to such a Council:
Whereas an Ecumenical Pastor, whose Authority reaches equally to all National
Churches, and to Magistrates as Members thereof, may Authoritatively command
the presence of any Reverend Father whatsoever, and demand the consent of the
Magistrate thereto, under the pain of Church Censures; and to permit his
Bishops to assemble in or out of his Dominions; whereas there is no one or more
Supreme Magistrate has any universal tie Ecclesiastical or Civil of other
States and Dominions to his Jurisdiction; so that they are necessitated under
any Law to submit thereunto, unless such which they have reduced unto Homage
and Vassalage by dint of Sword, or such as by voluntary Subjection have yielded
themselves. 3. Magistrates have not then a Power to call an Ecumenical Council
when they please; or if there were such an Emperor (there never was or will
be) that could in respect of his civil power do so, yet they have no
Ecclesiastical power to do it authoritatively, but only by concurrence or
consent; whereas all Church Assemblies are authoritatively to be called by the
Officers of the said Church, or else they cannot act so when called by
Assembled, unless we reduce Church Government unto a Democracy.

18. Obj. It may be also said, that an Ecumenical Council may be convened by
the consent of Patriarchs and Bishops among themselves. Answ. 1. This is no
Authoritative way of assembling, (such as Bishops will always contend for) but
only precarious. 2. If they assemble this way, either it must be no Council
till all be agreed, which may be long enough first; or any few agreeing to
assemble, and give notice of such resolutions to others, (who are averse to
such Proposals) may gather together and call themselves an Ecumenical Council;
undertake to make Decrees, determine matters of consequence, and impose on the
dissenting Churches. And what dangerous consequence would this be of in the
Church, especially where Heretical Pastors abound; as in the times of the
Arrian, Macedonian, and Nestorian Heresies? 3. If National Pastors may convene
by consent to constitute an Ecumenical Council, why may not Bishops and
Archbishops convene by consent to make up a National Synod without the
Authoritative Call of the Primate? which will by no means be allowed.

2ly. and lastly, By whose authority shall a Catholic Assembly have its
Sanction, if not by the Catholic Pastor? for it is not every Council that calls
it self Ecumenical, that can or may be allowed to be such; neither ever was
there, or ever will be any so General, that all the Pastors were assembled: But
it is in this as in all other Church Assemblies, if they be called by the
Pastor, and public notice given to all the Members of the time and place, the
absence of some alters not the nature of it; Ergo, there should be an
Ecumenical Pastor for these ends and purposes.

CHAP. XV. Of the Magistrates Power in matters of Religion.
1. THe power of Magistrates in matters of Religion, has been very much
controverted, and variously determined by men of Learning and Conscience. I
shall not fill up these sheets with transcribing other men's Sentiments; I shall
only propound what seems to me to be agreeable to Scripture and Reason, with
as much perspicuity and brevity as I can. There are three things for enquiry
that will principally lie before us.

1. Whether the Civil Magistrate may exercise a Legislative power in matters
Evangelically indifferent? 2. Whether in the execution of Ecclesiastical
Justice, the sword of the Magistrate may be used? 3. What are the true bounds
and limits of the Magistrates power in matters of Religion?
The first Question is thus to be understood: Whether the Civil Magistrate may
or can change things religiously indifferent, into necessities, by a competent
Law? i.e. by a Law binding Conscience primarily or secundarily, by Christ's
authority, (for we have showed that no authority can reach Conscience so as to
bind it or loose it, but Christ's alone) that being no competent Law that
answers not the true nature of the obedience required; which is always expected
here to be conscientious. All Christ's Laws flowing from his peculiar
Legislative prerogative over his Church, have an immediate influence on
Conscience, and do primarily bind as such. All just humane Laws do secundarily
bind Conscience, i. e. not quatenus humane; but they so far bind Conscience,
as men have derived such authority from the Lord Christ for the composing and
enacting the said Laws. Now if the Magistrate cannot make a Law in one of these
kinds to bind Christians in matters indifferent, he cannot do it by a
competent Law.

2. Having thus explained the true meaning of our Enquiry, we determine in the
Negative; and that for these following reasons.

Arg. 1. It Is Christ's peculiar prerogative to be the Lawgiver to his Church, i.
e. to make such Laws as immediately concerns it. He never gave this power to
any, or commissionated any to exercise a humane authority in this kind, as has
been abundantly shown. He only can do it. 1. He is the only Spiritual King;
there is no other mediate Spiritual King between him and his Church. 2. He
knows only what is fit to be the matter of such a Law: He knows only which
way he will be worshipped, and no way can be acceptable to him but that which
is of his immediate appointment; it is high presumption in any other to
prescribe. 3. It Is his Glory to reserve this to himself, and he gives to
Magistrates that power which they have; it is but reasonable he should reserve
to himself what he pleases. 4. If Magistrates can exercise any such power, it
must be by deputation from Christ. If there be any such, let them produce their
Commission; which cannot be pretended to in the New Testament: and what is said
of Magistrates power from the Old Testaments authority, will easily be refuted,
if the particular cases be duly considered; which I shall not now stay upon.
5. If Christ has given such a power to a Christian Magistrate, it belongs to
him as a Magistrate, or as a Christian; it does not belong to him as a Civil
Magistrate: for then, 1. As many sorts of Magistrates as the Church does
militate under, so many sorts of Lawgivers in Spiritual things she should be
subject to; whether Christian, Heretical, Profane, or Heathenish: and as the
government of State alters in the Supreme Magistracy, so the Laws of the Church
must, according to the several interests and corrupt designs of the sons of
men. 2. The number and certainty of Ecclesiastical Laws could never be known;
for as he may make Laws, he may repeal Laws where they are of the same kind: So
that there would be no certain standing Rule for the worship of God, all being
alterable in Addition or Substraction, by the will and pleasure of man. He may
alter the Modes and Dresses of the Church in all matter of Ceremony at least,
that the Church will be liable to as many new fashions as an English man: as
one Magistrate may change his own Laws, so many will change one another; one,
it may be, being Popish, another Episcopal, a third a Presbyterian. So that if
the Magistrates Laws must bind the Church Ecclesiastically, it may be bound
and unbound a hundred times in a few years, and put on as many Shapes as
Proteus: for still as there is new Lords, so new Laws. But where there is a
permanency and unchangeableness of Lords and Lawgivers, there will be a
certainty and stability of Laws, as always under Christ's immediate Legislation.
3. If this power be allowed to a Magistrate as such, then to a Heathen
Magistrate, and he may make Laws according to his Religion, viz. that
Christians should eat Meat sacrificed to Idols; which eating in it self is an
indifferency, 1 Cor. 10. But I would fain know whether any of the strenuous
Protestant-contenders for the Magistrates power in this kind, would not think
it a great sin both for the Magistrate to make such a Law, and for any Subject
knowing of it to obey him in it. Again, a Jewish Magistrate may make a Law that
all should be circumcised, because Paul determined it to be but an
Indifferency: after the abolition of the Jewish Law, a man might cut off his
Foreskin or let it alone; Circumcision was nothing, and Uncircumcision nothing;
it was but the taking away or keeping a little fleshie skin. But I would ask
whether if any Magistrate should make such a Law that all the Males in his
dominion should be circumcised, whether every conscientious Christian would not
then suffer much, before he would be circumcised? saying as Paul, That if they
were circumcised by virtue of such an Imposition, Christ would profit them
nothing: And this is the Doctrine preached by him to the Galatians.

3. Christ has not granted any such power to a Christian Magistrate as a
Christian merely; if so, it will follow, 1. That one Christian may institute a
way or mode of Worship for another. 2. That a strong Christian being a
Magistrate, may force the weak to use all those things that he calls
indifferent, though the other call them and reputes them unlawful and sinful.
3. If the Scales of Providence turn, and the weak Christian be made the
Magistrate, he may pay home the strong, and make a Law for him to punish him,
if he use that as an Indifferency which he esteemed so; and so bind him up in
many things from walking by the Rules of Expediency. 4. Every Magistrate that
calls himself a Christian, must be allowed the Christian's power, though never
so profane, erroneous, or heretical: for who dare control him so far as to
say he is no Christian? or to wrest the Ecclesiastical Sword in this kind out
of his hands, if it belong to him qua Christian? Or how dare any to say, he is
not a Christian so and so qualified, and therefore has not such a power?
Neither is it fit any exception should be taken in this manner; for we know
nothing lies more open to censure than Magistrates Religion: and if every
Subjects humor must be a Standard to the Magistrates Religion, all things
would fall as certainly to confusion on that side. If you allow such a power to
him as Christian, so he professes himself, and so he takes it; and it is too
late to dispute with him about his Sincerity and Qualifications* under that
denomination he took the Sword by your allowance, and has now more wit than to
part with it upon every humoursome exception made against the strictness or
modality of his Christianity. 5. If as a Christian, then such a power is a
proper adjunct of a Christian, and every Christian should have it; but nothing
is more false and absurd than this.

4. Arg. 2. That which destroys Uniformity in the Church, ought not to be
allowed; but for the Magistrate to exercise such a Legislative power, destroys
Uniformity in the Church, Ergo not to be allowed. The Major will be granted by
our Contenders for Uniformity in Ceremonies. The Minor is evinced thus: it
certainly hinders and destroys Uniformity in the Catholic Church; and that
which destroys Uniformity in a Universality, is the most universal enemy to it:
for if every Supreme Legislator in each Nation may dress up the National Church
in a suit of Ceremonies shred out of Indifferencies, according to the
imaginations of his own brain, (in which Ceremonies the great Uniformity
contended for, does consist) there can never be an universal concord of all
Nations, of the English, Greeks, Romanists, etc. to perfect and complete the
most beautiful and necessary Uniformity: All other ceremonial Uniformity which
men undertake to plead for, is but Uniformity in Independency, Disunion,
Disagreement, if not Schism it self: for though it be National, yet if it be
not Universal, it is but a particular Church in a way of separation from other
Churches; as an Independent Congregation in a Parish that is Uniform within it
self in judgment and practice, but disunited and separated from the Parish and
all other sorts of Churches whatsoever. Now if the stress of Uniformity lie
here (as these men plead) it cannot stand upon this basis of the magistrates
power: for there will never be the sameness of Ceremonies in all places; Rulers
being so adverse to each other, that they glory rather in a contrariety of Laws
and Customs, than are ambitious of having the same. And let it be considered,
whether the giving this power to him, does not cut the very Throat of
Uniformity in the Catholic Church, and lay the very Seed-plot of Schism and
Division. Hence those Principles that lay the undoubted ground of Uniformity in
a universal Head Ecclesiastical, do go upon far surer grounds of Reason for the
effecting it, than those that pretend and design to effect it by the
Magistrates power, as we have showed before.

5. Arg. 3. He that may not assume to himself the Executive power of
Ecclesiastical Laws, cannot enact Laws of the same kind. But the Civil
Magistrate may not assume to himself an Executive power, etc. Ergo, The Major
is evident, because he that makes Laws, may undertake also the Executive part,
or dispose of it by deputation. And the Argument of the Major is from the less
to the greater; for the Executive power is primitively in the Lawmakers, and
cannot become another but by derivation from him. Minor: but the Civil
Magistrate has no such power conveyed to him, etc. I mean, Judicial
Ecclesiastical Execution, according to the true intent of the Law for Christ's
instituted Worship. It is true; so far as Civility and Morality is to be
maintained in Religion and in the Churches, as well as Families, and other
Societies therein, they are as liable to the Judicial proceedings of
Magistrates, as any others be; but in these Evangelical parts of Worship
annexed by Christ in substance or ceremony, which distinguishes the Economy
of the Church from that of the Commonweal, here the Magistrate cannot execute
by himself, or depute another to administer the Executive part of Christ's
Laws. The reason is, because all such Laws changing Indifferencies into
Necessities in the Worship of God, are of a Spiritual nature, and
Ecclesiastical, and therefore must be executed spiritually in foro
conscientiae, or Ecclesiastically in foro Ecclesiae; but he cannot do either of
these: for the first he cannot, because Christ has absolutely reserved
Conscience to himself; nor the latter, because Execution in the Church is
peculiar to the Officers of Christ, as his Deputies and Officers of his own
appointment.

6. Arg. 4. They that are not to make Laws for the terror of them that do
well, are not to make such Laws as change Evangelical Indifferencies into
Necessities; at. Ergo. The Minor is undeniable. The Major appears thus to be
true, because to make such Laws, is to terrify Christians in the use not only
of their lawful liberty, but also to shake them from their standing in that
liberty that Christ has purchased, and commanded them to stand fast in;
besides the abridging them the free use of Christian discretion, which is good,
from which they should not be terrified.

7. Arg. 5. The Magistrate cannot take away the Rights and Privileges granted
to the Church by Jesus Christ, which he purchased for it, etc. by last Will and
Testament bestowed, and is his peoples right of Inheritance: But the liberty of
the use of the judgment of Discretion in matters of Indifferency, is a great
and valuable privilege* so granted and bestowed on his Church and People. Now
the Magistrate should be so far from bereaving the Church of these, that 1. He
is to maintain and defend the Church in the free use of its Liberties, and to
be as a Nursing Father to her therein. 2. The Magistrate should be ready to
punish the bereaving of the Church of her just Rights, as Sacrilege; which is
robbing a Church, a Sacred Body politic under the Civil Magistrates
jurisdiction: The Magistrate should be far from doing that action which he is
to punish in another as Sacrilege; and if a Christian's Liberty be a Sacred
thing, the taking of it away is Sacrilege. That it is Sacred, I prove thus:
That which is of sacred use, and peculiarly related to the Worship of God, and
to the Members and Church of Christ, as their Privilege, allotted to them by
Christ's special procurement and appointment, is Sacred; and the taking it away
is no better than Sacrilege. As for other lawful Liberties (common to them
with others in Morals and Civils) others may use them that are not related to
the Gospel; but a Christian Liberty is in things pertaining unto Christ, and
his ways of Worship and Service.

8. Arg. 6. He that can make those things necessary to the Worship of Christ,
which Christ has only made indifferent, can make the Kingdom of Christ to
consist in those things that he never did: the Kingdom of God stands not in
meats, etc. and the Kingdom of God stands in that which is necessary to it; and
if the Magistrate will make things necessary which Christ never did, he goes
about to make the Kingdom of God stand in that which Christ never did. And this
is a great usurpation of a power not belonging unto him; for Christ never
empowered the Magistrate to determine what his Kingdom should consist in, and
make it to consist in that which he never did.

9. Arg. 7. A Magistrate is not capable of exercising such a Coercive power as
will make me believe in my conscience, that to be necessary for the Worship of
Christ, which I am convinced that he has left indifferent only; that Law for
the Worship of Christ that lays no obligation on Conscience, is of no concern
therein. Now Christ having bound Conscience by his Law as far as is necessary,
there is no room left for Man to come in with his Laws. Whatever is
Evangelically necessary to the Conscience of a Christian, is so, because he is
convinced it is the Will of Christ that it should be necessary. Now can the
mere Coercive power of any one on Earth make a man believe that is not
necessary which Christ has made Conscience to submit to as necessary? If so,
then may the same authority make a man believe that to be necessary which
Christ has made us believe not to be necessary, but only indifferent: for as
no Law of man can absolve a Christian from the conscientious observation of any
one Law of Christ; so no Law of Man can bind a Christian in Conscience to the
practice of that in religious matters, which Christ never bound him to; but he
will be still persuaded that Christ has left it to him as an indifferency, and
it is his duty to walk in it by discretion; and that must be a Churches or
Christian's own, as the matter requires, relating to a Community or private
Person.

Obj. But the Magistrates Judgment can best determine of Expediency, being
greatest and wisest. Ans. In matters of that nature men may advise; and the
greater and wiser men are, its likely the more forcible Arguments they may
produce; but there is no force to be in the case, men are not to be forced by a
Law to do that, which is most expedient in the Worship of God: For 1. the
Magistrate may be mistaken, and that which is expedient to him, may not be to
another. 2. That which is expedient one time, may not be another* therefore in
the doing Expediencies, we are not to be determined to act always one way by a
Law. Object. But the Magistrate may punish for not practicing. Answ. None is to
be punished for not practicing what they believe unlawful.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Use of the Magistrates Sword, in the Execution of
Ecclestastical Justice.
1. THe Second Enquiry propounded about the Magistrates power is this; Whether
in the Execution of Ecclesiastical Justice, the Sword of the Civil Magistrate
may, or ought to be used? i. e. Whether for the punishing and reforming
Offenders against Church-Laws, the Magistrate may inflict such penalties on the
outward Man, as he and the Church shall agree upon; as Pecuniary Mulcts,
Scourgings, Imprisonments, Confiscations, yea, death it self in some cases, as
in matters of Heresy and Seduction. And to prevent mistakes, we shall premise
these things: 1. That Church Members offending Civil Laws, may, and ought to
suffer the penalties thereof from the hands of Magistrates, as such as stand
subjected to them in a civil capacity, equal with other Subjects. 2. That a
Churchmember (as of the Church of England, or any other) may justly suffer for
the same Offense, from the Church, and Civil Magistrate; as for Drunkenness,
Swearing, Fornication, etc. Moral Transgressions falling under the cognizance
of both States, though under diverse respects; but a Man is not ea ratione to be
punished by the Magistrate, because censured by the Church, nor vice versa. 3.
Hence we assert, That the Civil Magistrate cannot punish any Ecclesiastically,
virtute Officii; neither does any one merely upon that account deserve a
punishment from the Magistrate, because he is apprehended to remain under a
Church-censure; neither can the Church Appoint or Depute the Magistrate to use
his Coercive power to reduce any one to Ecclesiastical obedience.

2. The Question (on supposition that the Church will presume to take on her
the enacting and executing more Laws than ever Christ did or empowered her to
do) has two parts: 1. That in execution of Ecclesiastical Justice, of Christ's
own Institution, it is not agreeable to Christ's mind and will, that she should
use the Magistrates Sword. 2. That the Church is not to use it in requiring her
own Laws. I prove the first as follows.

3. Arg. 1. Christ has not annexed any Corporal punishments, or Pecuniary
Mulcts to his Laws, which he has enacted for the due governance of his Church;
if he has, let the Asserters show where our Saviors Law is, If thy Brother
offend, tell of it privately; if he hear not thee, take two or three more and
admonish him; if he bear not them, tell the Church; if he bear not the Church,
let him be as a Heathen and as a Publican unto thee; i. e. in respect of
Christian Communion and Society: and this is called by the Apostle, the
delivering up unto Satan; there being but two sorts of Communions in the world
in this fence, in the Church, and out; in the Church is in Christ's Kingdom; out
of the Church, is Satan's; and when he is cast out of the visible Society of the
Saints, it is for the humbling of him, and bringing him to godly sorrow and
Repentance; which is called there by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5. the destruction of
the flesh. But here is no farther degree of punishment, this being the highest
the Church is capable of executing: he says not, If he comes not in and submits
in so many days, let the Pastor certify to the Secular Powers, and let them
seize his Body and Imprison it, or his Estate and Confiscate it: This is a new
way of bringing Men into Gospel-Repentance for Church-Offences, which Christ
and his Apostles never practiced or prescribed. Will the Assertors say, that
the meaning of delivery of an Offender to Satan, is the delivery of him to the
Magistrate to be punished? this were to cast a great odium on Civil Government,
as if the Spirit of God did there represent the Magistrate under so
contemptible a Character. 2. It were to conclude, that Church Members were not
under the Magistrates power, to punish them for any Offenses, till they were
delivered up by the Church thereunto; and therefore, that he cannot take
immediate cognizance of his Subjects Offenses; so fat as concerns Moral or
Civil Justice, but must proceed still according to the Churches appointment and
determination. 3. That the Church has a binding or loosing hand on the
Magistrates Sword, to draw it out or put it up at her pleasure and the
Magistrate should be Armor-bearer to the Church.

4. If Christ had annexed any such penalties to his Ecclesiastical Laws, he had
left his Church very lame in its Polity; for in most Ages it has been Hated,
Persecuted, and Maligned, by Civil Powers under whom it has Militated, and the
point of the Magistrates Sword has been turned against her, and not the Hilt
put into her hand: now in such a state, how should the poor Church obtain the
said Sword to cut off a perishing Member? and how should she be able to execute
any Censure effectually, according to Christ's Law, if there be such a penalty
annexed which no Church of Christ in some Ages has been in the least capacity
of executing? If the Church were in capacity of doing it, it must be
capacitated from within, or from without; if from within, then Christ has
empowered it with a Magistratical authority, and every Church, as such, may use
it: and if so, she must show Christ's Commission for it. And if she pretend to
it, it is a question whether Civil States will allow it; she had need have good
power and strength to maintain it, as the Pope has. And where the challenge of
such Right has been made, has it not always been the occasion of the greatest
Civil Broils in Kingdoms and States through Christendom? And if it should be
made under Heathen States, and such Churches should presume to inflict corporal
Punishments, or pecuniary Mulcts on offending Brethren, they must certainly
expect the loss of any Liberties they do enjoy, and be adjudged for Sedition,
Treason, and Usurpation. But if it be said, that it is not from any Intrinsic
power that the Church uses this Sword, then it will follow, that it belongs
not to the Church as such, neither is her inseparable propriety. 2. She must
only borrow it; and suppose it will not be lent, does the true execution of
Christ's Laws fall to ground? and cannot Ecclesiastical Justice be distributed?
3. Again, if we must borrow the Magistrates Sword upon all occasions of
Reformation, then she is not sufficiently empowered by Christ to reform her
self; and Ergo, left more imperfect than any State or Society in the world; as
civil Corporations and Families, yea, and particular Persons, they have power
intrinsic sufficient for Self-reformation, if Virtue prevail, and the greater
ruling part be not corrupt. The Sword of the Magistrate is no more Essential to
the being or reforming a Church, than of a Family; a man may correct a child,
or turn away a servant, without a Magistrates power, or offending it, so he
keep within the sphere of Domestic Justice: So may a Church inflict the
greatest Ecclesiastical punishments without the Magistrate, or without
intrenching upon him, so as the true bounds of Ecclesiastical Justice which
Christ has set, be observed. And this brings me to the second Argument.

5. Arg. 2. If the Church may and ought to inflict Ecclesiastical punistments
to the full satisfaction of the Laws of Christ, without the use of the Sword of
the Civil Magistrate, then they may not use the said Sword, etc. nay, it is the
highest Injustice to use it, it being severity beyond Summum jus. But the
Church may inflict punishments to the full satisfaction of Christ's Laws;
Christ has put an Ecclesiastical Sword into the hands of the Church, to be
managed against Offenders (distinct from the Civil Sword,) the just management
whereof is as much as he requires from the Church, and the undergoing the pains
whereof, is as much as he requires that Ecclesiastical Offenders should sustain
in a Church Way. Neither does the political Laws of his Church demand any such
satisfaction from Church-offenders, as Fines, Whippings, Imprisonment, though
the Offense be such, as under the cognizance of the civil Magistrate, by his
Laws, and in his State, are deservedly punished so: As if a Churchmember be
drunk, the Magistrate may take him up in the street and set him by the heels;
but if the Pastor of the Church see him so, he has no such power as to punish
his outward man, but to administer Admonition, or Excommunication, as the
matter requires, till the person offending is brought to true godly Remorse and
Reformation; but the Church has nothing to do to imprison him, put him in the
Stocks, etc. or deliver him to the Magistrate by their Sentence so to be dealt
with.

6. Arg. 3. If the Church can and ought to use the Sword of the Magistrate,
it is surely to correct for the most gross and criminal Transgressions; as for
Drunkenness, Swearing, Lying-Theft, Fornication, etc. for all just Laws inflict
the most Exemplary Punishments on the most heinous and scandalous Offenders.
But it is most evident the Church cannot use the Sword of the Magistrate, in
case of the most criminal and heinous Transgression; because, 1. Christ nowhere
empowers a Church, or so much as allows it, as such, to fine, imprison, hang,
etc. for offenses deserving the same at the hands of the civil Magistrate. 2.
He nowhere requires the Churches to become Informers unto civil Magistrates; it
belongs to the Magistrate to look after the observation of his own Laws; the
Church is not to be his Constable to seize Offenders for him, neither is the
State to be the Churches Hangman to execute for her; each State is to look
after the execution of their own Laws, in their own way and manuer. 3. Where
Paul is distinct in each particular of the censure to be denounced upon the
incestuous person, 1 Cor. 5.4. requiring them to execute it in a strict and
sharp manner in the Name and Power of the Lord Jesus; and although Incest is a
crime to be punished by the Judge, and with death by the Law of God, he writes
not to the Church to inflict any corporal punishment on him; neither does he
certify the civil Magistrate against him, or command the Corinthians to
inform. What Peter did in the case of Ananias, was extraordinary and
miraculous, and not presidential in the least to any succeeding
Church Officers; neither did he assume any civil Authority in so doing.

7. Neither does the National Church (notwithstanding all her severity used
toward Non-conformists) execute any such punishments on the like sort of gross
Offenders, or by the highest censures turn them over to Civil Powers for that
end, though she says that all men and women inhabiting within her Precincts,
at least all such as are christened, are actually Church Members; and although
it is a confessed Principle of all Protestants, that all openly scandalous
Church Members incorrigible, ought by censure to be cut off from Communion; and
although her self affirms that the ultimate means to be used in cases of
obstinacy, persisted in (which she calls Contempt) after Church Censures, is
the application of the Magistrates Coercive power. Now how well she does apply
these Church-Remedies to the scandalous Church Members, let the impartial
judge. Is it not requisite that she should wait upon all her Tyburn and
Goal-bird Sons and Daughters a little more than she does? and endeavor first
by Admonition to bring them to Remorse; and in case of obstinacy to
excommunicate them, and not suffer obstinate Felons and Traitors to be hanged
within the Pale of the Church? Indeed there needs no certifying to the
Magistrate, and taking them by a Writ de Excom. cap. because the Magistrate
has secured them already: but I will tell you where there is need, viz. for
the picking up of obstinate contumacious Drunkards, Swearers, and fornicating
Church Members, which the Land swarms with. And what a blessed Reformation
would there be, if Mother Church did do her duty in this kind so strictly as
she deals with Non-conformists! viz. in admonishing them; and in case of
contumacy, to excommunicate them; and upon their perseverance in the said sins,
to take them all up with Writs de Excom. cap. and send them to Prison, there to
abide till they repent. If the Church proceeded thus with the generality of
scandalous and loose Parish-members, the major part left at liberty would be
Non-conformists; and if they were secured too for Nonconformity, the old Woman
might know where to find most of her children of both adventures. But who is
so blind as not to see the unspeakable Partiality of the Church in this kind,
in crying out against the conscientious Dissenters, and persecuting of them in
so merciless and outrageous a manner, and in letting all the rest of the
ranting debauched Church Members go Scot-free, yea, and encouraging them to
persecute the rest more serious and conscientious, under the name of
Separatists and Schismatics? Dat veniam corvis, vexat censura columbas. Juven.

8. The second part of the Question about the use of the Magistrates Sword in
execution of Ecclesiastical Justice, is built upon a supposition that the
Church might make Laws, besides what Christ has made, i. e. supposing she
might change Indifferencies into Necessities by positive Laws. The Question is,
Whether it be agreeable to her Justice and Wisdom, to annex to her Laws the
said corporal or pecuniary Punishments, or cause the Magistrate so to do? We
answer in the Negative, for these reasons. 1. Because to annex or cause to be
annexed the severest punishments, or at least most smarting to Offenders of
Laws of least concernment to the Public weal of Church and State, and of the
least necessity in respect of the Observers, is neither Justice nor Wisdom; but
for the Church to annex Excommunication, or cause to be annexed corporal
Punishments, or pecuniary Mulcts, to Laws of her own making, in matters of
Indifferency, is to put the severest Penalties to Laws of least concernment.
The Major is most evident, because Wisdom and Justice always requires that
there be a due proportion between the weight of Obedience required, and the
Punishment of the Disobedience forbidden. The Minor is granted by the Imposers
and Composers of Ecclesiastical Laws of this kind, and (as they think) a
plausible defense of themselves in so doing, viz. that they exercise this
Legislation only in matters of smaller concern, not necessary to salvation,
left by Christ indifferent; and what necessary goodness they pretend to be in
them, is the showing our obedience to our Superiors, and satisfying the Will
of man, and some little external Decency and superficial Uniformity: And for
offending in this kind, her children m^st be stripped of Privileges, and laid
open to all injuries of Church and State. Does this consist of Christian
Prudence and Justice? Is it not to tithe Mint and Annice with the greatest
zeal, and not only to neglect the weighty Laws, but to encourage the violation
of them, by taking into her bosom and dandling on her knee the most audacious
Transgressors, and the greatest and most professed Enemies not only to the
power of Godliness, but to common Honesty and Morality? 2. If it had been
Political Wisdom or Justice to annex such Penalties to Ecclesiastical Laws of
any kind, sure Christ (in whom are all the Treasures of Wisdom) would not have
been wanting in annexing Penalties of that kind to his own Laws of the greatest
and weightiest concern to his Church. 3. We judge of the greatness and weighty
concern of any Law, usually by the greatness of the Penalty annexed, in case of
transgression: and therefore herein we may apprehend that the Churches own Laws
challenges a preheminency before the Laws of Christ's own composure; and would
this King of kings make only Laws of lesser concern, and substitute others to
make the greater? this is absurd to believe. 4. It is a great piece of pride in
Mother Church to advance her self so far above the Civil State, that the
Magistrate should become the Executioner of her Laws; for the Lawmakers has
always a great priority and dignity above the Executioner. If it be replied,
That the Church only craves the Magistrates assistance to complete her
Ecclesiastical censures, and make them stick closer on upon the backs of
Offenders, Answ. Herein the Church bewrays her own weakness, in that she
confesses she is not a complete Polity, neither has power enough to reform
her self, or effectually enough to execute her own Laws, without being
beholding to an Exotic power: As if a Master of a Family had not power enough
to execute Domestic Laws in correcting a Child or Servant, without asking his
neighbors leave, and calling for his assistance. But in case the Church says,
(as indeed she does) that she goes to the civil Magistrate by way of Appeal,
and the said Magistrate has power at his pleasure to supersede her
proceedings; This is to set the State above the Church in Ecclesiastics;
whereas the civil State is Subordinate to the Ecclesiastic ecclesiastically,
and the Ecclesiastical to the Civil civilly; and both in respect of the
exercise of Jurisdiction in each particular Orb parallel or coordinate.

9. Lastly, such Penalties that cannot answer the natural end and design of
Church Censures, may not be annexed or used by the Church; but such a Penalty
answers not, etc. The Major is undoubted; the Minor thus appears: 1. Because
the Sword of the Magistrate reaches but the outward man; whereas the end of
Church Censures is to reach the Conscience. 2. The natural use of
Church Censures, is the exercise of them in foro Ecclesiae; but the Coercive
power of the Magistrate may not be exercised in foro Ecclesiae, upon any
allowable pretense whatsoever.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Limits of Magistratical Power in matters of Religion.
1. THe third Enquiry propounded, is concerning the true bounds and limits of
the Magistrates power in matters of Religion; a great and difficult Question,
but of very great concern to us that it be rightly resolved. I do not expect to
be so happy as to give others full satisfaction in it, I being not able to do
it to my self so far as I would; I shall only go as far as I can, and is
convenient for this undertaking, with all possible brevity and demonstration.

We spoke before in the two former Questions concerning the Magistrates power
in matters of Indifferency, both Legislative and Executive, on the behalf of
the Church. This Question is of larger extent concerning his whole power in
matters of Religion, and enquire how far he may and ought to go, and how far he
may not go, i. e. he cannot go without Usurpation.

2. Matters of Religion is a large word, and it comprehends not only Religion
it self, but all circumstances and attendances thereof; which are
Indifferencies in themselves, neither moraly good or evil; but in regard of
their tendency and respect, they are so. Concerning the Magistrates Legislative
power in these things, we have spoken somewhat already.

I shall speak no more here of the nature of Religion, than to make way for my
present Undertaking. Religion is usually understood to comprehend all moral
Duties and all instituted Worship; to which if we add the aforesaid attending
circumstances, we use a larger way of expression, and call them matters of
Religion.

3. The Moral Law is a general standing Rule to all sorts of Actions, Persons,
and Societies of the children of men, whereby God himself has challenged the
first right of dominion; as of particular men, so of all necessary Fabrics of
Rule and Government in the world: So that all Actions, Persons, and Societies,
duly measured and squared thereby, are rightly called Religious, and the
contrary Irreligious. Hence particular, Domestic, Ecclesiastic, and Civil
Jurisdictions in a Christian Commonwealth, are in proper sense called all of
them Religious.

4. Religion, taken in a stricter and more limited sense, is understood of a
holy life and conversation of particular Persons and Societies, not only
according to the general Rules of moral Obedience, but according to the more,
particular and special appointments and Gospel-institutions of our Lord Jesus
Christ, whereby he separates unto himself the most choice and peculiar
Societies in the world, under his proper and more immediate Rule and
Government, which are called his Church.

5. Therefore, 1. The civil Christian Magistrate has no power (in the strict
sense) in matters of Religion, quatenus Magistrate, no more than a Heathen
has: for though the embracing the Christian Religion does much capacitate the
civil Magistrate, as to his inclinations and endeavors for the improvement of
his Magistratical power toward the advantage of Religion; yet it adds no new
power or jurisdiction to him over Churches, Families, Christians, or others:
for a Heathen Magistrate is as much in his place the supreme Head and
Governmnour of the Church (considered in a civil capacity under his Government)
as the most Faith-defending Christian, or Catholic Prince in the world:
Neither by his embracing Christianity does he attain any augmentation of his
Magistratical Power, Headship, or Supremacy. A Christian is no more bound, as a
Subject, by the Rules of the Gospel, to a Christian Magistrate, than to a
Heathen or Heretical Magistrate. The Rules are indefinite to a Magistrate as
such, though a Christian Subject will be the better man and Subject, and a
Christian Magistrate the better man and Magistrate; Christianity making every
one the better man, and better qualified for the performance of the relative
Duty of his place that he is set in.

6. Secondly, No civil Magistrate can be an Ecclesiastical Head and Governor
of the Church, as such: It Is Christ's Prerogative to be the Supreme, and to
constitute what other Heads and Governors he in his wisdom thinks best. But I
find not that he ever made any Magistrate a constitutive Ecclesiastical Head
or Governor to his Church virtute Officii: for if so, in every Christian
Dominion the Prince should be the Metropolitan and the true Pastor to that
National Church.

7. Thirdly, No civil Magistrate can by virtue of any authority granted by
Christ, challenge to himself a Legistative power in religious matters touching
Faith or Worship: he cannot null or dispense with one of the Laws of Jesus
Christ; neither may he make any new Laws to bind us to believe any thing more
concerning God, than is manifestly by his Word revealed; or bind us to
practice any alteration or addition in the Worship of God, more than what
Christ himself has enacted. This we have sufficiently proved in handling the
Doctrine of Indifferency.

8. Fourthly, No civil Magistrate can by any deputation from Christ, claim an
Executive power of the Political Laws of Christ in his Church: for as Christ
has his own proper Laws in his Church, his militant Kingdom, distinct from
other Laws for the right and exact Gospel-management of all his Political
affairs therein, and is more faithful than Moses in that very respect; so he
has set in his Church his own Ministers and Officers, distinct from all other
sorts of Officers and Ministers in the world: As Christ's Ministers are no
civil Magistrates as such, so no civil Magistrate is a Church-Minister as such.
Hence, as a civil Magistrate has no power to execute Christ's Political Laws
or Institutions in his Church; so he has no power to execute any moral Laws in
the Church, i. e. he cannot punish a criminal offense by Ecclesiastical
censures. The moral Law runs through all Societies, as the natural fundamental
Rule to discern Good and Evil; and Political Laws of all sorts should mainly
respect it as the Standard and Magna Charta of all Laws and Justice which in
respect of it are derivative; though every particular Polity has its own
proper way and manner of distribution of moral Justice; The civil State by a
civil political Administration and Magistracy; Families Oeconomically, by the
Heads thereof; the Churches Ecclesiastically, by its Pastors and other
Officers; all endeavoring by their distinct way and manner of Administration,
to secure the honor and justice of the Moral Law: but none of these are to
intermix their governments and political way of distribution, seeing the God of
Order has fixed each one to his proper station and limit of jurisdiction.
Hence the civil State can no more punish the breach of moral Laws
Ecclesiastically, than the Church can punish them civilly; and the Church can
no more use the Magistrates Sword, than the Magistrate can the Churches, and
vice versa; neither can the Church or civil State punish the breaches of the
moral Law Oeconomically, any more than a Master of a Family, as such, can
punish them Ecclesiastically or Civilly, and upon that account may take upon
him to be Magistrate or Pastor. And though there was a mixture or rather
conjunction of these Authorities in the same person, in the infancy of
Polities, yet they have been separated in distinct persons by God himself for
many Ages; neither do any persons bearing distinct Offices, make the Offices
the same, or necessarily mingle them in the performance of their several
Functions.

9. Fifthly, It is not in the power of the civil Magistrate or any humane Laws,
to bind or loose Conscience. As Magistrates cannot reach it directly to charge
it with either duty or guilt, so it is the greatest piece of Tyranny to attempt
it by Penal Laws; whereby Christians may be drawn in, to ensnare their
Consciences in guilt, by sinning against God for fear of Man, and a Christian
is to obey the just Laws of man for Conscience sake, i. e. for the Lords sake.
It is extrinsick to the Laws of men, to bind Conscience; it is God that by his
authority gives them a mediate Sanction, and binds them on Conscience; but
where God lends not to humane Laws his binding power, they are of no more force
unto Conscience, than Withs to bind Sampson. It Is not the wit or strength of
all Men and Angels that can bind one Conscience under guilt, without a Law of
God, or divine authority to give force to humane: their Penal Laws, i.e.
corporal Punishments or pecuniary Mulcts, are very indirect and vain Mediums to
enforce Conscience, and very sinfully applied by Magistrates or others for that
end, in matters of Faith or Worship.

10. Sixthly, That the supreme Magistrate has not the determination of Causes
meenly Ecelesiastical; and these are of two sorts, either controverted
Doctrinals, or Causes disciplinary controverted: for by Causes are to be
understood here, things under dispute (and they controverted Doctrinals) or
under debate (and they controverted Causes disciplinary;) and those
Ecclesiastical things which are of this nature, fall under one of these heads,
Doctrinal or Disciplinary. First, In doctrinal Causes controverted, the
Magistrate is not appointed by Christ as Judge, neither is he a competent
Judge. 1. If he be quatenus a Magistrate, then every Magistrate is a competent
Judge, and then a Heathen, Mohammedan, or Heretical Magistrate; and then you will
say the determination must needs be very sound and good. 2. Again, how few
Christian Magistrates are studied enough in Polemical Divinity (being not bred
to that learning, or having so many recreations and secular concerns to divert
them from it) so as to be fit to have the ultimate determination of the most
difficult and weighty points, that learned Scholars in Divinity, yea, such as
are studious and conscientious Christians, after long study, scrutiny, and
prayer, cannot attain to a right understanding of, so as to demonstrate the
truth to the full and clear satisfaction of themselves or others? Is it fit to
make an Assembly of Divines, Judges of a great and difficult case in Law? There
is the same reason for one as for the other. 3. What determination a Magistrate
makes dogmatically, it is simpliciter but his private Judgment and Opinion,
though he be a public person: And why should any man's private opinion (be he
what he will in the world) be a binding Rule to the Faith of another in matters
of Religion? 4. It Is impossible that it should be so; for man cannot make a Law
to bound Faith in such things as are not founded on the light of Understanding;
and where they are so founded, no man believes because of the Law of man, but
because of the evidence of Truth. What Law can make any man believe that two
and three make six? but if it be, that we must believe that three and three
make six, we do believe it; but not because of the Penal Law, but because of
the evidence the Truth carries with it: Non lex penalis, sed veritas est ratio
formalis fidei. 5. The Faith of a Christian, or the Understanding of a Rational
man, can no more rest in the opinion or determination of a Christian
Magistrate, without a sufficient light of Truth to convince him, than in the
opinion and determination of another man: for he that tenders the honor of
God, and loves Truth, cannot receive that which he is convinced of (or at least
suspects in his most serious judgment) to be contrary to the truth of the Word
of God. 6. The Magistrate cannot be conteded to be such a Judge, nor is useful
as such, unless he may be acknowledged to be infallible. A supreme Judge in our
sense, and that which must be here understood, is one into whose judgment our
Faith has its last and utmost resolution; but we cannot acquiesce in a humane
fallible determination. And besides, what Prerogative has the Magistrates
judgment above another man's? and what ease and advantage is it to us, if our
minds lie open to doubt as much after as before the determination? No
Christians mind can rest satisfied in a humane fallible opinion of divine
things; the authority causing Belief, must have the same original that the
Revelation has: therefore Faith built upon a Testimony, must be only on his
own fidelity as one infallible; as we believe that Truth also which carries its
own Evidence with it axiomatically delivered, or evinceth it self from the
light of another Truth dianoetically.

11. The second Case consists in Causes disciplinarily debated, being
Differences arising within one particular Church, or between Church and Church,
or between Pastors and Churches, etc. All Causes usually handled and determined
in Ecclesiastical Courts. The Question is, Whether the civil Magistrate be the
supreme Judge, or Head and Governor? By Causes Ecclesiastic, are without
doubt meant in the Oath of Supremacy, all disciplinary Causes handled in
Spiritual Courts, the supreme Head and Governor whereof was the Pope; in whose
name and authority those Courts were called and managed, and to whom it was
lawful for any grieved party to appeal, before the reign of King Henry the 8th;
who by the Oath of Supremacy cut off the Popes Supremacy, and established his
own. Now I thus resolve, as follows.

12. If Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Courts be not jure divino, nor held jure
divino (Episcopacy as it is settled in the Hierarchy, and all its Offices and
Appurtenances, being only a humane politic device, as has been abundantly by
the Opposers thereof proved, and by many of the Asserter; and Defenders
confessed;) then, I say, it is fitter that man should be supreme Head there; and
if any man, the supreme civil Magistrate, within whose Realm or Dominion their
Courts and Causes Ecclesiastical be. The nature of this Supremacy is or should
be, that 1. That all Ecclesiastical Courts be called and kept in the Kings
Magisties name. 2. That the Sentence denounced should be also grounded on some
penal Law of the King; for all the Kings Courts should judge by his Laws. 3.
That any party grieved may appeal to a superior Court of the Kings, or to
himself, from whom there is no Appeal. 4. That the King has power by himself
or Judges, to prohibit or supersede the proceedings of the said Court at his
pleasure. This is the true sense of the Oath of Supremacy, which the Bishops,
notwithstanding all the noise they make against Dissenters from their Church,
will least subscribe unto; whereas most others of the Kings Subjects that
refuse to own the divine right of Episcopal government, will willingly swear
the Kings Supremacy in their Ecclesiastical Courts and Causes in the largest
extent. And though that sort of ruling men use all endeavors to suggest the
disloyalty of the said Dissenters, yet I doubt not but most Puritans in England
would rather refer themselves to the Kings judgment, and stand or fall at his
Tribunal, than at the Churches; and have generally found more relief from under
the severities of Excommunication in the Kings Courts, than in the
Ecclesiastical. Supposing that all Ecclesiastical proceedings in Spiritual
Courts of Judicature, and the whole Fabric of Church Government, as now it
stands, is a humane Polity, as is not denied by the most ingenious, I know not
why any Puritan or Papist should refuse for to take the Oath of Supremacy, for
it is no more than to acknowledge the King to be supreme Head and Governor in
his own Courts; which is but Reason, Justice, and Religion, that he should be.

13. But if Ecclesiastical Causes be understood of disciplinary Controversies,
such as follow upon the execution of Laws, and administration of the
Institutions of the Lord Jesus in the visible Gospel-churches; of such
Ecclesiastical Causes it is not the Magistrates part to be the determinating
Judge of: for, 1. To judge and determine a Cause in the Church of Christ, is to
judge Ecclesiastically; and such an act of Judicature is a Church-act, which is
always preceded by a Church Officer, and no other, in foro Ecclesiae; and if
the agrieved party appeal, it must be to an Officer of the same kind, it is not
to an Officer of another State. 2. He that is supreme Judge of a Church-cause
on Earth, must be an Officer substituted by Christ; for none can hold any Place
or Office in the Church, but by Subrogation from Christ, much less the highest
Authority: but none can show that Christ has substituted the Magistrate his
Church-Vicar on Earth. 3. If the civil Magistrate be supreme Head to the Church
Ecclesiastically, then, because he was always so since Christ was on Earth,
then there was times when Heathen Magistrates, in whose jurisdiction the
Churches was, were his Vicars: and Christ himself, when on Earth, was subject
Ecclesiastically, though Head of his Church, to Heathen Church Officers; for he
was no civil Magistrate, disclaimed it, nor could be appealed unto as such. 4.
If the civil Magistrate be supreme Judge, he is the supreme Church Officer; for
he cannot be denied to be an Officer of that state wherein he does acts of
Judicature as his right: And if a Church Officer, then the civil State has
power to choose and constitute a Church Officer, and that of the highest rank;
for if he become a Church Officer, his Calling and Constitution must needs be
Civil, and not Ecclesiastical: So that the civil State has the power of
Peter's Keys both to dispose of them and give them to whom she will, and the
Church cannot be entrusted with them; they must still be kept in the
Magistrates pocket. Hence it will follow, that Christ has not left power
enough in the Church for the management of its own political affairs, nor
wisdom enough for the determining her own Controversies.

14. Seventhly, No civil Magistrate can imposse Articles of Faith on any of his
Subjects, to be owned, subscribed, or sworn to by a Penal Law: for quatenus a
Magistrate he is not an universal competent Judge; for it is not necessary that
he should be religious, understanding, found in his principles, because he is a
Magistrate. 1. If he can do it as a Church Officer, we have showed that Christ
has made no such Officers in his Church. 2. If he were, Christ never empowered
any Church Officer to use a Magistratical Sword; he never put Temporal Crowns
on their heads, nor Scepters into their hands: if any of them, out of ambition,
have got Miters and Crosier Staffs, they had them from Antichrist, and not from
Christ. 3. He never ordained that force of Arms and Penal Laws should be the
way of propagating his Faith. 4. Forced Faith is neither pleasing to Christ,
nor profitable to us; for indeed it is no Faith at all. A force may lay hold of
the Outward man, but it cannot make the Understanding to believe that which it
sees no reason for to believe, no more than the Senses in the natural state can
be forced to own things to be contrary Objects; as the Eye to own white to be
black, the Taste to own that for sweet which is bitter, etc.

15. Eighthly, No civil Magistrate can impose a form of the Worship of God by a
Penal Law. 1. Because he cannot receive into the Church nor cast out of it at
his pleasure. 2. If he could, then the Subjects form of Worship must be such as
the Magistrates; for if it be justifiable in one Magistrate to enforce his
Subjects to a form of divine Worship, because he thinks it best, then it is
justifiable in another: If the Episcopal Magistrate may jure enforce his form
of divine Worship, then the Popish Magistrate may enforce his form, and the
Presbyterian Magistrate his form, and an Anabaptist his form, and every form
must become lawful and necessary to be practiced, because the civil Magistrate
commands it: for we must not suppose any one Magistrate, as such, to be more
infallible than another; and so upon every change of the supreme Magistrate of
a differing Persuasion, the Peace and Consciences of the most religious people
must be wracked and torn in pieces. Again, it is the most irrational thing in
the world to force a man to serve his God in such a way as he conscientiously
judges or supposes to be displeasing unto him. Likewise if the form of
Worship imposed by the Magistrate be pleasing to Christ, his imposition cannot,
because there cannot be a readier way to the profanation of the holiest
things, than to force them to come to them that are not only wicked and
profane in their lives, and corrupt in their hearts, but such as are professed
Enemies unto them, and would have nothing to do with them, but to save
themselves from the smart of Penal Laws; and the best of such persons that make
a more plausible compliance, can be no Better than Hypocrites, that the Law
being removed, their Religion would be dissolved.

16. Ninthly, As the civil Magistrate cannot enforce his Subjects to Particular
forms of real or supposed instituted Worship, so he cannot enforce them to
positive acts of moral divine Worship. As 1. We find no Precept or Example for
forcing a poor Pagan to the Worship of the true God; and for whipping,
imprisoning, or any other way afflicting his carcass by a Penal Law, because of
his not worshipping the true God. To punish a poor Jew till he would
acknowledge Christ and worship him, would seem hard. 2. And among such as do
own the true God, the Magistrate cannot, punish omissions or refusals of acts
of positive Worship. As for instance in Prayer, the Magistrate cannot enforce a
man to pray to his God, and punish him for not doing it. These are things,
though sins, and that of the highest rank, yet such as God intended the Sword
of civil Justice should never reach. There is in every Command of God a
prohibiting and prescribing part: The sins against the prohibiting part, is the
doing some act forbidden by the Moral Law; and here usually is the place for
the execution of a Penalty by the hands of humane Justice. Punishable sins by
man are commonly acts of Commission, and such acts must be apparent, not
secret, brought before the Judge per allegata and probata; and they are usually
criminal direct breaches, not consequential, dubious, and small. I know there
lies an Objection against this; which is, That a Father may correct a child
for not doing his command; and so a Master a servant. Answ. It Is granted, and
so will God punish the children of men for all omissions of their duty: He that
knew his masters will and did it not, should be beaten with many stripes. Then
there is a great difference between the constitution of a State-government and
of a Family-government: In a Family a Father, being a natural Relation, has
(so far as his power goes) a more Arbitrary way for the management of it, as he
can correct his child upon his mere suspicions of evil in him, or refusal of
good, without positive proof; so for omissions in not doing his duty; and so
for servants: the reason is, because it is supposed children and servants are
under tutorage as well as bare government, and therefore must be kept up to
positive acts of duty, being under education of Parents and Masters. But it is
not so with Subjects; they are subjected to a Magistrate for another end, viz.
in order to the maintaining the due execution of Commutative Justice, and in
case of the failure thereof, of distributive; and all things are to be brought
before the Magistrate by evidence, of matter of mere fact, and accessories
thereunto. God has not required that Laws should be so distinct and express in
a Family, as in a State, the government of a Family being for the most part
discretionary: if an eye be had chiefly to the general Rules of God's Word,
though Omissions of some kind come under the cognizance of the Magistrate, it is
principally in cases of commutative Justice, when such Omissions are injurious
to our Neighbors right; but those are not reckoned criminals.

17. Having had some short view of what we judge (upon good grounds) comes not
under his inspection as a Magistrate, we would consider a little in the next
place how far a Magistrate may go in using his Magistratick Sword in matters of
Religion. We have showed that matters of Religion, taken in a more limited
sense of Faith and instituted Worship in the Church of Christ, are not within
the circumference of the Magistrates Penal Laws. But if we understand matters
of Religion in a larger sense, then we mean that all States and Societies of
men ought in a Christian Commonwealth to be religious, i. e. the Moral Rules of
Justice should be the foundation of all Justice administered in the Church,
Civil State, and Family; and each of them ought to have a main respect to every
branch of the Moral Law, and adjudge the breaches thereof to be sin, and each
Polity to punish it according to its merit, so far as is allowed by the Charter
of Jurisdiction from the Lord Jesus Christ. Exemp. gra. Suppose Theft be the
sin, the Parent can correct his child with the Rod, the Church punish him with
a Censure, and the State by some Corporal Exemplary suffering. Though the
Transgression be the same, and justly punishable in all, yet the punishment is
not of the same kind, but various under the different Jurisdictions.

18. We say then, if religious matters be understood of that moral goodness,
fundamentally necessary to all actions becoming a Christian Commonwealth, then
so far the Christian Magistrate has power more or less, so far as may conduce
to the due maintaining of the being or well-being of a Christian State; and
therefore is to be conservator unriusque Tabulae, he has the conservation of
the second Table committed to his care, that it may be a civil State; of the
first, that it may be a Christian State. And therefore as a Family is to
preserve the honor and justice of the Moral Law by an Oeconomick Sanction, and
the Church by an Ecclesiastic, so the civil State by Civil Sanction; each
according to their just derived Laws whereby they are respectively to govern,
and distinctly to administer.

19. The great Question here is, How far the Magistrates power extends in the
making and execution of Penal Statutes? We have showed that the Lord Jesus has
not reserved to himself so near a propriety in the government of civil States,
as of his Church; having taken it as his peculiar Prerogative to give Laws unto
his Church: and presides there as the only Legislator. But unto States he has
only given them the Magna Charta of the Moral Law, and has allowed unto them
a Legislative power in all matters concerning the various Exigences, and diverse
Requisites, with attending Circumstances in the due management of
State-jurisdiction; so as the said Laws are promoting of the common Peace and
Justice of their Dominions, and deducible from and founded on the said Rules of
Distributive and Commutative Justice.

20. The Laws of men that are just and reasonable, may take place in all things
conducing to the being and well-being of a Christian Commonwealth, both as to
the matters of the first and second Table, so far as is necessary to the
managing of it under the due qualifications of a civil State; and therefore may
not only punish crimes committed against the second Table, but such as are
against the first also. And there are these especially that they are concerned
in: 1. Blaspheming of the true God, under which is comprehended common profane
swearing, transgression especially of the third Command. 2. Worshipping of
false Gods; a sin against the first Commandment. 3. Idolatry, or the
worshipping of God by Images; a sin against the second Commandment. 4.
Profanation of such times as is by God appropriated to himself for public
Worship; a sin against the fourth. So that these are palpable as to matter of
fact, clear as to the nature of the offense, and of dangerous consequences,
tending to the eminent ruin and apparent danger of a civil State.

21. In the concernments of the second Table, God has left the civil
Magistrate more Arbitrary in making or executing civil Laws, as the necessity
of the State does require, laying the general Rules of Moral Justice, and the
particular and relative benefit of the Commonwealth and Subject before his
eyes. Now in the matters of the first Table (being the moral Rule of duty
toward God) he only requires the Magistrate to punish and restrain those
Vices in this kind that are notorious, infectious, and pestilent to a Christian
Commonwealth, in matters of natural Worship; reserving instituted Worship,
built fundamentally on the same precepts, to another manner of dispensation,
wherein the civil Magistrate is not to intermeddle as such, neither as to
Legislation, nor Execution of Penalties, nor deligation of Officers.

22. As Murders, Rapines, Adulteries, Perjuries, etc. are destructive to
Properties, Communities, and Relations, and so to all civility in a State where
such Vices predominate, and are not generally suppressed by Justice, it cannot
be denominated a civil State, but rather a Pagan Salvage nation. So, where
false Gods are multiplied and worshipped, the true God is blasphemed openly and
notoriously, and all times for public Worship of him by his own appointment,
profaned publicly and generally: And such Vices not suppressed by
Magistrates, such a State cannot be called a Christian civil State, but
Heathenish, whatever moral Justice there is between man and man.

23. Though all sins be alike breaches of Gods Law, yet none but those of a
more gross, external, and exemplary nature, fall under the cognizance of man's
Justice. The Blasphemy, Profaneness, and Concupiscence of the heart, are not
punishable by man; it must come to the Magistrate per allegata and probata,
that such an one blasphemed God, worshipped an Idol, profaned the Name of God
by swearing, etc. and that openly, either in contempt of that God that is
worshipped, or that Worship set up, or in order to the delusion and seduction
of others: for it would seem very hard to break into the private houses or
appartments of Idolaters that may dwell in the land, and proceed judicially
against them for that Religion which they are peacibly retired to, without any
endeavor to publish or prvpagate to the disturbance of the public, or
infection of others. But no Magistrate ought to suffer that God to be openly
blasphemed, which he worships: If Heathens in a false Worship are zealous upon
this account, how much more ought Christians? Though no Magistrate can enforce
any Subject to worship his God, or ought to do it by a Penal Law, as has been
said, yet he may punish him for blaspheming him, or for seducing any from the
Worship of the true God; yea, for Apostatizing from the Worship of the true
God, after he has owned it. Precepts and Persidents, in the Old Testament, are
pregnant to these purposes, which I need not enlarge on; those that read the
Scriptures are acquainted with them: But we find no Precept nor Example for
endeavoring to reduce a poor Heathen from bare Idolatry to the Worship of the
true God, by pecuniary Mulcts and corporal Punishments; and I am sure Christ
never practiced it nor commanded it in the New Testament.

24. The great difficulty that yet attends this case (allowing the Magistrate a
power, as such, in some matters concerning our duty directly to Godward) what
are adaequate and proportionate Penalties in such cases as these: for the
Magistrates power is always insignificant, whatever the Law is, if there be not
a Penalty annexed to it, and vigor in the just execution thereof. Now the
Enquiry is, Of what kind and degree of punishments of such Transgressions,
ought to be? Answ. I apprehend it is a hard thing to determine to all men's
satisfaction; I know some have recourse to the proceedings of the Judicial Law,
which was but the reduction of the Moral Law into Civil Practice for the State
of the Jews, and look upon them as binding to Christian Magistrates. But I
suppose the Judicial Laws to be rather presidential only, that Christian
Magistrates may take a measure thereby for the degree of Penalty, setting aside
their different Emergencies of State, and extraordinary cases, when God would
make one sinner in a case exemplary to all ages, by his Prerogative and special
Command; as in Achans theft, and the profanation of the Sabbath by picking up
of sticks: And setting aside much of the severity which appeared in that more
legal Dispensation, which was both Typical and Temporal, and much of it in
special cases, and by special command by God; It would be accounted very severe
now to put a man to death for profaning the Name of God, though it were by
repeated acts of such horrid cursing and swearing as is frequent nowadays; or
for profanation of the Sabbath, etc. Then setting aside the relation the
Judicial Law had to the Levitical, and necessary dependence on it, which is
ceased; and considering that our Judicial Laws cannot so much depend upon
Evangelical instituted Worship, Christ having not so strictly tied Church and
State under a necessity of the same Emergencies as he did the Jewish
Oeconomies; I conceive likewise the just proportionating of Penalties in this
kind, ought to be done with great caution, and depends much on the Magistrates
prudent management of the Helm of Government, for the safety and preservation
of the Christian State; and Penalties cannot be positive and unalterable,
because cases do so frequently differ in the aggravating circumstances.

25. The Christian civil State ought to be very neighbourly and cherishing to
the Ecclesiastical; and the civil Magistrate is to improve his Magistratick
capacity to the utmost, for the interest of Christ's Church, and advantage of
the Gospel. 1. By subordinating as much as is possible, all State-interest to
the interest of Christ in his Church. 2. By giving all possible encouragement
to the purer Worshippers of God, and to the embracers of the Christian
Religion. 3. By encouraging the faithful preaching of the Gospel, and
propagation thereof by able Ministers duly called thereto by the Church, and
affording them external helps and supports in so doing. 4. By maintaining the
Churches in the due execution of the Laws of Christ, and in the enjoyment of
their Ecclesiastical and Civil Liberties, defending them from invasions and
disturbances in Gods Worship, from the rage of professed Enemies, from
tyrannizing usurping Imposers. 5. By being a nursing Father to the Church, both
as a Christian in an eminent capacity, going before others in the exemplary
practice of Piety, and calling upon all others of all ranks and degrees
whatever, to discharge their places in the fear of God, as Hezekiak and
Jehosaphat did, 1 Chronicles. 29.25, 26, 27, etc. 2 Chronicles. 19.8, 9, 10. and as a
Magistrate defending them by his power, as has been said.

CHAP. XVIII. Of a Christians Duty, in case of Humane Laws, in matters
religiously indifferent.
1. IN the next place it will be necessary to speak something to a Question of
no less weight than any of the former: for (it is said) that though it should
be granted that no power, Civil or Ecclesiastical, can (Jure) convert
Indifferencies in Worship into Necessities by a Law, yet it is inquired in case
any humane power assume so much to it self as to do it, Whether a Christian is
not bound to yield active Obedience unto the said Laws? and those that affirm
it, produce these Reasons to enforce it. 1. That every one is bound to be
subject to their highest powers, Romans 13.1. 2. That such Laws are not contrary
to the Law of God, because God has nowhere declared himself against one part
of the indifferency more than the other, but has left both equally lawful to
be practiced, according to the rules of discretion. And why may not the Church
or Magistrates discretion bind a Christian to obedience to his command, as
most expedient, the Church or Magistrate being better able to judge of an
Expediency than a private Christian? 3. Because if in a thing indifferent the
least offensive part is to be chosen, then surely that part which fulfils the
Civil or Ecclesiastic Law; for it is a greater offense to offend the Church or
Magistrate, or both, than to offend a particular private Christian, or company
of Dissenters.

To the first I answer, by way of concession, That a Christian is so bound, as
Romans 13.1. but 1. That place is to be understood of Civil, not Ecclesiastical
powers, as the Context shows. 2. If it be understood of Church Power, as that
Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you; it is to be understood of
such, as Christ has constituted Church Officers; and of obedience to an
Executive power committed to them, not of a new assumed Legislative power never
allowed to them.

To the second I answer, That such Laws are contrary to the Word of God: for 1.
Essentially they are contrary to the Word of God, it being the revealed Will of
God in his Word, that they should be Indifferencies, and remain so, not to be
made otherwise by any Law: for where God has granted a Liberty or Latitude in
the use of any Creatures or Actions, there to make or prescribe a religious
limitation by a Law, is absolutely unlawful, and directly contrary to the Word
of God. It Is express, Acts 10.13, 14, 15. where Peter, though an Apostle, is
charged not to put a religious difference where God has sanctified things to
our indifferent use, much less might he prohibit the Church from using any
Creatures or Actions made by God indifferently holy: therefore when it is the
Will of God that a thing be indifferent, it is contrary to the Will of God to
impose it as necessary. 2. Such Laws are circumstantially evil, and contrary to
the Word of God, because they hinder the free use of Christian discretion where
God would have it used; and Ergo, hinders an Ordinance of Christ. Besides, it
necessarily obliges to evil, whenas the expedient good is found by a Christian
to be in that part of the Indifferency which is contrary to the humane Law: And
besides, God having left both parts of the Indifferency equally lawful, and
declared it so in his Word, for man to declare one part unlawful, or make it so
by a Law, is to make a Declaration or Law contrary to the Word of God. Neither
may a Magistrate or Churches judgment bind a Christian to practice any further
than it brings light with it: for no man must walk by an implicit Faith in the
matters that concern the Worship of God, and the salvation of his Soul.

To the third Alleg. That part which fulfils the Civil or Ecclesiastical Law
for Will Worship, is not the least offending part, but the most: for the
yielding free active obedience to sinful Laws, is not only sin in the person
obeying, but the highest degree of scandal to the person commanding, it being
the edification of him in sin; whereas the refusal of active obedience in such
a case, is no offense given, but only a just cross of a perverse Judgment and
Will. Again, if any action be such as will offend justly the least of Christ's
members, it must needs be contrary to Gods Word; and I may not grievingly or
sinningly offend any of Gods children, that I may gratify and fulfill the Will
of man. We must rather choose that part of the Indifferency which a weak
Christian thinks (according to his best light from Gods Word) to be necessary,
than the other part which Authority lays a stress upon by a Law: the reason is,
because I must choose Suffering rather than endanger any Souls salvation in the
least. Now if I refuse active obedience to the Magistrate, I only run the
hazard of suffering the penalty, which it may be I can bear and comfort my self
under; but in case I wrong a Soul by my action, I cannot free my self from sin,
and am an occasion of another too; either of which are, but especially both,
much heavier than the greatest suffering. Lastly, if I suffer the penalty of
the Law, I both fulfill the Law, and save my Brother too.

2. Now these Obstacles being removed out of the way, I proceed to determine
the Question. That in case any power Civil or Ecclesiastical, shall presume so
far as to enact Laws in the concerns of divine Worship, so as to change
Christian Indifferencies into Necessities, that a Christian is bound to refuse,
active obedience thereto. And I make good this Assertion by the following
Arguments.

1. To yield such obedience, is to serve God according to the Will of Man; but
no Christian ought to serve God according to the Will of Man: Ergo. The Major
is true, because it is a serving God in such a way as is devised by man, and to
the obeyer is no other; for he in his conscience believes so, that it is not
the Will of God. The Minor is true, because that is Will Worship which is the
product only of man's Will, Gods Will being the only Rule of Gods Worship; and
we must be sure of that Will in all matters of his Worship, or else we bring
vain Oblations unto him.

2. The goodness determined by a humane Law for the sake of man's Will, ought
not to be preferred before the goodness of Expediency determined (by a
conscientious Christian) for God's sake; for such a goodness of Expediency is
approved of by God, and the contrary to it pro hic and nunc, is unlawful:
therefore from this closing with such goodness, we are not to be deterred by
any humane Law; for an expediently necessary action, according to the Will of
God, is to be of far more force with us, than an action made absolutely
necessary by the Will of man. Yea, it is to do a thing contrary to the Will of
God, to do that as necessary which God has revealed his Will concerning that
we should always do in a way of Indifferency and Expediency, determinable by
the judgment of discretion: for to do things by way of Necessity, and to do by
way of Indifferency, is to act by way of Contrariety; and therefore to obey
such Laws, is to act contrary to the Will of God.

3. To be brought under the power (i. e. a necessity by a Law) of any thing
religiously indifferent, is unlawful, 1 Cor. 6.12. but to be brought to
constant active obedience to man's Law, commanding a necessary performance of an
indifferent action, is to be brought under the power of a thing, i. e. into
bondage, i. e. under a Yoke which Christ never put us under. Now Christ would
not have us to make our selves slaves where he has made us free.

4. A Christian is to use his liberty purchased by Christ, and to stand fast in
it; Ergo, to practice it constantly, notwithstanding all ensnaring and
embondaging Laws of men, and is bound to use his judgment in all his actions;
and where there is an Indifferency, to choose by the Rules of Expediency, and
not walk by an implicit Faith. The wise man's eyes are in his head; the fool
walks in darkness.

5. Such active obedience is a betraying the Prerogative of Christ: for if a
Legislative power be Christ's Prerogative, as has been proved, then the
yielding active obedience to an usurping Law, is the doing Homage to another
Lawgiver in that kind, and giving up the power of the Lord Jesus. It Is like a
Subjects introducing the power of a foreign Prince, and doing all that lies in
him to subvert that Law and Sovereignty to which he is naturally related; and
what can be greater Treason to any State?

6. If a Christian here obey, it must be for Christ's sake, or Conscience sake,
Romans 13. It cannot be for Christ's sake, because it robs him of his
Prerogative, or betrays it; neither can it be for Conscience sake, to embondage
it self where Christ has left it free: whatever tends to the captivity or
slavery of Conscience, is not for the good of Conscience; for in this they are
not Ministers to me for good, for the Law tends not to my good in active
obedience; which if I see, and yet yield, I become a Minister of evil to my
self.

7. If it be a sin in the supreme Powers to command and impose their said Laws,
it is a sin in a Christian to obey; at. Ergo. The consequence is manifest,
because the most formal reason of an evil Law, is the evil obedience required.
The Minor has been proved, that such a Law is sin in Superiors to make: but
to confirm the consequence further, to be a copartner with another in sin, is
sin; but if the Magistrate command, and I obey, I am copartner with him. A
thing commanded can be evil but two ways; either materially, or
circumstantially: if it be materially evil, there is no pretense for doing it,
whatever humane power command; and if it be circumstantially, it must be in the
Commanders usurping a false power, or there is some circumstantial relation pro
hic and nunc, that makes it unlawful unto me or another. It may be the thing
may be materially lawful, but under both these sorts of circumstances; it may
be unlawful, as that I give away hereby Christ's Prerogative, I rob my self of
the use of my judgment of discretion, by which every Christian is to walk, and
I (it may be) offend my brother. I do not say a man may never do that part of
the Indifferency that is commanded by a humane Law; a Christian has the use of
his liberty as well after as before a humane Law, and he is to walk by the Rule
of Expediency still. When he finds it most for Gods glory, and his or another
edification, he may take that part of the Indifferency which is commanded, sed
non ratione praecepti humani, but from that Expedient or convenient Goodness
which pro hic and nunc he finds in it. But that obedience which we here declare
against, is the doing it as a duty constantly or conscientiously, sub paena
reatus, by virtue of such a Law.

8. A Christian cannot yield the aforesaid obedience, but he must offer
violence to his Conscience, i. e. practically to contradict the dictates and
light thereof; for every moral action must be approved or reprobated thereby.
But he must needs know that that which is not commanded, or approved by Christ
(as indifferent things are, though not commanded by him) in the matters of his
Worship, (no others approbation being enough to justify my actions, and
therefore to satisfy my Conscience) is but Innovation, and therefore vain
Worship, and Ergo, rejected by Christ, and sinful, Mat. 15.9. Now that which a
Christian is persuaded of to be thus in his own Conscience, and yet does, he
offers manifest violence to his Conscience in doing.

9. If such Compulsions do by Rules of Expediency necessarily require a man to
refuse active obedience, then it is a duty at least sometimes to refuse; but
Ergo. The Minor is proved beyond all controversy, from Paul's Doctrine and
practice concerning the use of Circumcision, Gal. 2.5. and Coloss. 2.19, 20,
21, 22.

CHAP. XIX. Of Humane Constitutions in the Worship of God, besides the Word.
1. THe usual grand Evasion of what has been said, That although the Church
cannot make Laws contrary to the Word, yet she may make Laws besides the Word,
i.e. new Laws which Christ never made: and if she make such Laws which are not
contrary to the Word, (i.e. directly and materially) she is to be obeyed by
every conscientious Christian. For Answer, I premise these things.

1. All Laws for divine Worship are enacted by Christ, or not: if enacted, we
question not the obeying of them; if not, let any one show by virtue of what
divine Authority we must obey them, for we cannot obey them without.

2. As Christ never deputed any humane Legislative Authority in his Church, so
he never allowed any to rectify and correct his Laws by adding to their
penalties, and making them more severe, and giving such express and explicit
Authority, which he has left implicit and consequentially only; and those
things more necessary, which he has left less: Christ blamed the Pharisees for
so doing, and not allowed any Churches or Christians so to do.

3. It would be grossly impudent if the Church should pretend to a power of
making Laws contrary to the Word of God, though they should be so; therefore
they cannot pretend to this Law-making power in any thing but what she says is
in it self indifferent: therefore she can pretend only to the making a new
additional Law for Christ, such as he never made, and for and in such things
which he thought best in his wisdom to leave indifferent. But the Church finds
a mistake in that first Constitution, and thinks best to make such things
necessary; thinks that Christ left too few ceremonies and significant signs:
and therefore enacts more Laws besides the Word, not contrary to what he has
enacted and established already.

2. But I shall now prove that all humane Laws and Constitutions in matters of
divine Worship, besides the Word, are contrary to the Word.

1. That which is not the revealed Will of God for his Worship in his Word, is
contrary to the Word of God; but humane Constitutions and Laws for divine
Worship, are not the revealed Will of God in his Word: Ergo. The Major is true,
because the Word is the revealed Will of God; and that Rule of Worship which is
not the revealed Will of God, is contrary to the revealed Will of God for his
Worship; for Revealed and not Revealed, are contradicentia, as justus and non
justus, honestum and non honestum; and contradicentia will never be denied (by
any good Logicians) to be contraria: therefore the revealed Will of God in his
Word, and not the revealed Will of God in his Word, are contraries, or there is
no contraries in the world. The Minor carries its evidence from the very terms:
for what is beside the Word, is beside the Will of God in the Word, and not to
be found there; for whatever is found to be the Will of God in the Word,
positively or consequentially, so obliges as a Law of God to obedience,
according to the true intent and meaning thereof.

2. Whatever be humane Laws for the Worship of God besides the Word, are at the
best but the Will of man, that those things should be necessary in the Worship
of God, which Christ has willed indifferent, and revealed in his Word so to
be; but for man to will those things to be necessary in the Worship of God,
which Christ has willed and revealed in his Word to be indifferent, is to will
or make a Law contrary to the revealed Will of Christ in his Word, i. e. for
the matter of the Law; for necessary and indifferent are adversa, and therefore
also contraria: if the opposites be necessary and not necessary, they are
contradicentia, and they are contraria as before.

3. Whatever is not according to the Will of God in the Word, is contrary to
the Will of God in his Word; but all such humane Laws besides the Word, are not
according to the Word: Ergo. The Major is true, because all actions are
agreeable to the Word by being according to the Word, and disagreeing by not
being according to the Word; and so are contrary to the Word, and are really
contradicentia: for according to, and not according to, referring to the same
subject, are contradicentia, every action being according or not according, and
so contrary or not contrary to the Word of God. Minor: I prove such Laws
besides the Word are not according to the Word; the meaning (of besides the
Word) is, that there is no ground for it in the Word, and therefore that cannot
be according to the Rule laid down in the Word; for that were to be built upon,
and to be justified by it: a man cannot sit upon a seat and sit besides it at
the same time; the same water poured cannot fall in the Cup and besides it too:
whatever Law cannot claim a Sanction from the Word, is not according to it,
therefore besides it, or against it; as Christ says, Whoever is not for me, is
against me. The Word does either justify or condemn all actions; and those
Laws that are not justified at least by Christ's approbation, are condemned by
the Word of God.

3. 4. Whatever is contrary to the Legislative Prerogative of Christ maintained
in his Word, is contrary to the Word; but such humane Laws and Constitutions
besides the Word, are contrary to the Legislative Prerogative of Christ: Ergo.
The Major is clear, because every truth maintained and defended by the Word, is
the Word; and whatever is contrary to that truth, is contrary to the truth of
the Word. And what truth is more clearly attested, and firmly ratified, than
this Prerogative of Christ? The Minor is clear, because nothing can detract
more than a Usurpation in this kind: What can detract more from the Legislative
power of King and Parliament, than for a Corporation or any inferior
combination of men, to assume this power to themselves?

5. To add any thing to the revealed Will of Christ, in matters of spiritual
concern, is contrary to the Word of the Old and New Testaments, Deuteronomy. 4.1, 2.
Rev. 22.18. but to make such Laws, is to add, etc. because such Laws (by our
supposition) being besides the Word, we have proved to be no parts of it; and
Ergo, additions to his Laws and institutions in the Word, which are perfect and
entire in themselves for Doctrine and Discipline in divine Service and Worship;
and these Laws of humane enaction (whatever pretenses are put upon them) being
for the same end and use, must needs be additional.

6. To teach for Doctrines the commands of men, is contrary to the Word of
Christ; but all humane Constitutions of this kind specified besides the Word,
are but Commands of men taught for Doctrines. The Major is true and undeniable,
from Mat. 14.9. where such Doctrines and Commands are charged by Christ for the
intolerable sin of the Pharisees. Compare with this place that in the Old
Testament, quoted and applied to them by our Savior, Isai. 29.14. Their fear
toward me is taught by the precepts of men; or which our Savior (the best
Interpreter of Scripture) says, In vain do they worship me; producing this
from the Prophet, Their fear is taught by the Commandments of men; not but that
they observed also Moses his Commands, but because they set up their Posts with
Gods, their Laws with Gods Laws: and this is that which Christ condemns. This
Argument is cleared, and fully prosecuted by another very lately, (in a learned
Exerc. on Mat. 15.9. and Mark 9.13.) And therefore I shall not actum agere. As
to the Minor, it is evident that such Legislators teach for Doctrine their own
Laws: for they press them doctrinally on the people, and charge it as their
duty to walk in the practice of active obedience unto such Laws, and condemn
all such as refuse such obedience (upon any pretense whatsoever) as disobedient
to Governors, and Schismatics.

CHAP. XX. Of the United Power Legislative of Church and Civil State.
1. LEst it should be replied to our preceding Discourse, That although the
civil Magistrate cannot of himself be a competent Compiler or Establisher of
Ecclesiastical Laws, Canons, or Constitutions, unless they be first compiled,
approved, and propounded by the Church to the Magistrate, to complete their
Sanction and Law-ratification with the impress of his Authority; yet the Church
and civil Magistrate both together, have a complete Legislative power in
Ecclesiastical Affairs. The Church is supposed to act by its Representatives in
a Convocation, Assembly of Divines, or Synod, or Council, lawfully assembled by
the call of the Magistrate. The Question is, Whether after they have agreed on
Ecclesiastical Canons and Constitutions, the civil Magistrate may give Sanction
to them, by making them Penal Statutes? The Question in brief is, Whether
Ecclesiastical Laws may become Penal Statutes by Magistratick Sanction?

2. In order to the right resolving of this Question, it is fit to enquire first
concerning the nature or subject matter of the said Canons and Constitutions,
whether the Composers and Proposers thereof do believe them to consist of such
things as Christ has left indifferent, and they would have to be necessiary?
or do they consist of such things as they have by disquisition found to be
necessary by virtue of the Will of Christ? for the end of such Assemblies is to
confer about the Will of Christ in the great and weightier matters of the
Church, for the clearing up of what is dark and dubious before. Now if the mind
of Christ be discovered, there needs no more Sanction; where the word of a King
is, there is power. Make it but out by the clearest demonstrations, that this
or that is the mind of Christ, there needs none of the Magistrates penalties to
be annexed; it has force enough of it self to reach the Conscience, which is
the end of Christ's Laws, and to charge guilt upon it in case of disobedience;
and that is more than all the Penal Laws of men can do. It Is needful to enquire
whether the Magistrates Sanction be by way of approbation only, or by way of
eminent commendation of the said Laws to his Subject; not annexing or executing
any Penalty himself, but allowing only some spiritual Penalty annexed by
Christ or his Church, to be executed by Church Officers? or whether he will
annex or cause to be executed any external Penalty by his civil Officers, as
occasion shall serve? The matter being thus stated, I proceed in the Negative.

3. 1. We have abundantly evidenced, that in the matters of Indifferencies in
Religion, no power on Earth may make any Laws, changing them into things
religiously necessary. 2. Where did Christ ever join Magistrates and Ministers
together in joint Commission in the government of his Church? 3. If so, why may
not Magistrates join in the judicial proceedings of the Church, and fit as due
Judges in all Spiritual Courts, and excommunicate and absolve? He that has a
share in Legislation, may reserve to himself the executive part at his own
pleasure. 4. If such Church-Laws are invalid without the Magistrates Sanction,
then he has a negative voice over the Church to stop any Church-proceedings in
Legislation or Execution; and indeed it is happy for some people that it is so,
else the Clergy (that call themselves the Church) would make mad work, were
not the civil State wiser and more moderate, and by its power able to put a
stop sometimes to their mad Carreers. 5. The Decrees of the Apostles, Elders,
and Brethren (being only a declaration of the mind of Christ in a difficult
case) became a Law to the Churches, without any such Magistatick ratification,
or annexation of Penalty. 6. Christ never annexed any corporal or
estate-Penalties to any of his Laws that he settled his Church with at the
first. 7. Christ provided so for the due government of his Churches, that
nothing might be wanting for the administration of Government and Ordinances,
in the worst of times, when most persecuted and opposed by those Magistrates in
whose Dominions they did militate. The Church of Christ would be but in a very
weak and lame condition in most Kingdoms and Ages, if the Magistrates
countenance and concurrence were an Essential Complement of its due state of
Ecclesiastic government; and that can never be accounted a right Model of
Church Government, that cannot be erected without the Kings and Princes of the
Earth set their hands to it: For if it were so, Christ should have few duly
governed Churches on Earth, that sort of men being oftener found pulling down
than setting up the Kingdom of Christ. Lastly, we having already proved that
neither Church Officers nor Civil have any Legislative power in the said
matters, and therefore being put together, they are but as two Ciphers that
make not so much as an Unite: for ex nihilo nihil fit, and therefore I need not
enlarge any further on this matter.

CHAP. XXI. Of Decency and Order in God's Worship, and Canonical Obedience.
1. THe great Plea that is made for the Magistrates and Churches Legislative
power in Spirituals, is, that there might be Decency and Order in the Church,
which is most meet to be, especially because Christ has advised it (and his
Advice has the force of a Command in it) 1 Cor. 14.40. (...). The Apostles
design in this Chapter, is to exort to love and peace, as appears from verse.
1. and 33. and that he may effect it, he reproves several things amiss in the
Church of Corinth: 1. Their Prophesying in strange Tongues. 2. Their speaking
so many together. 3. The immodest boldness of women to presume to speak in the
Church. 4. Their Pride, being puffed up with their gifts, etc. For Remedies he
advises in general, 1. That all things be done to edification, verse. 26.2.
That all things be done with decency and order. 3. In particular, how and what
things are to be done so to attain these ends. First, speaking with Tongues
should be with interpretation, verse. 27, 28. Secondly, Prophesying should be
one by one, with submission to the judgments of the Church, verse. 30, 31, 32,
33. 4. That the women should neither use Tongues, nor prophecy, but be silent
in the Church, verse. 34. Now lest this reprehension should be a discouragement
to them from striving after the best Gifts, and improvement of them, he would
have them to understand, that his design was only to rectify Disorders, not
to suppress or discourage from their Exercise of Gifts, that might be to
Edification: and therefore says, verse. 39. Covet to prophecy, or be zealous
for prophesying, as the word is, (supposing it a very profitable Exercise in
the Church) and forbid not to speak with Tongues (that being an extraordinary
Gift among their Primitive Disciples, for the propagation of the Gospel) but
let that be exercised also. The things in themselves are materially good, but
your way of managing them is not good, there is so much confusion and
unseemliness attends it: therefore do the things, but be careful that they be
done with Decency and Order for the present. And now behold here is the Text
that the whole Babel of ceremonious trash is built upon by the abusive
Interpretations both of Papists and Protestants; and therefore let us examine a
little, whether there be so much in it to give countenance to the endless
Inventions and Superstitions of the sons of men in the Worship of God.

2. We shall first open the words, that things may be the clearer: (...) [H.
Stev. composite, decenter, honeste] It Is rendered only decently in this place;
it is used in two other places, where it is rendered honestly, Romans 13.13. 1 Thessalonians. 4.12. and (...), 1 Cor. 12.23. is aptly rendered Decor, Comeliness.
(...) the adj. is read by H. St. Honestus, Decens, Mark 15.43. Honorable.
Joseph of Arimathea (is said to be) an honorable Counselor; and Acts 13.50.
chapter 17.20. Trem. honorable: but 1 Cor. 7.35. (...), I speak for -- that which
is decent or comely, etc. 1 Cor. 12.24. our comely parts. So that the sense of
the Text seems to be, Let all things be done with such a comeliness as is
honorably beseeming the Gospel, or that seemly Reverence that becomes the
Assemblies of the Saints. Tremelius's Interpretation seems much adapted to the
Context, cum modestia, in opposition to women's immodest boldness in presuming
to speak in public, and in opposition to that pride and confidence that
abounded among them in the exercising of their Gifts. Let things be done with
modesty: Wherefore the Decency here meant, may signify these three things in
the Worship of God: 1. A Comeliness; 2. A Reverence; 3. Modesty.

3. (...), Secundum ordinem fiant; the Word is but in the signification here
given only: it is sometimes taken for an Office-Order, as an Office of
Priesthood, Heb. 5.6. and 5.10. Luke 1.8. Heb. 7.11. but we have nothing to do
with the Word in that sense here; the acceptance here is of such Order as is
opposed to Confusion, in which sense it is used, Coloss. 2.5. (...), The Apostle
would have them exercise Gifts, administer Sacraments, and do all things in the
Church in the due place and season, that one Ordinance might not hinder the
edification of another, and nothing might be done confusedly; they might speak
all one by one, and the spirit of the Prophets subject to the Prophets. He
would not have Church Assemblies to be tumultuous, by many preaching, reading,
or praying audibly together, (for all may be understood here of prophesying) as
it is the custom in some Churches; but there should be but one at a time
speaking in the Congregation, and not that any one might start up (as the
Quakers do) and speak at pleasure to interrupt one another; but the spirit of
the Prophets should be subject to the Prophets. Let every one speak as he is
appointed and approved of by the Church Officers.

4. Hence we may gather, that Decency is a necessary external part of God's
Worship, consisting in a reverend deportment and comely management of the
Ordinances of Christ, as becomes the Gospel. 1. It Is externally opposed to the
inward Worship of the heart, a great part of that which is called a form of
Godliness. 2. It Is an external necessary part; there are internal Necessaries,
and external: I do not say it is an essential part of God's Worship, but it is a
necessary Accidental, it belonging to it in its kind, by virtue of a Law of
Christ; and all things (we have showed) commanded by him, are necessary:
therefore this Decency is no Indifferency, and determinable by any humane Law.
3. Consisting in a reverend Deportment, i. e. such an one as is morally
requisite, as signs to express Holiness, awful apprehensions of God, Humility,
Modesty, etc. for moral Virtue or Grace ought to be visible and manifest in our
external gestures and behaviors. Hence the behavior here mentioned, is
opposed to all irreverent, immodest, unnatural, idolatrous gesture in God's
Worship; all such as either denote profaneness of our hearts, disrespect of
God's Presence or Ordinances, or alienation of heart, or wandering of spirits.

5. Things done according to Order, is according to best understanding of the
ordination and appointment of Jesus Christ, from that place Coloss. 2.5. (...),
rejoicing in seeing your Order (to which the following words seem exegetical)
and your firmness of the Faith toward Christ; if the Conjunction be
Copulative, making the parts contradistinct, its rejoicing to see your
stability of Faith in your closing with Christ and your Order, i. e. in walking
in all his Commandments according to the Rule that he has given: for the whole
of a Christian is comprised in Faith and Order; and therefore doing things
(...), is (...), 2 Cor. 10.13. according to the measure of the Rule or Canon
which God has measured or distributed to us. The word is Canon; the same word
is Gal. 6.16. Philip. 3.16. and in both places signifies the Rule of the Gospel
by which we are to walk. In Gal. 6. he speaks in the verse before of
indifferent things; Circumcision avails nothing, nor uncircumcision, but the
new creature; and as many as walks according to this Rule, What Rule is that?
It Is this: To put no stress on things indifferent, but upon those that Christ
has made necessary to salvation for preserving the life of the new Creature.
So in Phil. 3.16. so far as we have attained, (...), where it is to be
understood of the one Rule of the Gospel, or System of Rules in things
necessary for our practice, by the special appointment of Christ; and so far as
Christians have attained to the knowledge of this Canon, we are to walk. Whence
I gather, that walking according to Order, is in the practice of Canonical
Obedience to the Rules of the Gospel; that is, in a due submission to and
practice of all the Ordinances of the Gospel, without distraction and
confusion; God being the God of Order, and not of Confusion.

6. Decency and Order is either Civil or Religious: by Civil I mean such as are
of civil use merely, or such rites and modes of action as are used in civil
affairs. Though these may have a moral and therefore religious foundation, yet
their Objects, Intendments, and Circumstances, being chiefly Civil, and the
moral foundation from the second Table, we call them Civil, and distinguish
them from religious Decencies: And these are such as have their foundation on
the first Table, and have God for their Object immediately, and manifest End,
being ordained for spiritual intendments and purposes; and therefore external
Notes of internal seriousness, reverence, and consideration of God's Presence,
Honor, and Worship, according as revealed and required of us in the Canon of
his holy Word. And though the mode and order of Actions and Gestures may be the
same materially that we use in civil Decencies and Order, yet the appropriation
being to contradistinct Objects, and their purport and design of the said
Actions and Modes thereof, they are justly reputed of another nature, and
receive contradistinct Denominations.

7. Religious Decency and Order is either of merely Moral, or of instituted
Original. Moral (and therefore called Natural) and instituted Worship, are
usually and aptly opposed; for such as are of Moral Original, are comprehended
in, or directly deducible from the precepts of the Moral Law, as all reverent
and humble gestures of the Creature before the Creator, such as standing,
kneeling, prostration, etc. which for the most part are only generally
propounded so far as they may hold forth a proportionate external indication of
the solemnity of our Undertakings; neither may they become any more definite by
man's Law, than God himself has determied. As for Example: No man can make a
Law to tie us up to any particular gesture in Prayer, as to kneeling, standing,
etc. because God has left it indifferent to a Christians election to govern
himself by the Rules of Expediency, so he have a respect to the general
Obligation, viz. that it be such as is reverent, and becoming our attendance on
God in such an Ordinance.

8. Decencies and Order belonging to instituted Worship, are separable from
merely moral Worship, and required by some more special Commandment of Christ
in the disciplining of his Church; and they differ as the Economy of the
Church does. The Levitical Economy made Levitical Decencies and Order
necessary, in mode and manner of the Jewish Worship then required in those of
Offerings, Sacrifices, Buildings, Gestures, Vestures, Washings; all which, as
shadows, vanished, and were actually abolished, with the whole substance of the
Ceremonial Law, when the Body approached: And therefore to introduce into
Gospel Worship, Modes proportionate and adapted to Mosaical Services, viz.
Priests, Ephods, Altars, Sacrifices, etc. is contrary to the revealed Will of
Christ, and an implicit denial of his being come in the Flesh.

9. The Levitical Economy, with all its Appendixes, being abolished, the
Evangelical takes place; which are determined by the Law of Christ, as to the
more and less substantial parts of Worship. And that we may be distinct about
Gospel- Decencies and Order, we must know, 1. That all merely moral Decencies
are in force under the Gospel, and needs no other Law to ratify them than the
Law of Christ, which has always continued the moral Law, and its due
circumstantial Attendments under all changes of instituted Worship. 2. All
Levitical Decencies and Order are abolished by Christ's coming, when his
Ecclesiastical Economy was changed. 3. All Evangelical Decencies and Order, as
women's being covered and keeping silence in public Assemblies, and such as
concern the Word and Sacraments, are sufficiently determined by Christ, by the
precepts or practice of himself, Apostles, and Primitive Church, that we need
not betake our selves to Rome or any other pretended Law-making Church, to
fetch new Prescriptions in order to the completing of the Worship of Christ.
And whereas present Innovations of our Pretenders are pleaded for from the
Primitive practice, I say no more but this, that when the Evidence of that
Practice appears from God's Word, we will not scruple the imitation; but being
imposed upon us by Tradition, mostly through Antichristian hands, or at best by
very fallible and inconsistent History; and if in many things true as to matter
of fact, yet we find them not justified by Sacred Authority, we dare not
assent and consent unto them.

10. Now if the Church knows of any more Decencies and Orders needful to be
used under the New Testament, and those that are of moral intent confirmed by
Christ, or Evangelical of his last Institution, then let her plead and use her
Legislative power (if she have any jure) in establishing the same: and if any
shall or does think notwithstadding, that it is needful to establish new
decencies of humane invention by Church-Laws, we shall still proceed further to
evince the contrary.

11. If decency and order be strained to the largest acceptance in the New
Testament's sense, they cannot be pretended to be any other than Evangelical
decency and order, comprehending all moral and instituted decency and order
which Christ has appointed to be used in his Gospel Church; else how should it
come to be so? for that only is Evangelical which Christ makes so, and calls
so; every mimical Gesture and antic Vesture that any brainsick Churchman, or
carnal Priests and Prelates, or any Convention of them shall devise, and
christen with the name of Decency and Order, is not Evangelical. The Rules and
Forms of Worship and Discipline which Christ has left to his Church, are
comely, grave, decent, and orderly enough, without any additaments and
amendments proceeding from men's corrupt fancy and interest.

12. And that it is not lawful for the Church to make Laws to establish more
decencies in the Worship of God than Christ has appointed or allowed, we have
proved already; if they undergo the lowest consideration as matters of
Indifferency, I shall only add a few words more.

13. First, If it be lawful for the Church to annex new decencies and order to
the decencies and order appointed by Christ, then these must be necessary or
unnecessary; but it is not lawful, Ergo. 1. It Is not lawful to annex
unnecessary: for this were to trifle, and would infer the greatest absurdities
imaginary; therefore none will insist upon that. 2. Not to annex any thing
necessary: for they must then judge something necessary which Christ has not
declared so, (as something belonging to the esse or been esse of the Church;)
and this were a high affront to Christ, and impeachment of his wisdom, as not
perfect and complete in his House; as likewise it is implicitly to condemn
Christ's Worship and Ordinances (as left by him) for undecent and disorderly,
and so naked and unfit to come to public view, till they be anew dressed up
and trimed by the Church in her Poppet-play Robes and Attire.

14. Secondly, And then she might re-establish any old absolete Jewish
decencies, so she use them Evangelically, upon as good or better ground than
she has brought in Heathenish practices into use in the Church. Thirdly,
Decency and Order in the Church, is no Indifferency, but necessary in its kind,
(as has been showed) because commanded and enjoined by Christ; and Ergo, if
the Church has power to enact Laws in matters of Indifferency, it follows not
that she has power to do the like in matters of Decency and Order, because
they are not indifferent things, but necessary, if we understand either Moral
or Evangelical decency and order.

15. It is fallacious and false to assert that the Church prescribes only
decencies in the Worship of God; for they are the smallest part of her
Ceremonies: for what are Holy Days, Cross in Baptism, Music in Divine Service?
And besides, most or all her Ceremonies respect other Objects, and are for
other significancy and ends, than for decency; some being chiefly gratia
divina, as all reverential Gestures and Postures, viz. bowing at the Name of
Jesus, bowing to the Altar, kneeling at the Sacrament, standing up at the
Gospel. These are signs of divine honor, and Latrical, and can be no
otherwise understood than respecting a Divinity: and therefore there can be no
pretense to call it civil Worship, because in all civil Worship man is the
Object; and were the same or like actions, which for the matter are neither
civil or divine, but indifferent as to both, but a peculiar Adaptation to a
singular end or object, they receive their distinct denomination therefrom.
Some are chiefly gratia humana, in order to the due preparing and qualifying us
for Spiritual Services; Surplices to make us appear more pure, and an Emblem of
Purity, and mind us of it; Music to raise the Spirits: and others more mixed in
their intention, tam gratia divina, quam humana, as Saints days, wherein God is
blessed for Saints, whereby God is honored and the Saint too; the Cross in
Baptism, and the Ring in Matrimony; which are Seals of obligation religiously
made use of, (therefore more than significant signs) and can be no less than
Sacraments. There are also diverse Responses and Salutations betwixt Ministers
and People; in all which it is easy to perceive that there is some weightier
matters respected than mere civil decencies and order, whatever pretenses are
made to the contrary.

16. We have before hinted what we apprehend true canonical obedience to be,
viz. that it is not a submission to a certain body of Laws made by any Church
challenging a Legislative power, neither to those feigned Canons of the
Apostles; but it is obedience to the Canons or Rules of Gospel-communion laid
down in the Scriptures: those that are acquainted with the true Churches of
Christ, know no other Canons, nor no other canonical Obedience they are obliged
unto. Now those that call for canonical obedience (under that term) they tell
us that it is obedience to the Laws, Rules, and Constitutions of the Church;
but I could never rightly understand any reason for their plea from the Church,
viz. of the authority pleaded for: for if it be a National Church that requires
the said obedience, we say, 1. That that Church cannot pretend to challenge
obedience, that is not capacitated to make or execute any Law; but the National
is not: Ergo. The Minor appears, in that there is no such thing as a National
organized Church constituted by Christ under the Gospel; for if there were,
there must be National Officers and Ordinances by the same appointment: but
Christ has constituted no National Officers, i. e. whose Office-power in the
Church is of such extent; nor no National Ordinances, i. e. such Ordinances
that the whole Nation may partake of in one Assembly for communion. The same
Argument will hold against Diocesan Churches. 2. How is any one National Church
the Church, more than another that has such a Ruling power, if all has it
alike? how various will Church-canons be, and how little Uniformity in
canonical obedience? 3. If this obedience belongs to any Church, it seems most
consonant to right reason that it should belong to the Catholic Church: for 1.
That may be as organical as a National can be by virtue of any institution of
Christ. 2. That Is most comprehensive; therefore challenges the pre-eminence of
all others in respect of extent, and by way of eminency may most properly be
styled the Church. 3. This is the likeliest way to attain a Uniformity; for
it is pleaded as the great reason why Christ gives a Legislative Compulsive
power to a National Church, viz. Vniformitatis gratia. Now it is but a partial
Uniformity obtained thereby, of an Independent nature; but if true Uniformity
be reached, it must be that which is Catholic; which can be no otherwise than
by Catholic canonical obedience.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Imposition of Ceremonies.
1. NExt to the consideration of decencies and order, it may be meet to enquire
a little into the lawfulness of imposition 1. of Ceremonies, 2. of a form of
Prayer.

Whether a Ceremony uncommanded by God, may be used in the Worship of God, is
not our present Undertaking to discuss; for in some cases it may be lawful, so
it be such as is duly qualified, and be used as indifferent and occasionally,
by the Rules of discretion: but our present Enquiry shall be,

Whether the Church is liable to the imposition of such Ceremonies as Christ
has not made necessary by any Law of his? Many Arguments before urged against
the Churches Legislative power, might be here of equal force. I shall only
add something proper upon this state of the Question, to prove that such an
imposition is not in the Churches power.

2. Arg. 1. Because the Church by such imposition does subjugate herself in her
Members to a yoke of bondage, which Christ has freed her and them from. That
Christians are freed from such yokes, see Gal. 4.31. chapter 5.1. and the Church is
not to return to any bondage that she is freed from by Christ, she being not a
competent Judge of her own bondage or freedom. The Church of the Jews were not
so; for they are condemned by the Spirit of God for not laying aside that
bondage to ceremonies which Christ would have eased them of. Hence in judgment
her Ear is bored, and she is become a professed Vassal thereto, until the time
of the fullness of the Gentiles; and would account it her greatest felicity,
might she but have opportunity to return to the full enjoyment and exercise of
the old obsolete Rites of the ceremonial Law. Hence nothing can be a more
unquestionable truth, than that a Gospel Church may not return her self or
members to a subjection to a ceremonial Yoke: for, 1. If a Christian or Church
may return to one Yoke that Christ has redeemed them from, then as well to
another; if to that of a ceremonial Law, then to that of the covenant of Works
also. 2. Again, if they may return to bondage, then they may stay in bondage as
the Jews did: for both ways Christ equally profits them nothing, as a Redeemer
profits not a Slave that will remain a captive, or return into it. 3. There Is
nothing can be more displeasing to a Redeemer, than so to overthrow his whole
design of redemption.

3. That Christ has freed his Churches and Christians from ceremonies as a
yoke of bondage, viz. from all not instituted and ratified by himself, I thus
prove. 1. If Christ has not freed the Church of the New Testament from all
ceremonies besides his own, the condition of the Gospel Church would be much
worse than the Mosaical, whose bondage was under a Law of ceremonies of God's
own promulgation; and sure if a Christian must be under the plague of
ceremonies, it is far better to fall into the hands of God than Man; and the
Jewish Church must needs be more happy than the Christian, who lie at the mercy
of men's vain Imaginations and tyrannical Will. It was known to them of the Old
Testament how great their burden was, though prescribed by God, and
circumscribed exactly as to the latitude, and extent, and bulk of them; so that
they could not easily be imposed upon by man: and yet we see they could not
escape the Traditions of the Elders, and superstitious Observations of the
Pharisees. But what a miserable condition are Churches of the New Testament in,
who are so liable to so heavy and intolerable a bulk of ceremonies, without
bounds or measure, arbitrarily to be increased by men of corrupt minds and
interest, calling themselves the Church: and were there a tithe of the
ceremonies in the Jewish Church of what is in the Romish, which the Papists
have accumulated upon this ground. And Christ has given leave to the Church
under the Gospel, to devise and impose what ceremonies she in her wisdom thinks
meet? 2. Unless Christ has freed the Gospel Church from ceremonial bondage,
how is the Gospel Church the free Woman? Was not the bondage-state of the
Jewish Church very much, yea most in this respect? But is not the Gospel Church
in far greater servitude? for the Jews were in bondage to God's ceremonies, the
Christian to man's. And if Christ allows us not to return to ceremonial bondage
of God's imposition, sure he allows us not a return unto such of man's phanatick
devising, and merciless imposition. 3. To be in bondage under ceremonies for
divine Worship, is to be in bondage under the Elements of the world; but the
Gospel Church is delivered by Christ from bondage to the Elements of the world,
Gal. 4.3.9. for (...) Elements or Principles of the world, Coloss. 2.8. they
are described to be (...), according to the tradition of men; and verse. 20.
they are those that Christ has redeemed us from, and weak and beggarly, Gal.
4.9. and if the ceremonies of the Jews, once instituted by God himself, were
such, how much more are the ceremonious Relicts of heathenish Idolatry, or any
other that are products of men's Brains and corrupt Wills? What poor, wretched,
and abominably beggarly things are they, for the members of Christ to be
enslaved to? What pitiful Ornaments are old rotten Hangings to put up in
Christ's house, that excellent Fabric of his own building? If they, I say,
(Jewish) were worldly, much more those which are originally from the world, of
worldly contrivance and interest: for all such must be of God or the world; but
they are not from God either immediately or mediately; not immediately, because
not instituted by him; not mediately, because he never deputed any authority to
institute them: Ergo, of the world. Hence the Church and Christians should be
dead with Christ, to the Rudiments of the world, and not live in the world
subject to such Elements, Col. 2.20. etc. 4. The ceremonies spoken of, Gal. 4.
and 5. which the Galatians returned to, were but humane commandments, though
Jewish; for they ceased now to be commanded of God, yea, were forbidden by him;
and all the Sanction which now they had, was from man: And the Apostle does
convincingly prove the unlawfulness of Resanction of Jewish ceremonies; by
doing of which, he does sufficiently cast down all humanely-instituted
ceremonies in divine Worship: and by the Prelates practice, many Jewish
ceremonies, as Music, Altars, Ephods, etc. are not only lawful as things
indifferent, but required as things not to be dispensed with, therefore
necessary. 5. Christ has freed his Church and Members from being servants unto
men in the Worship of God; Ergo, from humane ceremonial Laws: That place 1 Cor.
7.23. must be understood of servitude unto men, in an Ecclesiastical, or at
least Religious sense: for he says, Let every man abide in the Calling wherein
he is called; servants in obedience to their Masters, children to their
Parents, subjects to their governors, etc. For the Corinths thought that there
was a necessity on their conversion to alter their Callings which they had
before; as if a man were called, being a servant, to be a Christian, that
thereby he became his brother, and ought not any longer to ow^ him as Master.
But the Apostle clears up this doubt, and says, Thou being a servant, do not
think thy relation to thy Master is dissolved ever the more because of thy
conversion; thou art as much a servant as before; and therefore he says, being
called, do not presently renounce thy relation, and refuse subjection to thy
Master, upon pretense that thou art Christ's freeman, but abide in the place of
a servant as before; thou art nevertheless God's freeman, thy Conscience free
for God's Worship, to serve him according to his revealed Will: and therefore
in this kind be not a servant to men, or any sort of men; though thou may
lawfully remain a Family-servant, yet be not a Conscience-vassal unto any men.

4. Arg. 2. If it be lawful for the Church or other power to enact and impose
Laws for Ceremonies, whereby Churches and Christians are liable to such Laws,
then it is lawful to erect a ceremonial Law under the Gospel: for what is a Law
of, or for a body of Ceremonies, but a ceremonial Law? But Christ would never
pull down one ceremonial Law by his death, for man to erect another; and pull
down one Jewish, and leave it lawful for man to erect one more heathenish;
would he abolish one ceremonial Law of divine Institution, and leave it to man
to establish a new one of his own devising; yea, a thousand ceremonial Laws of
as many sorts as there are several Churches and Ages in the world? It Is a most
absurd and untheological conceit, that a ceremonial Law is consistent with the
state of the Gospel, wherein all Vails whatever is removed from the Lord Jesus,
besides the vail of his flesh; neither is the Spirituality of his Ordinances to
be clogged with such a bulkie mass of fleshly Institutions.

5. Arg. 3. If we be not liable to an imposition and enforcement of Christ's
own by a temporal Penal Law, much less liable to such imposition of ceremonies
by Ecclesiastic or other authority; for all imposition is by a Penal Law: but
we know Christ never made any Penal Law to be Ecclesiastically administered,
thereby to enforce men to Baptism and receive the Supper: His people that
submit to his Ordinances, must be willing and free: whereunto they are brought
by enlightening the Understanding, and persuading the Will, as the great end of
the Gospel preached. Those that will say otherwise, must justify the Spaniards
in America, in bringing the poor Indians to their baptism by force. The claim
that any make to the use of the Magistrates Sword, or force of Arms, to prevail
with men to submit to any things pretended to be spiritual, is of like nature,
and will fall under the like condemnation: And how much worse by the Rule of
Proportion must that needs be, to enforce ceremonies of humane institution,
than those of divine? Would not Christ give such a power to the Church to
enjoin his own institution under Corporal or Penal Mulcts? how much less will
he bear so great an usurpation for any to erect a body of ceremonial Laws, with
Penalties annexed, thereby to enforce them on the Consciences and practices of
others? The Argument stands very fair and forcing, from the greater to the
less: That power that cannot justify the imposing any of Christ's own
Ordinances on men, even on unregenerate, and no visible Members, cannot
justify the imposing humane Ordinances on the visible Members of Jesus Christ;
but no Power can justify the imposing any of Christ's Institutions by a Penal
Law, etc. Ergo, there is none can pretend to defend any such proceedings, by
any plausible Argument from Scripture or right Reason.

6. Arg. 4. If the Church is liable to the imposition of Ceremonies not
instituted by Christ, it is either to the imposition of insignificant, or of
significant. It Is not subjected to the imposition of insignificant, i. e. of
childish or irrational empty ceremonies of no signification: for this were to
mock God, and imitate the Heathens in a gross manner, to use antic gestures
and actions (in God's solemn Worship) of which there can be no plausible reason
pretended; therefore such things are absolutely vain and unlawful. 2. For
significant Ceremonies, Church-powers cannot impose them, 1. Because none may
devise and enact such into a Law at pleasure. 2. None can pretend sufficiently
to the sign and thing necessarily requiring signification thereby in Christ's
Worship, but Christ himself. A significancy in divine service, must be such as
Christ would have, and no other; he will not have such things signified as are
heterogenious to his service: and homogenious things only may be represented
by homogenious signs; and who can determine such, but the most wise Legislator
and King of his Church? 3. Significant Ceremonies are so by virtue of
adaptation of a sign by some Law to the thing signified, and they are either
Moral or Instituted: Moral and natural are such wherein there is a natural or
moral relation between the sign and thing signified, or at least acquired by
use and custom, as bowing the body, and uncovering the head, of reverence and
subjection, etc. and there is nothing in this kind necessary to be done in the
Worship of God, which is not already done: for if Christ had seen a necessity
of any more ceremonies of that kind, he would have annexed them. Again,
ceremonies of limited Institution are not to be imposed; for such are either
Typical or Sacramental. 1. There can be no Typical Ceremonies under the New
Testament, because the Body is come, and the Shadows must fly away. 2. Nor can
there be any Sacramental Ceremonies instituted: for herein lies the exercise of
Christ's Prerogative, to institute Sacraments; neither does he enforce the use
of any by corporal or pecuniary Penal Laws 3. A Sacrament (according to the
Church of England) is a visible sign of an invisible Grace; in which sense all
significant ceremonies should be Sacraments, as the Surplice a sign of inward
Purity; but they that have not power to give the thing signified as well as the
sign, have no power to make a Sacrament; which Christ does in all his. 4. A
Sacrament is not every significant sign in divine things, but such a ceremony
as is a federal sign and seal; such was Circumcision and the Passover of old,
Baptism and the Lords Supper under the New Testament; such (though humane
Innovatious) is the Cross in Baptism, and the Ring in Marriage: for they are
consecrated Ceremonies, significant, and federally obligatory; which appears by
the Churches institution of them. But there may be no Sacramental ceremony
instituted by the Church: this would be a gross addition to Christ's Sacraments
annexed to the New Covenant, which must not be altered, nor have any new ones
superadded: for if any humane power may increase the number of Sacraments, viz.
to three or four, they may go to seven with the Papists; and why not as well to
seventy? Those two additional which some Protestant Churches retain, they are
beholding to Rome for the institution of them. Mr. Bradshaw and others has
sufficiently proved that no Church can institute ceremonies of Sacramental
significancy and intent; and therefore I need not enlarge here upon it.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Obligation to a Form of Prayer.
1. HAving discussed that Question, whether a Church or Christian is liable to
imposition of Ceremonies, it remains now to enquire, How far a Church or
Christian may be obliged to a Form of Prayer? A Form of Prayer is such a Prayer
as is premeditated and prescribed by our selves or others, as to the matter and
form of Petitions and Words, constantly and unalterably to be used on times and
occasions suiting the matter, form, and drift of the said Prayer. The Question
here will not be, Whether a Christian may not use a Form of Prayer; but,
Whether it be lawful for a Christian (as much as to use any indifferency) to
bind himself, or suffer himself to be obliged to a prescribed Form of Prayer?
which Enquiry falls into two parts. 1. Whether a Christian may come under an
obligation, by vow or resolution, to use a Set-form of Prayer, as before
explained? 2. Whether he may suffer himself to come under any such obligation
by virtue of a Law made by any pretending Authority thereunto?

2. As to the first, we shall assert and confirm the Negative, That it is not
lawful for a Christian to put himself under any such obligation by his own Vow
or Covenant, or I may add, by his customary and constant abiding therein;
which does in effect amount to a Covenant-tye. If such a Tie were lawful, it is
either as a thing necessary, or indifferent; for all lawful things are so. 1.
It Is not lawful as a thing necessary (will be easily granted) because none will
say, that are Protestants, that a Christian is necessarily bound to a Form of
Prayer by the positive command of Christ; if they do, let it be shown where
Christ does require any so to oblige himself, or condemn any for not doing it;
or let him allege any Scriptural Example where any has done it, especially
in the New Testament. I suppose we need not stay on that part. The second part
of the Disjunction, that it is not lawful for him, as an indifferency, to bind
up himself to such a Form, I prove thus: All Christian indifferent actions of
concern in the Worship of Christ, ought to be determined by the judgment of
discretion, according to the Gospel-rules of Expediency, pro hic and nunc; but
to lay ones self under such an Obligation, would hinder him from walking by
such Rules, and by such a Judgment; Ergo, to use it as an Indifferency, and to
come under such an Obligation, are most inconsistent; but if it be said that
it is expedient for him to come under such an Obligation, the ratio formalis
must be because he cannot compose another Prayer, or pray by present
conception: But that is not a justifiable reason; for though he cannot at
present, he may afterward be able so to do. It Is just as if a man being lame
and uses crutches, makes a vow never to go without them, though he shall be
never so well. Or it may be another Form may be offered more suitable to his
condition (we meeting with daily alterations on that account;) it is not fit
therefore that we should be bound up always to the same Expressions, Petitions,
Confessions, and Thanksgivings; our Necessities, Temptations, Sins, and Mercies
received, daily changing. Besides, though a man have not at present the gift of
Prayer, or assistance of the Spirit thereunto, yet he ought to seek and wait
for it; and therefore ought not to bind himself up to such a Form, though he
may use it for present necessity.

3. Arg. 1. It Is not an indifferent thing for any man to stint himself in
Religion where God has not stinted him: Where Christ has allotted to us a
Freedom, the contrary to it is Bondage; and no Christian ought to put himself
into bondage where Christ has made him free. Whereas stinted Forms bound to,
brings a man into Bondage to Words, or these and those Petitions, Confessions,
etc. which though it may be suitable for one state and season, may not be at
another, neither so much to Christ's glory, and his own edification: for Christ
has foreseen a necessity of freedom in this kind, as to the use of words and
sentences in Prayer, i. e. to be regulated by Gospel-rules of Expediency, as
all Christian liberty is. 1. Because of the various Cases, Occurrences, and
Exigences that a Christian is liable to, that it is impossible any one can suit
fore-prescribed Forms unto them; and we are enjoined in all things to make our
Requests known unto God. 2. Because of the diverse helps and assistances of the
Spirit in expression of our wants, Romans 8.26. even sometimes in Sighs and
Groans, unutterable in words, and unreducible into any Forms; yea, often not
knowable before we come to ask, because discovered to us by the Spirit,
searching our hearts while we are waiting upon God in the duty. 3. Because of
the diverse frame of a Christians own spirit that he is subject unto, sometimes
of deadness and despondency, sometimes of enlargement (that for the most times
those are strangers to, who keep up in the road of words) that the same words
and sentences cannot in Faith be uttered, without the sameness of heart-frame,
which cannot always be; which they abundantly know, who have their senses
exercised by reason of use. There are the frequent ebbings and flowings of
particular Graces in a Christian's heart, as of Faith, Repentance, Joy,
Patience, etc. according to which he is always to proportion his expressions in
Prayer as near as may be, in order to his own comfort, and power against
prevailing corruptions. Besides, I might instance in the various assaults Satan
makes upon us, his manifold wiles, as also the diverse workings of our hearts
toward or against corruption; as lastly, the various and unexpected Mercies
that we be daily partakers of. Examples we have many in Scripture of suiting
Prayers in this manner, if we consider how it was with the Saints of old, as
David, Heman, Hezekiah, etc. 4. Because Christ has only given us general
Rules in the Gospel for particular Prayers, and has not bound or limited us to
any particular Form.

4. Obj. But Christ has prescribed us a Form of Prayer, viz. that commonly
called the Lord's Prayer; for he says, Luke 11.2. When you pray, say, etc.
Answ. It Is most absurd to think that Christ bound his Disciples to those words
and sentences, and bound us up from all others; and one Scripture must explain
another, Mat. 6.9. it is after this manner, i.e. for sense and meaning. 2. If
Luke 11.2. were to be understood strictly, then we must neither add to or
diminish from, nor alter the Form. Hence it were unlawful to use the Doxologie
mentioned Mat. 6. 3. If it were so, Christ's Disciples (this Prayer being
primarily directed to them upon their request) should never have used any other
Prayer; but we find not that they ever used the very Prayer in identity of
words and sentences. 4. In answer to their request, it was most probable to be
a Rule for Matter and Method; for they desired our Savior to teach them to
pray as John taught his Disciples. Now we find not any prescribed Form left by
John to his, neither I suppose did our Savior in this leave any more than a
Pattern or a standing Rule of Prayer to his people under the Gospel. 5. He
never used it himself, because he had no sin, need not say, Forgive me my sins.
6. All expressions are in the plural number, showing that we have only the
most general Rules; secret Prayer, is to be referred to it, and particular
cases, but not here mentioned in words and syllables. 7. If Christ had bound us
to this Form, then we were to use no other; neither might the Church prescribe
any other; neither might particular Christians use their gifts in Prayer, nor
various Forms of their own or others prescription: which would be too grossly
absurd for any to assert.

5. But fifthly, to infer that Christ (by prescribing this Form as imitable by
us, or by propounding and commending this to us as a Rule or Form) did thereby
tie us up to other Forms, or gave power to the Church to bind us to Forms, or
that we might bind our selves to other Forms, is as great an inconsequence as
any in the world; for we have showed there is more reason to judge that he left
it as a Rule than Form: If he left it as a Form, it is no ground for other men
to make Forms, but rather a ground to the contrary, it being his Prerogative as
our Lord and Master. And besides, if he has given us a Form, and we are
thereby bound to words and sentences, we ought not to take up other Forms, and
multiply thousands of men's prescriptions; for the sense of Christ must needs be
one of these two, when you pray, say, i. e. use this as the only Form of
Prayer, and stick to it for words and sentences, and never trouble your selves
about any other: for if it be taken in the other sense, it is universal. Take
this as a standing general rule of Prayer, to which all sorts of Petitions,
Deprecations, Confessions, Thanksgivings, are referrable. If he had authorized
any to compose other teaching Forms, he would have said, You, Apostles and your
Successors, thou Catholic Church, or National Church, or particular
Congregation; do you compose a Form of divine Service, and I will set my hand
to it.

6. The second part of the Question is, Whether a Christian may suffer himself
to be bound to a Form of Prayer by humane Authority pretending thereunto? The
Answer to this Enquiry will be double: 1. That whatever Authority,
Ecclesiastical or Civil, does pretend to such an imposing power, a Christian is
not to subject himself by active submission. 2. That no powers beneath Christ,
can pretend justly to such Authority. The reasons of the first has been
largely enough insisted on before; therefore I shall here but touch upon them.
1. Because Christ has not left it indifferent to a Christian to be bound in
matters of his Worship, where he has left him at liberty; for thereby the use
of discretion, in conveniences, is lost. 2. All those reasons why he may not
bind himself to a Form of Prayer, do formally prove that he is not to permit
himself to be imposed upon in this kind by another. 3. None but Christ may
prescribe Set-forms of his own Worship; and we are not allowed obedientially to
submit to any Legislative power in this kind, as has been showed. 4. If a
Christian suffer himself in this to be imposed upon, he parts with one of the
most eminent privileges that he is capable of, viz. that of speaking his mind
to God in Prayer, and not to be bound to the Dictates and Suggestions of
another. Who can know our own case in respect of Sins, Wants, Temptations,
Mercies, etc. better than our selves? What is more unreasonable, than that a
Child (though he cannot speak plainly) should not be suffered to speak his
mind to his Parents, as well as he can, but must be always prescribed to it in
the Servants or elder Brothers words and expressions? To deal thus with God's
Children, is to go about to abandon the Spirit of Adoption, which God's
Children are led by, Romans 8.2.14, 15. which Spirit they have for this end, that
they cry Abba Father, that they may speak the language of the Spirit in Prayer
(though their utterance be in broken and abrupt Sentences, even in sighs and
groans) which God knows the meaning of. Wherefore to put our selves under
humane set Forms, is to put ourselves into the greatest spiritual Bondage of
this nature.

. 7. Secondly, No Power Ecclesiastical or Civil can pretend justly to Authority
from Christ, to impose on Minister or Christian a set Form of Prayer.

Argum. 1. If any can pretend to such Authority, it must be to impose a set
Form of Christ's composing, or of humane composition: But they cannot pretend
justly to impose any Prayer of Christ's composing, because Christ has neither
required nor allowed the imposing the use of that which is called the Lord's
Prayer by penal Laws. What corporal or pecuniary Mulcts are to be inflicted on
a man that does not use the very words of that Prayer, by virtue of any Law of
Christ? Is he to be Whipped, or Fined for it by the Magistrate, or
Excommunicated by the Church? Again, they cannot pretend to impose a Form of
humane composition; for if there be no ground to impose a Form of Prayer of
Christ's composition, by a penal Law, much less to impose one of Man's: And for
any to undertake, either Church or State, to prescribe the worship of Christ,
and to enforce it by punishments, where Christ never deputed or allowed such
Authority, is the greatest presumption and insolency in the world.

. 8. Argum. 2. He or they that impose a Form of Prayer, must do it, because it
is necessarily or indifferently requisite so to do, according to the revealed
Will of Christ: But none can impose a Form of Prayer for any of these reasons.
Ergo. 1. None can, because a Form of Prayer is necessarity requisite, 1.
Because Christ has no where required the Church or Magistrate to impose. 2. If
a Setform of Prayer were absolutely necessary, it could not be to any person or
season dispensed with. 3. If the necessity be pleaded for public Prayers, that
there should be a set Form, there is as little necessity of that, can be proved
from the Word of God, as of private Set-Forms. 4. If there be need of a Form
for help in some cases, in respect of present weakness of Ministers or
Christians, it is no reason therefore it should be imposed as necessary to all
it is pleaded for upon the account of Uniformity; but if some of his Majesty's
Subjects wear Spectacles, because of the weakness of their Eyes, must all do so
too for Uniformity sake, though their Eyes be never so good? We are to strive
after perfection and conformity to Christ therein, but are not to endeavor to
conform to the weaknesses and imperfections of his Members, and take our
measures thereby; though we are to bear with and condescend to them as much as
may be without sin.

9. Secondly, A Form of Prayer cannot be imposed as indifferently requisite to
the worship of Christ; because 1. If any thing be indifferently ( i. e.
conveniently) requisite to the worship of Christ, it is because Christ has
willed it indifferently requisite: for all matters of his Worship take their
first reason from his Will. 2. There is no reason from the indifferency of any
thing, to impose it as necessary: But in Spiritual concerns the indifferency of
any thing is a reason against the imposition of it as necessary; because such
an imposition takes away the Formal use as an indifferency, 3. What Christ has
revealed as indifferently requisite, he has required a Christian to use
indifferently by the judgment of discretion; for every action concerning
Christ's worship, is to be performed as Christ has prescribed the nature of
it; necessary things to be done necessarily by us, (but not to be imposed on
us) and indifferent things indifferently. Therefore an Imposition to enforce
the use of indifferent things necessarily, and necessary indifferently, is
unlawful, as contrary to the Will of Christ. 4. We have before proved, that
neither Church nor State can change an Evangelical Indifferency in the Worship
of Christ into a Necessity.

10. Arg. 3. To exercise Dominion over Men's Faith, is unlawful: but for Church
or Magistrate to impose a set Form of Prayer, is to exercise Dominion over Men's
Faith, Ergo. The Major is without question; and to exercise such a Dominion, is
to prescribe what we shall believe and practice, or to enforce us to practice
in Sacred things without believing. The Minor is true, because there can be no
greater exercise of Dominion over Faith, than in imposing on us a Form of
Prayer; for every Prayer is to be prayed in Faith, or else it is sin. Now to
impose a Form on me, (being to enforce me to that Prayer that I be not
satisfied in) is to impose on my Faith, i.e. to prescribe what I should believe
for practice in Prayer; or to enforce me to practice that which I do not
believe; i. e. to pray that Prayer, and that constantly, in such a part of
Worship which I cannot do believingly.

11. Arg. 4. If one Church may enforce a Form of Prayer by a Penal Law, then
another may; i. e. if a National Church may enforce a Form of Prayer on all her
Subordinate Churches and Members, then the Universal visible Church may on the
National which are her Members; and if the National can punish the Diocesan, or
Parochial, for Nonconformity in this kind, why may not the Catholic punish
the National for the same fault? i. e. for using a Form of Prayer not
sufficiently allowed or prescribed by the Catholic: and if the National can
interdict an inferior Church, or Excommunicate a particular person, for
refusal of such Obedience, why may not the Catholic deal with the National in
the same kind? This must needs be conceded, but that it will be said, we do not
know Where to find the Catholic Church; and though the Church of Rome calls
herself so, yet she is not to be believed; she bears witness of herself, and
that witness is not true. I only reply, We can as easily, and more, find the
Catholic Church, as a National; for there has been always a Catholic Church,
but there never has been, nor will be, a National Gospel organized Church in
the world. And we may as well believe a pretending Church calling herself
Catholic, as a pretending Church calling herself National; when as they are
equally to be accounted as no Churches of Christ's Ordination, as I can easily
manifest when time shall serve. Well then, the National Church lies liable to
the censure of the Church Catholic, for using a distinct set Form of public
Prayers established by her self, whereby she renders herself a gross
Nonconformist to the Catholic Church, and an Independent in respect of all
other National, her Form of Prayer being not Uniform with theirs. If it be said
the Church may compose and impose a Form of Prayer, we must know what Church
that is, and not be deluded with a Name. Is it the Catholic Church? if so, why
have we not a Catholic set Form of public Prayers, and all National Churches
bound to the use of it? And why, on the contrary, does every National Church
make and use Forms of their own? And if it be said, The National is the Church,
it is false; for it is not the Church by way of Eminency, it is not the most
Generical Church, because it is not the only Church, there are many National,
and there are many other sort of Churches, that will put in for as good a right
as the National: and if every National under the Name of the Church may do
this, and have a distinct Form of Prayer, what will become of Catholic
Uniformity? And if the Church as Provincial or Diocesan, what will become of
National Uniformity? And if this power be granted to any, or all these
subordinate Churches, Actum erit de Vniformitate Catholica.

12. But the great plea for a Form of Prayer in the Church, is Uniformity, for
this cannot be (say some Men) without it. Answ. Uniformity in the Church cannot
be by particular National Forms, it must be by a Form Catholic. 2. Can there
be no Uniformity in the Church without a sameness in Words and Sentences in
prayer, there scarcely being two Scripture-Prayers that are altogether the same
in Words and Sentences? Does not Uniformity consist rather in agreement in
Principles, and the Analogy of Faith, submission to, and closing with the same
King, Priest and Prophet, conforming to, and walking by the same rule of the
Gospel, an influence and guidance by the same Spirit? 3. If Uniformity of the
Church lies in such Externals, why is not a set Form of Preaching established,
that none shall use any other besides such Homilies? 4. If a set Form of some
Prayers be necessary to Uniformity, why not of all, as well of private as
public? for if the Church be not close tied in bond of Uniformity, by uniting
Families and Individuals, it will break to pieces for all a public Form. The
first and main Union in the Church, is that which knits every purticular Member
to the whole by joints and bonds; and that there may be true Uniformity, this
must be carefully maintained, but it is (...) which the great contenders for a
pretended Uniformity least (...) themselves about.

13. Another great plea for public Forms of Prayer, is, the (...) ness,
ignorance, and laziness of many Ministers. Rep. The (...) holds for set Forms
of public Sermons, the necessity of which for a time was well considered, at
our first coming out of Anti^^^^an darkness; and any one that could read but a
Chapter, Prayer, and Homily in the Mother Tongue, did a great deal of service
to God and the people. But there is not the same reason now the Church is
better provided with able Laborers; or at least might be, if she would. 2. It
is the ready way to fill the Church with this sort of Cattle, those lazy,
ignorant, scandalous Priests, for Mother Church not only to connive at them,
but to countenance them, and maintain them in their pride and sloth, and by
making their Exercis^s for them, whilst they be idle, debauched, and profane,
minding nothing but the profits, pleasures, and Honors of this Life. 2. The
only way (Ignavum fucos pecus a praecipibus arcent) is to banish these droans
from the Church, and not to turn all the Church unto droans; and nothing
starves them sooner, than to leave them to their own stock for Praying and
Preaching; and it is best that their Ignorance be bewrayed, that they may be
ashamed, and get better instruction and exercise in Spiritual things, which are
to be guides to other Men's Souls; or if they be not ashamed, the people may
have a full knowledge of them, and be wiser than to entrust their Souls in
their hands. Therefore it is good that the Props be taken away, and it will soon
appear whether such pretended Church-pillars be sound or rotten.

14. What is alleged about Ministers abuse of parts in public Prayers, or
want of sufficiency, is no forcing Argument for imposing a Form; for the abuse
of good things, is no argument against the use; we may as well say, Because
some will be Drunk, therefore none must drink Wine or Beer. 2. Insufficient
Ministers are to be removed, or further instructed, if they be capable and
willing, as Apollo was. 3. Are not Church-Prayers liable also to abuse, when
used by sottish Priests, in a formal, customary, slovingly, and profane (...)
and a hundred times more wrong done thereby to the honor of Religion, and the
poor Souls of the people, than by some weak expressions and sentences or words
struck out of joint, by the laborious, faithful, and zealous Ministers, that
conscientiously endeavor to use and improve the Talents given them, to the
service of Christ, the conversion and edification of the Souls of the people.

FINIS.

