A Theological Dialogue: Containing the DEFENSE and JUSTIFICATION OF Dr. John
Owen FROM THE FORTY TWO ERRORS Charged upon him by Mr. Richard Baxter. In a
certain MANUSCRIPT ABOUT Communion in Lyturgical Worship.

Hebr. 11.5. By Faith Abel -- obtained a witness that he was righteous, God
testifying of his gifts; and by it being dead, yet speaks.

1 Cor. 4.3, 4. With me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of
you, or of man's judgment. -- He that judges me is the Lord.

LONDON: Printed for the Author, 1684.

A THEOLOGICAL DIALOGUE CONTAINING Dr. John Owen's DEFENSE AND JUSTIFICATION
AGAINST Mr. Richard Baxter's CHARGE, etc.
J. O. SIR you say, That there is a certain Manuscript come to your hand, which
is famed to be Dr Owen's, but received by you from a private hand, which you
publish, taking it for granted so to be, add his Name to it, and expose it to
Public View, and charge the said Dr. Owen with forty two Errors therein
contained: It is not yet proved by you to be his, and therefore whether its
reasonable for you to charge him with forty two Errors, if you had found them
in the said Manuscript, let the World judge. But whether the charge of such
Errors on the said Manuscript be just, give us leave to Examine by our Ensuing
Conference. And seeing by a continued Prosopopeia, you direct your Discourse,
Charges, Reproofs and Admonitions to me, as if I were personally present, or at
least living in the Body, who you know departed this Life some months since;
Take it not amiss if I treat you in the like nature, and think it as feasible
for a dead man to speak in the Ears of the Living, as for the Living to speak
in the Ears of the Dead.

I suppose if that Manuscript were mine, some or other of the Congregation to
which I was Pastor, might come to me with this Case of Conscience. Sir, Is it
lawful for us who are Members of a Congregation of Faithful People, (according
to Article 19. of the Church of England) for to join now, as things are in
their present Circumstances, in the Public Worship by the Liturgy? And that it
was Answered,


Manuscript. It is not lawful for us to go to, and join in Public Worship by
the Common Prayer; because that Worship in it self, according to the Rule of
the Gospel, is unlawful. Now I pray Sir, what Resolution would you give of this
Case?


R. B. I say, It is not only lawful, but a Duty for those that cannot have
better Public Church-Worship, without more hurt than benefit; and are near a
competent Parish Minister, to go to and join in Public Worship performed
according to the Liturgy, and in Sacramental Communion; and for those that can
have better, to join sometimes with such Parish-Churches, when their
forbearance scandalously seems to signify that they take such Communion for
unlawful, and so would tempt others to the same Accusation, and Uncharitable
Separation.


J. O. Sir, Your Resolution seems to me very long, and upon so many
Suppositions, that its very ambiguous, and does very scarcely, if at all, reach
the Enquiry here made: For 1. We ask for our selves, who are Actual Members of
a Voluntary Church, whether we may join in such Communion spoken of, when we
are, as we apprehend, of a Society, and have a Public Worship more agreeable
to the mind of Christ, and our own Edification; and do you judge whether that
be better or no for us. 2. What you mean by a competent Ministry, we know not;
one man judges a man a Competent, yea able and profitable Minister, which
another does not, who must be a binding Judge to me in this case? Must I walk
by my own Judgment for Edification, or by another Man's? 3. Does nearness to a
Competent Minister make it my duty to join in all the Public Worship of that
Church of which he is Minister? You say, If I cannot have better: But if I have
and can by going further, what then? And for those that can have better, to
join sometimes in such Parish-Churches, but then not always, and to leave
their aforesaid Communion as unlawful, whereas our said Parish-Churches require
us so to do, prosecuting us by Laws wherever they find us assembled. You say it
must be when our forbearance scandalously seems to signify that we take such
Communion for unlawful: Who shall be judge of this? Does my Actual
Non-communion with any Church scandalously reflect upon its Constitution, if I
walk in Communion with a Church which I judge to be a Church of Christ? Must I
go by the conduct of every peevish man or Church that will say so? If a Church
of Baptists in the same Parish with me, will say so, must I therefore join with
them upon their unalterable terms, which I am not satisfied in? Again, what if
I do take such Communion for unlawful, upon grounds satisfactory to my self, am
I bound to-slight those grounds because somebody says my forbearance has a
Scandalous Signification? Likewise if my Separation be in duty to wards God and
my own Soul, it is not uncharitable to any Man, neither do I tempt any man by
walking therein, to uncharitableness, or any Accusation thereof.


Manuscript. Something must be premised to the Confirmation of this Position.


J. O. These are the things that we premise, and therefore should be agreed
upon on both sides, pro concessis, before we go to prove the Position laid
down, by the following Twelve Arguments.


Manusc. 1. The whole System of Liturgical Worship, with all its inseparable
Dependencies, are intended; for as such it is Established by Law, and not in
any part of it only; as such it is required that we receive it, and attend unto
it. It is not in our power, it is not left to our judgment or liberty, to close
with, or make use of any part of it, as we shall think fit.

There are in the Mass Book many Prayers directed to God only by Jesus Christ,
yet it is not lawful for us thereon to go to Mass, under a pretense only of
joining in such lawful Prayers.

As we must not offer their Drink Offerings of Blood, so we must not take up
their Names in our Lips, Psalm. 16:4. have no Communion with them.


R. B. To the first I answer: 1. If he will include all that is in the Liturgy,
the Nonconformists confess that there is something in it which they differ
from, as unjustifiable; and so there is in all men's Worship of God.


J. O. We say, The whole System, our meaning is plain, the totum, as it stands
constituted in all its integral parts: When I speak of John or Thomas, etc. I
speak not of a Finger, or a Leg; if I do, I say, the Finger or Leg of such an
one; So we speak not of those things that you will call faulty, and
unjustifyable, as it may be a Surplice or Cross, etc. but of the whole
Liturgy-Worship, as Established.


R. B. He intimates that it is not in cur power to close with some, and not
with all: This is his First Error.


J. O. It seems its but an intimated Error then; we say its not left to our
Judgment or Liberty, ( viz. by them that challenge a Power over our Judgment
and Liberty) to close with or make use of any part of it, i. e. in our External
Communion; the Law allows it not, to read or hear it by bits or snaps, or leave
out what we please; the Administrators will not leave it to us to do so,
neither can it be done without manifest offense to such Worshippers.


R. B. Though man gives us no such power, God does; I am not bound to believe
or own all that any Preacher shall say in the Church.


J. O. We speak not only of what power God gives us, the sense is plain: But
God has not left it in our power to communicate with any Society, when they
make that the condition of my Communion, which I am convinced of to be sin to
me, or that I question whether it be lawful or no: And though by joining in any
Worship, you are not guilty of the Errors of the Administrators, yet you own
the Constitution of the Worship, and the Rule by which it is performed,
supposing all Rules of Worship be Christ's Laws and Rules, and therefore
perfect and unerring. To worship according to the Liturgy, is to worship
according to a Rule; and this must be Gods Rule, or Man's: If Gods, there is no
body will dissent from any thing in it as unjustifiable; If man's, the whole is
not justifiable; for let any sort of men show by what Authority they give a
Rule for the Worship of God.


R. B. Though the Mass have many good Prayers, the Corruption by twisted
Idolatry and Heresy, makes Communion there unlawful.


J. O. That Twist is made in the whole System, by the Law Establishing it,
where it is made their pretended Churches Worship; therefore being unseparable,
you cannot make use of those alone which are directed to God, by Jesus Christ
alone, but you must join in the Idolatry, if you come to the Worship as
Established. Again, when you join with a System of Worship, as by Law
Established, you join wlth the whole; as, if you touch a man's finger, you touch
the man: we have Communion with an Integrum, p^r parts, and with a Genus by a
Species and with both by Individuals: Nay, as every part of the Scripture, one
Verse or Sentence, if it makes up sense; so every part of the Liturgy, as in
form and manner therein contained, is Liturgy; and Worship thereafter is
according to the Liturgy, though it be but part of the Worship.


R. B. Prove any such Idolatry or Heresy in the Church Worship by the Liturgy,
and we will avoid it.


J. O. The Question is not, de Quanto, but de Quali; if we prove Sin twisted in
the Constitution and System, so that if we have communion with one, we must
partake in the other, it is enough we are not to partake in fore-known Sins that
we are convinced of, nor should we commit any Sin willingly, that good may come
of it. If a Worship be not really a Sinful Worship, yet if we believe it so, or
question whether it be lawful or no, we may not have Communion with it.


R. B. Heathens and Turks have good Prayers.


J. O. That Divinity wants several grains of Salt, and when you have done all,
it will stink.


R B. Psalm. 16 4. Is too sadly abused, which speaks only of Sacrificing to, and
Worshipping False Gods.


J. O. Though it specify but one sort of False Worship, yet if it speak of it
as such, then it is applicable justly to another; and if that be False Worship
we are speaking of, it is applicable to it, and the place is not abused.


R. B. God put it into the Disciples power to beware of the Leven of the
Pharisees, and hear them.


J. O. God commanded them to bewa^^ of the Leven of them; i. e. their false
Doctrines and Traditions, etc. he never bid his Disciples to have Communion in
one or the other; though he told them Moses Chair was yet standing, he had no
other Church or Ordinances yet on Earth, and the Constitution was Originally
his own, though now much corrupted by Corrupt Officers and humane Inventions;
Well, says he, attend the Ordinances and Offices of this Church yet, but take
heed of their Leven and Corruption; he does not bid them taste of the Leven to
prove whether it be so, when they know it, and he told them what it was; Nay,
you will say, a corrupt Church Communion is to be parted with for a better; our
case is such; but in Christ's case and his Disciples, it was not so; If they
had not Communion with that Church, they could not with any on Earth then:
Besides, it was his Church, and he purchased it with his Blood, and he had
choice Members in it; but he always witnessed against the corruptions of it,
and had no Communion with them. Lastly, he was Lord of the Vinyard, and his
Precept is a Law; let the like be showed for your practice: That Case and ours
differs toto Caelo.


R. B. Prove all things, is not approving all things.


J. O. The place is 1 These. 5.21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is
good; that is necessarily accompanied with avoiding that which is evil; I must
prove no longer than till I find it to be good or evil; and if the All things
be matters of Practice, I am not to prove them by doing them before I know them
to be in genere morali bona, or mala, or licita at least, for I may not do a
doubtful action merely to try whether it be good or no, this were to tempt God,
and wound my Conscience; but a doubtful action whilst such, must be suspended.
Prove all things, is especially to be understood of Doctrines that are
pretended to be good, and I know no other but they are so, till I hear them;
and when I hear them, and find them not so, I reject them as evil, and have no
more to do with them, to countenance them; if this proving be applied to
positive Actions, it must be by Pre-Examination of the nature of the thing and
circumstances before hand, till I understand it, as before-said.


Manuscript. It is to be considered as armed with Laws; 1. Such as declare and
enjoin it, as the only True Worship of the Church: 2. Such as prohibit, condemn
and punish all other ways of the Worship of God in Church Assemblies: by our
Communion and Conjunction with it, we justify those Laws.


R. B. That our Communion justifies all the Laws that impose the Liturgy, yea,
the Penal Severities, is to gross an Error to be written with any show of
proof. Error 2d.


J. O. Active Obedience to any Law, justifies the Mandatory part of the Law,
as good, either absolutely, or circumstantially and comparatively, pro hic and
nunc; but. passive Obedience does not justify necessarily either the
preceptive or penal part, though it justifies me before the Law.


R. B. What if the Creed or Lords Prayer were too rigorously imposed?


J. O. If the thing be my duty in obedience to a just and Supreme Law, I am not
to neglect it because an Inferior Governor too rigorously imposes it: 1.
Such a rigorous imposition hurts me not, in that which I take to be duty to do,
whether that Imposition be or no. 2. Christ never annexeth too severe Penalties
to any of his Laws. 3. If man undertake to annex too rigorous Punishments, or
unsuitable ones, it hinders not me in my Duty to Christ. As if a Magistrate
make Whipping or Hanging the Penalty of not receiving the Sacrament, in such a
time; If I upon Examination of my self and the Rule, apprehend it my duty in
Obedience to Christ, I will do it, but not in respect to Man's Laws: But if the
Subordinate Lawmakers alter the Nature and Circumstances of the Supreme, the
Law is another thing, and my Obedience justifies the power of the Lawmakers,
and the goodness of the Law, in the Mandatory part. Again, good things by a
lawful Authority may be too rigorously imposed, and the Law may be unjust in
the Penalty, though the Mandatory part be good; which injustice is the sin of
the Lawgivers, loss and wrong of the Transgressor, because he suffers beyond
the Merit of his Transgression; but this hinders not me from my Duty, neither
does this rigorous Imposition hurt me, so long as I stand in obligation and
practice of my duty by another Righteous Law, which requires the same thing. If
Christ commands me to say the Lords Prayer, and annexeth no corporal
punishment, I will do it: If Man's Law says, I shall be hanged if I do not do
it; I do the Action by virtue of Christ's Law; But let such Law makers look to
it that annex Corporal Penalties to Laws of his Institution; the Cries of them
upon which they are Executed, will be loud in Christ's Ear.


Manuscript. This Corjunction by C mmunion by the Worship of the Liturgy, is a
Symbol, Pledge and Token of ^n Eccles^astical Incorporation with the Church of
England in its present Constitution; it is so in the Law of the Land, it is so
in the Canons of the Church; it is so in the common understanding of all men;
and by these Rules must our Understanding and Practice be judged, and not be
any Reserves of our own, which neither God nor good men will allow of.
Wheref^re.


R. B. To the third Premise, I answer: The Church of England is an Ambiguous
word, 1. As it signifies a part of the Universal Church, agreeing in Faith, one
God, and all Essentials.


J. O. So any Church may be, as well as it, any particular Congregation; this
is no distinguishing Character, but is ambiguous too.


R. B. 2. As it is a Christian Kingdom, under one King.


J. O. A Church in a sense is a Christian Kingdom, i. e. a Royal Nation, under
Christ their King. But there is no such Gospel Church in your sense, for there
was neither Christian Kingdom nor King in the Apostles days.


R. B. As it is a Confedracy of many Churches to keep concord in lawful
Circumstantials as well as Integrals.


J. O. This will not tell us yet what the Church of England is: 1. A
confederacy of Churches is by Nobody called a Church in your sense of a
Church; the Scripture no where calls a confedracy of Churches a Church; nor
does any that call the Church of England ^ Church, owning it so to be in its
professed Constitution, mean thereby a confederation of Churches. 2. National
Churches may be a confederation of Churches, and such confederation in lawful
circumstantials as well as integrals, will make a Church. I know not why we may
not have a Catholic Visible Church Organized, if this be a due acceptance of
a Church.


R. B. If any Church go beyond these bounds, and upon good pretenses shall
agree upon any Error or Evil, it is a mistake to hold that all that incorporate
with them in the three aforesaid lawful respects do therefore confederate with
them in their Error. This is your Fourth Error.


J. O. That Is ^our Error, 1. In Arithmetic, its but the third by your own
mark; 2. In Logic, for what ^ounds have you set? These three things are but
general Descriptions of a Church at most. Here Is no definition in any or all of
them of any particular Church; and that is setting of ^ounds, when I difference
and describe a Species or Individual, under its next Genus, by its particular
form, or proper adjunct; we sp^ak of a particular Church so bounded. The Church
of England is so, according to its present constitution, by Establishing Laws
in its actual form of Officers, Members, particular Worship, and power, as an
Organized individual Church National. Church is not the next Genus of the
Church of England, but remote National Church is the next Genus Now I say, upon
whatever pretenses a particular Church calls and professes it self a Church,
as the conditions of their Communion; if you join with them upon those
conditions pretended and professed, that is a Token of your Ecclesiastical
Incorporation in the said Church, in its present constitution; the Church and
all others looks upon you as an Actual Member, let the conditions be Error or
no Error. The Question is not so much now, whether the terms be Error or not,
but whether your joining upon the terms required, is not your Ecclesiastical
Incorporation with them? And then if the terms be erroneous and sinful, whether
you do not join in the Error, and professedly allow it by your practice.


R. B. I will give you a general instance, and a particular one: 1. You cannot
name me one combined company of Churches from the Apostles days till now, that
had no Error.


J. O. You might as well have said any one Church, for we speak of a particular
Church, not of combined Churches; but suppose as you say, If that Combination
be an Error, or an Error be the condition of the Combination, then my coming
upon that condition is an Error, and an Incorporation into that combination, so
as to make me Confederate in that Error.


R. B. The Independents gathered a Syn^d at the Savoy, and there among their
Doctrinals, or Articles of Faith, laid down two points Expressly contrary to
Scripture: 1. That it is not Faith, but Christ's Righteousness, that we are
justified by; whereas it is both, and the Scripture often says the contrary.


J. O. It is a strange thing that any man should take upon him such Magisterial
Dictatorship in matters of Religion, to insinuate Error into Men's Minds, and
unjust accusations of others: For 1. When the Scripture speaks of Justification
by Faith, does any sound Divines or Christians understand it of the Act of
believing, but that the object of Faith that Justifies, is the Righteousness of
Faith, our own Righteousness, or Christ's Righteousness; but this dispute is not
our present Province. The Articles of the Savoy-Confession says, God freely
justifies us -- Not by imputing Faith it self, the Act of believing, etc. Will
you say, That God imputes the Act of believing for Righteousness, in
Justification of a Sinner before God? If you will, there is more good
Protestants will condemn this as your Error, then will say there is any Error
in that Article of the Savoy-Confession; I am sure we have Scripture enough
against you; but this is one of your Arminian Errors.


R. B. That Christ's Righteousness imputed* is our sole Righteousness; whereas
the Scripture does name also our inherent and practical Righteousness.


J. O. Why do you not speak out now, but intimate an Error? Does the Scripture
name inherent Righteousness for Justification? I know what you would be at, you
are for your Ev^ngelical Works to come in Cheek by Jole with the imputed
Righteousness of Christ for Justification; and you are enforced ^o it, because
you will bring in the To Credere, one may as well come in as the other; And in
this Doctrine I must tell you, you have laid ^he fairest Bridge for Popery to
come in, that ever any Protestant Divine has done this hundred years. And
that is your Popish Error.

I will rehearse the Savoy-Confession in its own words, which is taken verbatim
almost, if not quite, from the Assembly's; so that you charge the latter, in
charging the former.


Savoy-Confess. of Justification, Chap. 2.
Those whom God effectually calls, he also freely justifies, not by infusing
Righteousness into them, but by pardoning their Sins, and by accounting and
accepting their persons as righteous; not for any thing wrought in them, or
done by them, but for Christ's sake alone; not by imputing Faith it self, the
Act of Believing, or any other Evangelical Obedience to them, as their
Righteousness, but by imputing Christ's Active Obedience unto the whole Law, and
Passive Obedience in his death, for their whole and sole Righteousness, they
receiving and resting on him and his Righteousness by Faith, which Faith they
have not of themseves, it is the Gift of God.

This Article we stand by, and will defend against all men that shall oppose it
as erroneous.

R. B. I asked some yet living why they consented to these, and did not rather
expound the Scripture, then deny it? And they said that it was Dr. Owens doing;
Now does it follow that every one that there confederated with you, owned these
Errors.


J. O. If the bringing in this Article of Faith was Dr. Owens doing, as you say
you were told, I am not ashamed of it. 2. He did no more in this and the other
than was the Act of the whole Convention. 3. If any of the Members that were
there, were dissatisfied in the truth of it, why did they not protest against
it? But if it were an Error, all that acted silently, by implicit consent, were
confederate (if it were a confederation) in the Error; and there was nothing of
this kind done but by most Voices, which made every man concerned, that entered
not his particular Dissent.


R B. The Churches of Helvetia they are commonly such as we call Erastian, for
no Discipline but the Magistrates; are all that confederate with them as
Churches, guilty of this Error?


J. O. They are so, for subjection to such discipline is the Condition of their
Communion; and therefore they that are joined upon those terms, are guilty of
their Error.


R. B. But I further distinguish between the many Parish-Churches, and the
Diocesan, and the Church of England as constituted of such Diocesan Churches.


J. O. You may as well distinguish between the many particular men, and Homo
and Animal.


R. B. The Old Nonconformists commonly owned the Parish-Churches (and the
Church of England made up of such) but not the Diocesan.


J. O. You and they might as well own the Church of England in the form and
constitution as it is Established, as the Parishes to be particular
Gospel-Churches, and the Aggregatum of them to make up a Conglomorate Church;
there is as much ground for one as for the other; Methinks a Conglobate Church
makes a more firm and solid Body, being made of several Orbs subordinately,
inwraping and enfolding one another. Now it must needs follow, that where a
Church is thus constituted, that you cannot take out from such a Body any
middle subordinate Coat, but you must make Schism of the whole; and to come
into the Communion of the Church of England, which is such a conglobate Church,
with a denial i^ ^our heart or mouth of a Diocesan Church, is to come with
Schism in your heart and mouth, splitting a Church in order to Communion; yea,
a denial of the very Establishment of that Church; yea, the very Pastoral
standing of the constituted Pastor to whose Church you join; for the Diocesan
Bishop by the constitution, is the Pastor of that Parish in which you join, the
Parson or Vicar is but his Curate or Vmbra: Now to say you join with a
quatenus, and own not the very constitution and standing of the Church with
which you join, in the sense the Church asserts it, is the greatest
Equivocation in practice that is. You join with them quatenus Congregational
Churches, such they disown; as an Association of Presbyterian Churches, which
they disown; you disown the Diocesan Bishop for your Pastor, which he says he
is; you say he is a Presbyterian Superintendent, he says he is none. Is not
this high imposing, to come to Communion with a Church upon the terms of your
quaterus? As if I should get upon a Cow, and ride it with Whip and Spur, and
say I ride it quatenus Equus; and enter into the Society of a parcel of Pedlars
and Tinkers, and say I confederated with them quatenus Merchants: The meaning
is, by a reserve you can join visibly with one Church, and be a Communicate
with another sort of Church at the same time. Well, the Old Nonconformists, nor
you, are to be no Presidents to us in this case. We will not injure any Church
so as to impose upon them terms of Communion, as we would have none impose upon
us. So far as the old Nonconformists, and the old Reforming Conformists, went
forward with Reformation, to bring the Church out of the Wilderness, we honor
them; but when they turn back again, and entice the people so to do, we are
afraid to tempt God in that manner, for we have seen what God did with his
people in the Wilderness of old, which things were written for our Ensample,
upon whom the Ends of the World are come, 1 Cor. 10.


R. B. Also it is a mistake to say, That Communion by the Liturgy is a Symbol
and Pledge of the foresaid Incorporation in the Church of England, in its
present constitution; it is only a part of the Communion commanded, but no such
Symbol: And here is two Errors.


J. O. An Incorporation into a Species, is an Incorporation into the Genus;
that which is Incorporated into the Species of Homo, and therefore receives
that true denomination, is Incorporated into the Genus Animal. Or take the
Church as an Integrum; that which is incorporated into an integ^al part, is
incorporated into the Integrum, communion with the Integrum is per parts; and
such incorporation into any of the Parts, is an evidencing Pledge, which is a
Symbol of Communion with the whole; as by a Turf, you take possession of an
Estate in Land, and by the delivery of a Key, and entering the House, you take
possession; i. e. These are Symbols or Pledges of your being instated in the
whole.


R. B. For first, the Rulers openly declare that they take multitudes to be
none of their Church, who join in the Liturgy.


J. O. That Is false: Where do any Rulers by any Law declare so? And if any say
so, it is only concerning such as yield not to their required terms of
Communion, in joining with the Worship of the Liturgy, as the Establishing Law
requires; and will you join Communion with a Church, whose Officers plainly
declare that you are none of their Church, whilst you Communicate? Surely you
either strangely impose upon them to communicate, being a declared Non-Member,
or they are pitiful Church-Rulers, that look no stricter to their Communicants,
but whose will may break in upon them: So that here is a Church in Communion
with those that are declaredly none of its Communion, and Members and
Non-Members, in Communion, and Non-Communion, with a Church and no Church: This
is a very pretty Riddle!


R. B. And it is Subscribing, Declaring, and Swearing Obedience, which is the
Symbol.


J. O. Of what? Of Lay-Communion? You should speak out your Sentences, and not
squeez off a piece: Are any of those required of Lay-Communicants? Nay are they
not of another Nature, qualifications of actual Communicants for Office-Power?
I wonder that grave men, and Divines, will dare to Equivocate so. Is not
Baptism (according to the Liturgy) a Symbol of Incorporation into the Church of
England? Confirmation another? Receiving the Lords Supper, another Symbol?
ordinary Attendence on the Service, etc.


R. B. Yea, they Excommunicate many that come to the Liturgy-Service.


J. O. For what? For Bastardy, Whoring, Swearing, Drunkenness; these should for
all their coming to the Liturgy be Excommunicated* But why do they
Excommunicate them? Is it not because they look upon them as incorporated
Members before Excommunication? It were Nonsense for a Church to Excommunicate
a declared Non-Member. And are not Excommunicate Persons kept from coming to
the Communion by the Liturgy? So that it is apparent, Communion in the Liturgy
is the Symbol, yea, door of inlet to, and outlet from incorporation with the
Church.


R. B. And many come to it, who openly disown the Diocesan present
Constitution; so did the old Nonconformists, and many Foreigners, French and
Dutch.


J. O. Your Self for Example, the chief Head of that Trimming Sect, whose
practice condemns their declared Opinion, and that your Rulers know, or else
would not connive at such a scandalous sort of communicants, that deny the
professed standing and form of a Diocesan Church, whilst they have communion
wi^h it; and say, they communicate with it, qu^tenus a Presbyteri^n Association
of Churches. Those old Nonconformists that did so, are no Presidents to us; If
they hal^ed and were lame, must we be so? Such Communicants are not acceptable
to any Church; and I know what Church would never admit them, were it not to
punish and expose them and their Profession, as ridiculous, and inconsistent
with it self. And as for French and Dutch what are they to us, or any other,
any more than they follow Christ? And if the Church do not do their duty
toward disorderly communicants, let them look to it, it is none of our fault.


R. B. If one may join in Communion of Worship with a Presbyterian,
Independent, or Anabaptist Church, without owning the Errors of their
Constitution, then so we may with a Parish Church But, etc.


J. O. And a Diocesan too, you should say; for in joining with* one, you join
with the other as such. And I will tell you, if they make their Errors the
condition of your communion, you cannot join in communion, etc. without owning
their Errors; Suppose a Presbyterian Church makes worshipping according o the
Directory the condition of their Communion and I look upon this as their Error,
or that it is a false Rule of Worship; do not I in joining in Communion by the
Directory, own their Error? So Baptists making Re-baptizing the condition of
communion with them, and I look upon it as a sin, do not I own their Error, by
joining wi^h them on this condition? and so grossly condemn my self, and commit
a known sin; yea, it is no better than a presumptuous Sin.


R. B. You mi take when you say it is by the Law of the Land.


J. O. I admir^ you can say it, when I know you cannot but be better acqu^inted
with the Laws, then so* You should have instanced in some part or clause that
had excepted some Communicants from being reckoned of that Church: They would
thank you for it, that they might not be liable to Excommunication. All that
are liable to a Church-Excommunication when they have offended, are declared
Members of the Church. But all Communicants and Native Inhabitants are so;
therefore the Law has excepted none.


R. B. You mistake again, when you say it is so by the Canons.


J. O. Is it possible you can charge such things for mistakes? does not the
22^h Canon require every Parishioner that is a Lay Person to communicate thrice
every year? Is not that for a Symbol of their Incorporation with the Church of
England, which is affirmed to be a true Apostolic Church, Can. 3. Can. 14 89.
and how comes it to pass that the Church has power of Excommunicating any
person, but by virtue of Incorporation, which she has by the same Law? He that
is not in the Church, how comes he to be cast out? And how was it that he is
esteemed one? Is it not by virtue of the Church Canon or Rubric? Is he not by
communion in the Sacrament of Baptism made a Member? Is not that communion of
the Liturgy: So for Confirmation, or other Liturgical Worship, that are made
necess^ry conditions of communion, are they not Symbols of their Ecclesiastical
Incorpor tion, the neglect whereof is punished with Excommunication. And
likewise those that do not submit to the things therein commanded, not to be
admitted to the Communion of the Sacram^nts, and therefore to be reckoned as no
Members. Can 27. Sc^ism^ticks not to be admitted to the Communion? No
Mininister when he celebrateth the Communion, shall wittingly administer to ^y
^^t to such as kneel under p^in of Suspension, nor under the li^e p^in to (...)
that refuse to be present at Public Prayer, accordin^ to the O^ders of the
Church of England.


R. B. I formerly instanced in one of the sharpest Nonconformists, o^^ Mr.
Humpney Feu of Coventry, who would say aloud Amen to all he Common Prayer, save
that for the Bishops; by which all th^^e know his mi^d; whether it were ^ight
or wrong, I now determine (...). So here are t^ree more of your Mistakes,
M^rk'd 7, 8, 9 Errors.


J. O. I^ ^his the onl^ proof you bring of your charge of three Errors ^h^^ ol^
Mr. ^^u^p^^^ F n would not say Amen to the Prayers for the Bishops, and you do
no^ determine it, Right or wrong; And yet his practice, or rather offensive
forbearance, is proof enough of three Errors in the Manuscript. Is not this an
admirable way of Reasoning? I had thought Errors in Divinity, had been to have
been proved from the Word of God, and not from the sullen practices of an
half-pac'd doting Nonconformist, which you know not whether it be Right or
Wrong; surely Wrong, for Mr. Fen he ought to have prayed for his Pastor.


R. B. You make all other Reserves of our own to be allowed neither by God nor
good men. And this marked for two Errors, X, XI.


J. O. The Words are, By this Rule must our Profession and Practice be judged;
that is, by their agreement or non-agreement with the Churches Rule of Worship.
The common understanding of all, both Conformists and Dissenters, is, That any
man that holds communion with the Church, in the Worship of the Lyturgy, does
give to the world an Evidencing Token of his Incorporation with the Church of
England, in its present constitution; and so did Mr. Fen, for all his refusal
of his Amen for the Bishops; and such Reserves as those, are not allowed by God
or by good men. For a man to join in communion with a Church, and have a
reserve that it is not such a Church as they profess themselves to be, that the
Pastor is no Pastor and not fit so much as to prayed for; that is a sweet
Churchmember!


R. B. Here are two mistakes, 1. God makes it our great duty to hold Communion
with most or all the Churches on Earth, with these Reserves, i. e. to own them
in all that is good, and disown all their evil, though the Laws command the
owning of them; Without this Reserve, I would not join with yours, or any
Church on Earth.


J. O. And with this Reserve, you may hold Communion with the Church of Rome,
and you may keep any company of any sort: This Principle smells very strong of
I know what; I know also who can swear any Faith, or Allegiance, never
intending to keep one word of it, and call it good Divinity; it is all salved
well enough, hwit a Reserve; yea, and can do any evil actions, and it is all
well enough if there is a good meaning, and a reserve. This I think you call
Mental Separation elsewhere: it is an admirable Panacaea for a man to carry
about in his pocket, nowadays. But I pray will it serve in all cases of
Church Communion, when you know of Sin that will certainly be committed in the
Worship, before you come to it, and that you must practically by visible
participation have Communion in that Sin or Error; will a Reserve preserve you
from the guilt of that Sin? That which you speak of, is another thing, all
Administrators and Churches are liable to Errors; but we speak of Errors in the
Rule of Worship, and the conditions of Communion fore-known, fore-judg'd by
you: will God or good men allow of such? We speak not of the ordinary personal
failings of men; could you by virtue of this Reserve, submit to Re-baptiz^tion,
the condition of their Church Communion? And many Instances might be given of
the like Nature.


R. B. And it is an immodest Error to say that none are good men that are not
of your mind.


J. O. It Is an immodest false thing, if you affirm that ever Dr. O. said so, or
that there is any such thing in the Manuscript.


Manuscript. He that joins in the Worship of the Common Prayer does by his
Practice make Profession, that it is the true Worship of God, accepted with
him, approved of him, and wholly agreeable to his mind and will. To do it with
other Reserves, is Hypocrisy, and worse then the thing it self without them
Happy is he that condemns not himself in the thing which he allows, Romans
14.12.


R. B. This is the 12th Mistake, and one that has dreadful consequents: 1. It
contradicts the Express Profession of the Communicants, who openly tell the
World, That they take not the Lyturgy to be [wholly agreeable to Gods mind and
will] and you are not to feign a Profession of men contrary to their open
Protestation.


J. O. If men appar^ntly pr^ctice contrary to their Protestation, I call that,
(and all men do) Profession; and I feign it not: If men profess (that the
revealed mind and will of God is the only unerring Rule of Worship) with their
Tongues, and yet in practice submit to, and join in Communion with a Worship
which they openly declare to be by a false and Erring Rule, they make their
Profession contradict their Profession: For they that cannot justify a Rule as
wholly agreeable to the mind and will of God, and declare that it is not so,
and yet worship God according thereunto, do practice contrary to their declared
Profession. This we stand to as Truth, and will never be baffied to the Worlds
End.


R. B. It is most direful to your own Separating Followers; who by this are
supposed to profess all your Worship to be agreeable to Gods mind and will: And
so all the honest well-meaning People are made guilty of all the Errors which
you put into your Worship.


J. O. That Spirit of bitterness that appears here in this undertaking of
yours, as many other things of the like Nature, little becomes a Minister of
Christ, and one that in effect has sometimes writ himself Our Brother and
Companion in Tribulation, and in the Kingdom and Patience of Jesus Christ: I
could speak much of my mind to you upon this Subject, but for some Reasons I
only hint (as Verbum Sapienti) how sharp many of your Invectives have been in
the Hearts and Spirits of Christ's Members. 1. For your putting the title so
often of Separatists, Separating followers, dividing Separatists, upon those
who are tender of the Honor of God in the Purity of his Ordinances, you do but
therein Espouse the Quarrel the Beast has had with the Woman, ever since she
came into the Wilderness, in laying all manner of Reproaches upon her Seed, as
well as Sufferings, for hiding her self from his Abominations, and keeping
their Garments undesiled by false Worship: The day will come that you will see
those standing upon M^unt Zion, singing the Song of Moses and the Lamb; to be
Separating followers, not of me, but of the Lamb. 2. We endeavor to teach
those people you so contemptibly mention, That God is to be Worshipped by a
Rule wholly agreeable to his mind and will, yea and a perfect and unerring
Rule, not of man's making, and unagreeable to Gods mind and will, as you
confess. Though we acknowledge all the performances of Gods best people in this
World, are full of imperfections and weaknesses, and hence come short of his
perfect Rule, yet we dare not set up any Rules of Worship more then Christ
has, nor make our Errors the condition of Church Communion; which last we
should do, if we should do the first: What we do, is in waiting upon Christ for
a further attainment to the knowledge of his will, and strength to walk up
thereto; and so far as we have attained, we desire in all meekness and humility
to walk.


R. B. 2. It is contrary to your own Profession, that you could in Charity
Communicate with Presbyterians and Anabaptists; and so you approved of all the
Errors of their Worship.


J. O. We approve of none of the Errors of a Church or People that fall out by
reason of Ignorance not wilful, and Infirmity; when we see them truly design
the honor of Christ, and the Purity of Ordinances, desiring to walk as near as
possible to the Rule of the Gospel, according to their best light, then we have
Communion with them: But if they make to themselves Rules of Worship which
Christ never made, and make their Erring and Sinful Rules (such as are so to
us) the standing and unalterable conditions of Communion, we cannot communicate
with them, by what ever Names such Churches are called.


R. B. 3. It makes it a downright sin to communicate with any Church on
Earth, etc.


J. O. We utterly deny this Consequence upon the Reasons beforementioned; we
distinguish between the Rule of Worship, and the Administration and
Performance: For is there not such a thing as fellowship with others in Sin,
and partaking in other men's sins? 1 Timothy 5.22. Rev. 18.4. If there be such a
thing as this, it must be in some sort of Sins; Sins of ordinary infirmity
(such as you would force us upon here) it cannot be, because then I could have
no Communion on earth. 2. The sins of others, that I have no knowledge of
beforehand, so as to prevent joining in company with them, there my keeping my
self from participation, must be by witness against it, due Reproofs, etc. and
upon Non-Reformation, to separate my self again. 3. There are the sins of
others, that are known to me, that will certainly be committed, I know it, also
of what kind and nature, and by my presence I give a tacit consent; and all
that see me, by outward gesture and behavior, will judge me as far engaged in
it as others: Is it enough for my justification, to say I have a Reserve? Your
other Consequences therefore will not hold, that if I say it is Hypocrisy for
me to join with any Church in the Communion of known false Worship, i. e. with
them that Worship God by a false Rule; That, 1. I must hold no Communion with
any Church on Earth: 2 That it is a breach of the 9th Cammand; for I judge not
others in particulars; but to pretend to serve God with a Reserve, in public
false Worship, or any false worship, I affirm to be Hypocrisy; to perform the
External part in compliance with men, and pretend my heart was all this while
for God. 3. That it is no friendly Act to the Church; for there is no friendlier
Act to the Church, then to Endeavor the Reformation of her. 4 That it is
Self-condemning; for we say the practice that we plead against, is certainly
so, and prove it from Romans 14.12. 5. That it makes Christ and his Apostles
Hyyocrites; for we have proved that Christ never joined with false Worship so
much as with his presence at the place of it, unless with this intent, to bear
witness against it, (as the young Prophet that came to Jeroboams Altar) neither
did he ever advise his Disciples so to do: As for Moses Chair, it was then
Christ's own Institution, and he had then no other Church or Institution of
Worship on Earth.


Manuscript. There may be a false Worship of the True God, as well as a Worship
of a false God: such was the Worship of Jehovah the Lord, by 1. Calf in the
Wilderness, Exodus 33.5, 6. Such was the feast unto the Lord ordained by
Jeroboam in the eighth month, the fisteenth day of the month, which he had
devised of his heart, 1 King. 12.32, 33.


R. B. Your third Premise is unquestionable.


J. O. I am glad to see there is one Line without an Error.


R. B. But if you distinguish not of false Worship, you make but false Work of
it: 1. To be false, is corrupting Gods own necessary Worship; etc.


J. O. We know of no true Worship, but Gods own necessary Worship; as for that
which is not his own, nor necessary, God cares not for it, and we are better
without it, then with it.


R. B. There is that which is false in Integrals, Accidents, Degrees, pardoned
failings.


J. O. Worship is never called false, from failings only; when true, it is
supposed we worship by a true Rule, and a good heart, which carries us forth to
all careful endeavors to come up to it: As for falseness in Integrals, we
affirm that it gives the denomination to the whole; for an Integral part is an
essential cause of the whole.


R. B To be false, is to be disagreeable to the Rule.


J. O. That is not Universal, for it is not false to be disagreeable to a false
Rule. 2. There is no performance but in failings is disagreeable to Gods
perfect Rule 3. It Is rather thus; when the Rule of Worship is disagreeable to
the revealed mind and will of God: Its the Rule must be the Standard of Truth
and Falsehood, as to performances, and Gods Rule must be the Standard, and all
others that are not his are false. Sinful Worship and false, are not
reciprocally the same.


Manuscript. On these Suppositions, the Proposition laid down, is proved by the
following Arguments.


J. O. And therefore Sir, it is not justice to fall foul upon the following
Arguments, you having denied the Truth of these Premises, upon which the
Arguments are founded. But seeing we have gone so far as to defend our
Premises, we will proceed to defend the Arguments grounded upon them.


Manuscript. Arg. 1. Religious Worship not divinely instituted and appointed,
is false Worship, not accepted with God: But the Liturgical Worship intended,
is a Religious Worship not Divinely instituted and appointed: Ergo not accepted
with God.

The Proposition is confimed by all Divine Testimonies, wherein all such
Worship is expressly condemned: See Deuteronomy. 4.2. Chap. 12.32. Prove. 30.6. Jer.
7.31. Isa. 29.13, etc. that especially where the Lord Christ restrains all
Worship to his alone command, Matthew. 28.20.

It is answered to the Minor Preposition, That the Liturgical Worship is of
Christ's appointment, as to the Substantials of it, though not as to its
Accidentals; namely, Prayer and Praises; not as to its outward Rates and Form,
which do not vitiate the whole.


R. B. To your first Argument, I answer: 1. As to the bare name, either you
will call all Acts done to signify immediately the Souls honoring of God by
the Name of Worship, or will not; if not, then that which is no Worship, is no
false Worship; if you will, then your Proposition is false.


J. O. You love to play in the dark, and impose upon us your Suppositions, when
you have ours expressly before you: We take Religious Worship as the Genus, and
its distributed into true and false; all false Worship strictly taken, is no
Worship; and the Spirit of God sometimes speaks of it so; We know an Idol is
nothing in the World: But in the usual acceptance of the Scripture, because
men intend it for a Worship, and commonly call it so, it is named a Worship, but
a false Worship. Again, we distribute True Religious Worship into Natural and
Instituted; these may be either of them True also, or false. The Argument is to
prove a certain kind of Religious Worship, which the Church is appointed to
use, to be false, and it runs thus, the Medium is [Divinely]

All Religious [appointed or instituted] Worship not Divinely instituted, is
false Worship, not accepted of God.

Now you say either we mean by Religious Worship all Acts done to signify
immediately the Souls honoring God, or we do not: We deny your disjunction,
nam parts disjunctae non sunt oppositae sine velo medio; for we do not mean
all, but we mean some, we speak but of some Acts: Generalis Axiomatis
contradictio, non semper dividit verum a falso; but there must be Specialis
contradictio generalis Axiomatis, to make a true division: Ergo we say we are
not necessitated (as you would have it) to mean all or none. As if when we were
speaking of rich or wise men, you will say either you mean all men are wise, or
no men are wise; if you mean all men, that is false; if you mean no men, no men
are not unwise men: This is such a rude piece of Sophistry, that is very
unbecoming a Doctor of the Chair. There are Acts signifying our immediate
honoring of God in the Soul, which are not here intended. We tell you Prayers
and Praises are Natural Worship, considered merely as such: likewise there are
indifferent occasional Acts attending Natural Worship; as suppose, lifting up
the hands or eyes to God in Prayer, or in an usual Ejaculation, or holy
Meditation. You know we mean by Worship, a prescribed instituted Worship,
limited by a particular Rule and Form to walk by: The Jewish Worship was
instituted, and so the Gospel Worship of the New Testament.


R. B. I take it for granted, that by Gods instituting, you mean not a general
Command to man to institute it, such as [Let all things be done to Edification]
if you did, your Minor is not true.


J. O. God never gave any general Command to man to institute, i. e. to
prescribe his Worship by a Law; Gods giving us a Rule to walk by in indifferent
and occasional circumstances of his Worship, is no Command to us to make
Institutions: Institutions are not to be altered at our discretion; and general
Rules that limit our discretionary Actings, are so far Gods Institutions; but
those acts of ours, guided pro hic and nunc, lawfully by general Rules, any of
them are not by us to be brought into a binding Law, ad omne and semper,
neither for our selves nor others, for that would be a humane Institution in
Gods Worship; therefore your distinction of Instituted Divine Worship into
Primary and Secondary, cannot be admitted; for there is no Worship of Gods
institution, Secondary; your Secondary Limitations of the circumstances and use
of natural Worship not Instituted by God, is man's Will Worship only, and
therefore false Worship.


R. B. Your wrong Exposition of all the Texts here cited, is more then one
mistake; [Mark Error XIV.] Deuteronomy. 42. and 12.32. Prove. 30.6. Forbids adding to
Gods Worship; which is broken by all that either say, That that is in Gods
Worship which is not there, (as you do here.)


J. O. Do we not say that they that verbally or practically say that that is in
Gods Instituted Worship, or belongs to it, which he never commanded, adds to it?


R. B. Or devise any Worship-Ordinances, Coordinate, or of the same sort with
his own, as if they were imperfect.


J. O. We say so far the same, that they that devise an Institution coordinate
with Gods, set up Posts by his Posts, make them of equal Authority, yea greater
then Gods, by exacting the observance of them by Severer Penalties then they do
Christ's Institutions; yea, thrust out Christ's, and bring theirs instead. You
say they must be of the same sort, that is impossible, a Humane and Divine
Institution differs toto genere; therefore that is to suppose, that which never
was; and all such adding aforesaid, is as if God were imperfect.


R. B. But there is not a word forbidding Subordinate Secondary Acts of
Worship, such as kneeling, putting off the Hat, using written Notes in
Preaching, Forms of Singing, Praying, Catechizing, etc.


J. O. You might bring in what colored clothes the Minister should wear, what
kind of Caps, Hats, Perriwigs, Pulpit, the Print of the Bible, the size of it,
the tune the Psalms should be sung in, the Pues, the fashion of the Church,
the posture of the Communion Table, the clothes, the Cups for Sacrament Wine,
etc. such things are no parts of Gods Worship at all, but natural Attendants,
or Conveniences to Worship in general, that God under the Gospel has placed
none of his Worship in; he has by no limiting Institution given any sanction
to them; they are discretionarily to be used, or omitted, or altered at
pleasure of the present Worshippers, according to the general Rules of doing
all things to Gods glory and our own Edification; and its the Churches
Privilege that they have by Gospel Charter; that no humane secondary Law can
rob them of. And if there be such made, they are not Gods, its adding Laws to
Gods Laws of Worship to make them, and therefore here forbidnen.

See now what some of your Secondary Worship would come to; if it may bind one
way, it may another; and if it may be according to one Rulers humor, it may be
according to another; and if in one kind of such circumstances, then in
another; then all the old Popish Crossing, Cringing, Robes, Vestments, Altars,
Salt, Spittle, Holy Water, etc. may come in: Likewise in the Particulars
instanced in by you, it may be prescribed by Law how long the Sermon shall be,
how long the Prayer, what matter and words in both to be used at such a time,
whether the Minister shall preach with Notes, or without; that the People
should always kneel at prayer, or always stand; or times of kneeling and
standing: So in reading and hearing the Word; what tune should be sung to every
Psalm, and what Psalm at each time, and what times, what Meter, what Catechize
to be used, and when to be done, etc. with a thousand things more; and these
upon what Penalties the Lawmakers pleases, Spiritual or Pecuniary, or Corporal
Mulcts; would not here come in such a Monster under the name of Secondary
Worship, that would fright away all Gods true Worshippers from Communion with
it?


R. B. It was forbidden things, which in Isa, 29.13. and Matthew. 14, are
reproved, as being Precepts of Men, or things feigned to be necessary acts of
Obedience to God, which are not so.


J. O. We say they were forbidden; Precepts of men are humane Laws in Divine
things; their Traditions and Inventions, which they make necessary by their
Laws, and enforcing of them, and then they are feigned so by men: It Is not to
be found that all the Pharisees Superstitions were particularly mentioned and
named in the Prohibitions in the old Testament, nor a quarter of them by Christ
in the New: yet condemned by him as the Precepts of men; i. ^. They had nothing
but humane Sanction, they were forbid by Christ's general Laws, being excluded,
and a charge that no Laws of Divine Worship should be added as primary or
Secundary to his. His Disciples were not to go beyond his Commission, to teach
any thing but what he had commanded, or should, M^tth. 28 20. To go beyond a
Commission, is to break and forfeit it, in assuming that power that was never
given in it, by men's Law, much more by Gods; though the Particulars wherein the
Forfeiture of Charter or Commission lies, were not particularly mentioned, when
the Commission or Charter was drawn: it is enough that there is nothing therein
contained to authorize such practices.


Manuscript. But its replied, There is nothing accidental in the Worship of
God; every thing that belongs to it, is part of it Some things are of more
weight, Use, and Importance than others, Mat. 23.27. but all things duly
belonging to it, are parts of it, or of its subsistence; outward circumstances
and occasional, no accidental parts of Worship.


R. B. As to your Reply, it is the strangest that ever I read from so learned a
man, and is a great mistake [Error XV.] What is there in the World, that is a
Subject without Accidentals? Gods Worship has a multitude of Accidents; as,
the Hour, the Place, the Pulpit, Tables, the Cups of Silver, the Linen and
other Ornaments; the Books Printed, the Meter, the Tunes, Chapters, Verses, the
Words of Translation, the Building, Gestures, Vestures, Treasures.


J. O. The prescribing these and their fellow natural circumstances, by
particular limiting Laws, may make a Book as big as that of the Martyrs. Are
they not pretty things to be called part of Gods instituted Worship? They are
natural accidents of Worship, but not limit d or instituted: Is it not pretty
to say the hour and place is part of the Worship, the Pulpit of Preaching, the
Silver Cups and Cloth a part of the Sa^ram nt? But Bread and Wine is part,
though of less natural value in its self, then the Plate it is put in. There is
no instituted limitations of the use of these said particulars in Worship;
therefore not so much as proper adjuncts, or integral parts, which all Christ's
Ordinances are, though of more or less use, yet of equal Authority; the least
Pin in the Tabernacle, with the greatest Beam, all must be done by the Pattern,
as God commanded Moses.


R. B. You add another Mistake, [Error XVI.] That every thing belonging to it,
is a part of it.


J. O We say that every thing duly belonging to Divine Instituted Worship is a
part of ^t; because it cannot duly belong to it as a proper Adjunct, but by
Divine Institution. You run upon a great mistake, to talk so much of Physical
Common Adjuncts that never did participate of the nature of the Subject; all
things duly belonging to a man, as such, is part of him; all proper adjuncts
are so, all integral parts are so; but Cloth, Money, a House, etc. are not so;
therefore you did not deal fairly in leaving out [duely]


R. B. You say, [Outward Circumstances are natural and Occasional, no
accidental parts of Worship] Answer. Just now all accidents were parts, (or
else accidents belong not to it) and now it has no accidental parts: a man's
name, Relation, Trade, Clothing, Age, House, etc. belong to him, and no parts
of him.


J. O. We contradict not our selves in the least, we say there is no accidental
part in the Worship of God, no one part that cannot be called Gods Worship;
there is no common adjuncts belonging to it, that can be called Instituted
Worship; or a part of it, as Silver Cups in the Sacraments, Tables, etc. these
I say are natural, occasional, no parts, though accidents, they do not duly
belong as integral parts, therefore it has no accidental parts of its
subsistence; the Accidents are common and separable, as those of a man that you
instance in, and say are no parts, so in a manner you have granted all. Most of
the things instanced in by you, are not only no proper adjuncts of Instituted
Worship, but none of Worship in general, for they are common to other things.


Manuscript. Prayers and Praises absolutely considered, are not an Institution
of Christ, they are a part of natural Worship common to all Mankind; his
Institution respects only the internal form of them, and the manner of their
performance: But this is that which the Liturgy takes on it self, namely to
supply and determine the matter, to prescribe the manner, and to limit all the
concerns of them, to modes and forms of its own; which is to take the work of
Christ out of his hand.


R. B. Your second Answer is no better: 1. If by Absolutely, you mean not
generally, (but as opposite to conditional) it has no sense here that I can
find; but if it be in [genere] that you mean, they are no part of Worship at
all, natural nor instituted; there is praying which is cursing, and striving
against God and goodness, and praying to Idols.


J. O. Strange Logic and Divinity! 1. You need not have put your first
supposal of our meaning, for we mean in genere, that Religious Prayers and
Praises generally considered, merely as such, not specificated by any
limitation, are not an Institution of Christ: You say they are no part of any
Worship at all, natural nor instituted; its as much sense as if you should say,
When I say the Leg absolutely considered, i. e. ^ot relatively, as it stands to
the whole, but in respect of the next Genus, is no part of a man; say you, as
such, it is no part of an Animal, for its neither part of Homo, nor Brutum: Now
is this good reasoning? Negatur; for it must be part of one, because
absolutely, i. e. generically considered, i. e. as part of an Animal; a Leg
being a proper adjunct to an Animal, but cannot be found but in Homo or Brutum;
you say, Yes, it may be the Leg of a joynt-stool, fetching in a remote Genus,
falaciously: And mark the proof, for there is praying that is cursing, etc.
therefore Praises and Prayers absolutely considered, are no part of Worship at
all. I suppose your meaning is, That Prayers are either such as are Religious
Worship, or such as are not; as a Request or Petition to Man, and Praises or
Encomiums of Men, and so in respect of this remote Genus, they are no Worship
at all; but by your favor it follows not; for though some are not Religious
Worship, yet others are, and all are Worship of one kind or another, either
Religious or Civil. Again, It Is plain enough that we speak of Religious Worship
in genere, and then will you say that Religious Prayers and Praises, absolutely
considered, are no part of Worship at all, neither natural nor Instituted? If
so, your proof will be this, for there is praying which is no Religious
Praying, viz. Cursing, etc. And so we see how in your Arguments you go about to
delude and confound men's understandings with little School-Sophisms, that
becomes not the solidity of a Grave Writer, as leaping from one genus to
another, fallacia generis, putting a remote genus for a next, and a next for a
remote; and by your leave you are out in your Divinity too, for is not an
Imprecation a Prayer to some God, and therefore Worship? and Praying to Idols,
Religious Worship? will you say, These are no Worship at all? You might have
left out striving against God and Goodness, that is a general Character of Sin
and obstinate Sinners, but I cannot see how it comes in under the Genus of
Prayer; you might as well put in fighting a Battle, or running a Race, or
wearing Clothes, or killing a man, and a hundred such heterogeneous things, and
called them praying: But when men out of prejudice to any truth run into
absurdities, God leaves them to leave their own Reason and Understanding.


R. B. But I suppose you mean de specie, praying to God for good things needful.


J. O. You love to play with Genus and Species; such Prayer is Species in
respect of Prayer for the Genus, but it is a Sub-alternum Genus, in respect of
the Species under it, such as Natural or Instituted Prayers.


R. B. And it is another mistake, That this Prayer is not of Christ's
Institution, because it is a part of Natural Worship: All is of Christ's
Institution which is a part of his commanding Law. The Law of Nature is now
Christ's Law. Error XVII.


J. O. And was it not always as much as now? As all things were made by him,
and as he lightneth every man that comes into the world, by the Law of Nature,
which Law was never abolished, as to its use in the world, for Christ's Ends;
but merely as such, it was ever since the fall a weak and imperfect Law, as to
the Salvation of the world; Romans 8.3. It was weak through the flesh, and life
could not come by it, Gal. 2.31. Likewise at first by reason of the darkness
that came in by sin, there wanted a further and more express manifestation of
it, which was by Revelation, and in that respect was a revealed Law at Mount
Sinai, but thereby became a more killing Letter. Two sorts of people thereupon
were in the world, those that lay merely under the light of Nature, and they
that had the written Law, Romans 2.12. Now miserable had the condition of the
world been, if Christ had not manifested himself in another way then merely by
the Law of Nature: He reveals himself as the M^diator of the New Covenant, the
Seed of the Woman, the great High Priest, and Sacrifice, yea, a Redeemer of
them that were under the Law, and in the Glory and Power of this Undertaking he
appears King of Saints; first he reveals a Worship made up mostly of Types and
Figures, for the strengthening of the Faith of his People in the Promises of his
appearing in the flesh, when the fullness of time was come; wherein also he
fits and adapts the Law of Nature to his honor, and the use of his people, in
subserviency to the promise; and this was the first Model of Instituted Worship
that Christ set up in the World, and now is become Head of all things to his
Church: But his peculiar Regiment was exercised there in his Mediatory Office.
Afterward when he had appeared in the flesh, finished his Ministry, and was
offered up, the old model of Worship, the Law of Commandments contained in
Ordinances, was abolished, and a new Model of Instituted Worship set up for
Conversion of Sinners, and Edification of his Church, to continue to the End of
the World; and these two Models, Divine, have thought good to call Instituted
and Revealed Worship, as distinct from Natural. Now if you can find out a
better term of Distinction, pray do; but the thing must be the same: Now let
the world judge whether this be not perverse disputing, to endeavor to render
such a known and approved Distinction, absurd and ridiculous: Moreover see more
of this Spirit; you charge it for a mistake, in saying, This Prayer is not of
Christ's Institution; Is it said this Prayer? We say, Prayer in general, is not
Instituted Worship, but Natural; but this or that Prayer is of Christ's
Institution, which is appointed to be used by the Church, or his people; the
Prayer to be prayed by the Church when the Ark and Camp moved, and that when it
rested, was Instituted by Christ; Prayer upon particular occasions in the
Gospel Church, are appointed; as at the blessing and Consecration of the
Elements in the Supper; though not prescribed and limited as some men would
have them; but where Christ has prescribed and limited, we cheerfully obey him.


R. B. It is another mistake, That Christ's Institution respects only the
internal form and manner of performance; the interal form is the inward desire
offered mentally to God; and is not this natural, if Prayer be? Sure the form
is the thing.


J. O. It is so, or should be so, if men were able to do it since the Fall; but
the power of Nature was lost, and was supplied by Grace; take it as you will,
we allow it; but you speak of one thing, and we of another; you speak of of the
internal qualification of the Worshipper, the Performer of the Institution; we
speak of the internal form of the Institution, which is the perfection and
rectitude thereof, wholly according to God's mind and will, as to the several
particulars that it does concern The form is not the thing, but the form and
matter.


R. B. And that the manner of Performance is sinful, which is not of Christ's
institution.


J. O. These are not our words, but that his Institution respects the manner of
our performance; and that is, the external due manner, and the internal; the
internal is the due Gospel manner of offering our desires mentally to God,
which is not natural, but revealed, to pray in the Spirit with Faith, in and
through Christ: Heathens may offer up desires mentally to a Deity by the Law of
Nature; but by it they cannot know God in Christ, nor pray aright, without his
Revelation and Institution: So for the External manner, after what manner in
the Platform, and expressly, Not with vain bablings, and repititions, as the
Heathens.


R. B. The words, and method, and length, are the manner of performance; can
you show an Institution determinative of them?


J. O. No, nor you, neither do I desire it; it was not that manner you mean
that Christ determined expressly, it is enough that he determined other manners,
and his Institution reaches that always in his own way, though not in man's,
which thereby is excluded; for if Christ thought it not for his honor and the
good of his Church, to make determinative Institutions of such things, it is
great presumption in men to undertake it.


R. B. You say the Lyturgy takes on it self to supply and determine matter.
Answ. Matter is more than manner; but this is another mistake.


J. O. I wonder any man will deny the Sun shines; does not the Lyturgy
determine the matter for every Prayer? Dare any man con^ that ordinarily
officiates, and change the matter from the time an^ occasion prescribed; what
if there be Scripture Expressions? It prescribes what Expressions shall be used
in such a Prayer, upon such an occasion. You say, Matter is more then manner;
then they prescribe more then manner. But I deny matter to be more then manner,
in Gospel Worship; they are both of equal weight, in respect of the Institution.


R. B. It is another mistake, That thus to limit the concerns of Prayer to
modes and form, is to take Christ's work out of his hands: if so, you must show
where Christ undertook to limit us to his modes and forms only.


J. O. He has limited us to his Laws and Institutions only; and do you show us
where he has authorized any men to limit us to their modes and forms only.


R. B. Else it is not Christ's proper Work: Is there a Lyturgy of his making?


J. O. No, if there had been, we would not dispute its Authority; But if there
had been one to be made, it had been his work to do it; Law-making for his
Worship in his Church, being his work. It Is a sign a man has not the Truth on
his side, when he is put to such Childish Shifts.


R. B. Do not all Ministers in every public prayer take Christ's work out of
his hand?


J. O. No, they do not, they make no Laws for others praying.


R. B. Do they not limit the people in matter?


J. O. No otherwise then Christ has allowed them to do, by virtue of his
Institution and Charter to his Church; all Christ's Limitations we are for; we
are willing to be limited to Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper, but not to the
weight and measure every one shall put into his mouth; nor to the sort of Wine,
nor the fashion of the Cups it must be drank in, nor to the matter they must be
made of; and a hundred such particulars.


Manuscript. 3. Outward Rites and Modes of Worship divinely instituted and
determined, do become the necessary parts of Divine Worship; see instance,
Levit. 1.16. Therefore such as are humanely Instituted, appointed, and
determined, are thereby made parts of Worship, namely that which is false, for
want of Divine Institution.


R. B. Your third Reply is no better then the rest, viz. That, because Divine
Institution makes Rites and modes necessary, therefore humane Institution
makes such Parts thereof false Worship, for want of Divine Institution. Error
21. Gods determination can make any indifferent thing a duty; and therefore
does it follow that he has left nothing to man's determination?


J. O. He has left something to man's; 1. Where and so far as he has by
Commission in his word given man a Legislative power; but he has given no such
to him in the matters of instituted Worship; let him or you show man's
Commission. 2. Christ has left many things to Christian and Church
determination, by the Judgment of Discretion, and so occasionally, as pro hic
and nunc, to become a duty by virtue of his own Institution: but he has left
this as their privilege by Charter, none must rob them of it: And if they
alter the nature of the Rule, and come to make Law Determination, and binding
Rules in indifferences, they forfeit their Charter.


R. B. Gods choice of Jerusalem for his worship, of the Tabernacle shape, of
the Priests, etc. made those necessary, is therefore man's determination of the
fixed places for Ordinary Worship, of the Form of the Temple, of ordained
Ministers, false worship?


J. O. It was Gods choice of Jerusalem for his worship, that made Jeroboams
worship, and his determination, false worship, in that time that God had
limited his worship to a place: But when God binds his worship determinatively
to no place, its false worship in man to bind it to any; and so for man to make
binding forms in any thing of his worship, where he has not.


R. B. Christ taught his Disciples a form of Prayer, may you not therefore
teach your Children any?


J. O. No, if Christ has bound us only to teach or say that Prayer, then we
should teach or say no other.


R. B. That which God has commanded, is no false worship, but God has
commanded the Churches to determine undetermined Modes and Circumstances
needful in genere; so all may be done to Edification, decently and in order.


J. O. Now here is another fallacious reasoning; what do you mean by
[determine] its one thing to determine by a Legislative power, and another to
determine by the Rules of Discretion, pro hic and nunc; and so every particular
Church is to do as occasion requires, and therefore not to be bound up by any
standing Rule in those things, more then general, which Christ has made. Other
Rules binding to particulars, 1st. would infringe rhem of that Liberty they
enjoy by Charter; 2dly Cannot possibly consist with the Churches been esse,
because of the mutability of such occasions and Circumstances.


Manuscript. Prayer and Praise are not things prescribed and enjoined in and by
the Liturgy; It is so far from it, that thereby all Prayers and Praises in
Church-Assembly, merely as such, are prohibited: But it is in its own forms,
way, and mode, with their determination and limitation alone, that are
instituted, perscribed and enjoined by it: But these things have no Divine
Institution, and therefore are so far false Worship.


R. B. Here are two strange Mistakes: 1. Are there so many Prayers enjoined,
and the People called on it, with a [Let us pray,] and yet is not Prayer
Enjoined? There Is some secret meaning in it, etc.


J. O. No conjuring: We say there is no Law to command Prayer in general, but
these particular forms and modes: and so for the calls to particular forms
annexed, Let us pray, it intends not to leave it to your Liberty to choose your
Prayer. If a Law be made to prohibit Eating meat in Lent, is this a Law against
eating meat in general? Prayers are no where prescribed as such only, by the
Lyturgy, but as this or that mode, words, form, and manner: And, Let us pray,
is no term of Compulsion, but a form of Exhortation there prescribed among
others; if it be determinative, its to the Prayer next ensuing.


R. B. And are no Praises Enjoined? Are there no Psalms?


J. O. We say not that there are no Prayers or Praises enjoined, but not as
such, but as modified in this or that manner: besides, any lawful Prayers or
Doxologies (by Christ's Law) will not serve man's turn in this Case, he requires
his own Prayer, to keep its time and Circumstances exactly, without Alteration.


R. B. Your next misreport is, That [by the Lyturgy all Prayers and Praises in
Church Assemblies are prohibited.] Error 23. This can have no sense but that
either none are Church Assemblies that have Lyturgies, or that nothing
commanded in the Lyturgy is Prayer or Praises.


J. O. All Prayer and Praises in Church Assemblies in the time and place of
Lyturgical performance, are prohibited, except what is there prescribed; this
is a known Truth.


R. B. Is there no Church on Earth out of England?


J. O. There is; but all out of England, or in England, don't worship by
Lyturgies.


R. B. Or do they forbid any out of England, to pray and praise God?


J. O. No; to what purpose is it to forbid further then their power reaches.


R. B. Do they forbid the Dutch and French in England to pray and praise God?


J. O. No; the Law allows Foreigners the Free Exercise of their Religion in
their own way.


R. B. Do they forbid all Prayer in Pulpits?


J. O. That which is, is by the limiting Law, and must be no other then what
the Law of man determines.


R. B. Have you proved all the Parish-Churches in England to be no Churches?


J. O. As much as you have proved all the Diocesses in England to be no
Churches.


R. B. Have you proved that commanding men to pray in such words, is forbidding
them to pray?


J. O. Enjoining men to pray in such words by a Law, is forbidding them to pray
in any other.


Manuscript. Arg. 1. That which was in its first contrivance, and has been in
its continuance, an Invention and Engine to defeat or render useless the
promise of Christ unto his Church, of sending the holy Spirit in all Ages. to
Enable it to the due discharge and performance of Divine Worship in its
Assemblies, is unlawful to be complied withal, nor can be admitted in Religious
Worship; But such is Lyturgical Worship. That the Lord Christ did make such a
promise, that he does make it good, that the very being and continuance of the
Church (without which it is but a dead Machine) does depend thereon, will not
be denied; it has been andeniably proved.


R. B. I answer to your Minor, Do you mean that this was the intent of the
Contrivers and Continuers? Or only that it is the Effect, contrary to their
intent? The first seems your intent; that is Error 24. for, first, you know
not the first Inventers, and who all the Continuers, etc.


J. O. We speak of the contrivance and continuance; but if you must have the
first Contriver, it was that Spirit that acted the false Prophets in John's
days, 1 John 4. and that he with such Agents have been the main Continuers
thereof ever since.


R. B. Are you sure you lay not this Charge of Malignity on the men of God that
made the Jews Psalms?


J. O. We are sure we do not; we blame nothing done by the inspiration of the
Holy Ghosts. But by the Jews Psalms, we know not what you mean; it may be their
Lyturgy, in which are Fopperies enough to be Exploded, and like that you plead
for.


R. B. That which is imposed with an evil intent, may be used to a good one.


J. O. God never required any thing (with an Evil intent) of his Church,
neither does he allow his Church to yield Active Obedience to any that impose
matters in his Worship with an ill intent; for both the Imposition and Intent
are Sin; and we must not do evil for the accomplishment of a good intent;
besides, that is good which God judges so; our Intent makes not an Evil thing
good. Your 25th charge of Error comes in upon the Popes shoulders, and there we
leave it.


Manuscript. Hereon the Church lived and acted for several Ages, performing all
Divine Worship in their Assemblies, by virtue of the Gifts and Graces of the
holy Spirit, and no otherwise. When these things were neglected, when the way
of attaining, and the Exercise of them, appeared too difficult to men of carnal
minds, this way of Worship by a prescribed Lyturgy, was insensibly brought in,
to render the promise of Christ, and the work of the holy Ghost in the
administration of Gifts, useless: And herein two things do follow.


R. B. It is a great Error to think that the gifts and graces of the Spirit may
not be Exercised, if we use the same words, or if they be prescribed.


J. O. We do not say so here, and therefore I find you do not mark it for one
upon us.


R. B. If you had put all the Errors of this Writing into a Prayer or Sermon,
you had had need of more help of the Spirit to have avoided it.


J. O. Take heed of Scoffing at the help of the Spirit. If I should have put
them in a Prayer or Sermon, and imposed the use thereof upon you, it had been
unkind, and hard measure. I suppose as to the number of the Errors, they will
not prove to amount so high as you make, in the judgment of judicious and
impartial men; I wish you had never had more in less room.


R. B. May not a man use the Lords Prayer by the Spirits help, and sing Psalms?


J. O. All things that Christ commands have the promise of the Spirits help to
accompany them that wait for it in a due and faithful exercise of Obedience
thereto.


R. B: But you come to History, and add another mis-report in the Words [and no
otherwise] and mean that by such gifts the Church Excluded Lyturgical forms.


J. O. We say that the Church performed all Divine Worship [ i. e. acceptably]
by virtue of the gifts and graces of the Spirit, in all Ages, and no otherwise.
Tell us of another way to perform Divine Worship; we exclude no Worship so
performed.


R. B. It Is too true that the carelessness, sloth, and worldly Alienations of
Ministers, made all useful Sufficiency for the work of the Ministry, in praying
and preaching, to be neglected, and does to this Day.


J. O. And this was the design of the first contrivance, and after-continuance
of Lyturgical Worship: Here we agree well enough.


Manuscript. 1. A total neglect of all Gifts of the Holy Ghost in the
Administration of Church-Worship and Ordinances.


R. B. The first Consequence is an untruth; no doubt but Lyturgies were abused
to cherish Ignorance and Negligence: But that the neglect was total, is not
true; whether you respect all the Churches, or all the parts of Worship and
Ordinances.


J. O. We say it has been abused to a total neglect by many you call Churches
and Ordinances; it would be sad if it should be in all Churches and Ordinances;
but a total in not a few, is sufficiently known. We apply not total to the
universal Church, but to some Churches only; neither has the Universal Church
in all Ages served God by Lyturgies, nor in any one, I believe.


Manuscript. 2. When a Plea for the work of the Holy Ghost began to be revived,
it produced all the Enmity, Hatred and contempt of, and against the Spirit of
God himself, and his whole work in the Church, which the whole world is now
filled withal.


R. B. That word [his whole work in the Church] is another mis-report; it is
not [his whole Work] that is so contemned: Error 28.


J. O. The whole work of Christ in his Church, is by his Institutions and the
gifts and graces of his holy Spirit; and if these be hated and contemned, his
whole work is hated and contemned.


R. B And its a palpable mistake, that the foresaid scorn of all done by the
Spirit, [ariseth from hence alone] a justification of their devised way of
Worship; it arises more from a malignant Enmity to serious Godliness, etc.
Error 29.


J. O. But what has caused that in the case mentioned? Has not a
justification of their devised Worship: Causa causae est causa causati. When we
say the only Cause, we mean the principal first moving causer, causa procreans,
its here.


Manuscript. All the reproaches that are daily cast on the Spirit of Prayer,
all the contempt and scorn which all Duties of Religious Worship performed by
his Aid and Assistance, are entertained withal, arises from hence alone,
namely a justification of their devised way of Worship, as the only true way
and means thereof. Take this away, and the wrath and anger of men against the
Spirit of God, and his work in the Worship of the Church, will be abated: yea
the necessity of them will be Evident. This me cannot comply with, least we
approve of the Original design of it, and partake in the sins which proceed
from it.


J. O. You charge no Error here, do you?


R. B. No, but seeing you and your dividing Separatists are branded with D. S.
now my Irons are hot, I Will add R. too, the first Letter of my own Name.


R. B. I will tell you a story how the Separatists were the Causes of all the
Mischiefs in the late Mutations. -- And amongst the rest you know Oliver comes
to be made Protector, the Fundamental Laws made among themselves by we know not
whom; Parliament Lords made by him; Parliaments called and broken at his
pleasure; the Government of the Counties put into the hands of Major Generals:
After the Death of Oliver his Son set up, and his Parliament first pulled down,
(in which you told me you were an Agent) and next himself.


J. O. Let all this be granted, it amounts to no more then this, That I was an
Agent in pulling down a Usurper: I pray where lies the most Loyalty, in being
an Agent to aid and assist, and maintain such a one; or to contribute toward
the pulling him down? I know you were mightily displeased with me and the Army
for it; and I remember a remarkable passage in your Epistle to them, in the
Preface of your Holy Commonwealth, where you say, For my part, you see the
worst that I designed by this Book, which was written while the LORD PROTECTOR
(prudently, piously, faithfully, to his Immortal Honor, how ill soever you
have used him) did Exercise the Government.


R. B. Ay, but this you could not be contented with, to pull down the
Protector, but you must break the Army in pieces. You were once Pastor to the
Officers of the Army, when they pulled down and set up, and again pulled down,
till they had turned the Army Bulwarks into Atoms. And when you saw what they
had done, said, [I wonder the People do not cast stones at us as we go along
the Streets] was not this a blaming of the flock?


J. O. Very Good, Sir, and was there any disloyalty in all this? If all the
simple things that we have said must be told, and that you have writ, I could
tell tales too, but there is so much Printed of it, that I need not fill pages
with it, and I must tell you, it is that which is now much worse resented by the
World, then any thing you can report of me; but I seek not Revenge, though I
could give you heap measure in these matters. But if your hand be in at it once
more, you shall be sure to have that which you deserve in such cases; That
which is Sauce for a Goose, is so for a Gander also. I shall only add one
thing, that whereas you charge Separatists, as you call them for the great
Dividers in this Land; Let me tell you, there was never an hundred of
Separatists this Hundred years living together, that have made more dangerous
divisions in matters of Religion, both in Doctrine and Discipline, then you
have done: And with such Errors that it may be the Church had hardly seen, or
at least been vexed with at this day, had you not spawned them into her Bosom,
and given Credit and Life by your Authority to some Old and Exploded Ones by
most Protestants.


Manuscript. Argument 3. That in Religious Worship which derogates from the
Kingly Office of Jesus Christ, so far as it does is false Worship. Unto the
Office of Christ it inseparably belongs that he is the Sole Lawgiver of his
Church in all the Worship of God. The Rule of his Government herein is, Teach
men to do all, and observe whatever I Command.

But the Worship treated about, consists wholly in the Institutions, Commands,
Prescriptions, Orders and Rules of men, and on the Authority of me^ alone does
their Impositions on the practice of the Church depend. What is this but to
Renounce the Kingly Office of Christ in the Church?


R. B. To your Major of your Third Argument, I answer: First, there is that in
Worship, as the badness of men, etc. which is no part of Worship, and therefore
no false Worship.


J. O. This is the Old Crambe ter Coctum, tollere Subjectum, and let the
Predicatum go whistle, we will draw out this kind of Argument at length, and
send it to the boys at Oxford, to course with. That in Religious Worship which
is no part of Worship, is no false Worship; But there is that in Religious
Worship (as the badness of men) which is no part of Worship: Ergo there is that
in Worship, which is no false Worship.

And now you have proved that no Worship is no false Worship: but let me tell
you, (seeing you are so upon the Carp) a man of Clouts, a Picture, a Statue, is
called a false man; any counterfeit thing, is called a false thing: false
Worship in the Scripture strict sense, is called no Worship, because it is no
true Worship, signifies nothing, is not accepted of God, nor profits us. But
as to your retorted Argument, to destroy our Subject or Antecedent, it runs
after this manner; There is that in a House which is no House, as a Cat, Dog,
Pig, etc. and therefore no false House. Who goes about to say, A Cat is a false
House, or that Sin is part of Gods Worship? but quite contrary; neither does
any body say, Sin is in Worship as an integral part in the Totum or Species in
Genere: it is often said our performances are accompanied with Sin, but no Sin
is a part of a Religious performance as such. Besides, we often tell you when
we speak of Worship here, we mean the Rule of Worship, which ought to be
unerring, and so we will put it, though that is evident to be our meaning to any
man that is not contentious, That Rule of Religious Worship which derogates,
etc.


R. B. True Worship materially may be so abused as to derogate from the Kingly
Office of Christ.


J. O. All sin derogates from the Kingly Office of Christ, but Christ's Rule in
its self cannot be made sinful materially nor formally, men's Actions may; And
therefore if you will have that to be the sense of the Major, it is true by your
own concession, and there can be nothing in Worship that derogates but Sin; but
you know all men mean by that in Worship, that which men account and call
Worship, as the Traditions of men, etc. which our Savior blames for false
Worship.


R. B. That it belongs to this Office of Christ to be the Sole Lawgiver in all
the Worship of God, is Error 30.


J. O. This is one of the boldest Assertions that ever Protestant Divine made.
You say in your dispute about a Stinted Liturgy, page 360. That God being the
Supreme Lawgiver of the Church, having by Moses given a Law in Israel, did in
general command, Deuteronomy. 12.32. That they should add nothing thereto, nor take
therefrom; and consequently we may conclude it prohibited under the Gospel; nay
indeed the very prohibition of Self-Idolizing makes it a Sin, for any man to
arrogate that Legislation, which is the Prerogative of God, for that were to
Deify himself, and so this general prohibition does make all Unwarrantable
Additions to be sinful, i. e. which God has not Authorized men to make.

Your following mincing this great Truth, is as here; for we say, general Rules
of walking in the use of indifferent things, are no Rule for man, or Authority
for him to limit them by a binding Law in matters of Religion, but on the
contrary a prohibition of it. For walking at liberty in the use of those things
under the general Rules, are Churches and Christians Privileges; none can rob
them of them, nay, they themselves cannot alter their Nature, to make that
necessary in Christ's Worship, which Christ has made indifferent, no more then
they can make that indifferent which he made necessary. And therefore I roundly
assert against you; That though every Church of Christ has the liberty and
privilege to act prudentially, or make prudential determinations concerning the
present use of indifferent things, pro hic and nunc, yet to make any standing
or binding Determinations and Laws for themselves or others, is altogether
unlawful, as highly derogatory to the Kingly Office of Christ, and robbing
themselves or others of their granted privilege, and so a forfeiture of their
Charter; and all your by-standing Laws, and Subordinate Laws for Worship which
you talk of, are unwarrantable additions to the Word of God, according to your
own position, unless you show better Commission for enjoining Liturgies and
Forms of Worship by Laws Ecclesiastical or Civil, then you have done there in
your Dispute, or here.


R. B. Princes may make Laws for Translations of Scripture.


J. O. We utterly deny that a Prince may impose upon his Subjects what
Translations he pleases; it is true, he may Recommend what he thinks best, and
so may any Christian; and besides, is a Translation a part of the Worship of
God? even as much as the Printed Letter and the paper of the Bible, and as much
as the Pulpit and the Parsons Gown and Cassock, a part of his Prayers and
Sermons; and so for your time, place, utensils, that you would have some
Seducers restrained in; they must all be so, that you are pleased in Cathedra
to call so.


R. B. Mat. 28.20. by saying Whatever I command you, does not say, Do nothing
which your Parents, Prince Master, Pastor commands you: Heb. 13. Obey them that
have the Rule over you.


J. O. That is, in the Lord; Christ has Commanded Obedience to all the lawful
commands of these, but he has not given them a Legislative Power in his
Church, that is his own Prerogative; let any of them, or you for them, show
their Commissions for this if they can.


R. B. It is another mistake, Error 31. That the Worship treated about,
consists wholly in the Commands of men: The Worship contains, First,
General Praying, Preaching.


J. O. We have showed that these are not commanded in general, but as to the
kind and matter limited, modification, etc. it is the manner as to
Circumstances, Words, Sentences, kind of matter, that is limited, prescribed
and commanded.


R. B. Secondly, It contains for the matter signified, Confession of Sins of
Omission and Commission.


J. O. We except not against any thing that is in Worship, that is the will of
Christ that it should be there. But let man let Christ's Institutions alone, and
not cast them into his Mould; a good Iron Pot may be melted down into a Cannon
Bullet, and become quite another thing, an Instrument of destruction, and yet
the matter is the same.


R. B. It is also a mistake, Error 32. that on the Authority of men alone does
the Imposition on the practice of the Church depend, for first the aforesaid
are Imposed by God himself.


J. O. They will never serve God well, that look upon themselves to be Imposed
upon by him, neither are Gods Laws called an Imposition; imposition is usually
taken but in these two senses; first when a blind and delusion is put on my
Understanding, that I take that to be truth which is not; or secondly, upon our
Actions contrary to our Will, and it may be our Understanding and Will both are
enforced by Laws or Power to do that we otherwise would not.


R. B. Lawful Modes imposed by men, depend not on their Authority alone, but on
Gods who Au^horizeth the Ruler.


J. O. Therefore he is to Command only in his own Province, where by God the
Judge of all he is limited; a Justice of Peace's Authority reaches no further
then his Commission gives him leave to go. They have no power to impose l^wful
modes, things lawfully used are to be indifferently used in the Worship of God;
what he thinks is necessary to be made a binding Law, he has made so; or else
he is deficient in his house.


R. B. Your Conclusion is a Mistake, Error 33.


J. O. That it must needs be, if the premises were so full of Errors; but we
have vindicated them, so the Conclusion is true.


Manuscript. Argument 4. That which gives Testimony against the Faithfulness of
Christ in his house, as a Son and Lord of it, above that of a Servant, is not
to be complied withal, let all the Disciples judge.

Unto the Faithfulness of Christ does belong to appoint and command all things
whatsoever in the Church, that belongs to the Worship of God, as is Evident
from the Comparison with Moses herein, and his Preference above him, Heb. 3.3,
4, 5, 6. But that Institution and Prescription of all things in Religious
Worship, of things never Instituted nor prescribed by Christ in form and modes
of them, arises from a Supposition of a defect in the Wisdom, Care and
Faithfulness of Christ; Whence alone a Necessity can arise of Prescribing that
in Divine Worship that he has not Prescribed.


R. B. 1st. To your Major I answer, 1. To give Testimony, Signifies either by
remote unseen Consequence to cross Christ's Faithfulness, and so do many of your
Mistakes: 2. Or it signifies a plain Denial of Christ's Faithfulness, no
Christian complyeth with this.


J. O. By a remote unseen Consequence you have answered the Major, for no man
can see any Answer in it worth a Button. To give Testimony against the
Faithfulness of Christ is by making or Complying with Laws necessary for the
Churches Esse, or been esse, which he has not made, and it charges him for not
doing what he ought to do as the Lord of his house; and that which a man bears
Testimony to by open Profession in Words or Practice, is not to cross Christ's
Faithfulness by a remote unseen Consequence; men do not use to bear Testimonies
in the dark. Our meanig is, men's plain Denial in Practice, and it may be an
open mouth Vindication of themselves, and Condemnation of others added, as you
do. This we roundly affirm to be a Testimony born against the Faithfulness of
Christ, and in this meaning you grant our Major.


R B. To your Minor, I answer, In your Supposition it is not true, That it
belongs to Christ's Faithfulness to appoint and command all things whatever in
the Church, which belongs to the Worship of God. Else he were unfaithful in
bidding them appoint many things belonging to his Worship. Error 34.


J. O. Here is another bold Attempt against Christ, if it were not contradicted
in the same breath, for if he has bid them appoint and make Laws, then he did
it in faithfulness, and it belongs still to his faithfulness to give them a
faithful Commission, so as might not turn to the certain manifest wrong and
injury of his Church, as the exerting such a power has done; but tell us the
Vbi of those Laws and biddings to men in the present sense, and the Controversy
is at an end.


R. B. It is another Error, That the prescription of forms and modes of things
in Worship not commanded by Christ, can arise from nothing but a Supposition of
a defect in the Wisdom, Care and Faithfulness of Christ.


J. O. I prove it; either it is so, or all that is done in that kind is
superfluous. For if there were Laws enough ad esse and been esse Ecclesiae,
it is folly and madness to make more; that which you instance in forms of
Catechizing, Confessions or Forms of Prayer for Children, etc. they are nothing
to the purpose, they may be of use in their place for some means of instruction
to the Ignorant, as persons and cases require. But we speak of forms and
Systems of Worship imposed and bound on upon our shoulders at man's pleasure;
this we assert must be upon a Supposal of the defect of Christ's Law, or be done
in manifest opposition to it, to thrust it out, or be a professed folly to make
Laws were we declare there is no need of them.

Your Refutation in the three particulars are idle or false, not worth our
pains to take notice of.


Manuscript. Argument 5. That which is a means humanely Invented for the
attaining of an End in Divine Worship, which Christ has Ordained a means for,
unto the Exclusion of the means so appointed by Christ, is false Worship, and
not to be complied withal.

The end intended is the Edification of the Church in the Administration of all
its holy Ordinances; This the Service Book is Ordained and appointed by men
for, or it has no end or use at all; But the Lord Christ has appointed other
means for the attaining this End (as is Expressly declared.) He has given gifts
unto men for the work of the Min stry, for the edifying of the Body, Ephesians.
4.7, 8, 11, 12. that is, in all Gospel Administrations; but this means Ordained
by Christ, namely the Exercise of Spiritual Gifts in Gospel Administrations
unto the Edification of the Church, is Excluded, yea expressly prohibited in the
prescription of this Liturgical Worship.


R. B. To the major of your fifth Argument, I answer as to the former, no man
is to comply by approbation with any thing that excludes any of Gods means; E.
gr. not with you that exclude the great duty of Catholic Communion.


J. O. Then you grant the mayor, but insinuate a distinction, or keep a hole
rather, to creep out at: There is (say you) compliance by Approbation, and
compliance without, and that is by Compulsion: When men comply with a Worship,
they submit to the Rule as the mind and will of God, not as to a faulty and
Erroneous Rule: You are still upon your old shift, a short turn and a leap;
putting the Errors of Performances, inst^ad of the Errors of the Rule. It Is a
false accusation to say, that I did ever exclude Catholic Communion: But if I
should please men, I should not be the Servant of Jesus Christ; but it is a
very small thing with me, that I should be judged of you, or of man's judgment,
1 Cor. 4.3. He that judges me is the Lord, verse 4. Only this I shall say, I
will not go to the Church of Rome for Catholic Communion; nor betray the Lord
of the Vineyard, that I may eat of the fruit thereof.


R. B. It is another mistake that the exercise of Spiritual Gifts is expressly
forbidden; except you meant just at the use of the Liturgy, extemporate
utterance is forbidden; but it is not so in the Pulpit, Error 36


J. O. We mean that there is an actual Exclusion of the Exercise of Spiritual
Gifts in the whole Lyturgical Worship, both in praying, or any thing else; it is
all prescribed.


Manuscript. The pretense of men's liberty to use their Gifts in Prayer before
Sermon, and in Preaching, is ridiculous; they are excluded in all their Solemn
Worship.


R. B. This Answer is not only a mistake, but of an ill aspect on your self.
It Is not true [That the use of Gifts is excluded in all the Solemn Worship of
the Church] As if Prayer, Praise, Thanksgiving, Confession, Explication of the
Scripture, Reproof, Benediction, etc. Error 37.


J. O. I admire at your boldness in these things: what Gifts of the Spirit are
used for Edification of the the Church in all the Service of the Church? Is it
Reading, and an Audible Voice? There can be no other: Are these all that Christ
gave to men for Edification, when he ascended on high?


R. B. Indeed some Super-Conformists have said so, but I hoped you would not.


J. O. Whatever Super Conformists and Half-Conformists say, the truth is truth:
Do you think the meaning of the Apostle is, when he says, Christ gave Gifts to
men, that he gave Liturgies to them, with prescribed forms of Prayer, Praises,
Confessions, Benedictions, etc. If that be the meaning, produce Christ's Liturgy
that he dropped down from heaven with these gifts in it, and we shall with all
Alacrity yield to that way of worship; but see you bring good evidence for it.


R. B. 2. It has an ill aspect; if that Preaching and Pulpit Praying be none
of the Solemn Worship of the Churches, then all Churches that have not
Liturgies, have no Solemn Worship at all.


J. O. Non sequitur; we say Pulpit-Praying is not any of the Service Book
Church Solemn Worship; they are in that respect called the Prayers of the
Church; and if the Liturgy makes them none of its Solemn Worship; does it
follow that they are not so, or that other Churches does not make them so?


R. B. If it be otherwise, Parish-Churches excel you, etc.


J. O. We envy them not; we desire to excel in following Christ, and walking
according to his Rule; we compare our selves no otherwise.


Manuscript. Arg. 6. That which has been and is obstructive of the Edification
of the Church, if it be in Religious Worship, it is a false Worship; for the
end of all true Worship is Edification: But such has been and is the
Liturgical Worship.


R. B. This is but the former repeated.


J. O. It is false, it has another Medium; The Medium of the fifth Argument,
was, A means humanely invented to exclude Christ's means, for the attaining his
end, viz. Edification: This Medium is, The bringing that which is obstructive,
(i. e. apparently opposite) and contrary to all pretenses of Edification. But
the Major you grant.


R. B. To your Minor, 1. Such is all your Errors, all the disorder, ill
reflections, slovenly expressions, which any weak Minister uses, and the faults
that all men have in some degree.


J. O. And that few go beyond you in; instead of Reflections, you use Fractions
by your Magisterial Club; and of slovenly reviling Expressions, if they be not
slovenly, they are as dirty as I have met with from a Minister of your
Reputation; but for your way of arguing, the most illogical, fallacious, and
full of pedantick Carping that ever was: And all men that oppose you in your
confidently asserted Errors, must be stigmatized with all reproachful names
imginable; If they be not for Justification by works, then they are
Antinomians; if they be not for your Pye-bald Conformity, then they are on one
side Super Conformists, and on the other Dividing Separatists; and must have a
sentence passed upon their Persons and Learning, as Unstudied Divines,
Factious, Schismatical, Erroneous; and this is all to promote love and
Catholic Communion in the World. Must you be the Infallible Dictator in all
matters of Religion? Is there no men living that have Reason, Logic, Theology,
but your self? Are all the Divines and Scholars in England a company of
pitiful Mushrooms, to be treated so rudely by you, if they dance not after your
Pipe? Yea, it is a sufficient Refutation of any Book, if Mr. Baxter tells the
world it is a dangerous and Erroneous Book; and why? because it refutes his
Errors. And whereas you say, You have answered Mr. Ralphson, and slight Mr.
Warner, Dr. Sherlock, etc. Conformists and Nonconformists; it is neither your
Principles nor way of Argument will refute either of them; for it must be the
Word of God, and sound Arguments from it, must take place with men of
Conscience and Reason, in these mattters; not little shifting trifling
Sophisms, calling men Names, condemning them for Unlearned and Unstudied
Divines, confounding clear words and truths with an hundred particulars,
divisions, distinctions, nothings, till they are come to nothing; calling Truth
Error, and Error Truth; this is not the way to Peace nor Truth: You are never
like to die under the reputation of the Repairer of our breaches, and the
Restorer of our paths to dwell in, unless you take another course for it, then
yet you have done.


Manuscript. It puts an utter stop to the progress of Reformation in this
Nation, fixing bounds unto it, that it could never pass. 2. It has kept
Multitudes in ignorance, etc. 3. It has countenanced and encouraged many in
reviling and reproaching the holy Spirit, and his work. 4. It has set up and
warranted an Vngifted Ministry. 5. It has made great desolations in the
Church: first, In the silencing of painful Ministers: Secondly, In the ruin of
Families innumerable: Thirdly, In the destruction of Souls. It is not lawful to
be participant in these things; yea, the glory of our Profession lies in our
Testimony against them.


J. O. Well, what say you to these things? Are they Truth, or no?


R. B. I charge no Error here.


J. O. Truly the Church is much beholden to such a Champion.


R. B. But I have something to say to your Reasons.


J. O. Nay, but I have nothing to say to you further in these particulars, if
you have no Error to charge them with: I will leave them to defend themselves
against others.


Manuscript. Arg. 7. That practice whereby we condemn the suffering Saints of
the present Age, rendering them false Witnesses of God, and the only blameable
Cause of their own Sufferings, is not to be approved; but such is this
Practice; and where this is done on a pretense of Liberty, without any Plea of
necessary duty on our parts, it is utterly unlawful.


R. B. The Major means either Saints that suffer for well doing, or ill-doing.


J. O. It does so, one of them besure; who would have thought upon that fork?
But do you take the present Sufferers to suffer for ill-doing? I Will assure you,
you seem to insinuate your meaning pretty clearly, by your Exposing (in what
you lay) one that died in Prison as a blameable Cause of his own Sufferings;
and by many other Actions and Writings of the like Nature: Take heed of adding
affliction to the afflicted.


R. B. If the Anabaptists should be suffering Saints, I would not be for
Anabaptistry, for fear of condemning them as the cause of their own Sufferings:
By that Rule, I must own every Error or Sin that every Saint suffers for.


J. O. But I believe the world begins now to be pretty well satisfied that all
those things are not Errors or Sins, which Mr. Baxter calls so, and makes a
great putther to prove so; nor all those Truths or Virtues that he says are.
Mr. Tombs, a backsliding Anabaptist, was a great Saint in your Books: And
though you will not be of a Sufferers Judgment to justify his Suffering, you
might forbear Espousing the Imposers and Persecutors cause, and forbear
persecuting with bitter words that comes not short of the others: There are
hard words and Speeches to be reckoned for one day.


R. B. To your Minor, It is a gross mistake to say that going to the Lyturgy
makes the Refusers the only blameable cause of their own Sufferings; what are
you one that acquit all the Prosecutors?


J. O. You are so, for you justify the Law of which they are Offenders; he
that justifies a Law, justifies also the due Executioners of it; and therefore
condemns the Sufferer as the only blameable cause of his Suffering. A murderer
is condemned and hanged for Murder, the Law is good, the pro^eedings against
him just and due; who is the blameable Cause of his own Suff^rings but himself?


R. B. But are there no Saints that go to Common Prayer?


J. O. Men may be S^ints (as you said not long ago) and yet Engage in an unjust
Prosecution; and to join in Communion with them, is to justify their
violences, and passionate Mistakes, as also condemn the Sufferers: I wish such
Saints as you speak of, I mean they that separate not, would give more proof of
their Saintship to the world, by separating at least from malice, hatred and
bitterness of words and actions; yea, such inhumanity that Turks would not
boast of, Papists blush to hear of afterward; but some Protestants, your
unseparable Saints, plead for, as the Ecclesiastical and Evangelical
meritorious Righteousness by which they expect to be justified before God and
man.


R. B. The Truth is, Repentance is a hard work, etc.


J. O. It is so, but its an easy thing to make a great splutter about it, and
l^y the Law very hard to others, by Press and Pulpit. Is there a man on Earth
that will stand more upon his proud pretenses, and insulting too, in the
maintaining of manifest decryed Errors and Practices? Therefore such Harrangues
as these are, might be spared, for I know no body affected with them: Claudius
accusat etc. Turpe est Doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum.


Manuscript. Arg. 8. That Practice which is accompanied with unavoidable
Scandal, Engaged in only on the pretense of Liberty, is contrary to the Gospel:
But such is our joining in the present P^blick Worship. It were Endless to
reckon up all the Scandals which will ensue; that which respects our Enemies,
must not be omitted: will they not think, will they not say, that we have only
falsely and hyppocritically pretended conscience for what we do, when we can
upon outward considerations comply with that which is required of us? Woe to the
World because of such offenses; but woe to them also by whom they are given.


R. B. But in the first place take heed of offending Saints: Now we must none
of us hold communion with the Parish-Churches, least some Saints that separate
should be rendered false Witnesses of God, and blameable.


J. O. I do not believe that ever a man that scoffs at hol^ness, and the
Professors of it, will be justified by his own works. This and an hundred more
Expressions in this Book had become another man more then Mr. Baxter. Sir, Do
you know what Spirit you are of? It Is so manifest, I am moved in love to speak
so plainly.


R. B. To the Major, 1. It is not true, when there is far more Scandal by for
bearing that practice; but only when there is less on the other side.


J. O. Well, that is Answ. Bellarmine, thou lie; and it must be so, all the
World cannot help Bellarmine in this case, he is perfectly refuted. Observe now
how pretty the reason of the denial is, It is not true [that that practice
which is accompanied with unavoidable Scandal, etc. is contrary to the Gospel]
because there is greater Scandal by forbearing that practice: 1. Do we talk of
comparative Scandal? 2. Its unavoidable with a witness* if it lie on both parts
of an indifferent act^on. 3. It was always reckoned hitherto by (...) Divines,
that the forbearing a doubtful action had the least scandal in it; but I must
confess you are very safe, for you say, The Scandal is greater on the
forbearing side, only when there is less on the other side: One stick is
longer, when the other is shorter! This is now learnedly determined, Mr. Doctor!


R. B. To the Minor, It is not true. That it is only Liberty that is pleaded
for the Communion in question; It is a great Duty, i. e. of Union, Concord,
Peace, Obedience to Christ, etc. Avoiding of Schism, and twenty Duties more.
Error 39.


J. O. M^st D^sse^ters that afterward have complied, have done it on the
pretense of Liberty in matters of indifferency; against that pretense we
allege the business of Scandal, and the great danger of Scandal in matters of
that nature, which Paul lays such a Stress upon, yea our Lord Jesus Christ
himself in his Min stry annexing the greatest woes in the Gospel to Scandal.
Puh! says this Gentleman, here is no danger of a Scandal in this case; it is not
a doubtful case, its our duty to comply, a duty of Concord, Love, Obedience,
etc. Well, all that I shall say here is, If any man be troubled and disquieted
in mind about scruples of Consc^ence, here is a Casuist will do their business
beyond all Casuists before him, or any Antinomians whatever: For those things
that you and the Divines you have consulted with, have called si^s, and
thousands have been disturbed and wounded in Conscience for doing of he will
show to be an eminent duty. About the duties ^ere mentioned, Enquiry may be
made elsewhere, if need require; our Argument will stand fast enough without it
at this time.


Manuscript. Arg. 9. That Worship which is unsuited to the relish of the new
Creature, which is inconsistent with the Conduct of the Spirit of God in
Prayer, is unlawful: for the Nature, Use* and benefit of Prayer, is overthrown
hereby in a great measure. Now let any one consider what are the pr^mised Aids
of the holy Spirit, with respect to the Prayers of the Church, whether as to
the matter of them, or as unto the ability of performance, or as unto the
manner of it, and he shall find that they are all rejected and excluded by this
form of Worship as is pretended, comprizing the whole matter, limiting the
whole manner, and giving all the Abilities of Prayer that are needful or
required. This has been proved at large.


R. B. It is a mistake, Error 40. That this form of Worship rejects and
excludes the matter of Prayer.


J. O. That which prescribes the matter of Prayer, excludes all other matter
besides what is prescribed; and therefore is inconsistent with the conduct of
the Spirit, in taking the work of the Spirit out of its hands: It rejects and
excludes our dependence on the promises of the aid and assistance of the
Spirit in Prayer, because it prescribes and limits the matter, manner, and
gives all the abilities pre^ended to; there is nothing for the Spirit to do;
therefore here is nothing untrue: Where there is nothing left for the Spirit to
do, the work of the Spirit, as to Gifts, is excluded.


Manuscript. Arg. 10. That which overthrows and dissolves our Church Covenant,
as unto the principal end of it, is to us unlawful; this end is the professed
joint subjection of our Souls and Consciences unto the Authority of Christ, in
the observation of whatever he commands, and nothing else, in the Worship of
God. But by this practice, this end of the Church Covenant is destroyed, and
thereby the Church Covenant it self is broken, for we do observe that which
Christ has not commanded: And while some stand unto the terms of the Covenant,
which others relinquish, it will fill the Church with Confusions and Disorders.


R. B. To the 10th I answer, What your Church Covenant is, I know not; but if
it profess Subjection to nothing in Worship, but what Christ commands, it is
your Church-Error, and Error 41.


J.O. I may spare the pains to vindicate our selves from this charge of Error,
every Christian can do it. But Sir, are you serious here, and speak as you
mean? Or are you Ludicrous only, and would show a feat of Sophistry? If it be
the former, we must profess our Resolution to maintain that for Truth and
Religion, which you call Error; and that we profess subjection only to the
Commands of Christ in matters of Religion; and if you know any Religion, or
part of it to be exercised in Obedience to those Commands that are not Christ's,
keep that to your own practice if you like it, we need it not. What you say as
to Psalms, Translations, Time, Place, Utensils, we say we do nothing in them,
but in Obedience to the Commands of Christ, so far as they have place in
Worship; neither shall you nor any man prescribe to us. If your meaning be to
be taken in the latter sense, I say it is Ludere cum sacris, as has been too
often in this Undertaking of yours: Heathens had a serious Reverence to their
supposed Sacred Things, as appears by the Poet -- Procul! O Procul! este
profani.


Manuscript. Arg. 11. That which contains a vertual renunciation of our
Church State, and of the lawfulness of our Ministry, and Ordinances therein, is
not to be admitted or allowed; But this also is done in the practices enquired
into: For it is a professed Conjunction with them in Church Communion and
Worship, by whom our Church State and Ordinances are condemned as null; and
this judgment they make of what we do, affirming that we are gross dissemblers,
if after such a conjunction with them, we return any more unto our own
Assemblies; in this condemnation we do outwardly and visibly join.


R. B. It Is an Error to hold, That if any unjustly condemn other Churches, it
is a Renunciation of that condemned Church State, to have Communion with them
that condemn. Error. 42.


J. O. You cannot be ignorant, but know that you speak now fallaciously again.
To have communion with another man, in other things that he condemns me not
for, is no Renunciation of that for which he does condemn me; E. gr. A false
Worshipper condenms me for worshipping the true God, or the true God in a right
manner; I may maintain a Society with^h this man as to buying and selling, and
not condemn my Religion; but if I enter into a Religious Society with him in
false Worship, I then renounce what he unjustly condemns me for: So your charge
is fallacious and false.


Manuscript. Arg. 12. That which deprives us of the Principal Plea for the
justification of our Separation from the Church of England in its present
State, ought not justly to be received or admitted: But this is certainly done
by a Supposition of the lawfulness of this Worship, and a practice suitable
thereto, as is known to all who are exercised in this cause. Many other heads
of Argument might be added to the same purpose, if there were cccasion.


J. O. Is there any Error here?


R. B. I mark none, but I answer your Argument thus: That which discovers the
un^ou^d^e^s of any ones Plea for Separ^tion, is to be received,


J.O. That is not true universally, for the Commission of many Acts of Sin, is
a discovery to a man himself, and good men, of the unsoundness of any Plea that
has been made for (...).


R. B, There are several cases in which separation from the Church of England
is sinful: 1. If any separate as Papists do, and because they are against sound
Doctrine, or any good that is in the Church.


J. O This you charge them with; Papists will say your Doctrine is sound, and
that which you have justified more then any professed Protestant Divine since the
Reformation; as that of Justification by Works, Merits, Images, a power in man
to invent and to impose Subordinate Worship: They say they separate because of
the Errors of your Church-Constitution.


R. B. If any renounce Communion with Parish-Churches, under the name of the
Church of England.


J. O. Communion with the Church of England and Parish-Churches, is the same
thing; as communion with Homo, is communion wi^h Animal. But we know where you
would be.


R.B. If any renounce communion with the Church of England as it is a Christian
Kingdom.


J. O. See now the quatenus still, you will not have communion with the Church,
but with a Kingdom.


R. B. If any renounce communion with the Church of England, as its called one
from an Association of concord of its Pastors or Church Governors.


J. O. i. e. Quatenus a Presbyterian Church.


R. B. If any renounce communion with faulty Bishops, or worship simpliciter,
and not secundum quid.


J. O. Now here is a Communicant secundum quid. I would appeal to the Church of
England, whether Mr. Baxter be an acceptable Communicant? 1. He communicates
with a Parish Church, but renounceth the organized Church of England. 2. He
has communion in the Liturgy, but renounceth the Authority of Diocesan
Bishops, and their Office as established by the same. 3. He has communion with
the Church of England, but not as such, but quatenus a Christian Kingdom. 4. He
has communion with Parishes, but not as part of Diocesan Churches, but
quatenus Presbyterian Associations. 5. He has no simple absolute communion at
all, out is a mere secundum quid Communicant. Are not these now pretty clear
and plain things to resolve a doubting Conscience, in the great point of
Gospel-Communion?


R. B. Now I Will tell you the Reason of my Answer, These XII. Arguments I
understand they are likeliest to prevail most by the honor of Dr. Owen's Name,
more then by any strength that is in them: J was willing as long as I could to
believe they were not his, they being as fallacious and frivolous as the rest (
i. e. Mr. Ralphson's and Mr. Warner's and one Error managed with above forty
mistakes. Besides after being assured they were his, I was the more encouraged
by the Example of Paul, Gal. 2.


J. O. As frivolous as they are, or as little strength as they have, you have
not so much as shaken one of them, or any Scripture duly managed by the
Suffering Gentlemen you trampled upon, one dead, and the other alive; dead or
alive, it is all one to you; but go on: A Ream of Paper filled with such a Noise
as this was, will not carry the cause you have undertaken, unless you can find
better Arguments and Reasons, both Logical and Theological, to manage it with.
Put on the Spirit of Meekness, Gravity, Tenderness, Humility, Self-denial: Do
not think to raise your Honor upon the Ruins of Christ's Truth, and the
Reproaches of his Followers; this was not Paul's Spirit, neither have you his
cause; for the business that he withstood Peter in, was compliance with the
Jews abolished worship, in opposition to the present Gospel Worship, as it was
owned and professed by the Gentiles: Besides, there was his Cowardliness and
fear of man that brought him to it, with a great deal of dissimulation, whereby
Barnabas and others were drawn away; Gal. 2.12, 13.

Sir, you write much, and Err much, and yet justify your self as the most
infallible Person in the World, when you come to particulars. Sir, I tell you,
I shall appeal to any Christian Spirit, that reads your Refutation o^ these
Arguments, as you call it, whether you give any Testimony of the Spirit of
Christ accompanying you in it. I say no more, but recommend to your serious
consideration. 1st. The third chapter of the first Epistle of S. Paul to the
Corinthians; especially verse. 11, 12.13 14, 15. and 18, 19. 2dly, The loud
Pa^fietick Call of Mr. Vincent in the end of his Book of Love: O Tongues of
Professors! [Catholick Communicants as well as others] how long will it be ere
you be quiet? How long shall your breath b^ as the E^s^-wind, blasting all
about you? When shall your words be agreeable to the Word of God? When shall
your Lips feed many, and hurt none? Your reproachful backbiting railing
Language, your Lies and Falsehoods, have seen your sin and shame, and the shame
of Religion; Repentance and Amendment is absolutely necessary; else Salvation
will still stand at a distance, Isa. 63.8. This he said suspecting men spoke of
his Conformity.


R. B. Well, Doctor, I would not have you offended at what I have said and
done; I doubt not but whatever I wrote, was faulty. -- But I write as a
Defendant of Love, Unity, and the Catholic Church; and for the sake of such as
being justly afraid of Sin, and Idolatry, and Damnation, are affrighted from
Love Unity, etc. and fall into a wilderness of sinful Divisions and confusions
by these frightful names. -- And though in the Trials and late Distractions of
the Land* I mention some of your confessions, it is to tell you, That I had
reason to hope that you repented for doing no more in your public
Opportunities against the Spirit of Division that dissolved us.


J. O. True; had it not been for that Spirit of Division, there might not have
been cccasion of your Repentance for writing the Holy Commonwealth. The World
is hardly pe^swaded yet that it was hearty, but only to qualify your Self for
State-Charity, as many Catholic Communicants go to Church and receive the
Sacraments.


R. B. I will do much for that reason that the World may know my Charity with
you, and have Charity for me, (for all any thing said of you in this Pamphlet)
I will tell the Bishops, that they should not be angry with you, That I know
not three men alive whom they are more beholden to for their Restitution by
opening the door, and sweeping the way, and melting down and pulverizing all
that was like to have resisted them.


J. O. Now to return this great favor, we will take care, if they understand
it not already, to acquaint them that no ten men in England now alive, have
done more for their Establishment, by dirtying the Dissenters, and melting and
crumbling the Cause of Nonconformity to attoms, that upon the Principles and
Reasons that you would have the World believe it stands, it seems justly to
them, and all other duly considering men, the most idle weak and ridiculous
thing in the world. So that I hope now they will be well pleased with us both.


R. B. Dr. let us shake hands then, and be friends; and walk like B^e hren in
Catholic Communion; I tell thee one thing, but it is not fit to be spoken of
ye^ but among Friends: I am going to discourse Dr. Sie^^ck upon this great
point of C^tholick Commun^on, to beat it into his thick Skull how the Catholic
Church is united into one b^dy, so as to be one Church; I cannot make him
understand what is meant by the word Union, nor how many sorts of Union; ^e will
receive nothing de nomine, nor de re; but I am not out of hopes of effecting
something at last: If I cannot do it. I am sure no man can; It shall escape me
hard if I do not ^^r^ those worldly Pr. I G. and the unruly Pr. Ig's by
Persecution and by causless Separation and Alienation, to Catholic Communion.


J. O. Good night, S^r.


R. B. Good morrow, S^^.


J. O. We cannot ag^^e on the time of day yet, it seems.


FINIS.

