BELLS FOUNDER Confounded, OR Sabinianus confuted: With his damnable SECT.

Jeremiah chap. 50. verse. 2. Bell is confounded. Chap. 51. v. 17. Every man is
brutish by his knowledge. Every Founder is confounded by the graven Image: For
his molten Image is Falsehood, and there is no breath in them. Verse. 18. They
are vanity, the works of errors, in the time of their visitation they shall
perish. Verse, 19. The portion of Jacob is not like them. Verse, 44. I will
punish Bell in Babylon and I Will bring forth out of his mouth that which he has
swallowed up and the nations shall not flow together any more unto him, yea the
walls of Babylon shall fall. Written by a Lover of Music, especially in
Churches.

Barns, Durand, and Platino tells, That Pope Sabinnian brought in bells. Anno,
603.

The Preface.
FOrasmuch as the PARLIAMENT has voted down the Ca^hedrals, for satisfaction
of the PUBLIC FAITH; it is humbly desired by the best affected, that they would
proceed therein, according as the WORD OF GOD shall direct them, and take into
their serious consideration, the Bill that is drawn up for the demollishing of
the Cathedrals; with some exceptions of those which shall appear to be to the
worship only of the true GOD, that so there may be satisfaction provided for
the PUBLIC FAITH accordingly; and whereas it has been moved, that the Bells
should be pulled down also for satisfaction of the PUBLIC FAITH, It Is humbly
desired that the PARLIAMEMT would proceed therein likewise, according to the
Rules and Examples of the WORD OF GOD.

ERRATA's.
PAge 4, line 25, for occasion read Oration: l. 27, for sovereign read
suffregan: l. 29, for God read the Lord: p. 9, l. 30, for the late read your
late.

Babels Bells confounded BY SIONS ARGVMENTS.
Humbly proposed to the considerations of the PARLIAMENT.
IF the Brazen Serpent made by Gods appointment was broken in pieces when it
was Idolized, and that we must fight against spiritual wickednesses set up in
high places; If Baal must not be pleaded for; If Bell must be confounded; if
the bleating of the Amalekites fat Cattle spared by King Saul was offensive to
the Almighty; If Babel is so sick of the Popish Catholic disease that no balm
will heal her; If the indignation of the most high is manifested from Heaven
against the high places, by thunder and lightning, fire and brimstone, Storms
and Tempests, O let the pillars of your hearts tremble, and be ye moved at the
terror of the Lord, who does great things both in Heaven, and Earth, and has
said he will destroy the High places; Flee therefore from such abominations,
and deliver every man his soul, Plead not for Baal, but let Baal plead for
himself, and put to your hand to the throwing down of all the monuments of
Idolatry; for so you have sworn to do, and it is not for you now to repent
thereof: Therefore let it not be grievous in your eyes though the Houses of Baal
be broken to pieces, and the founded bells of Babels bulls confounded and
disolved.

For surely if these these things had been quite abolished in the days of King
Henry the eight, and King Edward the sixth, many a precious life would have been
preserved, which now is destroyed; but there being many Idols Temples, and
other monuments of Idolatry left undestroyed, Queen Mary did speedily set up
her abominable Idolatry in all these High places as much as ever; and had the
more time to exercise her self in most cruel persecution. And when Queen
Elizabeth came to the Crown, she threw not down these abominations; neither did
King James, nor the late King, but did still let them remain to the dishonor
of the living God, and plaguing of the Kingdoms. And although since the
beginning of these late troubles, there has been some reformation made by
demolishing of Crosses, and Idolatrous pictures, yet nothing is done so much as
ought to be: for the Roots of superstition, even the Idolatrous high places are
not yet removed, though many of them were built intentionally in the forms of
Crosses, and consecrated to Popish Saints, that thereby the people might
the-more adore them: Neither have you taken away the Popish bells, though they
are abominable Idols in the very conception, formation, dedication,
consecration, exaltation and occupation thereof, and therefore ought to be
taken down, and utterly demolished.

Oh therefore that the Honorable House of Parliament were thoroughly sensible
how greatly the Name of God has been blasphemed; and many thousands of poor
souls deluded, bewitched, and led headlong into hell by such abominable Idols.
Now that none may hence forward plead ignorance in omitting of this duty of
demolishing of these Idols the bells, which proceeded from the Dragon; which is
the Devil and Satan, I shall lay open the filthiness and abomination thereof,
See the complaint of Jacobus Selestadiensis to Ma^imilian the Emperor.
as those who have read their books and the Chronicles, and have seen their
practices, have spoken and can speak by experience, What great abomination has
been committed about these cursed Idols the Bells! What horrible blasphemies of
God, In Mr. Foxes acts and monuments.
and of the Saints in Heaven! What solemn profanation of the Name of the living
God, See also The. Bacon upon the relics* indulgences, pardons, stations,
Exorcisinse, consecrations; benedictions, where you shall see the abominations
of the Bells.
and of his holy spirit! What abuse and mis-application of the sacred Word, by
their filthy polluted lips! What Exorcisms, by the living God, the God of
Elizeus the Prophet,! What suplussing, and stoleing! What crossing and
cringing, with the Priests and Clarks singing! What invocations, execrations,
conjurations, and benedictions, blind devotions, and admirations! What wiping,
anointing* sweetning, and perfuming! What sprinkling, with choice of Godfathers
and Godmothers, naming the pretty bables for babies, the bells for Babels bulls!
What singing and ringing! What drinking and roaring! What Gossiping at the said
Christenings of these abominable Idols! Far worse then the Calves of
Beth-haven, or the Image of King Nebuchadnezzar, which was set up in the plains
of Dura: for these are ^^vanced above the rest of their Gods, even in the
highest places of their Idols temples, That the bells which through their
prayers have been brought into a right shape into Christendom (as they say)
may make sweet melody like David's Harp, and ring merrily as their Priests and
Clarks did sing merrily after it was cast, Te Deum, and De pacem, and a Domine
factum est istud, and est myrabila in occulis nostris. This is the Lords
doings, and is mavelous in the eyes of us: Oh horrible! the Founder foundeth
it, and they say, it is the Lords doings, when it is the Devils doings: For
from whence came these cursed bells, but from the Idol Bell and the Dragon,
Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils? Thus the children of Belial have called
their bells by the name of old Bell of Babel, even the God whom they worship;
and as Babel signifies confusion, so the almighty says, Bell shall be
confounded, I Will punish Bell, Bell stoopeth; and indeed the Bells begin to stoop
already, and it is hoped the Lord of Hosts will dissolve them in his fury. But
how have the eyes of the people been blinded and made to dote upon these
detestable Idols, that they prayed for the virtue of the Holy Ghost to be put
thereon, and again, that the same may be sanctified and hallowed of the Holy
Ghost; and in another prayer, that the Bell may be replenished with his
heavenly blessing; and in another prayer, that the dew of the Holy Ghost may be
poured out thereon.

Oh what power and glory, what virtue and goodness do they ascribe unto this
Bell, for as at King Herod's occasion, the people cried, the voice of God and
not of men, so these ignorant sots, after the Bishops or so^^raign has wiped
the bell with a linen towel, sing, Vox Domine super aquas, the voice of God is
upon the waters; Deus majestatis intonnuit, Domine superaquas multas, vox
Domine in virtute; vox Domine in magnificentia, vox Domine confringentis
cadros, and also ascribe that salvation to these bells, which belongs to God,
and only to his Christ; that the sound and noise thereof, shall drive away the
fiery darts' and power of the enemies, and make their army afraid. And as the
Heathen Romans of old ascribed deliverance to mother Idaea, See Mayers hist.
page 125.
upon the coming forth of a Prophecy of Sibil, that if Idaea the mother of
the Gods were brought to Rome, they should be able to drive the foreign enemy
out of Italy, whereupon Ambassadors being sent to Attalus King of Pergamus to
fetch her, and by the way the Oracle of Apollo being consulted with, he (that
is that Devil) answered, that they must have a care to bring this Idaea into
the worthiest man's house in Rome; wherefore with great solemnity one that was
judged by the Citizens of Rome to be the worthiest, was required to meet the
Idol, being then 50 miles off the City, together with a company of Matrons,
who brought Idaea the mother of their Gods by turns upon their shoulders, all
praying as it entered, that it would willingly enter, and be propitious unto
them; so the foolish people now, who hold ignorance to be the mother of
devotion, are made to believe, that the sound and noise of the Bells shall drive
away the fiery darts and power of the enemies and make their armies afraid; and
with such words do they pray at the dedication of the Bell; and likewise that
the imaginations of fantasies, the striking of Lightnings, the hurt of
Thunderings the calamity of Tempests, and all stormy spirits by the noise and
sound thereof may depart and go far away, and all the lying await of the enemy
may be far put back, that the beating of the Hail, the storm of Winds, the
violence of Tempests may be mitigated and assuaged; moreover that the fierce
thundering and boystrous storms may be so measured that they do no harm, or
hurt his creatures; in fine, that the powers of the air hearing this bell may
tremble and shake for fear, and flee before the Banner of the holy Cross, and
that when the sound of the bell pierces through the clouds that the hands of
the Angels may keep the congregation; yea, they ascribe such power unto the
bells, as when the walls of Ierico fell to the ground, and would make the
people believe that the presence of God is in them to work wonders, as at the
dividing of the sea and turning back of the waters of Jordan, and say when it
is demanded, wherefore? it may be answered, the earth was moved at the face of
the Lord, at the face of the God of Jacob, which turned the hard rocks into
rivers of waters, and the flint stones into watery streams; and thereupon say,
that when this present bell, (as the other vessels of the Altar) is touched
with the holy chrisom; and anointed with holy oil all they that come and draw
near to the sound and noise thereof, may be free from all temptations of the
enemies; and they ascribe salvation to t^os^ b^w^tching creatures, as if there
were power in them to deliver their souls from hell and cause them to pass
into heaven: Thus God is dishonored, his my steries mocked, his creatures
abused, superstition and idolatry upheld, the poor people deceived, O therefore
make have, vote them down, down with them, down with them to the very ground,
for God has a controversy with them, and with all them that cry them up, and
let them not be exalted any more to the heaven, but bring them down and destroy
them, for if you will not demolish them, God himself will do it some other way,
either by sending some other power to do it, or else by proceeding as he has
begun with Lightning and Thunder to destroy them, notwithstanding all their
prayers to be delivered from such judgments, the bells you see cannot deliver
themselves, and of all places in their Churches, Gods lightning lights upon
the Belfraies, so that in diverse countries the bells are melted, by the
vehemence of the flames of I A H, and many people killed outright this year, as
well as heretofore, and others dangerously hurt, in so much as we see THE
FINGER OF GOD pointing at them, directing you to destroy them.

Moreover, what abundace of good cheer these bells with the Dragons Priests have
devoured by the great Gosshops feasts, which were made at the baptizing
thereof! What gifts and offerings to the great impoverishing of the
inhabitants, whosoever reads the book of Martyrs may see, where it is
complained of. I would add so^ething more, how the Lords name is dishonored,
the Sabbath profaned, drunke^ness upheld, and many other vices by the
continuation of these ungodly trinkets, and how much money is daily raised by
the ringing of the bells for the dead, and mocking of many people, by making
them pray for the dead, as if they were alive and dying! But what has been
said and done is enough, unless you would have God speak and do more then he
has.

If you doubt whether they belong to the Commonwealth, assure your selves that
whatsoever ammunition is sent to the enemy (if it be taken) it is lawful prize,
and belongs of right to the Commonwealth; so these trinkets being devoted to
the service of Antichrist, do properly belong to the Common wealth, to do by
them as Asa, Iehosaphat, Hezekiah, and Iosia, did by such idolatrous dedicated
things, without any further dispute or asking leave of the idolatrous
propriators, and as many high places were abolished by King Henery the Eight,
and many Crosses from of the Steeples and May-poles and superstitious signs by
the Parliament were taken down. Yea, their Organs in their Churches were
destroyed also by order of Parliament, although they were never so tunable and
delectable to the ear and heart, and had multiplicities of notes, and all the
flats and sharps thereunto belonging, were full of divisions, subdivisions and
varieties of parts, far exceeding the bravest Bag-pipes, or the lustiest
Lancashire Horn pipes with all their drones, none of all which properties the
bells in any one of your Steeple and have, and the Organs required not so many
to be occupied in the setting them on work as the bells, one was enough to blow
and an Organist to play, which was done with less toil and sweating then the
ringing of bells, some bells requiring sixteen men to ring each of them, and at
the best are but novelties in comparison of the Organs, which is of four
thousand years standing, the bells being brought in by Pope Sabinianus in Anno
603. yet you have broken the Organs to pieces, and the rails of the Communion
Tables, and the Founts, although some Parishes and persons claimed a peculiar
interest, and property therein; even so ought you to destroy these abominable
bells, and this is a general maxim, that whatsoever is devoted to superstition
and idolatry, is forfeited to the Commonwealth, and you ought to seiz upon the
same, as of the goods of Traitors, which is devoted to the enemy, and if you
take not the opportunity now God has put a prize in your hand, your neglect
will be as a dead fly in the Oyntme^t of the Apochecary: If the ignorant people
alledg that the noise of the bell is heard a far off, and how shall they know
when to go to Church, if they be al taken down? Wot you not that in a Market
one bell is enough to give warning to the people? and Tread not that God
ordained any bells for his Church, but what were made of Gold, and they were
not for the assembling of the Congregation neither, but when they were
assembled, but indeed God ordained silver Trumpets for the assembling of his
congregation, and Trumpets of Rams horns, at the throwing down the walls of
Ierico, instead whereof the Papists have ordained bells telling us, they are
good to clear the air, but if these bauling bells, were metamorphosed into
roaring Canons, and charged with Gunpowder and flying bullets, against the
gates of our enemies, they would clear the air better, and make a better noise
then now they do, and be a better recreation; therefore I pray delay not to
abolish them: now make an end where God has begun, lest he prevent you; for
out of heaven has he thundered upon them, and his judgments finds them out
in the valleys as well as on the hills.

If you say that you fear the People, I answer, They are but an arm of flesh
and you need not fear them at all, for now you have no enemy in the Land in
arms against you; but when you threw down the Crosses and May-poles, and other
monuments of idolatry, you had the late King and his forces, and an unconquered
people to oppose you, yet you went on and the Lord prosper'd you: now you are
strong but then you were weak; now the government is settled in the way of a
Commonwealth, but then it was not settled; you had the King, and Lords, and
their Armies to oppose you; And who can harm you if you are followers of that
which is good? When you demolished the Cathedral at Leighfield, by the late
Order, who opposed you? When King Asa threw down the high places, and abolished
the Idols, it is said, the land was quiet before him. Do but you your duty, and
I Will warrant you will do well enough, the people will not harm you; GOD can cause
his fear and terrer to fall upon them, and thunder upon them by his power, so
that if they will contemptuously stand to Plead for Baal, they shall certainly
perish, and fall; and if they will have the Idol Bell, they must have the Dragon
too.

Subscribed by SAMUEL CHIDLEY,

On the behalf of all Saints,
And for the cure of all Souls,

To the Honorable Committee for regulating the Markets. The Humble Petition of
Samuel Chidley.
Shows,
THat although GOD has commanded, That the places wherein the nations
worshipped their gods, should be utterly destroyed. Yet there is suffered to
stand still that abominable idol Paul's, that old bawdy house of the whore of
Babylon, which was built, dedicated, and consecrated, first by the heathens,
and after that by the Antichristians, In which place filthy Idols have been set
up, abominable idolatry practiced, horrible blasphemies uttered, against THE
NAME of THE MOST HIGH GOD, and cruel murders committed against the Martyrs of
JESUS CHRIST, The repairing whereof (though impossible to be finished without
abundance of money) has robbed the people of millions of treasure, and made
them poorer then Job, and occasioned much strife, and many houses to be pulled
down, which were round about it, Whose highest spire, the lightning from
heaven, and fire has consumed once or twice, The form of that house being a
complete cross, the universal badge of a Papist, And the ruins thereof cumbring
the ground, and the middle place thereof being ready to fall of it self, the
whole Fabric thereof being no ornament, but a disgrace to the City and whole
nation, and is of no repute amongst any rational men, but a company of fool,
Papists, and Atheists, such beasts whom St. Paul fought with at Ephesus after
the manner of men; Besides, some persons out of covetousness have lately stolen
away very much of the Leads, after the HOUSE had voted the destruction of the
Cathedrals for payment of the PUBLIC FAITH.

Your Petitioner in conscience to his GOD humbly begs, that that great Idol may
be speedily rooted up to the very bottom of Sin Faiths, for satisfying of the
PUBLIC FAITH of this nation, And that there may be a NEW MARKET erected there
(and called by another name) that the adjacent streets may have a free passage
without that usual interruption, by crowds of people, Carts, and Coaches, on
every side, All which will no doubt tend very much to the good of the
Commonwealth in general, and the City of London in particular, and be pleasing
to GOD, which is best of all.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.

FINIS.

