Some Particulars Concerning the Law, SENT TO Oliver Cromwell, Who is chief
Ruler in these Nations, according to man: And to the Counselors, who sit in
Counsel with him: wherein is plainly laid down the difference betwixt the
righteous Law of God, and those Laws which are made and acted in the will of
man; and how they who make and act those Laws, which are according to the Will
of man, and contrary to the Law of God, are found opposing the righteous Law of
God, and so are transgressors of that Law which is according to that in the
Conscience.

With a word of discovery of the cruel oppression of the Priests, who call
themselves Ministers of Christ and the Gospel, which gives freedom; but they
are found to be Opposers, and out of the life that gave forth the Scriptures,
and so with it judged, which is according to the Law of God, which gives
freedom to the righteous seed, but have cleared themselves from Christ, who
disobey his Doctrine, and sue men at the Law, and take treble damages, contrary
to the Scriptures.

With a word of Exhortation to the Rulers and Magistrates, to own the righteous
Law of God, which will cut down sin, and cleanse the Land of evil doers, and
discover the Deceivers of the People.

London, Printed, Anno Dom. 1654.

FRiend, thou say, That in thy conscience tells thee, that there is no Law
that is extant by which the people of God are kept in bondage; to thee I did
allege the Act of Mary, which I say is contrary to that in the Conscience,
which is of God, for her Law did cause the righteous to suffer, which guarded
the Jesuits, which guard the Priests now; which thou with it would limit the
holy one, and cast the Saints into holes, and prisons, and dungeons, and
countest it just; and some are beat and stockt, and cruelly persecuted, and
then after sent to Prison; see if thy Law here do keep Peace, or break it, and
give liberty to all the peace breakers and fighters, and strikers, for them to
beat, to stock, and after send them to prison, and there the wicked, the
fighters, and strikers rejoice over them, and they can scarce walk in the
streets; and this Law thou countest just, which prisons the righteous, and
encourages the evil doers, which is contrary to the Law of God, which is
according to that in the Conscience, and which is contrary to Paul the Minister
of Christ, who said, if any thing be revealed to him that stands by, let the
first hold his peace; and if Paul were here again to go up and down the
Synagogues, and dispute with them, to bring them off the figures and shadows,
to bring them up to the substance. Queen Mary's Act would take hold of him; and
he was made manifest to the Consciences of all; and here thy Act is contrary to
that in the Conscience, which would limit the Spirit of the Lord.

And thy Act, as Queen Mary's, would take hold upon Am^s, and the rest of the
Prophets, and Christ, who was supposed to be the Carpenters son, who went up
and down in the Synagogues, and was hated of the Priests, and when he spoke in
the Synagogues, they were full of fury; and there again thy Law is contrary to
that of God in the conscience, and except thou do repent, God will remove
thy Kingdom: and if thy Laws were upon them that act, contrary to that in the
conscience, fighters, envious, quarrellers, drunkards, murderers, and all
unrighteous, such Law; we own, this is wholesome and good, but that which would
limit the holy One, and the Just, we cannot own.

Secondly, there is another Law which is acted contray to that in the
conscience, to put men to death for Cattle or money, when they were (according
to the Law of God) to make restitution, if not, they were to be sold for their
Theft, and there they had space to repent, for that in the conscience will let
them see what they have done.

Thirdly, and another thing is acted in the N^^ion, contrary to the light of
Christ in the conscience; men that cannot swear, but abide in the Doctrine of
Christ, who says, swear not at all, for what is more then yea and nay, is
evil; and the Apostle said, My Brethren swear not at all, lest you fall into
condemnation, and some that cannot swear, such are fined and prisoned, and many
suffer now, because they cannot swear; and so you would bring them into
condemnation, and into the evil contrary to the Doctrine of Christ

Fourthly, another Law is acted contrary to that of God in the conscience, that
men are forced to pay Priests tithes, and so deny Christ come in the flesh; and
if they will not pay Priests tithes, they sue them at the Law, or imprison
them, and that Law requires treble damages, and this Law is oppression,
contrary to that of God in the Conscience, neither is there honesty in it; I
charge it upon you, for Moses, which had the Law, and gave it forth to the
Priests and people, and the Priests that should receive Ti^hes, they were to
have a Storehouse to put it in, and it was to be filled with Tithes, but it is
not so with you; and all the strangers and the widows, and the Fatherless were
to come to be filled within the Priests Gates: and this the Priest was to
Minister out of the Storehouse; a figure of the everlasting Priest, who
Ministers out of the everlasting treasury: the Apostle who preached him, said,
the Priesthood that received Tithes was changed, and the Law was changed also;
and yet you have a Law, that if any one do not pay the Priests Tithes he must
pay treble damages, or lie in Goal, as many lie in Goal now, because they
cannot deny Christ come in the flesh, pay the Priests Tithes; but they witness
him, and deny the changable Priesthood, which you give Tithes to, but no
Storehouse; who deny Christ come in the flesh, though you talk of him in words,
but no Storehouse to fill all the widows, the fatherless, and strangers in
England, that there might be no beggar in England, as there was no beggar to be
in Israel, but be fed within the Priests Gates which receive Tithes: But by
this Law, by which your Priests receive Tithes, you help the Priests to make
many beggars, which is contrary to the Scriptures, and that of God in the
conscience both, and by that Law many righteous ones suffer; all who own Christ
in life, suffer by your Low, and are oppressed; and all your Laws acted contrary
to that of God in the Conscience: that of God in the Conscience will testify
and witness against you, and your Laws, and witness the Law of God, which is
according to that in the Conscience, which is perfect, and endures for ever.

You that swear, deny the Lord Jesus Christ that bought you, and his Doctrine;
and you that compel men to give Tiches, and you that take them are men that
deny the Lord Jesus Christ come in the flesh, the substance; you that sue men
at the Law, deny the Lord Jesus Christ, for he says, in all your
communications, let your yea, be yea, and your nay be nay.

And if you had a Law given forth to keep peace upon them that act contrary to
the light of Christ in their conscience, and put in just men's hands, to be
executed; but such are turned forth that are faithful, that are just, and so
here you encourage evil doers, fighters, quarrellers, and drunkards, that they
that fear the Lord, can scarce pass; to that in all your Consciences I speak,
that with it you may see your selves, and what is acted in the Nation.

There is another thing in the Nation, acted by them in Authority, which is
contrary to that of God in the Conscience; with such many have been fined and
imprisoned, because they could not respect persons, for if they did, they were
convinced by that in the Conscience, to be transgressors of the righteous Law
of God; and their Judges, Justices, and Majors would force them to sin against,
and contrary to that of God in the Conscience, in bowing to them with hat, and
respect the person, which that in the Conscience, which is according to the
righteous Law of God, says, Thou shall not bow down to any, nor worship any
but God; and he that respects persons and would have others to respect persons,
is convinced by that in the conscience, to be a transgressor of the righteous
Law of God; to that of God in all your consciences I speak, which lets you see
you should not do so, and yet you do so, and would have others to do so; and
them that do not, ye persecute, prison or fine with great sums of money; to
the light of Christ in all your consciences I speak, which shall condemn all
you that act contrary to it, and witness me eternally; to that in the
conscience I speak which respects no man's person: He that receives the Law from
God, dwells in the Light of God, and he does not respect any man's person, nor
the Law which is received from God: and he that does respect persons, this Law
goes upon him, and that in his conscence, which is according to this Law of
God, does convince him to be a transgressor of this Law.

And whereas the Priests should have Storehouses, that the Fatherless
children, and widows might thither come and be refreshed, that there might be
no beggars in England, as there was to be no beggar in Israel; but the Priests
and their Agents in raking terble damages, by virtue of your Law, have made
both widows and Fatherless to beg by reason of their cruel oppression, for
they took of one widow in lieu of her Tithes 11 s. 4 d. when all her whole
estate, after her debts were paid, would not yield to so much, and so left
widow and fatherless both to beg or starve; and this is their charity to the
poor; and many more in Westmerland, Lancashire, and Cumberland, who stand in
obedience to the righteous Law, made manifest, and witness the substance, and
deny the types, and so cannot put into the Priests mouths they make them pay,
somedouble damages, and some treble damages, to the making many poor; for they
that depart from iniquity are a prey to this Generation; For the Law that is
made by the Will of man, is made a snare, and a trap to take hold of them who
stand in obedience to the righteous ^aw of God, which is according to that of
God in the conscience, and this other is contrary to the Law of God in the
conscience.

And this was I moved to write to the Heads and Rulers of the Nations, who sit
in Counsel together, to exhort and charge them to stand in the Counsel of God,
and to mind the righteous Law of God, which is according to that in the
conscience, and that this Law of yours may be put in Execution, to be executed
by righteous men, who respect no man's person, and then it will take hold upon
the transgressors: and they who live up in obedience to this Law of God, which
is pure, which endures for ever, will own and witness you and your Law, if you
be obedient to this Law of God which is pure, and according to that of God in
every man's conscience, for his Law is not made for the righteous, but for the
transgressor: and if these be owned by you in your lives, you will put it in
execution and it will take hold upon all liars, swearers, drunkards, whore
mongers, dissemblers, cheaters, hypocrites, and persecutors of those who obey
this righteous Law of God; and it will take hold upon all fighters,
quarrellers, and vain-Contenders, and upon all false teachers, who pretend
themselves Ministers of Christ, but abide not in the Doctrine of Chirst, which
respect men's persons, but are Antichrists, and deny the Scriptures in their
lives, but take them to trade withal, and so deceive the people, telling them
they are gifted, and sell them a Carnal letter, and so kill them, for the
letter kills, and so devour souls for dishonest gain: the Lord has a
controversy with them, hold them not up; for if you partake with them in their
sin, you will partake with them in their plagues, for their fruits make them
manifest; for if any in obedience to this righteous Law, put not into their
mouths, they prepare war against them, and sue them at Law, or Agents for
them, and take treble damages, as many can witness in these four
Northern-Counties; and so they oppress the righteous, and none resists them;
and now it is come to you who are over the Nations, and it stands at your door,
and if you suffer those things to be, and count it just, I will visit you for
these things, says the Lord: For I bear testimony against them, and my witness
is true, that they are cruel oppressors, greedy devourers, Caterpillars, who
have done no good at all, but kept the people in blindness and ignorance,
making them light and vain, strengthening their hands in in iquity, and shut the
Kingdom of heaven against men, that if any would return from their evil ways,
they pull them back: all the Scriptures witness against them, if you will own
Scriptures, and that in your Conscience witnesses against them; for you had
experience of them; and if you hold up that which is contrary to your
conscience, God is greater, and will condemn you, and cut you down; were not
your Promises and Covenants to take oppression from off the people of God? have
you forgotten the days of your calamity and hardship, when you vowed unto the
Lord? and prayed unto him and he has preserved you? and were not all your
pretenses to take off oppression? and now the power is in your hand, and the
Lord has left you without excuse; for now you have time to pay your vows unto
the Lord, and to take off oppression, and to take away all those Laws which are
contrary to the Law of God, which is pure; and if ye will not own the Lord in
his own work, he will do it another way, and you shall be cast by, as not
worthy, with the rest that were cast out before you, who were not worthy: and
therefore if you will own the righteous Law of God, which is pure, he will own
you, and preserve you; but if you uphold those Laws which are according to the
will of man, and contrary to the will of God, you shall be as dust before the
wind, the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. And thus I have cleared my
conscience unto you, and that of God in your consciences shall eternally
witness me to be a lover of your souls, and of the righteous seed of God, a
well-wisher of the Peace of Sion, called by the world,

John Camm.

I Will arise now, says the Lord, and thresh, and scatter, and beat to pieces;
now will I arise says the Lord, and all bonds must be broken asunder, which
are made with the earthly will, and all Churches gathered with the earthly
will, with the earthly letter, who has not the life, will be scattered and
broken asunder, that the pure it self may arise which is bound with those
bonds, which the carnal mind makes Laws and Acts; but now will I arise says
the Lord, who is the King, the Lawgiver, and all who have not received the Law
from him, but make Laws with their inventions, must fall, and all their counsel
come to nothing in the end; though they may stand, and have their time a while;
and therefore to that in every one of your Consciences I speak, which is the
light of Christ, in it wait, to guide your minds to God, and it is but one, and
it will call you out of your reasonings, and turn your minds toward God, and
deny all that which does protect and preserve that which is not of God, and
condemn it: and where God is made manifest to reign, for that does protect the
just, and is a terror to the unjust, in your selves and without, so wait all
in your measure on the light of God within, to guide your minds to God, that ye
may grow as plants to receive the living water, to nourish you to eternal life,
to that which is pure in every one of you do I speak, which shall witness me,
and condemn all you that hate it: which if you take heed to it, it will call
your minds out of the world, to forsake the lusts and pleasures of it, and turn
your minds toward God, and let you see that God is near and present, who is
terrible and dreadful to the wicked; in him the righteous rejoice and are glad,
so wait all for Counsel from God, and God Almighty direct your minds; for all
your Laws which have been made and acted in that nature, from the light, and
contrary to it, and the Law of God, which is according to the light of Christ
in your consciences, all those Laws that have been acted from it, and contrary
to the light of Christ, have been murder with the murderous nature; and with
the light which Christ has enlightened every one that comes into the world
withal, with this light they are all to be condemned, and with the perfect Law
of God to be judged, which is according to the light of Christ in the
Conscience, which light of Christ owns the Law of God, and which Law of God
owns the light of Christ in every man's conscience; and the light of Christ in
every man's conscience which is perfect, witnesses the Law of God to be
perfect, and witnesses against all ^aws which is contrary to the Light of
Christ in every man's conscience, and which is contrary to the Law of God, which
is according to that in the Conscience: So to the light of Christ in all your
consciences I do speak, that you with it may wait upon God, to receive your
Laws from God, which is perfect, and endures for ever; else your Laws which you
make in your own wills, which is not perfect and does not endure for ever;
which the Law of God does, and that in the conscience: so with the light of
Christ, all such Laws, Lawgivers, and Lawmakers, are to be condemned with the
light of Christ, which does endure for ever: and the Law of God which is
perfect and does endure for ever, all such are judged with it, which are
contrary to it: So this is the word of God to you, and a warning to you all.

They that be in the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, do not respect persons;
they that be out of the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, do respect persons,
though they may profess him, and then the life makes the difference: as it is
manifest now in England, who be in the Faith, who be out of the Faith: and they
that be in the perfect law of God, according to the light of Christ, in the
conscience, do not respect persons: for he that does respect persons, is
convinced by the light of Christ in the conscience, to be a transgressor of the
law of God; so that they that do respect persons, do walk contrary to that in
the conscience, and the law of God, and are convinced by the light of Christ in
the conscience, and to be transgressors; and this is for all the powers on
earth; take warning, that with the light of Christ you may see what you act,
and what you acted from, contrary to this light: you are to be condemned by it:
all ye that respect persons, walk contrary to the Law of God, contrary to the
Faith: There is the difference, the one lives in the light of Christ, which
witnesses the Law of God, which is perfect, and the Faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which none of these that do live here does respect persons: now all
those that do profess the Law of God, and Faith, and respect persons, are out
of it, and here it is the life that makes the difference, and in it is the
Unity.

TO the Heads and General of this Land, to stand in the Counsel of God that you
may be directed by his wisdom which orders all things, for by it all things
were made, and if you make a Law with your own wills, over that in the
consciences of men, that God will throw down, you and your Laws: For that which
exercises the conscience, is the pure light of God, which leads up to God, out
of all filthiness, and uncleanness, and corruption, which the Law of God takes
hold upon; he or them that act contrary to a pure conscience: Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of God, and the powers
that be, are ordained of God, for conscience sake; now if a Law be made over
the conscience that is pure, that Law is against God, and many for keeping
their conscience clean, did suffer death; as God has given to every one a
light, and a measure to profit withal, mind every one that which is of God in
you, to teach you to walk to God before him; and as it teaches you, and
enlightens your understandings, it will teach how to direct others, and so to
judge of things eternal, so far as that is born up in your understandings,
which is eternal; and as every one has a measure, so every one to improve his
talent, and not limit God to learned men, as has long been, which have learned
but their natural languages, so their original grounds is external, their word
and light is external, and their preaching and gift is an external gift, and
they go to you Magistrates who has an external Law, to uphold them in their
external Ministry, for your Law does alter and change, which is external; now
that which is external, with it to judge things eternal, that cannot be but to
limit God; for he that has the first gift of God, has that which is perfect,
and that which is perfect is eternal, and such have a descerning to know the
gift of God, from the gift of man; and who are sent to preach the everlasting
Gospel, has that which is eternal, that which is everlasting has no end; and
he that judges of these things is eternal, that can discern the everlasting
Gospel from words; and the promise was, that the seed of the woman should
bruise the Serpents head; now thou that can witness the head of the Serpent
bruised in thee, and the seed of the woman heads in thee, which is Christ,
witnesses the Promises of God fulfilled in thee, which is the glad tidings to
the soul, and the soul come out of death; and here is Christ Jesus revealed
within, and this ministry is not man not by man, but by the Will of God, which
the will of man knows not; For the natural man knows not the things of God; now
every man in his first birth and state may see himself to be natural, and is
not able to judge of the things of God, which be eternal; the spiritual man
judges all things, yea the deep things of God; but this is the second man:
therefore all friends take heed of judgeing with evil thoughts, that mind that
respects persons, Judges with evil thoughts, and it is the Carnal part
within, who is not of the Faith: but who i^ of the Faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ, is without respect of persons; and therefore as God has given you a
measure of a light within, let that guide your minds, and keep you in the fear
of the Lord, and if you love that light and walk in it, there is no occasion of
stumbling; and if you hate that light, then you stumble at noonday, and there
is your condemnation: loving this light, and bringing your works to this light;
so far as this light has Judged you in particular, so far you may judge in
general; for that Judge is but one, and waiting in that light which keeps you
in the fear of the Lord, waiting upon the Lord, to be made partakers of the
precious Faith, for the mystery of Faith is held in a pure Conscience, and
walking in this light, it enlightens your consciences, and understandings,
walking in it you have union one with another, for the light is but one, which
will discover all imagined lights, false worships, ways and Churches, and draw
you up to the Church in God, the fountain of light; and their Faith is but one,
which purifieth the heart, which stands in God, which is a mystery held in a
pure Conscience, and all who are in it are one, if they be ten thousand. God
Almighty bless, direct and keep all you that fear him, how to wait upon and
walk before him, and be low, and stand in the Counsel of God, that whatsoever
you do may prosper: But if you go out of the Counsel of God, pride,
high-mindedness and oppression, and grinding the faces of the poor gets up; now
your minds being guided by that which is pure, it is cross to the carnal, which
oppresses the poor in particular, if it be not crossed; and out of it arises
pride, if the pure Spirit of the Lord be not your guide and head; and if there
be no oppression within, then there is none without; for woe is unto him that is
covered, but not with the Spirit of the Lord -- Therefore mind every one what
you are covered withal.

FINIS.

