THIS Was the word of the Lord which John Camm, AND Francis Howgill Was moved
to declare and write TO OLIVER CROMWELL, Who is named Lord-Protector: Showing
the cause why they came to speak to him: and showing that they came not to
petition him for any thing, but for the welfare of Sion, and for the righteous
seeds sake; and that those Laws which were given forth by the will of man, may
be taken away; that the Law may go forth of Sion, and the Word of the Lord from
Jerusalem; and so the Kingdoms of the world may become the Kingdom of Christ.

He that has an ear, let him hear.

Rev. 3. 13. LONDON, Printed, Anno Dom. 1654.

OF the last day of the first month, called March, about two of the clock in
the morning, I was moved of the Lord to write these ensuing lines, and to lay
before thee the cause of our coming hither to London. Friend, we came not to
thee, to petition any thing from thee in the outwad, but in the tender bowels
of love to exhort thee to mind thy own condition, how thou stand in
relation to the Lord God of heaven and earth, who is Powerful, and Pure, and
Holy, who will not acquit the wicked, but will wound the hairie scalp of him
who goes on in iniquity, before whose presence all stands naked and bare, who
knows and sees all the secrets of thy heart, thy outgoings and incomings, to
whom thou must give account of all things done in the body, whether they be
good or evil; therefore in love to thy Soul were we moved to come to exhort
thee to stand in the fear of the Lord, and in his Counsel: and to mind the
light in thy conscience, which is pure and of God, to guide thee in the great
affairs of the Nations; for to keep in his fear is safe, for dreadful and
terrible will the day of the Lord be to all who are found out of his fear, and
acting in their own wills, and bounding and limiting the Spirit of the Lord,
and walking contrary to the pure Law of God, the light in their consciences:
and we knowing the terrors of the Lord, were moved to exhort thee, in love to
thy soul, for the righteous seeds sake, which lies in bondage every where,
under the oppressing nature, that thou might be an Instrument in the Lords
hand, to take off oppression from off the necks of the people, and to remove
their Yoke which has been promised long, and now the power is in thy hand; and
thou must give an account to the Lord how thou have ruled for him, for the
mighty day of the Lord is come, and is coming, wherein all faces shall gather
blackness, it is a day of darkness, of bitter lamentation and woe, at whose
presence the mountains shall melt, and the hills shall tumble down before him,
and all the tall Cedars shall bow, and the strong Oaks shall be broken down,
and the roofs rent, and the earth shall remove out of its place, its a day
wherein the Lord will plead with all flesh, with his sword, and with fire: in
which day the lofty shall be brought down, and the Lord alone exalted, which
day we witness fulfilled in us in measure; praises, praises to the Lord God for
evermore: and therefore Friend, we having this testimony made manifest in us by
the eternal Spirit of God, We declare this unto thee, that thou may not be
found acting against the truth; for they who are guided by the Spirit of God,
will do nothing against the truth, but for the truth: by which Spirit we are
gathered out of the world, up to God, and have escaped the pollutions of the
world: and by it we are brought in obedience to the pure Law of God which is
written in our hearts, and his Spirit within us is our teacher: and so we deny
all the teachings of men, who have not this Law and Spirit to guide them; and
for so doing we suffer by them who are not guided by that Spirit; for my sheep
know my voice, says Christ, and they follow me, and will not follow a
stranger; and we know the voice of Christ, and the voice of a stranger: and by
the Spirit of the living God are we gathered up together, up to God, to worship
him in spirit and in truth, and are of one heart, and of one mind, and of one
soul, and have all one teacher, and speak all one thing: And we being all
taught of the Lord, are far from oppression, though we be oppressed; and for
the truth sake was I moved of the Lord to lay this before thee, that our
Conditions may be known, that the truth may not suffer under the reproach of
the heathen, who live after the flesh, and persecute them who live after the
Spirit.

A word more to clear thy mistake: when we spoke unto thee that the Lord would
make thee an Instrument in his hand to establish the Gospel; wherein thou
apprehendedst us that should be established by an outward Law, that was not our
desire, nor we spoke no such thing: but we witness the coming of Christ in his
Kingdom, is not by might, nor power, nor pomp, nor glory from without: nor by
any Law which is in the will of man; but our desires were, that there should be
no Law upon Religion, for it need no Law to defend it, for pure religion, and
undefiled is this, to loose the bands of wickedness, and set the oppressed
free, and take off every yoke: and where pure Religion is exercised, this is
the fruits; and if thou be guided by the pure light of God shining in thy
conscience, and the righteous Law set up in thy heart, and the Spirit of God
thy teacher, then there need none to desire thee to take away those Laws that
ensnare tender consciences; and so they who pretend conscience and are not
guided by the pure Law of God, will be seen by those who dwell in the Spirit,
to have erroneous consciences, and so this Law will take hold of them, and the
righteous Law is upon the transgressor, and limits the carnal mind and fleshly
will, but does not limit the Spirit, but is at unity with it: and therefore
friend, to thy conscience I speak, and witness this to be true in the presence
of God: that as thou art guided by this pure light in thy conscience, and this
Law of the Spirit set up in thy heart, thou can not deny us; for we are none
of those which despise Government and defile the flesh; who pull down others to
set up themselves; but all unfruitful works of darkness we deny, and seek to
advance the Government of Jesus Christ alone; and love all, and have unity with
all who are here, and honor all men in the Lord, and have fellowship with those
whose conversation is as becomes the Gospel of Christ: and they who rule and
live here, cannot suffer any outward Law to take hold on us, who stand in
obedience to the commands of Christ: for there is no condemnation to them who
are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit; and
where the Spirit of the Lord sets free and commands obedience, take heed how
thou suffer any Law to limit that Spirit, for they who are brought into the
obedience of the Spirit, are dear unto him as the apple of his eye, and his
care is over them: and the Lord will free them from their oppressors: and thus
were we pressed in Spirit to lay before thee our conditions, and the conditions
of our brethren: who are gathered into the eternal unity, where there is no
rent nor schism: that thou might not be ignorant of those things, and to show
thee that our desire is not for any outward thing or self-advancing: for all
self we deny; for we came contrary to our own will, and we declare this unto
thee contrary to our own will: and if thou stand not in thy own will, thou will
hear us, and own us, in advancing the Lord Jesus Christ upon the holy-Hill of
Sion, that the Law might go out of Sion, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem; and this we wait to see accomplished, and his promise fulfilled in
those who govern the Nations, that the Kingdoms of the world may become the
Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ. And thus we have laid our selves naked before
thee, in the presence of God, and cleared our consciences to thee: and leave it
to that which is pure in thy conscience to judge: Take heed, for he that is in
high place, is subject to many tentations.

This was I moved of the Lord to write unto thee, who is a servant of the Lord,
and a lover of thy Soul, called John Camm.

The word of the Lord came to me the 31. day of the first month, about the
ninth hour, as I was waiting upon the Lord, and waiting in Jamses Park at
London.
FRiend, I was moved of the Lord to come to thee to declare the Word of the
Lord, as I was moved of the Lord, and deal plainly with thee as I was
commanded, and not to petition thee for any thing, but to declare what the Lord
had revealed to me, concerning thee; and when I had delivered what I was
commanded, thou questionedst it, whether it was the word of the Lord or not,
and soughtest by thy reason to put it off; and we have waited some days since,
but cannot speak to thee, therefore I was moved to write to thee, and clear my
conscience, and to leave thee; Therefore hear the word of the Lord: thus says
the Lord, I chose thee out of all the Nation, when thou wast little in thy own
eyes, and threwest down the mountains and the powers of the earth before thee,
which had established wickedness by a Law: and I cut them down, and broke the
yokes and bonds of the oppressor, and made them stoop before thee: and I made
them as a Plain before thee, that thou passedst over them, and trod upon their
necks: but thus says the Lord, now thy heart is not upright before me, but
thou take counsel, and not at me; and thou art establishing peace, and not by
me; and thou art setting up Laws, and not by me; and my Name is not feared, nor
I am not sought after: but thy own wisdom thou establishest: what says the
Lord, have I thrown down all the oppressors, and broken their Laws, and art
thou now going about to establish them again? and art going to build again,
that which I have destroyed? wherefore thus says the Lord, will thou limit me,
and set bounds to me, when, and where, and how, and by whom I shall declare my
self, and publish my name? then will I break thy Cord, and remove thy Stake,
and exalt my self in thy overthrow; therefore this is the word of the Lord to
thee, whether thou will hear or forbear; if thou take not away all those laws
which are made concerning Religion, whereby the people which are dear in mine
eyes, are oppressed, thou shall not be established: but as thou have trodden
down mine enemies by my power, so shall thou be trodden down by my power, and
thou shall know that I am the Lord; for my Gospel shall not be established by
thy sword, nor by thy law; but by my might and by my power, and by my Spirit:
unto thee, this is the word of the Lord, Stint not the eternal Spirit, by which
I will publish my name, when, and where, and how I will; for if thou do, thou
shall be as dust before the wind; the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, and he
will perform his Promise: for this is that I look for at thy hands, says the
Lord, that thou should undo the heavy burdens, and let the oppressed go free:
are not many shut up in prison, and some staked, some stoned, some shamefully
entreated? and some are judged blasphemers by those who know not the Lord, and
by those laws which have been made by the will of man, and stand not in the
will of God: and some suffer now, because they cannot hold up the types, and so
deny Christ come in the flesh; and some have been shut up in prison, because
they could not swear, and because they abide in the Doctrine of Christ; and
some for declaring against sin openly in Markets, have suffered as evil doers;
and now if thou let them suffer in this nature by those laws, and count it
just; I will visit for those things, says the Lord, and I will break the yoke
from off their necks, and I will bring deliverance another way, and thou shall
know that I am the Lord.

Moved of the Lord to declare and write this, by a Servant of the truth for
Jesus sake, and a lover of thy Soul, called Francis Howgill.

FINIS.

