THE Churchman AND THE QUAKER Dialoguing: WITH A REPLY TO AN Answer to a late
Pamphlet, CALLED, A Sober Dialogue between a Scotch Presbyterian, a London
Churchman, and a Real Quaker.

Psalm XXXVII. 12. The Wicked plotteth against the Just, and gnasheth upon him
with his Teeth.

13. The Lord shall laugh at him, for he sees that his day is coming.

LONDON Printed, and Sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster, 1699.

THE Churchman AND THE QUAKER Dialoguing.
Churchman. SO old Friend, I perceive you still keep among the Quakers.


Quaker. Yea, for I find no cause to leave them.


Chapter That Is strange, if what I hear since I came to Town, be true.


Qu. What have thou heard?


Chapter I hear you are Charged with Blasphemy against God, Christ, and the Holy
Scriptures; and with great Contempt of Civil Magistracy, and the Ordinances
which Jesus Christ Instituted, viz. Baptism by Water, and the Lord's Supper
with Bread and Wine. And the Light within, as taught by you, leaves you without
any certain Rule, and exposes you to the aforementioned, and many other
Blasphemies.


Qu. It Is true, we are so Charged by some few hot Rectors in Norfolk: But if
thou will Impartially Peruse the Defense, lately Printed, in Reply to those
Priests, I doubt not but it may tend to thy Satisfaction, to which I refer thee.


Chapter Say you so; but what do you think of a late Serious Dialogue between a
Churchman and a Quaker?


Qu. I think that saying is fulfilled, Evil Men and Seducers wax worse and
worse; and that the old Enemy, to true Peace and Righteousness, is stirring up
his Agents to disquiet those that are quiet in the Land, and to raise the
Spirit of Persecution, in order to their Destruction.


Chapter Persecution, I cannot think so, for that never did any good, for it is one
of the bad Practices of the Papists, and from Popery, and such Slavery I hope
we are now delivered, and shall no more be concerned in any such work; for I
believe that it is neither pleasing to the King nor Parliament.

But this Dialogue, I mention, insinuates that you say, ye are of the same
Faith with us; and that ye grossly Pervert a Passage in our Common Prayer.


Qu. If your Faith be in God, and Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit, and has
Christ for its Author, we are of the same Faith; and if you believe what you
call the Gospel, to be read for Christmas Day, and what is written in your
Common Prayer, concerning Inspiration, in what Fundamental Doctrine, that is
Essential to Salvation, do we differ?


Chapter But your old Friend G. K. in a Postscript to this Dialogue, says, I am
ready to prove Face to Face, before any Judicatory, Ecclesiastical or Civil,
what is asserted in this Dialogue. And therein, as I remember, the Quaker is
made to confess, That if Christ, as without us, and as some call him God-Man,
be held forth to be the necessary Object of Faith for Eternal Salvation, it
quite overturns our whole Fabric.


Qu. If so, then G. K. is one of them that quite overturns that Fabric, in
saying, God and Christ, as inwardly Revealed, is the Object of Faith. And he
farther adds, That although the Preaching of Christ without us, in his Birth,
Life, Suffering, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession, etc. is a very
considerable part of the Doctrine, and of the Gospel; yet it is but an integral
part, such as the Hands and Feet of a Man; without which a Man may subsist: So
may true Religion and Christianity subsist, without the History of Christ in
the Letter; to wit, in the Mystery of the Life of Christ in the Spirit, with
much more to the same purpose.


Chapter But, peradventure, he has retracted this Doctrine?


Qu. And so he may any thing that he now writes, by the same Rule; for he has
declared in public Print, That if once People were persuaded and convinced in
their Consciences, that God did teach, and would teach them who wait on him.
Then the whole Clergy, and their so called Theology, Philosophy, Schools,
Colleges, and their Church, the People would turn their Backs upon, and their
Colleges would become like the Abacies at this day (which lodged that profane
Rabble of Papists, Monks and Friars, who pretend as great Spirituality as the
National Priests do) an Habitation for Owls and Ravenous Beasts; and then down
should all the proud, lording, lofty Clergy, with their many Degrees of
Doctorships, Lordships, and Masterships, pass; who being strangers to the true
Knowledge, which is Life, Peace, Joy and Satisfaction, in full Assurance to the
Soul, are vainly puffed up in their Fleshly Minds, by the Form of Knowledge in
the Letter, as I was my self, whilst amongst them, and thought all Men Idiots.


Chapter If this be true, I fear it is now his Condition too much; and his
Exclaiming against you now, is but what he once did against us, and may again.
And indeed there is some cause to think, he is more Envious than Sincere, and
acts little from Conviction; for what he seems to blame you for, viz. the
disuse of the Institution of Christ's Baptism with Water, the Sacraments, as we
use them, he is not in the Practice of; neither does he seek to be Qualified to
be a Minister among us, of the Church of England; or is he owned by any other
Society of Protestants, since he turned from you Quakers, against whom he now
Enveighs and Exhibits heavy Charges, as if you denied the Lord that bought you,
and did not own Jesus Christ for a necessary Object of your Faith, as he died
for Remission of Sins, and as his Blood was shed, and as he rose again, and
ascended into Heaven in our Nature (as we say) and is now in Heaven, making
Intercession for Men?


Qu. I could easily show how, in his former Fit, he rendered those of thy Coat,
the Priests, Gullers and Cheats; and said, It lay upon him from the Lord to
depart from those Teachers: And how he confesses, he came and heard Men and
Women who were taught of God, who pointed him to the True Principle; though some
of them could not read a Letter, yet he found them wiser than all the Teachers
he ever formerly had been under.

And if now he Belies, and falsely Accuses us, and Misrepresents us, as
Erroneous and Unsound in some Points of Christian Doctrine, not Fundamental, or
Essential to Salvation; he will not, I persume, say of the People called
Quakers, as of the Schoolmen, and National Teachers Doctrine, of whom he
says, They generally being Men void of all Sense and Feeling of God; have, in
the blindness of their Minds, and in the Wisdom from below, that is Carnal,
Earthly, and Devilish, formed and invented Perverse Doctrine for their own
Gains and Ends; And renders the Members by Wholesale, of the National
Churches, a mixed, confused Rabble of Godless Atheists; and as much Clamor as
he now makes against us; and Noise about Christ without, he has asserted, That
which makes the true Church Ministry and Worship is Jesus Christ revealed in
themselves; and that there is, not another Christ from him that came in the
Flesh, and died without the Gates of Jerusalem, but one and the same Christ;
and that the Light of Jesus Christ, which they so much despise and contemn,
this would end all their Controversies, heal their Diseases, remove all their
Doubts bind up all their Wounds and Breaches, if they would but come to the
Teachings of God's Spirit, and the Anointing in themselves; this would be an
Infallible Touchstone, and Rule of Trial unto them, for one and all.

And truly my desire is, he may return to this, that he may be healed, and know
the Breach made up, which he has made, if it were the Lord's Will.


Chapter Oh my old Friend, if thou art sincere herein, and what thou say be true
of him, he is not the Man that some take him for.


Qua. I am sincere, and what I say is true, of him; and he himself has
declared this great Truth, That the People and Children of God in all Ages have
been strangers unto the World, and unknown to it, and have been for Signs and
Wonders; their Doctrine, their Laws, their Conversations has always been
accounted strange and ridiculous, and they have been reckoned Deceivers and
Blasphemers, etc.

And yet now this Man, that with us reckoned himself to be of this Number, and
continued among us about Thirty Years, and said, Such, viz. The Children of God
having one Mind, Soul, Spirit, and Life in them all, they cannot but know one
another, in that wherein their Unity stands, p. 186, 187.
and Fellowship and Communion one with another; and this Unity of Spirit is the
Bond of Peace. And he farther says, If they did not Infallibly know one
another, they could not have Peace, and Unity, and Concord one with another:
How could they discern the true Friend from the secret Enemy, the Deceiver,
which is the most dangerous Enemy, and comes into all outward and appearances,
can put on the Sheep's Clothing; yet be a rotten Hypocrite, a Limb of Satan, a
Brat of Babylon, void of all fear of God. And he further adds, That these many
Churches, that have been set up in the Apostasy, have not been true Churches,
by reason of their Warring, Hatred, Variance, Strife, Emulation, and wherever
any thing of this Spirit of Strife, Hatred, p. 189.
Envy Persecution, enters, it eats as a Canker, and cuts off of the Body that
Member or Members whereinto it gets entrance; and so going from the Unity and
the Peace, the Love, they become past feeling Death, rotten Members, and are to
be cut off and denied. And for this Cause we have denied him; and now he Rages
and Joins with those that Belie and Slander us, and licks up what the foul
Stomachs of Persons that were overcharged with prejudice, cast forth against us.


Chapter Hold a little, and consider, whether what he charge you with, is not
some old dangerous Errors of yours, although lately discovered by him, that were
re-writ by some of your old Friends, that F. Bugg and the Norfolk Clergymen
(that have also charged you) would have you retract and blame you for Cloaking,
and accuse you with Painting Tricks, and render your Friends, G. W. and W. P.
and your Chief Leaders to seem to have some of the Policy of the Jesuits and
other Popish Orders, that to Lie and Disemble is no Sin, providing the Peace of
the Church can be preserved thereby,


Qua. Truly my old Acquaintance, I must say, to me it is very observable, how
Glib their Tongues and Swift their Pens run against us, how Loud their Clamor,
and Severe their Charges are, and yet how empty are their Alligations, and how
barren they are of Arguments, and void of Proof, as if the Mountains had
traveled and brought forth a Mouse, or according to the Proverb, A great Cry
and little Wool. Can any Man that is Serious and Impartial, think, that if
these Men had any Proof, that were as clear as the Sun at Noonday, and as
evident as could be demonstrated, they would not produce them? but no doubt
they know they must put the picked Sentences out of our old Friends Books, upon
the Tenters, and stretch them, as the Romanists do Heretics on the Wheel, to
see if by that they can get any thing from them, or by some false Inference,
and strained and undue consequences, that they might make the unwary prejudiced
Reader conclude, that if The Snake in the Grass, F. Bugg and G. Keith, or the
Noisie Rectors of Norfolk (which like empty Casks, makes the greatest sound)
being supposed (especially the 2 Countrymen and Brethren, Snake and G. K.) to
be learned, it must needs be true for they say it.

And since many of the Country Parsons have got that Book, called, The Snake in
the Grass, and Pilgrim's Progress, they hug and applaud them, as if they were
undoubted Truths, for alas they see it in Print, and if they meet with a Reply,
and the words they object against be cleared, from what they falsely suggest and
represent the sense and meaning to be, either by other parts of the same
Authors Writings, out of which they are picked, or by a more natural and due
Conclusion, or fair Interpretation of the words, than they cry out for Painting
Tricks and Glossings. But hear what G. K. says to such a Case, If it be so
among Men, that the Lawmakers is admitted, in point of Controversy, the
expounder of the Law (and if he who writes a Book amongst Men) be accounted the
fittest to Interpret, or give sense or meaning of his words, how much more is
it necessary, that the Spirit of the Lord, which gave forth the Scriptures, be
the expounder of them? Now, if this Justice be allowed us, and this Rule
observed, why should our Friends, G. W. and W. P. and our Chief Leaders (so
called) be rendered to have some of the Policy of the Jesuits and other Popish
Orders, that to Lie and Dissemble (as thou thinks) Is no Sin, providing the
Peace of the Church can be preserved thereby? Is this the way of a fair
Adversary? Or does this become Men that would be esteemed Just and Fair? or is
it like Learned Ministers of the Gospel? Or have they any Precept, President or
Example, for this in the Holy Scriptures? Do not they rather Imitate those they
would Insinuate the Quakers to be like? Do not they herein more resemble them?
And is it any Reputation to your Church, or any Principal Member of it, to Hug,
Promote and Recommend the Works of such Men, that neither own you, nor you
them, for I conclude your Church does not own the Author to The Snake in the
Grass, nor G. K. to be approved Ministers of your Church, if you do, why is the
first Suspended, and the latter not Instituted and Ordained by you? Is it not
because they do not own you, nor you them? Be plain and answer me herein, and
tell me whether you allow, that Men now have that Infallible Spirit of God, or
a Measure of it, that the Holy Penmen were moved to write the Holy Scriptures
by? If not, according to G. K. (whom you so Hug and Countenance) you have not
that which is necessary to Expound Scripture by, and then what need any to heed
your Interpretation? and if you Preach not by the Spirit of God, and Pray not
by the Assistance thereof, how can you profit the People? I both acknowledge to
thy Patience, and desire thy Excuse for being so long.


Chapter Thou have indeed now taken a long stretch, and if I be long thou must not
blame me.


Qua. Nay, therefore take thy Liberty.


Chapter Then I do first premise, whatever Opinion thy Friends may have of such as
I am, I do assure thee, I would be fair and just to all Men, for I am not for
such Christianity as does not exceed Morality, or that does not answer our
Savior's Doctrine, and I do confess, I am somewhat surprised at what G. K.
has said upon these points thou quotes him in, and if he be truly represented,
he appears with no Grace; but that Author of The Snake in the Grass, tho I know
him not Personally, yet he appears to be a Man of Parts and Learning, but
whether he owns our Church, or we him, as an approved Minister thereof, I
cannot tell; but as to G. K. I am of opinion the Church of England do not
esteem him a Minister thereof, and whether he owns them, or the 39 Articles, I
know not, but am of Opinion, he does not as stated by us.

But what he proposes about Authors being their own Interpreters, I think Just
and Reasonable if Living, and if Dead, the way thou proposed, I approve of, and
as to the Norfolk-Clergy, if I had been in their place, and knew my Proofs
clear, I would not have concealed them.

And the Simbolizing you with the Jesuits, and accounting you to have the
Policy of some of them, without good Grounds, I do frankly acknowledge I do not
like, for although I esteem you Erroneous in several things, yet I always
accounted you among Dissenting Protestants.

And as to our allowing Men now to have the Infallible Spirit of God,
Immediately to Guide them, I do acknowledge that I do not account we have, yet
being truly called and instituted, and ordained to the Ministry, and Preaching
those Truths that are agreeable to Scripture, and Living good Lives, we may and
do profit the People.

But Friend be plain with me now, as I have been, and tell me, do you own the
forgiveness of Sins, and the Doctrine of Satisfaction, the Resurrection of the
Dead.


Qua. I commend thy Moderation and Cautiousness in thy last Answer, although I
esteem thee mistaken with respect to the last part of it; and now I do in much
Plainness and Sincerity confess and acknowledge, I own the forgiveness of Sins,
the satisfaction of Christ, and the Resurrection of the Dead, according to the
Holy Scriptures.


Chapter Do you own that all Just and Moral Men, Jews and Mahometans, that profess
the same Light within as you do, and obey its dictates, to be your Christian
Brethren?


Qua. As G. K. has acknowledged in Print, so do I, concerning Jesus Christ,
that he did come in the Flesh, and Suffered in that prepared Body that was Born
of the Virgin Mary; yea, we own no other Christ than the very same who did then
come in the Flesh in that Body, and Preached a most Heavenly Doctrine, Lived a
most Holy Life, wrought most Excellent Miracles, and at last did offer up
himself, unto God without Spot, most acceptable upon the Cross, not only for
our Sins, but for the Sins of the whole World; and this Jesus Christ in us,
whom we Preach, who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, and Light, of the
World, even that true Light, that lights every Man that comes into the
World, is not another Christ from him that came in the Flesh, and died without
the Gates of Jerusalem, but one and the same Christ. And I frankly Acknowledge,
I own and esteem all them to be my Christian Brethren, that truly Believe in,
rightly Profess, and faithfully Obey him, i. e. Jesus Christ, and that walk in
his Light, and obey the Dictates thereof.


Chapter Do you think, that Christ, God-Man without you, to be the Object of your
Faith; together with the Light within you, will bring many great
Inconveniences, and sad Inferences and Consequences upon you?


Qua. Truly to take Christ whole and undivided for the Object of my Faith, I do
not think will bring any great Inconveniences, and sad Consequences and
Inferences upon me.


Chapter Why? In this late Dialogue I mentioned, the Quakers is made to answer Yea,
and to say, It quite overturns our whole Fabric, that we have been building
this fifty Years past, and plucks up by the Roots, the Testimony of our Ancient
Friends; yea, and our present Testimony among our selves.


Qua. It is our Lot, as it was the Primitive Christians, to be misrepresented,
and by such, whose Wrath is cruel, and Anger out-ragious. And who is able to
stand against Envy (which our Adversaries are filled with against us) but those
that have Truth for their Foundation, and Innocence for their Defense? Which,
we humbly Bless God, we have, as our Ancient Faithful Brethren, that died in
the Faith, and are at rest with the Lord, had, that is our Comfort and
Rejoicing; this the Testimony of our Consciences, 2 Cor. 1.12. And we can and
do testify and declare, That we sincerely own all those Divine Truths, and
Christian Doctrines, contained in the Holy Scriptures of Truth, however we are
misrepresented by our Opposers.


Chapter Do you own the Holy Scriptures a Secondary Rule?


Qua. Yea, and the Holy Spirit, by which the Holy Men of God were moved to
write them, the Primary.


Chapter Do you think the Light in all Men would reveal Christ, God-Man without
them, to be the Object of Faith and Worship, if all Men were duly Faithful and
Obedient to it?


Qua. We think and believe, God was manifest in the Flesh, justified in the
Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World,
received up into Glory; and if all Men did receive and believe in him, who is
the Light in all Men, then he would reveal himself unto all Men, and be the
Objest of their Faith and Worship, if all Men were daily Faithful and Obedient
to him.


Chapter Do you believe, that he that was Born of Mary, preached and wrought
Miracles, suffered at Jerusalem, died and was buried, was the Son of God? Yea,
notwithstanding them Diologues wickedly makes the Quakers say, Abraham and
David was his Father. But as G. K. says, True Christ owned, p. 18. If thou
deniest this, I ask thee, who was the Father of Christ, as he was Man, but God?
For if he had another Father, then he was not Born of the Virgin Mary: Which G.
K. concluded Rampant Blasphemy. But by the Dialogue I mentioned, I perceive the
Jews, and Mahometans, and Deists, are rendered your Christian Brethren; and you
are represented Anthropomorphites and Muggletonians.


Qua. We cannot expect better Treatment, nor to be allowed to mean what we say,
or believe what we really do, by those whose endeavors have been and are from
their Prejudiced Spirits, to misrepresent us, and to put as ugly a Vissage, and
as frightful a Dress on us as they can, that we might look Odious, and be
Contemptible in the Eyes of those who they would Curry Favor with, for their
own Ends, and to gratify their Ill Will, which as the Proverb is, never speaks
well.


Chapter But Friend, if thou accountest you are so much wronged; consider, and tell
me why you do not accept of G. K's Challenge? For in his Postscript to this
Dialogue, he says, I shall once more appoint Time and Place to them, and prove
out of their Friends Books, owned by them, that their new Creeds are utterly
Repugnant to the Doctrine formerly delivered in their Printed Books; and (he
says) I am ready to prove, as I hinted before, Face to Face, what is asserted
in this Dialogue.


Qua. G. K. began to expose us in public Print, and that way was answered; and
he has been Industrious since, with his few Abetters to spread his Books, in
this and other Nations; and after that to take upon him to Summon us to a
Corner to discover, in those things so publicly Exposed, and relating to what
has been so long Published in Print: Our Friends did not esteem themselves
obliged either to follow his Conceited Methods, or to regard his Peremtory
Summons, nor to take Cognizance of his empty and boasting Challenge.

But this I may observe, and would have thee well consider, how Officious he is
to be a Drudge or Journey-Man for the Norfolk Priest, and his Brother Bugg,
which I conclude is from the great Conceit he has of his own Abilities, as if
he could do that which they could not, at West-Dereham, which neither he F. B.
nor they have yet done, viz. Proved every one of the People called Quakers to
be Blasphemers, on all those Heads they were charged with, by them Priests, by
express words out of their Ancient Friends Books, without the wild and undue
Consequences, strained Inferences, and wrong Conclusions. And this I would have
thee well observe and consider, that he and F. B. seem to be in a wonderful and
great Travel, to prove our of their Friends Books, written whilst they were
amongst them, that they held gross Errors, and printed and approved many
Blasphemies; and that their new Creeds are utterly Repugnant to the Doctrine
formerly delivered in their Books.

Now if their new Creeds be utterly Repugnant to what they formerly writ; and
for that they formerly writ, are rendered Erroneous and Blasphemous, surely
they cannot be charged with Blasphemy and Error in what they have lately writ.

So that now the Quakers grow better, and they grow worse; they know how to
avoid Suffering, and the Quakers are liable to Suffer, they would Incense the
Government against them: Surely their tender Mercies are Cruelty, and their
Forgiveness short of the Governments, who have past several Acts of Indemnity:
If they had been formerly Guilty, which I grant not; they acted more like the
Lord that forgave freely, and those Men more like that Servant that was
forgiven, and yet took his Fellow Servants by the Throat; a plain Proof of an
ill Spirit, and ungrateful Temper. And take notice, G. K. says, He is ready to
prove what is in the Dialogue: Then why does he not? Who hinders him? He, to me,
seems willing to Brag, and speak Big, although he does little.


Chapter Truly I think it is pity you should be blamed when ye are accounted to
mend; but I would not have you think, there is any more fear of Persecution
therein, than you think there is for those Men that have so generally Charged
you all with Blasphemy, to prove that by Express Words, that will really appear
to be so. And truly I could, and do heartily wish, there might more good Nature
appear among us, and we all might be better Neighbors one to another, and be
no more angry one with another, simply upon the account of Conscience, and our
Religious Dissent; for I think there is no more reason for that, than our being
angry one with another, for not being all of one Size, and our Hair not all of
one Color.


Qua. Thy Moderation, and thy Sentiments are more like to prevail upon me, than
all the Peevish Carriage, and Bitter Invectives, and Envious Attempts of those
Angry, Hotheaded Men, who can better Rail than Reason, and Clamor than
Convince. And so Farewell.


A REPLY IN Answer to a late Pamphlet.
P. 4. THE Answerer quotes the Quaker, p. 5. for saying, By the Light within he
means no other than Christ, as the Divine Word, or (...), which enlightens
every Man that comes into the World; and for the Reformation of Man, God has
given unto every Man, and in and by this Light, Invites, Calls, Exhorts and
Strives with every Man, in order to save them; which, as it is received, and
not resisted, works the Salvation of all.

Answer. There he discovers his design, without any disguise.

Reply. Oh how Eagle-eyed this conceited Answerer, G. K's Friend pretends to
be! How sharp and quick in his pretended Discovery of Error and Deism! Let him
next time advise with somebody that is better acquainted with the Holy
Scriptures, that he may be informed, whether to Assert, that Christ, the Divine
Word, that God has given for the Restoration of Man, works his Salvation, as
the is believed in, received, and not resisted.

And in p. 5. he says, And here this real Quaker gives us a plain account,
what his Christ is; to wit, the Divine (...), or Word, without Christ's
Manhood, and all that he did and suffered for us without, and all that he is now
doing for us in Heaven.

Reply. Where, in all that Dialogue, he pretended to Answer, does he find the
real Quaker say so? What, has this Friend of G. K's no Conscience or Honesty?

I assure him, he that in that Dialogue is termed the real Quaker, believes in,
owns not, neither expects Salvation by any other Christ, than he that is the
only begotten Son of the Eternal God, which all true Christians did and do
believe in, and expect Salvation by; who is not any other Christ, than he that
was the Word that was in the beginning with God, and was God.

P. 6. In answer to the real Quakers saying, We search the Scriptures
diligently, and find, that in Man that Reproves for Sin, is the Spirit of him
that never Sinned, John 16. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 13.

The Answerer G. K's Friend, p. 6. says, Here the Quakers Ignorance and
Blindness is manifest, that he is not taught, according to Scripture.

Reply. I am well assured, notwithstanding this gross Reflection on the real
Quaker, that he is not so Ignorant and Blind, nor Unacquainted with the Holy
Scriptures, but that he knows that there are diversities of Gifts, but the same
Spirit; and differences of Administrations, but the same Lord; and diversities
of Operations, but it is the same God which works all in all; and that he is
taught according to Scripture, to distinguish, but not to divide the Gift from
that Spirit, nor the Illumination from Christ: For, although this Answerer
says, The Quakers common answer is, That Christ cannot be divided. He matters
not that, so long as it is true; neither heeds he the Commonness of it.

Was that Faith er'e the Less, True, and Saving, which Paul calls the common
Faith, Titus 1.4? Or that Salvation not Complete or Sufficient, of which Jude
wrote, because he writes after the Common Salvation, see Jude?

What Idle, Impertinent Scribble does this Man make about Common Light, Common
Illumination, and being Saved by the Light within, without any thing else? Now
if he could prove that Christ without and Christ within could be divided, which
he grants he cannot, he might do something toward proving that Christ, that
lights every Man within, and shows Man Sin by his Light within, was not able
to save without something else; but Christ, when he had preached himself the
Light of the World, bid or commanded, That they should believe in the Light,
that they might be Children of the Light, and Children of the Day.

And may we not well conclude, that those that answer his Command, take his
Counsel, and Believe and Abide in him, the Light, will be saved. It Is not all
G. K. and his Friends twisting, twining, and confidently crying out of Gross
Ignorance, Error and Blasphemy, nor his calling to the Clergy, and their
applying to the Parliament against the Quakers, and their and the
Presbyterians, Independents and Baptists telling the Parliament, If F. B.
writes true, which I suppose no Man that has a Grain of Charity can believe he
does, they are sorrowfully affected, that the Quakers are joined with them in
the Toleration. But it shows what G. K. and those he herds with, would be at:
They want the Toleration to be taken away from the Quakers, and pretend that
the Professors are sorrowfully affected, that they are joined with them,
according to F. B's Sheet, lately delivered to the Parliament; but I do not
believe he either truly represents the Conformists or Nonconformists therein,
but abuses and belyes both, as he does the Quakers: For if it were true, the
Professors then would seem to be willing to do that with a Toleration, which
they did not do, when under Persecution, viz. Stand alone: But away with such
Deceit, all his idle Clamours about being saved by Christ within, without
something else; for those that receive, and believe in him, that is, Christ the
Light, will not, cannot, do not in the least Slight, Undervalue, Disesteem or
Disbelieve what he did for them, without them, and now does for them in Heaven,
but Own, Honor and Esteem of the Lord Christ, in all his Offices, and bless
him for all his Gifts; knowing, that although there are diversities of Gifts,
differences of Administrations, it is the same Lord; and diversities of
Operations, but the same God. So that the Seed the Lord promised he would give
to the Woman; and he whose day Abraham saw and rejoiced in, that Moses
Prophesied of, and all the Holy Prophets; yea, he that was Born of the Virgin
Mary, wrought Miracles, preached himself the Light of the World, suffered and
died for our Sins, and rose again for our Justification, is one and the same
Christ and Savior. And therefore all the Noise, Clamours, Slanders, false
Accusations, and Misrepresentation of prejuced Spirits, and their Insinuations;
so the contrary can never hurt the Quakers; nor do I esteem, that what the
other hand says of the Light, viz. in his Advice, p. 16. 7. viz. I have often
known, that some which have been reproved by that Light, have greatly rejoiced,
believing it to be a Sign, that their Consciences are yet alive, and not made
Shipwreck of. Is this any proof, that Christ the Light is not sufficient to
Save without Something Else, or any thing else besides himself, whom God has
given to be a Savior to all Men, but especially to them that Believe. And let
him in his next show what that Something, or any thing else is, besides Christ.

And it may be well for him, and G. K. his Friend, if Christ's Light does
reprove them for their Evil Deeds, their Passion, Strife, Hatred Contention,
Envy and false Accusation, if they turn thereat; and from those things for
which they were reproved. But let them remember, That he that being often
Reproved, and hardens his Heart, shall be destroyed, and that without Remedy;
for if they Sin out their day, and will have none of his Reproofs, and set at
naught all God's Counsel; the Lord will laugh at their Calamity, and mock when
their Fear comes as Desolation, and their Destruction comes as a Whirlwind.
And if that be their States, all the Baptists and Priests in England cannot
help and deliver them. Therefore they had best be wise, and consider their
Ways, and amend their Doings.

As for the farther advice by another Hand, I see little or nothing in it, but
what was answered in the foregoing, except his Blaming the Author for
reflecting on what G. K. when he was one of them, wrote; from which I observe
the real Quaker and he is agreed, that G. K. is not now one of them. And let
him in his next tell us what distinct Society of Christian People will own G.
K. for one of them, and what Name they are called by, that it may be known.

But this is something of a Digression, and therefore I return to the Answerer.

P. 5. The supposed Presbyterian having said, That in Men that reproves for
Sin, is only the Law written in the Heart, p. 6. The Churchman is made to
check the Presbyterian, and to tell him, He fears, he does not well consider
the word only; for if it be granted, that it is Christ, as the Divine Word, that
reproves for Sin, as the Quakers say; then don't you carry it too far, by
asserting, it is only the Law.

Answerer, The saying that in Men that reproves for Sin, is only the Law, has
this true obvious sense, without any strain, to wit, the common Illumination
that is in all Men: And this sense, the Answer says, the Quaker is obliged to
hold to, if he will follow his greater Patrons, G. Whitehead and W. Penn,

Reply, Has G. W. or W. P. ever said that the True Light, that lights every
Man that comes into the World, was not Christ, or that Christ, that True
Light, was not sufficient to Save without something else, or that that True
Light, Christ, that reproves for Sin, was only the Law, or common Illumination
given by Christ, and of the Divine Word to all Mankind, and was not sufficient
to Salvation through Faith in Obedience to Christ this Light and Word, did they
ever say so?

I observe in p. 8. the Answerer complains, that the word Simply was left out,
in the repeating some words out of the Dialogue between a Country Friend, and a
London Friend, and one of G. K's Friends (which by the way, observe who began
this Dialogueing way, which now being taken up by them, they are followed in)
but to return, the unfair Quaker says, the Answerer leaves out the Word
Simply, which was mainly necessary, truly to the State of the Controversy,
viz. whether that Principle within Men, that only reproved or condemned them
for Sin, and but convinces of some Moral Duties, and does not propose to them,
the great Object of Faith, Christ Jesus, as he suffered Death on the Cross for
the Remission of our Sins, does Save them without Christ Crucified, and without
all Faith in him as such.

Reply, Let this learned Answerer that pretends truly to state the
Controversy, tell in his next what that Principle in Men is, that Only or
Simply Reproves or Condemns them for Sin, and but Convinces of some Moral
Duties; and does not, or is not sufficient to propose to them the greater
object of Faith, Christ Jesus, who suffered on the Cross, for the Remission of
our Sins.

For the Quaker believes and declares that the same Christ that by his Light in
Men, Reproves and Condemns for Sin, shows Man his Duty to God, is sufficient,
being the alone Savior to Save Man from his Sin, and to enable Men to perform
their Duty, and to propose to them the great Object of Faith, as he is the
Author of it.

P. 9. The Answerer says, He, i. e. Author to that Book he pretends to Answer,
blames his Opponent. for saying, that Cornelius was not to be saved by the
Light within without something else.

Reply, And when this Answerer shows that Cornelius was saved by any other than
Christ, the Light, which shines within the Hearts of Men, to show Sin, to
Convince and Reprove for it, he may expect farther Answer.

Again the Answerer says, p. 9, 10. The true Controversy is not what God can
do, but what Sufficiency of help he has given to all Men for their Salvation,
as whether their help is only and alone the Light within?

Reply, When he proves that Christ, who the Quakers assert to be that Light
within, which they Preach, is not sufficient for Salvation, or that he is not
only and alone able to save, he may expect a farther Answer, or when he proves
that Christ, or that Divine Word, is only sufficient to discover some Moral
Principles of Sobriety and Justice, and general Piety toward God, considered
only as a Creator, and not sufficient to save and reveal Christ Crucified; he
will do more than he has done yet.

And as to what he says, p. 10, 11. that Romans 3.25. Isa. 42. and 60. were
perverted and misapplied, -- and his complaint of bringing in the Churchman to
assent and approve of his Gross Perversion and Misapplication of the
Scriptures, and makes his Churchman assent to the Quakers Proof out of the
Gospel to be read on Christmas- day.

Reply, I deny that those Scriptures are either perverted or misapplied,
notwithstanding thy Confident Say so, and Gross Dealing, that they have no
special-reference to Christ within, and his being given as a Covenant of Light
to the Gentiles, who shall bring forth Judgment to them, and the Forces of the
Gentiles shall come unto him; and let him bring if he can, a more full Proof of
Christ, or the Life of the Word, that was in the beginning with God, and was
God; being the true Light, that lights every Man that comes into the World;
that is that which is out of the Gospel to be read on Christmas Day, viz. the 9.
Verses of the 1st Chapter of John, and I do not esteem that Churchman, or the
Church of England, Ficttiious and Treacherous, as well as Ignorant, as he
abusively says, for I am of Opinion, that the Church of England do expect
Salvation only by Christ, and do pray to him to Save them, who is the Word, in
which is Life, and whose Light is the Light of Men.

And John Norris, as quoted by G. K, says in his Reflections, etc. Reflect. 2.
N. 9. p. 69. The Right and Only method of Inquiry after that Truth, which is
perfective of the understanding, is to consult the Divine Logos, or Ideal Word,
for this is the Region of Truth; and here are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom
and Truth, this is the great universal Oracle lodged in every Man's Breast, --
and he says, this is Reason, this is Conscience, this is Truth, this is the
Light within.

And as to the Clamor that the Dialogue and Answerer makes against G. W. and
W. P. and the Quakers not owning the Fundamental Doctrines of the Christian
Religion.

I may say, as G. K. did to C. Mather, in his Serious Appeal, he being one of
G. K's Friends, He shall never be able to prove that the Quakers deny almost
all, or most of the Fundamental Articles of the Christian and Protestant Faith,
either in respect of the Body of that People called, in Scorn, Quakers; or in
respect of any particular Writers or Publishers among us, and particularly
George Whitehead and William Penn, I do solemnly Charge C. M. to give us but
one Single Instance of any one Fundamental Article of Christian Faith, denied
by us, as a People, or by any one of our Writers or Preachers, generally owned
and approved by us; I know none that are Guilty of such Heresies and
Blasphemies, and indeed those that do pretend to prove us Guilty in that kind,
generally Quote some ancient Writings of our Friends, and allege, although
with a design against us, that we are changed from what we formerly held, and
therefore I refer to that noted Treatise, as G. K. calls it, writ by John
Crook, called Truth's Principles (lately reprinted) and with which my Doctrine,
said G. K, in all particular does well agree.

But, if like the Weathercock, he is since turned, consider, as that, he may
again.

FINIS.

