To the Right Honorable the Lord Major and Aldermen of the City of London.
The Remonstrance and Petition of Thomas Church Esquire;
Most humbly showing,
THat your Petitioner having settled himself at the first on your Plantations
in Vlster, was long employed by some of your chief Corporations had interest
therein, though the ill carriage of your grand Agent, Mr. Berisford, much
hindered that service, who to work himself into favor with those that there
then ruled in chief, At the first let slip with Enishowne, some two thousand
Acres of Land, after the Kings then accustomed Survey, that should have
belonged to Derry, with some thousand Acres more from Colraine, together with
the Rights and Privileges thereto belonging; and suffered your Rents, Woods,
and Fishings to be common to all pleased him: Besides the innumerable store
there of his Ironworkes spent and destroyed, and all to gain to himself and
friends great bargains of your best profits and Revenues there (wherein some
here was surely to blame) which others perceiving, got whole proportions from
your most discontented Corporations at such underrates, as brought this
magnificent City of London, in so mean and slight esteem, with some that could
not scrue themselves into the like, brought caviling suits in his Majesty's
Name against you and those stood for your Rights, that for a long time, little
of those Rents was paid, but by the extremest means, wherein I had perished
and all mine, had not the Right Worshipful Company of Mercers born us out in
all just ways, as the Worshipful Company of Vintners did, to whom I gave all
due satisfaction; But your vast Arreares of some ten thousand pounds, wat so
long before I had to do therewith, that I could do small good therein, till
your troubles and the Sequestration thereof stopped the same to the loss of
all, with sore Charges, Fines, and Displeasures. The which that all
undertakers, and Adventurers may prevent in time to come, causes me, as in
duty bound, to present unto your Worthy considerations, these Propositions, for
the establishing such a government there, that may timely meet with all manner
of inconveniences for the good and safety of all Britain, as well as it, And
regaining your own, in a fair and honorable way, with all forfeited by that
Rebellion, to you and your several Corporations. And as the said Mr.
Berisfords overruling in peace proved destructive, so it continued, by his not
causing the British to entirely rise as I most earnestly desired, at the first
to suppress that rebellion, which had been most casie to do, but suffered his
Son Michael an Esquire, with his sister the Lady Cook, To leave that strong
Castle of Dongivin, As Henry Conway, Esquire, did the Vintners, to the Rebels,
to the quite overthrow of those parts; So as the said Berisford, (to save his
Ironworkes) persuaded the strength of Colrain, and the British thereabouts, to
garrison at Garvagh, a poor thatched Village without defense, where the
thirteenth of December. 1641. they were all slain to a very few, their Arms and
Munition lost, and all that whole Country overrun by fire and Sword, So as the
Commissioners of Colrain, sent for my aid, that wanted Match and some other
provision, (though by the right Worthy Mercers providence, had good store of
Powder and Arms, in so much as I left the Right worthy Mercers Castle, with
all my goods therein (after I had held it out seven weeks and three days) with
two near Kinsmen of the Earl of Antrims, (by the advice of the said
Commissioners) who undertook the safety thereof, they then seeming not to
affect that Rebellion, whose Lands are sufficient to make all good. And thus
with no small danger, I brought near two hundred British to Colerain, without
loss of any, where I found them in a sad condition, yet encouraged them so, as
we made up seven hundred Foot, and fifty Horse, And set it in a true posture
of defense, after the Discipline of the Low Countries, where first I was bred;
and made some Lethar-gunnes, with two pieces of Artillery, at my own charge,
And caused the weakest parts thereof to be Palisadoed, and close fights made
for saving our men, being for sixteen weeks space begirt in with some five
thousand Rebels, so as our duties proved extreme, and Pestilence with Famine,
took some thousands to the grave, many dying in their own Ordure, up and down
the streets. Besides all other our Losses, Crosses, and dysasters, through
treacherous, wilful and perverse Counsels and dealings, some of the best and
nearest to the said Berisford, favoring those Irish too much, as ever he did,
yet we held it out till about the seventeenth of October following, that news
came thither that we were all cast, and new men entered the same to our
terrible loss, and disparagement, being all the English Tenants, of your own
planting, that was thereabouts left alive, by that Massacre, able to bear
Arms; And is like never to be recovered, but by a true settled Government, in
a brotherly way. But not thus compelled to part with our birthright, and all
our possessions, for less then a mess of Pottage, after so high deservings,
as to Raise, Arm, Horse, Cloathe, and maintain so many men, for so long a
time, with that saved from those Rebels, upon the only encouragements of this
Honorable Parliament, That may it please you for their honors, maturely to
consider that those Towns, and especially Colerain, that cost you so much,
being but desired for their garrison, upon needful occasions of retreat, when
footing with safety was scarce thought there to be had, will be the better
spared now, there is so much room, as not a considerable party of Enemies does
remain within some hundred miles of that place, or in all Ulster, unless some
sew at Dongannon, and Charlimount, that is far from it. And especially now
three thousand of that new Army, of the ten thousand Scots, has left that
Kingdom so long since, so as they there yet remain with the rest of those old
Forces, may pursue the Enemy, as hereafter mentioned, for which purpose they
have their pay, and the rest by due Government, may raise what profits there is
to be made for the better supply and relief of them; and the ease and safety
to all Britain, as extreme necessity now requires. Your Honors Petitioner
for those Commanders, yet unsatisfyed any thing, do desire now that allowed by
the Parliament may be sent them, it being so little and long time due; And
that those other British with himself, and Sons, there planted by this
Honorable City of London, may be favored and employed, but as to Law, Reason
and Justice shall seem meet.

And Your Honors Petitioner shall duly pray, etc.

To the Right Worshipful Committee of Adventurers for Land in Jreland. The
humble Propositions and Petition of Thomas Church.
FIRST,
Whereas the Agents for those Armies, are content with a third part of pay for
all their Commanders, to the Sergeants; and the rest with half pay and
clothing; You may be pleased to procure a select Committee of your own, to
raise Provisions, there to maintain 20000 at the least, by sending (with the
Ordinance therefore) your Assurance by fit men, That what each Parish, or
party, now do give, lend, or adventure, for Lands in Ireland, shall be
employed toward regaining the same, and no otherwise. And that a due Record
thereof shall remain with you, for them and their posterity, to be satisfied
therein upon all occasions, that by a settled and constant course, means for
those Armies may be in a perfect readiness, and one quarters pay, at the
least always there under safe custody to be delivered as you shall appoint,
from the time you begin.

Secondly, That two Commissaries of known trust and skill be employed thither,
(that has no relation to any of those Commanders,) with other Commissioners
there appointed, to recrute all those Troops most fit for War, and
Field-service, into hundreds, (besides the Captains and Lieutenants) and each
like Foot Company into 90 Musquettiers, and 60 Pikes, (besides Officers) with
the rest that are not so convenient, and eight of those Companies to a
Regiment. To the taking away much danger, and all unnecessary charge. And then
paid and so continued.

Thirdly, That each Commissary may have power from time to time to call to
their assistance such chief men of trust, (not belonging to any those Armies)
as those places shall afford, where they shall take their Musters in, that the
Accounts thereof be certifyed under other men's hands, as well as their own;
And that they see the Soldiers have that allowed them by the State, and do
exactly muster once every half year, all other the British inhabitants there,
from fifteen to threescore years of age, that their strength be truly known,
and ordered accordingly, and that they have power to command their guard from
place to place about those affairs.

Fourthly, That no man do muster for a Soldier in other name then his own upon
pain of death, and check to such Officers of all their means then due, as
shall so attempt, and that every Governor and Assistant do take special care
herein, and that those Armies be dispatched to the Field in all convenient
time, to clear as they go, and live by the enemies spoils, and Garrison
themselves so near their Coasts, as to be with them upon all occasions.

Fifthly, Whereas no people can be truly happy, without a due settled
Government, that for every considerable place there, a Governor be appointed,
with twelve more of the best affected British within their several Precincts,
upon all fitting occasions, to rule by Marshall Law during pleasure, that
offenders be reclaimed or cut off, and the Subject cherished, and encouraged
to all manner of good husbandry, and Tillage, and drawn into List, from
fifteen, to threescore years of age, under fitting Commanders, for the better
safety both of Town and Country; And that every Governor have his Provost
Marshall with twenty men or less, as need shall require, to guard and keep
their several precincts, from Rebels, Thieves, and oppressors, and do preserve
all Woods and Fishings, and that all such Governors do every half year give
in their several Accounts, that a true Record thereof may be had in either
Kingdom without denial to any, whom it may concern, and do refer their pay
to their several deservings.

Sixthly, that to the Government of Londonderry, and those Liberties with the
two next Baronies belonging thereto, of Kenaugh, and Bainhur, be laid, The two
next Baronies of Enishowne, and Strabane, and to the Government of the Town and
Liberties of Colraine, and that Baronie with the Baronie of Loughinsolin be
laid, the two next Baronies on Antrim side, the River of Bann, from the Sea
toward Loughbeg, and the rather for that it was so determined, for the ease,
safety, and good of those parts, when his Majesty by his Commissioners, entered
on those Lands and Revenues, which belonged to the Honorable City of London;
and that they, with you, have the nomination of Governors there too, in regard
of their great care, and vast expense thereon, for the general good, and
settling of your plantations together.

Seventhly, That every Governor within their several Precincts toward the
better maintenance of those wars, have power to raise all profits and
Commodities of Lands, Rents, Fishings, and Customs, in a fair and indifferent
way, and to call all such to account, as have received the like, since the
beginning of those wars: And what those Armies or any part of them have taken
or received from any of those British Plantationers, to go on in their pay,
That the true Owners thereof, with the Creditors, and oppressed, be satisfied
in Lands or Moneys, and not driven from their own, as they have been, but
rather allowed all other their losses out of those Rebels Lands; and that upon
Wine, Aquavitae, and Tobacco, Excise be set for the more ease to England, all
that may be.

Eighthly, That no Governor, Officer, or Assistant, be admitted into that
service, or suffered to continue therein, that has, or shall have any
unlawful dealings with any of those Rebels, since their rebelling, or that
has colorable interests in any of their Lands, or given to pervert Justice,
Or that has slightly and carelessly lost or given up into any of their hands,
any City, Town, Castle, or strong Hold: But that such, and all Rebels Lands be
found out by all due means, and by each Governor, presented to this
Committee, That the King may be rightly stated in all, that is lost by that
Rebellion, and each Lord of Lands, and the Adventurers have their right, And
that no Cattle whatsoever be transported out of Ireland, upon pain of
punishment, and forfeiting the same, with such Barks and Boats, as shall so
presume.

Ninthly, That every sitting Congregation have a sufficient Preaching Minister,
with reasonable allowance where those livings will not maintain them, but the
malignant and ill-living Minister to be discharged. And the Ordinance for
swearing, drunkenness, and profaning the Lords Sabbath, be put in due
execution there.

Tenthly, That some prime Officers and Governors have power to protect all
such Irish that by their Papisticall Lords, Priests, and Gentry, have been
caused to rebel, and will show their repentance worthy of life, by their true
carriage, and service doing on the rest, That upon settlement they may have
pardons in new sirnames, to the quite extirpating all their old rebellious
names and Cepts; which being rightly ordered, will draw them into a religious
obedience, to the saving much blood and treasure, and soon gaining that Land,
with the Commodities thereof.

Eleventhly, That you will be pleased to take into your special
consideration, the true worth of Sir William Cole of Eniskillin, to be
Governor of Londonderry, and the four Baronies thereto, as formerly
mentioned, though my acquaintance is no otherwise of him, than from a long
continued report of his Valor, and integrity to Justice, that has been well
tried since that last rebellion, who doubtless will stand the State, and You,
with all of those parts, in most singular good stead, for the general good.

And whereas your Petitioner, with his four sons, lost great estates by that
Rebellion, besides debts and goods of much value, yet upon this Honorable
Parliaments encouragements, did raise two hundred choice British Foot, and
fifty Horse, wherewith they did good service, to the saving of Colraine, etc.
as has been truly proved, but were cast through your troubles here, with no
more allowed us for some ten Months pay, then 170 pound; Though your
Petitioner spent thereon 1365 pound, whereby we are made deep Adventurers to
the ruin of us all, if not timely prevented.

May it therefore please you to employ either of your petitioners Sons as
Commissary for Vlster, and himself Governor of Colraine, and those four
Baronies, as formerly mentioned, for the more perfect effecting these services
to the life.

And Your Honors Petitioner shall duly pray, etc.
FINIS.

