MR. JOHN CHILD'S BOOK, Entitled A SECOND ARGUMENT, For a more Full and Firm
UNION AMONGST ALL GOOD PROTESTANTS; WHEREIN The NONCONFORMISTS Taking the
SACRAMENT after the Manner of the CHURCH of ENGLAND, is Justified. The Root and
Foundation Of the POPISH PLOT Further Discovered In a LETTER to a Friend. Now
Republished upon the Occasion of his Disperation and Fatal End: which Book (as
he has often declared) was the Occasion off it.

Entered According to Order.

London, Printed for J. How, without Bishopsgate, 1684.

MR. JOHN CHILD'S BOOK, Entitled A SECOND ARGUMENT, etc.
Honored Sir,
IT IS not unknown to you that for Seven years last past it has been our
endeavor to correct some of the extravagant strains too apparently found in
many well-meaning Dissenters from the Church of England; and what by good
Arguments in private, and the Example of some who have had near Thirty years
Conversation amongst them; together with a sight of their folly, by being
debarred of their Civil Rights as Englishmen, for their groundless
Scrupulosities in Religion and the close concurrency of Penal Prosecution, they
have at last been prevailed upon to come to Church, and with Sobriety and
Patience to hear the good and able Ministers of the Church of England, to their
no small contentment and satisfaction: And so far we have gained the point, as
to disappoint our Adversaries, whose Work it has been to divide, that they
might take the spoil; and whose Design for a long time (as much as in them lay)
has been to put the Protestant Clergy upon Persecuting, thereby to justify
their old accustomed Cruelty, and then prepossess the minds of the unwary, That
this Protestant Church and Ministry was really Antichristian, and not safely to
be communicated with or confided in; by which means they have for many years
kept a wide gapp open, in hopes the more easily to get into Power; when there
should be an opportunity: for whilst the English Church and Clergy does think
all the Dissenters Heretics, misled and alike dangerous, if not more than the
Papists are, they make no bones in prosecuting Penal Laws against them, even to
the utter ruin of Persons and Families in many places. And on the other hand
they influence and persuade the poor simple Dissenters that Persecution is an
infallible Mark of an Antichristian Church; and by scaring Cautions warn them
upon the peril of forfeiting their salvation, not to come near them, not to
touch, taste, or handle with them: Nay so severe have these Sons of Leviathan
been upon the Consciences of the Nonconformists, as to corrupt them with a
Conceit, That it is a sin to go into the Places where the English Clergy
Preach, because they are Idol Temples; a greater Sin to hear them preach and
pray there, because it is as Meat offered to an Idol: but like the Sin against
the Holy Ghost, eternally impardonable, to communicate with them in the Lords
Supper. When in truth there is amongst them all things necessary to salvation;
of which I could never yet learn more than these Four, viz.

1. The Learning of a good Catechism to aid and conduct their Faith.

2. A good and well composed Form of Prayer to discharge their Devotion.

3. To hear learned and good Men Preach to revive and quicken them to Duty.

4. To Square and Regulate their Lives by Moral Precepts (or the Law of Nature)
the which whosoever shall humbly and carefully observe, constantly and
conscientiously perform, we will assure them Salvation, and undertake to answer
to God for them, an^ be content to stand Chargeable with their Blood if they do
miscarry; being undisputeably assured that it is more safe to rely upon these
Principles for Salvation than upon all humane Pardons and Indulgences under
Heaven: because these things do really constitute a good Man, which God for his
Truth and Justice sake cannot destroy or damn: Therefore that we may answer the
Command of God to his Prophet to take the stumbling blocks out of the way of
the People, and thereby disappoint the wicked purposes of ungodly men, save our
poor Neighbors and their Families from ruin by Penal Laws and Erroneous
Consciences, and a Glorious Nation from destruction by subtle. Adversaries; we
shall endeavor to evince that they safely may communicate in the Lords Supper
with their Brethren of the Church of England: In order to which it is proposed.

1. To Communicate in the Supper is either a Civil or a Spiritual Thing, for
betwixt these there is no Medium: If Civil, as such it may be done, because no
where forbidden by God.

2. It Is Commanded by the Laws of our Country.

3. It Is no natural injury to a man's Neighbor, therefore can be no real hurt
or prejudice to his own Soul; for what God forbids not, the Laws of my Country
commands to be done, and my Neighbor no way injured by, cannot be really
hurtful to my self; there being no Law of common good and safety violated, no
Right either Humane or Divine invaded; and for Obedience to the Laws of our
Country, in all matters purely Civil we are all agreed about. If it be
Spiritual, then it is Spiritual Goodness or Spiritual Wickedness, there being
no Medium betwixt these two (neither:) If Spiritual Goodness, it cannot be
dangerous and unsafe, because we have a Word of God that presses to whatsoever
is good, honest, and excellent: Besides, the Law of Nature obliges to all
degrees of Goodness within our power to perform. If it be Spiritual Wickedness,
then it lies either in the Matter made use of, or in the Manner of the
Administration: in the Excess and Defect of the Matter, or in the Design of the
Thing; but Wickedness lies in none of these, therefore it is not Spiritual
wickedness.

1. In the matter (viz.) The Bread and the Wine, it cannot lie, because both
are innocent and harmless, and fitly agreeing to Divine Institution. In the
manner of Administration it cannot lie, because it is solemnly performed with
holy Prayers and Thanksgiving, and with no small degree of Seriousness and
Gravity. It cannot lie either in Excess or Defect, because none is allowed
rudely to take it themselves, to eat unto Gluttony, or drink unto Drunkenness.
In the Defect it cannot lie, because given in both Kinds, and not more
spareingly than the nature of the thing requires, and is in common use amongst
others. In the Design it cannot possible be, because all that is proposed in
it, is a due Preparation for it, and a Thankful Remembrance of the Blessed
Sacrifice of a Dear Redeemer. And if no Evil in any of these, we challenge the
whole World to show any Formal or Positive Wickedness.

2. If it be Spiritual Wickedness, then the highest Acts or Instances of the
Church of Englands Goodness (which is the preparing Persons for a Right
Receiving of it, the Endeavors to strengthen Men's Faith thereby, and to
increase and continue Brotherly Love, is Positive Wickedness; And if so, what
will become of all that have died in this Communion? And what condition are all
those in that are left behind (in this Communion?) Surely if the highest Acts
of Goodness in the best Church Men is down right Spiritual Wickedness, then the
best Church men must be all wicked men; for if the Light that is in them be
Darkness, how great is their Darkness! If I mistake not, such a Dogmatical
Conclusion is the highest Violation of Christian Charity under Heaven: And
whatsoever men pretend, as to Talk and Faith, and the like, they do render
themselves by the want of Charity to be but sounding Brass and tinkling
Cimbals, offering manifest violence to that Sacred Text, Judge not, least you
be judged. And how such can be assured of escaping that dismal Sentence, What
measure you mete to others, the same shall be meted to you again: I yet
understand not.

3. That part of this Kingdom that bears the Denomination of the Church of
England, is either the Church of God, or it is the Synagogue of the Devil? If
the Church of God, it cannot be hazardous and unsafe to Communicate with it in
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; because it is an holy Rite truly
appropriated to the Church of God: And to join with the Church of God in one of
the highest instances of Positive Religion, cannot possible be dangerous and
unsafe. But if it be indeed the Synagogue of the Devil, and the Communicating
with it Positive Wickedness, let it be demonstratively made appear, and we will
resolve (by Gods grace assisting us) to be hanged upon Gibbets, to be burned at
a Stake, to suffer the worst of Deaths and Dangers, rather than to Incorporate
our selves into such a Diabolical Corporation. But if this be not, or cannot be
done, he that suffers ruin and death for a refusal, may go out of the World
with a lie in his right hand, and die under a far worse Sentance or Censure
then did Abner, and miss his expected Advancement for it in the next World,

4. He that shall Communicate with the good Members of the Church of England,
shall certainly Communicate with as good Men as any is under the Copes of
Heaven: For if we refer to the Clergy, then for Excellency of Natural Parts,
Profoundness of Learning, Evenness of Temper, Generosity of Principles, most
admirable Sermons and Doctrines, holiness of Life and largeness of Charity, we
challenge the whole Earth to overmatch them. Indeed such is the English Clergy
at this day, that I despare to see any outdo them till Elias comes with
Extraordinary Revelation to restore all things; and if it be damnable to
Communicate with such men (Good God) then what shall we do? Whether shall we
fly for help? Where shall we pitch our Tents, and where shall we fix our Glory?
Oh! how shall we be able to rejoice in being debarred of our National
Privileges, the having our Estates lost, our Families ruined, our Native
Country exposed to great hazard by Popery, our Wives and Children weeping, our
Persons banished and exposed to the mercy of strange Countries, or hanged at
home for an obstinate humor, in refusing to eat and drink in a godly sort with
some of the best of Men. What Judgment will the Martyrs that died in Queen
Mary's days make of us? Can they account us Martyrs without condemning
themselves, who all died in the same Faith and Practice that we are invited to
embrace?

5. If it be dangerous and unsafe to Communicate with the English Church, it
must be because she is no Church at all, or at best but an Antichristian
Church. An Antichristian Church she cannot be, because she has renounced the
Power and Headship of Antichrist, and in her constant Doctrines and Practice
keeps up and defends a Separation and Detestation of him. If she be no Church
at all, then these two dangerous Consequents will follow:

1. That the best People in the World, who profess the True God and the True
Savior, the True Rule, viz. The Holy Scripture, the Two Sacraments, at least
in the Name and Order of them; and who has made an Agreement to own, defend,
and stand by all the Necessary Articles of the Christian Faith (which is the
only Foundation of the True Church) I say then such a People, that has all the
Necessaries and Essentials of a True Church, and yet is no Church at all (how
Phanatical this is) let all Wise men judge? But,

2. As such a Sentiment must needs be a Contradiction to such a Supposition; so
it concludes that there is no Church at all: For if a People under such
Qualifications be no Church, then there can be no such thing as a True Church
in the World. For the Sectaries cannot be a True Church, because either they
have made no Solemn Covenant with God and one with another, which is the only
right Basis and Foundation of a Church State, or if they have, it cannot be
better than that already set forth: And then the same cause issuses in the same
Effect. And that the Sectaries are the True Church of God and no other, I
cannot yet be well satisfied; because the greatest number of them do hold
Principles dangerously Heretical and most abominably Abusive of the most Holy
and Blessed God: Such as indeed do no less in their direct Consequences than
un-god Him, by making of him the greatest Author of Mischief in the World, and
the Transactor of such profound Folly, that was never yet found in any weak and
silly Mortal under Heaven: And all this by their idle Dreams about his
Peremptory and Eternal Decrees. For if, as they hold, God has so limited his
Power and bound up his own Hands (by unalterable Decrees) as that he has left
himself no Liberty to advance the most Excellent and Virtuous, nor to degrade
the most Profligate and Vile, what greater Folly can be found amongst Mortal
Men? If those they call the Elect shall deny his Being, blaspheme him to his
Face, confront his Soveraignity, wrest the Scepter from him, trample upon his
Holy Name and Glory, laugh at the indignities and contempt cast upon his most
Sacred Image, yet they are as sure to be saved, as Heaven is to abide: And as
firmly fastened to the highest Station in Glory (to which they were designed)
as are the chiefest order of Angles. And if any of the other part, viz. the not
Elect, shall plead for God, vindicate his Name, defend his Soveraignity, and
maintain his Honor to the last end of their Life and Power, yet to the Regions
of Darkness they must go, to bear Beelzebub and his Black Tribe company, to
take their ever to be lamented and dismal Lot; with Cain and Judas; because God
has left himself no power or liberty to reward them for their good Service.

Oh excellent and stupendous Folly! did ever Traveller to the utmost Mountains
meet with the like in the Ruler of any People. Neither is this all, but indeed
the least part of what they impute to the best of Beings. For he is the
greatest, nay the sole Author of all the Mischiefs in the World. Did Beelzebub
transgress in Heaven? Did Adam fall in Paradise? Did Cain kill Abel? Simeon and
Levi murder the Men of Sechim? Did David commit Adultery, and treacherously
murder Vriah? 'Twas the inevitable Fate of the Divine Decrees God ordained
Judas to betray Jesus, the Jews by wicked hands to slay him, Solomon to have a
Thousand Whores, all the Roman Emperors and Popes to make Bloody Shambles of
the Christian World by Barbarous Butcheries; that when Men are Drunk, Lie,
Swear, Blaspheme, challenge God to damn them; when they Rob, Steal, Shed Blood,
are sent to Newgate and Tyborn for Felonies, poor miserable Wretches they could
no ways help it; an Irresistible Destiny was the cause of it: And yet that they
should be hanged here, and damned hereafter, for doing of it, although by the same
God forbidden, and commanded to the contrary with the greatest Threats and
Seriousness: If there can be such a profound Dissembler, such a deceitful
Worker, such an horrible Contriver, such an evil Ordainer, and mischievous
Author, that is not a great and mighty Devil, I will confess my self mistaken.
Now if a sound and true Notion of God, be the first and foundation Principle of
Religion, and consequently of a True Church, then suce as have it not; but the
manifest and direct contrary, can be no True Church, because upon a wicked and
false Foundation. Such I am sure there are among the Sectaries, and if such a
Villainous Body of People is the best and the true Church, that even in their
first and main Principle thus bloodily murder their Maker in his most
admirable Attributes of Wisdom, Holiness, and Goodness; I do wonder in my mind
what kind of people the World is. If Jacob said of the little Murder his Sons
committed upon Men, Cursed be their Anger for it was fierce; and their Wrath,
for it was cruel: O my Soul, come not thou into their secret, unto their
assembly, mine honor, be not thou united; to them: what shall we say of such
Monsters that murder God their Maker? Shall we join with them as a Pious
Church?

But to put the Matter further out of Doubt, if it can be, that the Sectaries
cannot be a Church in the best sense, because they are so giddy and foolish, as
that they want Wit and Policy for Church Government, and so penurious and
covetous, that they will not allow what is requisite to the keeping up of a
Church State: And can any man imagine that ever the most Wise and Good God
would trust a Church State in the hands of such Men?

For their Wit and Policy, take a short Specimen of it.

1. Would they have our Archbishops down? Yes no doubt.

2. Would they have the rest of the Bishops down? Yes.

3. Would they have the best Clergy about the City and Suburbs of London down?
Yes.

4. Would they have all the Clergy of England down? Yes.

5. Would they have all the Ecclesiastical Revenues (viz.) the unlawful
Maintenance by Tithes down? Yes.

6. Would they have all the Schools of Learning in both Universities down? Yes.
Because the Language of the Beast, that opposes the Spirits Teaching (set forth
by Samuel How) comes from thence.

7. Would they have the Laws that do force the Covetous to pay Parish Levies
for the Maintenance of the poor down? Yes. Because no Rule for it in Scripture.

Very well, then, raze Babylon by the very Foundations.

But hearken Brethren, Here is a very large empty space, and seeing Nature
abhors a Vacuity, what shall we leave nothing to fill up again? Must all the
People and Parishes of England be totally left without Preachers? Oh! No by no
means. How then, good now? Why they must all have recourse to us, and we must
supply them. That is it, Sir, That the Sectaries do aim at, to have all the
People come to them (and that is the meaning of so many new public places
being erected) and then for a filling up this large empty space.

1. You shall in the room of the two Archbishops, viz. Canterbury and York,
have a Tinker and a Tailor, men of great confidence and long standing.

2. For the Four great Bishoprics of London, Winchester, Ely, and Durham, you
shall have a Waterman, a Shoemaker, a Coffee-man, and a Hat-Dresser.

3. For the other Bishops, and the Clergy about the City and Suburbs of London,
you shall have Men of an inferior Rank to these in point of Learning and
Ability, and Suppliments for all the rest suitable hereunto against the next
Debate. In the mean while will it be amiss to send to France, Germany, and the
Low Countries, to acquaint them with what an honorable Reformation in England
is desired and pursued by a great many. But having thus discoursed a little
about their Wit, we come now to their Covetousness, which is inconsistent with
a Church State, and the good Government thereof; which take in Three Instances.

1. For Forty years last past they have made no Bank, built no Free Schools,
purchased no Church Lands, not so much as will be sufficient to support their
own Party.

2. They have lived in the total neglect of that great Moral Duty of paying to
God the Tenths of their Increase; which the Patriarchs before the Law made so
much Conscience of: and the detaining of which God accounts the highest Act of
Robbery, even no less than a Robbing of God himself: Mal. 3.8, 9.

3. For the Rich and Trading part of them, before they will consent to have all
things common, as the Christians in the Primitive Times had (as well as Water
Baptism and laying on of Hands) they will see the poor suffer, and their
Preaches go a Begging; as I have known ^^^ers of them has done.

Now Sir, This people neglecting to make provision for them of their own
Household, and thereby denying the Faith, and become worse than Infidels, as
they are not to be trusted with the Government of a National Church, so they
cannot be a Right and True Church themselves in the best Sense. And if neither
these nor the Church of England be the True Church, then the Church of Rome
must, or else where shall we find it? Tho Sir I do love the People of the
Romish-Communion well, yet am very loath it should be accounted the True and
Right Church, and come into Esteem amongst us under that Notion; because it may
be inconvenient upon diverse Accounts.

1. We shall then be in danger of having a Popish Parliament, which will be
always troubling and tempting our Kings to let in Popery; which will be a
Violation of the Sacred Oath and high Impeachment of their Integrity and Honor
(and then our English Church will be new modeled, all our best Ministers
turned out of the best Benefices, which must be resigned up to a Herd of
Pharaoh's lean Kine, that will come flocking in like the Armies of Flies and
Froggs upon the Land of Egypt. Our good Book of Common Prayer will be changed,
then which I think few or none can make a better. The Writ Haeretico Comburendo
will be restored again to its former force, and thereby the best Defenders of
our Religion against Popery be forced to pledge Philpot and Cranmer, Ridley and
Latimer, in a warm Cup of Smithfield Flames. All our Married Clergy must be
reputed Fornicators, their Wives accounted Whores, and their Children Bastards,
to the exceeding great grief and sorrow of their Aged Parents on both sides,
who carefully placed their Sons out to Learning on the one hand, that thereby
they might come to honor: and most tenderly brought up their Daughters like
Ladies on the other hand; gave good portions with them, and thought them
preferred when matched to the settled Clergy: not dreaming of a perpetual
Reproach and Infamy upon their posterity, etc. All our Nobles and Gentry will
lose a great part of their Estates, which was formerly Church Lands, and still
laid claim to by the Roman Church, to the lessening of their Revenue, impairing
their Honor, and provocation to their Offspring. The People will be generally
filled with discontent, who are strangely possessed with a dislike and fear of
Popery. London will much abate in his Trade and Grandeur. All Protestant
Merchants will be put to flight into other Countries to save their own and the
lives of their dear beloved Ladies, whom they value above themselves. The whole
Land from Dan to Beersheba will be inslaved so insufferably by an ignorant and
unclean Brood, that there will be a necessity to keep up a standing Army to awe
the People into a quiet Subjection: And this kind of Red-Coat Slavery the
Nation of England never approved. Besides many do fear, if Popery comes in,
there will yet be many more places set on fire, to the prejudice of the whole
Kingdom. We should now have come to the little Objections made by the Sectaries
against taking the Sacrament with the English Church, as that there are ill
Members in it, and they enjoined to take it Kneeling, and the like: But a
further progress in a way of Answer, shall be deferred to a New Command from
you. And dear Sir, after giving you Toleration to expose the first Argument
relating to this Design, if you think it may be serviceable to the public, I
admit your mind to a pleasant Recess, and rest

Your very humble and most obliged Servant, etc.

FINIS.
POSTCRIPT.
SInce the Printing and Publishing of this Book at first by the Author, he
fiill'd up the place of a Zealous and Strict Conformist, till within three
Months last past he appeared Extraordinary dejected and discomposed: And to
many that came to visit him, he Expressed himself as a Person under dreadful
Agonies and Horror in his Conscience; particularly acknowledging the just Hand
of God to be upon him for Scandalizing and Misrepresenting the Persons and
Principles (as he called them) of Thousands and te^ Thousands good and just
Men: By this Book. He was sometimes very free to Discours^ those that came to
visit him; greatly bewailing his Lamentable Condition; but he hat^ been more
reserved for a Month last past: And in the height of Desperation Hanged himself
with his own Girdle fastened to a wooden Pin in the Wall on the Seller-stairs in
hi^ own House, on Monday the 13th of October, about five a Clock in the
Afternoon* Leaving behind him a Disconsolate Widow and four small Children.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Reader is desired to take Notice that there is now preparing for the
Press, a Account of the Life and Death of the said John Child: Containing a
faithful Account of all the Remarkable passages during his Desperation:
Printed and Published by the publisher of this Paper.


