Articles of Peace, Ratiffied and Confirmed between the King of Denmark, AND
THE House of Lunenburgh. 19. Oct. 1693
Licenses, October the 17th. 1693.

IN the Name of the holy Trinity. Be it known to all Men by these Presents,
That the Differences happened between His Majesty the King of Denmark, Norway,
Vandals, Gother, etc. on the one part, and the most Illustrious House of
Brunzwich, Lunenburgh, Zell, and Hannouer, etc. on the other; upon Account of
the New Fortifications, made at Ratzeburgh, and of a considerable Number of
Troops; which having passed the Elbe, have been put there in Garrison by the
said most Illustrious House, have been at last admirably Annimated in the
Manner following, by the Intercession of His Imperial Majesty, of Their
Majesty's, the Kings of Sweden, and of Great Britain; of His Electoral Highness
of Brandenburgh, and of the High and Mighty Lords, the StatesGeneral of the
United Provinces: Who, to prevent the troublesome Consequences thereof, have
Interposed their good Offices: and promised Their general Guarantee, and each
of them in particular.

I. That the ancient Amity and Consience shall by the present Treaty be Renewed
and Re-established between His Majesty, the King of Denmark, and the most
Illustrious House of Brunzwich, Lunenburgh, and all that might have been done
on the one side or other, upon the Account of the abovementioned Differences,
shall be entirely forgot.

II. The said most Illustrious House, etc. declares, That She will demolish the
Fortifications, made as well within as without Ratzeburgh, and that She will
begin to cause Work thereupon the next day, after the Exchange of the
Ratiffications of the present Treaty, and shall continue the same without
Intermission, and with such Diligence, that they may be entirely demolished in
Three Weeks at furthest.

III. The said most Illustrious House, etc. further declares, That so soon as
the said Demolishing of Ratzeburgh, shall be entirely perfected, She will
withdraw all the Troops She had put therein, into Her own Territories, and on
the other side the Elbe, except 200 Men, which She may leave there, to keep the
Possession of the Principality, which She reserves to Her self, and to the
whole abovementioned most Illustrious House of Brunzwich, Lunenburgh.

IV. His Danish Majesty declares on the other Hand, That after the Exchange of
the Ratiffications of the said Treaty, he will withdraw into His Obedience all
the Troops that He has, as well before Ratzhurgh, as in all the Country of
Saxe, Lauwenburgh, promising to begin the next day after the said Exchange, and
to evacuate in Four Days the said Country of Lauwenburgh, excepting only Two
Regiments of Cavalry, and Six Battalions of Infantry, which shall remain with
the Artillery Fourteen Days at most, after the Ratiffication, in case that
these and the Artillery cannot depart the said Country sooner, on Condition
that the said Two Regiments of Cavalry, and Six Battalions of Infantry, can
exact nothing of the Country, except Forage only, and that His Majesty shall
cause, provide them with Bread, and other things necessary for their
Subsistence: In the mean time, the going in and out shall be free at
Ratzeburgh, after signing the Treaty, and the Artillery shall be likewise
removed from the Post without delay, after the Ratiffication, and transported
half a League from the said Ratzeburgh, where the Troops that are to remain
till the entire Evacuation of the Country; which, as it is already said, ought
to be done in Fourteen Days at furthest, after the Ratiffication, shall also
subsist.

V. It has been further agreed, That from the day of Signing the Treaty, all
Hostilities shall cease on both sides, and first on the part of His said
Majesty, no new Impositions can be exacted nor imposed upon the Country beyond
the Imposition, made and Intimated in the Month of August last.

As also that the Danish Generals in their Retreat, shall cause a good Order
and Discipline to be kept, so that the Contreveeners shall be punished
according to the Crime.

VI. That His Majesty shall not concern himself, nor employ any Interest in the
Affair of the Succession of Saxe, Lauwenburgh, in Opposition to the said most
Illustrious House of Brunzwich, Lunenburgh, and shall not trouble the same
Directly nor Indirectly in the said House, but shall stand to the decision that
shall be given by the appointed Arbitrators.

VII. And finally, That the above mentioned High and Mighty Mediators have
promised to secure the present Treaty, and faithfully to Maintain the Executors
thereof.

The rest contains the usual Formality Subscriptions of the Parties, and of the
Mediators, the Date, and the Seals of the one, and the others; with the Acts of
Exchange of Ratiffications, which we have not thought necessary here to relate.

London, Printed for R. Hayhurst, in Little-Britain, 1693.


