A WHIP FOR THE LECTURERS OF LEWIS, And for all those PRESBYTERIANS, and others
of the CLERGY which maintain that damnable opinion of absolute Reprobation,
according to the sense of the within written paper. With an exact Copy of two
several Letters sent unto the said Lecturers, wherein the Author desires
satisfaction concerning the said opinion, with an Answer to one of the said
Letters, being a true Copy also. By EDWARD CHOUNE of Kingston-Bowsey, in the
County of SUSSEX.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold at Mr Richard Dodsons shop,
a Goldsmith at Lewis, near the Market-house, in Sussex. 1657.

To all Christian people, but especially unto all those that live under the
Ministry of a parcel of Juggling Priests, being many of them LECTURERS of
LEWIS in the County of SUSSEX; Mr Pickering of Lewis, and Mr Newton of
Kingston-Bowsey, being two of them.
Good Christian,
ALthough I am no scholar to brangle in a sophistical way, with some Ministers
which maintain that blasphemous opinion of absolute reprobation, but blessed be
God, there are very many Ministers which are very well able to encounter them,
and well known to be better scholars then themselves; yet by the mercies of
God, and education of my Parents, I have been trained up in such a measure of
learning, as has enabled me to understand plain English. I was 39 years of age
before I did think there could be such a horrid opinion, as absolute
reprobation harbored amongst Christians; and do believe, for ought I know, I
might have lived 39 years longer, before I should have needed to have troubled
my thoughts with such a whimsey, had not Mr Newton the Minister of my Parish,
about two years and a half since, played the fool in making of it a pulpit story
in these very words following:

I would have you enquire of God Almighty, whether he had passed his decree of
reprobation against you, or no; in case he had, he was just, no hope of
recovery.

Which bloody inquisition did so set me in a fire, that I have many times
labored with the said Mr Newton, and many other Divines whose judgments were
for it, and against it, to be well satisfied; since which time, I thank my God,
I have studied the Scriptures more then formerly; I have also enquired into
men's works on both sides, and at this present I do find my self in such a happy
condition, that the wit of man by Scripture and reason is not able to quench
that fire which was first kindled in me, as aforesaid; and I do new think it is
not possible for me to do God greater service, then by reviling this sort of
people in all places, and upon all occasions, with the highest expressions that
is possible for the wit of man to invent.

This written paper, thou may call it what thou please, it being a
business of high concernment, in respect of men's salvation; my desire is that
thou would read it twice over before thou pass thy censure; if thou do
approve of it, I have my desire: and thou may do well to acquaint thy
neighbors and relations in what manner we are led by the nose with such a
juggling Ministry; and if thou do not approve of it, but do think I have
offended the Laws of God and man, thou may do well to acquaint Authority
with these my actions, for I desire no favor; for the Ministers about Lewis
are such dunces that they dare not come upon the stage; I have often dared them
unto it, and not one of them dares to engage, therefore let the world judge if
their cause does not stink in the nostrils of God and man, upon several
considerations more, both in respect of the glory of God, and men's eternal
welfare, I can give when I am thereunto called. I am now resolved to make them
ashamed of their private damnable erroneous opinion, or else they shall make me
ashamed of my rashness, if there has been any in me: Thus leaving all unto
your Christian consideration, I remain,

Yours in Christ Jesus, EDWARD CHOUNE.
Kingston-Bowsey, April 15. 1657.
A Copy of the LETTER sent unto the LECTURERS of LEWIS.
Gentlemen,
NOtwithstanding what I have formerly writ unto Mr Pickering and Mr Newton, and
to some others of the Lecturers of Brighthelmeston concerning an opinion they
maintain, I will also make bold to give you a particular of it; doubtless it is
a subject of high concernment in respect of men's salvation, but yet being
questioned by such a man as my self, who am no scholar, I know it disrelisheth
with many; but considering the censure of men cannot be greater against me for
writing the opinion of others, then it is against many Ministers who preach
other men's works verbatim; and against all Ministers who preach nothing but was
taught before they were borne; and doubtless those which own this opinion, for
the most part of their preaching is nothing but a parcel of nonsense,
therefore I care less for their censures.

Now I will state the business in difference betwixt us, in as brief a way as I
can, hoping I may receive some satisfaction, which is more then ever I could do
from them in the least degree.

About one year and an half since, Mr Newton the Minister of my Parish
delivered in his pulpit, How that all of us should enquire of God whether he
had passed his decree of Reprobation against us or no, in case he had, he was
just, and no hopes of recovery.

This confounded doctrine did so puzzle me, that I could not be at quiet, but
addressing my self unto Gods word, I found much comfort, and did begin to be
satisfied that God intended no such matter: And then I challenged him for his
doctrine, which he ingeniously confessed he did deliver, saying, He knew no
better way to make our callings and elections sure, then by such an inquisition.

Afterward I did repair to many Divines, who did satisfy me it was thundering
doctrine, and did wish me to read several books which I have now lying by me,
which do make appear their damnable opinion of absolute reprobation, to be most
horrid blasphemy, being against the whole Scripture, all the Attributes of God,
and our own reason; for the books say they have no color of Scripture to
maintain it, and there is the whole current of the Scripture against them, that
Reprobation is a conditional thing, and that men shall not be damned for not
doing impossibilities, as they most wickedly affirm they shall, which I now
shall make appear by their opinion.

Since discoursing with Mr Pickering and Mr Newton, they say and will maintain
as a truth of God, that there is never a soul which now lies damned in bell,
nor never a soul which shall hereafter be damned in hell, could have, or can
have whilst they live here on the earth any possible means by Christ Jesus his
death, or by the preaching and praying of Ministers, though the Scriptures say,
the prayers of the faithful avails much with God for sinners; nor yet by all
the endeavors that is possible the creature can use, will any thing avail with
God to free themselves from that place of to meant.

And also maintain that as God has ordained the end of the reprobate, which is
damnation; so has he ordained the means tending unto their damnation.

These opinions appearing so dreadful unto me, I have often solicited them how
I might hear them preach and pray with any comfort; for answering me in
writing, they are so ashamed of their opinion, that they would never set pen to
paper for to give the least satisfaction; and all the sum of their discourse
is nothing but this, if a man be not reprobated he shall be sure to have
comfort by their preaching; which for my part I think if there be no more
satisfaction to be given for this simple opinion, all you Ministers may go into
your pulpits and tell us stories of Tom an Oaks and John a Styles, and as much
good it will do in respect of our salvations.

I have heard one of them should say I were so wilful I would not be satisfied,
whereupon I writ unto them, if they did but give Mr Smith and Mr Mountague,
both Ministers who are not unknown unto you, satisfaction, I would then
acknowledge my rashness; but instead of giving them satisfaction, upon a
Sunday, Mr Newton having not the fear of God before his eyes, told me a most
damnable lie of Mr Smith, saying, he disavowed my opinion, much wondering at me;
I admiring at this change in Mr Smith, meeting with him that week, did charge
him with it; he professed to me that he did not deny it in the least tittle;
but told me, Mr Pickering desired to speak with him; they did meet, and Mr
Pickering had framed a writing about the opinion, and was very importunate for
Mr Smith to set his hand unto it, which he refused to do, telling Mr Pickering
they were not to preach unto stocks and stones, but unto rational creatures; as
for Mr Mountague he denied his setting his hand unto Mr Pickerings writing
also, and I suppose is unmovable in respect of this opinion; now let the world
judge if Mr Newton did not tell a most wilful lie of Mr Smith.

A man would much wonder to see men quote St Augustine, Bishop Overal, the
Church of England, and many others to maintain both sides opinions, being as
much difference as there is betwixt light and darkness. I will instance in some
of their sayings, as they are quoted unto me; Bish. Davenant quotes Austin in
these words, Whether ye run, or sleep, or whether ye receive the word into your
hearts, or reject it, yet in the conclusion ye shall be such as God who is
invincible decreed you should be. This says Davenant, is a most true doctrine,
but because in the manner of propounding it seems to separate the end from
the means, and invite men unto slothfulness; therefore as it is most true, so
it is most wicked to teach. The other side quotes Austin in these words; We
abominate the blasphemy of those who teach that any thing is commanded of God
which is impossible for man to do; and also says, that Austin shall speak so
plainly and as strongly to maintain reprobation to be a conditional thing, as
any man that can be bribed to be an advocate or a witness. Bishop Davenant
quotes the Church of England, and Bishop Overall calling him the judicious
Bishop, to maintain that God by his eternal decree, did give his infallible
grace unto some for bringing them to glory, which he resolved not to bestow
unto others which must perish. The other side quotes the Church of England,
saying, it is precisely the judgment of the Church; and quotes Bishop Overol
for the interpreting the mind of her articles in this particular, that
reprobation is a conditional thing; and saying, he was as well able to do it as
any man that ever lived; also quoting the 2.7. and 31. Articles to make it
good. I will write down the 31 Article; The oblation of Christ once made, is a
perfect redemption, propitiation, and satisfaction for all the sins of the
whole world, as well original as actual. Either those men which I have read on
both sides are mistaken in their interpretations, or else St Austin, Bishop
Overall, and the framers of the Articles of the Church of England, and others,
were fools and knaves, to write such things for the showing themselves to be
Jack on both sides; yet I confess this wonder may quickly cease, considering a
Proverb now used, that men are not ashamed in making Gods word a Nose of Wax
for the framing of it unto any fashion: doubtless a man may quote thousands of
places of Scripture, which do evidently make it appear that reprobation is a
conditional thing. I will instance in but a few, and them I will forbear
writing down, knowing who I write unto, as Deuteronomy. 5.29. Psalm. 7.13. the whole 15
Psalm. and Psalm. 81.14, 15. Psalm. 145.9. Ezekiel. 18.21. and 33.11. Hosea 13.9.
Micah 7.18. Matthew. 25.41. Mark 16.15. Luke 13.34. and 19.42. John 1.9. and
3.19. Acts 17.30. Romans 14.15. 1 Cor 8.11. 1 John 2.2. 1 Timothy 4.6 2 Pet. 3 9 now
if all these places cited do not sufficiently prove reprobation to be a
conditional thing, and that every son of Adam, especially all those that live
under the sound of the Gospel are in a capacity of salvation, notwithstanding
any decree of God. For my part I do verily believe it is not a three penny
matter whether Christ had ever shed any blood, or whether there were any
Scripture or no; and also no matter whether ever any Minister preach or pray
more. This is my belief, if I am in an error, the Lord help and instruct me;
for if God has decreed from all eternity, infallibly to save the smallest
part, and infallibly to damn the greatest part of mankind; I would fain see
any rational cause given, why all men should be invited to look heavenward,
when this cursed opinion says, all the Devils in hell cannot keep one of the
elect from glory, and all the saint-like actions in the world that is posble
for the creature to do, cannot keep one of the reprobates from damnation.

But I thank my God, being of a contrary judgment I do think Christ shedding
his blood, the Scriptures, and the praying and preaching of Ministers to be all
very necessary unto salvation.

I hearing Mr Newton preach about a month since, did like his Sermon and
Prayer very well, because it did not clash with the Scripture, but very much
with his opinion. I sent him a Letter, with some of the heads of his Sermon and
Prayer, advising him if he could make it appear that the doctrine of his Sermon
and Prayer did not contradict his private judgment, before any rational man,
that then I would very willingly shake hands with him concerning his opinion:
and telling him whereas I had not heard him preach above three or four times
for above a twelve month; I should hope to be a constant hearer of him, and
also be very sorry for what I have writ and said against him and others
formerly; and for the time to come, I should think my self an accursed of God,
if I should continue in that reviling and railing way against them; and also
that I could not go to Church upon any other account, until I were satisfied,
then Christ bid his Disciples and the multitude go to hear the Scribes and
Pharisees; and doubtless I may say of these men as heretics and dissemblers,
Matthew. 23.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. verse. what they bid you observe, that observe and do;
for they say and do not; so we may say of these men being rotten Calvinists in
this opinion, and Arminians in their Pulpits; for they believe one thing, and
say clean contrary; several other reasons I did give, as my wife being
unsatisfied, which was no small trouble unto me; and also for the disciplining
of my family in the ways of God; and how that many of my friends and
acquaintance do think me a very factions and dissenting man, though I could
never hear any give any other then a popish reason, because I will not believe
as my Priest believes; which belief as yet is nonsense unto me, but all would
not prevail with him, neither now nor before, to set pen to paper to give me
the least satisfaction. Now Gentlemen, if you think their opinion to be a truth
of God, which for my part as yet I say God for bid it should, then my earnest
suit unto you is, that all or some one of you would do that Christianlike
favor as to give me a plain and distinct answer unto Three Questions which I
shall propose: The first question is, that God having ordained that the
greatest part of mankind shall certainly perish for their sins, not having any
means given from above tending unto their salvation:

That whether all those souls that shall so perish are not damned for not doing
impossibilities.

The second question is, they say as God has ordained the end of the
reprobates, which is damnation, so has he ordained the means tending unto
their damnation:

For this I desire to know how God can be excused from not being called the
absolute Author of sin, which is blasphemy of the highest degree.

The third question is to give a reason why should all sorts of Ministers, in
very many of their Sermons, be very commonly bawling and crying upon every man,
telling us it is our own faults, and for our own wickedness God will damn us,
and that they have discharged their duties in telling us of our sins, and of
the dangerous consequence that will follow, which is Hellfire, and so
persuading us to repentance and amendment of life, that we may attain
everlasting glory; and so we may thank our selves for our own damnation,
because we would not believe and repent, when their cursed opinion stares them
in the face, with a lie, that we could not believe and repent, because of Gods
decree; so that now if you please to make a satisfactory answer unto these
three Questions here propounded, I am confident both my self and many thousands
more, will have very high thoughts both of your selves and also of that opinion.

In regard I did make bold with Mr Smith and Mr Montagues names formerly for to
receive satisfaction of Mr Pickering and Mr Newton, it being a business of so
high a nature in respect of men's salvations; I will once more presume upon
their goodness, as not to take exceptions that I will nominate them again; and
in case they do receive satisfaction from you in writing within a month, I
hope that then I shall not be so refractory, but to acknowledge my rashness.

I do believe I am much envyed by many men of your coats, for the writing such
harsh language, concerning Mr Pickering and Mr Newton, in saying if they would
not give a satisfactory answer unto my Letter about this opinion, men would not
only think them a parcel of dunstical fellows, but also judge them a parcel of
mercenary Priests, more fitting for to keep Hogs then to continue in the
Ministry, for to befool the people any longer. I confess for Mr Pickerings
part, I could wish I had been a little more sparing; but assure your selves, I
can show cause for it; but for Mr Newtons part, if it had been five times
worse, he had but his deserts; but I hope my writing in that language unto
them, your charities will be such that you will not refuse the answering of
this; in case you should, my desire is, for you to do me the favor in
presenting my service by a Letter unto Dr Channel, who in the esteem of the
world is a very eminent knowing man; I do not doubt but he will endeavor to
clear this point of conscience; which I profess before Almighty God, there is
nothing I aim at more, then to have my mind and conscience well settled, which
has broken more hours of sleep with me, then every one can imagine; but in
case none of you will answer it, let me desire this one favor of you, that you
will speedily acquaint Colonel Morley with this writing or some other knowing
Justice of the Peace, that if it do appear I have offended the laws of God, or
man, I shall desire no favor; and if I have not offended, I hope they may be
as instruments for the stopping of the mouths of all such juggling Teachers: So
concludes he whose mite of prayer I hope shall never be wanting to be cast
into the treasury of the Almighty for the peace of Jerusalem.

Kingston-Bowsey, Jan. 26. 1655. EDWARD CHOUNE.

A Copy of the Answer unto this fore written Letter, I received fom the
Lecturers of Lewis and Brighthelmeston.
Sir,
WE judge it needless to answer your paper in writing, you have a full answer
in those who have answered your Authors, who strengthen you in your opinions,
as in Bishop Carleton, Dr Featly, Bishop Davenant, Dr Kendall, Dr Twisse, Dr
Prideaux, Dr Ames; read some of these with a single eye, pray for
understanding, if any scruple remain, we shall at all opportunities by
conserring either jointly or severally, and when you please clear the truth
unto you, provided that you come in the spirit of meekness; take notice that
the truths which you decry as horrid and cursed, are held forth in the public
confessions of the Protestant Church beyond the Seas, in the Articles of
Religion and Confessions of Faith of the Church of England, whereof you profess
your self a member; what you utter or write, let it be against those, and in
their own words, not as you report opinions to render them odious; we pass over
your unchristian language, praying the Lord to give you pardon and repentance,
and to grant you the spirit of truth, who is also the spirit of meekness, that
he may lead you into all truth; casting down your reasonings, and bringing into
captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, to whose grace you are
commended by your well wishing friends,

The Lecturers of Lewis and Brighthelmston.
I received this the 12 of March, 1655. they sending it without dating.
A Copy of the Answer unto this Letter before written.
Sirs,
I Received a thing like a Letter, with no man's hand unto it, wherein you judge
my Paper sent unto you concerning absolute reprobation, needless to be
answered, in regard some learned Bishops and Doctors have answered my Authors
fully as you say; wishing me to read their works with a single eye, and then if
any scruple arise, if I come unto you with the spirit of meekness, you would by
conference clear the truth; for what I have read, and heard, of Bishop
Davenant, Doctor Twisse, and Doctor Prideaux, it has more confirmed and
strengthened me in my opinion then otherwise; it is above a year since that I
did first speak and write unto many of you upon several Christian
considerations, to give me some satisfaction; and now at the last you have sent
me a piece of Paper, which is little better worth then to wipe ones breech, for
any satisfaction I can see in it. Now if this be all the advice you can give
me, let me desire you, all that writ unto me, for to accept of the same advice
from me: In the first place, with an honest and conscientious heart read the
word of God: Austin and Tertullian being quoted unto me, I will also put you in
mind of their sayings: Austin says you must not contradict plain places of
Scripture, because your shallow brains cannot comprehend the obscure:
Tertullian says, A few testimonies must receive an exposition answerable unto
the current of the Scriptures, not contrary: And as Mr. Pierce says, Is there
no other way to understand those Texts in Romans 9. then to make those Texts
which sound severely, to clash with those that sound compassionately? let us
not do so, having a thousand compassionate plain places of Scripture, unto one
harsh and obscure: read also Bishop Montague, and he will tell you that you
swerve from the Church of England, in maintaining your erroneous point of
absolute reprobation; one of my Authors quoted Bishop Overal in his
interpretation of the 39. Articles, who says the maintenance of absolute
reprobation is precisely against the judgment of the Church of England, pray
read also Bishop Harsnets Sermon on Ezekiel 33. v. 11. which will tell you your
blasphemous opinion is grown high and monstrous, that it is like unto Goliath
that men tremble and shake at it, and no man reaches his hand to David's sling
to cast it down, but in the name of the Lord of hosts we will encounter it, for
it has not reviled the host of the living God, but the God of hosts: read also
Doctor Jacksons Treatise on Gods attributes: Doctor Hammonds Fundamentals, who
will tell you, that your opinion is against the judgment of the Church of
England; read Doctor Potters Apology, Mr. Goodwin his agreement and distance of
the brethren, read also Haggars Stoics, and Moalamb on Romans 9. and many other
books, but beyond all compare let me commend unto you Mr. Hoord and Mr.
Piercy's books, for I believe they have so sufficiently maintained that
doctrine against your blasphemous opinion, as they call it, of absolute
reprobation, both by Scripture, by Antiquity, and by Reason, that the wit of
man is not able to give any considerable answer by Scripture, by Antiquity, by
Reason to gainsay it; doubtless these men will give you satisfaction if any
scruple do arise. My desire is that any two of you Lecturers will give me a
meeting, five, ten, or twenty miles from home, and I will meet you, and by Gods
help will give you better satisfaction for the maintenance of my opinion, then
ever I received from any of you against it, provided you will come with an
humble spirit, keeping close unto the Scriptures, and cast away all carnal
inventions; but to meet a multitude, I will not be baited at, or for fear I may
be jugled out of my wits by such a company: you would have me also utter and
write against the Protestants beyond the Seas, and the Framers of the Articles
of the Church of England. And in their words, for the greatest part of the
Protestants beyond the Sea, holds against your wretched opinion, as I have been
well satisfied, and will sooner close with the Papists in respect of their
religion then with your selves; as for the Church of England, the framers of
the Articles, have left them in such a dubious way, that some Bishops, and
Doctors, and other inferior Ministers do interpret the Articles absolutely
against that horrid point of absolute reprobation, and some Bishops, Doctors,
and other inferior Ministers do interpret the same articles, making absolute
reprobation a truth of God, just as they do the Scripture, framing it unto any
fashion or shape. Now if this be a truth, as you maintain, that God by his
eternal and unalterable decree, has elected the smallest part of mankind
infallibly unto glory, and reprobated the greatest part of mankind unto
damnation; I would fain hear any rational man give a reason, why it should be
an error in me for saying, I would not give three pence a dozen for all the
Bishops, Doctors, and other inferior Ministers in Christendom, unless I had a
commission to sell them to the great Turk; and also for my wondering that our
forefathers should so unadvisedly suffer these drones to suck so much of the
good of the land, as allowing in all places the Tenth of the Revenues, and in
many places to my knowledge at this day they enjoy the sixth part of the
Revenues of the land; and beyond sea amongst the Papists, as I have read, all
sorts of their dronish Clergy enjoy almost half of the revenues of their lands;
now if this be a truth of God, what is the Priests work, both here and beyond
sea, but only to enslave men's consciences whilst they live here on earth? and
I would fain see any judicious man who renounceth his believing, because his
Priest believes it, to give a satisfactory answer, why so many bagpipe players
as there are Priests, which may be competently maintained with an hundredth
part of the Priests charge, may not do God and man as good service in respect
of men's salvation, to keep one merry day in a week, let it be Sunday or any
other day, either in this Nation or in any other part of the world; provided
that that judicious man shall grant that which all you maintain, that is, that
all the Devils in Hell cannot keep one of the Elect from glory; neither Christ
Jesus, nor all the Saint-like actions in the world that is possible for the
creature to do, can keep one of the reprobates from damnation; this being
granted, if I am in an error, I have a longing desire to be convinced by
Scripture and reason. I have already written to you under my hand, which
opinion I suppose you maintain, because I never heard from you, that I had
belied you in the least degree: as for rendering your opinion odious, and for
giving the maintainers of it, that true character of juglers; I am very
confident I cannot do God greater service then by so doing, as long as you
maintain one thing privately, and preach publicly clean contrary; you write
that you will pass by my unchristian language, and will pray unto the Lord for
my pardon and repentance: For my unchristian language, I know of none I used
toward you, unless you will acknowledge it is unchristian language, to call
blasphemers, Jesuits Jews, or Turks, by the names of dissemblers, or juglers;
if you do, then I must confess I have touched your copyholds. For your prayers,
I am not sensible I have sinned against the most high in that particular;
therefore my advice is unto you, as Christ said unto the daughters of Jerusalem,
weep for your selves; I know the Apostle tells us, the prayer of the faithsull
avails much with God for sinners; but I believing your selves not to be of
that number, as long as you continue in that cursed opinion, I will as soon sue
unto the Pope, or to the great Turk for their prayers, as for yours. Thus
desiring the Almighty to open the eyes of our understandings, both of your
selves and my self, and all other people of what Religion soever, that we may
clearly see those things that belong unto our peace, before that peace be taken
from us, or we taken from it, and be no more seen. So rests him that is no
well-willer unto your opinion, and not ashamed to set my hand for the
maintenance of my own.

EDWARD CHOUNE.
Kingston-Bowsey, March 24. 1655. I am assured you will not find two lines more
then in the original Letters.



IT is above a twelve month since I did write both these Letters, I have
several times solicited for Mr Pickering and one Minister more, with two or
three Laics, to give me a meeting, and I to have one Minister, with two or
three men answerable more, they refuse, saying, if I come only, what good they
can they will do, but will have nothing to do with others.

About four or five months since, Mr Newton the Minister of my parish did
recant his blasphemous opinion before my Brother Bray Choune, and my Brother
John Choune and my self; they being both at my house, we all went to hear him
preach; after the Sermon they were much troubled there should be such a
difference betwixt the Minister and my self in our judgment, supposing it to
be, for want of a right understanding, there having been some distance in
affection betwixt my Brother Bray and my self about this judgment, in opposing
the Ministers. I was very importunate with him to send for Mr Newton over,
living but cross the way, and so to endeavor a reconciliation; he did come
over, and after some discourse, in conclusion did own these following words.

I believe all Christians may be saved, quitting the corruption of their own
nature, which is not impossile to do; provided they follow those means which
God has appointed; which means are attainable, in case it be not man's own
fault, there being no decree of God to the contrary. To this his recantation I
have both my Brothers hands.

At the writing of this opinion, he did say he did own it, and also promised
that he would presently set his hand unto it; I answered, if he would, I would
presently burn before their faces all manner of writing, concerning our
difference; and that if he would not swerve from these particulars in his
preaching, nor after by his opinion, I would cut off a piece of my tongue
rather then revile him for keeping unto this opinion; he considering of it, did
say for the present he would not set his hand unto it, but said he did own
every word of it, but would take some farther time for the setting his hand
unto it, and so we parted, he taking this his opinion along with him in writing
to consider of: Since which time he came over unto my house, but refused to set
his hand to the abovesaid opinion, which he formerly owned, before my brothers
and my self as aforesaid, and discoursing with him did find him like the dog
unto the vomit, or the washed sow into the wallowing in the mire, return
again unto the maintaining of his old blasphemous opinion of absolute
reprobation as formerly, how that Christ dyed for none but the Elect, and how
that the greatest part of Mankind shall most certainly perish, having no
means left them for their salvation; that their preaching and praying only
concerns the Elect. I have asked them, Wherefore all those souls which are in
hell, and shall go to hell, are damned? Their mouths are so stopped, that
they can say, For nothing but Adams sin; for which they have no colorable
Scripture to maintain, as ever I heard of; only they pretend Romans 5. will
maintain them, but so poorly, that it cannot hold water; and men of an ordinary
capacity must easily conclude it a piece of nonsense; for in the 18. and 19.
verses of the same Chapter, the same all that were condemned in Adam, the same
all were justified in Christ, and the same many as were made sinners through
the disobedience of Adam, the same many shall be made righteous by the
obedience of Christ. And he also wretchedly maintains according unto a
blasphemous Marginal note on Deuteronomy. 2.30. that as God has appointed the end of
the reprobate, which is damnation; so has he appointed the means tending to
their damnation; notwithstanding a man cannot hear one Sermon of ten but the
whole drift of their Sermons runs clean contrary against this their odious
opinion.

A man would admire that those Ministers that hold this cursed opinion of
absolute reprobation, should not blush, tremble, and quake, for fear of some
present judgment from the all-knowing God, for telling of so many palpable lies
in most of their Sermons they preach, as saying, God would have all to be
saved; and how God swers by his life he does not desire the death of a sinner;
how mournfully he wishes it, O that my people would have hearkened, that it
might go well with them and their children for ever: And Christ came to save
the greatest of sinners, and how he wept over Jerusalem bemoaning them, saying,
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered you together, as a hen
does her chickens, and ye would not? How the greatest of sinners have found
mercy, as David, Manasseh, Peter, and many others, and how Christ was a general
Savior, as Paul says, who was not a reconciliation for our sins only, but
for the sins of the whole world. I say let any man deny this if he can; if this
be not the ordinary way of preaching, in stuffing their Sermons with the free
and universal mercies of God unto the sons of men, and how that always in the
method of Gods dealing with the greatest of sinners, he is so unwilling that
any soul should perish; that he will still have his instruction go before his
destruction; so that if the creature would but seek and knock, God is so
gracious that he upbraids no man; they might both find and have the gate of
heaven opened unto them, for they are sent as Ambassadors from Christ to this
purpose, for to proclaim these rich mercies unto the world, and to entreat us
to be born again, for the preventing of our souls damnation, and are not only
sent to proclaim these rich mercies, but are also sent to assure us, we may
have all our souls saved, if we will not now reject these present offers of
grace; but if we will not believe and repent, the Lord will require our blood
at our own hands, for they have discharged their duties, in telling us of our
sins, and of the dangerous consequence which will follow. Now this is one, I
say, of the great things, which does daily trouble my thoughts, to see these
Ministers which are sent, as they say, Ambassadors from Christ, to proclaim
these precious Gospel truths, as before written; which without doubt they are
so; and yet privately to maintain such a diametrically opposite, and
contradictory opinion, which is such a gallimafry, that no rational man can
tell what to make of it, for to my knowledge, notwithstanding those rich
mercies above written, which they are sent to proclaim, yet they privately
maintain, that there is never a soul in hell, nor any hereafter that shall go
to hell, but that God from all eternity did bar them from all his mercies; that
Christ shed not one drop of blood for them; that Ministers prayers and
preaching does not concern them; that all the Saint-like actions that is
possible for them to do, all will not avail with God to free them, or any one
of them, from that place of torment.

Surely if men were not altogether bewitched unto their Priests, right or
wrong, they might easily discern with half an eye most sordid contradictions,
and also confess that there cannot be greater impostors, juglers, call them
what you will, in any religion amongst the Papists, Jews, or Turks, then these
men are, which would be accounted the only Zelots of the Nation. For my part I
do much wonder that all men which stand in the presence of God to hear them, do
not stand amazed to see this their abominable wickedness, in their offering all
men salvation conditionally, when their damnation is determined absolutely, as
appears by their cursed opinion.

Which damned opinion cuts asunder the very sinews of religion, encourages
profaneness, draws away the strongest enducements unto a holy life; roots up
virtue, plants vice, leaves no place for reward or punishment; for by this
cursed opinion all our actions and ends are fastened at the foot of Gods chair,
leaving us nothing to do, but only to obey our own fates, to follow the duct
of the Stars, or necessity of those Iron thaines we are born under, our end is
pitched, therefore we may sit down and take our ease, and wait what the Lord
will do unto us, for we have our supersedeas.

I will set down the judgment of four or five Authors in their own words, for
the maintenance of universal redemption, which being against their abominable
doctrine of Christ's dying only for the elect; the first Author is Bishop
Latimer, I hope he is authentic, because he was burned for his Religion in
Queen Mary's days; he says in a Sermon of his preached in Lincolnshire, it is
no more but to believe, and has not Christ shed as much blood for Judas as he
did for Peter? Peter believed and was saved, Judas would not believe and was
condemned: and in another Sermon of his says, The preaching of the Gospel is
universal, it appertains to all mankind through the whole earth, their found
is heard, and that there is no man so wicked, but he may have a remedy for his
salvation.

The second Author is Bishop Hooper, who died also a holy Martyr in queen
Mary's days, being against them; some part of his sayings being also for the
maintenance of Universal Redemption, as God accounted in Adams sin, all
mankind being in his loins, worthy death, so accounted in Christ, or to be
saved from death; all those promises that appertained unto the salvation of
Adam and his posterity were made in Christ, and for Christ only, and
appertained to our Fathers and us, as we appertained to Christ, He is the door,
the way, and the life, he is the only Mediator between God and man, without
whom no man can come to the father Celestial, John 1.3, 6. The virtue and
strength of Gods promise extends as far to save man, as the rigor and
justice of the Law for sin to damn man. Romans 5.17.18. For by the offense and
sin of one man death was extended and made common to all men unto condemnation,
as Paul says; so by the justice of the one is derived life unto all men to
justification: as we were in Adam, and partakers of his ill, so we were in him
when God made him a promise of grace, and partakers of the same grace. Not, as
the children of Adam, but as the children of the Promise; and the as sins of
Adam without privilege or exception, extended and appertained unto all Adams,
and every of Adams posterity; so did his promise of Grace generally appertain,
as well to every and singular of Adams posterity, as to Adam, as it is more
plainly expressed, Genesis 15.4, 5. and 17.1. where God promises to bless in the
seed of Abraham all the people of the world. Saint Paul makes no diversity in
Christ, of Jew nor Gentile, as Galat. 3.28. Col. 3.11. Further Saint Paul does
by collation of Adam and Christ, Sin and Grace, thus interpret Gods promise,
and makes not Christ inferior to Adam, nor Grace unto Sin: and likewise
Christ says, That the gate is strait that leads to life, and few enter. Thus
the Scripture answers, That the promise of Grace appertains to every sort
of men in the world, and comprehends them all. Howbeit within certain limits
and bounds, the which if men neglect or pass over, they exclude themselves from
the promise in Christ, as Cain was no more excluded, till he excluded himself,
then Abel; Saul then David; Judas then Peter; Esau then Jacob: by the Scripture
it seems that the Sentence of God was given to save the one, and damn the
other, before the one loved God, or the other hated God; howbeit these
threatenings of God against Esau, if he had not of his wilful malice excluded
himself from the promise of Grace, should no more hinder his salvation, then
Gods threatenings against Ninive, Jonas 1.2. which notwithstanding that God said
should be destroyed within forty days, stood a great time after, and did
penance; Esau was circumcised and presented unto the Church of God by his
Father in all external ceremonies as well as Jacob; the Sentence of God unto
Rebeccah was not in the fault, that Esau his life and conversation was not
agreeable unto justice and equity as Jacobs, but his own malice, for there is
mentioned nothing at all in that place that Esau was disinherited of eternal
life, but that he should be inferior to his Brother Jacob in this world, as
the Prophet Malac. chap. 1. makes it appear, who says S. Paul uses this
example of Jacob and Esau in Romans 9 for none other purpose, but to take away
from the Jews the thing that they most put their trust in, to lay the vain
hope they had in their carnal lineage and natural descent from the family and
household of Abraham, and likewise the false confidence they had in the keeping
of the Law of Moses: Paul's whole purpose is in this Epistle, to bring Man unto
the knowledge of his sin, and to show him how he may be remitted. He also
speaking of several impediments which hinder us from keeping of Gods Law, men
will not return from their evil and licentious ways by repentance, but mount
straight ways into Gods Providence; searching the privities and secrets of
God, which were never made known unto Man, or Angel: and in another place the
Bishop says, our Gospellers are better learned then the holy Ghost, for they
wickedly attribute the cause of punishment and adversity to Gods providence,
which is the cause of no ill, as he himself can do no ill: and of every
mischief that is done, they say, it was Gods will. The Holy Ghost puts
another cause, that is to say, sin in man, and contempt of his holy word;
further, the pain is not inflicted by predestination to loose man, but both
predestination and the affliction extend to call man from damnation. The blind
Sooth sayers that write of things to come, are more to be esteemed then these
curious and high-climbing wits; for they attribute the cause of ill to the ill
aspects and sinister conjunctions of the Planets. Also he says, the commands
of God are easy to be observed, we need not sail to the Indies with danger of
our lives for it; he says no man is so cruel but he may wax meek if he give a
willing ear to discipline; all men are bound to know upon pain of damnation the
Articles of their faith, to know God in Christ, the ten Commandments, for to
know what works to do, and what to leave undone; and also the Pater noster,
Christ's prayer, which is an Abridgment, Epitome, or a compendious Collection of
all the Psalms and Prayers written in the whole Scripture, in which thou
prayest for the remission of sins, as well for thy self as for all others,
desire the grace of the holy Ghost to preserve thee in virtue, give thanks
for the goodness of God toward thee and all others: he that knows less then
this, cannot be saved; and he that knows no more then this, if he follow his
knowledge cannot be damned.

The third Author is Dr. Hammond in his Fundamentals, who p. 130. says, That
Christ dying for none but the Elect, it is asserted without any pretense or
color of Scripture Proof, nay, in opposition to as plain distinct affirmations
as can be produced for any Article of the Greed, and says that Christ's dying
for all is the express doctrine of the Scripture; concludes that chapter 14. p.
144. as necessary as hope is to labor, encouragement to quickening of action,
so necessary is the belief of universal redemption to the superstructing of
Christian life.

The fourth Author is Mr. Pierce in his vindication of some; notes concerning
Gods decrees, written this very year p. 85. says treating of the error of
Christ's dying only for the Elect, that it is a pernicious heresy, being
contrary to Scripture, and the clearest Scriptures that can be named; for
universal redemption is exhibited to us in Scripture, by all expressions of
universal which the tongue of Men and Angels is possibly able to express, he
concludes his 23. Sect. of his third Chapter: the adversary disclaiming this
error of Christ's dying only for the elect, all the rest will tumble of their
own accord. The fifth Author is Mr Sanders in his book, Gods love manifested
unto all men, p. 161. says, they that teach Christ died only for a few, take
away the true Gospel and ground of faith, and do introduce a false Gospel which
affords men no grounds to believe. I have read several Authors which maintain
we shall not be damned for original fin; and they say themselves that Adam the
great offender was certainly saved. I have heard Mr Hugh Peter's himself preach,
Let men talk what they will, said he, that in his judgment the pain of loss in
respect of hell fire, which loss was the being deprived of the presence of God
and his Angels, would be greater then the pain of sense. Now Sanders says,
page 60. and p. 79. no man shall ever perish for Adams sin; I speak of this in
answer to Mr Peter's judgment; for says Sanders, if those that perish, had not
sufficient of means afforded them to life and happiness there can be no pain of
loss, but rather comfort themselves, that their misery was unavoidable, and so
says he the case would be still alike, for they were lost before they were
borne, and therefore no more to blame themselves, then an heir has reason to
blame himself, because his father spent his inheritance before he was borne: it
would rejoice my heart to see these Authors well answered by Scripture and
Reason; I could instance in many Authors more, but I will forbear, only
commend the Reader to Mr Hoards book called Gods love to Mankind, who will tell
thee their wretched opinion is contrary unto Gods nature, the Scripture, and
sound reason: who will tell thee it overthrows all Religion, and how it makes
God a mere deluder, and his Ministers false witnesses, for they offer unto men
salvation conditionally, whose damnation is determined absolutely, and how it
makes the whole circle of a man's life nothing but a mere destiny.

In a word, read but his book twice over, and then if thou art not too much
biased, in believing as the Priest believes, right or wrong, Pope-like, I am
very confident thou will do as I my self am resolved, never to reverence
these Reprobatarians more, until such time they will better satisfy me by
Scripture and reason for the maintenance of their most impious opinion.

Besides what I have read, I do believe I have discoursed with thousands of
people, some of them Doctors of Divinity, and many of them Ministers, and very
many of them, in the esteem of the world, have been a precise, religious,
knowing sort of people for the most part, have concluded with me that their
opinion of absolute reprobation, they holding of it as aforesaid, is a most
damnable, erroneous, blasphemous opinion: saying, if a truth of God, no matter
for Ministers, nor the Scriptures, nor for Christ Jesus his coming.
Notwithstanding it does appear, both by Scripture and the learned, that the
whole body of Divinity turns on this hinge, and no matter for any religion, if
that be a truth of God; yet I have been deeply censured by many of my friends
for being so singular in the opposing and reviling those Ministers which
maintain it.

Now in regard I see very few Ministers will stand in the gap to oppose them,
for fear of losing their Bacon, or their noble Tithes; and other men, they do
not care for troubling themselves, desiring to live quietly: my answer shall be
Luther's own words, as he is quoted in the Book of Martyrs; when he alone
appeared against the Papists, many of his friends persuaded him to be silent
for fear some temporal persecution should be inflicted on him, his answer was,
saying, If there were as many Devils in the town of Worms in Germany, as there
were tiles on the houses, yet he would appear in that cause.

This cause having much more need for another Luther to appear then ever the
other had, and yet there be but very few dare show themselves in this great
work; therefore by Gods help, I will with my very small abilities, appear to
the utmost of my power in this cause, until such time as I am convinced by
Scripture and Reason, and then I shall most willingly lie down at their feet.

I confess some have seemingly reproved me for using passionate expressions in
the forewritten letters, as they say, in calling the Ministers juggling Priests,
and saying they are more sitting to keep hoggs then to continue in the
Ministry, and such like words: but doubtless no Christian upon due
consideration, can think there is any passion used; in regard they are such
blasphemers, in making God the Author of sin; for they say, As God has
ordained the end of the Reprobate, which is damnation; so has he ordained the
means tending thereunto: by which plain words, let the world judge if they do
not make God the Author of all sins.

But many of these men that I have to deal withal, are mere shuttle-cocks,
saying one thing to day, and denying it to morrow, especially Priest Newton to
my knowledge; therefore look on the Marginal notes on Deuteronomy. 2. and v. 30. there
you shall find those very blasphemous words above written, of Gods appointing
the means unto the end; which I suppose was done by their Geneva brethren, and
unto this purpose if you will but look into those cursed Authors, Zanchius,
Crowley, and Knox, they will tell you, all those who are, or shall be damned,
are necessarily damned, and that by Gods predestination we are compelled to do
those things for which we shall be damned. Reverend Calvin himself, as some
call him, but for my part I think if all his works were answerable unto this
most abominable and blasphemous expression, his title only deserves Calvin Sir
Reverence, where he faith, lib. 1. c. 27.. 11. That the wicked are not only
bound in fetters, but are guided by Gods bridle to do all manner of their
wicked actions. Many such damnable expressions of such wicked Authors I have
lying by me, but I will forbear.

Some men have imagined that I was set on by some Jesuit, or some other wicked
men, or else distracted, or else I would not so violently oppose those cursed
Reprobatarians; doubtless it had been no sin against God or man, if thousands
had joined with me in this nature for the opposing sucha dwellish heresies. I
suppose the very style of this writing will so clear the business, that no
Scholar head any hand in it; but I profess in the presence of that God before
whom I write this, that never any man did dictate one line unto me what I
should write, either now, or whatever I did write before, or ever gare me any
enconragement to oppose them in this nature. If ever I do suffer any temporal
punishment for these my own actions, I will give you four unanswerable reasons
which moved me unto it: The first reason is Gods word, which will be an
unquestionable evidence for the clearing of me at the last day. The second
reason, my reading of many eminent men's works upon that subject which concur
with the Scriptures: The third reason, several conferences I have had with many
Godly well disposed Christians, which have agreed with me in this judgment: The
fourth and last reason is, my own conscience, which I make no doubt of but will
prove a continual feast unto me.

As for my being distracted, I never did know my temporal judgment in a better
condition, blessed be that God who is the only continuer of it, and I suppose
I have not give any of my acquaintance cause to think the contrary.

As for my comfortable assurance of my eternal welfare, I can boldly speak it,
if I were now at this instant to give an account for all my wicked actions, I
do verily believe that my gracious God is not in the least degree angry with me
for any thing I have said or written against those Ministers which maintain
that blasphemous opinion of absolute reprobation; but I have great cause to
think rather that my gracious God does very much own these my undertakings; and
I do also verily believe in respect of my souls salvation, I am at this present
writing, and have been ever since the fortunate difference betwixt the Parson
and my self brake out, in a more blessed condition then I was before for a long
time.

I will draw toward a conclusion, with a learned man's character of the Clergy
in general; his book is called The Modern Policy, to be sold at the George in
Fleet Street, a little book about eight pence price.

I confess I shall rove from the subject in hand, only I will make some use of
it by way of application; I have not read in this book very lately, yet I will
not add one line more then his own words; he says, it much pierces his heart
to see the Clergy in such a high degree accessory to the civil distempers, how
they have every where shaken the foundations both of Church and state; and how
it has been observed that there has been no flood of misery, but did spring
from, or at least, was much swelled by their holy water: says he, I have
searched the Evangelical records, and there was nothing but mild and soft
doctrines; I enquired into the breathings of the Spirit, and they were
pacificatory; I wondered from what presidents and Scripture-encouragements
these men deduced their practices; and at last was forced to conclude that they
were only pretended chaplains unto the Prince of peace; it is hard to find in
any place any tragical scene or bloody Theater, but a Jesuit or some
stone-Priest has had a part in it. He also, says the Politician, must nourish
some mercenary Jesuit or other Divines to cry up their aims in their
Churches, that so the poison may insinuate more generally into all; for the
sharpest sword in his Army cannot vie services with his subtle quill: and so we
may see those torches that should have been for saving light, were degenerated
into firebrarnds; those trumpets that should have sounded retreats to popular
furies, knew no other music but martial allarums. I confess I have both read
and discoursed with many of the same judgment, but until within these two or
three years, I was very unwilling to entertain such vile thoughts of them; but
now I confess if this plain English be a truth of God, which those I write
against maintain it to be; that is to say, all the Devils in hell could not
keep any of those which are in heaven from that place, nor shall be any
hindrance to any of those that shall be heaeafter received into that place of
glory; nor Christ Jesus, Ministers praying and preaching, nor all the
Saint-like actions that are possble for the Creature to do, could keep any of
those which are in hell, nor can keep any of those which shall hereafter go
into hell from that place of torment, (if this be a truth) then Iverily believe
the character the learned man gives as aforesaid of the Clergy, may be as true
as the Gospel, they having nothing to do for to employ their wits on but on
such devilish designs; but for my part believing their opinion to be one of
the Devils truths; for indeed it is impossible for the Devil to be a deceiver,
if their opinion be a truth of God; therefore I hope to have more honorable
thoughts of those Clergy which discovered that hellish opnion. Though I confess
to my knowledge many of them ought to have a slash provided for them, because
they will not show themselves in this great work for the opposing of such a
devilish heresy; and very many Ministers have abominated this opinion unto me
in such like terms, and yet all the reason they can give to excuse their
silence, is only, as I said before, for fear they should lose their Bacon. O
sad, sad, sad are these miserable times we live in! but I hope yet in Gods good
time we shall have a through reformation; for doubtless as in the 106. Psalm,
were there not some Moses's, that did stand in the breach to stop the fury of
the Lord, many may expect the same judgment which was inflicted on Dathan and
Abiram, for this their most damnable opinion. There have many eminent men for
learning and piety, both formerly and lately showed themselves in print for the
opposing of this heresy; and I doubt not but many more will appear in this
great work, not only to reprove the Reprobatarian Ministry; but also other
Ministers which are of the contrary judgment, and yet think themselves to be
Gods laborers, though they will not appear in Gods vineyard to do the work of
the Lord, which doubtless is to inveigh in their pulpits against those wicked
Reprobatarians in the bitterest language which can be invented, which may prove
under God to be the only means for the suppressing this most damnable and most
blasphemous heresy. Although I am my self but a Farmer, and was never since I
was 14 years of age capable of any better preferment; yet I would most
willingly ride 500 miles, and spend or give 100 l. upon some charitable use,
that this Nation were well satisfied concerning this heretical opinion, which
is so stiffly maintained by Mr Newton the Presbyterian Priest of my parish, and
other men of that stamp; and so farewell.

FINIS.

