CHRIST'S ORDER, AND THE Disciples practice concerning the Ministers
maintenance, and releeving of the Poor: whereby the claiming Tithes, or any
thing in stead thereof, appears to be contrary to the Gospel.
Matthew. 10.10. The workman is worthy of his meat.

Luke 10.5.7. Into whatsoever house ye enter, remain eating and drinking such
things as they give, for the labourer is worthy of his hire.

Gal. 6.6. Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate unto him that
teaches, in all good things.

1 Cor. 9.7.14. Who goes to warfare any time at his own charges? who planteth
a Vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? or who feeds a flock, and
eats not of the milk of the flock? Even so has the Lord ordained, that
they which preach the Gospel, should live by the Gospel.

Act. 6.2, 3, 4. Then the twelve called the multitude of the Disciples unto
them, and said, It is not reason that we should leave the word of God, and
serve Tables: wherefore Brethren look ye out among you seven men of honest
report, full of the holy Ghost and wisdom, whom we may appoint over this
business, but we will give our selves continually to prayer, and to the
ministry of the word.

C. 2.44, 45. All that believed were together and had all things common, and
sold their possessions and goods and parted them to all men, as every man had
need.

C. 4.32. Neither said any of them that ought of the things which he possessed
was his own but they had all things in common.

Romans 15.26, 27. It has pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia to make a
certain contribution for the poor which were at Jerusalem: It has pleased
them verily and their d^b^ars they are: For if the Gentiles have been made
partakers of their spiritual things, their duty is also to administer unto
them in carnal things.

2 Cor. 8.3, 4. To their power (I bear record) yea and beyond their power they
were willing of themselves, praying us with much entreaty, that we would
receive the gift, and take upon us the fellowship of administering to the Saints.

C. 9.5. I thought it necessary to exh^rt the brethren that they would go
before unto you, and m^ke up beforehand the bounty, whereof ye had notice
before, that the same might be ready as a matter of bounty, and not of
covetousness; every man according as he purposes in his heart, so let him
give, not grudgingly.

1 Cor. 9.11, 12, 13, 14. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a
great thing it we should reap your carnal things? If others be partakers of
this power over you, are not we rather? Nevertheless we have not used this
power, but suffer all things, lest we should hinder the Gospel of Christ. Do
ye not know that they which minister about holy things, live of the things of
the Temple? and they which watt at the Altar are partakers of the Altar? even
so has the Lord ordained that they which preach the Gospel should live of the
Gospel.

V. 15, 18, 23. But I have used none of these things, neither have I written
these things that it should be so done unto me, for it were better for me to
dye, than that any man should make my glorying void. What is my reward then?
verily that where I preach the Gospel, I may make the Gospel of Christ without
charge, that I abuse not my power in the Gospel. And this I do for the Gospel
sake, that I might be partaker thereof with you.

C. 4 14. I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved sons to
warn you.

2 Cor. 4.5. We preach our selves your servants for Jesus sake.

1 Cor. 4.11, 12. Even unto this present hour we both hunger and thirst, and
are naked and buffeted and have no certain dwelling place, and labor, working
with our own hands.

Acts 18.3. And because Paul was of the same craft, he abode with Aquila and
Priscilla, and wrought for by their occupation they were Tent makers.

C. 20.33 34, 35. I have coveted no man's silver, or gold or apparel yea you
your serves know that these hands have ministered unto my necessities, and to
them that were with me: I have showed you all things, how that so laboring ye
ought to support the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he
said, it is more blessed to give than to receive.

2 Cor. 11.7, 8, 9, 10. Have I committed an offense in chasing my self that
you might be exalted? because I have preached to you the Gospel of God freely?
I have robbed other Churches to do you service. When I was present with you
and wanted, I was chargeable to no man, for that which was lacking to me, the
brethren which came from Macedonia supplied, and in all things I have kept my
self from being burdensome unto you, and so will I keep my self, as the
truth of Christ is in me, no man shall stop me of this boasting in the Regions
of Achaia.

Act. 3.6. Peter said silver and gold have I none, but such as I have give I
thee.

2 Cor. 12.13, 14 What is it wherein ye were inferior to other Churches,
except it be that I my self was not burdensome unto you? forgive me this
wrong: behold the third time I am ready to come unto you, and I will not be
burdensome unto you, for I seek not yours but you, for the children ought not
to lay up for the parents, but the parents for the children.

V. 16, 17, 18. I did not burden you, nevertheless being crafty I caught you
with guile. Did I make again of you by any of them which I sent unto you? I
desired Titus, and with him I sent a brother: did Titus make a gain of you?
walked we not in the same spirit? walked we not in the some steps?

Phil. 4.15.16, 17. Now ye Philippians know also that in the beginning of the
Gospel when I departed from Macedonia, no Church communicated with me as
concerning giving and receiving but ye only, for even in Thessalonica ye sent
once and gain to my necessity, not because I desire a gift, but I desire
fruit, that we may abound to your account.

1 Thessalonians. 2.9. Ye may remember our laboring night and day, because we would
not be chargeable unto any of you.

C. 4.11, 12. Do your own business, work with your own hands (as we
commanded you) that ye may walk honestly toward them that are without, and
that ye may have lack of nothing.

2 Thessalonians. 3.8.10. We did not eat any man's bread for naught, but wrought with
labor and travail night and day that we might not be chargeable to any of
you; for even when we were with you this we commanded you, that (...) any would
not work he should not eat.

THe best Christians of the Primitive times had all things in common, and
without all dispute and controversy, we ought to hold nothing so proper and
peculiar unto us, but that we should see our selves obliged to part with it,
not only for Gods more immediate worship and service, but also for sustenance,
relief and comfort of the meanest brother upon the face of the earth. We are
but Stewards of what we have, and are all one day to give account thereof to
the Great Master of the Household, and of such as have had most, of them shall
be required most, Luke 12 48. Who think we then must answer for so many as
have fallen into sicknesses, and at last died in our very streets and prisons
of penury and want, whilst we have surfetted with abundance? But to such as
labor in the Ministry, to such as dispense unto us of the heavenly Manna,
toward these we have a stronger tie, not only that their necessities may be
releeved, but that thereby they may be more free from worldly care and
temptations, enabled to be hospitable and bountiful unto others that stand in
want, 1 Timothy 3.2. Tit. 1.8. There is an obligation hereof in respect of God,
but it was voluntary and ought not to be compulsive in respect of man: And
therefore Paul, whether in regard he feared his Disciples would not relish
the Gospel so pleasantly, if in any manner it became chargeable, or because he
saw that contributions toward his maintenance would come heavily from them, or
for what other respect soever, rather than he would put it to the hazard, he
does not only forbear to press for the reward which was due unto his
Ministry, but yields diverse exceeding pregnant reasons, why others ought and
are obliged to do the like, Act. 20.35. 2 Cor. 11.14. and 12.14. And as of two
evils we are to choose the least, so of two good things we are bound to do the
best: we must rather preach the Gospel gratis, than insist so much upon our
maintenance, that it become distasteful.

But of far different temper are such, who yearly, quarterly, or the like,
require of the people certain set sums of money, or Tithes, as the hackney wages
of their ministry, forcing them that have resisted in such violent manner, as
the whole Parish, though at first they approved their doctrine, became at last
aweary and in hatred of their persons: It Is true, they had prescription, and
certain Civil Laws to justify their proceedings, but were they not enacted
at first by Popery, the mystery of iniquity, and by them for their own ends
conveyed unto us? Let us examine how they agree with the Gospel of J^^^s
Christ, who against such times prepared and sent forth his Apostles, and in
them all Ministers successively, with a freely ye have received, freely give;
(...) Mat. 10 8. Or have they any resemblance with the spirit of Paul, who said
(...) been better for him to dye, than that he should want the glory of not
making the Gospel chargeable to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 9.15.18. Oh how ought
they to tremble who have gone point blanck against the evidence of such a
truth? Besides, may we not justly fear these Popish badges, remaining still in
Gods just judgment, may prove a sovereign bait and temptation to entice those
slow bellies to us again, who first established them? But is it not most
evident, that throughout the whole Gospel there is not one word found to
countenance a forcing of the people to contribute unto the poor, or to the
ministry any thing, but what they please themselves? if tithes or such like
maintenance were due now under the Gospel by virtue of the Mosaicall Law,
doubtless our Savior and his Apostles would have signified so much. It Is
true, that certain passages of theirs are mistaken by some, as if they seemed
to glance thereat, 1 Cor. 9.13. 1 Timothy 5.18. but that was only so far forth
as we are still bound by the equity thereof in foro conscientia, not to the
literal observance in foro fori, as no ways suiting with those several
expressions of Paul's, in urging it only as voluntary in those which were to
give it, and his own practice in not requiring it as a legal duty: for his
own behoof, and instructing others to do the same, 2 Cor. 12.17, 18. Again,
if it were legally due, why did not Paul compel them to the payment of it? Did
he want means or power so to do? Surely such as have the gift of miracles
cannot be said to want help to right themselves, and vindicate Gods portion?
and we may see Act. 5. in the beginning, that Peter knew full well his own
strength, and made use of it in such a case; when Ananias and Saphira having
put themselves into the number of the Disciples, to show they did, at least,
desire to seem like the rest, sold a possession, and made as if they had laid
the whole value thereof at the Apostles feet, but secretly withheld part
thereof; for which gross hypocrisy, Peter punished them no less miraculously
than severely with death, saying, Whilst it remained was it not thine own? and
after it was sold, was it not in thine own power? why have thou conceived this
thing in thine heart? thou have not lied unto men, but unto the holy Ghost,
Act. 5.4. From whence we may gather a clear argument, that they were not
forced to any allowance of Tithes, or ought else in stead thereof: for had
there been any such like duty due to God in his Ministers according to the
Letter, (I say not according to the equity thereof) it was as much due before
the possession was sold, before it was laid down at the Apostles feet devoted
to the service of the Saints, as it was afterward; the civil proprieters
consent gains neither unto God nor to his Saints under the Gospel ever a whit
the better title to any earthly goods in respect of the right or thing it
self; but in respect to the manner of receiving it in a legal compulsive
civil way, if the interessed having once given consent, may afterward
continue (but refuse) payment of it without defilement to their consciences.
Ananias and Saphira were not struck dead for denying alms unto the poor
Saints, or maintenance unto the ministry; but because they played the
hypocrites so grossly, seeking to be thought more liberal than their
covetous desires would give them leave: And yet we may not think that denying
alms and maintenance were a lesser sin than hypocrisy; or that hypocrites may
now be punished with death by Civil Magistrates: but as in the yielding of
such maintenance and alms there must be so much spiritual, and consequently
voluntary as made them acceptable unto God; so will God himself have the
punishing of the nonperformance, because man cannot possibly be a competent
Judge thereof: and hypocrisy in like manner being not discernable by man, and
the punishment of Ananias and Saphira miraculous; none can possibly, much less
may justly claim to do the same, unless they have the same power of miracles
and discerning.

But Peter's professing that what Ananias and Saphira did possess was their
own, as before; and our Savior in the Parable, Math. 20.15. makes it lawful
for us to do what we will with our own; I query by what Law we can be
compelled to part from that we have without our own consents? If Tithes, or
whatsoever like them, be either Gods or Caesar's, I know a warrant for them: but
as Caesar's Image entitled him to the tribute money, Math. 22.19. so does God
chiefly aim at the tribute of our consciences, on which he stamped his own
image and likeness in our father Adam at his creation, Genesis 1.26. But if the
Tithes be the Ministers, why do we still commit sacrilege, withholding them
in so many places of the Kingdom? Do we not fear what befell Ananias and
Saphira, if our sin be the same with theirs, as is by all tyth-masters
pretended? But if there be nothing due to them by that Law, why do we give
them the gleanings under such a Jewish notion? If we be justified in one, we
condemn our selves by the other.

And whereas it is alleged, that if they which attend upon the ministry must
be bound to live on such alms only as shall be voluntarily given them; it may
likely prove a great temptation to frame their doctrine according to the
peoples cares, for the farther enlargement of their maintenance. I answer, that
we have found it by experience a far greater temptation with many men who
being sure of such fat Benefices and yearly Incomes, especially for their
lives, took little care of often preaching, and how lean souls the people
had; but when Churches shall be gathered and constituted according to our
Saviors commission, and the Apostles practice; we need not by Gods blessing to
doubt of a powerful Ministry, nor they of liberal maintenance; or in default
thereof, that the denouncing of Gods threats and judgments, which are his own
ordinances, should not sufficiently prevail upon the consciences of men, if we
had but faith therein, and forbore the persecuting of their persons, which is
the unwarrantable device of man: And as it would not have been justifiable in
the Apostles, if it lay in their power to prevent it, to be taken off from the
Ministry to serve Tables, to spend time in seeing the poor provided for, Act.
6. beginning; so now may not Christians put the Ministers of the Gospel to get
their living by working with their hands, it would be as great a sin and
sacrilege in us now, as withholding Tithes was under the Law; they ought to be
liberally provided for, that they may live comfortably on the ministry of the
Gospel, as on their Altar, that they may, being void of all distractions, more
freely employ all thoughts and studies on their ministry; but what ever
extremity good Ministers should be reduced unto, through the hardness of the
people, or Gods intention to try their patience in this respect; it were far
more Apostolical and Christianlike for Ministers to labor as Paul did with
his own hands, than to force or require a subsistence in such a manner, as
being never appointed nor sanctified by the Lord Jesus, makes the Gospel seem
wearisome and chargeable.

Our Savior, we know, told his Apostles that the workman was worthy of his
hire, bidding them remain eating and drinking in whatsoever house they came:
and Paul knew his right thereto so well, that he exhorts all Christians to
communicate unto such as taught them spiritual things, informing them that the
Law of Moses prohibited the very musling of an Ox that trod out the corn, and
inferres what greater care God takes of those that labor in his vineyard, 1
Cor. 9.9, 10. Nay, though he tells us that other Apostles enjoyed this benefit,
and that he was inferior to none of them; yet it was better for him to dye,
than so live as to make the Gospel be thought chargeable. My brethren, what
think we was the meaning of Paul's proceeding thus? No Minister can at present
have better title unto Tithes or such like maintenance, than Paul had in those
Primitive times, and yet he waved both all such title and pretending, so often
as his Disciples were unwilling to be at charge thereof.

Under the Law God required expressly the tenth of all the people had, Lev.
27.32. and how such were punished that denied or sought evasions, let these
Tyth-masters produce, and justify it to be their own cause by their activity
in doing of the like? But in the Gospel we find nothing but The workman is
worthy of his meat; The labourer is worthy of his hire; The Ox that trod the
corn was not to be musled; No man plants a Vineyard, or goes to warfare at
his own charges; They which minister about holy things, live on the things of
the Temple; and they which wait at the Altar are partakers of the Altar: This
and the like is all we find to this purpose throughout the Gospel; and what
can be inferred from thence, but that in equity the Gospels Ministers should
be provided for? The Tithes are only due unto the Tribe of Levi (and that to
o^^raine purposes, most whereof are void, abolished) which had no other
inheritance, Deuteronomy. 18.1. It Is they only that can plead for them even in rigor
of the Law, if it were now of force: But if that Tribe be dead, dispersed, not
to be found, or appear not to receive them; such as have possession both may
and ought to keep them, as being they only who must give a strict account
thereof hereafter: And what account this is, would easily be learned, if we
did but take Paul and the other Apostles for our study and imitation. They
tell us we must communicate unto him that teaches in all good things, Gal.
6.6. and accordingly we find that the believers had all things in common, Act.
4.32. So that if any thing of this nature may be inferred as a standing law,
from our Saviors commands, together with the Apostles and other Christians
practice, it must be community of all things. And as it may doubtless be a
great perfection in some particular Christians to be so liberal in
distributing their whole estates, even whilst they are living, unto the
necessity of the Saints; so far better were it for the Civil State in
general, that there were a community of all things, than that a pretended
Tribe of Levi (which though they had a rightful title, are not the five
hundredth part of the whole people) should surfeit on the tenth of all Gods
creatures, and their increase.

Paul tells the Philippians that they only in the beginning of the Gospel
communicated unto his necessities, Phil. 4.15, 16, 17. letting them withal
understand, it was but their duty so to do; and yet (mark) he terms not
what they gave him a reward of his deserts, but as a gift from them; neither
required he it at any time so much for his own advantage and necessity, as a
fruit of Gods grace in them; as an odor that smells sweet; as a sacrifice
acceptable and well pleasing unto God, from whence such power proceeded, ver.
18. And as he tells the Corinthians upon the same occasion, I write not these
things to shame you, but as my beloved sons to warn you, 1 Cor. 4 12, 14.

Oh the blessed spirit of Paul that knew thus to beguile men of their souls,
by a sanctified craftiness, and win them unto God by wiles l 2 Cor. 12.16.
Some few now adays who are ashamed to stand upon these Tithes, to sue for them
out of covetousness, or their private ends, as if they valued them for
themselves, but say they do it to uphold the right thereof, and that they may
not prejudice the title of their successors; but consider, dear Christians,
and you will find even from the persons and manners of such proceedings, that
all these are mere excuses to color their own corruption (a crime no whit
inferior to that of Ananias and Saphira's) most rashly censuring their
successors with the idolatry of covetousness (as if they knew who should
succeed them after death) and ought not to judge otherwise than charitably of
them beforehand, what e're they prove afterward: but yet there is a president
of Paul's to teach such better, even against this palpable evasion of theirs;
Paul who it seems was so far from thinking it fitting to set out to sale the
ministry of the Gospel, that even by his own commandment and law (as I may
say) was contented not to eat, unless he did his days work with his own
hands, 2 These. 3.10. did in conformity hereunto not only forbear to require
wages of his Ministry from the Corinthians for himself, but as is
insinuated, 2 Cor. 12.18. desired Titus to do the like, and so questionless
would have required of others, if he had seen cause, or imagined that men
would have been extravagantly covetous; which is an undeniable argument that
Pastors, Ministers, and all other Church Officers, ought not to force
maintenance, rewards or gifts from such as will not pay them willingly.

I know we are taught and bid distinguish times and seasons, as though such
fond distinctions could as easily reconcile Christ and Antichrist, as it does
furnish all Sects and Heresies with flourishes and shelterings for their most
confident respective inventions of will worship: But consider, I beseech you,
you that cry out so much for distinguishing of times, will you make no
distinction between types and autitypes? Is not God a Spirit, and will he not
be served in spirit? even under the Law when God stood so strictly upon his
Sacrifices and Ceremonies yet David the man after Gods own heart tells us,
that praising and magnifying of his name, with other spiritual worship, was
then more acceptable than sacrifice, Psalm. 69.30, 31. But now under the Gospel
there is no sacrifice, no worship, no service beside spiritual; what ever he
requires of us, or what ever we perform unto him, it is only the spiritual
part thereof which he regards, which is accepted of him: Now as he looks only
at the spiritual part, and as spiritual means can only prevail in working
and disposing people to spiritual service; so it were preposterous to think
that God should approve or allow of any course which were not suitable, much
less not capable to conduce unto such spiritual ends and service: amongst the
rest, the communicating of our earthly substance unto the poor, and such as
stand in want, especially to those of the housh Id of faith, Gal 6.10. unto the
Saints, particularly for maintenance (as was said before) of such as minister
to us in the Lord; even this I say, as all other duties of a Christian must be
spiritual; but how compelling men by compulsive courses to pay tithes or such
like duties, can be a spiritual way of making men to pay them willingly, as if
there were no compelling; or how the paying them unwillingly through
threatening, or imprisonment, or other civil punishment, can possibly become a
spiritual duty, and sweet smelling sacrifice ^cceptable and well-pleasing unto
God, as Paul tells us, such contribu^ions ought to be; me thinks any one that
were not tempted as a sharer of such unrighteous Mainmon, if they did but never
so little consider in the fear of God, would easily perceive and be convinced.

Which, that it may better prevail upon them with Gods blessing, amongst
sundry other evidences of Scripture, I will crave leave to reduce unto their
memories this one of Paul's, who exhorting the Corinthians to such like
contributions, distinguishes, and sets those that were not done grudingly, but
as matter of bounty, in opposition to those of covetousness, 2 Cor. 9.5. And
whether such as are drawn from us by compulsion against our will, can prove
matter of bounty; how we may warrantably be constrained to sacrifice the
effects of covetousness unto God; or how such involuntary and abortive fruits
can possibly ascend up as a sweet savor into His nostrils; I leave together
with this Scripture and the rest, to their more sad and serious consciences to
ponder on.

Since then the compelling men to pay tithes cannot cause that such as are
compelled, by so paying against their wills, to do a spiritual duty or
acceptable service unto God: perhaps some may say, Why may not men be forced to
these as well as any other contributions or taxations which are rated and
levied by order of the Civil Magistrate? I answer; that these other
contributions are expressly warranted by the Word of God, as Subsidies of
Customs, Tolls, or any other taxes, whether for defense or honor of the
Estate, or maintenance of the Civil Ministers in service of the Estates,
wherein each inhabitant participates and has a benefit. Secondly, such
cessements as are merely civil. Thirdly, these tithes and maintenance may be
required for such a spiritual ministry, which perhaps some may, 1. not
approve thereof: 2. they may likely thereupon scruple at it: 3. God will not
have the ministry of the Gospel to seem chargeable to any: 4. he never
ordered any compulsive means to be used against those that denied such Gospel
maintenance and contributions: 5. such as neither approve nor participate of
such ministry, may likewise be exempted in the contribution of charge thereof
without any damage or injury to others; in that the Ministers, for number, may
be regulated according to the Ministry; and the Laborers increased only
according to the harvest; and lastly, it were neither equity nor justice to
compel this or that man to contribute maintenance for the service and
ministry of others, with whom he either cannot, or desires not to join
himself: Holy David was so far from such a practice, that when Ornan the
Iebusite proffered to give him his Threshing sloore to build an Altar, Oxen for
burnt offerings, threshing instruments for wood, wheat for meat offering, and
all for nothing; David would needs pay for them at the full value; saying; I
will not take that which is thine for the Lord, nor offer burnt offerings
without cost, 1 Chronicles. 21.22.23.24.

But if any thing be now due in the nature of Tithes, and men be justly forced
to make payment thereof; it must be Tithes precisely; the tenth of all what
ever we possess; for we find not so much as a shadow in Scripture for any
other warrant: and according to this proportion, either the tenth man should be
a Minister of the Gospel, or else the Ministers being never so few, and the
fewer the better cheer, sharing among themselves the tenth part of the revenues
of all the Kingdom or Christian world, each of them would have a yearly income
larger than that of Canterbuties: surely this is such a temptation, that if
such as expect the sweetness of it may be judge thereof, as doubtless they
will never more away with Bishops; so they will as certainly be desirous, and
no ways be prevailed upon, till God turn their hearts, not to enjoy such
large estates, which through pretense of enabling them to become hospitable and
attend upon their ministry, will as infallibly make them degenerate into
drones and dumb Teachers as ever were Bishops of any Country.

But if perhaps they should be so modest for the present as to say they barely
aim at maintenance; 200. or 300. pounds per annum shall be the height of
their ambition, etc. I answer, 1. that what e're the maintenance be, whether
more or less, our chief care ought to see it settled in such a way as were
warrantable from the Apostles practice here on earth, and sanctified by God
above: If we want this groundwork, the foundation which we build on being
sandy, no marvel if we attend a blessing thereof in vain. 2. I answer, that
for such as are not spiritually minded, 200. or 300. pounds per annum, and a
far less revenue certain, is as great a temptation to those whose ancestors
perhaps were never worth the tithes thereof; I say it is as great a templation
and altogether as sufficient to make such intrude into the Ministry for love
of the maintenance, as a more corpulent fat Bishopric: it is the lazy but
constant Benefice which for the most part does first corrupt their younger
thoughts and actions: from whence according to the same depraved principles
they afterward aspire unto a Bishopric, which perhaps their more inferior
aims did never think upon before. But it should be the love of God and not
of Mammon which winnes men to the Ministry of the Gospel. Dear Christians,
let it not be offensive to you, nor give occasion to think I want charity
toward the Ministers of Christ, that share unto us of their spiritual things,
1 Cor. 9.11. (I dare call God to be my witness to the contrary) if I ask how
few there are who take Orders and apply themselves unto the ministry out of
pure zeal unto the Gospel? and how many on the other side, chiefly out of a
design to live upon it, as if it were the easiest way to grow rich and get a
living by; making the Ministery^d mercenary trade, and as much as in them lies
endeavoring to bity and sell the gifts of the Holy Ghost, for which Simon
Magus was deemed by Peter to be in the gall of bitterness, in the bond of
iniquity, and doomed to perish together with his money, unless he did repent
thereof? Act. 8.20, 22, 23.

Good Reader, resolve this question in thine own heart before thou pass on
farther: does not thine own experience inform thy conscience, that even too
great a part of Ministers, however God may since upon their repentance have had
mercy on them, have heretofore, by what appears, been too too much prevailed
upon in this respect? nay do not such scroules and Catalogues of scandalous
Ministers even at this day fully demonstrate so much? and can a Synod, a
Parliament, a Kingdom, after so great light of Reformation permit the same
temptations unquestioned, wherein our predecessors so shamefully miscarried?
Forbid it good God in anger, if not in love, and that with speed; lest this
enormous sin having helped to fill up the measure of our iniquities, thy just
wrath and indignation burst out upon us as hot as fire, until it quite consume
the disconsolate remnant of this unhappy Nation.

What is it to partake in other men's sins by laying hands suddenly on such as
take upon them the ministry of the Gospel, which Paul to Timothy forbid? 1 Timothy 5.22. if it be not what was practiced heretofore in England: I wish I
could hear of some means taken for preventing it hereafter.

A young Scholar (and how reproveable young Scholars are is well known to those
that live near them) having already, or intending to make love unto a fat
Passonage, or some pretty parcel of Tithes, applies himself unto One or more;
a Bishop or Presbytery of which he was seldom or never seen before in all his
life time, desiring to be admitted into the Ministry of the Gospel upon
payment of certain fees: perhaps they used heretofore, and may again
hereafter examine such a one upon some few questions, and give him a Text to
try whether his Commonplace books, with such like ready helps can furnish him
with a Sermon. Alas my Brethren, neither your questions, though they were
multiplied, with his answers, nor yet a Sermon or two are competent trials of
his gifts; they must be such as have known his conversation; such as have eat
and drunk with him; and been witnesses to the integrity of his life, and
seen his studies, with the fruits thereof, that are only able to judge of his
abilities, whether he be capable of so high a calling. How woeful then must it
needs be when none may call him, save they who for the most part, if it may be
said a calling, call, or rather lay hands on, they know not who?

I dread to think how usual it is with many to rush themselves most
Simoniacally and sacrilegiously into the Ministry, and yet with greater
wondering and amazement that this arch-temptation and grand stumbling-blocke of
Tithes, which so many of our blessed Martyrs have even to death so much
inveighed against, should yet remain the greatest Idol and hindrance of
Reformation.

And as Tithes or other maintenance to the Ministers are no Civil Legal debt;
so neither are alms to the poor, but both alike are to be made partakers by a
voluntary communicating to them of what we have, according as their respective
necessities shall require: we are bound in equity to both, and sin damnably if
we come short with either: but no warrant or Law of God does authorize any man
to compel such as will not willingly comply therein; the producing such order
out of Gods word to be now of force under the Gospel, lies on them which must
in such case be plaintises, and make claim thereto: no man being bound to part
from any thing which is his proper goods, and afterward be put to sue for it
again: Prescription bears sway no longer when the paying or parting from any
thing is discovered to contract a guiltiness of conscience.

But for such whom it concerns not in point of conscience, it is yet better to
acknowledge and make payment of such Tithes, than confessing some such debt or
duty to be due, leave it to the determination of those who are to have the
benefit thereof what proportion of their estates they will require; it is far
better to be at a certainty of a harder measure, than trust unto their mercy.

Call to mind the two shillings and nine pence, remember with what vehemence
and diligence it was prosecuted: God was pleased to blast it notwithstanding:
But had it once been settled, and men's purses with their consciences brought
under contribution of their prerogative, as they might as legally have doubled
or trebled it upon any occasion afterward, and that not without pretending
full arrerages: So we may be certain, this only privilege of theirs would
have quite devoured the subjects whole propriety: and this consequence have
thereupon succeeded: that afterward there would have been little need to
trouble Parliaments with granting Subsidies, the Clergy, for continuance of
their greatness, might likely have been no less willing, than it would have
been able to supply such trifling sums out of their boundless Revenues.

I know it will be objected, that such and such great Clerks and Doctors are
all with greatest might and maine for Tithes.

To every one in particular, and against them all in general (save one to whom
I crave leave to speak a word a part, beseeching God it may prove seasonable)
with whole Cathedralls full, how many soever there be of them: I will oppose
only the blessed Scriptures, and such despised Christians as most exactly bare
witness to them; as they whose foolishness will yet in time appear of
deepest wisdom, their poverty of greatest value, and their weakness of such
invincible strength, that they, and only they will at last infallibly overcome
and judge the world, with all their vain imaginations.

The Discourse entitled A new discovery of personal Tithes, or, The tenth part
of men's clear gains, pretends the tenth part of whatsoever any person of any
profession does any ways lawfully advance, to be due unto the Minister of the
Gospel both by the Law of God and man, unless some special custom,
composition, or privilege of the place allowed by Law exempt him, page 1 Now
we know that amongst several others, the public practice and profession of
Usurers is neither of the rarest nor least gainsome in Christendom, (to the
shame of all such be it spoken) no one trade produces such certain nor so much
gain throughout the world: But by what Law of God the tenth hereof, and of a
thousand other unwarrantable, I may say damnable increasings, becomes due unto
the Clergy, I know not, unless by their conniving, in not reproving us in
these sinful courses, out of a design to wrest that Scripture to prove it,
where we are required to make us friends of our unrighteous mammon, Luke 16.9.

But if any one shall say that Usurie or such unlawful gains were not
intended. I answer, that since none are exempted but by special privilege,
the words infer all gains to be lawful which the Laws of the Land
permitted, or could not punish, innumerable particulars whereof the Law of God
abominates: and though many professions of themselves be lawful, yet the
greatest part of all their gains is otherwise most commonly. But can we justly
blame these men that are so good accountants? that have such care of themselves
and families? They require not only the tenth part of all the four Elements
produce, as Corn, Fruit, Fish and Foul of all sorts; the tenth part of all
increase in Cattle, and of Poultry; the tenth of all house-rent; but also the
tenth part of what is gained by Handicraft, Manufactures and Merchandise, or
any kind of bargaining, etc. which yet is more than double as much as all the
rest in value: surely we may well answer these men with Ye know not what ye
ask, Matthew. 20.22. as our Savior did those two Disciples, not more ambitious
than these are avaritious. And yet the Author of the said Discourse professed
that he thought himself bound in conscience to make discovery how due these
Personal tithes are, chiefly to pull sundry honest Christians out of a
damnable sin; lest through his silence he should be both guilty thereof and
of their blood, page 3. But since on the contrary (as I hope) he is by this
time fully informed how many men's sin and blood he may have been deeply
accessory to, though himself never thought thereof, in publishing so
unjustifiable, so unhappy a Discovery: Oh how acceptable would it be to all
rightly informed conscientious Christans, since the Father of mercies has
given so large a time to see so great a mistake retracted? Such public
offenses require no less than public acknowledgement and remorce, if perhaps
the gui^tinesse may be forgiven, Act. 8.22.

This Idol, this golden wedge of Tithes was execrated in most, if not in all
other Countries by the first Reformers, only Episcopacy has thus reprived the
worshipping of it so long in England; and unless these gods of theirs be sent
away packing with them, as it is impossible that either of them can chastely
long observe a voluntary withdrawing from each other, much less an unwilling
parting; so may we be as certain, that where ever such a carkeis is, there
will be the Eagles (of spiritual prey) gathered together, Math. 24.28. if not
the worst of ravenous carrion Crows.

And in regard this is a subject, which through the successive iniquity of the
times has not been permitted to be treated on; as it cannot be expected but
much will be omitted which might be produced against it: so if any thing which
is superfluous, or that might have been spared is yet alleged; the well
affected Reader as he is bound in charity, so is he requested in all courtesy
to seek to salve it by Christian admonishing and reproof. It cannot upon due
trial be found unseasonable at such a time when Civil and Church estate are
both to be reformed, to have said somewhat about this Cankerworme, which with
such pestilent influence reflects and feeds upon them both. Under the Law two
witnesses were as good as twenty even in case of Civil death; and if but two
be found to witness against this monster, such as are wanting may be the
better spared; but through Gods gracious assistance we are sufficiently
provided, if the Gospel of truth it self wherein we have a complete Jury of
Apostles, and our blessed Savior not disdaining to be foreman, may be
believed, and prevail with us in a cause which so much concerns our selves,
the interest of all Estates.

Our Savior in his Commission to the Apostles for preaching of the Gosspel,
inserts this injunction, viz. Freely ye have received, freely give, Math. 20.
from verse. 5. to 8. Into whatsoever City ye enter, and they receive you, eat
such things as are set before you, Luke 10.8. In obedience whereunto Paul says
unto the Thessalonians, Ye may remember our laboring night and day, because
we would not be chargeable unto any of you, 1 Thessalonians. 2.9. and in that respect
tells the Corinthians, It were better for him to dye than that any man should
make his glorying void, 1 Cor. 9, 15. My Brethren, have we not here the
express commands of God concerning his Ministers maintenance, and Paul's
conforming thereunto, both related to us by inspiration of the blessed Spirit?
and will we yet from a typical prohibition only of not musling an Ox that
trod out the corn under the Law, Deuteronomy. 25.4. presume to leavie maintaintenance
by force of arms for the Ministry of the Gospel? when it appears plainly by
Paul in the beginning of that Chapter where he quotes the same words, 1 Cor.
9.9. that we are now only bound by the equity thereof: that is, Christians are
now obliged in conscience to order matters in such manner that Ministers of the
Gospel might live comfortably of the Gospel, verse. 14. and Paul had this power
as well as other Apostles, v. 3 4. to require it by exhortation; and yet he
never used it toward the Corinthians, lest he should hinder the Gospel of
Christ, v. 12. But what power is it which Paul says he never exercised toward
the Corinthians? not a Civil power; for we do not find in any place that
ever he had such a power; but a power he had to eat and drink such things as
were set before him, 1 Cor. 9.4. with Luke 10.8. And as the believers were
bound in conscience to give them a competent allowance to live upon, so the
Apostles both might and ought to press it upon their consciences, receiving it
as a gift, not to satisfy their covetousness, nor yet so much for supplying
their own necessities, as out of a desire that the fruit thereof might abound
to the Donors accounts, Phil. 4.17. I know the exceptions will be, that if
Ministers must have no other maintenance but what good Christians will give
them of their own accords; the Universities will become solitary, Learning of
no account, and the Ministry of the Gospel grow contemptible and quite
deserted. To this seeming threefold cord of objections, I will only answer,
that these are all but fears and jealousies of mortal men at belt, which may
not be put in competition, much less make void our Saviors Commission and
Paul's practice, both which proceeded from the infallible Spirit of God for
preaching of the Gospel freely; which whilst it was practiced in the Primitive
times proved so successful, and amongst other blessed effects wrought so
powerfully upon their spirits, as that we find not a few only, but even all
that believed had all things common, who selling their goods and possessions
parted them to all men as they had need, Act. 2.44.45. Do we think the
Apostles or other Ministers could want amongst Christians that were thus all of
one mind, no man saying that any thing was his own which he possessed, Act
4.32? Or do we distrust Gods providence, and think his Ordinances have not
the same blessings both spiritual and temporal accompanying them, if we be
alike faithful in submitting unto them? or if a Minister which truly labors
in the Gospel shall really want maintenance, may he betake himself to
requiring it by compulsive means, or else not preach at all, or preach
unwillingly, for which he has no president in Scripture, neglecting Paul's
example, who wrought with his own hands, that he might make the Gospel without
charge, and yet think to share reward with Paul in heaven? 1 Cor. 9.17.18. he
may steal as well (for it is a robbing them of that Gospel which was directed
to them, if he withhold it totally, set such a price on it, or in such a manner
as God never gave commission) and though he escape on earth, his sins will
follow after him to judgment, 1 Timothy 5.24. He that walks in darkness
knows not whither he goes, John. 12.35. he may be in hell before he be
aware. Since then light is come into the world, let us not be found to love
darkness rather than light, John 3.19. the Epidemicall corruption throughout
all Christendom, of men's thrusting themselves into the Ministry merely to
make a gain thereof, which Paul disavowed, 2 Cor. 12.17. and not sincerely for
the Gospels sake: For as it cannot be denied but such are more swayed with the
love of lucre than of Christ, so is it an undoubted cause that their endeavors
ever since have proved so unprofitable unto the people, still remaining for the
most part without any power of godliness, secure in ignorance, dead in sin:
whereas we observed before the great successefulnes wherewith God was pleased
to bless the contrary practice in the Apostles times; and if yet we shall
apply our selves to follow them in this particular, God can no more be wanting
to second us with a blessing, than to deny himself in suffering his own
Ordinances to be ineffectuall, injurious to his people, and prejudicial to his
Gospels cause. On let us try our good God herein before we censure Him of
unfaithfulness: and the Lord in much mercy prevent, that this temptation
remain no more amongst us, to the great scandal of our B^^thren of Scotland,
and other Protestant Churches; not without great shame unto our selves in this
world, and imminent danger of rasing up against us in the world to come.

FINIS.

