CATHOLIC HISTORY, Collected and gathered out of Scripture, Councels, Ancient
Fathers, and modern Authentic Writers, both Ecclesiastical and Civil; for the
satisfaction of such as doubt, and the confirmation of such as believe, the
Reformed Church of ENGLAND.

Occasioned by a Book written by Dr. Thomas Vane, ENTITLED, The Lost sheep
returned home.

By Edward Chisenhale, Esquire.

Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 30. Christianus si malus evaserit, pejor fit quam
suisset Gentilis.

2 Pet. 2.21. For it had been better for them not to have known the way of
righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment
given unto them.

London, Printed by J.C. for Nath-Brooks, at the sign of the Angel in Cornhil.
1653.

To the Right Reverend, The LEGAL CLERGY OF The Reformed Protestant Church OF
ENGLAND.
The Author Wishes many days of consolation here, and eternal joy in the Holy
Ghost.
THe Israelites lamented after the Lord, when the Ark was removed, and it
pittyed the children of Sion to see her stones in the dust, and how can any
sing a song of the Lord in a strange Land? For my own part, many have been the
troubles of my spirit (Right Reverend) for the desolations and miseries that
have of late befallen our English Church; and amongst the rest, this has not
been, the least affliction of my soul, to see her, like Sennacherib, murdered
of her own sons, to see her laid desolate, whilst her enemies cry, There,
there, so would we have it.

When Jerusalem was destroyed, she became an habitation unto strangers; and our
English Sion being now laid waste, a Babylonish Tower of Rome would fain be
built by the Enemy upon our holy Hill.

But that which most afflicted me, was, to see the sons of our Sion's Tower,
being completely furnished out of her spiritual Magazine, and being harnessed,
and carrying bows to resist the Darts of Satan, should like the children of
Ephraim turn their backs in the day of battle, amongst whom I find Doctor
Vane, the Author of a Book entitled, The lost sheep returned home, to be the
Ring leader and chief of the Apostate-Tribe; who had no fooner escaped out of
our English sheepfold, but straightway he discovers the Muset through which he
stole, thinking thereby to decoy the rest of the flock into the Wilderness.

Now I seeing this injury done unto our English Vineyard, though it was not
proper to me to make up the fence did presume to lay these thorns in the
breach, whereby I might divert the Flock from straying after novelties, and
seeking after strange Pastors, and in the interim blind the Wolves, that they
should not discover the breach that is made in our Pale.

Some I know will condemn me for presuming to treat upon this subject, being a
Theme too high for my reach, and too sacred for my calling; and with Socrates
will condemn Lysia's Oration, as not being suitable for him that was to
pronounce it. If there be any such amongst us, I desire them to take notice,
That when the Temple was to be rebuilt, all the people of Israel (without
exception) contributed toward the work, Ezra 11.5, 6. The Priests, and
Levites, and all the children of Israel, etc. and appointed the Levites to set
forward the work, Chap. 3.8. For my part, I do not desire to transgress the
bounds of a well-wishing Israelite; I do not with Uzzah think to support the
Ark with my own hand, but humbly present to your judicious sense, the sweet
smelling flowers which grow in others Gardens; and withal, give your
Reverendships a view of the wild Thistles that bear no Figgs; leaving it to
your choice to weed out the one, and root up the other, to whom the work more
properly belongs. For my part, had I not perceived that the hearts of many of
the Romish Faction were hardened through the deceitfulness of that Book,
insomuch that many began to triumph over the wounds therein given to our
English Church, as if the Protestant Religion were neckt in the sparring
blows; And had I not been upbraided daily with the clamorous insultings of
diverse Papists, that our Church wanting grounds of Replies, was the cause of
her silence; I had neither given them this occasion to censure me of
presumption, or busied my self either for their information, or the Church of
England's justification; the one more properly belonging to another charge,
the other needless, in respect the quarrel they have renewed, is but with their
own shadow; all that ever they now pretend being heretofore fully answered; the
force of Divinity, and weight of Reason, adjudging the Garland to our English
Church.

Nevertheless, those answers being in several pieces, and many not having the
several Books, and the Doctor having couched many subject matters in one
Volume, I thought it requisite that a Reply were composed in answer to his
objections; not the importance of his subject matter, but the ease and
convenience of the people to have him answered in one piece, calling upon some
to this work.

And I consulting with my self, and imagining (after so long a time of its not
being answered) that the more judicious amongst you might perhaps think it
below them to make a reply to that, which had already by others been most fully
and plainly refuted, answered) did assume the boldness to re-capitulate this
ensuing Treatise, which (together with my self) I prostrate at your feet.

Amphion played ever best, when he heard poor Ithoneus blow upon his Oaten Pipe;
and I could wish these rude Collections of mine might but serve as a
Plain-song, whereon your Reverendships might descant.

I did not intend that these loose pieces thrown into the Gap, should stand for
a sufficient Fence for our English Vineyard; only I was something confident,
that they might be serviceable to you, and be made use of in part, as being
Materials prepared for your use, wherewith you might firmly repair the Breach
which the Doctor has made; which being set by your more Divine hands, might
become a growing Rampire against the Wolves and Foxes that would steal into
your Vineyard, to pluck your Grapes, and a standing Bulwark to keep her up,
maugre the engines of Hell and Satan.

I know it is you, to whom the charge of the Plantation is committed, it is you
that are the proper Husbandmen, and know best how to fence her clusters; you
are the Levites must repair the breaches in our English Tabernacle.

I beseech you be not offended that I have taken notice of this Gap made in
your Fence, but rather let this my boldness find pardon from your goodness,
and let this piece be acceptable to you, as coming from one, that in humility
and love desires you to have an eye to this breach; and if (when you view the
pieces I have thrown into the Gap) you find any that are proper for your
Fence, fix it down, and throw the rest by; or if (in your judgments) you think
it need no further reparation, yet vouchsafe to confirm it with your holy hand:
and since this bold action merely proceeded from my earnest affection, and love
unfeigned toward my brethren of your household; and to manifest my desire to be
folded under your charge, I humbly beg, that you would favorably interpret the
the truths, and gently correct the errors of the same; and that against all
malicious and injurious encounters of the Enemy, both I and it may find shelter
under your wings. In confidence whereof, I remain (upon my knees asking your
Fatherly Benediction upon your obedient son in Christ Jesus, and)

Your Reverendships most devoted, most humble and faithful Servant

Edward Chisenhale.
From Chisenhale, Febr. 11. 1651.
Catholic HISTORY.
CHAP. I. The Jntroduction.
THe Author of the Book, entitled, A lost Sheep returned home, begins his Book
with an INTRODUCTION, which might invite any good Christian to read further,
and to fix his Meditations upon the ensuing Discourse, in hopes to meet with
excellent matter, suitable to that groundwork which is so fairly laid, to wit,
That the means to attain Eternal Life is not otherwise then by Faith, grounded
on the Word of God; and not by Discourse founded on the Principles of Reason,
nor by Reliance upon Authority humane. And that God revealed all these things
to Jesus Christ, and he to his Apostles, Joh. 15.15. to the end that they
should deliver them to Mankind, to be received, believed, and obeyed over the
whole world, even to the end thereof; bidding them, Mat. 28. Go and teach all
Nations; and that they did accordingly teach all Nations, Mark 16.20. And
concludes, That the Universal Christian Church was built upon the Apostles, and
that nothing is to be believed as matter of Faith besides that which was
delivered of them, as S. Paul says, Ephesians. 2.20. And are built upon the
Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the chief
Cornerstone.

The Doctor (if the Author of that Book) plays the part of a careful builder,
to seek out a good Foundation; but they who please to examine his work, will
find he proves himself a bungling workman; for he goes on without line or
level in order to this Foundation, and presently his superstructures find new
bottoms: His eyes may be lifted up to the hills, and his purpose might be to
have builded upon the Rock; but his mind is presently changed, his Meditations
presently become earthly, and his hands are found scratching in the sand: with
the Lark he begins to sing and mount up toward Heaven, but his weak quils
presently flag; he comes down and builds a nest below upon the Earth.

In his first leaf he professes the Church built upon the Apostles, and that
nothing else is to be believed as matter of Faith, but what was delivered of
them; and then presently after he brings in the Traditions of Rome for his
ground of all: So that they who please to compare the frontispiece of that work
with the inward rooms of the whole building, will find it to be like Julian
his picture, which whilst Christians (according to the Roman Law) bowed unto
it, they were deluded, he having put false gods in the picture, that they might
unwittingly adore those cunningly included Idols. The Frontispiece of that Book
invites every Christian Soul to take up its lodging within that Tabernacle,
which being further riffled into, it proves a painted Sepulcher. The fairest
Apples are not always the soundest at the heart; no more may the ensuing
Discourse of that Book be judged by the Introduction: for who pleases to
compare that Frontispiece with the matter contained in the following Chapters,
must confess, when he meditates upon the Introduction, Here is the chief
Cornerstone in Sion, elect and precious; but when, upon the following matter,
that there he meets with the crasied pieces of Babylon, the rubbish and
trumpery of humane Inventions; here the chief head of the corner, which the
Doctor having forsaken, is become a stone of stumbling, a rock of offense:
there the rotten principles of man's framing, for want of this Foundationstone,
sink under the vain top ambition has towered upon them.

The Pharisees made broad their Phylacteries, which S. Jerome, upon Matthew. 23.
compares to certain women, who carried up and down Parvula Evangelia, thinking
by those Spells to be free from danger: and it may be the Doctor thinks the
rest of his Book shall escape censure for its Introduction sake, but he must
not think to escape by reason thereof; it does rather increase, then extenuate
his condemnation. Seneca witnesses, that the Heathen reputed it an indignity
to the Emperor, that any should Principis Imaginem obscaenis infer, much more
should Christians beware how they engrave our Saviors name upon vain and
unsuitable pieces. If Achan have any thing execrable consecrated, his Tent must
be searched, and the Babylonish garment with the wedg of gold (though hid in
the midst thereof) must be ransacked, and exposed to public defacing or utter
demolishing: And must the Doctor think, because he has written upon the Portal
IHS, that his new built Babel, standing upon another Basis, and not upon that
Cornerstone, shall be free from winds and storms? No: such Paper Buildings
must expect that their lofty fames must bury their heads in their sandy
bottoms, and serve for no other use then to administer comfort to them that
stand upon the Rock, beholding the ruins of Babel.

The Introduction, as it stands in that Book, serves for an Index, to show from
what the Doctor is fallen, from a practique to a speculative Religion, from a
Church built upon Christ and his Apostles, to a Synagogue of Statists, who
having cast aside the Commandments of God, prefer their own humane Inventions,
which merely tend to the vassaling of Princes, and trampling upon all the
Churches of Gods Saints; who prescribing rules to others, become lawless unruly
Masters of all, making the whole World, as it were, an Ass for the
triple-crown'd Pope to ride on, who would have it thought humility in him to
bestride so dull a Beast.

It likewise speaks the Author a wavering and unstedfast man; it contains in it
self a Contradiction: and as the Doctor now contradicts that Faith he formerly
professed, and sets himself against that Church he was christened and educated
in; so his Book contradicts the Introduction, and the Introduction contradicts
it self, both being the fruits of the spirit of Contradiction.

In the beginning of the Introduction he says, Peter is Prince of the Apostles;
in the latter end he says, The Church is built upon the Apostles generally,
Jesus being the chief Cornerstone: and in Chap. 20. he says, It is built upon
Peter alone, and his successors.

From these varieties of his unsettled Opinions results this Conclusion, That
Protestants can neither take courage to follow after him, nor Papists gather
any assurance (from this experience of his temper) of his non-recoyling.

I hope his change proceeded not out of hardness of heart, that he for private
ends should, against his own judgment, set himself against his Mother Church,
but only out of some failings in his Judgment: and therefore I have adventured
to lay open the E^ors of his choice, which if he please to consider seriously,
I may win him again to his proper Sheepfold, from whence he is gone astray; how
ever I hope I shall, by the blessing of God, hinder others from wandering after
him, and shall be a means to make up that gap, which the Doctor has made in
the pale of our Church; which whilst it lay open, administered occasion for
some to escape into the Wilderness: Wherefore I will not hold the Reader longer
in suspense with a dilatory Introduction, but will briefly show that the Doctor
is not gone to the Catholic Church, which is the main thing he persuades,
(though it be obscurely wrapped in general terms in his first Chapter,) but that
he has forsaken the faith once given to the Saints; he has gone away from the
pu^e Fountain of Verity to the puddle of Error; he has forsaken the living
water, and chosen the Romish cisterns (dug by men's hands) which hold no
water.

CHAP. II.
That the Roman Church is not the Catholic Church, either in respect of the
Universality of her Doctrine, or any Jurisdiction she can claim from Peter, or
by the consent of the Primitive Churches; and that the Pope is not the
governing Head of the Catholic Church.
THe Church is called Catholic in several respects: 1. In respect of places,
as being spread universally through the whole world, and is not tied to any
place or Kingdom. 2. In respect of Times, because but one Church of all Times;
it having ever been from the beginning of the World, and shall continue on
Earth till the end thereof; Isai. 59.21. and Matthew. 28. the Church of both
Testaments being one and the same. 3. In respect of the Collective Body
thereof, the Catholic Church being gathered of men of both Testaments, and
the Communion of Saints being the union and coherence of all the Saints in
Christ their Head; according to that of Paul, Ephesians. 1.10. That he might gather
together in one all things, both which are in Heaven, and which are in Earth
even into Christ; who is and ever shall be King and Head thereof. And generally
when we speak of the Catholic Church, this Collective Church is to be
understood; which appellation, Catholic, was used by the Apostles before ever
Rome was a Church: So that neither in respect of Place, Time, or
Catholiqueness, may Rome justly challenge the only Title of Catholic, she
being but a particular part or member of this Catholic Church, we the Saints
being the Body and Members for our part, Ephesians. 1.22. But for the better
illustration of this Point, I will examine the Doctors Arguments in particular,
concerning Romes Catholiqueship; and I shall in so doing more plainly disprove
her Title thereunto.

The word Catholic, as it is defined by the Doctor, is not a word of Belief
only, but of Communion also: So that, that Church which holds the same Belief
with the ancient Church, and yet does not communicate with her, may not rightly
be called Catholic. I shall retort this Argument which he intended against
the Protestants, and prove it to be their Justification, and the Church of
Romes own Condemnation.

Catholic, as I said, in a general sense comprehends all the Elect, and is
the full Body of Christ that fills all things in all things, Ephesians. 4. And when
we in our Creed say, We believe in the Holy Catholic Church, it is understood
of all the Elect of God, which have been, are, or shall be; of which the
Church-Militant on Earth is but part. But because I suppose the Doctor means
only of a Church upon Earth, I will therefore insist upon his own definition,
and treat of the Church upon Earth, which, as it is universally spread over the
Earth by the Apostles, who had equal commission to teach all Nations, no one
particular Church can or ought to claim to be the Catholic or Universal
Church upon Earth.

As for the Distinction which the Doctor makes betwixt Doctrine and Discipline,
thereby to excuse the unproper style of Roman Catholic; That is (says he)
Catholic in respect of Doctrine, Roman in respect of Discipline: That will no
ways strengthen her claim, or clear her incongruous Title: He does but thereby
show the World how distinct her Discipline is from her Doctrine, and thereby
give occasion to the world to suspect both: And upon this score may the
Presbyterian Church of Geneva be called the Geneva Catholic Church; that is,
Geneva for Discipline, Catholic for Doctrine, she professing the Catholic
Faith of the holy and blessed Trinity: and yet the Church of Rome, I persuade
my self, would think much that such a glorious appellation should be given to
such an upstart Youngling, that wind-egg of a Tumult, Geneva Church
which being braddened under a Toad of France, is become a staring Cockatrice,
and thinks to center the World within the compass of his contagious Den,
darting poison upon whom he first espies; as experience tells us, how he
glancing upon the poor Scot, has given him such a deadly wound, that he will
scarce ever recover it; teaching those that have escaped that plague, with the
Wesel, each morning to bite on Rue, which, says Avicen, secures her against the
toxicating of that venomous Basilisk: I say, if the Church of Rome think much
that the Geneva Church should arrogate such a glorious style, let her never
stand upon her own Title, which is equally weak to challenge the same.

The Doctor proceeds further upon Romes Ti^le to her Catholiqueship, and gives
a further explication of the same.

Catholic (says the Doctor) imports both the vast extention of Doctrine to
Persons and Places, and the union of all these places in communion.

It cannot be denied but that there were other Churches of ancienter and more
reverend setlement then the Church of Rome, as the Churches in the East, as
Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus, etc. and in aftertimes the Gospel was to be
carried before Kings, and to the Gentiles by S. Paul, being by Jesus ordained a
Minister and an Apostle of the Gentiles, amongst whom Rome was then a chief
City, which as she received the Faith by S. Paul, or S. Peter, cannot properly
be called a Mother Church, but as a babe and suckling received the sincere milk
of the Word: She was one of the places to which the Doctrine of the Catholic
Church of Christ was extended, but no extender of that Doctrine. So that by the
Doctors own definition, she cannot properly be called the Catholic Church,
she being in her Institution but a private particular Member of the Catholic
Church, as Englands, or any other Church planted by the Ambassadors of Christ.
And if since, by the indulgent favors of her nursing Fathers, the Christian
Princes, she has grown to that maturity that she has many Daughter Churches of
her own plantation in the dark corners of the old known, and the new discovered
parts of the World; yet she cannot by reason thereof assume to her self any
more super-intendency over them as their Mother, then Jerusalem, from whence
Paul was sent after he had the laying on of hands, or Antioch, from whence it
is pretended Peter to have came, may by the same rule challenge over her and
hers a Jurisdiction as Mother to her and them.

And as in respect of extention of Doctrine she may not assume the name of
Catholic; so neither can she claim that Title to her self in respect of her
Communion with the Primitive Churches, as every point of this ensuing Discourse
will evidently show: So that unless the Universality of Power and Jurisdiction
she claims from Peter will support this her Title and Dignity, she is
altogether at a loss, and must henceforth discontinue her claim to be the only
Catholic Church. It rests therefore to examine, That,

1. Catholic in respect of Peter's having been there, Rome not Catholic ^n
respect of Peter being there.
no more then the Church of Antioch, of which he certainly was Bishop.

The power of planting the Gospel was given in charge to all the Apostles, Go
and teach all Nations: And, as the Doctor has it in his Introduction, they
going forth preached every where: And in the Acts it is said, That the Apostles
sent out Peter and John unto Samaria, hearing that they had received the Word,
who laid hands on them. If then Peter was subject to their mission, how comes
he to give unto Rome any power above other Churches of Apostolical Plantation
and by the same mission that Peter was sent out to Samaria, are elsewhere
planted? Peter was as well to observe the directions of the rest of the
Apostles, as to prescribe any Rules to them or others. It is true, Christ said
to Peter, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church. Saint
Cyprian says (Cypr. in Tract. simp. Praelat.) This was but to denote the Unity
of the Church, in that it was built upon one; for the power of governing and
instructing was alike given to all: So that admit it was built upon Peter, as
the Doctor argues, fol. 284. yet that gives nothing of superintendency to Rome;
for Christ, after his Resurrection, gave power alike to the rest; the naming of
him alone in that place was, ut Ecclesia una monstretur, not to take any power
or honor from the rest: For should it be granted that the Church was built upon
Peter alone, so that none else should plant or govern, then it would follow,
that any Church planted by any other of the Apostles, who received neither
order nor power from Peter, were not Apostolical; or true Churches of Christ,
which S. Augustine, de Doctrina Christiana, lib. 2. cap. 8. plainly affirms to
the contrary. The Apo^tles Foundations of ^e Church.
We are built, says S. Paul, Ephesians. 2.20. upon the foundations of the Apostles
and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the chief Cornerstone: by which it appears,
that the rest of the Apostles were foundations as well as Peter; and when there
was a strife amongst them, who should be greatest amongst them, Mat. 20.26.
says Christ, Whosoever shall be greatest, let him be your servant; which is
not to be understood, that Christ did thereby reprove pride and haughtiness
only, but was against superiority or pre-eminence amongst them: It is true,
Christ was not against superiority utterly, for he calls himself their Lord and
Master, John 13.10. and their head, but this pre-eminence he did not delegate
to any one amongst them, for they were the foundations, he the Cornerstone;
they the body; he the Head; they ministers, he their Master; they equal, he
their superior.

The Apostles power to plant the Gospel was equal, The Apostles power equal.
and they dispersed themselves for the propagation of the Gospel, not by any
order received from Peter, but by the Commission they received from Christ
himself. In the eighth chapter of the Acts it is said, that Philip went toward
the South and baptized the Eunuch, the Queen of Ethiopia her chief Governor,
and to this day the Catholic Faith is professed in Ethiopia, being there
preached by the said Eunuch: Nor does the Pope exercise any jurisdiction there,
which he might as well as in any other Countries which received the Faith from
some of the Apostles, and not from the Bishop of Rome, if Peter was chief
Governor of the Church, and he his successor. Does not the Scripture plainly
affirm, that the Holy Ghost came upon all? Acts 2. and Gal. 2. James, Peter and
John gave Paul the right hand of fellowship. When Christ instituted his Supper,
he said to them, Hoc est corpus meum quod pro vobis datur, hoc facite, etc. He
gave to all a like power of administration: And Joh. 20. As my Father sent me,
so send I you; he speaks it to all the Disciples, and not to Peter alone,
Nolite vocari Rabbi, Mat. 23. unus enim magister est vester, scilicet Jesus,
omnes autem vos fratres estis, that is, says S. Austin, you are all equal:
And S. Hierome in his Epistle to Evander, Omnes Episcopi, five Romae, five
alibie jusdem sacerdotii atque potestatis, a Christo collationem habuerunt. The
Doctor cites Bellarmines argument, that Christ is the invisible head, but there
must be a mysteriall and visible head to govern the whole: and therefore when
it is said, 1 Cor. 12. that the head cannot say to the feet, I have no need of
you, it must not be understood of Christ, for he the eternal Word can say. J
have no need, etc.

The Apostles are called skillful master builders, 1 Cor. 3. Christ the Head of
the Church.
but another foundation can no man lay then that which is laid, Jesus Christ:
It cannot therefore be understood that Peter was the foundation and rock on
which the Church was built. Christ as he is head, it is of the whole Catholic
Church, and therefore when Paul ( Ephesians. 1.) calls him the head, he brings in
both men and Angels into the rank of members, men, ver. 4. and Angels, verse.
21. But as touching the particular Churches upon earth, they all are but as so
many members of the head, Christ Jesus, and are built upon the Apostles, as the
Doctor confesses in his Introduction, who (as I said) are called
master builders, or the heads of those respective Churches, but there was not
one of them that was to bear rule over the rest: Peter was primus in ordine,
not supremus in potestate, you cannot have twelve without one, but every one is
as much one as another, whether in respect of Power or Ordination, as S.
Cyprian de unitate Ecclesiae agrees, some were ordained Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists, for the work of the Ministry, for the edification
of the body of Christ, and to every one of the Apostles was grace given,
according to the measure of the gift of Christ, by whom he ascended into
heaven: but those that were Apostles were aequales inte se, and the Churches
founded by them equal, as so many members of the mystical Head Christ Jesus,
and as to one was given by the Spirit of God Faith, to another gifts of
healing, to another Prophecy, to another interpretation of Tongues,
destributing to every one severally by the same spirit, yet this is but to make
up one body complete, for the gathering together of the Saints, for verse 27.
ye are the body of Christ, and members for your part, so that he that thinks he
has the greatest gift, must not, because he thinks himself the head, say he
has no need of the other members, for all are not Apostles, all are not
Prophets: wherefore let the Church of Rome remember what S. Paul said to the
Romans chap. 12. that none presume to understand above that which is meet to
understand, ^ut that he understand according to sobriety: for as we have many
members in one body, and all members have not the same office, so we being
many, are one body in Christ, and every one another members: wherefore then
shall the head say unto the feet, I have need of thee? will the Church of Rome
cast off all other Churches, because she supposes her Bishop is Peter's
Successor? will she be the Rock and Foundation of the Church, and leave others
as built upon the sand? S. John in his Revelations chapter 21. says, the Apostles
are counted the twelve Foundations, or twelve stones of the house of God, and
will the late Popes allow no other Foundation but Rome? The Apostles are called
Builders and Foundations, but none the chief Stone, but Christ, elect and
precious, 1 Peter 2. Behold I put in Sion a chief Cornerstone, elect and
precious; and he is the Head of the body of the Church, Colos. 1.18.

Bellarmine being engaged to maintain the Popes Supremacy, is not ashamed to
ascribe the Prophecy of Esaias, cited by S. Peter, to be meant of the Pope, which
S. Peter himself expounds of Christ. I much wonder that so great a Scholar
should commit so great an absurdity, he strains the Scriptures to maintain the
Supremacy of Rome, because of Peter being there, expounding Babylon, from
whence Peter directs his Epistle, to be meant of Rome; and yet he, against S.
Peter's interpretation, will expound the chief Cornerstone, Elect and precious,
to be put in Sion, to be the Pope of Rome, and so he makes Rome to be both Sion
and Babylon: he will have it Babylon to prove Peter there, and Sion to exclude
Christ from being Head of the Church; contrary to S. Peter's own interpretation,
and contrary to the interpretation of Cyprian, Bid, and several Fathers upon
the 21. of John, who agree that Christ was the Rock, upon which Foundation even
Peter himself was built.

The Papists, when that text of Matthew 16.18. will not serve their turn, for
to warrant their pretended title, to lord it over all other Churches, they then
fly to the 21. of John to the treble pasce, construing to feed, to signify to
govern, and because generally spoke to feed my Sheep, to govern all, not some.

The word (...) is not to rule, but to feed, An answer to the treble pasce.
and (...) are not Rectors but Pastors; wherefore to me it seems a strange
interpretation. But why should I think it strange, it is but like that other
interpretation of S. Peter before mentioned. The grand Doctor and Conclave of
Rome have the Keys of the Scripture in their Cabinet, and can by a word of
their mouth make the dead letter speak as they please, and like an Italian
Padlock open at a private kue of their own invention: they make Scripture like
the Fish Popile, which turns it self into the similitude of every object, and
they make the leafs of the holy Bible, as it were a pair of Cards, which they
can so pack by false gaming, that they can cut Christendom the head, and make
the Knave of the Clubs trump when they please.

I hope Christians in these later times, when as deceivers are come abroad,
will be more wise, then to be ensnared by the novell Doctrines of Rone, which
she holds forth to the people for her self-interest, and not their good and
welfare, and does quite forsake the Primitive truth, exalting her own
Traditionall rules above Christ, the Apostles, or the ancient Fathers, as it
were to fascinate the people under a color of Holiness, to become slaves to
her new acquired Prerogatives, though inconsistent with her See and function.

The Fathers severally concur upon this place of the 21. of John, that it was
not said to Peter, whereby to exclude the power of governing, and feeding the
flock of Christ from the rest of the Apostles, not for any honor, but rather
comfort to Peter, or if for honor, not that it was hereby enlarged to Peter
above the rest, but that it was restored to Peter, of whom Christ required a
threefold confession of love, that with his threefold confession he might blot
out his threefold denial.

Besides, the words are my Sheep, not thy Sheep, as my sheep seek my glory in
them, not thine own, my gain, not thine: Ezechiel 34. Woe to the shepherds of
Jsrael that feed themselves, not my flock. Christ here demands if he loved him,
then he should show that love to them, feed them, not thy self. Chrysostom
lib. 2. de sacerdot. when Christ said to Peter, feed my sheep, it was to teach
Peter and all the rest, how much he loved the Church, not to teach Peter alone,
but all the rest, and fo S. Austin liber de agon. cap. 3. it was spoken to all,
when it was spoken to Peter, do thou love me? feed my sheep; to him, to put
him in mind of his threefold denial; to the rest, to make them mindful of
their charge, that the same love they bare to their Master Christ, they should
now henceforth extend that love toward his Flock.

And whereas the Church of Rome does urge, that Christ gave this power to Peter
after his Resurrection, which should therefore carry more efficacy, as coming
from immortal Christ. I may answer, that this was the third time he appeared
after his resurrection, but after this he gathered them together, and commanded
them not to depart from Jerusalem, but to watch for the coming of the Holy
Ghost, Acts 1. which when they were together with one accord, it came and sat
upon each of them, Acts 2. After this the Lord Jesus appeared to Paul, Acts 9.
in a shining fire about him, and he was thereupon converted, and ordained an
Apostle and Minister o^ the Gentiles: So that admit Peter did receive by the
treble pasce a general Jurisdiction (which cannot from thence plainly be
evinced) yet Christ did after restrain this power, that it should not extend to
the Churches of the Gentiles, Paul only being appointed an Apostle and Minister
over them. Successor of Peter not equal to Peter.


I might for Argument sake, grant, that Peter had not only a Primacy, but
Supremacy over the rest of the Apostles, and yet it would not at all help the
Popes case, to claim that power over the rest of the Churches: for if Peter had
any such power, it was to him as an Apostle, neither was he the surviver of the
Apostles, so that this superiority in him as an Apostle, either died with him,
or else survived in John, who was an Apostle, and survived Peter: and Christ had
promised to be with them unto the end of the world, so that as long as any of
them were living, they were to be preferred before any that succeeded the
deceased Apostles, in their several Sees and Plantations; in respect that S.
Paul reckoning the degrees of orders in the Church, 1 Cor. 12.28. God ordained
some in the Church, first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly Teachers, etc.

Baronius writes that Peter died the 69. year after Christ, and that John the
Bishop of Ephesus survived him long. Rome uncertain in her succession.
Now if Linus succeeded Peter in the Sea of Rome, or Anacletus, or Clemens, (of
which their own stories differ) I hope they will not deny, that S. John whilst
he lived was Superior to Linus or Clemens, otherwise they give the world
occasion to laugh at them, to think that the Successors of Peter should be
above John, who was an Apostle, that the subordinate should be set above the
Superior, the derivative above the Primitive. I wonder that the Papists should
think the world so stupid and void of Christianity, that they should prefer
one of her pretended Bishops, and if a Bishop there, it was by humane
Institution, before John, who was an Apostle by divine right, and called by
Jesus Christ the only Son of the living God, and one, on whom the Holy Ghost
had vouchsafed to descend and sit upon his head; and therefore certainly was to
be preferred before any Linus or Anacletus of humane ordination; and if at any
time after Peter, any other was to be preferred before the Bishop of Rome, then
her succession from Peter, by which she claimed her Universal Jurisdiction, is
quite destroyed.

Bellarmine lib. 2. de Pontif. cap. 12. and Ca^^tan de Jnstitut. Pontif. cap.
13. to evade, this Argument will have their succession from the fact of Peter,
inasmuch as Peter was Bishop there, and not from the Institution of Christ, and
so they make their Catholic Church matter of fact, not Faith.

And the better to color this their assertion, they stick not to add, that it
was by the special appointment of Christ that Peter placed his See at Rome,
and died there; and for this they fly to their never failing starting hole, the
Magazine of Romish Traditions, and from thence borrow a story, how Christ met
Peter as he was flying out of Rome for fear of persecution, and admonisht him
to return, that he might die at Rome, and that the very print of their feet, as
they two talked together, is at this day to be seen without the Gates of Rome.

The first founder of this story is Linus, a foolish counterfeit writer, as
Baronius terms him, and should any Christian give up himself to believe this
story, it were to forfeit his faith he has in S. Peter and the Catholic
Church, which believed the profession of Peter to be the Dictates of the Holy
Ghost, by which is expressly declared, that the heavens shall contain him till
he come, Acts 3.21. Now that he should be so corporeally there, as to leave the
print of his feet behind him, is so much against the Scripture, and the tenants
of the Primitive Church, as I shall show in the sixteenth chapter, that for my
part I dare not admit it into my belief. Yet suppose that Peter was at Rome,
and by a Vision was warned to go back to Rome; I know not what this can make
for the late Successors of Popes in that See to claim their Universal
Jurisdiction, they have no rule by divine Writ nor Revelation, or vision, to
confirm it to them any further then by humane consent, as by consent of
Counsels, grant of Princes, and by election of Cardinals: therefore
whatsoever is of late acquisition, if it be contrary to the rules of Christ
given to his Apostles, it is not for other Churches to believe and follow it,
nor to give their obedience to it as matter of Faith, for they are built upon
Christ the chief Cornerstone, and have Apostolical Foundations, as S. John
calls the Doctrine of the Apostles, and if Christ by Vision warned Peter to go
to Rome, it cannot be construed, that that Vision shall be a warrant for the
succeeding Popes to claim the same Prerogatives Peter had, in that it appeared
to Peter, it was to teach him to follow Christ, to lay down his life for the
profession of the faith in him, who spared not his own blood for the redemption
of mankind, and is from heaven, but these succeeding Bishops are elected by
men, claim more then ever Peter had, giving rules of obedience to others, and
lording it over Gods Heritage, do thereby manifest their calling to be earthly,
and not true Successors of Peter. Peter if he planted his See there, it was by
Vision from heaven, but the late Bishops of Rome, they consult with flesh and
blood, and by sinister means, by strivings, contentions, and plottings of
aspiring and covetous men, is the Chair continually furnished with a Patron, in
so much that a Cicilian Cardinal coming to the Election of a new Pope, and
finding such a change from the old way (which was wont to be with supplications
to God, for the directions and assistance of his holy Spirit in so great a
work, and not by the then present practices, to wit, menaces, promises of
rewards, perfas aut nefas to climb the Chair) ad hunc modum, says he, fiunt
Romani Pontifices, and so departed and retired himself from that Scarlet tribe
for ever after. And here by the way I beg leave of the Reader to speak a word
or two concerning the Cardinals of Rome, though I must confess it be a little
digression from the point, but I will be brief, and return to the subject
matter of this chapter again.

I could wish to be satisfied by what Authority Paschalls did create the Parish
Priests of Rome Cardinals, Of the Order of Cardinals
for it is no spiritual order, as is confessed in sum Sacrament, Romans Eccles.
Sect. 154. Cardidalis non est Sacerdos, nec habet de jure potestatem
absolvendi, and it is no honor temporal, because not derived from any King or
Prince (from whom all true titles of honor are derived). It Is true, Carolus
Magnus had then lately endowed the Sea of Rome, with a Donation of the
Exarchate of Ravenna, and the Dukedom of Spoletto, with some other territories
which he annexed to the Sea, for the support of hospitality, and to promote the
charity of the succeeding Popes of Rome not giving them thereby any Iura
regalia, as I shall show anon in the thirteenth Chapter. Neither is there any
warrant from Scripture, or other antiquity to warrant these titles, unless
like a Sowter the leather with his teeth, his Holiness will strain Scripture
so far, that he will have that place of 1 Samuel 2. Domini sunt Cardines terrae
to be prophetical of their order, or else orrows the phrase from a Carpenter,
who is said to incardinate, or mortize, or rivet: and the Pope alluding to
this, thinks he has so engeniously strengthened the door of his Palace, by
these adventitious props, which (though at first they were but underhand Vicars
to the Parish Priests of Rome, insomuch that a Bishop formerly refused to
accept the title, because he would not descend from a higher to a lower
dignity; yet now (through the iniquity of time, the pride of Popes, and the
dullness of Christian Princes) are started up from minor shrubs, to top the
pole of Majesty, and instead of Parish Priests, are become Princes Peers, and
by Pope Nicholas the second, made sole Electors of the Pope, of which in the
fourteenth chapter.

The first that was elected by their holy honors was Pope Hildebrand, a most
troublesome wicked man, of whom you will hear more hereafter; and one, in whom
nature seemed to have placed the indelible characters of rebellion against God
and man, a fitting son for such a Mother; the first born of this purple
Conclave, in whom they perceived their own Image, and that the tree might be
known by the fruit, did therefore elect him Pope, who did not afterward
bastard his calling but manifested through the course of his life, from whence
he sprung, and lest in time this plantation should degenerate from that
sublimity was then challenged by them, they have continually since studied to
find out men suitable to their own heart to make Cardinals of, and generally
such are chosen into this order, as will not stick to pull down their natural
Prince, to advance the designs of their new Master: witness my Countryman
Allen, who confessed to the Jesuit. Parsons, that his Holiness had made him
Cardinal, intending to send him as his Legate, for the sweeter managing of that
great and godly design of the Spanish Armado against England, and that he
compiled a book which should have been published for the better drawing on the
people of England to join with the Spaniard. The first part whereof was
called, A Declaration of the Sentence, the second, an Admonition to the
Nobility, wherein he promised their safety and preservation, though it may be
doubted he intended to practice the feats of an Allen upon them, which says
Purchase in his Pilgrimage, lib. 8. cap. 3. beats other Beads, till they vomit
their prey for him to devour, and then dismisses them away with little meat in
their bellies, or feathers on their backs, and t^is like he would have used our
Noble^ no better, had his Bilbo Blades been once brandished on our English
plains, and proved successful in that design. He for this his unnatural
cruelty and treachery against his own dear Country and liege Lord, was admitted
(as Saul amongst the Israelites) chief of the scarlet crew; a godly tribe, and
truly worthy of their red Cap and Gown, as thereby denoting to the world their
bloody inventions and close practices against all that will not become
subservient homages, and vassalize themselves to their impious Lord and Master,
to whom I desire-to return my present discourse, to disprove his pretended
Catholiqueship.

I have hitherto argued ex Concesso, Peter was not Bishop of Rome.
that Peter was not Bishop of Rome, which I desire might be proved. I find that
he was appointed over them of the Circumcision, and Paul was to preach unto the
Gentiles, he was appointed Bishop of Antioch, and I do not find that he was
removed by any order or mission of the rest to translate his See to Rome, nor
that he himself had any vision or revelation to warn him thereunto: when he
went to Cornelius, being a Gentile, we read that it was upon special
revelation, Acts 10. for ordinarily it was not lawful for him to accommodate
with the Gentiles, he being consigned over them of the Circumcision, insomuch
that Paul withstood him to his face, Galat 2. for accompanying with the
Gentiles, which the Doctor confesses in his book cap. 20. to be an error of
conversation; wherefore for him to argue that Peter was at Rome, is to charge
Peter with more errors, and so it will prove a hard task for the Pope to prove
his Church built upon him, to be infallible, unless he can prove mission of
the rest of the Apostles, or an especial revelation from God for his so doing.

The Popes Parasites must pump for a new tradition, to prove that Peter had
another vision for his coming to Rome, as they have already done, to prove his
returning back to Rome, when he had intended to have left it, and when that is
done, still they are at a non plus; for should they prove that he was there, it
does not thereby follow that he was Bishop there; for if so they charge him
again with another condemnable error, as that he should for fear of persecution
forsake his Flock, insomuch as his own traditions say, he was flying out of
Rome, for fear of the persecution, which was not done like a good Shepherd, if
he had a flock in Rome, wherefore should they prove him there, and that he was
warned to return, as their traditionall story does purport, yet they cannot
from thence conclude that he was Bishop there, his walking through all quarters
did not make him Bishop in another Dicesse; James continued Bishop of
Jerusalem, notwithstanding Peter and the rest were there, nor is it evident, by
the Scripture, that he walked through the Gentiles quarters: For admit
universal power of governing was given to him by the treble pasce, yet yet it
was afterward restrained from the Gentiles, Paul being a chosen Vessel for to
carry the Gospel to them, and was ordained an Apostle and Minister to that
end, Paul appointed over the Gentiles. infra. 63. chap. 8.
so that where it is said that Peter walked thorough all quarters, that is to
be understood, the then known quarters of the East, for at that time Paul was
not called, who after his Ordination preached at Damascus and Jerusalem, and
after to the people of Rome, and that without let, as it is in the last of the
Acts, and he did magnify his office, Romans 11.13. in that he was appointed over
them, Marsilius defensor pacis 2. dict. 16. cap. affirms, that he was Bishop
there, and if so, then Peter's coming thither did not nullify his Office, for
that it was the direction of the Holy Ghost, Romans 15.19. that none should build
upon another foundation, that is, they should not be busy Bishops in another
Diocese, so that it will be very hard for the Doctor to prove his Holiness
Peter's Successor.

Linus, who by some, is supposed immediate Successor after Peter in that
Diocese, was a Disciple of Paul's, and sent greeting to Timothy from Rome, 2 Timothy 4.21. Peter directing his Epistles from Babylon, makes mention of Silva^us
and Marcus, and Paul writing many Epistles from Rome, as the Epistles of the
Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossi^ns, the second Epistle to Timothy,
and the Epistle to Philemon, never makes mention of Silvanus in any of them;
and for Mark, he writes to have him come to Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.11. so that it is
probable that Peter wrote not his Epistle from Rome, and that Linus, if he were
Bishop there, succeeded Paul, not Peter.

As for the traditions of Rome, of Peter his being there, and his being Bishop
there, they have no ground from Scripture, but rather plain and evident
testimonies to the contrary, wherefore as yet they find little faith with many,
insomuch that Marsilius, one of their own Writers, suspects the truth thereof:
It was (says he) very strange that Peter should be contemporary there with
Paul; for it is plain by Scripture, that he was not there before Paul, in as
much as when Paul came thither, they had never received any letters concerning
him out of Iudaea, nor any of the Brethren ever heard of him, Acts 28.21. and
certainly he went not along with Paul, insomuch as no mention is made of him in
the express of that perilous journey, and the several miraculous occurrences
which happened to them that were with Paul; for if he was, certainly S. Luke
would have mentioned him, or if he was superintendent over Paul and the rest
(as the Papists persuade) sure he would have showed some miracle among those
Gentiles, and not have letten the people wholly follow Paul, if they had
belonged to his charge: wherefore I rather conclude that he was not there, or
if he was there, that he never was Bishop there.

Osius Bishop of Cordubia, one of no small account amongst the 318. Fathers, of
the first Council of Nice, in a Couneell at Sardis did declare, quod non
licuit episcopo de Civitate sua ad aliam transire civitatem, unde apparet se
avaritia infl^mmari and ambitioni servire ut dominattonem agat, to which all
the Fathers answered placet, this was the sense of the Fathers of those days,
as may likewise appearby the 1. Council of Nice. 16. Can. and Council. Antioch.
21.22. Can. and in the Council of Chalcedon 10. Can. Si episcopus confugit ad
aliam civitatem ob inanis glo^ie cupiditate^, revocari debet ad suam ecclesiam,
and ibi tantummodo ministrare: and Council. Nicaenum 15. Can si quis episcopus
de civitate ad civitatem transeat and se negotia manciparet in irritum ducatur
hoc factum and restituatur ecclesiae cui fu^t episcopus,

This was the profession of the Fathers of those days, who certainly, if Peter
had removed his See from Antioch to Rome, would rather for reverence sake to
him a chief Apostle, have suspended their opinions, then by promulgating
thereof, have thrown this scandal upon him.

And i^ the Doctor would but seriously consider of these reasons and opinions
of the ancient Fathers in this point, he would not ascribe universality to the Sea of Rome upon Peter's score, for by them it appears that Peter ought not to
remove his See, and if he did, it was void. And the Doctor confesses fol. 288.
he was Bishop of Antioch, and if so, he ought not to remove his See, unless
you will make him above Counsels, and that is plain in the 14. of the Acts to
the contrary, of which I shall speak at large in the chapter of Counsels: and
to say that by any revelation he came thither, and planted his See there, that
were to deny the holy Spirit to the general Councels, who declare the contrary
to that Revelation, and so they will make the Church fallible, of which in the
eighth chapter. It might be that upon some extraordinary occasion (as Eusebius
says) he came thither to withstand Simon Magus; Paul desiring his assistance,
he might come to Rome, but without all doubt he was never Bishop there, for it
is both against the testimony of Scripture, and the infrence of Counsels.

Lastly, I conceive that Peter was not Bishop of Rome, though (I confess) I am
something induced to believe he might be there, for that the Bishops of Rome
vary in their styles, sometimes they style themselves Successors of Peter, and
sometimes of Peter and Paul. I my self have seen a Bull of the Popes, dated 1500.
wherein his Holiness is styled the Successor of Peter and Paul.

Thus these grave Fathers of Rome, like the Elders that would have betrayed
Susanna, cannot agree in a story, they would despoil other Churches of their
Rights and Privileges, and ascribe all Jurisdiction to their own See; but
examine them apart, and they cannot agree how and by what means to derive their
title thereunto: for who please to examine Platina, Onup rius, Genebrard,
Sabellicus, Anastatius, Baronius, and such like Pope Parasites about this point
of Succession from Peter, will find them agree like a dog about a bone; and
like Aesops dog, they snatch at he shadow, and let go what they had; they that
might universally lord it over all other Churches of the world, will needs give
Peter a strange power, and tie that power to themselves, whereas if they could
have been content to have acknowledged themselves Successors to Paul, as he
having been Bishop there, and being the Apostle of the Gentiles, I persuade my
self that no Churches of this Western world, but would give the Bishop of Rome
the right hand of fellowship; but since the boundless ambition of the Pope
carries them beyond all limit of fellowship, it makes others to set their
ambitious ends at defiance, and to stand fast to that Christian liberty to
which they are called, only to beware they use it not as an occasion to the
flesh, but by love to serve one another, Gal. 5.13.

I have I hope sufficiently proved, that Rome may not challenge to her self any
universality in respect of Peter having been there; for that it is not
altogether clear and manifest that he was there, or if he was there, that he
was Bishop there, or if he was, it makes not much for them to prove any
universality to the succeeding Bishops in that See; and if from Peter no
universality will arise to them, it rests to examine whether they may claim it
by consent of Counsels.

The first general Council, the Council of Nice, The Counsels against the
Universality of Rome.
to three principal Patriarchs, Alexandria, Rome and Antioch, and after came
in Constantinople, and by the sixth Canon thereof, Egypt, Lybia, etc. were
allotted to Alexandria, quia and urbis Romae episcopo parilis mos est. And
hereupon Athanasius says, Roma est metropolis Romanae ditionis; Rome was shut
within the compass of her own Province, inasmuch as she was made like unto
Alexandria: therefore the Government of Alexandria was like unto Rome, which
likewise proves the Bishop of Rome provincial, not universal.

The second general Council, the first Council of Constantinople, the second
Can. did appoint, that the Bishops of the East were only to govern the Eastern
Churches, saving to Antioch metropolitan Jurisdiction, the Asian Bishops to
govern the Asian Churches, Nec non and Ponti episcopi eas quae sunt in Ponto,
and Thraciarum quae in Thraciis sunt, gubernent, veruntamen propterea quod urbs
ipsa sit junior Roma: By which it appears that Romes primacy over
Constantinople is in respect of the honor done to her City and seat of the
precedent Emperors, not in respect of any Jurisdiction she could claim from
Peter, which certainly if any such had been, they could not be ignorant of it,
nor would either the Fathers of those Counsels have preferred her for
temporal respects, if any divine right did lift up her head above her fellows,
nor the then Bishops of Rome have suffered themselves to be made equal with
Alexandria, if from Peter they had had any right of Universal Jurisdiction,
which Marsilius, who was a Roman Catholic, and writ 328. years since, affirms
to be the profession of those days; and the Bishops of Rome did style
themselves accordingly, Romanae urbis Episcopi, and after Silvester, which was
the first Bishop after the persecutions, then they styled themselves
Archiepiscopi.

Nilus de primatu Romanae ecclesiae, says; In respect that certain Countries
were allotted to the Bishop of Rome, and certain to the Bishop of Alexandria:
those under Alexandria, are no more under the Bishop of Rome, then these under
Rome were under the Jurisdiction of Alexandria.

By these Constitutions of the first Counsels it is plain, that no
universality will belong to Rome beyond her own Province; all Churches in
themselves, as they are members of the Catholic Church being equal, only for
order sake and better Government, the Fathers in those Counsels appointing
several Metropolitans, to whom others in point of order and discipline should
within their proper Precincts be subordinate; but for Rome to have universal
jurisdiction over all, that can never be evinced from those Counsels; and
unless She will blot out those ancient records, The Church of Rome blots out
what makes against her, Infra. cap. 10.
they stand in bar against any Plea she can make for it; wherefore to make good
her pretended title, she flies to her index expurgatorius: and as many as she
meets with, corrects or blots out what makes against her, as witness S.
Austin, who in his book de doctrina Christiana, lib. 2. c. 8. and de civitat.
Dei lib. 15. cap. 23. speaking of such Scriptures as are to be taken for
Canonical, says, those which the most or greatest part of Christian Churches,
amongst the which those Churches be, which deserve to have Apostolic Sees,
and to receive Epistles from the Apostles: The Papists blot out these words,
Apostolic Sees, and have put in these words, Apostolic See, meaning thereby
the Sea of Rome, and those Churches which deserve to receive Epistles from the
same Church of Rome.

I must confess by such sleights as these, she may in time gain an opinion of
Universality, and so wrong posterity; nor is she sparing of any costs to
compass those ancient Records, that she may form them anew in her own forge,
and make them speak nothing but Universality of Rome: wherefore to prevent the
deceivings of some by these tricks of hers, I will proceed to lay open some
more Records of antiquity and credit which make against her in this point, and
which I hope will stand against her false suggestions to the contrary.

The third general Council, the first of Ephesus, called by Theodosius the
younger Anno Christi 431. and the fourth general Council of Chalcedon,
gathered by Valentinian and Marcian, Anno Christi 451. confirm the Canons of
the former Counsels; and the 28. Can. of the Chalcedon Council, gives equal
privilege to new Rome, that is Constantinople, which is afterward confirmed
by the fifth general Council, the second of Constantinople, in the 36. Can.
whereby it is evident, that Constantinople had equal privilege with Rome, or
any other Provincial.

This I know will be an offensive History to the Papists, that I should make
Constantinople equal with Rome, but since it is the Authority of Counsels
guides me to it, I may hope the moderate part of them will be satisfied, as for
the rest I care not, such as will set all divines Rule aside; to uphold the
unlimited unwarwarrantable power of the late Popes; I leave them to their own
phansies, hoping the more sober sort of them will hearken to instruction, since
that which the others would draw them by, to wit, the Authority of Fathers and
Counsels, calls them to take notice of this truth, and to a sense of the high
injuries and indignities offered to those sacred Decrees, which are made every
day speak new language, such as their Fathers never knew, to warrant Romes new
inventions. I desire the Jesuits, if will fully they have not sold themselves to
work wickedness with greediness, to hearken to the Fathers of these Counc^ls,
as for the seculars, I hope they will not set so highly by them, as to put them
in the scale with newfound traditions, or if others do it for them, that they
will see fair play, and then blind Justice will point our these more solid,
those more vain and ayrie.

The Fathers of those times searched with discerning ey^ into the Mysteries of
the Divine Writ, and yet they could not from thence evince, that Peter had any
greater or better power given to him, then to any of the other Apostles; there
was no more excellent or shining fiery Tongue sat upon him, then did alight
upon the rest, nor did he arrogate at any time, to be transcendent or
superintendent over the rest, he was subject to their Massion, he likewise did
submit to the Centurions power he came at his sending, and gave an account of
his fact, and that without saving nay, Acts 10.29.

The Apostl^s were men full of the Holy Ghost, and to them was given to know
the mysteries of Christ, and if by the words, Thou art Peter, in the 16. of
Matthew, or by the treble pasce in the 21. of John, Peter had been made
universal Bishop, Peter had never been assigned only over the Circumcision,
and Paul to the Gentiles, or else it must follow, that Peter did offend God so
highly after that he had received Commission that it was afterward cancelled,
and the charge of the Gentiles committed to Paul, which is one estoppell to the
Successor of Rome, to derive a Jurisdiction from Peter.

Moreover Peter forbids Superiority in his first Epistle fifth Chapter, he calls
himself a fellow-Priest, and in his second Epistle third Chapter, he calls Paul
his Brother, and if a fellow Priest, and Paul his Brother, Par in parem non
habet potestatem. This likewise destroys his universal Jurisdiction: but I
return to search a little further into the Councels. The sixth general Council
the Council of Carthage, in which S. Austin was present, did confirm the
Cannons of the former Counsels, No ^ppeals to Rome. infra chap. 11.
declaring the powers of the Patriarks to be equal, and the right of appealing
to Rome, by such as were condemned by the Arch bishop of their own Province,
was declared unnecessary. S. Austin after that (who was Bishop of Hippo)
opposing three Bishops of Rome, Zozimus, Boniface, and Celestine, in this so
just a cause common to all provincial Sees, as appears by the ensuing report.
One Apiarius an African Priest, being excommunicated, and flying to Rome, and
being absolved by Zozimus the then Bishop of Rome, Aurelins the Metropolitan of
Afrie, with the Council wrote to Celestine, the succeeding Bishop, stiling him
Dominus Frater, and acquainting him that by the sixth Canon of the Council of
Nice, ecclesiastic persons are to be committed to the charge of their
Metropolitans, appealing to provincials or general Churches, but not to any
foreign See: and reproving the absolving of Apiarius, exhorted Celestine, Ne
induceret fumosum typum in Ecclesiam Christi quae lucem simplicitatis and
humilitatis praefert iis qui Deum diligunt; and did afterward proceed against
Apiarius, enjoining him penance, notwithstanding the Bishop of Romes former
absolving of him; and this was acknowledged and received of all Churches as an
Evangelical truth, and acknowledged by the succeeding Bishop of Rome Gregory I.
who lived An. Chri. 590. reputing the decrees of these first Counsels equal
with the Evangelists, as proceeding from the same holy Spirit of God, and which
he had promised to his Church: Se suscipere quatuor prima concilia sicu^ sancti
Evangelii quatuor libros, and venerari fatetur, and thus did the Church of o me
continue in brotherly fellowship with the other Patriarks, not claiming any
Jurisdiction over the rest, till Phocas the Emperors time, which change was
occasioned through a wicked murder, and having by that means acquired a
superintendency over the other provincialls, the succeeding Bishops have since
practiced Navigation in the Red See, her universal Ark, not knovving how to
answer its helm in any clear and pure waters, the brief of which history
follows in these fevv words.

Mauritius the Emperor having made John of Constantinople universal Patriark,
Gregory the Great, John of Constantinople universal Patriarch.
Bishop of Rome, writ against that, and maintained, that whosoever took upon
him that style, was the forerunner of Antichrist, and did in opposition of that
style assume to himself the title of servus servorum: Gregory did not oppose
that title in that sense, the Doctor would have us to rake it ( folio 293.) to
wit, that none should be universal Bishop, thereby excluding others, but to be
Bishop of the universal Church, it was in Gregory's opinion lawful; a
pitiful shift to excuse the unjust usurpations of Gregory's Successors; by
this means he will tie universality to Rome in respect of the place, not as
Peter was universal Bishop; and this distinction has destroyed all Bellarmines
Arguments, who would have the Church built upon Peter, and all power of
governing given to him, which Gregory, (by the Doctors own distinction
confessed) calls Antichristian, so that I would fain know how Rome can be a
Universal Church, since no Bishop can be a Universal Bishop: for certainly it
was not the Universal See before Peter's coming, and if he was not Universal
Bishop, how could he make it a Universal See? I send this riddle back to the
Doctor, and desire he will recommend it to the Ignatian tribe, to varnish over
with a new paint: For if this must pass for current, that the Bishop of Rome
is universal, in respect of his See, and that the gates of hell shall not
prevail against local Rome, the world knows they maintain a lie, as will
appear more at large in the fourteenth chapter of this Book.

^t is plain to any judgment not aleady forestalled with a preoccupated
conceit of Romes sophistical delusions, that Gregory writ against John of
Constantinople his being universal Patriark, for that it was an injury to
Alexandria, Rome, Antioch, etc. that any should take upon them that title, when
both by the holy Scriptures, and the judgments and decrees of the reverend
Fathers of the holy Church, the powers and Jurisdictions of Patriarks were
declared to be alike: The same Gregory when he was by Eulogius Patriarch of
Al^xandria styled universal, refused the style as derogatory to his Brethren,
and writing an Epistle to the said Eulogius, he calls that style new, foolish,
perverse, wicked and profane, and whosoever shall arrogate that style, he does
the work of Satan, to whom it was not sufficient to be alike and equal to
other Angels, Phocas made the By hop of Rome universal.
and did tax John of Constantinople for the same.

It happened so, that not long after this affront done to Alexandria, Rome, and
the other Provinces, that Mauritius was murdered by the means of Phocas, who no
sooner had perpetrated so vile and heinous an offense, but his guilty
conscience contracted many dark jealousies upon his soul, and presented to his
fancy many sad and fearful apprehensions; one amongst the rest, was that
Italy would certainly shake off all Faith and Allegiance to such a Monster of
mankind, who had justly provoked their dissents to obey him, who had forfeited
all their loves and affections, by his bloody violation of the Bonds of Nature
and Civility, by this his barbarous assassination of his Liege Lord and
Sovereign, and thereupon he casts upon all essaies, which way to preserve his
Western Territories (the garden of his new acquired Empire) and calling to mind
the respect the inhabitants thereof bore to their Metropolitans, and that the
affront done to him, by setting the Constantinopolitan above him, was thorn in
his side, and had bred in him a grudge toward the then murdered prince
Mauritius.

He to engratiate with the people of those parts, and to engage a pragmaticall
Orator to blandish his foul murder, did resolve with himself, to make the then
Bishop of Rome Universal Bishop, which he accordingly did, by virtue of which
Donation, and by their own strengths and policies since, the present Bishop;
thereof claim this title and Jurisdiction, which their Predecessors did condemn
in another, from which bloody founder they took this Prerogative, and in a full
measure of tyranny, and against all divine Right Ecclesiastical, and against
the doctrine of that See, whilst any other had that Prerogative, will needs
persuade the world that the present Church of Rome, is the only Catholic
Church.

Yet blessed be God, the light of the Gospel having shined in several Nations
of this Western world, by the means of S. Paul, who God ordained by his grace
hereunto, has taken such root in many Churches of the same, that they will not
admit of this Antichristian usurpation of the Romish See, according to that of
S. Paul, Galat. 2.8. He that was mighty by Peter in the Apostleship, over the
Circumcision, was also mighty by me toward the Gentiles, but do, and hope
still to hold out the truth they have received against any innovation of the
Romish See whatsoever, and particularly the Church of England.

When the first Council of Nice was called, England not subject to Rome.
we had a Church planted here, and public profession of the Faith of Christ
120. years before that Council, and had Bishops and Metropolitans of London
and York, and although it might tacitly be inferred from the sixth Canon of
that Council, that we were within the Jurisdiction of Rome, as being within
the West, yet in the second Canon thereof is mention made of many Provinces,
and power of Jurisdiction reserved to every Metropolitan, which by the next
general Council 2. Can. is further enlarged, Ecclesias in longinquis Gentibus
consti^utas gubernari convenijtuxta consuetudinem quae est a patribus
observata: By which Canon we may justly claim provincial Jurisdiction to the
Church of England, having at that time a Metropolitan of our own, however it is
confirmed to us in the Chalcedon Council 19. Can. Episcopos in unaquaque
Provincia bis in anno Metrapolitano istius provinciae provinciales Episcopos
admonente convenire licet, which was afterward confirmed and declared in a
Council at Antioch, 20. Can. Provincial Councels.
that it was lawful for Metropolitans of Provinces to call Counsels, propter
utilitates ecclesiasticas and absolutiones earum rerum quae dubitationem
controversiamque recipient; and by the said Council of Antioch, the nineth
Can. and the Council of Carthage, the seventeenth Can. it is decreed that in
every Province there be a Metropolitan, so that had we had none before, we
might by these two Canons claim one, but having one, it is confirmed to us to
be distinct of our selves, and for one Metropolitan to govern and call
Counsels, without any appeal to Rome, having the authority of Counsels to
confirm this unto us: nor is this to arrogate to our selves any more then what
of right belongs to us, and what other Provincials may justly challenge to
themselves, and what has beeh practiced of old, both by the French, Germans,
Spaniards, etc. as shall be showed more at large in the chapter of Counsels.

If I should argue like the Doctor, Possession infra chap. 4.
I must plead possession of this privilege, as he does for Universality, and
say it were jus Gentis, but I dare not in cases of this nature stand to that
humane Plea, possession for hold, and prescription for time is no good Plea in
cases of Religion, though in civil matters for peace sake, and avoiding
contentions, it be admitted in bar of after too busy Inquisitors: for the
first may be a claim by intrusion, which is the point in question, and the
other antiquity of error, and malus usus est abolendus, let custom yield to
truth, is a sound axiom of Divinity. I will not therefore stand so much upon
possession of this immunity, as upon the right of that possession, though
whilst I prove a possession from these Counsels, I destroy Romes prescription
to Universality, in that these records are above her Donor Phocas, and so
annihilate her puisne title.

It was the Decree of the Council of Carthage, 28. Can. that Priests if they
thought themselves agrieved at the censures of their Diocesans, to appeal to
the primate of their own Province, and not to Rome, or any other See over Sees,
and if they did, they stood excommunicate from the rest of the Churches in
Africa, and shall we, being as free, and having as good right to this
privilege, subject our selves to a foreign See at Rome; since, we may call a
Council of our own, which may upon serious debate judge of things maintained
and done by other Churches, and resolve whether to admit of them into their own
provincial Churches, without being branded for Heretics and Schismatikes;
upon which score, the Church of England, did in her full and lawful assembles
heretofore, cast off some usurpations of the Sea of Rome, and did retain what
she conceived Apostolical: what she cast off, we offer to the world, to
maintain the action by authority of Scripture, Fathers and Counsels, and what
we retain, Rome cannot blame; for we being provincial, and having a
Metropolitan of our own, and a lawful Succession of Bishops, (as I shall show
anon) even from Apostolical Ordination to this day, we might well reform
propter utilitates ecclesiasticas and absolu jones controversiae infra
provinciam, without either appealing to Rome, or she questioning what we do
herein, yet in those things we differ, we would willingly submit them to the
sentence of a general Council, might it be free and rightly constituted; of
which in the chapter of Counsels; In the mean time we may with confidence
affirm, that Rome is not the only Catholic Church: and for the better
satisfaction of the Reader of the justness of this our claim, and to acquit us
of all presumption in this point, I will crave pardon, though it do not much
conduce to the subject matter of this chapter any further, then what is already
spoke, to give him a brief relation of the planting of the Christian Faith in
this Island of Britain.

It is recorded by the ancient Writers and preservers of antiquity in this
Isle, England converted to the Faith.
that the Gospel was planted here, by Joseph of Arimathea, who was sent hither
out of France by Philip, who was sent thither by Paul; some affirm it was
Philip the Apostle, upon dispersion of the Jews to have come to France; but for
my part I rather incline to think it was Philip the Deacon, who was ordained by
Paul, Acts 6. and that Paul sent him into France, and that he planted the
Gospel here, and it is agreed by all that Joseph of Arimathea was here, and
did preach the Gospel to the Britains, about the year of our Lord 63. and here
remained in this land all this time, and died here, and was buried at
Glassenbury, and was the first that preached to the Britains: but whether he
was sent of Paul from Rome, or came from Philip out of France, who came thither
directly from the East, and not from Rome, (as some suopose,) the histories do
not plainly declare, nor is it much material, for whether Philip came from the
East, or from Rome, and sent Joseph hither, it is certain Joseph had his
Mission from Apostolical order, besides presently after Simon Zelotes was sent
out of France hither, as Nicephorus lib. 2. cap. 40. reports; and here the
Gospel was received and nourished, though not publicly professed, before
Lucius time, which was Anno 169. after Christ: for as a City upon a hill cannot
be hid, so the Gospel having been preached here, (though but in some obscure
corners of the Isle) did so spread by Gods blessing upon the labors of them
that preached it to the people, that within a short time, the Sunshine thereof
arose to such a latitude, that it gave light to the before dark closets of the
Kings heart; who thereupon sent to Elutherius Bishop of Rome, two of his best
Divines, to entreat assistance from him, who sent some laborers into this
harvest, who for the better promulgating of the Faith, and the winning of souls
unto Christ, and that all the people of the Isle might be instructed, did
divide themselves into several circuits; Lucius and his Nobles appointing
three Superintendents, instead of the three Arch-Flamins, who formerly ruled in
the time of Paganism, one at London, another at York, another at Carleon in
Monmouthshire, the Archbishopric of Carleon was after removed from thence to
S. David's, from thence into Normandy: London was in after times by Austin the
Monk translated to Canterbury, only York continues still a Metropolitan. This
Austin was sent by Gregory Bishop of Rome hither, and did convert the South
Saxons, but the Britains had before his coming received the Faith, and though
expulsed from the body of the Land, into the mountainous part thereof called
Wales, by the impetuous fury of the Heathen Saxons, yet they still retained
their faith, and had a Monastery of Monks at Bangor in Caernarvanshire, when
Austin came to preach unto the Saxons, and this tradition challenges any
Christian man his belief, as well as any Romish Tradition whatsoever.

There does not from this story any thing at all arise, which may conclude us
to be beholden to the Sea of Rome for our faith, though some say Philip was
sent from Rome by Paul; or if they will persuade the world that we received our
faith from Rome, I should not much stick to grant it, for it then follows, that
if it came from the Sea of Rome, that Paul was Bishop there, and so they
destroy their universality built upon Peter.

As for the Allegation of those, who say we first received the faith from
Eleutherius, it is false, and utterly against the current of all Antiquity, as
may appear by Eleutherius himself, who writing to King Lucius an Epistle,
says, Ye have received of late, through Gods mercy, in the realm of Britain,
the Law and Faith of Christ; Ye have with you within the Realm, both the parts
of Scriptures, out of that Law; take ye a Law (by Gods grace) with the Council
of your Realm and by that Law; through Gods sufferance, rule ye your Kingdom
of Britain, for you be Gods Vicar in your Kingdom, etc.

By this it appears, that this Isle had received the faith before that, and had
the Scriptures with them before, and therefore the Papists cannot brag that
Rome is the only dispenser of those sacred Oracles, of which in the eighth
chapter. We became Christians, much what about that time Rome received the
Faith, and who was our first Planter, it is not of necessity to be proved, since
we claim no Jurisdiction, but what is common to every Provincial See to lay
challenge unto: Let Rome, who builds upon Peter, take heed to her succession
precisely from him; it shall suffice us, that we received the faith before
Eleutherius time, and that we were acknowledged by him to have that faith, and
the holy Scriptures in our Isle, before he writ to King Lucius, and can produce
a continued succession of Pastors, if not governing Bishops, from before him:
For those two which were sent by Lucius to Eleutherius, were Bishops, Infra
chap. 4.
as Gildas and others testify, without a precise Catalogue of our first
founders, and that in respect the Church of Rome did confess we had the true
faith, and the holy Scriptures, which could not otherwise have come, but by the
Mission of some of the Apostles, or by some ordained by them to that purpose,
of which more at large in the fourth chapter.

Reverend Bid seems to incline, that we first received our faith from the
East, for that our Easter was kept almost a thousand years after Christ, after
the manner of the East in the full Moon, what day soever it fell upon, and not
on the Sunday, and not after the Roman custom.

The like does Petrus Cluniacensis testify of the Scots, that they kept their
Easter after the manner of the Greek Church, and not after the Roman, by which
they collect, that the first planters of the Faith here came from the East: but
I shall not much stand upon that, for it makes nothing for the present point;
for whether we received the faith from the East, or from Rome, by the means of
Paul, I hope none will affirm, but that we are of Apostolical Plantation, and
having a Metropolitan of our own, and being a distinct Province of it self,
have right to the provincial Jurisdiction, declared and confirmed by the first
Counsels, which makes us so free of our selves, and independent of Rome, that
we may justly deny her to be the universal Church.

And since there is no express and positive proof that our first planter of the
Faith was sent immediately from the East, and since the inducements to that
belief are but bare conjecturalls, I should hold it more proper to admit what
is desired from the Church of Rome, that she sent Joseph of A imathea hither,
or that he was sent by Philip, who was sent from Paul, and that because Paul
was the Apostle of the Gentiles, to carry the Gospel unto them, and would the
Church of Rome not forsake such a Pastor, to feign one by traditionall stories,
against that which the Scripture and Primitive Church teached, we should
willingly give her the right hand, and honor her as our elder Sister, and in
order to the Western plantations from Paul, and I believe the Churches of
Germany, France, Denmark, etc. would do the like, not that they prefer Paul
before Peter, but because Christ had ordained Paul a Minister over them, and
the Scriptures and Counsels forbid any to intrude upon another plantation,
and especially Peter being reproved for that very thing, he being appointed
over them of the Circumcision; and therefore unless Rome will lay claim to
Paul for her Bishop, they cannot allow her that primacy of order they heartily
wish she were honored with: but I much fear, whilst the Ignatian tribe are
suffered to put in practice the imperious Dictates of the Scarlet Conclave,
this will scarcely be embraced, their whole study is to ascribe all pomp and
power to the Papal throne, being in hopes to be masters of that Seat e're they
die, (it being by their new order of electing Popes, not transferrable to any
other) and so to enjoy their long studied Dominion, and having by a long
expectation so sharpened their appetite, and set it on so keen an edge, they
greedily gape after all honor and Sovereignty, and think the world too narrow a
Province for them to Lord it in; whereas if primacy of order would serve their
turn, none of the Western world would deny it to them; and as the case stands
with the Eastern Churches, they, I am persuaded, would not bogle to condescend
hereunto; but by no means let her ever hope to have a supremacy of
Jurisdiction, she may force it, but never by argument evince it; and so
according to its first beginning, prosecute to rear up her tower of
Universality, with the cement of blood, which whilst she prosecutes, she forges
her Keys into a two-edged sword, and when she has done, she like a Heathen
Roman destroys her self, by cutting off some of her fellow members, robbing
them of what belongs to their office, and makes them useless pieces of the
mystical body Christ Jesus, of which all the Churches upon earth are
fellow members, and though many, yet make but one body, being all baptized into
one body, by one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.12. Let us therefore follow the truth in
love, and in all things grow up unto him which is the Head, that is Christ, by
whom all the body being complete and knit together, by every joint, for the
forniture thereof (according to the effectual power which is in the measure of
every part) receives increase of the body, unto the edification of it self in
love, Ephesians. 4.

The Doctor confesses that Christ is the Head originally, but the Pope is the
Head derivatively, for says he, with as much reason may we deny a King to be
Head of his Kingdom, because the Scripture says, God is King over all the
earth, as deny the Pope to be Head of the Church, because Christ is so; To
which I answer, Christ is the Head of the Catholic Church, that is,
comprehensive of all the Elect, Pope not Universal Head.
Saints, Angels, and men, of which the particular Churches on earth are but
members, and the people, the Saints of God assembled together, to worship God,
and call upon him in his Sacraments, make a Church, Christ being their Head,
and as they are a people not convened to that purpose, their several Princes
and Magistracy is to rule over them (which I judge to be the principal reason
of the Law of Sanctuaries.) Now for the Pope to claim an universal headship
over them, is either to rob Christ of his office, or to deny Caesar his due;
for as Head of the whole Catholic Church he candot be, and to be Head of the
Universal Church upon earth, is not consistent with the plantations of the
other Apostles, nor was any such universal headship delegated to any one of
the Apostles; Christ sent out his Apostles to all Nations, and they ordained
spiritual heads and Governors over their several plantations, none being to
intrude upon another foundation, and ever since Christ, there have been
superintendents over the several Churches, yet those superintendents were
equal amongst themselves, none lording it over another, but only within their
distinct territories did equally exercise the authori y of their headship, and
every one within his own Province being representative in point of order, of
Christ the mystical Head, without ascribing a single universality to any one
of them, although by this means there be many headships over the several
plantations, yet it does no more destroy the representative headship of Christ
here on earth, then the Spanish, French, etc. acknowledging obedience to their
distinct Princes are against Monarchy, because the Turk claims to be Sovereign
Lord of the Universe: Wherefore if the Church of Rome will needs have the
Catholic Church to be understood only of a Universal Church upon earth, and
some one Bishop to be the governing head thereof, I must tell her, that she can
lay no just claim hereto, because if Peter had any power above the other
Apostles, it does not appear to succeed to the Bishop of Rome, for that it is
not proved Peter to have been Bishop there, and if he was Bishop there, yet
there wants a clear and perfect deraigning of succession from him, some
affirming Linus, some Clemens, some Anacletus to succeed him, and some Bishops
of Rome claiming as Successors to Paul, some to Peter: or if they could perfect
their Succession, yet it is not evident that Peter's power did succeed to them,
in respect it was Apostolically in him, and either died in him, or survived to
John; besides, they cannot agree in the manner how this power of supremacy
should be in them; for if they have it as universal Bishops, Gregory declares
it, and the Doctor confesses it to be Antichristian; for that hereby they deny
others to be Bishops, and so rob them of their divine order, and Ecclesiastique
Jurisdiction, granted by consent of Counsels to Metropolitans, to govern
within their provincial precincts, without appealing to Rome, and if they will
have it in respect of Rome, see how they make Rome the Rock, not Peter, and go
against the Symbol of our faith. The Apostles, who composed the Creed (as the
Doctor confesses 148.) and professing faith in the Catholic Church, did
publish that Creed at Jerusalem, before ever the faith was preached at Rome,
and when her Church was invisible, or not in rerum natura, and did not
therefore intend Rome for the Catholic Church.

Wherefore for these reasons, I hope I may, without incurring a censure of
presumption, with confidence affirm, that Rome is not the Catholic Church,
nor the Pope the universal Head of the Catholic Church, either in respect of
any Jurisdiction derived from Peter, or by the consent of Counsels, lawfully
deraigning any title thereto.

CHAP. III.
That the name Church is proper to England, as well as to Rome.
THe Doctor is pleased in his fifth and thirteenth chapters, to take notice of
several definitions of a Church, which are distinctions of several Sectaries
that are in England and elsewhere, but never glanced upon that which is
maintained and professed in the Church of England, which belike he omitted, on
purpose to make people believe that we had no Church at all properly
distinguished by her self apart from those Sectaries, and therefore he fled to
Rome to find one, if he have forgotten, I will put him in mind of it.

The Church of God is a company of men chosen by him to call upon his name, and
therefore did the Apostles term it Ecclesia, alluding to the custom of Arkens,
to call together the people, to hear the promulgation of any Law, or any
public Oration, and not Synagogue, that is an inordinately met assembly,
without a lawful calling together, wherefore we say that Ecclesia in the most
proper and genuine signification, is Vniversitas fidelium credentium and
invocantium nomen Christi: By which interpretation, if we be in the faith of
Jesus, and have our solemn assemblies to worship and call upon his name, we may
properly be called a Church, and a member of the Catholic Church, which (as I
said before) is comprehensive of all the Elect of God, which have been, are, or
shall be.

The Doctor cannot deny but that we maintain the Apostles Creed, Rome; The
Church of Rome abuses the Apostles Creed.
we whilst we say we believe the holy Catholic Church, mean thereby the whole
Elect of God, as well Saints in heaven, as the Church upon earth, which is the
full body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. and Romans 12. but they thereby will have Rome
understood, which as I said, was not in being before the Creed was composed;
and it seems strange to some, that the Church of Rome should admit of the
following Article, to wit, the Communion of Saints, to extend to the Saints in
heaven, and will exclude them from the Catholic Church; but the reason's
plain, for it stands not with the Majesty of the Pope, for in admitting the
first, he loses his headship, we being all members of the Catholic Church, but
by the other his honor is not diminished, in respect none are to be reputed
Saints, but such as are of his own making.

But if the Doctor will not admit of our definition, I hope he will not be
against our embracing of his, which is this, A Church is a Society of those
whom God has called to salvation by the profession of the true Faith, and
sincere administration of the Sacraments, and the adherence to lawful Pastors.

I wonder what the Doctor means by the society of those that God has called to
salvation by the profession of the true Faith; sure he will not deny, but that
those Societies which were gathered by other Apostles were true Churches as
well as those which were gathered by Peter: He himself, fol. 192. confesses the
true Church visible in Ethiopia, where the Eunuch which Philip baptized,
preached the Faith; and it is hard he should d^ny this to his own mother County
which he allows to Ethiopians; especially considering we (as is believed by
some) received the Faith by the same Apostle Philip. But it is no great matter,
we need not stand to the Doctors courtesy herein, we have a better warrant
then his Concession, Act. 20.28. the flocks whereof the holy Ghost made the
Elders overseers is called the Church of G^d, Paul ordained Elders, and
committed charge of Flocks unto them, A Christian Society makes a Church.
etc. That the distinct Societies of Christians are called Churches, is
likewise manifest by several other places of Scripture. 1 Cor. 1. Paul writ to
the Church that was at Corinth, and to all that call upon the name of the Lord
Jesus, Gal. 1. to the Churches at Galatia, Grace, etc. 1 These. to the Church of
the Thessalonians; Col. 1.4. salute the brethren which are of Laodicea and
Nymphas, and the Church which is in his house: Rev. 1.11. there were seven
Churches in Asia, Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamos, etc. In the same manner Rome may
be called a Church, if she have a Soci^ty of the faithful calling upon the name
of Christ Jesus; wherefore Peter writing his Epistle from Babylon, (which the
Papists interpret Rome) s^^es, The Church that is at B^bylon elected together
with you, saluteth you: that is, the Saints which dwell here and there
dispersed through Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bythinia, the society
of the Saints of Babylon saluteth the several societies of the Saints of those
parts which were several respective Churches, members of the Catholic Church
elected together in Christ Jesus: So that from these places it is evident, that
the name of Church is applicable to all Christian Societies, whether they be of
Peter's, or any other of the Apostles gathering: For the Apostles had equal
commission from Christ for the gathering together of the Saints for the work of
the Ministry, and for the edification of the Body of Christ, though in the
Church were men of different Gifts, as Apostles, Teachers, Evangelists, etc.
yet the Apostles amongst themselves were equal, and their several plantations
coordinate and equal, as to any power or Jurisdiction. If then we be in the
faith of Jesus, and have Societies of Christian believers in him, we may
properly be called a Church, and that especially, because we are of Apostolical
plantation, and are not beholding to Rome for that Plantation, as coming from
Eleutherius (successor as they pretend to Peter.)

But if we had our Faith from Rome, it came by the means of Paul, and certainly
we had that Faith long before Eleutherius time, as I have already proved in the
precedent chapter; wherefore we may properly, both according to our own, and
the Doctors definition of a Church, assume that title to our selves, we being a
Society of Christians calling upon the name of Jesus, which is called a Church,
1 Cor. 1.2. Rome a particular Church.
and for Rome, or any other Church to arrogate more then to be a particular
member of the Catholic Church whereof Christ is the Head, and Jerusalem which
is above, free, and the mother of us all, is Antichristian, and abominable;
especially for Rome, that she should style her self the only Catholic Church,
when as Ephesus, the Sea of John, and John the surviving Apostle, in whom alone
survived the Apostleship, calls that Church but one of the seven in Asia, Rev.
1. Were John, Peter, or any of the Apostles alive to see to what a lofty pitch
ambition has hurried the aspiring Prelates of Rome, they would blush to behold
such iniquity, and reprove any that should call Rome the Catholic Church. For
alas, The Pride of Rome.
how little does she resemble Christ's Spouse, his Church. Christ's Church was
planted in humility, Romes Church lords it in Sovereignty; Christ's Church had
her White vest of Innocence; Romes Church is clad in her purple of blood and
cruelty: how little does the Scarlet tribe resemble the train of Christ? were
Peter, or any of Christ's disciples now at Rome, and should see the Pope, they
would rather take him for Pilate, an Officer or Judge of Cesars, then for Peter
a fisherman, and servant of Jesus, and would think his Cardinals to be rather
the Ambassadors of Bozra, then the Messengers of the Gospel, and servants of
Christ, and should any but assume that Christian boldness to tell them that their
Scarlet Robes did cover, and make invisible the Seamlesse coat of Jesus, he
were in danger of a Council. To such a height of Majesty are they of late
aspired, that they exercise dominion without restraint, little regarding
Christ's precept to his Apostles; the Kings of the Gentiles bear Rule, and
exercise dominion, Vos autem non sic. And here by the way I will insert a story
of Peter, and Simon Magus, incertainty of Peter being at Rome.
Aegesippus, lib. 2. de excidio Hierusal. cap. 2. reports that Peter came to
Rome to withstand Simon Magus, 44 Christi, ( Eusebius says he was crucified 36
Christi: others, that Paul and he together; others, that Paul was crucified a
year after, and on the same day: Prudentius, that Paul followed Peter to Rome,
from which contradictions no certainty of his being there is to be concluded)
but I return to my story. It is said that Simon Magus taking some offense with
the Citizens threatened to leave them, and to fly away from them in their sight
to fetch down vengeance from Heaven upon them, and the day being appointed, he
began to take his flight in mount Capitolinus into the air, and that Peter, by
the power of the Lord Jesus brought him down, and broke his bones; which act of
Peter's occasioned his persecution, for that Simon Magus was beloved of Caesar;
this Story is in the Roman Legends. I could wish the Pope to make this moral
use of this story, to wit; to beware how he exalts Rome, above the heavenly
Jerusalem; for if he continue to cuff the Heavens with his towering waxen
pinions, he must expect the divine majestic rays of the heavenly Sun to melt
his proud supporters into nothing, he must not think to exalt himself against
God and prosper. Is it not enough for him to be primus Episcoporum ordine, but
he will contrary to Gods Word be Supremus Potestate, etc. God gives wings to
the Ant. that she may destroy her self the sooner, let Romes Bishop be content
with his own Province, for it is a rule, that that State that goes beyond the
lists of mediocrity, passes the bounds of safety, all Churches of Europe would
honor her as a sister, but it is unnatural to love a stepmother: we are all
fellow members of Christ, let not Rome therefore despise her sister England.
Let us strive together in love, and let the Church that is at Rome, salute the
Church that is in England, and let us greet each other with an holy kiss, she
must not rob England of her name of a Church, if she think not to bastard her
self, for we are all ingrafted in the same stock, and baptized into one faith
by the spirit of Jesus, and it is not for her to be busy in another diocese to
judge of our matters of discipline or doctrine in that wherein we differ from
her any further, then that if she conceive we err, to give admonishment to
those of her own Province, they fall not into the like condemnation, she must
not upon this score deny the society of Christian believers the name of a
church.

Admit the unfriendly appellations of Schismatics and heretics which they
bestow upon us were deserved, Haereticus est pars ecclesiae.
because we do not in all points agree and communicate with Rome, yet we must
not therefore be denied to be a church, and for this assertion I have the
authority of the Council of Trent, I say, which was wholly gathered of men
against the reformed churches, and men totally for the Popes supremacy, yet
they did not deny but that Schismatichs and Heretics were in the Catholic
Church, and might confer orders, administer and baptize, and the council of
Florens agrees herewith sum. Sacrament. Romans Ecclesiae Sect. 136.28. and
therefore it is very harsh dealing in the Doctor to deny us this which their
own Councels allow, so that Saint Paul's saying is verified in him, Heb. 12.15.
when one falls away from the faith a root of bitterness springs up in him, and
that is the reason the Doctor is so harsh against the English Church.

The name Protestant, The name Protestant.
and English Protestant, which the Dr. so much spurns at, does not at all speak
us members cut off from the old stock the Catholic Church, for as the Doctor
maintains that the name Roman Catholic is proper and significant language and
sense, so may we as well say English Protestant, and with more reason, for we
will note by the Doctors distinction thereby the difference between our
discipline and doctrine, only for our particular selv s assert the Catholic
faith, thereby to manifest the readiness of us a particular member of the
Catholic Church, to give the head thereof our Master Christ, for the word
Protestant is comprehensive of Catholic, and is no more but to assert the
faith, which faith is Catholic, so that an English Protestant may be said
truly to be he that will hold, stick to, and to his power maintain the
Catholic faith taught and maintained in the English Church. For the word
Protestant, though of a new addition, proves not the Religion new, or
profession not agreeable to the Old Faith and profession of the Primitive
Churches, but being added with reference to their profession is an evidence of
their zeal, and affection to maintain and profess that ancient and Catholic
truth. For we do not profess our selves to have left the Catholic faith once
preached and professed at Rome, but that Rome has left of to be a Catholic
Church, bringing in strange delusions, and persuading people to believe lies,
which especially since her pretense to universality has been much studied, to
make her new claims good, whereas we desire only to impugn her late errors,
and to protest against them, and to maintain the ancient faith, and though in
this we may to some seem to set our selves against the Church of Rome, to
forfeit our interest in the Catholic Church, because as they suppose, we
claimed our Religion from her, yet there is nothing less, for we are a
Province, and had a Metropolitan of our own, and might call a Council, and
reform things amiss by the authority Ecclesiastical without appealing to
Rome, nor do we hereby forfeit the title of a Church, But rather justify the
same, in respect we differ in nothing, but we would submit it to a free
General Council, and though we were heretical in some points, yet having a
society of believers in Jesus, and having Apostolical orders amongst us, we
still may without offense to any, retain the name and appellation of a Church.

CHAP. IV.
Of the right of Collation to Bishoprics and of the Ordination of Bishops, of
succession of Pastors, and particularly of the Succession in England, and that
the Pope ought not to intermedle in the appointing of Bishops in England.
THe Doctor has a great spleen toward our succession of Bishops in our Church,
and would fain persuade the world we are not of the Catholic Church for our
defect therein: It rests therefore that I clear our Church from that new
devised scandal.

Ecclesia non consistit in hominibus ratione potestatis vel dignitatis
Ecclesiasticae vel secularis, quia multi Principes and summi Pontifices inventi
sunt, qui a fide apostatasse, propter quod ecclesia consistit in illis personis
in quibus est notitia vera and confessio fidei and veritatis.

Could we not prove one line of succession, it much matters not, for we may
notwithstanding lay claim to be of the Catholic Church, and having a society
of believers in Christ, do notwithstanding make a Church. If we agree with the
Apostles and Fathers of the Primitive Church, it is sufficient, says
Tertullian, to give us the name of Catholic Church, Ecclesia quae licet nullum
ex Apostolis authorem suum praeferant, tamen in eadem fide conspirantes non
minus Apostolicae reputantur pro consanguinitate doctrinae. Though our first
planter Joseph of Arimathea, is not certainly known to have come, whether from
Rome, from Paul, or from Philip out of France, or immediately from the East, it
is no great matter for by the confession of the Church of Rome we had the true
faith amongst us before Eleutherius time, and had Pastors then, and since have
continued a lawful succession of governing Bishops, Succession of Bishops in
England.
even to the last late reverend father William of Cant. and whereas the Dr.
twits against our succession of Bishops, that we cannot maintain it unless we
fetch it from Rnme, I answer that we being a distinct Province, the Bishop of
Rome has no power of Ordination here, for by the Council of Nice, the 22.
Can. a Bishop is not to ordain in another Diocese: Et si quis tale facere
tentaverit irrita sit ejus ordinatio, and though we be different of late from
Rome, and that it were time we had our order of Episcopacie from thence, yet
the late Bishops which were so different from Rome, might ordain others within
their own Province though Heretics, for that as I said before Haereticus est
pars Ecclesiae. Moreover it is decreed in the Council of Florens, that ordo
imprimit characterem indelebilem, and therefore children baptized by an
heretic, are not to be rebaptized which the Council of Trent has decreed
against the opinion of Cyprian. Nam licet male utuntur potestate ministri sibi
tradita, prosint aliis non sibi. Sicut enim per asinam Balaam loquutus est
Deus, ita per malos ministros Sacramenta praestat. And Sum. Sacr. Romans eccl.
Sect. 136. Episcopi haeretici veros ordines conferent, and vera praestant
Sacramenta.

So that by the rules of the Papists themselves, we, notwithstanding we be
heretics or Schismatics, yet having once lawful orders, which gave an
indelible character, and in that a power of conferring the same upon others, as
long as we remain Christians, and believe in the holy and blessed Trinity,
though we differ in other points, yet we remain still members in the Catholic
Church, and have a power of conferring orders, and I much wonder the Doctor
should be so harsh against our Hierarchy, (unless he sometimes made a bait to
fly at a Bishopric, and being canvassed in Peter's net, it stirred up some atra
bilis, which since would never be allayed) he is so much incensed against it,
that he utterly denies our succession upon the interruption of Roman Bishops
in H. 8. and Queen Eliz. time, for my part his allegations against it do not
much trouble me, nor I hope will they find entertainment with many, since they
carry with them no more weight then the bare opinion of himself, he positively
affirming upon his own authority, that our ministers are not in legal Orders
insomuch that if one of our Priests came to Rome, he must be ordained a new;
which if it be true, it is contrary to the decrees of Popish Counsels, and
will be a sufficient testimony to the world to convince them of falsehood, and
juggling with the world, that they should profess one thing, and practice
another, to declare in Counsels, that a Heretic confers true and perfect
orders, and yet will not in their practice allow of it: however, for them to
affirm us Heretics, is to beg the question, and therefore we may safely within
our own province continue a succession of Orders without any approbation of
theirs at all: nor is this any more then of right is due to us, as may appear
by the 1 Council of Nice, Provincial Ordination of Bishops.
4 Can. a Bishop ought to be ordained by the several Bishops of the Province;
but if they cannot conviently all meet to this purpose, then three shall serve
to perform the ordination, which is also confirmed by the Council of Antioch
19 Can. and the Council of Carthage 13 Can. and it is the opinion of some
learned Divines, that in case, of necessity the Ministers may Ordain where
Bishops are wanting; for that the Presbytery or Ministry have right to impose
hands, and the Keys are said to be Claves ecclesiae, non claves episcoporum
seu presbyterorum; Infra 43.5 chap.
yet God be blessed England was never put to this strait, we still had a
continuing succession of Bishops, notwithstanding the deprivation of the Popish
Prelates, and so according to that Canon did ordain in our own Precincts, which
as it is of right our due, and belonging to us, so it is likewise practiced,
and has been the ancient Custom of other Provinces as well as this; as the
Eastern Provinces ordain without the assistance of Rome; and in these Western
parts, even in France and Germany, and other places; which right of Ordination
being thus by decrees of the General Councels annexed to distinct Provinces I
much wonder, the moderate Papists of France and Germany should suffer
themselves to be trampled upon by the Ignatian tribe, sworn Servants to the
imperious Pope, who daily exercises strange dominion over them, making no other
use of them then the Turk does of his slaves, to wit, to do his drudgery whilst
he himself reaps the fruits of their labors: It argues a cowardly spirit to be
afraid to right themselves herein, because some of their Princes have fallen in
the attempt, amongst whom the 4th Henry's of both Countries were sacrificed to
the ambition and rapine of the encroaching Popes: such horrid attempts as these
should rather stir up their noble spirits to a just revenge, upon the bloudied
conclave, for putting into act such cursed designs, then through the base
treachery of an ignoble nature, slavishly to submit themselves to the
Antichristian yoke of Rome, when as if they would noblely withstand his unjust
intrusions upon them, they might restore to themselves a Church free from such
Babylonish bondage, and in some commendable measure imitate the heavenly
Jerusalem, which is above free, and the Mother of us all. For though their
Consciences be not convinced of Romes Errors, yet they may, having distinct
Provinces within themselves, hold Councels, ordain Bishops, and perform other
ecclesiastical rights and duties without being appointed thereunto from Rome,
or being commanded to give an account thither of their proceedings therein. The
Bishop of Rome being only equal to other Sees in a Pastoral institution, and
locked up within certain provincial precincts by decrees of the primitive
Councels; and let them be sure of this, as long as they continue themselves
Saints to the Church of Rome, they shall be sure to be fed with step-mothers
shives, whereas if th y would put their Churches under natural, and proper
heads of their own, they might be sure to find more indulgent cherishing, and
tender care, whereby they would in the eyes of their husband look more comely,
and the French Lillies would more nearly represent Christ his Spouse. But I
return to the Doctor.

The Doctor urges that our succession of Bishops in England was last, for that
it was interrupted by the turning out of the old ones in Hen. 8. and Q. Eliz.
time, and the temporal Authority prefering others in their room: The Civil
Magistrate nominate Bishops within his Dominion.
I answer, that of right it belongs to the Civil Magistrate to appoint Bishops
within his own Territories and Dominions, especially that in England it has
been an ancient right and privilege of the Magistracy; nor is the Pope himself
free from this right of the Civil Magistrate, as I shall show an none.

It does not impugn any ecclesiastical privilege grounded upon Divine
Authority, to grant this to the Civil Magistrate: For by this, there is no
intrusion upon the function, the Bishops are not hereby deprived of their right
of ordination; for this does not awarrant any to step into the Ministry,
unless he have Apostolical mission according to Christ's rule, Mat. 28. and
Saint Paul's declaration, Romans 10.15. By which Mission we understand the
Imposition of Hands, Imposition of Hands.
which is the outward sign of the invisible grace conferred in that holy
Order, and which is the means that Christ has appointed outwardly for the
conveighing of the holy Ghost, and giving them Spiritual Grace, 1 Timothy 4. and
Acts 6. and it is according to Christ's example, Luke 24.50. Christ lifting up
his hands blessed them, and according to his precept he commanding Paul to go
to Damascus, and it should be told him what he should do, and accordingly he
was warned in a Vision, that Ananias should come unto him, and ^ay his hands
upon him, and he should receive his sight, Acts the 9. neither did he receive
the holy Ghost before this, ver. 17. and this being the outward sign Christ
has appointed, we ought not to admit any into the Ministry without it, for by
this they are devoted to us as true Shepherds, coming in at the door, and
without it, they should not exercise the Ministry, thereby not assuring us
they are no intruders; for we are not to give credit to pretended Revelations,
to a Mission by a Vision, or by dictates of any Spirit, in regard Christ has
appointed this way and means for us to know to whom he has in truth given his
Spirit: for as the outward means is nothing worth without the inward Grace;
neither ought we to be persuaded they have the inward grace, without the
outward means, Christ having shown the way how they must come into this holy
Function; if any enter not that way, but climb in another way, he is a thief:
Yet this does not at all contradict the Civil Magistrates recommending any one
to supply an empty See, or other Benefice, that being warranted by the example
of the Apostles: For Act. 6.3. when they considered that it was not meet to
leave the Word of God to serve Tables; The people elect Ministers.
they called the multitude, and bade them look out amongst themselves seven men
of honest report, which they might appoint to the business; and Acts 14.23.
the Elders, that is, the Ministers of the Church were elected by the people,
and after ordained by Paul and Barnabas; by which places it is evident, that
the election belonged to the Civil Power, to the people where the Civil
Magistracy is lodged in them; to the Prince, where he has the Temporal Sword:
so that if we can show jusgentis for this, it is warrant enough, which I
purpose not only to make clear for our selves in England, but likewise that
the Emperor has right of Collation to the Sea of Rome.

Whilst the Emperors of Rome were Heathens, The Pope appointed
they had no regard to the Church, either to endow it with Revenues, or to take
care who ruled, or had the charge of the Ministry: But as soon as Constantine
received the Faith, then not only he, but his Successors had especial care
toward the Rules thereof; Constantine by an Edict confirming Silvester over
the Church, and his Successors after him, he appointing who should succeed
Silvester in the Sea: neither was this unreasonable, for it was fit that the
Civil Magistrate should appoint who should succeed in that See, because now
they were to receive some certain benefit belonging to this See, by the
donation of the Magistrate, and a thing so appropriated being part of his
Temporal possessions, as Lord Paramount within his own dominions; and for
which they become Homagers to their donor, they not otherwise having any title
to temporal possessions. For as Ministers, they are not to take care for the
things of this world, Mat. 7. and Christ denied to meddle with the temporal
inheritance of the brethren; and the Disciples were commanded not to carry
scrip, Luke 22. but having meat and drink, to be therewith content, 1 Timothy 6.
Paul did not seek for gain, Acts the 20, neither was he burdensome, 2 These. 3.
yet notwithstanding, though they ought not to be solicitous after these things,
they were to live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9. and the labourer is worthy of his
hire, Mat. 10. and he that finds the Sheep, must live of the Milk; it is
lawful for them to require victum and vestitum; and if through the bounty of
any Prince, under whom they reside, they have any thing bestowed upon them,
which will amount over, and besides this, it ought to be bestowed in
Hospitality: For 1 Timothy 3. Episcopum oportet esse Hospitalem; so that though
they are not to seek for any thing more then meat or drink; yet if any more be
bestowed on them, it is lawful for them to accept it, provided it be bestowed
upon Hospitality. And in all Reason the founder of such overplus ought to have
the nomination of the person that must distribute that revenue. Nam cujus est
dare ejus est disponere; and for this reason have Princes right of Collation to
Episcopal Sees, and other ecclesiastical places so endowed. And for this
reason the Emperors had right to Collation to the Sea of Rome, as appears by
Marsilius defensor pacis dict. 2. cap. 21, etc. as is manifest by what here
ensues.

Boniface the third writ an Epistle to Honorius, Infra 142.14 chap. and 76, the
10 chapter.
that he would permit him to continue in his Seat at Rome, he having been
placed there before by division of the Empire, and Honorius his coming to the
West.

Anno 451. Leo, Bishop of Rome writes a gratulatory Epistle to Marrian for his
care to the Church, in relation to his calling the Council of Chalcedon; by
which peace was restored into the Church; and as Boniface writ to Honorius, so
he entreats, that by the favor of Marrian, he might continue in his See: by
which it is evident, that it belonged to the Emperor to appoint the Bishop of
Rome. And thus it did continue until Anno 687. Constant. Pogonot. infra 141.
14 chap.
that Benedict 2. obtained of Constantine the 4th, that the Bishop of Rome
should be created without the confirmation of the Emperor, which continued not
long in that state, but was reduced back, and centred again in its own proper
sphere; and that not by any compulsive power, but as if the succeeding Pope
Adrian had felt some compunction of Spirit for detaining that which of Right
belonged to the Civil Magistrate, he did freely, and by consent of a Council
at Lateran, give power to Charles the Great to appoint the Bishop of Rome, and
to dispose of his See Apostolic, which so remained in him, and his Successors
for a long time; and since diverse Popes of Rome, by virtue hereof, have been
deposed, as Benedict 5th by Otho the first, and Leo placed in his room; and
Gelasius deposed by Hen. 5. and several others which came not in, in right of
the Emperors, as may appear by the German and Italitan Histores; wherefore the
pretense of some Popes Parasite, that Ludovious Pius, successor to Charles the
Great, should release this privilege of Collation back again, is vain, and
utterly false, as is evident by these transactions of succeeding Ages. The
Romans bound themselves to Henry 3d, the Emperor, by Oath not to meddle with
the appointing the Emperor, which after, within four years, when the Emperor
was absent was violated, the Clergy of Rome choosing Stephen 9th, anno 1057.
which being but an usurpation in the Clergy so to do, the Cardinals thought
they had as much right as those Clergymen, and therefore upon the Rule, that
one Thief may rob another, did by the assistance of Pope Nicholas 2d, and
Hildebrand, his Cardinal, Chaplain, take it to themselves: so that whosoever is
Pope by their Election, has no right to the Chair; for that the Title of the
Cardinals is surreptitious, and illegal in its Commencement; Et quod ab
initio valet in tractu, Temporis non convaliscat. For the Pope being a
Spiritual man, ought not to plead possession, when as his claim is by
Intrusion; and prescribe he cannot, for that these Records are extant to the
contrary, since therefore by primitive right, and by reduction, after a
separation thereof, and that made good by Authority of Pope and Council, and
after by Oath confirmed, it does belong to the Emperor of the West, or the
King of France, to appoint the Bishop of Rome. Let the present Emperor look to
his Right, as he will be served; and let him beware of too long a
discontinuance of this privilege: for should the gnawing rusty teeth of time
worm-eat, and raze all his Records and Testimonies that prove him a right to
this Collation, he shall never repair his loss, when as he may be sure the
Vactitan Hill shall be stored with old and new additions to the Bishop of Rome
a right to appoint Germany an Emperor.

And as the Emperor had right to Collate to the Sea of Rome, so likewise had
he the same right to other Metropolitan Sees of Germany, till over looking his
Right to Rome, the rest fall from him according to the Rule, Dato uno absurdo
mill sequuntur. But I return back to England, and will show what right the
Civil Magistrate has to appoint Bishops in England without consent of the
Pope.

By the Ancient Laws, The Kings of England appoint Bishops without the Pope.
the King was Patron of all the Bishoprics in the Land: for the Rule is,
Patronum faciunt dos, edificatio, fundus; they were all donative, and of the
Kings gift: Per traditionem annuli and Pastoralis baculi, as appears by the
Law Books, 7 Edw. 4. Cook 10. Report 73. and Matthew Paris History, fol. 62.

The King, by Edward the Confessors Laws, cap. 19. is declared to be Vicarius
(which was long before acknowledged by Eleutherius, in his Epistle before
recited) summus, and persona mixta cum sacerdote Constitutus est, ut Populum
dominii, and super omnia ecclesiastica Regat.

By the Judges of old it was declared, that Papa non potest mutare leges
Angliae: none can Found, or Erect a College, Church, Abbey, etc. without the
Kings Warrant, Dyer 271. the Privileges of the Church were growing out of the
Civil Magistrates power, and therefore by the Articles, Super clerum, made 9
Edw. 2. no suite was to be before the Bishops for any matter whatsoever, but a
prohibition lay, and there it is expressed in what cases it shall be allowed.

16 Edw. 3. Excom. 4. and 2 R. 3.22. Excom. by the Pope is no disability of any
suit within this Kingdom; which resolutions are grounded upon the Common Law
of this Kingdom; which Common Law is but certain reasonable Customs and
usages of the Land refined by the experience of succeeding Ages, and drawn into
form by Edward the Confessor, which gathered it out of Divine, natural, and
moral principles; and as I said, the ancient reasonable usages of the precedent
Ages, and that the King is by ancient Custom Vicarius sumus, and with the
advice of his nobles did appoint Bishops, is proved by Eleutherius, who was the
first Bishop of Rome that ever had any intercourse concerning Church affairs
in this Land, which was only to assist, and further the Ministry, but in no
means to take from the King what was his right, or what formerly belonged to
him; nor was this Ancient right ever invaded till Beckets business, that I can
find: it is true, that some strangers were sent hither, and recommended by the
Bishop of Rome to be by him preferred to English Benefices, which were out of
courtesy accepted, but this did not prove any right of Collation in the Bishop
of Rome at all, nor did ever he set up his pretense to that Right, till Hen. 2.
time. Which quarrel the advantage of the troubled times did occasion, not the
Justice of the Popes Cause, to spur him to clear his title thereto, he knew
well enough that the King had the sole Power, and just Title without him to set
up what Bishops he pleased. And whereas it may be objected, that the Bishops of
England are elegible; it is true, they are so, but that was by the consent of
King John; for before that they were not elegible, but were made elegible by a
Roll, 15 Jan. 17. of K. John; but notwithstanding that grant is so restrained,
that they cannot be elected without the Kings Writ of Conge Deslier.

As for the Pope excommunicating the King about Beckets quarrel, Tho. Becket.
that does not prove the Popes power so to do: For to argue de facto ad jus,
brings with it an absurd consequence: it pleased the King to submit to it, not
being able to oppose the Factions then stirred up against him. Infra 90. 11
chap.
But it cannot from thence be evinced, that the Kings voluntary submission out
of policy of State, does make the Popes claim to exercise that power in
another Province lawful. I have more at large treated of this particular
business in the 11 chapter, to which I refer you. But the main business
insisted upon by the Papists, is the grand contest between Innocent the third,
and King John, about an election of a Bishop of Canterbury, the King electing
John Gray, and the Pope Stephen Langton; which Stephen Langton was in right of
the Pope, set up against the Kings election: Which case, if truly weighed with
discretion, and due consideration, it will neither tend much to disparage the
King, nor to advantage the Pope in point of claim. The business was briefly
thus, as it is recorded by feverall Authors, domestic and foreign. There was a
controversy started between the King and the Monks, Saint Austins (who against
the Kings right, and the opinion of Hubert the Archbishop, did withhold the
Kings Presenter out of possession of the Church of Feversham, insomuch that the
King was forced to make use of the posse commitatus, and by force to expulse
them from their unjust possession, which was presently reported to his
holiness, who never examining the Kings right did conceive a grudge against
King John, and as time and opportunity served, did vent his spleen against him,
insomuch as he, after the death of Hubert, did upon his own score, and both
against the King, and the Monks of Christ Church elect Steph. Langton: A man
that was a great friend and familiarly entertained by the French King, who was
an utter enemy to King John, and whom the Pope had wrought (to compass a
revenge against King John) to prepare a numerous and powerful Army to invade
England; and this upon no other Quarrel, but because King John had by force
expulsed the said Monks from their unjust detaining possession of the Church of
Feversham, pretending that that force which was used for the gaining of the
Kings Right, was a violation of the Rights and Privilege of the holy Church:
and so did make use of that liberty for a cloak of malitiousnesse, and not as
the Servants of God, 1 Pet. 2.16. Stephen Langton.
And the crafty Pope having thus prepared the French King to fly into
hostility against King John, he thought he might with more confidence oppose
the King in his election of Gray: and did after a time work so with the Monks
of Christ Church, that they were induced to adhere to the Popes Election of
Stephen Langton. This Langton says Matthew Paris was Virum strenuum, a man that
could exact of the Clergy, keep in awe the Laiety, and encounter the King and
Nobility: he was a man after the Popes own heart, and therefore such a man must
not want a Bishopric. Yet King John did heartily enveigh against his
admission, and the rather, because he was so great a Favorite of the French
Kings, who then lay at Calice, ready to invade him. The Pope having thus broke
the Kings head, by bringing these innumerate troubles and dangers upon him:
That he might appear to the world to be notwithstanding a Holy Father, and one
who minded the peace and welfare of Christian souls, he gives a plaster to
the wound he himself had made, and steps in to mediate between the two Kings,
who then stood in a mutual posture, of Arms ready to expose the lives of many
thousands to the hazard of the Sword in this their quarrel, which quarrel being
merely fomented by the Pope, and not proceeding from national interests,
(which was unknown to King John:) For the French pretended their Invasion upon
the score of Kingship and Conquest) the Pope knew how to take Philip the French
King off, because he was merely put on by him upon his blessing, and pardon of
sins (and promise of the Kingdom of England, if he could catch it) and upon
such promises of reward, and such indulgences, he had poisoned some of the
Nobility of England, who thereupon made defection, and seemed to incline to the
King of France his side. The Pope I say stepped in as a peacemaker betwixt them,
and sunt his Legate Pandulphus to King John, who insinuating unto him the
danger he then stood in; and how his Kingdom stood open to a powerful enemy
then ready to invade, and was like to be made a prey unto them, for that the
King went against his Holiness reco^mendation of Langton, and had violated the
privilege of the holy Church; and for this many of his Subjects were in France
with the French King ready to engage against him; and likewise that there were
many in the Host, and several of his Nobility which (if it proceeded to a war)
would desert him, and therefore his holiness, out of the love and affection he
bore to the King, and the tender care of his Christian sons in England, came
thither to entreat his Majesty (which word, Majesty.
though it was not familiarly applied to our Kings before Hen. 8. time, yet it
was an ancient attribute long before King John, as may appear by Bracton,
Britton, and other ancient writers) to be reconciled to his Holiness, and he
would undertake to divert the French, and restore a general quiet and peace to
his Realm of England: The King warily suspecting the danger of foreign, and
treachery of Domestic Enemies, and wisely recounting with himself, the grounds
he had to suspect the dangers at hand, did for to avoid that mischief, more
then out of any fear he then stood in of the French King, agree to serve the
time, and did admit of Langton, and taking the Legate to Dover with him, did
there sign a Bull of submission, The Golden Bull.
by which Bull he acknowledged his Crown to be held of the Popes Myter,
promising to pay yearly 1000 marks for England and Ireland to his Holiness,
and his successors for ever; which promise might have been performed as to
that payment, would that yearly stipend have satisfied the Popes, and have been
allowed as a free donation, like to the former grants of Iva offa, and
Ethelwolf of the yearly Peter Pence. But 'twas not that he looked for. The
crafty Pope having thus wrought his ends against King John, got double honor
by his enterprise; for by his peace made with King John, he had utterly spoiled
the ground of the French King his Quarrel, his Army being raised upon the
Score of the Holy Church, which the Pope declaring his peace with K. John, the
French King Philip, in great choler, partly for that he was thus deluded, and
partly for that he had lost his Navy, which the Ear I of Salisbury had set on
fire in the Haven at Calice did retire; he now being out of hopes by this
Quarrel, any further to promote his own interest, in respect he found
defections at home; not only the English, but his own subjects not being
willing to engage in a national quarrel against England: besides, the
discords of England by this peace, made with the Pope, being reconciled, all
hopes of prevailing against K. John forsook him, and in a discontented mind and
rage he retired back to Paris. And thus the Pope at once fooled two Kings; for
the Bull of delusion which was thrown at King John did rebound into the face of
King Philip; the same Instrument that was made use of to cheat King John out of
his right, served likewise to delude King Philip of his vain hopes: which
Instrument bringing so much honor and profit to the Sea of Rome, was
afterward, with great insultation, and triumph, glased in Gold, and was called
the Golden Bull: and Pope Innocent the third, having so good success against
these Kings, he procured presently after, in a Gouncell of L^teran, that the
Popes should be declared above Kings, as appears in the 14 chapter. This is
that Magna Charta by which his Holiness claims a superintendency in England,
who please duly to consider, will find that it is a thing of scorn, and mockery
to Rome, and of no dishonor or damage to the Crown of England. For King John
subscribing that Bull, and making the Kingdom tributary, was against the Law
of the Land: For the King cannot dispose of those things that are inherent in
the Crown, much less of the Crown it self, and to make it tributary; and this
Moore, a great Roman Catholic, confessed, that unless it were by consent of
the Nobles. And the Commons of the Land, it could not bind the successors of
the King, which is the true Rule of our Law, and agreeable to the ancient
Constitutions of our Land: and whereas Steph. Langton was confirmed Bishop,
that confirmation, unless it had been by the Kings consent, gave him no right
to that place; for the consent of the Monks to his election, without a Conge
deslier, against the Kings consent, who had sole right to collate to the Sea of
Canterbury, in respect that of that time the Bishops were not elegible, did not
at all help the matter: for Stephen Langton was admitted, anno 1205. and the
Roll for making them elegible, was not till the 17 of King John, which was 12
years after his installment, so that had it not been that the King consented to
it, and did repel his electing of Gray, Langton had been an usurper,
notwithstanding the election of the Monks; befides, the Monks could not elect
him, nor any other without the Kings Writ of Conge Deslier.

This Langton (as I have said before) was a man so much qualified, that he
could not want his Holiness favor, for he was a second Hildebrand, a mere
State incendiary, and knew how to trouble the clear waters, and make them fit
for his Holiness to fish for gudgeons. P^^ Favors, Railors.
And would the Doctor but conspire to plot some mischief against his mother
Country, no doubt he might be preferred, as Allen was, to the dignity of a
Cardinal. But I hear he is a man of another temper, and therefore I much
honor him, and am sorry he has betaken himself to the company of those, whose
respects toward him will grow cold: for as he is a meek and sober man, he is
useless to his Holiness, and must never think to find any extraordinary
favor or honor from him; for it is a Papal maxim, not to Canonize Innocents
amongst Saints: time has made the Popes experienced, and master builders of
their Spiritual Babell, they are grown Cunning architectors, and know how to
fit every piece serviceably in the rearing up of the Babilonish Tower: The
Doctor was presently discovered not to be fit for an ignation, of whom it is
required to be active stirring, and turbulent: But he would serve for a
Carthusian, who spend their time in more confined, and retiredness, Ex quovis
ligno non fit mercurius. But this by the way, I return to the Golden Bull. As
the installing of Langton had been void, notwithstanding the election, had not
the King consented to a new Conge Deflier; so was the donation of that tribute
to the Pope void and null, notwithstanding the Golden Bull: The Golden Bull.
which Bull, though it received so much honor, as to be entombed in Gold, and
laid up for an everlasting Monument of Romes acquired wealth and dignity. Yet
(in my judgment) serves for no other use but to take up a room in the Treasury
of their Superstitious Trumperies; and instead of being consecrate to the
memory of Pandulphus, and serves to put posterity in mind of his course
employment to cheat Princes, and the Popes wickedness to set him a work about
unlawful designs; which when they were at chieved to their desire, became of
no validity; and so this sacred Monument, instead of Glory, becomes a lasting
Record of their shame and foolery.

I wonder in what form this Magna Charta was enclosed when it received its
Golden-outside; The Golden Bull, Anno 1217.
sure it is was made like a Nut, and did thereby Hierogliphick its short
continuance, for it was not long preserved, it proved deaf presently after: For
that very year it was Sealed, King John dyed, and Hen. 3d his son succeeded
him who sent Hugh Biggod, a Noble man, and others to the General Council at
Lions in France, to require that Bull to be Cancelled in respect that it passed
not by consent of the Council of the Realm, which the Pope put off for that
time under pretense of more weighty affairs, and still keeps the same amongst
his other Monumentall Trophies; nor did England at any time since seek to have
the Nut resto^ed, but waves all interest to it, and freely proclaims, that any
who please may crack it, and take the Kernel for their pains.

By virtue of this grand Charter, the Pope had in conceit under his
jurisdiction the Kingdom of England, but it was but in conceit; for he
regained no more benefits, or vertuall prerogative from thence, then the Turk
does, (who tacitly by his title of being Lord of Europe) styles himself Lord
thereof: Hen. 3d never paid any tribute, nor acknowledged it due, nor any of
the three succeeding Edwards, and Anno 6. R. 2. all the Kingdom willingly
bound themselves by a Law to maintain the Crown of England, against all Papal
citation, suspension, excommunications and censures whatsoever, which they
judged free, and subject to none save God: The power of Magistracy being
innate, not affixed to England.

The next Argument the Papists make to prove the Popes Ecclesiastical power in
England, The King styled Defender of the Faith, by the Pope.
is from Hen. 8. his accepting the style of Defender of the Faith, as an honor
proceeding from his Holiness, whereby they would persuade that the King is not
to meddle with matters of Faith within his own Realms, unless by deputation or
consent of his Holiness; to which I answer.

I have proved that by the ancient Laws of the Kingdom, the King is
superintendent within his own Dominions, as well in cases Ecclesiastical as
Civil: in Scripture Kings are called Nursing Fathers of the Church, Isai.
49.23. and this right was in the Crown before ever Hen. 8. had it promulged by
the Pope for R. 2. in a Commission granted by him used these words, Nos zelo
fides Catholicae cujus sumus and esse volumus defensores in omnibus, etc.
wherefore for the Pope to give this style, it was superfluous; for expressio
eorum quae tacit insunt nihil operatur. It does but argue he is covetous and
ambitious; covetous in that he hereby makes himself master of another
Interest, and ambitious in that he would be thought the Author of Princes
dignities.

As for King Hen. 8. his adding that style to his other distinguishments of
Dignity it did not proceed from any conceit that he could not have styled
himself so, had not the Pope saluted him with that courteous appellation: But
only in respect it was grown into fashion to add to their temporal Styles,
some denotement of their ecclesiastical power, as the Emperor of Ethiopia
styles himself the Pillar of Faith, without deriving that dignity from Rome.

It is true, the French embrace the style of Christian, and the Spaniard of
Catholic King, from Rome; yet I suppose they might without that be so
dignified: As for England, it is plain, that her King may without any donation
thereof from Rome: for that it is warranted by her ancient Laws; and
Eleutherius called Lucius Gods Vicar; the King was styled, Persona mixta cum
sacerdote; which was many hundred years known before Hen. 8. Ante 37. Cap. 4.
and therefore since by the ancient Laws of the Land the King is Vicarius
su^mus infra Regnas. He must nominate, or ought to Authorize some by virtue of
his power, (all foreign provincial Jurisdiction being locked up by consent of
Councels within its proper provincial precincts) to appoint Bishops; this
ancient right being grounded upon Gods Word, in that I have proved that the
Temporal Magistrate did elect such as should be ordained, and therefore for
the Doctor, to deny us to be a Church, because we want succession of Bishops,
the new ones being appointed by the Temporal Magistrate, when as they wanted
nothing to complete their Order, seems to me strange, and unreasonall.

If the Doctor, No discontinuance of Succession of Bishops in England.
when Queen Elizabeth turned out the old ones, could prove that the new ones
had no Imposition of Hands by Bishops, then his Argument touched us something,
though it be not absolute necessary that Bishops ordain Bishops: Ante 33.4 chap.
For what if all the Bishops should die so near at one time, that none were
left ordained by them, shall not the Presbytery make Bishops? they have right
to the Keys, which are called Claves ecclesiae non episcoporum, and they are
the remaining Pillars of the Church, and certainly may confer the Order of
Bishop upon others, and that the rather, because the Counsels forbid Bishops
of another Province to ordain in a foreign Province; and though it may seem
strange to some, that Ministers which are subordinate should ordain Bishops,
and so confer Superior Orders; it is not (if rightly examined) contradictory
to reason: For in this first ordination of Priests and Deacons; they are infra
ordines majores, which orders are called Holy, and Sacramental, and are the
Highest Orders, witness Pope Urban decret did. 60. sum. Sacr. To. Eccl. 226.
as for the Order of Bishops, it is no more then a Priest as to the Holy and
Sacramental Order only; more excellent in respect of the Order of Governing,
which is rather of Humane then Divine right: Priests ordain Bishops.
for as it is Divine, it is no more then what every Priest has by the
Sacramental order; but as it is Humane, it is transcendent in relation to
Discipline; Ante 33.4 chap.
and therefore the Presbytery may agree to ordain one over them to govern them
in ecclesiastical Rites, as the people may choose a Prince to Govern in civil
affairs: Hence it was, that the Apostles sent John to Ephesus, Peter to
Antioch, and appointed James over the Churches at Jerusalem: which before such
their Consignations were but equal with the other Apostles in every respect;
but after that, if any other of the Apostles came where they had the
oversight, they were observant of them: Hence was it, that James was
prolocutor of the Council at Jerusalem, and not Peter, because James was
Bishop there, (I may from thence infer, that if Peter came to Rome for the same
reason, he was observant of Paul) and therefore it is conceived, that in case
of necessity Priests may ordain Bishops; for that Bishops in relation to their
Jurisdiction, are not a Sacramental Order, but only as they are Priests. But
if this opinion be by the learned condemned, I shall submit, and yet with
confidence affirm, that we may in England claim a Church notwithstanding: For
when Queen Elizabeth turned out some Popish Bishops, those that were put into
their rooms were ordained by the remaining part of the old Bishops: For all
the old Bishops were not turned out then, nor in Hen. 8. his time. For first,
in Hen 8. time the controversy was about Supremacy; which question the
Insolences of the Pope occasioned, (though I do not justify that Prince for
all he did) and being once started, it gave occasion of further scrutiny into
the primitive Fathers and Councels, Reformation of England. Infra 55.5 chap.
which did so far persuade the Consciences of the then Clergy, that many of
them did adhere to the Prince against the Pope, and by that and other after
inquisitions, they found they had primitive right of calling Councels, and
reforming things amiss in their Church without appealing to Rome; and
thereupon having the authority of Scriptures, Counsels, and Fathers, they
restored to themselves their just rights, and shook off their servile obedience
to the Sea of Rome, which the Popes continued over them, by keeping them up in
ignorance, not allowing them their own judgments and illumination
ecclesiastical to understand the plain letter of any thing, be it never so far
demonstrated to the easiest capacity without his Holiness interpretation; and
having thus shaken off that slavish yoke of Rome, the scales of blind obedience
fell from their eyes, and they clearly perceived the Popes false cunning, and
damnable abusings of Scriptures, Fathers, Councels, and what not, through his
unjust usurpations of universality, and infallibility, whereby he became a new
Legislator of Divine rules of Faith, which had in them too much of gross and
fleshly compositions, tending merely to enslave Christendom, and to set up the
Popes triple Crown; for all the people to worship, thereby making them forsake
Christ, and his Truth, for the fables and traditions of that abominable Idol.

And as In Hen. 8. time all the Bishops were not turned out; so neither at the
coming of Queen Elizabeth to the Crown, but continued in their Bishoprics,
excercising their function, ordaining others as formerly, only the Archbishop
of York, the Bishops of Elie, Lincoln, Bath, Worcester, and Excester were
outed, and the Bishops of Saint Asaph, Bangor, London and Chester fled; the
rest continued, and ordained others: The Queen her self being Enaugurated by
Bishop Oglethorp, one of Queen Mary's Bishops, and Bishop of Carlisle; and
Parker, the Archbishop was consecrated by the Imposition of Hands of Barlow,
Coverdale, and Korey; three of Queen Mary's, Bishops, and two suffragan Bishops
more, as appears by the act of Consecration: for that our succession was not
totally interrupted; or if it had, I hold that succession of Bishops is no
inseparable mark of a true Church; for if so, then where was the Church before
Christ, Aarons succession, Succession no inseparable mark of a true Church.
but after the order of Mesehisedeck; and Peter was designed of Christ, having
none to go before him; so that succession is no absolute mark of a true Church.

And whereas the Doctor objects, that we are beholding to the Romish Bishops,
if our succession was not interrupted; I have already proved that we had
Sacramental Orders at least, if not governing Bishops before ever Eleutherius
sent any Priests into England; Ante 24.32 2 and 4 chap.
and our English writers say these two which were sent to Rome by Lucius were
Bishops; however, they were in Holy Orders, though I rather incline to think,
that none excercised any Episcopal Jurisdictions, till by the Prince
Christianity was publicly professed, and being in Orders, did consecrate
others; and there were others which had given to them the imposition of Hands;
from whom, and not merely from Rome, we claim a succession of Pastors: yet I
might admit, we had it from Rome, and though all of the Romish Institution were
extinct, yet we continue a succession; for that still we are pars ecclesiae,
though Heretics: But that is but their begging of the question, we appeal to
the Scriptures, primitive Counsels and Fathers to Judge, who are of us two the
Scismaticks or Heretics; and I submit to the Judicious reader to censure, or
condemn us in the points here controverted, whether Rome or we be in the Error.

Thus briefly I have answered the Doctors condemning of us for want of
Succession; and have in some sort proved that the Church of Rome cannot
properly be said a true Church in respect of her Succession, Ante 9. Rome
uncertain in her succession, chap. 2
of which more in the next chapters; for that she is uncertain in it, and many
of the Bishops of Rome usurpers in it: so I will now proceed to examine the
rest of his marks by which he has distinguished her Truth, and Catholickship,
and shall prove that she may not ascribe to her self the Title of the Catholic
Church, for and by reason of any of them.

CHAP. V.
That the Church of Rome has been, and any particular Church may be Invisible.
THe first marks by which the Doctor has labored to prove Rome the true
Church, to wit, Universality and Antiquity are already answered in that I have
Proved others equal, and some ancienter then the Church of Rome; it now
follows, to look a little further after her, whilst she may be found; for
shortly she shall be Invisible.

The Church Visible is a Company professing the Doctrine of the Law, and the
Gospel, Visibility.
using the Sacraments, according to Christ's Institution, in which company are
many unregenerate as Hypothules, as by the Parable of the seed and tares is
manifest.

The Church Invisible, is a company of those only which are elect to Eternal
life, of whom it is said, No man shall pluck my sheep out of my hands, Joh.
10.28. and is Universal, or comprehensive of all the Elect, which both now have,
and heretofore living, had one Faith. The Church visible is Universal, in
respect of the dispersed Companies of those that profess one faith in Christ,
which must continue till the end of the world: And the Visible Church is
particular in respect of place and habitation, and of diversity of Rites and
Ceremonies, as England, Rome, etc. which particular Churches may becoming
Invisible; and particularly Rome has been Invisible in respect of her
Assemblies, and is invisible in relation to the true Faith, and Doctrine: for
though at present she has companies of men which assemble to worship God, and
serve him in the Sacrament, yet she therein follows not Christ's institution;
she is now invisible in respect of Faith and Doctrine, and in respect of Men;
she cannot boast of this mark of Visibility, but Tares grow as well as Wheat:
and as Rome has been invisible in these respects, so may any other particular
Church be Invisible.

Elijah complained that he was left alone, A particular Church may be Invisible.
and that the Prophets were slain: that complaint of his (says the Doctor)
does not prove that the true Church may be Invisible: for (says he) that
complaint was uttered with relation to the Kingdom of Israel, only wherein
Elijah then was, and not with reference to the Kingdom of Judah, where Elijah
was not persecuted by Ahab, and where the Church of God does flourish.

This his Argument, in my opinion proves what is objected against the Church of
Rome: It is true, it is an Argument that the Church shall not be Universally
Invisible; but if by the true Church he mean the Church of Rome, (and I think
he would not otherwise be understood) it is no Argument but that it may be
Invisible: it is true, at one instant of time the Church shall not be
universally invisible; (God having promised his Spirit to be with the Apostles
in their teaching of Nations to the worlds end;) but yet in any particular
place it has been, and may be Invisible, as he confesses himself; he says, it
was invisible in relation to the Kingdom of Israel; and in Judah they knew not
whether to resort, when the Temple it self was defiled; neither was there
Place, nor Sacrifice, nor High Priest; the Priest was wicked, the Temple was
defiled, 2 King. 19.2. and when the Doctor is charged with its being invisible
in Judea, he pleads it invisible in Ethiopia, the Eunuch having received the
Faith by Philip: and so by these landskips he makes intervalls of darkness,
proving that in particular places it was Invisible; and if so, then may not
Rome, being a particular Church, boast of absolute truth, by reason of this
mark of Visibility? we do not go about to prove the Church universally
invisible, at one instant of time, whilst we say that any particular Church (as
Rome) may be Invisible; but that no one particular Church but at some time may
be Invisible.

Time was, when both Rome and we agreed in the same Principles of Religion,
conform to the Rules of Scriptures, Councels, and Fathers: but of later years,
Rome being grown above Apostolical Orders, abusing the indulgence of Christian
Princes, and other Churches toward her: She has turned the grace of God into
wantonness, converting Premacy into Supremacy, and that Supremacy into
Infallibility; and so having acquired that uncontrolable Prerogative, by the
dull consent of some lame Princes, and blind servile slavish People, she became
the only evangellicall cradle, accounting the Scriptures dead Letters, and to
receive articulate sense from her dictates, and so for her own advantage
pr^s^^ibe Laws and Religion to her blind obedient Prosylites.

Yet the all disposing power of Heaven, which suffered Romes Bishop thus by his
own Innovations to darken the light of his neighbor Churches, did now and then
give him a scourge to let him know he was but a man; and in respect of that
frail composition was elementary, and subject to vicissitudes and alterations
in his Constitution; and that nothing that was the production of that various
body of inconstant humors but was obnoxious to a countermand by its mutable
framer, or to be trodden down by others, whose strong bulkes cared not for his
too curious preparatives; and when a general face of quiet seemed to smile upon
the Territories of Romes Church; and that she flourished in that height, that
she thought her self above all opposition, behold a sudden destruction overtook
her; and as the mighty Elephant, whose power is able to throw down great and
ponderous masses, is tamed at the sight of a Ram, and trembles at the
gruntling of a little Pigg: even so her desolation came from an unsuspected and
contemptible hand; insomuch that Rome, in the height of this her glory, and
though she was the admired Metropolis of the Western world, and her Temples
adorned with the offerings of several Nations. Yet she was not secure, and
above the Heathenish suppressions of the runnagate Goths, the beggarly
Scithians, and the spoiling Arrian, Vandals, that head City of the World not
escaping the sacking by Alaricus in Honorius time; nor her Temples free from
the rapine of the Genserick in Marcianus time, and her Capitol left unransackt
by our Belivins, and proved no Sanctuary against Totilas, and his Northern
forces. From these Judgments, if she reflected upon Gods Justice, she could not
promise to her self security. For if Jerusalem, which was the seat of James,
the beloved of the Lord, must not be free from the harrassing of the northern
Forces, how could Rome promise Immunity to her self from the like afflictions:
I wish she would call to mind these her former occurrences of misfortune;
Infra 135.14 chap.
and that she would by these examples of Gods Justice and indignation toward
her, forbear to claim an Universality in respect of her See; for she may by
them clearly perceive that she is not the rock against whom the gates of Hell
shall not prevail; nor are her Temples so immovable, but the battering shot of
the Rummishing Canon can strike a palsy into their lofty heads, and by Divine
permission have laid their honors in the dust.

This was the day of her Visitation, and now sits she in quiet, whilst we groan
under the calamities of this mischief; but let her not laugh to see our candle
put under a bushell^ the rudeness of some not respecting the privileges of
our Church, for there has no evil befallen us, that she her self by experience
is not subject to: These sad and dreadful visitations of the Lord may tell
both them, and us, that we are Churches militant, and must after the pattern,
and in imitation of our Head, Chrst Jesus, suffer her in misery, that we may
triumph hereafter in Glory; there is no particular Church but is subject to
these tokens of Gods Wrath: When under Dioclesian Christians were so wasted
through persecution, that there were, in the Judgment of many, none left
remaining, their Books burnt, their Churches destroyed, and themselves put to
death by sundry torments; and Pillars erected in every place, with this
blasphemous Inscription, Superstitione Christi ubique delecta. Then did we
escape that persecution, when the glory of Romes Church was much darkened
thereby; and now that our Church suffers an eclipse; whilst the same occasion
of darkness does not debar the light from Rome: Let not this be an occasion of
rejoicing to her, but rather remember her own former sufferings, he that stands
take heed lest he fall: for there has no tentation taken us, but such as is
subject to man, and God is faithful, who will not suffer us to be tempted above
that we are able to bear: God for a time may take away the Candle from amongst
us, thereby to show we of our selves are not perfect; but if we trust in him,
he can restore our light; he is faithful, and his hand is not shortened so, but
that it can help, and he has power to deliver, Esaias 50.2.

Saint Cyprian complained above 1270 years since, that for the great
persecution that was against the Church, they could not meet, as they desired,
to execute Discipline, and who will deny that the discipline of the Church is
perpetual? but yet at all times it is not to be had, which proves it may be
Invisible.

These vicissitudes and alterations in every place, are incident not only to
the Civil, but the Ecclesiastical state: Constantine may set up the Cross in
Jerusalem, but that cannot free it from Mahomets Banner: where Christ to day
has his Church, he sometimes suffers the Devil to morrow to make his
Chapel. The Kingdom of Heaven is said to suffer violence, and the societies
of men on Earth, must not think to go scot-free; Christ suffers his Saints to
be persecuted for the trial of some, and for the utter ruin of others, 1 Pet.
1.7. 2 Pet. 2.9. Christ's Church is the Congregation of Saints, and those Saints
are subject to persecution and dissipation; so that in any particular place, or
Region, this Society may be broke, and so the Church made there Invisible,
which is a truth so plainly demonstrated to us, I wonder the Church of Rome
should urge the contrary.

Rev. 2.5. Christ threatened the Church of Ephesus, that he would remove her
Candlestick, unless she amended: the seven Candlesticks are the seven Churches
of Asia; and Christ threatens the Church of Ephesus, that because of her
backsliding he would take her Candlestick away from her, because she had
forsaken her first Love: and if her Candlestick were taken away, sure she would
be left in darkness, and made Invisible.

Christ threatens to withdraw his Heavenly Beams from Ephesus, and yet he had
promised his Spirit to his Church to the worlds end, and that the gates of Hell
should not prevail against her, but that she should be Visible in some one
place, and not Universally taken from the face of the Earth at the same instant
of time: But that the Church might be Invisible in any one place, is evident by
this threatening of Ephesus; at which time she was the only Apostolic See,
John being the^e, and Peter being dead when John writ the Apocalipse: and if
Ephesus be in danger to be made Invisible, I wonder how Rome should arrogate
that immunity to her self, that she alone shall not be made Invisible, when as
when Christ promised his Spirit to his Church, the Church of Rome was
Invisible, and therefore it cannot be in tended that this mark of Visibility,
which is to be applied to the whole Church, should only, and merely be
prescribed unto the particular Church of Rome, unl^sse her Church be like the
Temple of Venus, in which there was a Lanthorn made of the stone A Beston,
whose nature, as Isidore, lib. 15. de Genuus says, is such, that being once
set on fire, no wind nor rain can extinguish it, which made the Heathen people
Idolize it: but she must not think so to delude us, we know her Virgin Lamp is
sunk in its sockets, and that fuliginous li^^k, composed of adulterate
combustibles, which she has set up in its room, is but a thing of exhalation,
the heavenly Sun, from whom she formerly borrowed light, having withdrawn his
shining beams from her terrestrial Orb, and so she is left in both internal
and external darkness; her understanding being darkened in that, whilst the
truth is removed from her, she thinks others see it with her; and that she
neither has been, nor can be invisible; the contrary whereof is plain, Romes
Church has been Invisible.
and by this that follows.

As the Church of Rome has been, and may be Invisible, in respect of
persecution, so has she been by reason of the vacation of her Head.

The Doctor in his 22 Chapter, fol. 360. says, the Church of Rome is the
Catholic Church, because her Bishop is the Head thereof, and has been so
accounted through all Ages.

That he has not been so reputed through all Ages, appears by the testimony of
the first Councels; and if Rome be the Chatholick Church in respect that the
Pope is the Head, then it follows, that the Catholic Church has been
Invisible, because of the vacation of that Head, for cessante causa cessat
effectus: The light of the body is the Eye, which is placed in the head; and if
the body be without the eye, the whole body, is in darkness. If then this Mark
of Visibility be such an incident, and inseparable token of her truth, I would
fain know where the Universal Head of the Church was whilst Rome had no
Bishop: for either they must confess that the Univensall Church must be in
darkness for want of a Head, and so they make Gods promise of none effect, if
the Church be universally hid, or else they must confess that Romes Church is
but a particular Member of the Church, and that then like the Church of the
Israelites, or the Church of Ephesus, she is subject to be made invisible for a
time; and that she has been invisible, may appear by these enfuing proofs.

Two years together, after Pope Nicholas the fourth, no Pope was chosen, and
when after much dissension amongst the Cardin^ls, Celestine was chosen,
Boniface the 8th murdering him, was made Bishop in his stead; where was the
visible Head whilst Benedict the tenth, and Nicholas the second both stand
Popes at once? The Clergy, who then had the Election of the Popes, not daring
to proceed to a new Election, to cross Benedict, who was very much beloved of
the Citizens of Rome, withdrew themselves to Seen, and there elected Gerrardus
Bishop of Florence, by the name of Nicholus 2d, who was the only favou^^ite of
Hildebrand, whom Hildebrand caused to be made Pope, that he (as then not ripe
for the Seat) might under him rule all: for Pope Nicholas was but a dull
fellow, though proud, and ambitious of Honor; and be sure, when he saw his own
time to out him, that he might succeed in the Chair, and so it happened
accordingly: for Hildebrand succeeded Nicholas 2d, two fit to go together, the
one bringing in at the Council of Lateran, the new Doctrine of
Transubstantiation; the other maintaining the then never heard of sin of the
Popes power to depose Kings.

Where was the triple Crown; when at once there was 3 Popes, as Innocent 7th,
Gregory 12th, and at the Council of Pise, Alexander 5th chosen. I might add
more of this nature, but I will reserve the rest of my arrows to shoot at his
other Marks, and shut up this point, and conclude that the Church of Rome, in
respect of Persecution, and vacancy of her Bishops, cannot be the only
Chatholick Church, and distinguished to be so by any certain Infallible rule of
a constant Visibility.

CHAP. VI.
That the Church of Rome cannot be reputed and taken for a true Church in
respect of her Unity in Doctrine, or Sanctity of Life only.
Christ's Coat was seamlesse, and the Soldiers cast Lots for it; that Coat was
to teach the Apostles unity and concord: The Ministers of the old Temple were
clad in White, thereby to betoken their Innocence: Let us look upon Romes
present Church, and see if her Pastors be not worse then the Soldiers, in
rending in pieces the one, and like Baals Priests, not having any right to the
other. And who please to examine their private practices, how they agree with
their public Professions, will find such a disproportion, and dissonancy,
that it will be hard to judge whether his Holiness's Decrees as compendiums, and
true abstracts of the Cannons of Councels, or his Pontifical Robe as the
Conusance of Peter's successor, then with them less of agreeableness and
representation; the one privately thwarting the public edicts of General
Councels, and the other publicly unsuitable and dissonant to a Minister of the
Gospel, so that a man cannot at any time judge by his outside what his inside
should be, nor prove by his inner closet that ever he was in the public Halls;
so that I may return the Doctors saying against Beza, Luther, and others more
properly and fitly to the Pope, Vide uiram tunica filii tui sit vel non.

The Church of Rome would fain have us to believe that she is free from the
blood of this and that Prince, basely by her practices and instruments
assassinated, and barbarously despoiled of their Crowns and Scepters: and if
any question arise about such business, she is ready to disavow all privity to
the act, though the scene was studied in her Cardinals Conclave, and acted
abroad by her own emissaries, as who please to peruse the Anatomy of Popish
Tyranny, will find presidents enough of this nature; but it makes not much to
my present purpose, and I will forbear to trouble the Reader with them, I will
proceed to show her discords and variances in point of Doctrine.

She professes to maintain the Councels of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus,
Chalcedon, and Carthage, and the Council of Constant. has appointed an Oath
to be taken by the Pope (at his installing) to that purpose: But how little he
performs that Oath, or observes the Rules of those Councels, let what I have
said in the 2d Chapter serve to witness.

The Church of Rome in this respect, (I mean the Pope enchathedrated) who
judicially declaring any thing as Pope is confessed by all to represent the
Church may be compared to a Water-man, who looks one way, and rows another.

She may have some land marks and tokens to steer by, but she quickly lays
those observations and wanders into unknown latitudes, one Pope this way,
another that, the third another way, etc. and so being meandred upon the waves
of several opinions; it is by chance if any of them bottom upon mount Sion.

What good Christian of Apostolical Faith looks upon Rome as she now is, and
hangs not his Harp upon the Willowes, and with the children of Israel, by the
waters of Babylon sit down and weep to remember Sion: Sion at unity within it
self, Babylon full of strife, envy, Papists differ about the Keys.
and debate. Sanders maintains that S. Peter received both temporal and
spiritual power by the Keys; not so says another Jesuit, affirming the
power of the Keys to be alia a civili potestate: Baronius affirms that the
Pope may positively dispose of Kingdoms.

Bellarmine not so, but only in ordine ad spiritualia: Cauterenus says, that
this power was given when Christ said to Peter, Quaere Ante 2.
Thou art Peter, etc. de sacra Christi lege lib. 3. Bellarmine, de Romans Pontif.
lib. cap. 12. that it was not given until the treble pass: But of this more
at large in the 9th chapter, why should any be so lame as to allow to Rome this
prerogative, since she cannot tell how to revive her Title to it?

I might instance in many more differences of this nature amongst the Papists
themselves, wherein they dissent one from another; nor are these differences
only betwixt Cardinal and Cardinal, Doctor and Doctor, but the Church of
Rome against the Church of Rome, differing from the ancient Fathers, and
primitive Church; nay, point blank contradicting their own modern Contestation
of Popish General Councels, as I shall show in the ninth Chapter; neither are
the differences amongst them of small consequence, but in the most concerning
points of Religion, as whether the holy Ghost proceed more principally from the
Father, or the Son, about meritum congrui, about the thing designed by the word
hoc est Corpus, about the conception of the Virgin, and all high matters of
Divinity, and are not of any small importance.

For whereas the Doctor would persuade us, fol. 236. that these are not
differences in point of Faith, the Church having not interposed her Decree; and
in the mean time, without breach of Unity one Doctor may differ against
another in point of Reason, which is but to guide to a conclusive Faith; so by
the same reason no Church but is at Unity, for in their Counsels they may
conclude points of Faith, and in the intervals of Councels wrangle about the
Reasons of those points; and yet by the Doctors Logic are at unity, because
the reasonings of private men.

If they hold against their Decrees, why does she not punish them as Heretics?
and if the points be of importance, and the Church does not interpose her
Decree, Infra 92.11 chap.
she then suffers those contentions to be amongst her own Saints, and then
draws on her a suspicion of a false Church, because she seeks not peace and
truth, to preserve the unity of spirit, and bond of peace; for discords are not
musical in the heavenly ear; and if she be not afraid to loose a Faction by
displeasing them, should she interpose her Decree, or else have some such like
worldly end, why does she suffer those contentions daily to grow, which whilst
she does not rectify it, administers just occasion to others to deny her to be
a true Church in respect of her unity, and they have very much reason to induce
them thereunto, as I shall show anon in the nineth Chapter.

I am loath to rifle into this matter, could I otherwise avoid it, Sanctity of
life no mark of the Church of Rome's truth.
I desire rather to lay open the errors of the Chair, then to tax the persons
possessing that Seat, I would reprove the Heresy of Rome, but not the Bishop:
I do not malign a Papist, but only Popery. And now that I must go about to
lay open the fullness of these men (otherwise the Doctor will take it for
granted, that I subscribe to that mark of of Romes truth, that she has none
but godly and sanctified Pastors) it goes against my nature. If I seem
satyricall blame the Doctor, who provoked me hereunto by this false position of
his, and by an unworthy upbrading of the Crown of England, by his cutting
Cross capers upon the dust of one of our Royal Monarchs, whereas he is forbid
to speak evil of dignities, Judge 8. the Prophets boldly reproved Princes, 2
Kings 58. but it was to reclaim their Vices, not to traduce their persons, they
may be reproved, being alive, when as by that means amendment may be wrought
upon them, or else by vexation they will be grieved; Against Ruling Princes.
but these ends cannot be in any reproving of a person that is Dead.

Saint Paul withstood Peter to his face, but backbiting defiles a man's own
soul, Eccles. 21.28. yet the Doctor not caring for to follow these Presidents,
takes a liberty to himself to rake in the quiet Urn of a deceased Prince, and
with insultation to inscribe a new Epitaph.

Here lies no King, The Doctor his injury to Henry 8.
(Kings being called Gods) but such an one as the Poets fain Jupiter, who was
transformed into a Beast for the Love of Women; which unworthy act of the
Doctors gives me occasion to say of him as Saint Jude says of false Prophets,
As beasts without reason, they speak evil of these things they know not.

It is reported, that when Silla set one on work to kill Marius; when the
Vassal came to put into execution that bloody command, he beheld such Majesty
in his face, that his conscience presently was prict with the horror of the
act, his heart failed him, his flesh trembled, and his hand knew not how to
manage that black instrument which should have pierced that noble Cask, and
let his Royal liquor to the ground.

And no less Majesty (as our Stories mention) dwelt in the Princely
countenance of our noble Henry; so that should the Doctor have appeared before
him, as a traducer of his worthy and nobleness with one majestic frown, he
would have sent his Satyricall spirit to the infernal shades to study
invectives.

Principem populi non maledices was Moses precept, Exodus 22. and Saint Paul
appears of that rule, Acts 23.5. and by the 74 Cann. of the Apostles, a severe
censure was to be against any that should be called Contumeliosus in
Magistratum. So that the Doctors reviling of Hen. 8. is on his part
inexcusable: now let me examine whether I may not incur the same censure, by
setting forth the Errors of the Roman Bishops, and I conceive, under favor,
I may not.

1. Because I do it not out of any malignity toward their persons, but their
Profession of Vice, under the hood of godliness and infallibility.

2. Because whilst she persuaded others of the truth of her Church, for the
mark of sanctity of life, and yet her Bishop, the visible Head of that Church
is evil, they hereby draw people into mis-belief: therefore for avoiding of
this Error, and for reforming her evil ways, I may without the compass of
censure justly reprove her Bishops, whilst I do not personally traduce the
men, but reprove the Errors of the Chair: or if I personally touch any one, it
is not I, but some one of their own Church that did it:

3. I shall not speak evil of any lawful Magistrate that ought to bear Rule,
and exercise Dominion, nor any to whose right of power I stand naturally
obliged to respect and Reverence.

The Doctor would persuade us that the wickedness of some Popes does not
blemish this Mark, which is strange to me; she will have it a blemish against
the reformed Churches, because Luther, Beza, etc. are by Basseck termed with
infamous conversations, and shall it be a blemish to private Churches to have
ungodly Bishops, and not to Rome? this is unequal dealing.

The Bishop of Rome is rather a blemish to the Church of Rome, then any other
Bishop is to a private Church, if they both be wicked; for the higher a man is
lifted in honor and dignity, as he is thereby made more near the similitude of
God, who is above all, so he ought to give a testimony of his good works above
others, lest he deface that more noble Image by his unworthy acts: besides, the
Bishops of Rome have of late declared to be above Councels, and are in
themselves representations of the Catholic Church: wherefore for them to be
wicked and dissolute, must needs deface this Mark of sanctity.

As for the distinction between the Person of the Bishop, Infra 70.9 chap.
and his Power, that is, his judicial Seat, and so that he may err as a Man,
not as a Bishop, it is a mere juggle, and that which savours of the Tenants of
those they call Heretics, the Presbyterians, who divide person from power,
Infra 130.14 chap.
and it is rediculous, and a mere evasion to escape this censure: For if a man
should affront Clemens, Vrbam, etc. Bishop of Rome it would be construed an
injury to the Sea, and not that personal, of which more in the 9 chap.

I have a warrant from Saint Hierome, Causa 11. Question 3. if any believe that
man to be holy that is not holy, and join him to the company of God, he does
villainy to Christ, whose members we are; I say I have a warrant by this rule to
lay open the Iniquities of the Bishops of Rome, that men may no longer be drawn
into the guilt of this injury by exalting hypocrites, believing them to be true
Apostolic teachers, which indeed are ravening wolves, not to feed, but to
destroy the flock of Christ; wherefore take a view of some of her Bishops of
Rome, as I find them described by ancient and modern writers.

Those Popes which were condemned and censured for their intolerable abuses
toward Princes, I reserve for another chapter, take here only a view of those
that in other most loud and vile positions were most notoriously wicked.

Wernerus exclaimeth, that anno 883. Holy men were perished from the earth, and
he writ to Martin 2d. So that in his time there was wickedness amongst the
pastors of Rome.

Wallerus Mapes writes of the Roman Clergy, that they studdy villainy, envy
reigns, and truth is buried amongst them.

Peter de Alcaco in lib. de reform eccl. notes the luxuriousness, avarice,
Idleness, Blasphemies, Magic Arts, and other wickedness of the Bishops of
Rome.

John the 12th. was a Dicer, and a wicked fellow: Gregory the 7th, as Beno the
Cardinal testifies was a Magitian, Hildebrand Infra 14. chap, 142.
and what stirs and commotions raised he about the elections of his
predecessors. Sigebert writes, that he confessed when he felt himself at the
point of death that he had raised many stirs by the persuasions of the Devil:
it is likewise recorded, that Silvester 2d, Gregory 6th, Benedict. 9th, and
Paul the third, and diverse others were Magitians. John the 23d was condemned by
the Council of Constance for denying the resurrection of the dead, and other
points of Atheism. Sixtus the 4th builded the Stews at Rome, (a godly
foundation, and well becoming so Holy a Father) Alexander the 6th presently
became his successor, and much improved the revenues of that delightful
Corporation, he was so bold and shameless in the sin of whoredom, That he
openly acknowledged the Popes Nephews to be his Bastards, as Guichard
testifies: and thus I have given you a brief of some wicked Popes of Rome
before they were declared above Councels, Wicked heads of the Church.
and now see what those are which are professed by the the late Latteran and
Trent Counsels to be above Councels; and if so, then their wickedness utterly
blots out this mark of Sanctity.

Leo, the which was a Blasphemour, insomuch that he was often heard ^ay,
Quantas nobis divitias Comparavit ista fabula Christi: Luther his Reformation.
Ante 22, 44 chap. 2.
In his time (it being high time to shake off such wicked Society) did Luther
reform the Germane Churches, Truth and Falsehood, Christ and Belial are
incomparable; either he, or some one else must write against these damnable
Doctors, and their diabolical practices, otherwise the Kingdom of
Antichrist would have been universally spread over the face of the Earth; and
should none stop the furious course of these Cato demonaick Priests, they would
convert Tiber into Barathrum, and plung the whole world into that bottomless
Abisse: (mistake me not, I do not approve of all that Luther did, only this,
that he being of another distinct province apart from Rome, and having Cure of
Souls, and seeing the Errors of Rome, and his Flock addicted to follow after
Rome, for the honor and credit her ancient truth drew from the hearts of many,
might lawfully admonish, and was bound in Conscience to check Rome of her
Errors: now that she flew to so high a pitch of wickedness, and having no
hopes of her self-reforming, were she not admonished by some one of her faults,
might therefore take upon him, to lay open before her eyes some of her Errors,
hoping thereby to reclaim her, or at least to stay his own Flock from wandering
after her, by laying before them the present practices of Rome, contrary to the
ancient Truth: Luthers Reformation.
nor was this any more then formerly was practiced by the Apostles, and
confirmed by Councels for Provincials to reform: Saint Paul, Peter, James, and
Saint John did write to several Churches, and admonish them, and especially
Jude says, It was needful to write, to exhort the people of God earnestly to
contend for the maintenance of the Faith, which was once given unto the Saints,
for that there were certain men crept in which were before ordained unto this
condemnation; ungodly men, which turned the grace of God into wantonness, and
deny God the only Lord, and our Lord Jesus Christ.

And if ever they must contend for the maintenance of the ancient Faith, it was
then the time, when such a brutish Leo, who was the head, and reputed Oracle of
the Church should belch forth such bold blasphemies, thereby to bring in the
doctrine of Devils, and to obtrude upon the Consciences of men a new profession
of a Stygian Creed.

Nor was this Leo the only Blasphemour of the God of Heaven, Wicked Popes.
of those that possessed the Roman Chair, but to manifest to the world, that
these antichristian aberrations from the Divine rules of Truth, are common (I
much fear they are incident) to the Popes of that See. He has both before him,
and after him, Popes after his own heart; Sixtus the 4th, and Alexander the
6th, his Predecessors, the one denying there was a God, Riserat ut vivens
caelestia numina Sixtus sic Morceus nullos credidit esse Deos: and the other,
says Sanazer, dissolved both Gods Laws, and man's Laws, and believed not that
there was a God. And Clement the seventh, and Julius the third, his
Successors, the one in heart doubting whether there was a Heaven (though
outwardly he taught both that Hell and Purgatory) insomuch, that when he drew
toward his end, he said to those that stood about him, that he hoped shortly
to be resolved of that he had so long doubted, to wit, whether there was a
Heaven or Hell, or no; of whom this was said, Contemptor divum scaelerum vir
publicus hostis. The other not inferior to him in this height of wickedness,
insomuch that the Papists themselves report diverse speeches proceeding from
him, which savoured of Atheism.

I might, if I would, have been very inquisitive, have made a large muster-Role
of these wicked Prelates, but I rather weep, then rejoice, that I should meet
with any Records of this nature to refute the Doctor in this point of their
pretended Sanctity; nor is this their case only, I suspect that in most
Churches have been many Ministers bad men, according as our Savior says,
There must Tares grow up in the Corn till the end of the World. According to
the Proverb, Christ cannot have his Church, but the Devil will have his
Chapel: Satan is busy to cast his evil seed into the field, and scarce any
field so well manured and tilled, having their stony hearts melted, and their
clods of flesh mollified with the beams of the Heavenly light, that in some
corner thereof has not this Zizania growing, and sprung up as high as the tops
of the Corn, thereby to teach us, that in our best estate and condition we have
not whereof to boast. The Angels, which are the Reapers, and the laborers to
be sent into the Harvest, will find both Tares and Corn growing in the field,
they are called Laborers to gather the Elect, and Reapers to throw the Tares
into the fire, but both must grow together till the end of the world, but I
have to an end of this point.

The Doctor, nor any other must not boast of the Truth of the Church of Rome in
this respect; for if they make this an absolute Sign, then in respect their
Popes the Head of that Church, and declared it to be above Councels, have been
wicked, it follows that she is not the true Church: I must confess, that
where this Mark is to be found, it is demonstrative, of a true Church; it is a
persuasive argument, but no positive sign of a true Church: In the twelve
Apostles one was a Devil, yet God made him the Instrument to bring to pass our
Salvation: the Devil confessed Christ, we must not therefore deny him. So
then, as the wicked practices of Pastors is no absolute condemnation of the
truths they shall deliver to others; so their uprightness of moral
conversation is no positive rule to demonstrate the purity of their Faith. For
upon this Rule Christians, Turks, Jews, and Pagans may be all of a true
Church, which is absurd to hold; therefore we must not absolutely conclude Rome
the true Church upon the score of sanctity of life.

CHAP. VII.
That the Church of Rome cannot be reputed and taken for a true Church in
respect of Miracles: and of her abuse in maintaining Images in the Church.
THe Doctor is pleased to argue the truth of Romes Church from her miracles;
and he shows that he has not traveled beyond Seas for nothing: est natura
hominum novitatis avida: he has been peeping into her Legendary-stories, that
he might be furnished (upon the authority of a traveller) to send news to
England. For my own part, I dare not give up my self to such delusions as it is
well known the Church of Rome uses toward the people to gain their faith to
believe in his Holiness the Pope, as to credit the most (scarce any) of her
miracles: and that the rather, for that it has been by experience found out
(especially in England) that most of them were feigned, and invented only to
cheat the people into a blind obedience; and I persuade my self, if the Doctor
had known as much as I do, by the reading of histories in this point (which
histories may as well challenge belief as the humane tradions of Rome) he would
never have insisted upon this mark: but as it fares with men that are groping
in the dark, sometimes to run their heads against posts; so the Doctor having
forsook the light he was in, and as yet being not well acquainted with the
windings and stranges mazes that are in the dark cloisters to which he has
betaken himself, at unawares he dashes his head against the door of miracles,
which makes him recule with affront: but I Will so much be his friend, that I Will
help him to revenge his quarrel; I Will pick the lock, and furnish him out of her
stores with miraculous knick-knacks.

It were to make this book swell with impossible trumperies, Miracles.
to report the thousand part of her legendary stories; as that Saint Dennis
carried his head in his hand after it was stricken off; and of Saint Clement
the first, who being cast into the Sea with a millstone about his neck, the sea
forsook the shore three miles, and there was found a Chapel ready built, where
his body was bestowed: and many such like stories are to be found in Bozius de
Saguius. These fictious wonders, fill the ears, not the hearts of many;
therefore the Doctor might have done well to have followed Bozius example, who
finding his grand inventions meet with small belief in these coasts, he runs
adrift till he came to Congo, Colachina, and Japonia, and in his return tells of
wonders done there, and so gains of some an opinion of belief, who will rather
seem, for satisfaction to the reporter, to lead credulous ears to history, then
upon an unknown score to censure him of falsity: wherefore he goes on (with
their patience) to tell them that in these foreign Indies he did but lay the
Gospel upon a woman's breast, and the devil flew from her as if he had been shot
out of a gun; he but set up the standard of the cross, and an army of horsemen
in glittering armor appeared, whose harness did dazzle the eyes, and whose
number struck terror into the hearts of the adverse party. But here in England
they could do no such feats.

It may be that where people give up themselves to believe in them, deceivable
wonders.
their priests, as having a power from Hildebrand, Gregory the sixth,
Silvester, and the old Magician Popes may do strange wonders, (as the Doctor
confesses, folio 253. wonders may be done by the power of Antichrist) but
certainly such cannot before the eyes of true believers in Christ show any
wonders at all. And here I desire to remember a story of a Vestal Nun in Spain
which was cried up for miracles, insomuch that when the late King of England
King Charles was there, he was over-intreated by the Infanta to go to see her:
it was reported to the King, that sometimes she would be lifted up in the air,
and be as fresh as a Rose, though she was furrowed with age. The King came with
the Infanta to her, but she could not do any one feat before the King (though
she could never have shown her miracles in a better time.) The King was of too
strong a faith for her spirit to work upon, and therefore could she show none
then creed quod habes, and habes. All the answer I can give to the supposed
mark of miracles, is, that no good Catholic can well deny to credit them; for
if he believe the Church of Rome to be the only Catholic Church, and the Pope
the head of the universal Church, and sticks to believe these stories, strives
at a gnat and swallows a Camel; let him never leap at blocks, and stumble at
strawes.

Yet lest the Doctor should think that I have given up my self to hardness of
heart, because I am so hard of belief in this point, I will show him my reasons
for it.

I know many of her miracles are false, and the Church of Rome, hand over head,
has recorded the false ones with the true ones; and as the proverb is, We know
not how to believe a liar when he speaks truth. The Doctor confesses fol. 253.
that all her miracles are not true: and if she have Cataloguised the false ones
together with the true ones, we know not how to distinguish them: if I had not
the Doctors own confession that some are false, yet I should not seem rash to
any indifferent man, in that I tax the Church of Rome of false miracles, for
that her teachery and cozenage in this point has been detected in this
particular, it being but held forth to the blind people, that they being struck
into admiration of their wonderful power, might with fear and reverence become
devotaries to their miraculous instruments, offering freely to those Antique
Gods, by which cheat the Clergy obtained no small riches. Infra 13. chapter 113.
For proof hereof, be pleased to take a veiw of her miraculous images here and
hereafter in the chapel of Radcaeus.

There is a marble Image at the Castle of Saint Angelo in Rome, Images to
delude the people.
which when Gregory came in procession with the painted image of the Virgin
Mary which he carried in procession, that marble image bowed it self to the
image of the Virgin in the presence of the people, and sung out a loud,
Allelujah, and regina caeli letare; and thereupon S. Infra 113.13. chap.
Gregory made the prayer Ora pro nobis Deum: allelujah etc. For my part, I
believe this; for belike that image was made like to the image of Saint
Grimbald in the Abbey of Boxley in Kent, which was fastened to a pillar by a
private pin, and a man stood privately behind the pillar, and by plucking out
of the pin, it might be lifted up by a boy: which posture they exercised to any
that freely offered: and if one came niggardly offering, it was immovable; by
which trick the people were made believe, when the Image would yield to be
taken up that their sins was pardoned, by reason of satisfaction made by their
offering. There was another Image in the said Abbey, which is more nearly
comparative with the marble Image of Saint Angelo, which was made of such
curious contrivings, that by certain wyers a man standing within it might make
it frown, simile, bow, nod the head, etc. by which postures those which came to
offer, knew when they had made satisfaction for their sin, by the pleasantness
and acceptance of that carved god; or if they were penurious and sparing in
their offerings, that nimble contrivance of foolery gave them some denotement
of his displeasure; and the priests were ready to interpret heavy judgments to
befall them: or by the similes of that image (which only a golden Wire
procured) to assure them of Gods mercy toward them; and that God signified
that to them by his Saint there standing: by which Cheat they got no little
advantage.

The like cheating and Idolatry was exercised by means of a Rood at Ashhyrst in
Kent, and in several other places of this Kingdom of England. By which it is
evident, that the use of Images was not, as the Doctor would persuade us, only
to put us in mind of the things by them represented, but rather to persuade the
people they were the very immediate instruments of God, to signify his will
unto us; and did thereby persuade the people into adoration of them. And yet,
lest the Doctor's Arguments for their retaining in the Church might seem with
some to be unanswerable by me, should I pass this point so slightly and overly,
condemning the use of them, because they were abused; and lest I should run
into an error with those which upon that score cry down Bishops, which, if as
they ought to be, are both a shelter and ornament to the Church; and, in my
poor judgment, they may as well deny the Apostleship, because there was a
Judas amongst them: I will not therefore, from the abuse of any thing, utterly
condemn all use thereof. It rests therefore to examine how far the use of them
may be lawful.

The Science of Painting and Carving is an Art profitable for man's life and is
the gift of God. Images how far lawful.
It is profitable to the memorial of things done; and to that purpose have the
Pictures and Monuments of Noblemen been used through all ages, being a
grateful memory of those they represent: And this Art and Curiosity of
Workmanship being an adorning and graceful beautifying of any buildings, the
Temples in old time were made sumptuous therewith; which by the Heathen
Persecutors were, as the Psalmist witnesses, broke down with axes and hammers,
by the enemies of the Church. Yet that amongst those curious Pieces there were
any representations of the Godhead, it does not appear; but rather, the
contrary: For it is impossible for humane flesh to draw any thing that shall
represent God by any corporeal or finite image, who is incorporeal and
infinite: Isai. 40.18. To whom shall we liken God? or what similitude shall we
set up unto him? It is true, that God of old represented himself in man's shape;
but we must not therefore think to make semblances of him: it is lawful for him
to do as he pleases; but not for us to make such representations of him as are
not commanded. Besides, those visible shapes by which he vouchsafed to appear,
had God after a special manner with them, and in them present, to command and
hear them to whom he so manifested himself: which cannot be ascribed to men's
representations of him, which are against Gods order; he forbidding us to turn
the glory of the incorruptible God into the similitude of a corruptible man,
Romans 1.13. And though some urge, that such semblances serve as Laymens books,
to teach them to know Christ; yet that is no excuse for the use of such, since
God has ordained his Church to be taught by his Word and Sacraments, and not
by these. And whereas the Doctor urges that they serve to stir up men to give
honor to the thing signified by the sign; that must be understood of a true
sign ordained by him who has authority to ordain it, and the will of him that
is honored prescribing the honor to be given to the sign: which neither he
nor any else, can prove that Christ should be honored by such signs. And as
it is not lawful to make such representations of Him, so neither of any
creature, to the end to give worship to the signs, as significations of what
they represent: And yet I allow that the curious Draughts and Paintings of
Ecclesiastical Stories, and of other Portraictures set forth with art and
skill, may be used to adorn our Churches, so that no adoration be given to any
such signs. Wisely therefore did the Council of Constantinople called by
Constantinus, Images are dangerous to the people
in forbidding the use of Images in the Church: and pernicious was the Decree
of the second Council of Nice, declaring the contrary, which hereby gives
occasion of idolatry to the weak. And there being no ground for them in the
Scriptures, but rather against them, it were more safe (although to the more
learned they be no occasion of offense) to abolish them, then to retain the use
of them in the Church. But I doubt his Holiness will not easily be induced
hereunto, in respect they are much instrumental, by Oblations made to them, to
increase his book: for he, with the people of Zachan in China, feeds the Idols
only with the smoke of the Offering; himself faring deliciously by such
libations. And although these golden pieces, which those wooden gods procure
him, be the offerings of sins, and sacrificed to Idols; yet, by virtue of his
holiness, he can easily wash that iniquity from them, and teach it for a truth,
that when once they are laid up in his Holiness Chests, the squallid nature of
their inquination is changed; and, by a wonderful metamorphosis, they become
pure Peter Pence: and therefore he will not willingly part with such gainful
and profitable instruments. They are of double use to him: for they do not
only serve for the ends of gain, but likewise to win the people to obedience,
by the seeming-miraculous apparitions of them: and therefore by no means must
the use of them be laid aside. Though of themselves they are but manimate
blocks, yet, as Toys and Rattles please Babies, these delude the ignorant
vulgar, striking them into admiration of them; which is none of the least
occasions of the Papists being trained up in ignorance. And whilst his Holiness
can by their means be enriched, who can blame him for retaining them in the
Church of Rome?

But I return to the other Point concerning Miracles, and will shut up this
Chapter, touching both with this advertisement to those that believe the
Miracles of Romes Church, as done by the power of God, Not to give themselves
to such delusion. The Doctor confesses, fol. 253. that by the power of
Antichrist wonders may be done: and most of Romes Miracles are known to be
Mountebank-juglings; and the Doctor confesses some may not be true; and yet she
proclaims all for true Miracles, as proceeding from the Spirit of God. She does
not declare out of her Legends which are true and which are false. But her
Legends being filled with several bundles of them, she delivers all for true
miracles, and therefore is credit to be given to none of them, as done by the
power of the Spirit of God: for did they work by that Spirit, they would not
lie in any one of them.

CHAP. VIII.
That the Church of Rome is not the true Church, because of her pretended marks
of conversion of Kingdoms and Monarchs, or because of her not having been
separate from any Societies of Christians more ancient then her self.
IF the church of Rome have converted any Church since her declining the
Apostles doctrine, it is no more then what the Arrians did unto the Goths, and
so by the Doctors own rule, fol. 256. she has not whereof to boast: and if
other Nations have the Apostles doctrine, the pure and primitive faith, they
now differing in material points from Rome, it serves rather to condemn her
Apostacy, then to record her charity toward them; in that if she gave them
faith, it was but such an one as she her self condemns; or if they have the
pure faith, the present Church of Rome, having fallen away from the the faith of
those first plants, may not properly be called their Mother Church. But
however, I will argue de facto that this mark is not only proper to Rome.

Conversion of kingdoms may as well be applied to the Church of England, which
has planted the Gospel in several Northern parts of the late discovered world;
and although not in so large a measure as the Spaniards Westward, and the
Portugals Eastward, yet it manifests that other Churches have a title to that
mark, and that Rome must not soley monopolize that to her self. Besides, I do
not think that many of the Plantations in the West were by immediate Mission
from Rome, but that the Bishops of Spain and Portugal sent Priests thither to
Preach Christ unto them; and they, and not the Bishops which his holiness sent
to rule and govern the Churches so planted, are, to be called the converters of
the Nations and People: and ^bough the Priests so sent by the Spaniards and
Portugals, be of the same faith with the Church of Rome, yet they coming from
distinct provinces and not from the peculiar See of Rome; and those Bishops
having power to ordain those Ministers, and they by the command of their
Prince being recommended to his new Plantations, I wonder why Rome should for
this bragg and vainly arrogate to her self that she is the sole converter of
these Nations and Monarchs.

The Spaniard and Portugal had the faith of Christ first preached to them by
Saint Paul, who was himself amonst them; and the Church of Rome claims from
Peter, who had not commission to carry the light to the Gentiles, and to Kings;
For that as I said in the second Chapter, the general commission given to go
and teach all Nations, Ante 13. 2 Chap.
was afterward restrained as ^o the Gentiles, Paul being a chosen vessel
thereunto ordained by God himself.

Besides, Spain, as I said before, is a distinct Province from Rome, and has
held several councels without the Bishop of Rome; as the several councels of
Toledo. Cardubia, etc. Wherefore if his priests have planted the Gospel, how
comes this to denote the truth of Rome? But so it is, that the Pope has got
such a hank upon the Spaniards, that he as Superintendent lords it over all his
provincial Sees; and whatsoever is done or acted which may bring glory or
honor to the Church, or if any profit may redound from thence, his holiness is
ready to patrize the action, not allowing a jot to any Spanish provincials; it
not being consistent with his universality and headship, to have a partner or
sharer in any his exploits But if any thing amiss or enormious arise in these
planted Churches, his holiness then disclaimes to own them as his, and declares
them to be members of the Spanish Sees: so that it fares with the Spanish
Plantation, as once it did to the Temple in Rome, dedicated to Castor and
Pollux, which presently after the building obtained a sole name of Castors
Temple: whereupon Bubulus (who was fellow-Conful with C^sar, and did expend
more in the public Trophies of the City, and in that contributed more f^^ely
to grace the City, then Caesar during his Consulship did, and seeing for all
that that Caesar had the name and carried all the honor of those and other
actions wherein Bubulus was equally concerned) merrily said, it fared with him
as it did with Pollux, who had lost his name in the Temple. And thus may the
Spaniard and Portugal say of their Western and Eastern Plantations, that it
is with them as with Pollux; they must not so much as be named the planters of
the Cospel in those parts, but his holiness alone must be said the sole
converter of those kingdoms; as if his painted Sepulcher were not sufficiently
notorious, without the varnish of the counterfeit Plaster. And I wonder the
Spaniard and Portugals should suffer themselves to be despoiled of these
glorious works of their, and thus to suffer the Pope, like Venus transformed
waiting-maid, to minks it, and pride himself in this disguise, unless it be
that the grave Dons have a design upon the Papacy, and for some private ends
forbear at present, but purpose cre long to show a mouse before the
counterfeit, that he may discover his false habit, and prove himself not the
only Catholic father in respect of his converting of those kingdoms, and
thereby at once to manifest the depth of their policy, and the Popes
foolishness and vain glory. Rome has separated from the Churches more ancient
then her self.
And as the Church of Rome cannot alone be said a true Church, in respect of
her converting of Nations, so may she in no sort lay any just claim to that
denomination, in respect of the other mark by which she desires to be
distinguished, viz. her non-separation from Churches more ancient then her self.

The Doctor confesses that Jerusalem, Antioch, and other Churches are of more
antiquity: But Rome cannot be said to have separated from them, in respect they
were of Romes faith. To which I answer, it were more proper to say that Rome is
of their faith, because he confesses her puisnee to them, and they to have the
faith, when Rome had not; and they may lay claim to the former mark of
conversion, in respect they extended the faith to Rome: and if Rome have
converted any, the first foundation coming from the Eastern Churches, Rome
ought not to challenge that attribute, which belongs to them in that particular.
And as these Churches were more ancient, and had the true faith; it is manifest
that Romes title to this mark, is as improper, as her claim to be sole owner
of the other; for that she has made a separation in forsaking the Primitive
faith, and public Decrees of the ancient, holy, and Catholic Church on
earth, as may appear by every particular point in question in this Troatise,
and by some others; of which the Doctor not having started the question, and I
not minding to make her gap of separation wider then the Doctor himself has
done do forbear to mention them: I do keep my self only to answer those points,
upon which the Doctor does insist.

It is manifest that Rome has in fundamental points changed her faith, and
though as she inclined or declined, she drew these parts (being too much
addicted to imitate her, upon a bare score of the antiquity of Romes having the
pure faith) to pin their faith upon her sleeve: yet all other parts of
Apostolical Plantations did not forsake their first faith, and turn after the
Lateran weathercock. There was a remaining part of the Greeks Church, which
the black wings of Mahomatisme and Judaisme had not overspread; and in
Aethiopia the light of the Gospel did still continue to shine; neither were all
the Indies of Portugal Plantation (and so Rome to be their founder, in that she
claims to convert Portugal.) Demetrius Bishop of Alexandria, sent Pantenus to
Preach to the Indies, not long after Christ; The East Indies not totally
converted by the Potugal.
and when he came thither, he found Saint Matthews Gospel writ in Hebrew, and
left there by Saint Bartholomew, which the said P^ntenus brought to Alexandria;
by which it appears that some part of the Indies received the faith, not from
Rome with the Western Churches. Fox. Mar. 48.
Therefore may we not conclude Rome to be the true Church, or else the true
Church has been utterly extinguished; nor that because it was not of late any
where else, but where she planted therefore she cannot err or the like. We must
not with the Doct. upon this score, argue that Rome has not forsaken her first
faith; he himself confesses, fol. Ante
192. that the faith was in Aethiopia by the Plantation of Philip: And by this
it appears, some part of the Indies retain the faith from the Plantation of
Bartholomew; nor can the Church of Rome deny this, in regard that then she
makes the Church universally invisible, which is absurd, and contrary to
Christ's promise. For in that she in many points maintains contrary to the
Apostles Doctrine, contrary to the first councels, and contray to her own
modern constitutions as shall appear in this next Chapter; she may not properly
be said the true Catholic Church, in respect of her non-separation from a
society of Christians more ancient then her self.

CHAP. IX.
That any particular Church may err, that the Church of Rome is not Infallible,
that she has erred in matters of faith as well as in matters of fact.
I Know I shall incur the grand displeasure of his Holiness, and his
pontificial tribe, and not altogether please the Doctor, in truly laying open
some errors of Rome. The one will tell me some truths are censured for treason
against the triple crown: the other will say according to the Proverb, Sooth
seems not at all times. I fear not the censure of the one, for I shall as much
please him, as displease him; if I break his head, I shall make a plaster of
his blood; I may displease him in laying open his errors, but I shall be his
darling, whilst in so doing I make his Church visible. As for the Doctor, I
presume, when he seriously considers how much we are concerned in this point to
lay open Romes errors, he will not altogether condemn me; for should we in
silence pass by, and tacitly consent that the church of Rome is infallible in
what she maintains, Then it follows we are Heretics because she says so. I
have partly cleared our selves from this aspersion already: it rests now that I
prove Rome to have fallen into errors; and if so (according to the Doctors rule,
folio 210.) if (says he) she err in any one point, she cannot be prudentially
sure of the least tittle she affirms.

Mercurius gave the Egyptians laws, Je. chall.
received (as he said) of the God Mena; Licurgus to the Lacedaemonians, from
Apollo Velphicus, and Lactantius, lib. 1. cap. 15. divinar. Institut. Minus to
the Cretians, from Jupiter; the Lady Pallas directed the Tro^ans, Caberius the
Macedonians, Urania the Carthaginians, Phaunus the Latins Juno the Samnites,
Venus the Paphites; and all (as they would make us believe) proceed from some
god or goddess. The Turk affirms his Alcaron to have been received from heaven
and the Ephesians de Diana sua cogitatarunt eam a Jove delapsam fore. Even so
does Rome at this present, boast of an infallible Church, which to prove, she
must go to some Heathen Deity or other; for as she is a Church militant here
upon earth, governed by humane flesh and blood, and but a particular society or
Church (and so a member of the Catholic Church comprehensive of all the Elect
and Saints of God, which have been, are, or shall be, and whereof Christ Jesus
is the mystical head) she is subject to fall into errors; and though she were
the Sea of Peter, and that power which Peter received from Christ, to be
remaining with her (which she would feign persuade the world to believe) yet
notwithstanding she may err: For still she is but a particular Church, and may
err, though the universal Church cannot err, in respect of Christ's Spirit given
to her, and his promise that she shall continue in her foundation till the end
of the world.

Saint Peter did err after he had received the Holy Ghost, Act. 10.34. Saint
Peter did err.
he was of opinion that the Gospel pertained not at all unto the Gentiles,
until he was informed by a vision, that he should go to Cornelius; for, says
he, I perceive of a truth that God is no respecter of persons, but in every
Nation he that fears him, whether Jew or Gentile, and works righteousness,
is accepted with him; so that there was a time whilst Peter was in error; and
Gal. 2.14. he walked not with a right foot according to the light of the
Gospel; Paul withstood him to his face, and this was not for any small fault, or
error of conversation, as the Doct. would persuade us, for Saint Austin against
Saint Jerome, does Justify the reprehension. Besides, to say it was an error of
fact, and not of faith, were to charge Saint Peter with dissimulation either
against his conscience or with it: sure he did it not for any worldly respects
against his conscience; and if he did it because he thought it was his duty in
so doing, to bear with the weakness of the Jews, and to think that a man may
dissemble in such a case, then it was matter of faith, whether a man may in eo
casu dissimulare, or no; therefore his error was a matter of faith, not of fact
only.

I need no other Argument to clear this, then what the Doctor has himself
framed against our proposed difference between fundamentals and not
fundamentals in point of error: for says he, fol. 88. There is no distinction
of points of faith, in regard of the object or motive for which we believe;
namely the truth of God revealed by his Church, we being equally bound to
believe all that is by her proposed to us, whether the matter be great or small.

Upon this the Doctors argument I infer, That the Church having proposed
before, That the Jews should not eat with the Gentiles, Peter did offend
against this injunction which he ought to have believed, as the truth of God;
and therefore it was in him an error of faith. Before the vision in the 10. of
the Acts, Peter was not to preach to the Gentiles.
he was not to communicate to the Gentiles, and would not go to Cornelius
before that; and therefore in the 2 of the Acts, when there were men of all
Nations, and strangers from Rome, at Jerusalem, and when they every one heard
their own language, and therefore mocked the Apostles, saying, They were full
of new wine; Peter lifted up his voice and corrected the men of Judea, that
was, only them of the circumcision, and did not intermeddle with the Gentiles,
they not belonging to his charge; and therefore did Paul reprove him for eating
with them.

Dissoluteness in manners, argues unsoundness in opinion, though it be in
things wherein the Church has not interposed her decree: But if she have
enjoined a thing to be done, or not done, though it were indifferent in it
self; yet her command takes away the indifferency, upon the Doctors own rule;
and therefore Peter's offense against the Churches rule, was error of faith.

Shall Peter the blessed Apostle of Jesus Christ, be taxed of errors, he being
here by Saint Paul, and in several other places of Scripture reprehended by our
Savior for his failings before he received the Holy Ghost, showing hereby he
was a man; and after he had received the Holy Ghost, doubting to whom the
Gospel was to be preached, and offending against the injunctions of the Church,
showing hereby he was no God? and shall the wicked Popes of Rome think much to
be taxed of their errors, and daily failings? I might easily be reprehended for
injustice, should I bury their errors in silence, and publish to the world
Saint Peter's failings; wherefore I must lay open their aberrations to the
public view. In prosecution whereof. I will not as a private man challenge
them of error, but only put them in mind what councels, the ancient fathers of
the Church, and their own latter writers, have given them to understand.

What is the Pope? The Pope may err.
he is no Samuel under the Ephod, no Moses on the Mount, no Aaron with Urim and
Thummim, he is no Ark with the Tables of God, the Rod of Aaron, or the golden
pot of Manna, that the Papists should put such confidence in him; take a view
of him as he is decyphered to us by their own writers: Peter de Alliaco, a
Cardinal, in libde reform. Eccl. grants that there were many things amiss in
the Roman Church, which had need of reformation both in faith and manners: and
Adrian the sixth confesses, that all the mischiefs in the Church proceeded
from the Popes, and promised reformation to the Germans by his Legate
Cheregalus. Saint Bernard, in sermon primo in conversione St. Pauli, long
since complained of the iniquity of Popes, and of the dissoluteness of Priests
and people. The Bishop of Bitonto, preaching in the first session of the
council of Trent, acknowledges the Apostasy of the Church of Rome, in the
chief heads, both of doctrine and of life. Chrysostom 30. Hom. in 12 Mat.
calls them dry men, which have not the dew of Gods Word in their breasts; which
he plainly expresses of the Bishops of Rome.

Nicolas Lyra, who writ three hundred years since, says, Ab Ecclesia Romana jam
diu est quod recessit gratia; and Johannes Episcopus Chemensis, one of Romes
Religion, confesses in his book entitled Onus Ecclesiae, chap. 9. Ecce, Roma
nunc est vorago and mammon inferni, ubi diabolus totius avaritiae Capitaneus
Je. chapter 12.
residet. Gerson, a man of great esteem amongst the fathers of the council of
Constance, and Chanceler of Paris, in prima part exam. doctr. consid. 2.
says, that the resolution of the Pope alone in things pertaining to faith,
does not tie a man to believe it; and infinite of other presidents of this
nature might be produced, all concurring to this point, that the Church of Rome
has and may err. For is this any more but what other Churches have done? as
for example, Particular Churches have and may err.
the Church of Galatia is said to have erred, not as the Church of Corinth,
which erred but in part, some of her Church denying the resurrection, 1 Cor.
15.12. but totally about the matters of justification, Gal. 3.1. O foolish
Galatians, who has bewitched you that you should not obey the truth? and the
Churches of Ephesus, Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis, and Laodicea, are blamed by
Saint John in his Revelation, for their erring from the truth: and this is a
truth so manifest, that the Papists themselves cannot deny, only they would
excuse the Church of Rome by the subtle sophistry of humane invention, and
salve the errors of Romes Church with distinction; they confess (to their own
shame) that Bishops per se may err, which Bellarmine in his book de conc. cap.
2. in fine, Sine dubio singuli Episcopi errare possint, and aliquando errant,
and inter se quandoque dissentiunt; so that we may not know which of them to
follow: How the Pope may crr.
and if this be so, I wonder he should elsewhere contradict himself maintaining
the Pope alone infallible: of which contradiction he having been formerly
taxed, he was put to his trumps, and played another distinction, that he might
err in matter of fact, not of faith: in matter of fact as concerning the
condemnation of this or that Bishop, etc. but in matters of faith he cannot
judicially err; and thus the learned Cardinal being too busy in this point,
Meanders himself into contradictions, without satisfactory conclusions to the
principal point, according to that saying of Solomon, Eccl. 12.12. There is no
end of making many books.

The stout maintainers of his Holiness infallibily being thus tript in their
own devices, and forced to wave the quarrel, being overcome with the strength
of Reason, drawn from divine examples, and the testimony of many learned
Authors; and being thoroughly convinced, yet notwithstanding, out of a self-love,
and pertainacy to maintain their pontificial patron, having drawn from their
education blind principles of his justification, will not quite desist, but
scrue their wits to new inventions, to deceive the world; persuading the world,
that they are not overcome with dispute, nor his Holiness right to infallibily
(though shaken) quite blown up by the root; and therefore they publish to the
world, that notwithstanding all gainesaying, the Church of Rome is infallible;
with this distinction, that her Bishop per se may err, but not when the Bishops
are met together; then they cannot err. To which I answer, If the Bishop of
Rome may err per se, then the late councels of Laterane and Trent, which have
declared him above councels, have thereby consented that the Church of Rome may
err; or else if it be to be understood that the Pope of Rome, with his other
Bishops of Rome, cannot err, they do hereby make the private Council of Rome
above the general Council; which is absurd, and utterly against all principles
of reason and divinity; I will therefore proceed to show that Councels have
erred, and therefore, in no respect whatsoever, is the Church of Rome
infallible.

The Pope is declared above Councels, General Councels have erred in matter of
faith.
and yet he is confessed to be fallible per se. And whereas he would force a
distinction upon the world, that he may err as a man, not as a Pope judicially;
Ante, chapter 6.
I have elsewhere answered to that point; it now remains to look upon him in
his chair, Infra.
with his Court of Cardinals about him, to examine his judical proceedings, and
try if they be infallible.

I would fain know in what capacity the Pope claims this infallibility: by the
power of succession from Peter, I have proved he cannot claim it; and if he
claim it as from the consent of the late councels, then is this his politic
capacity dirivative from thence, and must not exalt it self above the
Primitive; or admit that those councels declared the then present Popes
infallible, for such certain notes of sanctity as was to them discovered, it
does not follow that their successors should be so. But that I may put all
scruples out of men's hearts concerning this point, I will prove that those
Councels in themselves were not infallible, and much less any substituted power
of judicature which must have its rise from them.

The council of Carthage decreed rebaptisation of those that were Baptized by
Heretics: Councils erred in matter of faith.
this Saint Austine after opposed, and the Council of Trent, Sess. 7. can. 4.
repealed this, and allowed of such baptism to be sufficient, if done in the
name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

The second council of Nice was diametrically against the council of
Constantinople in matters of Images; the one approving, the other condemning
the use of them in the Church.

The councels of Constantinople, and Basil, decreed the councels to be above
the Pope; and the councels of Laterane and Trent, decreed the Pope above
councels. Fox. 132.
Pope John the tenth called a Council at Ravenna, and sentenced the Acts of
Pope Steph. which were in a Synod by him decreed, to be burned.

The Council of Constantinople took away the cup, which another Council
restored; and which decree of the Council of Constantinople, and the now
present practice of Rom's Church, in that point, is utterly against the
doctrine of Christ, and the practice of the Apostles, and the Primitive Church,
as I shall show in the sixteenth Chap. The Council of Nice declared Angels to
be circumscriptible; and the souls of men, and that they have bodies, and are
visible, and circumscriptible; which is against the rules of our faith; for we
believe that God is the Creator of all things, visible and invisible; and if
Angels and Spirits be visible, then are there no invisible things (as one
argues upon this point.) But I do not much urge this, in regard some hold that
spirits may assume visible shapes; nor does my argument much rely upon this
mistake in that Council. I need not rifle much into Councels, to pick out
contradictory Canons, since the Councils themselves declare they are not
infallible; insomuch that the whole Council prays, at the end of every
Council, in a set form of prayer, that God would pardon their ignorance, and
errors; and quia conscientia remordente, fabescimus, etc. and because our own
conscience accusing us we do faint, lest either ignorance has drawn us into
error, and hasty will driven us to decline from thy will and pleasure of
heavenly Father, etc. In which it appears, that they confess the frailty of
that Assembly, that it may not only err in matter of fact through ignorance,
but in faith also, by declining from justice.

Lame and frivolous therefore are those distinctions, Alleged that the
contrary decrees of later, are but the explications of former Councils.
by which the Papists would deceive the world, that Councils do but declare and
explain the meaning of former Councils, but do never gainesay any by a contrary
decree: for the contrary is absolutely proved to you already, in that they are
diametrically opposite one to another: and besides, the four first Councils
were reputed and taken to be so holy, that Gregor, the Gr. in regist. primo,
libr. 24. and Masilius def. pac. dict. 2. fol. 229. affirm they are to be
believed sacred tanquam quatuor Evangelia; and if a later council shall decree
any thing contrary to them, it shall not be received into the Church. How then
can the Church of Rome for shame claim universality to her self, and supreme
jurisdiction? the Church of Rome being but equal with Alexandria, and declared
to those Councils, sicut Alexandria, as I have proved in the second chapter.
But the Church of Rome, by virtue of her new-acquired attributes of
universality, infallibility, and supremacy, may declare as she please, and none
to question her for it; and she has her champions with Sophistry to make good
whatsoever she proposes; and therefore, whereas those first councils were
accounted sacred by the ancient Fathers, even as the four Evangelists, and
therefore none might add to or diminish from them, notwithstanding Rome may, by
her new prerogatives, being declared above Councils, do what she please; and
so, upon the matter, all Religion is by her made arbitrary, we having neither
Scripture, Fathers, nor Councels, but must be interpreted by her, after her own
fancy; and no other sense to be received of any thing, though never so plain,
but what she gives; and whatsoever interpretation she makes, through never so
repugnant to the plain text, words, and sense of Scripture, Councils, and
Fathers, must not be denied, but understood to be growings, and explanations of
the first faith, spun out of the stock or depositum Ecclesiae; with which
delusive pretenses of her strange contexture, drawn from her own Spiders womb,
she entangles the lesser and small flies; but the more sollid break the net of
her artificial cunning, and leave her in the snare she prepares for others; and
hereupon she has in the Council of Milan added a new Symbol of faith to the
Nicene Creed, which she calls new rules of faith; which indeed, are new articles
of faith, Explanations of Councils.
as common under one kind; worshipping images, supremacy, etc. which cannot be
as they would have them, understood explanations: for explanations are
declarative illustrations of a truth involved in some former article, and not
additions of a doctrine newly conceived for truth.

I allow that out of the depositum Ecclesiae, Depositum Ecclesiae.
as the Doctor says, fol. 123. there may be growings in faith and knowledge,
and new articles imposed upon the people by representatives in collective or
Provincial Councels, which upon new questions and disputes may resolve (being
the proper interpreter and reconciler of differences) and by the authority of
Scriptures frame new articles, which before were not thought of, as occasion to
that purpose may be administered; and having framed such articles by authority
of the Church, may deliver them to be received as matters of faith; by which
the people by the approbation of the civil magistrate of the respective
jurisdictions are bound. But if those be contrary to what former Councils have
resolved, it proves their decrees peccant, as Romes supremacy by the Laterne
and Trent Councils, as against the first Councils of Nice and Constontinople:
or, if those new rules, or articles of faith, be not warranted by Scripture,
they are not binding to absent provincials: as I shall show in the twelfth
Chapter, for it is clear and evident, that the Scripture is above the authority
of any Council that ever was since the Apostles Council at Jerusalem; and it
self does, in matters of points necessary, judge it self, Infra. 102.112.
as is in that Chapter plainly proved, though all those points were not at
first digested into a Symbol of faith. Scriptures above Councils.
For if by authority of explanation, the Church represented in ordinary
councils shall not be bound by Scripture, so that she shall not frame new rules
contrary to the plain letter, of those points of our salvation the Holy Ghost
has set down in the Scriptures; we do then submit the whole matter of our
salvation unto the power of humane judgments, and so make void the dictates of
the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures, at the wills and discretions of mortal men;
which though they were Angels sent from heaven, in that case are not to be
believed, shall they teach contrary to that the Apostles here delivered:
therefore, I say, because all points of salvation may not be methodized into a
certain Symbol and rule of faith, the Church as occasion may require, may,
out of the treasure of the Scriptures, take new rules; but those rules must not
impugn the plain letter of Scripture, which, because such a Council is
fallible, must be made the square and rule to judge that Council by. Now
because God has promised his Spirit to his Church, and Councils are the
representation of Churches; and for that it is more probable, that they shall
decree according to the rule of Scripture, which every private man in charity
ought to think, and therefore to incline himself to follow the rules she shall
prepose, I will show how far a Council is Binding.

It does not destroy the Church of Christ universally, to say that a General
Council may err; For concerning the true faith of Christ, it is already made
known by the preaching of the Apostles to most parts of the known world: which
faith God will have in some part of the world, till the dissolution thereof;
for, as I have already said, at one instant of time Christ's Church shall not be
universally invisible. The Councils of Laterane, By the erring of the General
Councils, the universal Church does not err.
Trent, Milan, and Nice, may err from the faith they had formerly received: But
this does not prove a universal falling away; and any other Council that of
latter times has been, cannot assure it self upon the promise of Christ's
Spirit, that it is infallible, because not collective of all parts where the
faith of Christ is preached; which if it were so collective, it argued
infidelity of any private Church to distrust their rules. For in such a condion
as they are representive of the universal Church, they have the same Spirit
with them the Apostles had; and though but men, yet by virtue of that Spirit
became infallible in their judicial decrees of Articles and Rules of faith. But
such a Council was never gathered since the Council of Jerusalem; therefore the
later Councils being but representive of particular Churches, as those
particular Churches may err, so these Councils may err.

For as much as since the Apostles Councils, Who shall tax the Councils of
errors.
there was never any Council which was collective of the universal Church, and
so had the assurance of Christ's Spirit; It is requisite that every provincial,
who by suffragan vote is not represented there, shall examine within his own
jurisdiction, how the rules of such Council agree to the Scriptures, which he
is already assured are of the Holy Ghost, and in themselves prime verities, and
to walk according as Gods Spirit shall give him to understand those Scriptures,
he being within his own charge and territory, made a dispensor of those sacred
oracles: and as for any private man, he is to be guided by the rules of the
particular Church of which he is a member, without openly taxing his
Mother Church of error.

I do not infer hereby, that because there has not lately been, How provincials
are bound by a collective Council.
or because that it is very difficult (if not impossible) to have a general
Council collective of all Christian Churches, that therefore every provincial
Council has the same efficacy of decreeing, that a General Council, collective
of many provinces, has. For according to the Council of Antioch, 14. Can. and
Carthage, 19. Can. I approve of provincials appealing one to another, to decide
controversies, and to bring the the neighbor provinces into unity of faith,
that they may support one another, by keeping the unity of the Spirit, in the
Bond of peace, Ephesians. 4. and that it is convenient that such provincicals as
are represented in such a Council, should acquiesce in the result of that
council so convened; but not to conclude that such councils are infallible for
that because they proceed upon humane judgments, not being assured of the Holy
Ghost by Christ's promise to his Church, in respect they are not a perfect
representation of that Catholic Church: and as the Scripture is to be the
guide to any Council, so more especially shall it be a rule to others, by which
the absent provincials are to examine the rules of that Council. As for the
several provincials and Sees then by suffragan vote represented, I hold it fit
for them to acquiesce in the result of such a collective Council; wherefore,
for the further illustration of this point, I hold it necessary to add a
Chapter of the constitutions of Councils, thereby the better to lay open this
point of Romes errors in her ascribing to her See infallibility.

CHAP. X.
Wherefore general Councils are called: of their power, that they are above the
Pope; and how they are of later times, by the abuses of the Pope, made of none
effect.
I Look upon a general Council with that respect and reverence, The convenience
of Ceneral Councils.
that I account her the Bulwark of Christian Churches, the Tower of defense
against the enemies thereof, the hill whereon Christ's City is built, in whose
heavenly top arises a fountain of unity, which sends forth such irresistible
streams, that, with the advantage of that Rise from whence they descend, they
beat back any muddy inundations of error which Satan the prince of the air
sends down to trouble her channels; and, notwithstanding any rubbish which by
his industry shall be cast in their ways to dam and straiten their course,
they, (with the supplies they receive from this inexhaustible source) beat down
those malicious obstructions; and, in spite of all opposition of evil angels,
smoothly glide away unto the pacifick sea.

I look upon her as a bundle of arrows, not easily broke; from whose quiver the
particular Churches are completely armed, to resist the fiery darts of Satan.
In brief, I honor, respect, love, and in all humility reverence her: and when I
consider her in her right constitution, I hold my self obliged in a tie of
indispensible obedience to conform and submit to whatsoever rules of faith she
shall constitute and appoint: I account her the mother of the particular
Churches there represented, betwixt whom there is an harmonious intercourse of
reciprocal love and duty; she to acquit her obligations, provides for her
daughters their portions, food and raiment, Heavenly Manna, and Christ's
seamless coat; and her daughters, to discharge their duty, return her a
tribute of honor and obedience. Thus, and no otherwise, do I look upon her.

These are her just and proper attributes: and who, without regret, can
consider that this beauteous Lady, the mistress and mother of us all, should,
through adulteries, and her late Apostacies, have dethroned her self from this
her so glorious and Celestial estate! she to forsake her husband Christ, and to
go a whoring after her own inventions; by which she has contracted such black
spots of lepresie upon her ruddy cheeks, that she is no more white and ruddy,
the fairest of ten thousand; she is no more the beloved of Christ, and the
fairest amongst women: she with the Jews has chosen Barabbas, and cast off her
husband Christ; her inner rooms are the chambers of death, into which Solomon
enters, and commits fornication with her. She has taken the devils counsel, and
thrown her self from off the Pinacles of the Temple; and, forsaking the house
of the Lord, she has erected a house which is the way unto the Grave; her house
tends to death, and her paths unto the dead; and for this cause many of her
former daughter-Churches are become strangers to their mothers womb, and have
withdrawn that tribute of honor and reverence which they formerly ascribed to
her, and give it to that Nurse and foster-mother, who, with indulgent care,
lets her suck from her breasts, the sincere milk of the word, humbly
complaining unto the General Council, Sal. Song. 5.17.
Oh thou fairest among women, whither is thy well-beloved gone? whither is thy
well-beloved turned aside, that we may seek him with thee? Return, return, O
Shulamite return, that we may behold thee, Solomon's Song. 6.12.

The unkindness of this our natural mother, By whom Councels are to be called.
charmed my senses into stupefaction, and made me dwell too long upon her,
admiring her unnaturalness, of which I could wish I had no ground or proof. But
lest my bold assertions against this reverend Lady, might with some find no
credit, and with others be accounted the evaporations of a revengeful spirit, I
will lay open her digression, and acquit my self from all aspersions of slander.

The style of a General Council runs thus: Jussu Imperatoris, fraternitatis
nostrae coetus est adventus, as may appear by several records of ancient
Councils, and by what follows.

The Emperor in General Councils of the West, and every prince respectively
within his province and dominions, is supreme head of Ecclesiastical affairs,
as I have already proved in the fourth Chapter; and has right to collate to
Bishops to call Councils, and to reform the Church, etc. I do not mean hereby,
that he should determine judicio definitivo to resolve what is sound divinity,
and so to impose that upon men for faith which he defines to be so; But the
Civil Magistrate may, Infra 142.14. chap.
judicio exequutivo, or by right of jurisdiction; and ought to command the
profession of faith determined and decreed by the Church: he is supreme, and
has the sword, that he should not bear it in vain; and as the head in the body
is reliquorum membrorum imperator, so he is the guide and director of other
members, to enjoin Church Officers and others the discharge of their several
duties, and to punish their negligence and contempt: and to deny this to him,
is to make him no longer a nursing father, but pinching suppressor, at least a
cold-hearted favorer, of the Church. As then the Civil Magistrate is supreme
head and governor, Infra 14. chap. 149. and 10. chap 76.
(of which more at large in the 14 Chapter) to him of right it belongs, to call
a Council, for the correcting of sin and schism; otherwise to what purpose
should there be any Council at all, since that nothing there decreed can be put
into practice, without the approbation and allowance of the Civil Magistrate,
who only has the corrective power, to enjoin obedience to what shall be there
decreed? Saint Austin says, that it is the duty of Kings to command, not only
in matters pertaining the state of men, but the Religion of God also: and Saint
Ambrose, though he was against the Emperor, to allow him power as Judge of
Doctrine, by determining points of faith, yet he did not entrench upon his
other Civil power, he being to have obedience performed him, as well of the
Temporal as Ecclesiastical persons, and to punish the negligence of the Clergy,
if they shall make rules of faith, and not themselves observe them; the King or
Civil Magistrate being hereunto ordained, to punish the offenses and
miscarriages of his people, and is therefore said supreme: omnis sub ipso ipse
sub^nullo nisi tantu^ sub Deo; nor is he bound to give an account for his so
doing, saving to God alone; by whom he decrees justice; and this Saint Ambrose
allows, in his Comment upon the 50 Psalm: Against the O Lord only have I
offended. said David. Blind Homer in his Iliads could say, (...) and will not
the holy father of Rome, being full of visibility, vouchsafe to reflect thus
much upon Kings and Princes? if he will not, it behooves the Temporal powers
which have the sword, to look to their charge, and by the examples of David,
Hezekiah, and Josiah, to punish wicked Priests, and to let them know, that
their power is from God: and let them withal take this caution to themselves,
as they have that power from God, God will require an account from them, how
they use that power, either through negligence, or wilfully turning the power
of justice into unequal tyranny. But this by the way: I return to the subject
point in hand.

That the General Councils of the Western Empire were of Right to be called by
the Emperor, The Emperor or Civil Magistrate may of right summon a Council.
Infra. 10 chap. fol. 76. ante 36.4. chap.
it does plainly appear by these ensuing presidents. The first Council of Nice
was called by the Emperor Constantine, as Marsilius, dict. 2. cap. 21. and
Theodosius the Elder, called the first Council of Constantinople. The Ephesine
Council was called by Theodosius the younger, at the earnest request of
Celestine Bishop of Rome, and Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria: and the Council of
Chalcedon, ex decreto piissimorum imperatorum Valentiniain and Marciani
congregatus, as the preface to that Council plainly witnesses; and Marsilius in
his 2. dict. 20. cap. who wrote above 320 years since, says, that though the
Popes then did call some General Councils, it was not of right, that the Pope
with his Cardinals should do so. It is true, that for order sake, and for honor
to the City of Rome, her Bishop is president in the Council, he being by the
Council of Constantinople made prime Bishop, in honor to the City of Rome, and
in after times by Phocas was made universal; yet for all that, he never
challenged any supremacy of power, as to this point of calling Councils, till
long after; only hereby enjoyed a primacy of order, which would it satisfy
him, I believe few would gainsay it. But for the power and privilege of
summoning a General Council, it still notwithstanding this, remained
unquestioned in the Civil Magistrate. And whereas it is alleged by a
president of Saint Ambrose, that the Bishop had power to convene a Council, and
not the Prince; I shall clear that objection, and plainly prove that it makes
nothing for the Bishops of Romes purpose.

Saint Ambrose denied to dispute with Auxentius the Arrian before Valentinian
in the Consistory, Saint Ambrose denial to dispute before Valentinian, proves
not the power to call Councels to be in ^he Pope.
and shows his reasons for it: he does not positively deny, but lays down his
reasons why he cannot, venissem imperator, etc. Epist. lib. 5. he had come but
for these reasons.

1. Because the Emperor was a young man, not then in the faith of the Trinity,
being brought up an Arrian, and having made a law for the Arrian doctrine:
Toll legem, si vis esse certamen, says Saint Ambrose.

2. The conference was to be in a public theater, amongst a company of Jews
and Heretics, where he could expect no other issue, but what the Apostles
found when they spoke with diverse tongues, to wit, mocks, and scoffs; and there
are some places not fit either for actions or arguments: our Savior could do
no miracles in his own Country.

3. Because there was none there to be judge, but the young Emperor, and other
Arrian Heretics; which in matters of faith is not allowed, and therefore Saint
Ambrose might not come: for the spirit of the Prophets must be subject to the
Prophets, by the Apostles rule, 1 Cor. 14.32.

Saint Ambrose denied likewise to tolerate a Church for the Arrians in
Millaine, Saint Ambrose aagainst resistance.
that being to set up the kingdom of Antichrist; yet in his oration against the
said Auxentius, Epist. 5. he declares against resistance of the Prince; and
though not to be obeyed actively in unjust commands, yet not to be resisted in
any case; wherefore if the Emperor resolved to have a Church in Millaine, he
would not resist; For as he could not consent, so he would not resist: for,
says he, preces and lacrymae sunt armae Ecclesiae. Inf^a 147.14. chap.
Now what may be gathered from hence, to prove that the Emperor his appointing
the public dispute was unlawful, and in that that the Emperor had not right to
call a Council? Saint Ambrose lays down his reasons wherefore he could not
come, and in that desires excuse: he is not peremptory to deny: for if the law
made against Christians might be abrogated, he would have come: wherefore this
is a poor shift to prove that the Emperor has no power to call a Council; and
indeed, it is an absolute abuse to that deceased holy Father Saint Ambrose, who
never meant any ^uch thing; he plainly teaching the contrary, as may appear by
his own writing. For when the Synod of Aqnileia (convened by the Emperors
command) broke up, he wrote with the rest of his fellow-brethren (there
assembled) to the Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian, Humbly desiring them to
make good what they had in that assembly concluded, Ne obtemporantes vestrae
tranquillitatis statutes frustra convenisse videamus etc. lest that this
meeting, made in obedience to their clemencies command, should be frustrate and
to no purpose. So that it is plain he was not against the Emperor his calling
of a Council, only could not approve of the manner of the public assembly
appointed for dispute against Auxentius: wherefore, for shame, let none urge
that, to the injury of that holy father, and to the perverting of truth, whilst
they strive to prove thereby, that the right of convening Councils belonged not
to Civil Magistrates: for it was practiced by the first Councils a hundred
years before Saint Ambrose time, and by Saint Ambrose professed, and till of
late maintained, as may appear by latter writers, as Gerson, in sermon coram
Council. Constant. prim. part. A General Council may be called, says he,
without express mandate of the Popes.

The first Council, the Council of Jerusalem, was not called by Saint Peter, or
any one of the Apostles; but the text says, that the Apostles and Elders came
together, after Paul and Barnabas had warned them of the dissension, Act. 15.
and when Judas and Silas were from thence sent to Antioch, and letters writ by
them, those letters were not directed from Peter, But thus: The Apostles and
Elders, unto the brethren which are at Antioch, send greeting.

So that the Pope cannot claim this prerogative jure Apostolico, as deriving
it from Peter: and if he have it by the gracious grant of the Emperor, or any
humane law, I for my part do not grudge it; nor does it much matter who be the
summoner of it; I shall allow to the Bishop of Rome, since he is primus inter
Episcopos, to have his privilege, if the Emperor have given it to him: for as
he was made primus inter Episcopos in honor of the City of Rome; so let those
Bishops appear at his summons, to convene about matters of the Church, which I
should think to be fit and convenient so to do, might the Council be free.
Covenient the Pope call a Council.


Not that (...) are thereunto bound, in relation (...) charge or duty lies upon
them (for the Pope claiming this privilege from the Emperor, it cannot
positively oblige provincials not within his jurisdiction) but for order sake,
and for that some one must call it, and the Bishop of Rome may as well be the
trumpeter to summon them, as no. Therefore I should think it convenient for
them to appear there, might it be free: and for that by order of Council,
primacy of order is given to the Bishop of Rome, I hold it fit that he should
be president of such a Council. But by no means may it be allowed, that by
reason of this prerogative granted by the Emperor, other Princes not subject to
him, shall not have privilege to summon a provincial Council: within their
respective provinces and jurisdictious: and that notwithstanding the Pope may
for order sake summon them to a general meeting, yet if he be negligent, and
will not call a Council, the several provincials may agree to convene without
him: for that is granted to them by ancient Councils; and what they shall so
decree, may by the consent of the several Princes (under whom they are) be
imposed as rules of faith upon the people, to which their obedience shall
positively be required: for it is not much material by whom a collective
Council be summoned. I will admit it lawfully assembled, and now proceed to
examine its power.

Gerson, a famous Papist, and Chancellor of the University of Paris, in sermon
pro viagio-regis Romanorum direct. 1. prim. part. A General Council
representing the Church, is a rule directed by the Holy Ghost, and given of
Christ, that every one of what estate soever, even Papal, must hear and obey
the same, or else he must be reputed and taken as an Ethnic or publican. And
again in another place, prim. part. de examinat. doctr. consid. 2. the Pope
doubtless is subject to Councils, and a Council has power to depose him, as
was done upon John the 12. and Joh. the 23. And the same Author in another
place affirms, in prim. part. pro viagio regis Romanorum, consider. 2. A
General Council may not only induct one to be Pope, but may compel any Pope to
depart from the Popedom by way of authority. And though this may seem but one
Doctors opinion, yet it has formerly been the general doctrine of the Church,
as may appear by the ancient Councels, especially that of Constant. which
expressly in that point declared the General Council above the Pope; and should
it be otherwise, the General Council is useless and vain, if the Pope with his
Cardinals should be esteemed and judged above them: I will therefore examine
this point.

As the Pope is not universal Bishop (which title the Doctor disclaims) nor the
Church of Rome universal, Councels above the Pope.
as I already proved: so neither may he be said to be above Councels, which
though not representive of the universal Church upon earth, for that all
particular Churches and provinces may not be there by suffragans represented;
yet for all that, it is a collective Council of distinct provincials; which
provincials are not subordinate nor subjugate to the Sea of Rome. The Pope with
his Cardinals (the representative church of that particular society) may not
properly or of right be said above that Council, which is there for order sake
and unity convened, that those several provinces, of which she is collective,
may concur in unity of Doctrine, and conformity of Rules of Faith there
decreed; which decrees and Rules, should by the approbation of the Civil
Magistrate be put into execution, within those respective provinces, and
distinct jurisdictions, without any further allowance or approbation, or
controlment of the Pope of Rome, who is thereunto equally obliged with any
other provincial; and to assert the contrary, is novelty, and the unjust
usurpations of the proud pontifical prelates of Rome, and those cursed Lordly
parasites about him, that thus have flattered the chair into this deceivable
mischief, and erroneous novelty; which according to Tertullian's Rule, adversus
prax. in princip. Id esse verum quod primum esse, adulterum quod posterius
semper adjudicandum est. Wherefore this new doctrine of the Popes supremacy
above Councels representive of many provinces, must not be received as true and
justifiable doctrine; for that it is clearly opposite to the ancient faith of
Rome; insomuch that the former Popes of Rome did as Popes did at an Altar,
promise to hold the faith taught by the traditions of the first Councels of
Nice and Constantinople, etc. Infra 84.
which made Romes Bishop but equal with other Patriarks: but now contrary to
that sacred vow, his holiness will be above Councels, and utterly destroys the
constitutions of those Councels.

The Council of Nice hemmed in the Sea of Rome into certain limits, The Pope
inferior to Councels.
wherein being included, she should not break forth: yet such is the restless
motions of her troublesome head, the Pope, that he has made corruptions beyond
his bound, and like as a violent Tide that has lately overwhelmed some parcel
of ground not before made a prey to Neptunes wide swallowing jaws, does for
joy of its new mastery, tumble it self upon its new-acquired Lordship, making
new beds of ease, whereon it intends the next high-springing flood shall lay
his foamy head: so does his holiness, having broke down this pale of the
Church, which kept her within a known and certain Rule of Faith and manners,
insult over the poor captive Lady; and having thus trod her down, which
formerly was a rampire to circumscribe his power and jurisdiction, he
recommends his lawless president to his successors imitation, and proclaims
the Sea of Rome boundless, save only as her will shall please to prescribe unto
her self a limited confine.

And having, Samson-like, thus tore the Lions whelp of the tribe of Judah, he
expects to find a nest of honey in her dead carcass; and from his Papal chair
puts forth such riddles that none that plows not with his Heifer can declare:
which riddles and Roman mysteries, shall any interpret, or put a sense upon
them contrary to his will, or displease him in abating any jot of his
new-acquired Sovereignty, he sends his Foxes with firebrarnds to destroy the
corn of the field, and to spoil the vineyard which Christ with his own right
hand has planted.

Is this Pastor-like? is this to follow Paul's rule to the Romans chap. 11.8.
Boast not thy self against the branches: for if thou boast thy self, thou
bear not the Root, but the Root thee? Surely no, This is rather to pull up
the tree of life by the roots, because her branches wither; and if other
branches sprung of the same stock decay, it may serve to put Rome in mind, that
the sap she has robbed from others will not long maintain life in her arms, in
respect she has thus lopped her self from the bulk of the Church.

She may for a time flourish like a green Palm Tree; but if she do not play
the good husband, and inoculate her self again into the old stock, it is more
then probable she will shortly become a dotard; wherefore I heartily pray she
would no longer exalt her self against that that gave her what she has, I mean
a Council that made her equal with the chief Patriarks, and the Princes that
gave her honor, lifting her head above her fellows: Let her no longer triumph
above measure, knowing this, that whilst she rejoices in her boasting, all such
rejoicing is evil.

Now lest any may censure me for slandering the Church of Rome herein, I will
show how she has changed by degrees from her primitive faith in point of her
honor and confidence in a General Council, and at length quite destroy it, by
claiming to her self to be above it.

First, Boniface by the edict of Phocas (as you have heard) claimed to be above
a Bishop; then in process of time Greg. 7. claimed a power above kings, as shall
appear in Chap. 14. after which the wings of the succeeding Popes being chipt
by four Councels, Worms, Papia, Brixis and Mentz, grew again in his successors,
that at last they flew above Councils, till the 3 General Councils of Pise,
Constance and Basil did not only displace Popes out of the Popedom, but
decreed that Councils were above the Pope. Popes displaced by Councils.
The Pisen Councels did out two, Greg. 12. and Benedict. and placed Alexander
5. and the Council of Constant. deposed John 23. and placed Martin 5 in his
stead, and decreed that the Pope himself for ever should be subject to their
decrees. The Council of Basil deposed Eugen. 4. and placed Nicholas 5. and
declared the Council of Constant. in this point of the Councels supremacy, to
be a matter of faith; so that the late Councels of Laterane and Trent do not
only prove the fallibility of Romes Church, but that Rome has changed her
faith. For such is the ambition and pomp of the possessors of the Roman
chair, that they could not rest quiet as long as the edicts of the Councels of
Constant. and Basil were in force; it bred heart-burings and struglings in the
breasts of the succeeding Popes, it being an undervaluing to their claimed
Imperial dominion, to be Tenants at will of their triple crown; and that a
Council should at pleasure put an end to their state and Empire: wherefore, as
a current kept back by some forced rampire, if it shall once break down that
dam, runs headlong with more force and violence; even so the Popes having
pack't the Councels Laterane and Trent after their own humors, did procure them
to remove and batter down that bulwark of Constant. and Basil, which was
raised against his crown and dignity; and dismounting those Canons, to proclaim
in a loud volley of their own artillery his holiness the Pope not only above
Councels (which was the former dispute) but above Scripture too; and that from
henceforth none shall have voices in the General Council, An Oath to be
enjoined those that sit in Council.
but such as shall first swear obedience to the Pope, and promise to defend his
Canon Law; which oath put Bellarmine to hunt about for an evasion, and lib. 1.
de council. cap. ult. he would have it understood, that this oath is only
intended of obedience to the Pope whilst he is Pope, but not against the
deposing of an heretical Pope, which is a mist the Cardinal would throw before
the eyes of the people, that a man should not see the gross violation of
privileges, and grand abuse offered, and henceforth to be exercised upon the
liberty, freedom, and pre-eminence of so sacred and reverend a Lady as a
General Council is, and of right ought to be; whenas whosoever knows the Popes
Canons, Popes Canons.
which teach that the Pope cannot err in his judicial decrees of faith and
manors, that no Councels are of force without the Popes confirmation; that all
Councels confirmed by him are approved by the holy Ghost; That he can
excommunicate and depose all Emperors and princet, and many such like strange
and horrible positions plainly understands that he is bound by this oath to
maintain those Cannons of the Popes, which are in themselves, another powder
plot to blow up the General Councels: For if they were but to obey him whilst
he taught and ruled according to God and the holy Canons, none would be averse
from it, for by that rule every one might have liberty to examine him, which I
believe Bellarmine would not grant: wherefore it was but a mere evasion of the
oath for that time, whenas he knew well enough the oath was positive, enjoining
obedience to the then known Canons of the Pope, which in themselves are
destructive to Councels, had not the late Laterane and Trent Councels decreed
already his holiness to be above any Council: so that since these decrees of
those two Councels, since this oath to be enjoined to them that shall come to
sit in Councels, and since these Canons made and forced upon the consciences of
them that shall be members of that Council; it may no longer be properly called
a Council, but rather a conventicle of Pope- Parasites, who came thither
forestalled in Judgment, and pre-obliged by oath to maintain the Pope in his
present Canonical power; whenas by this means, nothing that shall reflect upon
his unjust usurpations can or may there receive a free debate; or if it should,
and be there decreed against the Pope, yet he being above that decree, may
alter it in his closet at Rome, at pleasure: and till this be rectified, we may
all bid farewell to General Councels; nay, such is their impudence and vain
glory, now that they have attained to this pitch of height, that they may teach
what they please, no power being to question them, that they stick not boldly
to affirm, that the first Councels of Nice, Constant. etc. had not been of
force, had not the Pope been there; and had he not been there, they had erred:
For he is the only head, and infallible legislator of rules pertaining to
faith, he is the only interpreter of the Scriptures, the Sphynx that can lay
one all former decrees, and the holy Writ it self (be it never so plain) to be
a riddle, to expound it according to his own sense and best a veil.

He may call all Bishops of the Christian world to decide and determine
controversies in Religion; Abuse of General Councils.
but yet (salvo jure) they must decree nothing against what he please to decree
in his chair at Rome. For as for himself, he never comes at a General Council;
for if he should, the Emperor must sit above him, and that stands not with his
princely highness and magnificence: besides, the Eastern Churches do not
acknowledge his primacy; and should he come there, it might give an occasion to
have that questioned, which the old Fox would not have brought into dispute,
because that thereby the unjustness of his claim to others as much transcendent
prerogatives, would be laid open to the world.

The Bishops, as I said, may meet at his beck, fast long, pray long, consult
gravely, deliberate maturely, decree soberly, command strictly, and accurse
severely: But neither they, nor any other, shall tell what shall be of force:
for all shall be as please his holiness, sitting in state in his
only-infallible chair at Rome; wherefore a Roman Bishop Melchior Canus, lib.
de locis 5. cap. 5. non itaque quod in humanis concessionibus fit, plurimum
apud nos sententia prevalet, etc. It is not, says he, with us, as it is with
other humane assemblies, where plurality of voices prevail, for lo here
matters are not to be judged by number, but by weight; and the Councels, says
he, receive their weight from the gravity and sole authority of the Pope: and
the Papists of Rhemes, upon the 15. of the Acts allege, that the determination
of Councels is needless, because his holiness the Pope alone is infallible; and
therefore, say they, they are but called for the contentation of the weak, not
for necessity sake; which if this was the Religion of the primitive Church, let
their own Councels, the fathers of the primitive times, and their own
consciences (in the presence of God) witness.

First, Councils abused.
they deeree Canons in Councels, under pain of Anathema, and yet the Pope may
withstand them salva conscientia: whereupon their Angelical Doctor Thomas
Aquinas, 4. con. page 422. touching that Canon of the Ephesine Council, that
none under pain of damnation, should frame any other Symbol, or add any other
thing to that of the Nicene Council, answers (to excuse the new Symbol set
forth in the Millain Council) that that Anathema is only to private men and
does not bind the Pope. Is not this a strange exposition of a learned Doctor?
As if the Councils of Nice and Ephesus prefumed that private men should make
new Articles of Faith, and enjoin them as canons of the Church: or as if they
had allowed the Bishop of Rome any Legislative power to frame new Rules without
a Council. I blush to see how the Popes parasites, to help a lame dog over the
style, will bolster up his Holiness in whatsoever he propounds; and shall
either receive a cloak to blind its contradictions from former principles and
practices, or, if they cannot easily dissemble the grosness of the Tenent, will
enforce it upon his Holiness score of infallibility; or else, by virtue of an
Index expurgatorius, alter the Rules and Canons of the first Councils, and make
them speak new doctrines suitable to the humor and present tenants of the
Church of Rome: or if the Popes genius cannot see far enough to advance the
Papal Throne, they will in his name, and by his authority, make Scriptures,
Infra 12 Chap.
Councils, and Fathers, noses of wax, make the dead Fathers speak things they
never thought or uttered, and put new faces upon the old Fathers and Councils.
As for example:

S. Fathers and Councils a bused by the Popes Parasites.
Austin de civitate Dei, lib. 15. cap. 23. speaking of Canonical Scripture,
says, Those Scriptures are to be taken for Canonical, which the most part of
the Christian churches so take; amongst which those Churches be, that deserve
to have Apostolic Sees, and to receive Epistles from the Apostles: the word
Sees is turned into See, as I have already alleged. Ante Chapter 2


The sixth canon of the first Council of Nice, which made Rome equal with
Alexandria, is corrupted, and fifty false canons are added to the twenty canons
of the same Council; and the Jesuits would hereby persuade the world, that his
Holiness supremacy, which was shortened by the Fathers of the Nicene Council
being alive, is enlarged by his Holiness they being dead; and contrary that
Council, his Holiness gives leave to Abbots to consecrate Bishops; which Abbots
are not, quatenus Abbots, infra sacros ordines: and, contrary to the fifth
canon, he absolveth those that are excommunicated by other Bishops. Contrary to
the sixth canon, he invades the Diocesses of other Patriarchs. which Eutiches
condemned in the Council of Chalcedon. He believes that Christ has a body
neither solid nor palpable, nor like to ours: (for such is that
transubstantiated body he maintains to be in the Sacrament.) He has further
abused the Fathers of the Chalcedon Council, who, being alive, said, Let the Sea of Constantinople be as well advanced as the Sea of Rome, being the next
unto it: which words are filthily corrupted by a negative added to the last
words, Let her not be advanced in matters Ecclesiastical as she: let her be the
next unto it. So in like manner he has abused the eight and twentieth canon of
the Council of Carthage, speaking how the Churches of Africa should not appeal
beyond seas, he has added this clause, Unless it be to the Sea of Rome.

I might instance a thousand more of the like nature; but these particulars may
serve to give a light unto their dark proceedings. Hercules is known by his
foot; and by this brief epitome of the Church of Rome's tricks and juglings
(for note, Reader, where thorowout the Book I name the Pope. I thereby
generally understand the Church of Rome) with Fathers and Councils, you may
ghess what multitudes of errors and wrongs she daily commits, not making
conscience to abuse the dead Fathers, (which, were they alive, could not think
much at it, because the dictates of the holy Ghost, the Scripture it self, is
not free from his abuses in points that contradict his new profitable tenants)
and to make the Rules of Councels stand upon new pantables which his Holiness
has shod them with, to make them tread Papal measures in.

To this pass are general Councels come: those of old speak new language, those
of later times teach things contrary to the old: nor are these modern Councels
free in their Constitutions; every member thereof must be engaged by Oath to
maintain the Pope in his new-usurped privileges: and should they freely debate
and decree any thing, yet it is to no purpose, being subject to alteration,
controlment, or denial of his Holiness: and therefore since they are brought to
this pass, who will give ear to their Edicts, or honor them as a
Representative of several Churches united in that body? since thus by the
practice of the Church of Rome, general Councels are brought into this servile
condition, and made subordito the Pope, it behooves Provincials to reform
themselves, and to call Provincial councils to that purpose, and no longer to
expect the decision of Controversies from a General Council which is thus made
servile to the Pope, to decree to please the people, but in no ways to
displease the Pope. Since then General Councils are brought to this pass, I say,
it behooves Provincials, as they tender the purity of doctrine delivered by
Christ, and the dictates of the holy Ghost by the mouth of the Apostles to be
preserved in the several Churches of Christ, without being perverted to please
the humors of men, To cast off these wicked designers of the Churches slavery,
and introducers of error and innovation; and to desire the assistance of the
holy Spirit of God, to direct them in their own respective Provincial Councils,
which they may by the example of the Primitive Churches, and by authority of
the first Councils, lawfully convene, without any Rule or Order from the Sea of
Rome for their so doing; and no longer (unless those things may be amended, and
that they have sufficient assurance thereof from the Sea of Rome) to appeal to
any General Councels called by the Pope.

CHAP. XI.
That there may be Provincial Councils called, without the Popes approbation;
which councils have power to reform Schisms and Heresies, and may enjoin Rules
of Faith, which the people by the consent of the civil Magistrate are bound to
obey: and especially that the church of England has this power.
THat the Metropolitanes of distinct Provinces have power to call Councils for
reformation of any Schisms, or decision of any Questions or Doubts in Religion,
it was the practice of the Primitive Churches: and if the Pope of Rome have any
preeminence of Jurisdiction in order to Councils, it was but derived from the
power of Councels, as I have proved before; and therefore the same power giving
authority to other Provincials to call Councils, they are not debarred of this
privilege by any Order or Decree of the Church of Rome, they not being under
her jurisdiction or power (especially those Provincials which were not by
Suffragans represented in the late Laterane and Trent-Councils, which gave this
supremacy over Councils to the Pope.) And that this was granted to all
Metropolitanes of distinct Provinces, may appear by these ensuing presidents
and warrants so to do.

By the General Councils of Chalcedon, the 19 Canon, it is decreed. Quod
oporteat per Provinciales bis in anno Concilia celebrare; and this is likewise
agreed by the Council of Antioch, can. 20. and by the first Council of Nice;
and by the the 18 Canon of the Council of Antioch, that one Bishop should not
meddle in the Diocese of another: and herewith agrees the first Council of
Constantinople, Can. 2. Provincial Councils, and several Provincials to meet in
one, with out the Popes approbation.
By the Council of Carthage, Can. 19. if any difference arose, it was to be
referred to the Metropolitan of the Province, who should call the Bishops of
his Province together: and if they could not resolve the doubt, it was to be
transmitted to a General Council: and if any party thought himself agrieved at
the Decrees of the Provincial, he was to appeal to the General Council within a
year. And by the Council of Antioch, can. 13. if any thing of controversy did
arise in any Province, and the Metropolitan could not in his Provincial Synod
decide the matter, the Metropolitan might call upon his Neighbor-provinces
for assistance in Council (a shame therefore for the Church of Rome to affirm
that no Council is of validity without the Pope:) which canon of the Popes to
that purpose, is contrary to the practice and doctrine of the Primitive Church,
Ante Chap. 10.
and therefore to be rejected. By the ninth canon of the Council of Antioch,
the Metropolitan of every Province has the Government of that Province
assigned to him.

By all and every of which canons it is plain, that one Bishop should not
intermeddle in the Diocese of another, Ante Chapter 2
nor one Metropolitan in the Province of another; for that every Metropolitan
has the government of his own distinct Province committed to him and that he
may call a council within his own Province; and if there the matter in question
cannot be determined, may desire the assistance of his neighbour-Provincials;
which makes by that means a general Council, by calling in the
neighbour-Provincials as the cause shall require: and this is declared by these
Councils for to be lawful so to do, without any reservation to the Sea of Rome,
(as if without her Provincial this might not be done) who by the sixth canon of
the first Council of Nice, is but equal with Alexandria; and Alexandria,
Antioch, Rome and other Provinces, have like privileges reserved to them by
the express words of that canon.

This was the practice of the primitive Churches; England equal with Rome.
and when those constitutions were made, and long before, was England a
province, and had her Metropolitan, who after King Lucius conversion did
publicly exercise the Jurisdiction of a Metropolitan; which was 120 years
before that Council of Nice: and by the words of that canon the several
Provincials then in being having equal Jurisdiction reserved to them, England
may by virtue hereof claim equality with the Church of Rome, the same Authority
making them equal in power and jurisdiction: nor had she so much as primacie of
Order, till the ensuing Council of Constantinople (can. 2.) gave it her only
for honor to the city of Rome, and no other respect. Nor does it appear that
England had any Suffragan in that Council; so that had it not in aftertimes
been confirmed by other Councils, England had not been hereunto bound. Which
council of Constantinople was not called till 26 years after the council of
Nice. So that for the Doctor to allege against us (as he does positively in
his book, fol. 221.) that we cannot call a Council, seems something strange to
me, to proceed from a Doctor; for it is an argument that he is ignorant of
those canons, or else if he have read them, those copies he has perused are of
Rhemish print, and much vary from the Originals. However, I must needs wonder
at his harsh censure against his native country, and his quondam-mother-Church,
that he should deny her that privilege and jurisdiction which is not due to
her alone, but common to all Provincials, which by the authority of Councels
and by the practice of the Primitive, and by the ensamples of later ages, have
and do call Provincial Councils within their respective territories and
precincts, and do there decree Rules of faith to be observed of all within the
Province, as may appear by these ensuing presidents.

There was a Provincial Council called at Ancyra in Galitia of eighteen
Bishops; Provincials called of old.
and that other of Neocaesaria, of fourteen Bishops, before any General
Council: and after the General Council of Nice, were held several Provincial
Councils in the East; as that Council of Grangene, of sixteen Bishops; that of
Antioch, of thirty Bishops of several Provinces in the East (in which respect
it rather deserves the name of a General Council, then a Provincial Synod.)
Likewise the Council of Laodicea, of several Provinces of Asia; Councils held
without the Bishop of Rome.
and this without the Bishop of Rome: for he was not to govern the Asian
churches; but the Bishops of Asia and Alexandria the Churches in Egypt, and the
Bishop of Pontus them in Pontus according to the Council of Constant. can. 2.
Hereupon likewise the African Province held several Councils under Theodosius
the third, without any dependencie upon Rome; which upon the authority of the
Primitive Churches and Councils has been continued down to these days, not
only in those of the Eastern, Asian and African Provinces, but in other of the
Western European Provinces; it being a Right equally due to every Province: and
therefore I need not travel so far for Presidents; I might have saved labor,
and answered the Doctor with presidents nearer home and have instanced in
France those of Arles, Tours, Toulouse, etc. which Genebrard in his Chronicle.
lib. 4. anno 814. calls Concilia reformatoria: and in Germany those of Worms,
Mentz, Brixia, Frankfort, Noremberg, and Ratisbone. And in Spain those of
Toledo; and one of Sardis called by Osius Bishop of Corduba a little before the
Council of Nice. And in England, the Councils of London Winchester, Gloucester:
and many and several even to this day, the Pope never intermedling in any of
them, but in most of the aforementioned Provincial Councils was opposed, and
declared upon several questions started that he ought not to intermeddle,
Provincial Councels not to appeal to the Bishop of Rome.
nor any Appeals ought from those Provincials to be made unto him, it being
against the privileges of the several Provincials to allow of Appeals to him.

And as it was their ancient Right, Ante Chapter 2.
so was it maintained by the Princes of later times, who like careful nursing
fathers would not suffer their Provincial Rights to be invaded by the ambitious
and covetous incroaching Popes of Rome. Hereupon, Ludovicus Pius the Emperor
did by public Edict prohibit all exactions of the Popes: which Ludovicus
perceiving they began to grow proud upon the freedom and donation his
predecessor Charles the Great had bestowed upon them, did hereby show unto the
world, that the clemency and indulgencie of the Imperial Crown should not be
an occasion to make other Princes suffer in their Ecclesiastical Rights by the
Popes of Rome, under color of shelter from the Emperor to invade them in
their said Ecclesiastical privileges belonging to any Provinces within their
proper dominions: and therefore by public Edict did the said Emperor prohibit
all exactions of the Popes Court within his Realm. The like was done in France
by Philip the fair, prohibiting all Appeals to Rome, 1246. and that was
confirmed by Charles the 5 and 6. punishing some as traitors for appealing. And
in the Reign of Charles the 7. was set forth a Decree against the annates,
reservations, expectations, and other proceedings of the Popes of Rome's
pretensed Jurisdiction. And 'twas thought by many that H. 4. would have revived
this; which many conceive did given occasion to shorten his days.

And as these Provincials were free and immune without appealing to the Sea of
Rome, so had England the same privilege and jurisdiction; nor did she ever in
any businesses appeal to Rome she being a distinct Province of old, and
declared by the Bishop of Rome, Eleutherius, that the King is Vicarius summus
infra Regna, might call Councils; and by the ensuing Liberties granted to
Provincials by the first Councils, might make Rules of Faith, to which the
people by the Princes consent were bound; and this to be without appealing to
the Sea of Rome: and never before Becket's business, Becket's c^se, ante Chap.
4.
of which I have already spoken in the fourth Chapter, did the Pope intermeddle
here. Besides, that business of Becket was betwixt the King and his own
Clergy, about a Law made at Clerudun, by which Law Ecclesiastical persons were
not to be freed by Church-priviledge from murder: and one Brock a Monk after
committing a murder, was by contrivance of Becket and others delivered from
public Justice; whereupon the variance began, and the Pope excommunicating the
King, the King was forced, through necessity of State, at that time to submit:
yet nevertheless in the Articles made between the King and Pope Alexander, at
that time, it was conditioned amongst other things, that the King should suffer
the people of England to appeal to Rome; as appears by the Annals of those
days; which is an argument it was not before due to the Sea of Rome. And
indeed, that it was not due, is a truth so manifest, and a right and
jurisdiction belonging to every Province so unquestionably, that I will forbear
to insist any further upon this particular; and submit to the Reader, whether,
upon what I have here fairly laid down, we in England may not call a Council
without appealing to the Sea of Rome. For as for that concession of H. 2. it
was afterward declared void, it being a thing not properly lying within his
conusance, compass, or capacity, to grant, being a right inherent in his
Provincials: and those bare Articles forced through necessity of State from the
King could no ways oblige the successors in the Sea of Canterbury and York; but
that still notwithstanding there may be Provincial Synods in England, for
reformation of Schism, or reconcilement of Controversies, as occasion shall
require, and that without any allowance or approbation of the Pope of Rome.

For to argue a claim to the Pope to require Appeals from hence, by reason of
the Articles between H. 2. and Pope Alexander, and that the Provinces of
Canterbury and York should be thereby bound, is no more reasonable, then if the
Emperor should condition with a Bishop of Canterbury that the Bishops of Rome
should appeal to them; which I believe his Holiness would not think should bind
him or his successor. And for that there was no right to be proved before those
Articles, I say the case is equally just; and therefore as the Bishop of Rome
for shame must not claim it from this argument of H. 2. so may we in no other
respect grant it, but that we, as I said before, may still without his
allowance call Provincial Councils for deciding controversies, and correction
of Schism and Disorders in our Church.

I must confess that the Doctor has justly reproved some dissentions and
varieties of Opinions amongst us in England. Sects in England.
But that excuse he made for the differences which are amongst the Papists,
salvs up our sore as well as theirs. For as the Doctor ( fol. 236.) says, They
are but Reasonings of private men, and (the Church not having interposed her
Decree) may not be properly said differences of our Church, or distracted
contradictions in our Articles of Faith. For should our Church convene a Synod,
she would either reconcile the differences, or condemn them as Heretics which
dissent from her: and after that sentence pronounced, they are no more of our
Church, though they may be said to be in our Church, according to that of S.
John, 1 John 2.19. Si ex nob is essent, permanserint nobiscum. And let me not
appear partial in this point, to pass it over barely thus, without showing the
reasons the Church of England does not reform these differences, since before in
this Treatise (Chap. 5.) I have taxed the Church of Rome of error of
negligence in this particular.

The Church of Rome at present is in so flourishing a condition, that nothing
can stop her (unless the private interest of her Pope hinder her) to reform the
differences that are in her own Church. She may convene a Council without any
opposition: But such is the distressed condition of the Church of England that
on a sudden her ^lilies were over-topped with weeds: the Sectaries which fed
upon wild olives, gave thereof unto the giddy multitude, who were presently
like cursed children of old Adam tempted to eat that forbidden fruit; and
having Liberty promised to be masters and lords of the whole Vintage, they
claim bargain with the merchandizers of holy wares, and presently cry down the
ancient Husbandmen of the Vineyard. Which strange and unheard of change struck
such amazement in the hearts of the people, and caused such struglings in
nature, to digest this new-tempered Potion she was to drink, that the whole
body of the Land was severed; so that till this fit of her sickness be over,
her ancient Husbandmen cannot nay must not enter into the Vineyard to prune and
dress her, and to cut off those extravagant branches, which like ill weeds,
have thriven fast, and make the whole Plantation seem out of order. Let us
therefore pray the Lord of the Vineyard that he would restore her Husbandmen
unto her, that he would repair her walls which are trodden down, and make up her
hedge, that she may no longer be eaten up; that in stead of these wil^e grapes
she may bring forth fruits meet for her Lord and Master: and that he would
strengthen their hearts in this day of visitation, and give them patience to
undergo the Cross that is laid upon them; and no doubt but in due time he will
give her joy for heaviness and turn the hearts of her persecutors, to support
with the right hand whom they have buffered with the left.

This is the Lords doing thus to visit her: and would it please him to say to
the destroying Angel. It is enough; would he in mercy turn to his Vineyard, and
have pity on her; would he please to restore her beauty, that she might rejoice
in her salvation; and and that the world might no longer laugh to see Christ's
disciples weep, Joh. 16.20: Then I dare on her behalf promise, she would not be
slack to reform the enormities committed against Christ and his Truth. And as
in the mean time she may not justly be taxed for negligence herein; so neither
has she heretofore been careless in this point. It is true, according to that
of S. Paul. 1 Cor. 11.19. that there must be heresies, that they which are
approved might be known: But she was never wanting friendly to admonish, and
with motherly reasons to persuade her Christian sons to obedience, as
witnesses the several public Conserences had at Hampton and elsewhere; which
was all that of her self she was able to do. Bishops cannot reform without
approhation from the Parliament.
She may decree things in her Convocation and Church Assemblies; but they are
no binding Rules by the Laws of the Land, without the approbation of the Civil
power: and therefore is it ordinarily that the Convocation sits when there is a
Parliament, that if there be any new Rules of Faith to be declared, they may
receive the approbation and allowance of the Temporal Magistrate, by force
whereof they become obligatory to the people.

As for the Bishops their sitting in Parliament, they do not sit there as
Bishops to judge, but as Barons they judge: as Bishops they only advise, left
any Moral Law be made repugnant to Gods Word; and so likewise the Judges sit in
Parliament to advise lest any new Law be made either in it self irregular, or
contradictory to the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom: but neither the Bishops
as Bishops, or the Judges sit in Parliament as Judges to decree and vote in the
legislation of any new Rule.

Whereas in old Presidents it is said By assent of the King, Bishops si^ as
Barons, not as Bishops, in Parliament.
by the advice of the Lords spiritual and temporal, etc. it is not hereby to be
understood that as Spiritual Lords they judged in the making of the Municipal
Law; only they were named before the Temporal Lords, for that they were the
greater number, and all Barons or Peers were alike. The Bishops, Abbots, and
Priors which had Baronies annexed to them, were far exceeding the number of the
Temporal Lords, as may appear by ancient Rolls: there were 27 Abbots, and 2
Priors, which had Baronies annexed to their Spiritualties; by virtue whereof,
both they and the Bishops (which likewise had Baronies annexed to their Sees)
sat on Parliament in a distinct capacity from the Spiritualty, as to the
matter of Judicature.

Now that they were the greater number, appears by this: The Abbots. Priors,
and Bishops, which held by Barony, were fifty; and there were but few Noblemen
of the Laity: there were none or few Earls, but of the Blood Royal, Noblemen
in England.
and therefore to this day they are termed by the Kings Writs, Consanguinei
nostri: in aftertime they were made more common; insomuch that whereas Alfred
had divided the Kingdom into Shires, and committed the Government of every
Shire, and appointed a Lieutenant to every Shire to govern it, and to rule and
control the outrageous subjects at home, as well as to defend it from foreign
enemies, That Officer in aftertimes became a Count, and the country over which
he was appointed Governor was called a County; which since was changed, the
King taking from the Earl or Count that power, he not liking that this power
should remain main in one hereditary, and which had it not immediately from
himself. And because the Earl to whom such charge was committed was not so
ready to be corrected if he did amiss, and that the administration of justice
might immediately proceed from the King himself, it was therefore taken from
the Earl, and given to one yearly appointed thereto; who because he did execute
that power which the Earl formerly had, is called Vice-comes, quia vicem Commit
is suppleat. Mirror. cap. 1. sect. 3. By which it appears, that there were not
many Peers of the Laytie.

And as for any other degrees of Nobility, as Duke, Marquess, Nobility in
England.
or Viscount, they were but puisne names of titular dignity, and does not make
them Peers or Judges of Parliament, unless they have Baronies annexed to them,
as it is resolved by the Law of England, 14 H. 4.7. and therefore in Parliament
all Peers votes are equal, without distinction of their titular dignities. For
as for the name Duke, there was none in England after the Conquest, before the
Black Prince Edward, son of Rich. 2. nor any Marquess before Robert Earl of
Oxford was made Marquess of Dublin by R. 2. nor any Viscount before John de
bello monte was made Viscount Bellamont, or Beaumont, by H. 6. By which it is
manifest, that the Nobility was but few in ancient time; and therefore the
Lords Spiritual being the greater number of Peers, are named before the Lords
Temporal: not that they either have any superiority in Judicature, or that they
sit there as Judges in their Spiritual capacity, as may likewise appear by Roll
of Parliament, 18 H. 3. m. 17. The Bishops sitting in a Convocation at
Gloucester, were inhibited to meddle of the Temporal state of the King or his
Nobles, etc. upon pain of having their Baronies confiscate: for they had
distinct capacities: as they are Bishops, they were not to meddle with Temporal
affairs, wherefore were they inhibited in that Assembly at Gloucester, which
was merely of spiritual men, to proceed in matters temporal: and as they are
Barons, and therefore sit in Parliament, they may not there judge of things
spiritual, all transactions of that nature being to receive debate in the
Convocation of the Clergy. Wherefore it may not be laid to the charge of the
Bishops, that they sitting in Parliament did not reform the Schisms in the
Church, for that they were not proper Judges thereof as they sat in
Parliament, but only when they sat in the Convocation; which Convocation was
prevented to be convened according to the old Rules and Customs of this Nation
by the popular sort; which then not knowing what they would have, at all
adventure cried down Episcopacie; and having pulled down that stately glorious
fabric, all that ever the then-busie Reformers could frame out of the timber
of the old building, was but to patch and cobble up a Presbyterian cottage and
that so weakly joynted and set together, that it was judged by the most of them
that it could not stand above three years. A pitiful change!

It is an evil bird defiles its own nest: and must our English Sion, which was
the glory of this Land, and the envy of other Nations, be made a scorn unto
her enemies by her own adopted sons? If children live honestly, (says Solomon,
Ecclus 22.) they shall put away the shame of their parents: but if they be
proud with haughtiness and foolishness, they defile the nobility of their own
kindred.

Wherefore I humbly beg of the chief Governors and Rulers of the people, to
reflect upon their Mother Church, and to consider her in her sufferings, to
pray for her, and to endeavor her peace: Pray for the peace of Jerusalem; they
shall prosper that love her: And to put to their helping hand to lift up her
head out of the dust, That she may no longer lie groaning and grovelling under
the heavy hands of wild persecutors, but may by the assistance and loving aid
of the Judges of the people, be called upon, that she may either clear her self
to the condemnation of her opposers, or suffer according to her deserving, by
the grave judgment and sentence of the Wise of the Land, and not to be trodden
down and censured without a fair trial, (any further then her sufferings with
patience witness her faith:) which if they would please to condescend unto, it
would certainly conduce to satisfy the consciences of many that doubt, and by
the blessing of God would bring peace into the Land: and that according to
Solomon's saying, that there might be a Rod and Correction in the Church,
whereby the sons obtain wisdom; but the liberty of the children makes the
mother ashamed.

Now the Lord open the hearts, and give bowels of compassion to the Rulers of
the people, that by their favors the Church may be again restored to us, so
that we may worship God in spirit and truth; and that we having again restored
unto us a Jerusalem at unity within it self, we may keep the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace; that we may suck and be satisfied with the brefts
of her consolation; that we may milk out, and be delighted with the brightness
of her glory; and that by the means of her nursing fathers, it would please God
to extend peace on her like a flood, that we may suck, be born upon her sides,
and be joyful upon her knees; to the quieting of all differences amongst us,
and to the everlasting peace of those that wish well to Sion.

But I have dwelled too long upon this point: I return to the subject matter of
this Chapter.

You may partly perceive that the Church of England is not altogether to be
blamed for the Errors and Divisions in our Land in matters pertaining to Faith
and Discipline. I dare be bold on her behalf to assure the Papists she desires
a fair debate of all those differences, and would willingly reconcile them, or
cast off those that would not hearken to her instructions: and might she by the
favor and free leave of the Civil Magistrate convene, and were encouraged to
have his assistance in order to put in execution her Decrees (without which*
whatsoever she resolves is but like a Laterane Junto not obligatory to the
Western Princes, nor the people under their jurisdiction) she would not be
sparing to lance the wounds of these divisions to the bottom, that, if there
were any hopes of amendment, to cause sound and new flesh to grow a gain; or
else, finding them irrecoverable by reason some are grown desperately wicked
beyond all remedy, to cut off such as withered branches, that they might no
longer be a cause to putrify the stock and body of the tree: and when she has
done, would not be ashamed of her work, but would recommend it to the public
consideration of others; which being by them approved, might be exemplary for
their imitation; or if by the Divine Rule of Scripture it was to be faulted,
then to be by them rejected, and receive a just condemnation.

I dare be bold to say, that if any thing should be debated in her Convocation,
which might not seem satisfactory to any other sister-Province she would
entertain a free debate with her: and if they two could not determine the
controversy, so far as might be satisfactory to others, she would agree to
submit the debate to a General Council, might but that Council be free in its
constitution, and not subservient to one man the Pope; which by the confession
of Bellarmin. (lib. de Council. cap. 21. non potest fieri ut aliquando ad finem
controversiarum deveniatur Synodus, nisi detur locus majori parti suffragiorum.
No Appeal to a General Council whilst the Pope is allowed above that Council.
And in another place, lib. 2. cap. 11. de Council. Est verum Decretum Concilii
quod fit a majore part) destroys the very being of a General Council; whenas
what shall there be concluded by a major part must stand null, unless his
Holiness approve thereof, or shall be subject to be altered at his will and
pleasure.

It is reported by Quintus Curtius, fol. 13. that in the City of Gordin in
Phrygia was laid up in Jupiters temple the furniture of King Midas Wagon, knit
up in such an intricate knot, that it was extreme difficult to be untyed: and
the countrymen had a Prophecy, that whosoever should unt^e it, should be Lord
of Asia. Alexander coming thither, and viewing the knot, and doubting if he
should not inexplicate it, that it might be reputed as an evidence to those
superstitious people of his bad fortune to come, with his sword cut it asunder,
by which the Prophecy was expected to be fulfilled: and thereupon those people
submitted to him; and, not long after, he became Lord of Asia. And thus the
Pope deals with Councils: if any thing of consequence be to receive debate
there, he will not abide the canvasing of the Question, and the sober unfolding
of the knot and difficulty thereof, but uno flatu resolves the scruple, and
with his false key picks the lock of the business; by which means he promises
to himself an universal obedience, as the only nevererring Oracle; claiming by
this means a sovereignty over Councils, Kings, and Bishops: which all other
Churches of Apostolical plantation judge to be an horrible presumption. And
till this be rectified, we utterly deny all Appeals to a General Council of the
Popes convening: and as S. Ambrose said to Valentinian, so we say to the Pope;
Toll Legem, si vis esse certamen.

CHAP. XII.
That the Scriptures are only infallible rules of faith, and contain all
things necessary to salvation: That all people are to read them, because those
points are plain and easy: That they themselves witness this truth in those
points of salvation: And how the Church of Rome abuses the Scripture.
SCripture is the only foundation and basis on which our Faith is built, Of
the force and efficacy of the Scriptures.
according to that of S. Paul to the Ephesians, chap. 2. the faithful are built
upon the Apostles and Prophets: it is the sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6. being
profitable to instruct, and reprove, and being able to make the man of God
perfect.

Irenaeus in his third book against Heresies, cap. 11. says, The Apostles first
preached the Gospel, and afterward delivered the same to us in Scriptures,
that it might be the foundation and pillar of our faith. And Origin upon Matthew.
25. says, They are to be brought for proof of all Doctrines. Our Savior by
Scripture convinced the devil; teaching us thereby to know what weapons we are
to use against all Heresy and Schism. And in the General Councils of old, not
the Popes Decretals, but the Scriptures were laid before the holy Fathers. Est
firmamentum and columna Ecclesiae Evangelium. It only is infallible in it
self; all other Councils and Traditions may err, says Tom. lib. 2. contra
Donatistos, cap. 3. And though an Angel from heaven teach another doctrine, no
faith is to be given thereunto. Tertullian contra Hermogen. page 373. I
reverence (says he) the fullness, plenitude, and perfection of Scriptures, as
that which shows to me both the Maker and the things which are made. Austin
confesses the authority of Scripture to be above the authority of the Church,
in his Epistles contra Manich. tom. 6. cap. 4. The consent of people and
nations the authority of the Church, begun by miracles, nourished with hope,
increased with charity, established with antiquity, succession of Priests, and
the name of Catholic, says he, are great motives to keep me in the unity of
the Church: but above these, he prefers the truth of Scripture; in regard
whereof, he promises Manicheus to give more credit to his doctrine then to the
Church, if he be able to prove it out of Scripture.

These and many more authorities in this point might be produced, to manifest
what credit and reverence the Fathers of the Primitive Church did attribute to
the sacred Oracles of God. Now what may we think of those that count them a
bare letter, Inkie Divinity, a matter of strife, and ground of Heresies? And by
the Doctor, fol. 255, the light of the Gospel is termed Ignis fatuus, because
not borrowed from Rome's dark lanthorn. Others affirming, that if any contemn
the authority of the Roman Church, that he shall not be able to assure himself
of Scripture, any more then of a Robinhood-tale.

To which I answer: The Council of Laodicea, can. 59. (which Council was held
long before ever Rome's Bishop claimed a Supremacy over other Churches) has
declared which shall be taken and accepted for Canonical Scripture, and has
decreed that none else should be read in the Churches besides them: and we
according to that Canon, accept and embrace them, and, according to the ancient
copies, does our Clergy retain them in the Church; nor are we altogether
beholding to Rome for the Translations. It Is true, she has a glorious Library
(as many witness) the only ornament of her Vatican Hill. And in some competent
measure is our Oxford replenished with the ancient Manuscripts of the Primitive
Fathers and of old approved Translations of the Scriptures, both after the
Hebrew, Syriack, Rome not the only dispenser of the Scripture.
Chaldee, Greek, and Latin Translations; which the Fathers and the Reverend
Governors of the Primitive Churches have permitted to be transmitted to other
parts: and in these later days we have been beholding to Rome for some
Translations: But she was not the first that sent the Gospel hither, as may
appear by Eleutherius his Epistle to Lucius: You have heretofore says he,
received the law and faith of Christ; ye have within your Realm both the parts
of Scripture out of which by the counsel of your Realm take a law, and by that
law rule your kingdom: for you be Gods Vicar within your own kingdom etc. And
in this particular, I think Rome as well as we, is beholding to other Churches:
why then should she boast that we know not what is Scripture, but that which
she has delivered? Had not the Apostles equal authority to teach all nations?
Does not Peter direct his Epistle to the Saints which are dwelling about
Cappadocia, Galatia Asia, and Bithynia: and S. James to the twelve tribes which
are scattered abroad: and S. Jude to all which are sanctified and called of
God? And S. Paul writes as well to the Corinthians, Galatians, Ephesians,
Philippians, Colossians, and Thessalonians, as to the Romans: wherefore how
comes it that the Church of Rome should be the only Monopolizer of Scripture?
Was not the holy Ghost given to them which Philip, Paul, and Barnabas did
ordain, as well as those Peter did ordain? And admit that Peter was Bishop of
Rome, had not the rest of the Apostles received the holy Ghost as well as
Peter? did it not sit upon each of them like cloven tongues of fire? And why
should the Church of Rome boast her self to be only and alone endowed with an
only spirit of interpretation? Let none understand more then is meet to
understand, was S. Paul's instructions to the Romans: But such is the
uncharitableness and presumption of the present Church of Rome, that she
accounts her self the only wise interpreter, and no other Church to have the
spirit of discerning the Truth, unless she have received that spirit mediately
from her. I must needs tell her, that she has no warrant to arrogate this
transcendency and super-excellencie in this point of wisdom from any divine
precept: it is but her own humane institution, (no other Church approving of
it) and so it is but the wisdom of this world, which, as S. Paul says, 1 Cor.
1.20, is found foolishness before God; and according to that saying of Solomon,
Prove. 12.15. The way of a fool is right in his own eyes.

The treasure of the holy Writ is no common or ordinary bank, That the
Scripture contains things necessary to salvation.
but a precious store of eternal happiness: in them is laid up life
everlasting, according to that of S. Paul, Romans 1.16. It is the power of God
unto salvation, to every one that believes to the Jew first, and also to the
Greek: and 2 Timothy 3.14. Timothy had known the Scriptures from a child, which
were able to make him wise unto salvation: It is profitable to teach, to
improve, to correct, to instruct in righteousness, that a man of God may be
absolute, being made perfect to all good works. Therefore are we bidden, Joh.
4.39, to search the Scriptures; for in them is eternal life, and they are they
which testify of Christ. It is true, All things that Jesus did, are not
written, says S. John: but, says he, these things are written; that ye might
believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and believing ye might have
life through his Name, Joh. 20.31. Cyril, lib. 2. upon that place of S. John,
says, Non omnia quae Dominus facit transcripta sunt, sed quae Scriptores tam
ad mores quam ad dogmata sufficere putarunt ut recta fide and operibus ad
regnum coelorum perveniamus. And Saint Austin likewise says, that all things
were not written, but only so much was written as was thought to be sufficient
to the salvation of the faithful. And whereas in the 20 of the Acts ver. 27. it
is said, I have not spared to show unto you the whole counsel of God; Lyranus
and Carthusianus expound it only to be understood of things pertaining to our
salvation: which S. Austin lib. de doctr. Christian. 2. and cap. 6. plainly
affirms, that all things necessary to our salvation are plainly contained in
the written Word. And Irenaeus, lib. 3. cap. 1. We know (says he) the
dispensation of our salvation, by whom only the Gospel came to our hands;
which Gospel they first preached, but afterward by Gods appointment they
delivered the same to us in writing, that it might be the foundation and pillar
of our faith. Wherefore seeing that this is the Magazine of our salvation, let
us only repair hither to be spiritually furnished against all temptations of
Satan; and let us cast off all other traditions of humane invention, which
shall declare any other thing then what is contained in these Evangelical
truths.

Now since the ground of our faith is contained in these Scriptures, All people
to read the Scripture.
and laid open unto us by the blessed authors of these sacred and holy
testimonies of our salvation; why should not any one be permitted to read and
to peruse these glad tidings of his eternal Redemption from the bondage of sin
and Satan? since we are not only allured by its worth and efficacy, it being
of so high a consequence as the eternal redemption and salvation of our souls,
and being profitable to teach, to improve, to instruct in righteousness, 2 Timothy
3. but likewise are commanded to search them, Joh. 5.39 Till I come, (says
Paul to Timothy 1 Timothy 4.13.) give attendance to reading, to exhortation, and
to doctrine. And Coloss. 3. the Saints of Colossus are commanded to let the
Word dwell in them pleteously in all wisdom, admonishing themselves in psalms,
and hymns, and spiritual songs. And not only the Saints of Colossus; and
Timothy, are enjoined to this diligence; but all in general, by S. John in the
place afore-cited. And Acts 18.24. A certain Jew named Apollos was great in
Scripture, and taught diligently. And Acts 17. the Noblemen at Thessalonica
received the Word with all readiness, and searched the Scriptures daily whether
those things were so which Paul and Silas taught at Berea; and many of them,
and honest women and men, not a few, believed.

S. Chrysostom, the golden-mouthed Doctor, discourses at large upon this
subject in several places of his Works. I shall show you two or three. In his
Proeme in the Epistle to the Romans, he says, If therefore you will read the
Scripture with alacrity of mind ye need no other help at all: for Christ's
Word is true, Seek and ye shall find, etc. because many of you are charged
with wives, children, and domestic affairs, and so cannot wholly addict your
selves to this study, yet be ready to hear what others have gathered; and
bestow as much diligence in hearing as you do in scraping worldly goods
together: for the cause of your infinite evils is your ignorance in Scripture.
So that by his Rule, 1. We need no other help to our salvation. 2. All sorts
should study it. 3. Evil manners, dissolute life, and all other mischiefs,
proceed of ignorance of the Scriptures, and by not reading of them.

Again, the same Chrysostom in his 29 Hom. upon Genesis 9. I beseech you (says
he) that you now and then come hither, and attend diligently the reading of the
holy Scripture; neither that only when you come hither, sed and domi divina
Biblia in manus sumite, and utilitatem in illis positam magno studio suscipite.
Again, the same godly and zealous Father in his 9. Hom. upon the Colossians,
says, Hearken, all ye that are encumbered with worldly affairs, and have wives
and children, how ye are especially commanded to read the Scriptures: Comparate
vobis Biblia, animae Pharmaca. If ye will have no other thing; at least provide
ye the new Testament, etc. S. Austin de tempore, sermon. 55. Nec solum vob is
sufficiat quod in Ecclesiis divinas lectiones auditis, sed etiam in domibus
vestris, aut ipsi legite, aut alios legentes requirite, and libenter audite.
And herewith accords S. Hierome upon the 133 Psalm, affirming, that in his time
both Monks, men, and women, did contend which should learn most Scripture
without book; and in co putant esse meliores, si plures edicerint. The Council
of Laodicea, can. 59. positively decrees, Licet plebeis legere sola sacra
volumina veteris and novi Testamenti.

Thus you see the invitation by way of persuasion, as it is for advantage, it
being the means of our salvation, and a charge and command by the Apostles to
search those Scriptures, lest we fall into evils and mischiefs, and holy
Fathers instructing all to follow those Evangelical precepts: whereby it is not
pressed unto us as a thing of convenience only, but likewise of necessity for
every one to perform this duty; every one being concerned to read and learn the
Scriptures. How much then is the Church of Rome to be blamed, that debarreth
men of this means of salvation? she excommunicating every one that shall read
the Scriptures in the vulgar tongue. And so much are the Papists bewitched with
the terrors of the Popes curses and the flattery of his blessings, that they
will not read any thing that is opposite to Popery, not having license so to
do; and so they make Ignorance the mother of their devotion, and that contrary
to the practice of the Primitive Church, as appears by the Council.

As touching this Point, Who are to judge of the Scriptures.
Who shall be Judge of the Scripture, the Doctor is pleased to accuse our
Church of universal error, because of some Protestants that hold strange
opinions concerning this matter; and yet he cites but an opinion or two of
private Ministers in our Church. So I may justify our Church from the
imputations he herein lays to her charge, as he has elsewhere done in the like
case. That it is not the opinion and judgment of the Church, but only the
conceptions of those private men. Certainly the Doctor could not be ignorant of
our Churches Tenent in this particular: and truly this gives me occasion to
suspect the Doctor is not the Author of that Book called The Lost Sheep, but it
was composed by some one that was less knowing of the Doctrines and Tenants of
our Church. However, for satisfaction of others, I will here set down what our
Church has prescribed de fide in relation to this point.

The Church of England teaches, that the Scripture is the only Judge of
Traditions, and Rule of salvation; and that it contains all things necessary to
salvation: and whatsoever is not contained therein, or may not be proved
thereby, is not to be received as an Article of faith, or thought requisite to
salvation.

But she does not determine that this Scripture shall be interpreted by every
man's private fancy: for, The things necessary to salvation are plain, and easy
to be understood.
to charge her with that, is a known untruth, and contrary to the 6 and 20
Articles of the Church. I confess that we generally maintain that those things
which are necessary to salvation are clear and manifest; the whole Scripture
being termed a light unto our feet, and a lanthorn to our steps, Psalm. 139. And
if it be hid, it is hid unto them that are lost, whom the God of this world
has blinded, that the light of the Gospel of the glory of Jesus Christ should
not shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4. For it is plain by the Scripture, that Jesus was
the Christ, Acts 18.28. And Joh. 5. The Father has sent the Son, and his works
bear witness of him; and the Scriptures testify of him: God the Father, God
the Son, and God the holy Ghost the Comforter, his Passion, Resurrection,
Ascension, and the coming of the holy Ghost, being so plainly preached and set
down, that a man may read them running: and this Word endures for ever, and
this Word is preached unto us, 1 Pet. 1.25. And Joh. 3.16, God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him
should not perish, but have everlasting life: and what need we any more? This
is eternal life, to know the Father, and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent,
Joh. 17.3. He is the Way, the Truth and the Life. We believe that thou art
Christ the Son of the ever-living God, and thou have the words of eeternal
life, Joh. 5.68. Hence S. Austin, lib. de doctr. Christianae, cap. 9. did
affirm, that all things pertaining to man's salvation are plain and easy to be
understood. And Chrysostom upon 2 Thessal. 2. Hom. 3. Omnia plana sunt sunt
e^x divinis Scripturis, quaecunque necessaria sunt manifesta sunt.

It is not therefore an idle and presumptuous doctrine in the Church of England
to maintain this, since we have both authority of Scripture and the Fathers for
the same. Nor do we hereby rob the Church of her authority to judge of and
determine controversies, and those things that are doubtful in the Scriptures.

There are some things of Discipline, and pertaining to Manners, in which the
Scriptures may be doubtful, or not easy for every capacity to understand: and
for those, it is fit the Church should determine them, and having determined
them, to impose them by the Princes authority as Rules of faith upon the
people; and so teaches the Church of England, in the twentieth Article. Laymen
to read Scripture.
But the main things necessary to our salvation, concerning our faith to be
grounded upon Jesus the Son of the ever-living God, the author and finisher of
our faith, those, as I said before, are clear and manifest: and though Angels
from heaven should teach any other doctrine, they are to be accursed, Gal. 1.
Wherefore since this is plain and manifest in Scripture, that Jesus gave himself
for our sins; and whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but have
everlasting life; and for that this faith is given by the Spirit of God, 1 Cor.
12. Phil. 1.29. 2 Pet. 1.3. and Matthew. 16.17. and is the gift of God, and no
man has it of himself (for flesh and blood does not reveal it) and for that
Christ has prescribed the way how and by what means we shall obtain this gift,
even by searching the Scriptures, Romans 10; It must needs be a grievous and
intolerable sin in the Church of Rome to debar the people of this means to
attain this precious jewel, the salvation of their souls.

Upon these grounds do we allow the Laytie to read the Scripture; but we do not
hereby give them liberty to interpret it according to their will and humor.
They may in them find Jesus to be the life everlasting, the Spirit giving them
faith; and therefore must not be debarred the means. But they are not allowed
in points of difficulties to be their own interpreter, but to repair to the
Fathers of the Church to declare the meaning of those Oracles of God, to whom
it is given by the power of the holy Ghost to know the mysteries of the kingdom
of God, Matthew. 13.11. For which end, Christ has commended the Scriptures to the
Church, that she may discern, keep, and publish them: Christ opened the
Scriptures to his disciples Luke 24. and they preached it to all nations. The
Apostle Paul, 1 Timothy 3. calls the Truth the fountain of the Church, and the
Church the pillar of Truth: as Solomon made his Chariots to have a golden
axletree, and pillars of silver; understanding by the axletree (says one) sound
doctrine; by the pillars, the faithful teachers of the same. The Scripture is
the truth of God, and the Church the house of God; the Scripture the
foundation, the Church the pillar: and the foundation is not sustained by the
pillar, but the pillar supported of the foundation. Truth makes the Church, not
the Church the Truth. We are to observe the Scripture as it were the Candle,
the Church as the Candlestick; according as S. Austin upon Gal. 1. says, Church
how to interpret.
The Scriptures are not true, because the Church says they are the Word of God;
but the testimony of the Church is true, because they are the Word of God.

Now as we ascribe to our Church this privilege of interpretation of difficult
and obscure places, Scriptures above Councels, ^nte, Chap. 9.
we do not either deprive Rome of her right, or too much extol our own Church.
Nor do we hereby make void the Laytie's reading of Scripture. The Laytie may
read it, because the main points are easy; and it is the means to obtain
faith, as well as by hearing the Church, in those points that are easy; and it
is the way enjoined by God to attain faith, as well as by preaching; and he has
promised his Spirit to those that seek him earnestly, and with unfeigned lips.
And when it shall please God by their reading to give them of his holy Spirit,
that Spirit will guide them to come to the Church, to be informed in those
things they understand not; or shall the Church understand that through
weakness they misunderstand any point in those Scriptures, and she shall
reprove them, the same Spirit guiding them into the way of Truth, will lead
them to hearken to the dispensers of the sacred Oracles. And if the Church
shall deliver any thing which to other Churches may seem strange, and not
satisfactory; she, as I said before in the precedent Chapter, will call a
Synod; and if there the business receive not an absolute and satisfactory
resolution, to submit the business to a General Council rightly constituted,
and free in it self. And in the mean time, if our Church offend the Church of
Rome, for that she differs from her in any particular; let her make her self
capable to reform by a General Council, by taking off the slavery that lies
upon it by the Popes Canonical Law, and we shall submit our Church to the free
debate in a perfect Council to decide the points wherein we differ; (otherwise
the Church of Rome might seem to have just cause to accuse us* for that we cast
off the discipline of the Primitive Churches as to that particular:) but in the
mean time, upon the former recited texts of Scripture, upon the authority of
the Fathers, and the example of former ages, we shall persist to affirm, That
the Scriptures contain all things necessary to salvation, That those points
necessary are plain and easy, and That the Laytie may read the Scriptures. And
for any blemishes which the Doctor would in this particular have thrown upon
our Church, I hope it is but dust thrown against the wind, and is flown back
into his own eyes. I wish the Scriptures received no more injury by the Church
of Rome, then it does from our Church: but that is manifest to the contrary, as
may appear by that which here next follows.

The Doctor in his Book, fol. 229. Scriptures abused by the Church of Rome.
reckons up a great number of corruptions and errors crept into our
Translations, but named not any; only cites one Broughton for his author. I
must confess it was wisely put off: for should he have named them, they would
have appeared to have been different from the Rhemish Translation, but not
dissonant from the ancient Copies; and so he would, in stead of faulting ours,
have censured their own Translations. Yet he craftily imagining that those 848
corrupted places should be believed to be so, if he could instance any, he
names four in his 22 Chapter.

1. Answer to the mistranslations we are taxwith.
He brings in Beza and Luthers Translations, adding the word only in Romans
3.28. And this he would have to be an error of our Church. He might as well
tax Rome as England for this fault: for the Church of England does not add
that word in her Bibles which are printed by authority, and by direction of the
Church enjoined to be read: nor is the word to be found in Fulk and Rhemes,
those two quarrellers each with other. Wherefore I must needs wonder that the
Doctor should be so injurious to us, to bring false accusations against us.

2. The second place which the Doctor alleadges to be a mis-translation in our
Bibles, is 2 Pet. 1.10. Giving diligence (by good works) to make your calling
and election sure: He charges us with corruption, for leaving out these words,
by good works. This I must confess is different from the Rhemish Translation:
but I rather suspect that that Translation is to be faulted, not ours: for
Rome, to maintain her doctrine of Merits (by which she cozens poor silly souls,
and to enrich her Clergy, cheats them of what they have) has added these
words. And I am the rather induced hereunto, for that I have seen an ancienter
Bible then the days of Luther, and it has them not in: and Erasmus his
Translation has them not in. So that as the Negro's blame all that is white in
others, because nothing to them is more comely then their own tawny black; so
the Doctor quarrels against our Translation, because of its innocence, it is
not besmeared with Romes new adulterate alterations, and therefore not in
fashion, or to be approved; and upon this score I may say the Doctor was modest
that taxed us with no more then four. For he might as well have named the 848.
if all must be censured for corruptions wherein we differ from the Rhemish
translations. But let the Church of Rome remember Saint Paul's rule to the
Corinthians, 2 Epist. 13.5. Prove your selves whether ye be in the faith. Saint
Paul, 1 Cor. 9.27. beat down his body and put it subjection, lest while he
preached to others, he himself might be reproved. Wherefore let Rome examine
the ancient Copies, and try if she find those words there; and till then, let
her forbear to tax us of error, who in this follow antiquity; and so upon the
old rule, Id verum est quod prius; id adulterum quod posterius, Tertul.
adversus prax. in prim. part.

3. The third error he taxes us with, is, In putting and for or in the 1 Cor.
11.27. which he himself, to excuse Rome of perverting the Scripture, she being
taxed in this very particular, in another place, she putting or for and, and
thereby to prove communion in one kind, affirms that et is often rendered or;
and if so, it may as well be taken so out of the English as out of any other
tongue. But I referr the reader to a fuller answer of this objection in the
sixteenth Chapter.

4. His fourth objection is the 15 verse of the 2 of Saint Peter 1. I will do
my diligence you to have often in remembrance after my decease. The English
translation reads it thus, I will endeavor that you may be able after my
decease to have these things in remembrance. For this we likewise appeal to any
translation which was before the second council of Nice: and many of their own
translators long after that council did render it post exitum, non post obitum.
Peter being to go to his See at Antioch in Syria, writes to the Saints that
dwell in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, that after his
departure they should strive to have in memory to make their calling and
Election sure; of which in the 12 verse he says, He would not be negligent to
put them in remembrance. Now how can this be interpreted, that after his
decease he should put them in remembrance, unless he should come again unto
them? it must therefore be interpreted of his departing from amongst them to
Antioch, and that he would send to them to put them in mind, knowing that his
end drew near, when he could not; and therefore, says the text, he would use all
diligence to put them in mind. Now how he should put them in mind after his
decease, is to expect that Peter shall not rest from his labors, as if he were
not dead in the Lord, which is unchristian to think: wherefore I submit this to
the learned in the Hebrew tongue, to illustrate this further to weaker
capacities, if there be any occasion of scruple in our translation, which for
my part I conceive, that, taking that verse with the sense of the former, our
translation is more genuine and carries more of integrity then that of Rhemes.

The Bishops of Rome having by the politic practices of their predecessors,
and by the unworthy complottings of the Cardinals (who being in hopes to ascend
the Papal Throne themselves care not what dominion and Lordship they ascribe
unto the Pontifical seat) gained a superiority over Kings and Councels,
controlling the one and ordering the other as they please, did daily consult
not only how to preserve what they have (though their possession be utterly
unjust) but likewise continually study to enlarge (if possible) this their pomp
and dignity. For their ambitious minds not satisfied with these large
acquisitions, thinking them but an earthly sovereignty, and too narrow for
their large souls to strut in, they would persuade the world that the Pope is
an angel or more, and has Commission from heaven, and is sent from thence to
possess the chair, and tanquam a Tripode to deliver new oracles upon earth.

Thus wisely casting with themselves and reflecting upon the curiosity of some
who would be over-scrutinous to examine the points of this Commission by the
rule of the holy Writ, at last they concluded upon this result.

That it must be de fide received that his holiness is the only exposito^ (and
by the same rule of gradation an Evangelist to deliver new Scripture) of the
old and new Testaments: The Pope abuses the Scriptures.
and having persuaded some and forced others into this opinion, without care
for the souls upon earth, without respect of Saints and Angels in Glory, and
without all fear of the Almighty God of heaven, he commands the holy writ
(which was the dictates of the holy Spirit of God) to be blotted, wrested
mangled, and tortured at his will and pleasure, making no more account thereof,
then if it were but the Embryo of a Bear, which by the licking of its dam were
to receive shape and perfection. And if there be any text which does impugn
this his usurped unlimited power, it must not be suffered to pass the Press
before first it be either rubbed over with his holiness index expurgatorius, or
else brushed with his Ghostly interpretation. As for example, Josh. 1.18. the
people professing an unlimited power to Joshua in all things to obey him, The
words (in all things) are expunged in the Rhemish translations: for it stood
not with his holiness interest and prerogative to let them be for a president.
For if the people of God were in all things to be obedient to their Prince,
this spoils his holiness claim to command in temporalibus; wherefore it was
thought fit to send these words to the index expurgatorius:

Object. The Doctor in his book, fol. 59. argues the truth of Romes doctrine,
for that she has not corrupted or extinguished the text, that being easier to
do then to change her doctrine. To which I answer.

Resp. The Scriptures which Rome has she received from other churches; and
those Churches from whom Rome received them, sending as well to other places as
to Rome copies of those holy writs, it would much ashame her to alter them, in
respect that true original Copies would be produced against her to her
condemnation; but the Bishop of Rome being to teach these Scriptures within his
own precincts and territories, he as times served, to advantage himself, might
and has in many places strained courtesy to wrest the sense, delivering to the
people doctrines not warranted by this holy writ: which he might with more
confidence do, in respect that no other Bishop was to meddle in his diocese;
and he by the favor of Princes being accounted summus pontifex: wherefore
reason tells, that his doctrine and traditions are more questionable then his
translations of the Scriptures: for he needed not much to alter the Scriptures
in respect it matters not what they say, being but dead letters without the
spirit of his holiness interpretation. Yet so much did they dote upon the pomp
and vainty of this world and upon that lordly height they have aspired to here
upon earth, that the devil did bewitch them to alter that text of Joshua, which
did directly gainesay such their dominion and power, though by reason of their
new pre-eminence they being above councels, and the only infallible expositors
of the divine oracles, they needed not so to have done: or rather thus, that
corruption of Joshua was before the late councels of Lateran and Trent; which
made the Pope above councels; and it behoved them to blot out such words as did
impugn their other power of lording it over Kings and Princes: but since these
councels, they may now put them in again. For it is no matter what the
Scripture says, for his holiness will give such an exposition as shall not
destroy his own interest; and since those councels, such exposition though it
be never so contradictory to the word of God, it must de fide be received. O
tempora, O mores!

Saint Basil says, they which have been brought up in Gods word, will not
suffer one syllable of her doctrine to be betrayed: what then shall we think of
the fathers of Rome's Church that practice (as time serves) these tricks upon
those sacred letters?

These divine writs the dictates of Gods holy Spirit (...) no marvel if they
make bold with the fathers, mis-translating and altering their writings, and
crying up their own traditions, making their own mole-hills mountains, and
making the fathers like unto Moles, whose nature as Aristotle says, is never
to open her eyes till she be dead; and so they make the fathers, being dead, to
witness things they never dreamed on or saw being living, as I have showed in
the tenth Chapter. If these divine oracles of God must not escape the venom of
their claws; if these must not be delivered to the people without corruption, I
know not how we may give faith or credit to her traditions, the vanity of which
I will briefly discover in this ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. XIII.
That because all things were not written the Church may deliver traditions,
such as she derives from the doctrine of the Apostles or ancient fathers. That
the Scriptures are to judge of those traditions. That Rome is to be blamed for
her traditions because they are against Scripture.
THe Jews say, That when Moses was with God on the Mount, and received the
written law, that he had unwritten law likewise delivered him by word of mouth:
for certainly (say they) God staid not forty days and forty nights on the
mount to keep Geese, nor needed he stay so long to interpret the law of the
tables; wherefore they conclude that Moses received traditional law, which he
taught Joshua, Joshua the elders, the elders the Prophets, the Prophets taught
the people. Now because those their traditions were uncertain, the sects of
the Pharisees sprung up, and Essenes, obtruding new traditions as simply
necessary and a more perfect Rule of Sanctity then that that was writ:
whereupon our Savior in the seventh of Mark reproves them, saying, They
worship me in vain, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men; and yet in
the 23 of Mat. he has commanded us, saying, All that they bid you observe,
that observe and do; but after their works do not: for they say, and do not.

These two texts seem to impugn each other: but the fathers of the premitive
Church have resolved this knot, and reconciled these texts, by this exposition:
that all traditions agreeable and consonant to the holy word, are to be
observed; but such traditions of the Scribes and Pharisees as were not
agreeable to the holy word of God, were to be rejected.

We confess that all things which Christ and his Apostles did, No traditions
but such as are agree able to the word of God, are to be embraced.
were not written, according as is expressed, Joh. 21. verse. ult. And that the
Apostles had order to teach the people whatsoever Christ had commanded them:
but as we allow this; so by no means must we admit that they taught any thing
contrary to what they writ: they had the Holy Ghost, that never-erring Spirit,
that did lead them into all truth, and could not at one time write one thing,
and after teach another. We allow that they did deliver traditions to the
people; but Saint Peter in his 1 Epist. 1.25. tells us it was the word of the
Lord that was preached amongst them; for nothing contrary to that was preached
and delivered: and that the people were bound to observe all things they did
teach by the commandment of God, Mat. 28.20. and therefore Saint Paul enjoynes
the Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. to hold fast the traditions they had learned,
whether by word or Epistle.

The old Testament was delivered by the Jews, and confirmed by Christ and his
Apostles; and therefore the Church of Rome did embrace that, and reject the
other traditional books of the Jews, which were not by Moses written, or by
Christ approved of.

Now we make bold in this to follow her example: if the Church of Rome have any
traditions which are not repugnant to the written word we shall not disallow of
them; but if they make against that with the Evangelists and the Apostles have
delivered to us in writing (which writing we approve in our Judgment as the
infallible oracles of God) we by her own e^ample as rejecting those traditions
of the Jews which were not consonant to the written law of Moses, or approved
of by Christ, and likewise by warrant of Christ not to lean to the traditions
of men, and to cast off the commandments of God, desire to be excused for not
embracing every tradition the Church of Rome would obtrude upon us: and we
persuade our selves, that since she has rejected the traditions of the Jews,
because not warranted by the written word, she cannot be so impartial to deny
us the same liberty to reject her traditions upon the same score; and that the
rather, because she has not so good a ground for her traditions, as the Jews
had, in respect Moses talked with God face to face, Exodus 33. Besides, the Jews
traditions were certain, and reduced into writing by the late Rabbis; and
therefore the Church of Rome might better have embraced them, then think that
we shall follow hers, which are daily of new invention.

After the destruction of Jerusalem, and scattering of the Jews, Papist
traditions uncertain.
one Rabbi Juda Hannasi got leave of Antoninus to assemble the people; and
because the books of their old traditions were utterly lost and perished, they
then being met, writ all that they could remember, The Jews Talmud.
calling it Mischna, that is, Deuteronomy, or a Law reiterated, which was a
memorial of their Cabala, or traditional law; which collections of theirs were
afterward, Anno Christi 219. by Rabbi Jochanan enlarged, and called the Talmud,
which Talmud was after, Anno Christi 500. perfected, and received as a Rule in
all cases Ecclesiastical and civil. So that the Jews having thus reduced their
traditions into certainty, it were more reasonable for the Church of Rome to
embrace them, then to think that we shall hand over head accept of her
ever-growing traditional rules, which are not held forth in any certainty to
us, but every day upon color of Church-traditions, she plays an Affrican
trick, and brings out new monsters; so that I may say, it is as easy to make a
gown for the Moon, as for any man to think he can keep and observe her
traditional rules.

The variety of her strange production in this particular, might serve to cloy
the appetite of any that should desire to render himself obedient to her rules:
but the vanity of them, and their contrariety to Gods word, does more
especially and justly detain every good Christian for being her superstitions
proselyte to embrace them, and e^pecially those Christians which are not within
her jurisdictions, nor belonging unto his charge; Amongst whom I may rank our
English Church, which being of Apostolical foundation, and in power and
Church Authority equal with the Church of Rome, and for that the Law of God was
as well extended to other Churches, and particularly to her, as to Rome, as I
have proved in the second and fourth Chapters, may in that respect as well
prescribe traditional law to the Church of Rome, as she should send forth her
historical edicts to England.

Yet lest some may think that if upon this score we cast off her traditions,
we do but thereby evade the question of validity and authority of her
traditions in themselves, as they are by her held forth unto the world; I will
therefore make it evident, that neither those of her own Church and province,
nor the Roman Catholics of other Kingdoms, are bound or ought to receive and
embrace whatsoever traditions the Church of Rome shall hold forth to them, as
being so imposed upon them to be received for matter of faith.

I have in some measure in the former Chapter treated upon the autho^ity and
excellency of Scriptures, wherein I have showed, that she is the ground and
foundation of the Church: and if so, then it follows, that whatsoever tradition
the Church shall deliver as matter of Doctrine, must either stand upon this
groundwork, or else ^t is a paper-building, an airey piece, a black cloud of
humane condensing, hurried to and fro by contrary winds, ^ill [the
loosly-contracted vapor dash ^t self upon this rock of Christ, and ^^ke smoke
vanish into nothing. She ^s the touchstone, must distinguish the gold from the
drossy and courser pieces of Rom's treasure; she is the Fan must winnow and
purge the floor of the Churches granary from all chaff and light corn, and from
those Tares, which being cast into her field by Satan, sprung together with her
better grain. And hereupon the good Emperor Constantine (as it is recorded in
the Ecclesiastical History lib. 1. cap. 7.) did say, That seeing the
Evangelical and Apostolical books, and the Oracles of the Old Testament, do
plainly teach us any thing that we ought to know or learn concerning God;
whether concerning his Divine Nature, as Saint Luke uses the words, Acts
17.25. Or his attributes and qualities, as Saint Peter applies it, 2 Pet. 1.5.
Or his Law and Religion, as the penner of Maccabees takes it, 2 Mac. 4.7. Away
therefore with all strife, and seek for the solution of these matters out of
the Scriptures, inspired by God himself. And herewith agrees Bellarmine, Tom.
1. Col. 2. saying That the books of the Prophets and Apostles are the true word
of God, and the sure and true rule of our faith. And as I said before in the
precedent Chapter, All things necessary to our salvation are contained in the
Scriptures. It is true indeed, that in the Scriptures we do not find any
mention of Peter being Bishop of Rome or of the Assumption of Mary the mother
of Jesus: nor can we find by Scriptures, that Saint Luke was a Painter, or
that Nicodemus had so much skill in Appelles Art, that he drew that exquisite
picture of Christ (which Rome has) representing unto us his posture whilst the
Jews whipped him. I must confess that for these matters of importance, we must
submit to the traditions of Rome. But all things touching God, and the means to
attain faith in him, are plentifully therein to be found.

Chrysostom says in his 41 Hom. upon the 22 of Matthew. Quicquid queritur ad
salutem, totum eam ademptum est in Scripturis; and upon the 95 Psalm, Si quid
dicatus absque Scriptura, etc. If any thing be spoken without the Scripture,
the cogitation of the Auditors fail; but so soon as the Testimony of Gods
voice is heard, out of the Scripture, it confirms both the word of the
speaker, and the mind of the hearer.

Saint Hierom upon the 9 of Jeremy, Nec parentum ne majorum error sequendus
est, sed author it as Scripturarum and Dei docenti imperium. Saint Cyprian who
writ almost 1400 years ago, would not yield to Stephanus Bishop of Rome, but
reproved him for leaning to tradition and demanded of him by what Scripture he
could prove his tradition Cyprian Epist. ad Pompeium, 74. So then, if in his
time it was not enough to allege tradition for the proof of the Doctrine of
the Church of Rome, much less is it lawful to follow the Popes definitive
sentence in matters of faith and doctrine.

When the Arrians would not admit the word (...), because it could not be found
in Scripture, Athanasius did not plead tradition for it, but said, Although the
express words be not found in the Scripture yet have the Scriptures that
meaning and sense in them, as every one that reads the Scriptures may plainly
understand, and therefore by warrant th^eof that word might be maintained.

Saint Austine de unitat. Eccl. cap. 10. Nemo mihi dicat, quid dixit Donatus,
quid dixit Parmenianus quid Paulus, aut quillibet illorum; quid nec catholicis
episcopis consentiendum est sicubi forte falluntur ut contra canonicas Dei
Scriptures aliquid sentiant.

Methinks the very word Canonical (which the Church of Rome having approved,
Canonical Scripture disprove ^raditiods.
what Scriptures shall be Canonical, what not) is sufficient of it self to
prove this point: for, signifies a rule, and thereupon those books are called
Canonical, because they are the rules of our faith; and consequently whatsoever
is not consonant to the Scripture, ought to be rejected as pernicious, and
swerving from the rules of our faith. For as whatsoever is not of faith is sin,
and as faith comes by hearing and hearing by the word of God, therefore
whatsoever is extra Scripturam cum ex fide non sit peccatum est. This was the
saying of Basil one of the Church of Rome's Saints, in his Ethics difinit.
ult. prope finem. And for my part, I shall not be so harsh with her as this St.
was. I should be willing to allow of her traditions, if they do not impugn the
Scriptures; and not to be so rigid against her traditional power, as upon
Basil's rule, utterly to reject all, if not expressly contained in Scripture. I
say for my part, I should allow of such and approve of them, as to be cerdited
for the matter of fact; but if she enjoin them as doctrinal and to be rules of
faith, then ^ith Cyprian I desire to examine them by this Touchstone of truth,
the Scriptures. For if once she propound traditions to be rules of faith then
with Hierome Cyprian and Austin I must examine the truth of them by the rule of
Scripture, and with Saint Chrysostom, in his 13 Hom. upon the 2 Cor. 7. do
pray and beseech the Church of Rome to reject what this or that man says, and
search the truth out of the Script^re that learning true riches* we may follow
them, and so attain life everlasting; neither let any Church be wedded with her
own traditions, or give her self to believe the traditions of other Churches,
unless (says he) she can bring authority from these truths, to a warrant her
doctrine, and not to receive for doctrine the commandments of men: and with
Saint Cyprian examine from whence such tradition came, whether it descended
from authority of our Lord Jesus Christ or his Gospel; or whether it came from
the Mandates of the Apostles, or their Epistles. If so says he, let such
divine and holy tradition be observed; if no, let it be rejected especially any
tradition that shall contradict the written verities of God, for such certainly
proceed from spirits of error.

Here is a cloud of witnesses all agreeing in one, that no traditions are to be
embraced, that have not warrant from the word of God; so that for the Church of
Rome to put her traditions upon the people for rules of faith, upon that score,
that it is the power and authority of the Church that awarrants those
traditions, is vain, and not binding to the conscience of men, unless she can
justify and maintain them warrantable by the word, according to Saint Paul's
saying to the Galat. 1.9. Though an Angel from heaven come and teach any other
doctrine then what we have preached, let him be accursed. For the Testimony of
no Church whatsoever is to be received, if it be contrary to the Scripture;
S^riptures above the Church. Ante 73. Chapter 9.
according to that of Saint Austin upon that text, The Scriptures are not true,
because the Church says they are the word of God; but the testimony of the
Church is true, because they are the word of God; and should Rome or any other
Church teach contrary to the holy Scripture, it is to be rejected, as that
which has nothing of verity in it.

Now since the Scriptures are the only rules of our faith, The vanity and
falseness of the traditions of the Church of Rome.
and do contain in themselves the necessary points of our faith, what shall we
think of the traditions of the Church of Rome, which have no warrant from the
holy Scriptures, but many of them being repugnant, and utterly contrary to
those Scriptures (which therefore by the rule of Christ himself in the 7 of
Matthew, and by the general consent of the fathers of the primitive Church, are
to be rejected) yet notwithstanding are by her enjoined (upon her pretended
authority of universality and infallibility) to be rules of faith unto others?
And lest any should think me injurious to the Church of Rome in this
particular, I will give you a small taste (for I delight not to lay open her
infirmities, thereby to draw a scandal upon her) of such of her traditions as
are not warranted by the holy word of God, only maintained out of self
interest, and to warrant her claim of universal power Spiritual and Temporal,
by these ensuing examples, and further refer you to the 7 Chapter.

The Church of Rome, that she might persuade the world of Peter's being Bishop
of Rome, by which she would derive all her power, and jurisdictions, does
therefore teach the people this tradition under pain of Anathema That Jesus
met Peter as he was, going out of Rome, and the steps of their feet as they two
stood talking, have left an impression in the place, which remains to this
day. Now let a man examine the Scriptures, and he shall find Saint Peter
himself witness against this tradition, in the third of the Act. 21. where he
says, That Christ ascended, and the heavens shall contain him till he come;
which coming is called his second coming to Judgment, according to the Article
of the Apostles Creed: and therefore that he should be bodily there with Peter,
so bodily as to leave the impression of his footsteeps, is against Saint Peter's
own saying, against the whole current of the Scriptures, and against the
Apostles Creed. So I referr this to the Reader, whether to believe Saint Peter
himself, or his pretended successor, in this point.

It may be that Peter might see Christ in a vision as Stephen did, Act. 7. but
not bodily, for that he is there in heaven, whom the heavens must contain till
all things be dissolved.

Another tradition the church of Rome teaches, How that in the Church of the
Friars minors at Rome, is a picture of the Virgin Mary, drawn by Saint Luke,
which Gregory carrying in procession in the time of a Plague, the Plague
ceased; and they taught the people that it was by our Ladies means, for the
honor done to her Image; and so ascribe that to her, which is due unto the Lord
God, he correcting by Judgments, and out of his goodness extending his mercy
as seems best to his divine wisdom: and hereby they neglect that duty God has
enjoined them, in that they did fly to the Lady Mary for succor in that day of
their visitation, whenas God has commanded them to call upon him in the day of
trouble, and he will hear them.

The Papists likewise teach, that in the Church of Sebastian in Rome, an Angel
appeared to Saint Gregory as he was saying Mass at the Altar of Saint
Sebastian, and said to him these words, In this place there is true remission
of all sins, brightness and light everlasting, joy and gladness without end.
And this favors of Atheism, to affirm, that on earth there can be light
everlasting, as if the world should never have an end, which is contrary to
Scripture, for that they plainly affirm an utter dissolution of all things 2
Pet. 3. And Saint Matthew witnesses, How that at the end of the world, the Sun
shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon and the Stars shall lose their
light, the Stars shall fall from Heaven, and the powers of the Heavens shall be
shaken. They likewise teach, that in the Church of Calixius, is the Altar
whereon Saint Peter said Mass; which is not probable in respect he never
mentions it in Scripture; nor Saint Luke, that ever he used any such thing;
besides, the sacrifice of the Altar is against the Scripture, as may appear in
the sixteenth Chapter.

The Church of Rome likewise teaches, that in the Church of Saint John's the
Lateran in Rome, is a Chapel called the Sacrists, wherein is remission of all
sins, both a poena and culpa; and that not far from the same Chapel is an
ascent of thirty two steps, which were the same Christ went up when he went
before Pilate, and were brought from Jerusalem thither; and that whosoever
ascends those steps, for every step he has a hundred years of pardon: which is
contrary to the Scriptures. Matthew. 1.21. It is Jesus that must save his people
from their sins; and the whole Scriptures witness, that by his stripes we are
healed; it is his blood, that is shed for many, for the remission of their
(...), It is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, Joh. 1.29.
Neither is there salvation in any other. Act. 4.12. and through his name all
that believe shall receive remission of sins, Act. 10.43. he being for that end
sent into the world, 1 Timothy 1.29. which gave himself for our sins, that he
might redeem us out of this present evil wo^ld, Gal. 1. and is a reconciliation
for our (...), 1 John 4. without which we are not cleansed, his blood only
being our remission. Hebr. 9. Wherefore how ^bominable is this Romish
tradition, which is for no other end, but to cozen people out of their money,
who for the pardon to be received by going up those steps, must liberally
dis^urse to his holiness use, who more thinks upon that private advantage, then
Christian-like considers how by that tradition he makes the death of Christ in
vain.

With many such like traditional stories, does the Church of Rome delude her
blind votaries, which I blush to repeat, and will rather send the Reader to
her own Legends, where he shall find great store of these Papal knocks, then
that I should be the ^uthor to discover these her fopperies; which I rather wish
were not at all, then to her shame to be remembered. For my part I honor Rome
as the metropolis of Europe, and her Church, as being at first of Apostolical
faith and doctrine; and do heartily wish that these late gross absurdities I
find repeated of her, were not true; that so we might embrace her as one
sister, and might together serve the true and everliving God, who is a Spirit,
and will be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth; and that we might together keep
the unity of Spirit in the bond of Peace: for GOD is not the Author of
confusion but of Peace, as we see in all the Churches of the Saints.

Thus Reader I have briefly run through most part of the Doctors book: and
though I have not observed the very same method the Doctor has followed, yet
many of his Chapters being to one and the same purpose (as who please to peruse
his book, will find it true) I have couched an answer to most material parts
thereof in what I have formerly writ: and now I am come to his twentieth
Chapter, which is concerning the Popes headship.

Now for that I have given answer to this in the second Chapter, in relation to
his universality, it may be thought by some needless to treat any further
thereof in relation to his spiritual jurisdiction; and for that the Doctor has
not at all treated of his Temporal power, it may be others be thought
extravagant in me, to add a Chapter concerning that particular: Yet, because
that the Pope is bolstered up in this point, by virtue of his Spiritual
headship, by many who extend it generally, as well over temporalties, as
spiritualties; And for that the Doctor having formerly treated of Romes
Catholickship, and of her universality, and of her being the only Catholic
Church, yet notwithstanding adds this twenteth Chapter of the Popes headship:
and for that, as I said, this headship is by same extended unto Temporalties; I
crave pardon to add this ensuing Chapter, and that the rather, because I will
therein give a brief account of the state of the Popes, and of the means and
ways by which they have grown to the present height of jurisdiction they now
exercise, as well over other Churches, as over Princes; and in that respect, it
may serve for an answer to the Doctors twentieth additional Chapter, without
incurring a just censure of an absolute digression from the subject matter of
the Doctors discourse.

CHAP. XIV.
That the Pope has no power to depose any Prince, although an Heretic. That
Bishops are not equal with Kings; and that the ancient practice of Rome's
church was against this, neither claiming the same in Spiritual or Temporal
capacities.
THe Pope of Rome claims to be Peter's successor, and by virtue thereof to be
Christ's Vice-general, universal father of the Church, the only dispensor of
Apostolic Benedictions, and supreme head of the Catholic Church, these are
the titles and appellations, by which he desires to be distinguished, that by
these it may be known he is dignified above all the Clergy upon earth.

I have in the second Chapter given some satisfaction concerning the unjustness
of this his claim; yet I might admit him what he here desires to be thought to
be, and notwithstanding prove that that power of jurisdiction will not extend
to a warrant his busy intermedling in temporal affairs much less be a
sufficient warrant for his dethroning of any Prince or Potentate, or
disobliging his people and subjects from their obedience and duty to such civil
Magistracy, as is set over those people to rule and govern them. In prosecution
of this matter, I will first treat of the power of Kings and Bishops in
general, then examine the Popes power in particular.

Kings are called sons of the most high, Of the prerogative of Kings.
2 Samuel 7.14. Gods on earth, Psalm. 82.6. All people are to obey them in all
they command, Josh. 1.28. They have their Commission from Almight God: by me
Kings reign, Prove. 8.15. and Romans 13. Their wrath is as the roaring of a Lion
Prove. 19.12. And if they transgress, none is to question them, Psalm. 51.4.
Lyranus upon this Psalm says, David had sinned against God alone; as a Judge to
punish him: for being a King, he had no superior to punish him, and yet he had
sinned against Vriah, causing him to be murdered: but as to be punished, he
cries out unto the Lord, Against thee only have I done this evil. And herewith
agree. Saint Ambrose de Apolog. David. cap. 10. page 386. and Hugo Cardinalis
upon that Psalm. Kings shall bear rule and exercise dominion, Luke 22. He is
the Minister of God to take vengeance on them that do evil. The whole Scripture
magnifies the majesty power and dominion of Kings; which it witnesses to be
given to those absolute Monarchs and Kings mentioned in Scripture, even by God
himself, that power which they had being of God, Romans 13. And none should say
unto them, What do thou?

As for Priests, it is plain by the Scripture that those under the Law were to
offer sacrifice for the sins of the people, Of the Office of Bishops.
1 Chronicles. 9.2. Heb. 9.6. and 5.1. Gods Covenant with them was of life and
peace, and that their lips should preserve knowledge, Malach. 2.4. And the
Priests under the Gospel are a holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifice
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5. they are commanded to pray for
all men, 1 Timothy 2. For Kings and all that be in authority: and Peter the prime
Apostle was commanded to follow Christ, who left him an example of suffering
and obedience; which S. Peter himself witnesses to the world, 1 Pet. 2.21. For
hereunto are ye called: for Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an ensample
that ye should follow his steps. From all which places of Scripture may be
deduced these conclusions.

Kings are representatives of God the Father; to them is given all power and
dominion to rule and command: Priests are the lively Images of Christ, to whom
he has left his precept of humility, to be obedient and serve. To Kings is left
authority to punish evil doers; to Priests, to pray for all men, even their own
oppressors; not to recompense evil for evil, Romans 12.17. Kings are to use the
material sword for vengeance; Priests the spiritual sword the Word to make
supplication for all Saints, Ephesians. 6.18. Kings are not to be rebuked; Priests
are to suffer with patience. Kings sit in Gods throne; Priests serve at his
Altar. Kings are Angels of God, 2 Samuel 14.20. Priests are the Ambassadors of
Christ, beseeching us in Christ's stead to be reconciled unto God.

Yet Kings, though they be thus exalted and superintendent over all, they have
an especial charge to respect the Priests, and hearken unto them, Number. 27.21.
And it is the duty of Priests to reverence them, 2 Chro. 13. Priests pay their
tribute of obedience, and duty; but Kings are to recompense it with respect and
love. The power of the Priest over the people ceased, when Saul was King; and
yet Saul was to hearken to Samuel. The Majesty of the one must not despise the
humility of the other: the King, as I said, is the Minister of Justice, the
Priests the Messengers of Mercy. These two must not clash against each other,
but with Princely David, ought with harmonious concurrence of spirit to sing of
mercy and judgment; mercy and truth to meet together, righteousness and peace
to kiss each other. For as there is a Noli me tangere for the one. Touch not
mine anointed; so there is a precept of preservation for the other, Do my
prophets no harm. There is a general tie laid upon all, Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers; wherein the Ministers of the Gospel are included:
and likewise there is a rule of obedience prescribed to all, Heb. 13. Obey them
that have the oversight of you, for that they watch for your souls, etc.
wherein Princes are not exempted. Which shows, that Princes are to hearken to
their word and doctrine, and to be courteous to them, and not to grieve the
holy Spirit of God. Ephesians. 4. and they are to be obedient to Princes, for that
they bear not the sword in vain. So that these two seem to have a mutual
dependencie each on other: the Priest must exhort with sound doctrine, to which
obedience must be given upon pain of damnation; and the King may enjoin the
practice of that or any other rule of faith agreeable to the word of God, which
the Bishop likewise upon the same pain is bound to observe: only here is the
difference; in point of variance betwixt King and Priest, the King is above the
Priest to execute Judgment, the Priest being bound to obey not to rule; which
is no confusion of the Ecclesiastical estate, they being hereunto ordained to
suffer for Christ's sake, when it shall please God, for their sins, or the sins
of the people, to set an ungodly man to be ruler over them; Against whom should
they out of the dictates of humane reason exalt themselves, for that they
fleshlily conceive that otherwise the Church of Christ will be utterly
destroyed, it argues their infidelity of Christ's promise to his Church, which
shall never be universally invisible: and he having enjoined unto them
obedience, they must submit unto that rule, and rely upon Gods providence to
his Church, who can (contrary to humane reason) make the blood of the Martyrs
the seed of the Church: Wherefore Saint Paul and Saint Peter have left these
commendations to the Saints of the several Churches, To suffer is the fruit of
the Spirit, Gal. 5. and blessed are ye if ye suffer for well doing: and Saint
Peter. 1. Pet. 3.14. Blessed are ye if ye suffer for righteousness sake.
Wherefore, says he. 1 Pet. 4.19. Let them that suffer according to the will of
God, commit their souls to him as unto a faithful Creator: and you hereby,
says Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 2. make proof of your being in Christ, if ye be
obedient in all things; knowing this, That if ye suffer, ye shall reign, 2 Timothy 2.12. This was the practice and precepts of the Apostles: and that the
Pope is bound hereunto, I shall make it evident by the examples both of the old
and new Testaments, and likewise by the ancient and modern practices of all
Christian states.

The Jesuits, Bishops not above Kings.
those stiff maintainers of the Popes prerogative, have endeavored to beguile
the world with their subtle sophistry, that they might by any means set up his
holiness above all powers on earth; and therefore they would persuade that
Churchmen are as far above Kings, as the soul is above the body; and that
Kings should be subject to them, in respect their power is from the people, the
Bishops power is from God: and if Churchmen obey Princes, it is out of
discretion, for order sake, not out of necessity of obedience. To which I
answer.

That the people desired a King, it is true, and they had one given them; but his
power is from above, and he was by appointment of God anointed, 1 Samuel 9. and
after that the people had submitted themselves to the King, they could not cast
him off. Samuel told them by way of premonition, that he should rule over them,
commanding their sons, servants, fields, sheep etc. and you shall cry out in
that day, as thinking your selves oppressed but the Lord will not hear you, 1 Samuel 8. For his power once vested, it is from above by which he holds it: he is
Vnctus Dei; and the Bishop of Rome may in this respect as well as he be said to
derive his power from men, for that he is chosen by his Cardinals, and formerly
was nominated by the Emperors, as I have showed you in the fourth Chapter: so
that the Kings deriving their power from the people, as in reference to their
particular exercising of the Kingly power, does not prove their power from the
people; their power is from God, though the people desire this or that prince
to be over them: and therefore as their power is from God, it is at feast equal
with the Bishop in side to the derivation of the power; and if it were no more
but so, the Bishop cannot be above Kingship: for par in par^m non habet
potestatem.

Now that I may further illustrate the truth of this point, I will borrow that
Objection; and prove by that Reason of Kings having their power from the
people, that the Pope has no power to dethrone them.

That Monarchy and Civil Magistracy have their rise from consent of People, is
a truth most clear and manifest. It is true, that Kingship was anciently upon
the earth. Nimrod, the son of Cush, the son of Ham, the son of Noah, was King
of Babel, Genesis 10. and the Egyptians had a Pharaoh over them, six hundred years
before Saul. Whereupon, some have from hence conceived Kings to be Jure Divino:
which Assertion of theirs admits of this distinction: they may be said Jure
Divino, as in reference to their power, because, By God Kings reign; they are
the Generals which go in and out before the people; and it being the Lord of
hosts which gives victory in the day of battle, their power is from God. But
they are Jure Humano, in reference to their Institution, the People only
having a power of choice, whether such a particular man shall be set over them,
so rule them, and to go in and out before them.

Nor is it any thing but reason, Kings derive their power from the people.
that the People had this power from the beginning. For as the King was to have
command over their persons, sons, and servants; so it was nothing but right,
that the people should approve and allow, or disallow of the particular man,
that should have that particular power over them. Hence was it that Saul,
though anointed of Samuel by special appointment of God, yet by that
consignement he was not absolute King, but was preordained to be Governor over
the inheritance. For that anointing of Samuel did not give him power to
exercise his kingly Office, till Samuel assembled the people in Mizpeh, 1 Samuel
10. and by consent of the Tribes was the lot cast, which fell upon the Tribe of
Benjamin: and verse. 24. All the people shouted, and said, God save the King.

So likewise David was anointed by Samuel, 1 Samuel 16. yet after Readiness death,
he was not King, till the men of Judah came and anointed him over Judah, 2 Samuel
2. And though David swear unto Bathsheba that Solomon her son should succeed
him; yet it was the people came and confirmed it, saying, God save king
Solomon, 1 King. 1. And Rehoboam his son succeeded him; but it is plain, he was
not king by descent, but by the peoples making him so: for, says the text, 1
King. 12.1. All Israel were come to Shechem to make him king.

It was not by inherent right, that the sons commonly succeeded the fathers in
the Regal Throne, as may appear by that, and the example of Joash; who being
son and heir of Ahaziah, 2 King. 11. yet was he made king by the people; they
crowned him, and clapped their hands, saying, God save the king.

And as these Kings. so the Roman Emperors, and indeed, all other kings
derive their power of governing from the people, not from any Birthright; not
as Heirs succeeding in right of Blood, but only receiving their power from the
choice and consent of the people; which people would commonly make choice of
such heirs, and crown them kings; with Solomon accounting their land blessed,
when their king was the son of nobles, Eccles 10.17. For since they were
resolved to have kingly Government over them, (which Kingly Government is by
some naked nations not clothed with wholesome Laws and Privileges, but
prostitute to the daily various imperious dictates of humane will, without
known Rules to govern by, approved of as most good and convenient. And some
there be, which, though made trim and comely by kings favors, legal Liveries
given by good and bounteous Princes, as heirboons to them and their posterity,
could wish a Royal Master to go in and out before them, in defense of such
hereditary freedom; concurring with the other in opinion, That Monarchy is the
best and safest Government, for avoiding of factions in the Commonwealth, and
preserving a mu^^al confidence and alacrity betwixt the Magistracy and the
People; for that the king is but one, and trusted by them, and consented unto
to govern: whereas oftentimes in Democratical States, the major part sways, and
perhaps disposes of particular interests, when the party concerned, neither
ever heard of, or trusted any particular man of that major part, nor had any
vote to elect any one of the same qualification of that major part. Besides, as
the king is but one, he is sooner persuaded to Justice, and moved to Mercy,
then a multitude) they might as well make choice of such heirs, as of any
other; and that the rather; because they had formerly prayed, and in faith were
persuaded that God would give righteousness to the kings son. And when he is
installed in the Throne, notwithstanding he succeed his father, yet he may not
properly be said a king by descent, but made so by the consent of the People.

Now since the title and power of Governing is given, by consenting to have such
power over them, I will consider how far the king, and how far the people, are
bound each to other.

First, for the People: I conceive, that since this power of the King (...)
derived from the stipulation of the People, the People on their parts, as they
expect to have the King to govern them with regardfulness, stand firmly bound
to observe their Covenant made with the King. Wherefore, if they submitted
themselves under Absolute Kings, as the kings of Judah, or the Emperors of
Rome, etc. those kings were to take their sons, and appoint them to their
chariots, etc. and shall command their servants young men, etc. and when they
cry, the Lord will not hear them, for that they have covenanted for him so to
do; they being thereof advertised before, 1 Samuel 8. and that Covenant is not to
be cancelled, without the Prince his allowance.

Plutarch records, how that Lysander and Dionysius (two Heathens) had an
Apophthegm, That children were to be mocked with toys, and men with oaths. But
I hope Christians will hearken to the holy Ghost, which both by the mouth of
Moses and S. Paul commands them to perform their promises, as in the sight of
the Lord. Moses, in Numb. 30.3. commands that he that makes a promise should
not break it, but do according to all that proceeds out of his mouth: for it is
(says one) Vinculum animae; according to that of S. Paul, Gal. 3.15. Though it
be but a man's covenant, yet when it is confirmed, no man does abrogate it, or
adds any thing thereto. Wherefore the people having by stipulation put
themselves under that Government, and that Government over them being Absolute,
they may nor so much as say unto that absolute king, What do thou? but are
(as Joshua says, Chap. 1.27.) to obey him in all that he commands.

Again, Kings bound.
As by that stipulation the People are bound to submit to the will of that
Absolute Monarch; so on the other side, if between the King and the People
(when the King is appointed over them by their crowning, and acclamations of
Vive le Roy) it be conditioned and agreed, that such a king shall be over them,
yet nevertheless subject to such and such qualifications; the king is bound to
perform those unto them; for it is his Covenant, and the people are only bound
by the pledge of their faith to obey him upon those terms, and not else. And
therefore if such a king on his part break his conditions with such a people,
they may (having power to convene a Diet or Parliament, the commencement and
determination of such Assembly not depending upon the will of the Prince)
depose such a king, and proceed to a new election: and this I conceive (with
submission to better judgments) is not against any texts of Scripture; for
that obedience generally enjoined to kings in Scripture, is meant of absolute
Kings, to whom the people having submitted themselves, could upon no terms
disclaim their subjection to them: however every one stands bound, for
conscience sake, to any qualified Monarch, indispensably, according to the
condition of his stipulation, to be obedient to him.

As the power of Kings is merely from this stipulation with the People who put
themselves in subjection to such a man's government; None bound to obey, only
such as promise to obey.
so this mutual personal Contract, as it shall not extend to the heirs of the
king, so neither to the heir of the party promising.

That it does not extend to the heir of the king, is manifest, because of the
personal confidence of the peopole in such an one, to go in and out before them
and to be over them; and likewise because of their personal promise only to
that king: which promise, if it had extended to the heir, the people needed not
to have met at Shechem to make Rehoboam son of Solomon king. And in all
countries and kingdoms the people meet and crown their new king, for that he
personally is to govern them, and they personally submit to him: which
obedience, had it grown from the faith pledged to the old king, it had been
needless to have had a meeting to make a new king* I must confess, that
quilibet potest renunciare juri per se introducto; the people may make a
Covenant to be obedient to such a King and his heir; and his heir, by virtue of
that Covenant, shall be over them: and according to the connditions of that
stipulation, both such heir as king and such people engaged as subjects, are
indispensably bound. But yet such stipulation to obey the heir of the king,
does not bind the heir of the party promising; for that, as I said before, the
power of governing the people is derived from their voluntary subjection to be
under that Government; which subjection is personal and bins no further then
the party promising.

It is true, that such were the conditions of the kings of Israel and Judah,
that by the promise of the people their sons and servants were bound; that
being foretold them by Samuel; and so they condescending unto it, it becomes,
de modo concessionis, due and to be obeyed. And thus it was with the Jews under
the Roman Emperors; in which respect, all the Land of Jewry was bound, it
being taxed under Augustus Caesar. Luke 2. and this being generally proclaimed
and known, and the sons and servants not gainsaying it, they (as it were
represented by their parents and masters) are likewise bound to this obedience,
though not personally promising the same. But generally in all other Countries,
the Covenant between the king and the people is so personal that it is only
restrained to the parties so promising, and no further. For were the son to
obey by reason of his fathers promise, it were needless to have the fealty of
the succeeding generations. And therefore was it, that in England there was a
view of Frank-Pledge, where every man of twelve years of age shall take the
Oath of Allegaince: and it is declared that every one (21 E. 3.12.) ought to be
attendant to some view of Frank-pledge or other, to take an Oath to be true and
faithful to the King. Which was a very politic constitution: for, should any
difference after arise between the king and people concerning his
mis-government, none should judge thereof, but such as stood bound by Oath to
obey the king according to the Laws; whereby the king might be confident the
people would not wrongfully tax the king lest they should pull Perjury upon
themselves; and the king was likewise hereby to take heed, that he did govern
according to that Law, lest the succeeding generations would not subject
themselves to have him over them and for that without their voluntary and
personal consents, they were not thereunto bound.

As for the term of Natural Allegiance, Natural Allegiance considered.
it is in respect of a man's being born of parents which have right and
privilege in the Laws of the Nation and Country of which they are, for that
they are thereby naturalized, endenized, and made free, to receive protection
from those Laws. For those Laws proceeding from the people of such Nation or
Country, and being by king and people confirmed to posterity, they are only
proper to the natural people of such Nation or Country; which Laws are to be a
guide to such people: and for that they are annexed in point of protection to
the offspring of such people, such offspring is said a^ natural subject, as
having birthright to those Laws which are to protect and govern them. For as
they are only to receive correction from the Rule of that Law, they may more
properly be said local subjects then natural; every stranger being with them,
in that respect, during residence in such Nation or Country, equally obnoxious
to them: and therefore being only born of natural parents of that Country,
they are said natural subjects to that Law. Natural Allegiance.
For as to the personal subjection of any man to be governed by such a king of
that Country, he is not by naturality absolutely concluded under that power
before a personal engagement; only it is a persuasive motive to make him
subject himself to such a king or power, but no positive tie; the obligation
that thereby accrues to king and people, only arising upon the mutual
stipulation, personally conditioned and agreed upon by king and people.

Since then it is plain, that kings are by the people instituted into their
Regal power, whether absolute (and so upon no terms to be questioned by the
people engaged, God only being to punish such for their mis-government, by
raising some strange power to scourge them when and as he pleases) or
qualified; and so to govern according to the Articles of Stipulation. The Pope
upon no terms is to intermeddle to depose them: for after they are once
invested in this power over the people, whether Absolute or Conditional, yet
whilst they are so over the people, and to go in and out before the people,
their power is from God, by whom they reign, and therefore not to be questioned
by his Holiness, who is neither the party without which they were not set up,
nor yet having any authority above their power.

And should any Prince or Potentate once acquire this Regal power from the
alacrity and free consent of people, and afterward submit that right to the
Pope's will; I dare affirm he betrays the peoples interest to a stranger, and
is utterly injurious to his own Crown; for that he being once invested in the
Regal Throne, is by Gods power and authority to go in and out before the
people: and having this power under so heavenly a Master, he must not become
tenant at will to the Pope, who is below him as to question his Power and
Government.

And whereas Bellarmine, de Pontif. l. 1. cap. 7. would exalt Bishops above
Kings, for that they administer Sacraments, etc. and Kings only administer
Justice in Civil matters; that does not subject Kingship to Episcopacie: for
the credit of the Bishops actions must serve the glory of God, not the Bishop
only; the spiritual work is of God, the bodily service is of the Minister. Now
the honor that is to be given him, is in respect of his Officiating, not his
Person: and in his respect, every man in his own Trade or Calling may be said
excellent before the King. The Bishop is a better Bishop then the King, but the
King is a more excellent man then the Bishop. The honor due to the King is in
respect of his person: Who shall lift his hand against the Lords anointed, and
be guiltless? 1 Samuel 26.9. His person is sacred, and above the reach of
Violence: his hand bears the Sword, and the obedience thereunto is annexed to
his person. But the honor and respect to be given to the Bishops, is in
respect of their Ministerial function: as they are men they are subject; and as
they are Ministers, or successors to the Apostles, which Office let it in it
self be more noble and to be honored for Bellarmine's reason, yet if they
rightly dispense the sacred Oracles of Truth, they must by that not only teach
others, but convince themselves that they are to obey the Civil Magistracy;
not out of conveniencie, for order sake; but out of necessity, for conscience
sake.

Christ ordained both Powers: Bishops to rule the Church, Acts 20. and Kings to
rule the men, and to guide and dispose Temporal affairs: though, both have
Government annexed to them, yet that of Kings is in his own right; that of
Bishops, in Christ's stead to persuade to rules of Faith and Discipline, not to
compel: the power of the one is Absolute; of the other, but Effective: the one
may compel, the other only persuade.

Whereupon Chrysostom upon Romans 13. The weapons of Bishops are spiritual,
those of Kings material: Bishops are to admonish, reprove, and exhort; Kings
are to restrain the disobedient, by loss of life, limbs, estate, or liberty:
the King is to be conversant about holy things, not in the administering and
execution thereof, as was Vzziah, but in appointing and ordering them, as was
Hezekiah; and is to overlook the Bishops in their exercising the spiritual
Function. He is to make Laws, and he is to see the execution of those Laws; and
therefore he is to look into the conversation of the Bishops, that they walk
according to those Laws, otherwise to punish them.

But if the King be given over to hardness of heart, and will not hearken to
the voice of his Priests, calling unto him in truth and sincerity; yet, where
he is an absolute Prince, he is not to be called to an account by them, or the
people who have submitted themselves to be governed by him; but, in such a
case, Preces and lachrymae sunt arma Ecclesiae, according as S. Ambrose
witnesses, in his Orat. contr. Auxent. l. 5. And this was the practice of the
Priests under the Law, and according to Christ's own practice whilst he was
upon the earth, and according to the precepts he left to his Apostles for them
to walk by, and according to the Rules of those Apostles prescribed to others
as examples for their imitation, and according to the ancient practice of the
Primitive Church. So that for the Pope upon any pretense to dethrone Kings, is
not warrantable, but utterly against all truth recommended unto us by these
faithful witnesses.

Christ Jesus our Savior, the only Son of the ever-living God, King of
heaven, and Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek, being both King,
Priest and Prophet, denied all Kingship in this world, Joh. 1^.36. He was by
the Jews called Jesus of Nazareth king of the Jews, partly in scorn, partly to
justify their putting him to death, pretending he wronged Caesar; and hereunto
forging false witnesses, Luke 23. did give him that title. But Christ in this
was innocent; he never wronged Caesar, but commanded his Tribute, and those
things that belonged to Cesars to be given to Caesar, Matthew. 22.

Shall Christ Jesus, a Priest, a King and a Prophet, give tribute to Caesar, and
will not the Bishop of Rome allow it? Shall the Jews be so tender of Cesars
right, (though an Heathen and but the second over them, and that by Conquest)
that they would not spare Christ himself, upon pretense that he should call
himself King; and will not his Holiness vouchsafe that Christian Kings and
Princes may enjoy their Rights and Prerogatives?

He may plead for his excuse herein, the Heathens Apophthegm, Si jus violandum
est, certe regnandi causa violandum est; and by that Rule, adorn his own
Temples (if his triple Turbant be not weight enough) with all the Crowns upon
earth: But I am sure he cannot plead any Christian practice or president,
either out of the Old or New Testament, to warrant his action. He must not
think that that late invention of the Jesuits, forged upon the Anvile of their
own brain, to please their master his Holiness, (to wit, That after a King is
excommunicated, he ceases to be a King, and no subjects owe obedience to such
an heretical Prince) will be a sufficient excuse for his dethroning any such an
one.

Aquinas, Papists Objections for the Popes power to dethrone.
and a Council of Laterane, have adhered to this distinction, and did, to
justify their opinion, cite for an evidence and proof the example of
Hildebrand against H. 4.

To which I answer:

De facto ad jus non valet consequentia. Aquinas was 1200 years after Christ,
and was the Popes vassal and overtaken with the errors of his time: and he did
not allege any warrant from the Scripture for this his opinion, and
therefore, being a thing of novelty, upon the Papists own rules, is to be
rejected.

As for the Council of Laterane, Council of Laterane, called 1215 which set
Popes above Kings.
it was called at the beck of Innocent the third, he being at that time at odds
with the Emperor Otho, with John King of England, with Peter King of Arragon,
the Earl of Toulouse, and diverse others: and at that time, this Juncto,
consisting of eight hundred Covent-Friars, and their Vicars* (who ought not to
have sat there) to please their great master, overcame four hundred Bishops,
not with strength of Reason, but Voices; where he likewise was with his Court
to overawe them. And therefore when any thing of Papal interest is to be
passed by Council, this place is ever pitched upon, as most convenient, for
that his Holiness is at hand either with fair means to allure, or with threats
to force the opposers to condescend to his desires. Hence was it, that in a
Council here, anno 1056, Pope Nicolas the second was not afraid to broach the
doctrine of Transubstantiation: And here Pope Innocent the third did ratify
that doctrine. And here first was hatched that other tenent of the Popes
Supremacy over Councels. Wherefore, this being a Laterane-Decree ^it ought to
be of the less credit: and that the rather, because the thing in question was
the Popes own par^cular case, (who being at that present in open defiance
against those Princes) it was for flattery to the Pope, and for necessity of
State (thereby to divert many from joining with those Princes against his
Holiness) who, if the differences amongst them were not appeased, were like to
sit too heavy upon his Holiness skirts; declared that his Holiness was above
kings. And for this they instance the president of Hildebrand's excommunicating
H. 4. and his successor Paschalis deposing him.

Now these things considered, I leave it to the Reader, whether to give credit
to that Council, or the Council of Mentz, which deposed all the Clergy which
joined with Hildebrand, it being an unwarrantable act in Hildebrand to oppose
the Emperor, and was by Sigebert called Novellum Schisma; and Sigebert wrote
above five hundred years since, and therefore, according to the Papists rules,
that which is later, is less to be credited in those points wherein it differs
from the ancient profession. And since there is no warrant from Scripture for
the decree of this Council, or the opinion of Aquinas, I hope there is no
judicious Christian but will adhere to that of Mentz, and not in his judgment
approve of the Laterane Council, which was of more puisne time, and strave in
all things to please the Pope: and that the rather, because Otho Frisigensis,
lib. 6. cap. 35. and Vincentius, and diverse others concurred with Sigebert, and
the Council of Mentz, in this opinion; whose resolutions in this point are
grounded on Gods Word, but the Decree of Laterane on man's will, and therefore
none may submit his judgment to be deluded with the erroneous and unwarranted
decrees thereof.

The Jesuits therefore thinking this too weak a prop to support so weighty a
Potentate as they would fain make his Holiness to be, Objections out of the Old
Testament answered.
wave their confidence in this, and flee to their last refuge, to wrest and
abuse the Scriptures, under pretense of Ecclesiastic power of interpretation;
and therefore they cite some presidents out of the Old Testament, which they
mis-apply, and would fain have them mis-understood. As for example: They would
prove by the examples of Saul, Jeroboam, Joash, Athaliah, and Ahab, being put
from their kingdom by the Highpriests, to be a warrant for the Popes
dethroning of what Prince he pleases to account wicked. Whenas those
presidents rightly understood, make nothing for the Popes pretended power
herein, but rather against him.

As for Saul, he was not cast out by Samuel; Samuel only denounced Gods will,
(which was to him revealed, how that Saul should be cast from his kingdom) and
he did therefore by divine appointment anoint David in his steed. But
notwithstanding it appears by the Scripture, that although Saul stood
excommunicate, as being rejected of God, yet he continued still king, and both
David and the Israelites did obey him, David calling him his Lord, and Anointed
1 Samuel 24.7. God forbid (says he) that I should lay hands upon him: for who
shall smite the Lords anointed, and be guiltless? 1 Samuel 26.9 And the like was
of Jeroboam: the Priest did not impose the punishment, only denounce the
judgment that was to come upon him, by way of Prophecy. And whereas Azariah
was shut from men, being a leper, and his son Jotham set up to rule in his
stead; this does not prove that Excommunication (which the Jesuits would
persuade to be the figure of the spiritual leper) does ipso facto dethrone a
King: Azariah continued King till his death: he was called King in the 22 year
of his Reign, which was the last year of his Reign, 2 Kin. 15. So that Jotham
was not King, but Vicegerent, during his fathers leprosy; and then, his
father dying, he claimed an absolute power in his own right, not by virtue of
his fathers seclusion. And whereas Athaliah was deprived of her kingdom by
Jehoiada the Priest, that was by virtue of Joash whom the Priest preserved in
the Temple, he being the right heir, and Athaliah an Usurper, and murderer of
old Azariahs children, only Joash escaped her bloody treachery; and after
that, the people did adhere to make Joash their king, and did promise to put
themselves under his Government: whereupon, the High Priest did command
Athaliah the usurper to be put from the throne, for that Joash was both heir in
blood, and had the general approbation of the people. 2 King. 11. They clapped
their hands, and said, God save the king. And for Elijahs withstanding King
Ahab, it was because of his Baalitish Prophets, whom by a miracle he
demonstrated to Ahab to be the cause of the famine and the drought, which he
showed by prayer for rain: and Ahab being herewith convinced, gave consent that
the Baalitesh Priests should be delivered up; which, by consent of the people,
by a public Decree were put to death by Elijahs hands.

But none of these examples do prove that Priests have a right to depose Kings;
though the contrary may be proved that Kings deposed Priests, as Saul slew
Abimelech for taking part with David, Joash commanded Jehoiadahs sons to be put
to death, and Solomon displaced Abiathar the High Priest from his primacy and
dignity, for following Adonijahs faction. The Scripture recites nineteen Kings
of Israel, and fourteen of Judah, who brake the Covenant made with the Lord,
and followed strange gods, and drove the people to apostacy; yet was not one
of them deposed by a Priest or a Prophet; for they knew that they ^eld their
authority from God, not from them; and therefore, with David all agreed to
subscribe, Who can lay his hand upon the Lords anointed and be guiltless?

Now as there can be no proof produced from the Old Testament, so much less
from the New; but positively and plainly to the contrary, Christ himself
commanding tribute to Caesar; and Romans 13. Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers: and 1 Timothy 2. Let prayers and supplications be made for princes:
and 1 Pet. 2. Submit your selves for the Lords sake whether to the king as
supreme or unto governors sent by him. Again, Christ said to his Apostles, The
kings of the Gentiles bear rule, and exercise dominion: Vos autem non sic. Luke
22.25. There must be no strivings amongst them, who should be the greatest;
which Christ manifests, by setting a child amongst them, Matthew. 18. By all
which texts of Scripture it is plain, that Ministers of the Gospel, and
successors of the Apostles, are to submit to, pray for, but not oppose kings;
neither are they to look after worldly power and lordship, Christ himself
denying to meddle with the dividing of the land betwixt the two brethren Luke
12. For this was praeter his business he came about.

Now if the Pope would be thought to be Peter's successor, let him follow Peter's
precept; and let him imitate Christ, who commanded Peter to follow him: let him
do his Masters business. Let him never think to entangle himself with the
temporal affairs of this world, let him never think of disposing of earthly
Crowns, but seed his flock, and instruct them in the ways of godliness, that
they may with meekness, temperance, patience, and snffering, attain to a crown
of glory, being strengthened through the might of Christ his glorious power,
unto all patience and long suffering with joyfulness, Col. 1.11. For such is
the will of God, that by well doing they may put to silence the ignorance of
foolish men, 1 Pet. 2.15. Let him not think to turn Peter's keys into Hercules
club; and when a Prince will not hearken to him, he may dethrone him: for he
has no warrant for his so doing: And the power of the keys given to Peter, did
not extend to this; nor may the Pope claim any such privilege by virtue
thereof.

When Christ said to Peter, The power of the keys does not warrant the Popes
deposing of Kings.
Whatsoever thou shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever
thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven, He did not thereby give
him power to pull down kings, for that after he enjoined Cesars tribute, and
Peter himself after submitted, and taught rules of obedience. Nor was this
power given to Peter alone, of binding and loosing, but to the rest of the
Apostles also: John, James, Bartholomew, etc. had the like power, as I have
showed in the second Chapter. And admit Kings be so included under the power of
the Keys, yet that does not prove any power in the Priest to dethrone him,
only to denounce Gods judgments against his sin, and to admonish him, and to
pray for him; but he must not meddle with his Temporal Regiment, nor so far
extend his Ecclesiastical power, as to dis-engage Subjects from their
Allegiance to such a Prince: for that is against the practice of the Apostles,
and against the precepts of Christ. And certainly, if the Apostles or Peter had
had any such power by virtue of the Keys, they would never have suffered it to
have been depressed, without giving testimony to the world of the injury done
unto them: Peter, if he suffered at Rome, and Paul, whom all stories agree to
have suffered under Domitius Nero never so much as denouncing him Ethnic, or
incapable to rule because a persecutor of Christ's Saints: nay, they were so far
from this, that they commanded others for conscience sake to obey Heathen
Princes, and that because of their power which is from God; which power, as I
have partly showed was beyond their compass to take from them.

The Jesuits being beaten from this hold of the Keys, they betake themselves
to the treble Pasce which after Christ's resurrection was said unto Peter, Joh.
21. and would fain deduce this power from thence; and so persuade the world,
that the Shepherds Crook is the Arms of all other Sees not of Rome; the Bishop
thereof being no ordinary Pastor, but one that is known by more Nable bearing;
viz. Mars, a Papal Mitre ensigned with a triple Crown and a Cross. Pater, Sol;
which in my opinion stands for no good denotement of Episcopal dignity, in
respect it does not sympathize with the Successor of Peter; and therefore
serves rather to denote him sprung of another tribe. But this by the way.

They would fain persuade the world, The treble Pasce does not extend to depose
Kings.
that this power was given to Peter by virtue of the treble Pasce; and by his
being Bishop of Rome, is devolved upon the Pope: which I have already touched,
in the second Chapter, That nothing does belong to Rome, any more then anyother
See Apostolic, by any power thereby given. I will only, for better
illustration of the present point add this, viz. That Peter and Paul both
submitted unto Domitius Nero, a cruel Heathen and persecutour; neither did they
thunder out any Excommunication against him, thereby denouncing him incapable
to rule; which if they had thought to have been so, certainly they would not
have concealed it at their sufferings, when they saw they must die, and all
hopes of their natural lives debarred from them.

If Peter suffered at Rome, he left no such Testimony behind him, nor Paul
neither; so that for the Pope to aspire to this prerogative upon Peter's score,
is an injury to that blessed Apostle, he having received rules from his Master
Christ to the contrary, of which both he, and the rest of the Apostles were
faithful witnesses in their sufferings.

The Papists beaten from all Scripture, there being neither from thence, nor
any practice Apostolical, the least warrant for this their presumptuous claim,
they then begin to strive with flesh and blood; and forsaking the rules of
Christ, and the exmples of Peter and the rest of the Apostles, notwithstanding
they would have Peter to be the Rock of the Catholic Church, they quit the
harbor adjoining to that Rock, and rove themselves upon the billows of strange
contests: And as when the Fish Meron perceiving a storm, lays hold upon a
chance pimple stone, and thinks to save it self from the tossing of the waves
by sticking to that, whenas both it and its stone are tumbled to and fro at the
will of the sea; so these men think by a newfound invention of their own, to
make good this their bold assertion against all opposition; whenas any
reasonable Christian may easily refute the same; and if with reason they will
not be driven off it, dash their brains against Peter's Rock. Wherefore they
blush not to affirm that God was not provident enough to his Church if he
should leave her without a head to rule and govern her, and as a widow to be
despoiled by any Heather or persecuting Prince; and therefore of necessity the
Pope must have this power: they are the principal wards in S. Peter's Keys to
depose Princes, and excite subjects to oppose them, if occasion be; otherwise
the Church should want the Pope her Head, that Pillar to support, and that Eye
to direct her; as Cardinal Allen in his Apology observes. Allen for deposing of
Princes.


This Doctrine of Allen is gross and Heathenish, tending to Blasphemy and
infidelity: infidelity in Gods promise, he having promised his Spirit to his
Church to the end of the world, and that the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it: she shall not be totally extirpated from off the earth till Shilo
come, though she may be invisible in this or that Country as I have showed in
the fifth Chapter; and therefore Christ bids his Apostles suffer for
righteousness sake: for Sanguis martyrum shall be semen Ecclesiae. Wherefore for
Allen to affirm that the Pope must have this power or the Church will be lost,
argues his distrust in Gods promise to his Church.

And it likewise savours of Blasphemy to tie Gods providence to the Papal
Chair, and so denying him a power or will to remove the Candlestick from Rome.
and to give it to another. Providence (as Aquinas defines it, Aquinas summa
contr. Gentiles) is said to be invisible, and remain in Gods secret council,
Nondum rebus impressa: for after it appears, and shows it self in effects
sensible, then it is called Fate, not Providence. Now for him to tax God of
improvidence, unless the Pope should have this visible power of deposing Kings,
is neither Scholar nor Divine like; he might as a Sooth-sayer of Egypt,
experimentally, upon the coincidence of the effect of some inspection or
Heathenish observation; as that when the black Eagle shall preach upon Laterane
Steeple, the top of Saint Angelo shall be lifted up, as was at the time of Otho
3. and Gregory the 5. etc. Or have foretold that it was the Fate of Rome, that
if any Prince withstood the Pope, he should be deposed, as was in Henry 4. and
Gregory 7. days; but not to conclude this upon Gods Providence, which no man
by the reach of humane reason is able to pry into: it is more transcendent then
the consult of flesh and blood can apprehend. Saint Paul cries out, How
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out! who has
known the mind of the Lord, or who was his Counselor? Romans 11.34. And will
Allen take upon him to circumscribe Gods Providence? To know the secrets of
man's heart, is Gods attribute: but such is the gross impiety of this
blasphemous man, that rather then the Pope should want excuse to depose Kings,
he will take upon him to know Gods heart, and prove this prerogative by Gods
Providence; whereby he runs himself upon these absurdities.

He does hereby spoil the honor and credit of the glorious Martyrs, by
accusing them of error or ignorance: of error, for tamely suffering, whenas
they should have resisted; of ignorance, if they suffered, because they knew
not the will of God herein. And he does likewise give God the lie: for if it
was God's providence to his Church to resist, in case Religion be opposed by
the Prince, sure he would not have bid Peter go back into Rome (as the Papists
pretend) nor would he have prescribed the forementioned rules of obedience,
which are diametrically opposite to Allens pretended known Providence.

It is not the revealed will of God, that the Crosier should resist the
Scepter, and the Mitre the Crown; none of the Fathers of Romes Church ever
practiced or published that Doctrine before Hildebrands days: and if it was
Gods Providence first known to Allen, then Allen proves the Church of Rome to
have been invisible for 1074 years after Christ; and hereupon he has quite
spoiled the Doctor; for by this means, he has hudwinkt his marks of Romes
truth, to wit, Antiquity, Universality, Unity in Doctrine, etc.

But my Cardinal thinks to salve up this error by another trick, and that
almost as gross as this; only this reflects upon the Divinity, that upon the
Apostles personally. He takes upon him to make known to us what was the secret
opinion of Peter and Paul, etc. which have suffered for Religion, to wit that
they suffered because they wanted power to resist; not that it was the will of
God they should do so; and so he makes the blessed Apostles and holy Martyrs
dissemblers, speaking one thing, and thinking another. For, says he, as soon
as a Prince begins to appear heretical ipso facto, though Excommunication be
not denounced, he shall be put from his Kingdom: for as Fame, so Heresy
gathers strength by going forward. Which Axiom of his is verified in this, for
that since he wrote* Bellarmine plows with his heifer, and persuades the same
Doctrine. So that hereby S. Paul is accused of dissimulation, That he should
bid the Romans obey for fashion-sake to please the times: and so he makes the
blessed Apostle an object of scorn, not pity; That he should be a time-server,
and yet play his cards so badly, that he could not humor Domitius Nero better.
Is it likely that the Apostles would have commanded others to pray for them, if
they would have taken their blood if they could? Unless these Cardinals would
have them like the Presbyters of England who prayed for King Charles, whilst
their Armies kept him in prison; or like Charles the fifth, who commanded
prayers to be made for Clement the seventh his deliverance, and suffered his
own Bands to confine him. Is it likely S. Peter preaching the Word, would bid
them submit, which Word he said should endure for ever, 1 Pet. 1.25. even that
Word which was preached amongst them, if he knew that it was lawful for them to
resist if they had power? This were to ascribe want of faith to Peter, that God
would never deliver his Church out of the hands of Persecutors, but suffer her
to be always under Tyrants; or else that Peter taught one thing, and thought
another. And why should both Peter and Paul press this duty of obedience and
submission and that not for wrath, but for conscience sake, were it lawful to
resist? This affertion of the Cardinal is therefore gross and impious. It is
plain by the Scripture, that this duty of submission to the Civil power was a
precept enjoined by God, not proceeding from any fear, (the production of a
base nature.) And whenas Paul and Peter did practice and recommend this duty to
others, it was to give a testimony of their faith in Jesus; who, as he had laid
down his life for them (who wanted no power to have withstood the Jews: he
might have commanded legions of Angels to have come and rescued him out of
their hands) in obedience to the will of the Father: so they, as obedient sons
of Christ Jesus, whom he had in his blood adopted, would, according to his
precepts and example, lay down their lives for the testimony of the Gospel.
Solomon forbade that any should curse the King secretly in his conscience:
which sure he never would have done, if it had been lawful (having power) to
cast him off. Saint Jude calls them filthy dreamers that speak evil of
Government, and despise such as be in Authority: I wonder what he would think
of those two Cardinals (were he alive) who would have the Pope drive Kings out
of their Kingdoms if he can.

There are some Roman Catholics, who being with Agrippa half persuaded to be
Christians, and being touched in Conscience, decline these gross absudities of
Allen and Bellarmine, as being pernicious, and tending to the injury of Christ
and his A postles, and the holy Scripture (and in that, injurious to the holy
Ghost, Scripture being nothing else but the dictates of that holy Spirit.) But
yet for all that, they are so bewitched to the Roman Faith, out of a blind
conceit of its Antiquity, and therefore of its truth, that they will not leave
her, but strive to justify her in all things, and to excuse this point, for
that it is a point controverted by some of their own Church, and not yet
decreed by any public Council (nor ever must it be decided, may the Pope
choose.) Besides, should it be referred to a Council, there is no credit to be
given to the result of that Council, for that none must sit there, but such as
first must swear to maintain the Pope in the very point to be controverted; and
so it would be coram non judice: or if it should be decreed against his
holiness, yet by the prerogatives Spiritual of his late Laterane and
Trent-assemblies, he might notwithstanding repeal that Decree, or choose to obey
it, for that he is by them declared to be above Councels. And till this be
rectified, this error can receive no reformation from a Council, nor can any
satisfaction from thence redound to clear the scruples of any man's conscience
in this particular. In the mean time. Popery is like the Religion of the
Pharisees: Councels declare one thing de fide, the Pope is found contrary de
facto; so that as our Savior said of the Pharisees, Matthew. 23.3. so say I of
these Roman Catholics. All that such a Council should so decree, observe and
keep; but after their works do not: for they say and do not.

The last shift that the Jesuits have to maintain this point of Papal
prerogative, is, The Pope (...) a temporal Prince.
that the Pope is more then the Apostles, having acquired a Principality on
earth; and so by Jus belli, he may pull down one Prince and set up another;
for, say they, the Apostles had no charge, but only to preach the Gospel; but
his holiness the Pope has other fish to fry, then what Saint Peter left him; he
is a temporal Prince, he wears a triple Crown, he disposes of Kingdoms,
Crowns, Emperors, Grants Dispensations, sends Indulgences receives Appeals,
answers Ambassadors, takes Homages, releases Oaths, dissolves Leagues,
interposes in the Election of Princes, has an Emperor to hold his stirrup,
bring up his first dish, a King to serve him at Dinner, and many a glorious
matter more, which Saint Peter never dreamed on; so that for him to depose
Kings, he being more then ever Peter was, is no such a strange thing. To which
I answer.

It Is strange so great a Potentate should be thrust up into so little a Corner
of the Earth, as the Territories of the Papacy are, and yet that his
Jurisdiction over other Princes should be of such vast latitude: I persuade my
self that as our Savior said, a Prophet is nothing worth in his own Country;
so the Popes power is made more glorious afar off, then it is in Italy taken to
be: whence it is that he is bearded and confronted by his neighboring petty
Princes and puisne States; and it is an observation, that his thundering
excommunions are forceless, where they meet with resistance: so that this his
greatness is caused through the debased Spirits of other Princes, that suffer
him to tyrannize over them; not that he has any right or due so to do, whether
in relation to any temporal title, or in reference to any Spiritual claim. It
remains therefore to examine how he can derive any right of title, to make
other Crowns as it were Homagers, and holden of his holiness, and that he has
an Universal power to dispose of them.

Baronius and others affirm this power to be inherent in the Pope, The
Popepower to depose Kings, is in ordine ad spiritualia
and absolutely in him as he is Pope: But Card. Bellarmin says it is in ordine
ad spiritualia; for, says he, although he be not the Lord of all temporalties
directly, and as Pope has absolute power to dethorne Kings, yet says he, it
is in him indirectly; that is, in order to the Spiritualties, he being
universal head of the Catholic Church.

Bellarmine, by this distinction has quite overthrown the Popes direct
Authority: for the Pope is no otherwise spiritual Vicar, but as he is Pope; and
if he cannot as Pope dethrone Kings, he cannot do it as Universal Vicar.

That this power is not in ordine ad spiritualia, of right belonging to the
Priest, I have already proved, in the fourth Chapter and by what follows, Ante
chapter 4.
where I have proved that Kings are vicarii summum infra regna. And I may
further add these examples out of the Scripture. Infra chapter 14
The Israelites obeyed Nebuchadonosor, Pharaoh, and Cyrus in matters of
Spiritual services. Moses and Aaron did offer Sacrifice unto the Lord by the
Kings appointment. Moses was their spiritual Governor, yet in the fifth of
Exodus, he desired of Pharaoh that he as well as the people might have leave to
go and offer Sacrifice. It was the duty of the Priest so to do, it was their
Office, and yet they asked the King leave, that they might at such a time do
it. Kings have spiritual power.
The commandment of Cyrus was in a cause merely Ecclesiastical, to wit, the
building of the Lords House, and the transporting thither the Consecrate
Vessels; and the Priests and Levites at his appointment went, and without that,
refused it. Ezra 1. I might produce many examples more to prove that the power
of spiritual things belongs to the King, as to govern and command the Priests.
But since the Papists differ among themselves and cannot agree how the power
over Kings should be in the Pope, whether directly or indirectly; others
affirming that he has it not at all as Pope, I will try whether he can claim
it as Prince.

Franciscus a Victoria, de potest. Eccl. relect. 1. sect. 6. says, that many
absurd things have been affirmed by the Popes Parasites, to please him:
Dederunt dominium papae cum ipsi essent pauperes; amongst which of his
flattered attributes, this is the chief, to depose Kings and translate
Kingdoms. I will now, for better satisfaction to the Reader that this is an
unjust practice, both in the Popes exercising the power, and in his Jesuits,
which bolster him up in so doing, describe their several risings and steps of
advancement toward that present Lordly state they now stand in; whereby it may
plainly appear, that as it is already made manifest, that by any divine rule he
cannot claim this privilege, no more may he by virtue of any civil title
arising either out of lawfulness of Custom or property by Donation. And being a
Spiritual man, it is improper in him to plead Usage, if at first not lawful, as
I have already said, in the fourth Chapter.

The first means which gave an advantage to the Popes to lay hold of any
Temporal dominion or rule, The History of the Pope.
was the removing of Constantine from Rome to Constantinople; which gave an
occasion to the Popes to lord it over the people of Rome in the absence of the
Emperor, for that then there was none appointed above them: and they, in the
absence of the Prince, drew the eyes of the people upon them; and that the
rather, because Constantine and his successors gave great respect and honor to
the Bishop of Rome, in honor to that City which formerly was the seat of the
Empire. And even as the Moon gives no shine as long as the Sun is visible in
the same Horizon; but he being removed thence she becomes a glorious Lamp, and
sovereign Lady over the lesser Stars: so the Popes borrowing their light from
the Emperor, were nothing illustrious before his face; but he having withdrawn
the rays of his presence from the Italian clime, the Pope became the only
admired Lord and Governor over the common people, during the residence of the
Emperors at Constantinople, and did still steal by degrees into an opinion of
greatness amongst the people of Rome. And although Theodosius, (anno 399.)
divided the Empire to his two sons, Arcadius and Honorius; yet the Western
Empire stood not long, but like a branch slipped off the main bulk, began
presently to wither, wanting that sap and nutriment it formerly received from
its old root, whilst it continued entire, and unseparate from the same; so that
in less then fourscore years, the Western Empire proved Occidental; and setting
in Augustulus for above three hundred years bade goodnight to the world.

This obscurity and privation of the luster of the Imperial Diadem, gave again
opportunity to the Bishops of Rome to grope about in the dark for Rome's
forsaken Sword and Scepter; and making strict and diligent search, at last they
found out some splinters of the late Emperors Staff of Majesty, which Staff
was shattered into many pieces; and having none to own it, they became a prey
to any that could lay hold first.

In this scattering of the Eagles Princely plumes, all people strove to gather
up those noble Ensigns, that they might be the honorable ornaments of their
own stock and families: And in this general striving to share those imperial
portions, it happened so, that the busy and stirring Visigoths laid hold of
part of the Empire in Spain, The Abtenes in Guien and Gascoigne, The French in
the rest (...) France. And in this general happacappa, the Vandals in Africa,
the Saxons in Britain, and the Herule^ in Italy, shared the rest amongst them.

A bundle of Arrows is not easily broken; but take one by one and any child
may snap it in pieces. Even so whilst the Empire stood united, the Pope was
afraid to attempt any thing against it; but now that such divisions were run
upon it, first making the Eagle (Monster-like) with two heads; after that, her
left side being plucked bare, whilst her left eye was shut and her feathers
scattered through all the Western parts; his Holiness in these divisions assumes
the confidence to claim a portion.

But the sweet thoughts of enjoying such a Princely dowry had no sooner kindled
in his ambitious heart, but behold, a storm arose in the North, which did not
only prevent his further acquisitions of those Imperial relics, but did
quite extinguish the sparks of those glowing embers, which he thought (if not
by force prevented) to have grown to such a flame, that they should have been
the light of the Western world.

The Heavens not smiling upon such lofty designs, (much unsuitable for one that
claims to be Peter's successor) permitted the Goths and Vandals to come down in
vengeance upon his proud head, and by their subduing sword, to teach him that
Maxim of Divinity which he perhaps had forgot, i. e. that Man purposes, but
God disposes. They let the proud Prelate see, that he that yesterday promised
an Empire to himself, to day can find no Sanctuary even in his holy Temples,
to be safe from the fury of a conquering enemy.

Totiles with his Armies, an. 536. forced Rome to become a prey to his
Soldiery; plundering her houses despoyling her Temples demolishing her Walls,
and prosternating her lofty Spires, the glorious ornaments of her towering head,
even to the ground. Which current of Heathenish Tyranny it pleased God, Ante,
chapter 5.
not long after, to divert by the means of Bellisares and Narses, two worthy
Captains sent thither by Justinian the Emperor: who did subdue the Goths and
Vandals, and restored Italy to its proper Master, the Emperor of
Constantinople.

And the Western flowers of the Empire being thus returned to grow and flourish
in their Royal bed of Majesty, the Bishops of Rome were thereby reduced to
their first principles, and thought themselves happy if they might enjoy the
Mitre. Their thoughts were no longer fixed upon a Crown: nay, the Bishop of
Rome was so far from bearding with Majesty, that he was content to be
subservient to the Governor of Rome appointed by the Exarch of Ravenna;
Justinian at that time setting a Goveruour over Italy, who kept his residence
at Ravenna, and appointed the subordinate Officers in the remoter parts of the
Italian territories.

Thus it continued but seventeen years: for Narses being upbraided by Sophia,
Justin's wife (whose noble spirit could not brook any affront, especially from
them from whom he had very well deserved) began to check the course of his
proceedings; and having driven out the Goths and Vandals, and having gained the
hearts of the people of the Country, he was as much through love, as by force
master thereof, and therefore thought he could prescribe nothing to the people
which they would deny. Whereupon, not fearing the displeasure of an ungrateful
Master, he lets him know, that as he had won Italy from the Emperors enemies,
he had equal power to dispose of it to a stranger, as to his Master. And being
enraged toward the Emperor for suffering his late affront put upon him,
(whereby he became accessory to the injury, for that in him only it lay to
redress the wrong) he sent for the Lombards, and made them, under their king
Alboinus, anno 568, master thereof.

The Lombards continued masters of Italy above two hundred years: Lombards
during which time, the Bishops of Rome being hopeless of any respects from
them, did withdraw all endeavors tending that way, and did wholly apply
themselves to the Emperors of Constantinople; and the succeeding Bishops (as
if the Chair were infectious, and made the owners ambitious, and seekers after
worldly honor and preferment, more then regardful for the souls of their Flock
over which they are made Overseers) did bend all their endeavors to please the
Emperor, that being gracious with him, they might (by his favor) lord it over
the rest of the Patriarchs.

And whereas formerly, Phocas, ante chapter 2.
by Decree of a General Council, they were made equal with Alexandria, they now
procured of Phocas, anno 607. to be made Universal Head of the Church: which
Boniface procured (as I have already showed in the second Chapter) for
favoring Phocas his murdering of Mauritius the Emperor. A good and godly
foundation for their Universality.

From this foundation of their Headship, they not long after raise another
superstructure, (which being a chip of that block, and having that example of
Phocas, the succeeding Pope thought the Emperor of Constantinople could not
blame it.) Pope Zachary being sent unto by Pepin of France, to know whether he
might depose his Master Childerick, the Pope (good man) never made scruple of
conscience at it: for he knew that Pepin was his good friend, and was an able
Statesman, and knew how to settle his affairs, both for his own security and
advantage, and so might be in a condition to do courtesies for the Pope; who,
upon consideration hereof, did assoil both him and the rest of the subjects of
France from their promised Allegiance to Childerick, and by that means was
Pepin settled in the Throne of France.

During these transactions and affairs in the West, the Empire in the East was
got into a declining condition; the Saracens encroaching upon them, and having
brought them to that strait, that Caliph Zulciman besieged Constantinople.

The crafty Popes seeing the glory of the Eastern, Empire to look pale and wan,
and perceiving that the Lombards began to gather more strength and heart by the
depressions of the Imperial power, thought it was in vain for them any longer
to flatter the Emperor of Constantinople, and that because if he was not able
to redress the injuries done unto him by the Saracens, much less to be
assistant to the Pope if he stood in need: wherefore they withdrew their
addresses of humility and respect from the Eastern to the Western clime; and
Italian-like, will not bestow a cake upon him, that has not one in the oven to
requite it. The Pope of Rome, upon these important considerations, quite leaves
off the Emperor of Constantinople, and insinuates altogether with the French
King, he being one that was endeared to the Sea of Rome for the late courtesy
done him; and withal being powerful, might stand by the Pope in his
necessities; which accordingly fell out. For it happened that the Lombards
seeing the declining of their great enemy the Emperor, they began to enlarge
their Dominions in Italy. They took Ravenna from the Empire, being the seat of
their Exarch, and besieged Rome: whereupon, Pope Stephen the second made suit
to Pepin King of France to march to their relief; who coming with a numerous
and powerful army against Astulphus King of the Lombards, besieged him in
Pavie, and constrained him to yield to his mercy; who, in this his strait and
necessity, yielded up the Exarchate of Ravenna and Peutopolis.

This being thus accomplished, Pepin made the Pope Governor of Italy.
Pepin gave up the Government of Italy into the Popes hands, as a requital of
Zachary's favor formerly showed to him; by whose favor only he was grown to
be so powerful: (for the people of France would never have obeyed him, had not
the holy Father of Rome persuaded them of the legality thereof.) So now Pepin
was mindful of this great courtesy, and makes good the Proverb, Manus manum
fricat.

These employments and great Authorities which the Pope had thus acquired
(though the only ship of this advancement was that unconscionable persuading
the people of France contrary to their Faith and Allegiance pledged, to depose
Childeric) made him proud, and puffed him up, so that he began to insult over
the people; who not liking of such tyrannous proceedings (especially from a
Ghostly father) and knowing that he was but a Deputy, and had not right
inherent in himself to govern and command them, did therefore expel Leo the
third from Rome: who appealing to his Patron Charles King of France, Charles
the Great made Patron by Adrian predecessor to Leo. Ante chapter 4.
wrought so much with that King, that he came to Rome, and appeased the matter
of difference and pacified the people and restored Leo: by which action, he did
not only please the people, but the Pope likewise. Wherefore the people having
a long time conspired to shake off their obedience to the Eastern Empire, and
now that opportunity was offered them, by reason that that Empire was much
decayed; and for that at that present there was but a woman to govern them (
Irene being the Empress) they did with one consent proclaim Charles Emperor of
Rome giving him the title of Caesar and Augustus: and he was crowned by Pope
Leo, anno 801.

Charles the Great, son of Pepin, being thus by the consent of the Romans
climbed up into the Imperial Chair began to reflect upon the justice and right
of his possession. Wherefore, as Blandus and Platina (two Popish Writers)
affirm, he fearing to have too many irons in the fire, and not altogether
relying upon the Peoples choice and consent to have him Emperor, for that it
might not be lawful for many of them so to do, in respect they stood already
bound by stipulation made with the Empress, not to cast off their Allegiance
from her (which Covenant could not lawfully be dissolved, without consent of
parties, or that Irene had forfeited her interest to their obedience) did
therefore make his peace with Irene the Empress, and Nicephorus her successor;
that by their consents and approbations he might rule in the western Empire:
which was by them confented unto. And thus it continued in the blood of
Charles, till the year 920. when Henricus Auceps was chosen Emperor by the
Saxons and Francones; Henricus Auceps.
which continued in his blood by way of succession, till the Empire was made
Elective: and Henricus Claudus, 1002. was by virtue thereof elected Emperor.

Now I submit to the Reader^ whether any thing from hence may be evinced to
prove any right in the Pope to dispose of the Empire. First it is evident, that
the Bishops of Rome were subject to the Emperors, and were but equal with them
of Alexandria. And though they were in aftertimes made Universal Head, yet
still they remained subject to the Emperor, having nothing to do with the
disposing thereof. And when Pepin was made King of France, it was not by the
donation of the Pope, but by the people of France; only the Pope declared his
opinion concerning the lawfulness of their casting off Childeric. And when the
Popes were by Pepin made Governors of Italy, it was but as substitutes to
Pepin, and not in their own right. And for Charles the Great being made
Emperor it was the People of Rome that did it: it may be that the Pope was
instrumental to persuade the people thereunto; but that which made him
Emperor, was the salutation of the People, Salve Caesar, etc. Besides Charles
the Great procured the consents of the Empress and her Successor, to confirm
him in his Regiment: which is a manifest proof that no right of donation was at
all in the Pope, as Sigebert and others testify concerning this very point,
That the Pope never took upon him an absolute right solely to dispose of the
Empire, but as instrumental to the People, to inaugurate and crown him, after
the People had consented to have him over them. Che crowning of the Emperors.
And the Popes crowning of the Emperors, does not prove any right at all in
him to be disposer of that Crown, any more then the Bishops of Canterbury their
inaugurating the Kings of England, does prove a right in them to dispose of
that Crown: for this was the Office of the Priests, as may appear by the
examples of Samuel, who anointed Saul; and Zadok, who anointed Solomon; and
Jehoiadah, who anointed and crowned Joash. Which act of theirs was done as they
were Priests, not as they had any Temporal right to dispose of those Kingships.

It Is true, Emperor elective.
that Gregory the fifth being near kinsman to Otho the third, did by his favor
and consent procure that the Empire should be Elective, the Emperors thereof
to be chosen by seven Electors; the Archbishops of Mentz, Triers, and Collen,
the King of Boheme, the Duke of Saxony, the Marquess of Brandenburg, and the
Count Palatine of Rhene. This Constitution was enacted, an^o 994. and was done
by the approbation of the Emperor; the Pope not so much as having any right at
all appointed to him to give a voice in the Election.

And I wonder how they can pretend any title to dispose thereof: for, by reason
of their spiritual Function they cannot; and by color of any Temporal right,
they may not. And although the Council of Laterane^ he^d under Innocent the
third, did declare them to be above Kings; yet the succeeding Popes did not
rely upon that Edict, as being too little to be given to their Pontifical Seat
in regard it was declared conditionally, i. e. in case any King became Ethnic;
and therefore Boniface the eighth did make a Law himself, more full, and of
ampler power: for, says Appendix Puldensis, Constitutionem fecerat, in qua se
dominum spiritualem and temporale^ in universo mundo asserebat. And if from
this Edict this Regal power must be ascribed to them, it is strange and
unreasonable.

Shall the Pope, by a Decree of his own making, rob others of their right? I am
sure there is no right in such a Constitution. To transfer a property in any
thing, requires the consent of the owners; otherwise it is Robbery, not a
lawful Contract. And yet because this is done by his Holiness, who cannot err
(as his flatterers tell him) it must be construed against all Principles and
Rules of Law and Nature, to be a lawful Constitution, and binding unto Kings.
Which if they be so tame, as to suffer themselves to be fettered with this
Paper-gin, when the heirs of their bodies may not succeed them, they will find
but few to pity them.

This is the Popes Royal Charter, by which he entitles himself to this
Celestial power: and this is the chief and principal Canon of the Popes Law.
This is that which every one must swear to maintain, before he be admitted into
the General Council; and whose blind obedience is to be pitied as much, as the
Popes presumptuous ruling by this counterfeit Record, is to be lamented. And I
much wonder the Christian Princes will suffer the Pope, upon such groundless
and unjust terms, to be Lord Paramount over them, whenas the warrant by which
he claims this power, is merely void in it self, for that it wants their
concurrence. Nor is it credited as authentic as many of the Roman Bishops and
Popes, practicing the contrary, have been honest witnesses.

Pliny says, It is the nobleness of the Eagle, to leave part of her prey for
other birds. Whence it is, that other birds of prey still follow after the
Eagle, to feed upon her scraps. But if the Crow presume to come too near the
Eagle, she lets her feel her talons; and, in stead of being fed, the Crow
becomes a prey her self. And will the Germane Eagle suffer himself to be
out-towred and cuffed with an Italian Rook? It argues a degenerating spirit
from the true Eagle, to suffer it; and gives occasion to the world to suspect,
that he is that bird the Eagle throws out of her nest, and not one of those
which the Eagle (ciscovering Majestic rays in their eyes) n^urishes up, and
carries on her wings, above the common region here below.

The ancient Bishops of Rome never tasted of this sour grape; and I wonder how
the later Popes came to set their teeth on edge. Resist not evil, was Christ's
precept, Matthew. 5.39. But the Pope is so far from this Rule, that he will not
do good to them that have been benefactors to him. Kings have been kind
nursing fathers to the Church of Rome; and will she be so unnatural, to cast
them off, now that by their indulgence she is grown to a riper state? Kings
granted he^ precedence above her sister-Churches, Kings have endowed her above
them and in necessity have relieved her Popes: and will the Pope now, lik^ the
Wolf in the Fable, devour the Crane that took the bone out of her throat? Will
the arrogant Hop, having overtopped the Pole by which it grew, think to bear up
its weak head above its first supporter? Sure these are practices which do
little become a Spiritual Father, an Universal Head of Christ's Church; who, by
how much his head is lifted on high, should be more given to good works, to
piety, to humility, to charity, and to patience; and that the rather, because
on such an one, in so eminent a place, all eyes are fixed, and should there
find examples of Godliness, which might be as a heavenly light to guide them
unto their Lord and Master Christ Jesus.

But I should wrong Romes Church, should I for some men's faults condemn all.
All are not Tares, that grow in that field. In these last days, Satan is more
busy to throw in his seed, because his time is short. But heretofore, she had
Bishops which never laid claim to these unjust demands. Wherefore that I may
make the present Pope ashamed of this his unjust claim, I will produce the
godly practices of his predecessors, to his own condemnation.

Notwithstanding all the shifts and tricks the Jesuits use, The ancient
Bishops of Rome, and modern Popes, have obeyed the Emperor. Ante chapter 10 and
cha. 4.
to maintain this strange power they ascribe unto his Holiness, they fall short
to give satisfaction to any reasonable man, that has not given himself up to a
stupid sense, to believe all they say be it right or wrong. And who please to
reflect upon the practices of former Ages, will find this to be a mere
Innovation and in^roachment upon the Temporal power.

Melciades, Bishop of Rome, acknowledged Constantine the Great to be Supreme,
even in things Spiritual. The same Constantine called a Council at Aralatensis,
excluding Melciades out of it. Where was then his Supremacy, either in
Spiritual or Temporal affairs? Did not Damasus, Siritius, and Anastasius,
acknowledge Theodosius the elder their Supreme Lord, and submitted unto him,
whenas Flavianus was accused before the Emperor for intruding into the Sea of
Antioch? who was by the Emperor freed against their wills, as Theodor
witnesses, Lib. 5. cap. 23.

Innocent the first obeyed Arcadius when he bid him call a Council for the
examination of Chrysostomes cause.

Gregory the Great being commanded to publish a Law made by Mauritius, desired
to be excused, and showed his reasons against it; but those not prevailing, he
submitted, and did publish the Law, as appears by his Epist. 61. lib. 2. cap.
100. S. Ambrose ante chapter 10


S. Ambrose being commanded by Valentinian to allot a Church in Millain for the
Arrians, his answer was, He would not willingly; but being compelled, he had
learned not to resist. And this is by some much pressed, How that he did
utterly withstand it, How that he did excommunicate Theodosius the elder, and
made him do Penance. For my part, I do not credit the story: for it is not
likely that there was any such ruffling betwixt them, whenas it appears by the
testimony of all Writers, that whenas Theodosius had freed the Empire from all
troubles, he retired himself to Mallain, where S. Ambrose was Bishop; and
leaving off the charge of the Empire to his two sons, Arcadius and Honorius, he
died in peace at Millain. And certainly if there had been any such clashing
betwixt them, he would have made choice of some other place for his retirement.
Besides it does not stand with S. Ambrose doctrine: for he affirms, Preces and
lachrymae sunt arma Ecclesiae. He never taught, that it was lawful to take
vengeance upon the Supreme Magistrate; as his Epist. contr. Auxentius does
witness. He freeth Kings from all Laws made by man, as appears in his book
Apolog. David. cap. 10. page 386. Rex nullis legibus tenetur humanis, homini
non peccavit David, cui non tenetur abnoxius. Now if he should inflict Penance
upon the Emperor, it was against this doctrine: and so the Papists wrong S.
Ambrose, in fathering a practice upon him which was contrary to his profession.
Wherefore I suspect this tradition of the Church of Rome in this point, that S.
Ambrose should make Theodosius the Emperor do penance. It may be he enjoined
Penance to Theodosius after he was become a private man, during his retirement
at Millain, and after he had left off the Regiment of the Empire to his sons:
but that is no warrant for the Pope to do the like to the Emperor or any other
King; for that if he did so, it was a punishment inflicted, not upon the
Emperor, but upon Theodosius, being a private man. And as this makes nothing
for the Pope in this particular point, so may he not arrogate this by reason of
his Universality granted by Phocas, for that his predecessors never claimed, or
was it allowed or intended by the Emperor, that he should have this power by
virtue thereof, as may be proved by these examples.

Pope Agatho, who when Constantine Pogonot the Emperor called a Council,
Consiant. Pogonot, ante.
writ that he had sent his fellow servants to his most excellent Lord,
according to the most holy Decree of his Princely Majesty, and the duty he
owed him. After that, Leo the fourth showed to the Emperor Ludovicus the
second, that if he had not dealt justly with them over whom he was placed,
whatsoever was amiss, he would amend, at the discretion of his Excellency. And
some other Presidents of this nature I have showed, in the fourth and tenth
Chapters.

Thus you see in all Ages, Ante chapter 10 and chapter 4.
the Popes acknowledged themselves obedient and subject to the Emperors, till
that firebrand of dissension, Haldebrand, ante.
Hildebrand, or Gregory the seventh, opposed Henry the fourth; which by the
Fathers of those days was called Novellum Schisma. Neither did it pass
unpunished, he being afterward thrust from the Popedom, and himself confessing
at his death the unjustness of his proceedings, as I have formerly touched in
the sixth Chapter. And as Hildebrand escaped not the divine hand of Vengeance,
so did none after him attempt the like, but it was punished either in
themselves, or their immediate successor.

Pope Innocent the third did excommunicate Frederic the second: but the Bishops
of Germany denied to obey the Bull; insomuch that one Eberhardus Archbishop of
Saltzburg did condemn that proceeding of Pope Innocent against Frederic, and
likewise disapproved of what his Predecessor Pope Celestine the fourth had done
to Henry the sixth, uncle to Frederic; basely and unworthily crowning him with
his foot: and what Pope Alexander the third most insolently and antichristianly
did to Frederic the first, treading upon his neck: and calls them worse then if
Luther or Calvin had been to have spoken their epithets in a full Council: all
agreed to withstand the Pope in those his unjust proceedings.

The French and Spaniards oppose the Pope.
Nor were the Germans sole opposers of his Holiness in this point, as may
appear by the practices both of the French and Spaniard.

The French, as I have formerly expressed in the eleventh Chapter. And anno
1600. the whole body of the Sorbonne, and the University of Paris, did condemn
this tenent as Schismatical and pernicious. And the Spaniards, his dearly
beloved Catholic darlings, did in a Council at Toledo oppose his Holiness in
this point, as may appear by the six Councels of Toledo, can. 18. Testamus
coram Deo and omni ordine angelorum, etc. We protest before God and his angels,
that no man ought to intend or enterprise the destruction of the King: they
having formerly by the fourth Council of Toledo and can. 75. established an
Oath of Allegiance indispensable; which was done, anno 633. and was revived by
the sixth Council, and since observed and kept even to this day; the Pope
having no right or usage to dispose of that Crown. England not under the Pope.


And as of right this is due to other Princes especially may England claim this
immunity, she having had Kings to govern her, before ever there were Bishops of
Rome. Nor can Rome lay any title to dispose of her Crown, she having still
continued a succession of Princes, without any appointment by the Pope, and
having an ancient Law to establish them in her Throne, without any appealing to
his Holiness. And should any, under pretense of Religion (as Allen did) go
about to betray the Magistracy of his native Country into the hands of a
foreign power, he becomes a sinner against the God of Nature, rebelling
against his own native Country, to which he stands inseparably engaged to
reverence, obey, and love: and such his Treason is not any jot extenuated, for
that it has the cloak of Religion; for no man must do evil that good may come
thereon, unless he think with the A theist, that in nomine Domini begins all
mischief. Wherefore, how Allen would answer his Treason before the court of
Heaven (he being naturally bound to his King and Country, and not, against that
tie, to confederate with strangers to make it a prey, as he confessed to
persons he did, Quod lib. S. Art. 7. page 247.) let God and his Truth witness.
Alas, it was not the Popes Bull could excuse that: the Pope cannot dispense
with inseparable duties, especially when the interest of Kings is concerned: he
has no Commission (but one of the Popes forging) to dethrone Kings, or to
disengage Subjects from their stipulation of obedience: Peter's authority.
He, as he pretends to be Peter's successor, is to use the Spiritual sword, the
Word: he is to make intercessions and prayers: he is not in that capacity to
use the material Sword. Peter had command to put up his sword; he might not use
it, though in defense of Christ his Master: his office was to persuade, not to
compel: his commission was to feed, not to kill; to obey, not to rule. Christ
commanded his Apostles to wash one another feet: Peter was not to tread upon
Kings necks, nor was any to kiss his toe. Peter would not suffer Cornelius to
fall down at his feet and worship him, but took him up, and said, Stand up, for
even I my self am a man. And now that the Pope should cause all these things to
be done, under pretense of power derived from him, seems to me a mere
Solcecism, and a knot so inexplicable, that let the whole tribe of Ignatius
Loyala study till their brains resolve to jelly, they shall never produce a
convincing reason for it. And it is an arrant shame for Princes, in the mean
time, thus to be trodden by Romes Crows; which, like Aesop's Chough, being made
fine with others feathers, moveat Cornicula risum. It is brave pastime for the
Grand Seignior, to see his Holiness with borrowed feathers mount above the
Eagle; whilst other Princes, like little birds, only stare with wonder to
behold such a monstrous Owl abroad at noonday, neither offering to beat her
back to her Ivie-bush, nor to take from her their own proper plumes: by which
means, they make the Pope an object of admiration and glory; themselves, of
scorn and misery. And whilst they suffer him to trample upon any one particular
Prince, they consent to their own ruins; whenas they ought to make it their
own case in general: and every one ought to consider it as a wound in his own
side in particular; which whilst it is suffered, and not remedied, it grows to
gangrene the very body of Kingship, and all Temporal Magistracy. Be wise
therefore, O ye kings; and learn ye that be judges of the earth.

CHAP. XV.
That Christ is spiritually eaten and drunken by the faithful and worthy
Receiver. That Christ's calling the bread and wine his flesh and blood, was a
figurative speech. That the outward elements are not changed: and That the
doctrine of Transubstantiation is utterly against the truth of the Catholic
faith.
THe Doctor in his One and twentieth Chapter, fol. 323. calls the Protestants
startling at the Romish doctrine concerning the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
a Prodigy of Opinions: And he musters up several Tenants concerning the same;
which being various in themselves, and contradictory each to other, I wonder he
should offer them against any particular Church, especially the Church of
England, (against whom I suppose his darts are by this intended, for that
elsewhere ( fol. 259.) he speaking of Protestants, offers grounds of converting
to them again: which must needs be intended to the Church of England, (from
whence he is gone) which he in this particular goes about to tax her of Error.
Wherefore I made bold to recapitulate these ensuing Truths professed by her,
and which she assumes to maintain against the Errors and Innovations of Rome,
touching this Sacrament: wherein my desire is, rather to clear her from all
malicious dirt by Satan's instruments thrown upon her, then that I should by
this means lay open the failings of the Doctor, or his ingratitude to his
Mother Church.

The Church of England does maintain, That Christ's body is given, received, and
eaten, after an heavenly and spiritual, not after a carnal and corporal manner;
and does utterly disallow of the new doctrine of Romes Transubstantiation: not
condemning it as new, in respect of the Word; but as it is a doctrine and
practice in it self varying from what Christ, his Apostles or the Primitive
Churches taught; and contrary to what the Church of Rome has formerly
maintained; for that it is a mere novelty, through the corruption of later
times; and by covetous and ambitious Popes, for self-interest, obtruded upon
the people; making them believe a real transubstantiated presence by the
Priests consecration, and by him offered up for the sins of the people: that so
the people giving money to the Clergy, they may buy Masses and Sacrifices for
their sins, and for the sins of others, as well quick as dead. Against which
impious practice, and vain assertions, I will, for the satisfying of some
doubting, and others deluded in opinion, offer these professions of the English
Church to their serious consideration.

The Church of England teaches, 1. Christ is spiritually eaten.
That Christ is not in the bread and wine, but only to such as worthily eat
and drink them: That as Christ is a spiritual meat, so he is spiritually eaten
and digested with the spiritual part of us, by faith. And for this her
doctrine, she has warrant from Christ himself, who speaking of the bread of
life which came down from heaven, and the bread which he would give them, which
was his flesh, Joh. 6.51. the Jews and many of his disciples were offended,
saying, How can he give us his flesh to eat, and his blood to drink? Christ
perceiving their murmuring, (that they should not remain in ignorance) explains
it to them, saying, What if you see the Son of man ascend up where he was
before? It is the Spirit that gives life, and flesh avails nothing. The
words which I speak unto you, are spirit and life. Which is a manifest clearing
how the flesh is to be eaten, and how the blood to be drunk; that is, after a
spiritual manner: and so Abraham, and many others, did eat him many years
before he was born of the Virgin, according as S. Paul witnesses, 1 Cor. 10.
They did eat the same spiritual meat, and drank the same spiritual drink, that
is to say, Christ.

For, to eat that meat, and drink that drink, is to have Christ dwelling in us,
The wicked do not eat the body.
and we in Christ: which must needs be understood of worthy receivers and not
of the ungodly, in whom Christ cannot be said to dwell: it must needs be
understood of one that truly believing, feeds upon Christ in his heart; and the
wicked unbelieving sinner, he receives only the bread and wine, not
discerning the Lords body. Saint Paul witnesses this truth, 1 Cor. 11. He that
eats of this bread, and drinks of this cup, unworthily, shall be guilty of
the body and blood of Christ. He says not, He that eats and drinks the
body and blood: for none but a worthy receiver does that.

Nor does this doctrine deny any to receive unworthily, as the Doctor ( fol.
328.) would persuade us; because (says he) such only receive bread and wine,
and not the Lords body. But it rather serves to condemn their errors, who
would persuade that the wicked receive very Christ; and so none should be
guilty, because whosoever verily eats his flesh, and drinks his blood, has
everlasting life. Therefore the Church of England is careful to avoid this
error, and maintains, according to Christ his explanation, that Christ is only
spiritually given, received, and eaten; and that those only that believe in
Christ, eat him, and live by him; and that every one eating that bread
according to Christ's institution and Ordinance, is assured, by Christ's own
promise and testament, that he is a member of his body, and receives the
benefit of his passion: and likewise be that drinks of that cup according to
Christ's institution, is certified that he is made partaker of Christ his
legacy, his blood, which was shed for remission of sins. Whereas the unworthy
receiver coming to this divine Ordinance without due reverence and a lively
faith, eats and drinks his own damnation; for that he receives that bread
and that wine unworthily, which ought with faith to have been received,
believing that as that bread and wine nourish the outward man, so Christ is
thereby conveyed, to the nourishment of the inner man; and so Christ is in him,
and he in Christ. And by thus receiving, is the saying of Christ (in Joh. 6. My
flesh is very meat, and my blood is very drink) to be understood: for none but
the faithful are partakers of this heavenly banquet. Christ is the bread of
life: he that eats that bread, shall live for ever; which must be by faith in
the Son of God. Gal. 2. It must needs be understood of a mystical, and not a
real eating; that even as the bread and wine which we receive, is turned into
our flesh and blood, and is so joined and mixed together with our flesh and
blood, that they be made one body together: so be all faithful Christians
spiritually turned into the body of Christ, and be so joined unto Christ, and
also together amongst themselves, that they do but make one mystical body of
Christ, as S. Paul, 1 Cor. 10. We be one bread and one body, as many as be
partakers of one bread and one cup. The wicked are not partakers of this
banquet, but only the members of Christ: therefore none verily eat the flesh
and drink the blood, but the believers. It is not like the eating of Manna:
both good and bad ate that; says our Savior, Your fathers did eat manna in
the wilderness, and are dead: but he that eats of this bread shall live for
ever; which must be by faith, and in heart believing unto this salvation. And
herewith agree the Fathers of the Primitive Churches.

Origin, who writ about two hundred years after Christ, upon the text of Matthew.
15. The Word was made flesh, and very meat, which whosoever eats, shall live for
ever; says, that no evil man can eat thereof: for it is only eaten by faith.
And herewith agrees S. Cyprian, in Sermon. de Coena Dominic. saying, Our eating
and drinking is a certain hunger and desire to dwell in him; and that none do
eat of this Lamb, but such as be true Israelites; which hunger is termed of the
soul, as David was an hungry, Psalm. 41. My soul has thirsted after God, which
is the well of life. For the soul feeling nothing but the horror of death, and
the terror of Gods justice, sin, by the Laws impeachment, having drawn that
direful sentence upon her; in her pensive meditations of her just demerits,
betakes her self to this spiritual refreshment of comfort and solace, being
hereunto invited with the sweet appellation of blessed, if she hunger and
thirst after righteousness; and a cheerful promise of comforts, that she shall
be satisfied, Matthew. 5.

Which spiritual hunger and thirst, as it is not perceived of a carnal man, but
only of such as inwardly desire this refreshment, and ease from the deep
throws of their sad condition: so is it not given to any, but such as
spiritually long and seek after it. God feeds the hungry; but the rich those
that stand upon their own integrity, he sends empty away. It is no carnal
banquet, that flesh and blood can thirst after: Have ye no houses to eat and
drink in? 1 Cor. 11. It is not eating an ordinary Supper, to satisfy the
greedy appetite of a natural man; but, as Christ said to his disciples, Joh.
4.32. I have other meat to eat, which ye know not. The disciples themselves, as
carnal men, knew not of this spiritual food; and therefore Christ minding to
draw them from their gross fleshly principles, and to convince them that there
is spiritual food, as well as that which the mouth and throat take and swallow,
plainly says unto them, Is any dry? let him come to me, Joh. 7. for he is meat,
he is drink, which whosoever by faith spiritually eat and drink, live for ever.

Athanasius, de peccat. in Spir. sanct says, Christ made mention of his
ascension, to pluck men from corporal fancy, and thereby to persuade them that
his flesh was spiritual food: the things which he spoke, were spirit and life.
It must needs therefore be understood of spiritual eating and spiritual
drinking his flesh and blood; which heretics and unbelievers could not do, as
S. Hierome upon Hos. 8. witnesses. And S. Ambrose, de benedict Patr. cap. 9.
says, Jesus is the bread which is the meat of the Saints; and he that takes
this bread, dies not a sinners death: for this bread is remission of sins. And
S. Austin, in his 26 Tract upon John; Bread and wine which nourishes the body,
a man may eat and drink, and nevertheless die; but the very body and blood no
man eats, but has everlasting life.

And in another place, in sententiis ex Prosp. decerpt. cap. 339. He that
agrees not with Christ, does neither eat his flesh, nor drink his blood,
although (to the condemnation of himself for his presumption) he every day
receive the Sacrament of so high a nature. Judas did eat the bread, says he,
in his 59 Tract, but not the bread that was the Lord. Christ is only
spiritually in the bread and wine, to such as by a lively faith receive him. As
for the wicked they receive but the mere bread and wine, abusing the Ordinance.

From these Authorities may clearly be evinced, that the Church of England does
maintain in this point as the ancient Fathers taught, concerning this
Sacrament. Nor can any otherwise understand of this holy mystery: for if Christ
be corporally in the bread and wine, then the wicked receiving him, receive his
body, and not his Spirit: for, Romans 8. as he that has not the Spirit of Christ
is none of his; so he that has Christ in him, believes, because he is
justified. And if his Spirit that raised Jesus from the dead, dwell in you; he
that raised Christ from death, shall give life to your mortal bodies, for his
Spirits sake that dwells in you. So that no wicked man has the Spirit of
Christ in him: and to maintain that he has him corporally, and not
spiritually, is to divide his Humanity from his Divinity; which blasphemy the
Catholic Church abhors.

Now the Church of England does not thus divide the Natures, but holds that
both his Body and Spirit is by faith received; but not that the body is
corporally in the bread; the bread and wine being but the elementary parts,
signifying the spiritual substance: and that God works this faith inwardly in
our hearts, 3. The bread and wine are but figures of the body and blood.
by his holy Spirit, and outwardly confirms the same to our ears, by the
Word; and to our senses, by the eating and drinking the Sacramental bread and
wine in his holy Supper: Which eating and drinking is a spiritual feeding,
requiring no real presence of Christ, but only in Spirit, grace, and effectual
operation. And that when Christ said, Hoc est corpus meum, it was but
figuratively spoken; it being bread which he brake and gave, as a type, for a
remembrance how his body was crucified for us. And let none wonder at this her
tenent, to say that Christ spoke in figures, when he did institute this
Sacrament: for it is the nature of a Sacrament to be figures and types,
signifying mystical grace thereby received. Hence it was that the Philistims,
when the Ark came into the army of the Israelites, said that God was come into
the army, 1 King. 4. And God himself at that time, by the mouth of his
Prophets, said, that from that time that he had brought the children of Israel
out of Egypt, he dwelled not in houses, but that he was carried about in tents
and tabernacles, 1 King. 7. which was a figurative speech, he speaking that
thing of himself, which was to be understood of the Ark. Which phrase of
speaking, Christ himself often used; as in Mat. 13.11, 17. The field is the
world, The enemy the devil, etc. Joh. 16. I am the vine, you are the branches.
Joh. 4. I have meat to eat, which you know not. And Joh. 10. I am the door,
Matthew. 12. He that does my Fathers will, is my brother and sister, etc. These,
and many more, Christ spoke in Parables, Tropes, and Figures; but chiefly, when
he said, Hoc est corpus a figurative speech.
This cup is the new Testament in my blood; the word my, taken for the thing in
the cup. Neither is the cup nor the wine Christ's Testament, but a sign and
figure of his Testament. And admit that by the word cup neither the cup nor
wine is meant but the blood; yet it is a figure of the Testament of Christ,
which was to be sealed with his blood. For his blood is not the Testament, but
the thing that confirms the new Testament. This is so evident a place to
disprove the tenants of Romes Church in this particular, that her champions are
forced to their last refuge of abusing Scripture; and therefore they render
that text thus: This blood is a new Testament in my blood: which translation I
submit to the judicious Reader, whether it be not more strange then any
figurative speech.

Christ says, we must be baptized with the holy Ghost: this is a figurative
speech. So likewise, Except a man be born again, etc. that was a figurative
speech, intending thereby spiritual regeneration. S. Paul says, that in
Baptism we cloathe us with Christ, and be buried with him Romans 6. which are
figurative speeches of our newness of life, and mortification of sin. The
Paschal Lamb without spot, signified Christ; the effusion of that blood,
signified Christ's passion; and the sprinkling of the posts with blood, whereby
the firstborn escaped death, is a type of those which at the last day shall be
saved, being sprinkled with the blood of Jesus. As in the Old Testament, Exodus
12. God said. This is the Lords passover; which was not the Lords Passover,
but a figure representing the Lords passing by: so Christ in the New Testament
says of the bread and wine, This is my body, This is my blood; which is not so
in substance, but in signification.

A figure has the name of a thing that is signified thereby; as we say a man's
image is called a man; the figure of a tree, a tree, or the like. So we say,
Let us go to S. Peter of Millain, to S. James in Compestella, etc. not meaning
thereby the things themselves, but understanding by the things representive,
the things represented. Even so the bread and wine, though Christ call them his
body and blood, yet they are not verily so, but the elementary parts and
outward signs of the invisible grace, his flesh and blood thereby signified.

Nor is this a strange interpretation, but according to Christ's own figurative
speech, saying, Luke 22. I have much desired to eat this passover with you.
Which words none can deny to be figurative. God himself used that figurative
speech; and Jesus, the only Son of that Father, to ssure us of his unity with
the Godhead breathes out the same Spirit to his Apostles; This is my passover,
This is my body, This is my blood As the shedding of that Lamb's blood was a
token of the shedding of Christ's blood then to come, and forasmuch as the
Sacraments of the Old Testament ceased and ended in Christ; lest we should,
through corrup^ion and depravity, forget the accomplishment of those Types, and
not take heed to print in our memories the benefits we receive by Christ:
Therefore Christ at his last Supper, when he took leave of his disciples, being
shortly to depart out of the world, according to the will of the Father, did
make a new Will. He did make a new Will and Testament, wherein he bequeathed
clear remission of sins; which he sealed next day with his blood; and
instituted this holy Sacrament in remembrance thereof; and ordained the same in
bread and wine, saying This is my body; This cup is my blood, which is shed for
remission of sins. Do this in remembrance of me. And Saint Paul says, 1 Cor.
11. As often as we eat this bread, and drink this cup, we show the Lords death
till he come. Therefore, when we come to be made partakers of this heavenly
food, we should seriously call to mind the wonderful sufferings, great
goodness, and marvelous kindness of Christ, he offering himself for our
redemption; and, by a lively faith apply the merits of his Passion to our
souls: and so we verily receive Christ, he to be in us, and we in him.

The Scriptures do sufficiently set forth this truth, That when Christ said,
Hoc est corpus, it was a figurative speech: and the Church of England holds
forth this truth, against all adversaries and opposers thereof. And that in
this she may not seem arrogant, to assume a self-interpretation of the
Scriptures, to maintain this her assertion, I will bring in some ancient
Fathers to bear witness for her.

Saint Augustine, How to interpret Scrip ure.
de doctrina Christiana, lib. 3. advising us how to interpret Scripture, bids
us beware how we take literally any thing that is spoken figuratively, and
figuratively any thing that is spoken literally. And he therefore gives this
Rule in way of caution: If the thing (says he) that is spoken, be to the
furtherance of Charity, then it is a proper speech, and no figure; as when it
commands any good, or forbids any evil act, then it is no figure: but if it
command any evil thing, or forbid that that is good, then it is a figurative
speech. Now this saying of Christ, Except ye eat my flesh, and drink my blood,
ye have no life in you, seems to enjoin a heinous and vicked thing; and
therefore, upon S. Austin's rule, it is a figurative speech. But I will not
only conclude it upon that general rule to be so; But I will likewise, for
better clearing this truth, ^t down the express opinions of the Fathers in this
point. The ancient Fathers agree that it was a figurative speech.


Irenaeus contr. Valent. lib. 4. c. 32. ^aith, Christ confessed bread, which is
creature to be his body, and the cup to be his blood. And in cap. 57. he ^^ith,
that Christ taking bread of the ^ame sort that ours is of confessed that ^t was
his body. It was (says he) ma^erial bread, and therefore a figurative ^peech.

Cyprian ad Magn. lib. 1. Epist. 6. Christ called bread made of many corns, and
wine pressed out of many grapes, his body and blood.

Cyril in Johan. lib. 4. cap. 14. Christ gave to his disciples pieces of bread,
saying, Take, eat; this is my body.

And herewith agree Austin de Trinit. lib. 3. cap. 4. Theodoret. dialog. 1. all
concurring, that when Christ took bread and wine, and spoke these words, This
is my body. This is my blood, that it was bread and wine which he gave, and not
any other substance.

And Origin in Levit. Hom. 7. declares the eating and drinking of Christ's
flesh and blood to be figurative: therefore, says he, understand them as
spiritual, not as carnal men.

Tertul. contra Marcion, lib. 1. calls bread broken by Christ, a figure of his
body, and wine his blood; because, says he, in the Old Testament bread and
wine were figures of his body and blood.

And Chrysostom upon Psalm. 22. says, that Christ ordained the Table of his
holy Supper for this purpose, that in that Sacrament he should show unto us
bread and wine for a similitude of his body and blood. So that all agree, it is
a figurative speech.

S. Ambrose, upon 1 Cor. 11. says, that in eating and drinking the bread and
wine, we do signify the flesh and blood which he offered for us. And the Old
Testament (says he) was instituted in blood, because that blood was a witness
of Gods benefits; in signification and figure whereof, we take the mystical cup
of his blood, for the tuition of our body and soul: he and many more concurring
in judgment in this point, that the Sacramental bread and wine are not
corporally and really the natural substance of the flesh and blood of Christ,
but that they are similitudes significations, figures and s^gnes of his body
and blood and therefore be called and have the name of his flesh and blood, and
were but indeed tokens thereof, and meant of a spiritual grace; as Christ
witnesses, The words which he spoke were spirit and life, Joh. 6. It was bread
which he took; it was wine which he gave, saying, I will drink no more of the
fruit of the vine, till I drink it with you in my Fathers kingdom. They were
the elementary parts of the Sacrament, signifying the spiritual substance of
his body and blood. And when he took the bread, and the cup, and said, This is
my body, this is my blood; it is manifest, by what I have already spoken, that
that saying was a figurative speech.

To maintain that it was very flesh and very blood Christ gave to his
disciples, Bread and wide are the outward elements of the invisible grace.
does utterly destroy the nature of a Sacrament, both according to the Tenants
of the Church of Rome, and all other Churches, concerning the nature of a
Sacrament.

The Church of England holds, that the bread and wine are but the outward
visible signs of the inward spiritual grace.

And herewith agrees S. Austin, in his definition of a Sacrament, lib. 2. de
doctr. Christian. Sacramentum est sacrae rei signum sensibile, sanctificans nos.

S. Tho. part. 3. quaest. 60. art. 3. says, Tria significantur: primu^, causa
effectiva nostrae sanctificationis, scilicet, Passionem Christi: Hoc facite in
mei commemorationem, 1 Cor. 11. secundum, causam formalem, nostrae
sanctificationis; scil. gratiam: tertium, cansam finalem, quae est gloria.
Whereupon, the Church has this heavenly Song: Oh sacred banquet, in which
Christ is received, and the memory of his Passion recollected; by which our
minds are filled with grace, receiving a blessed pledge of future glory!

Hugo de Sancta Victoria part. 1. cap. 1. Sacramentum e materiale elementum
foris sensibus praepositum, ex similitudine representans, ex institutione
significans, ex sanctificatione continens, aliquam invisibilem and spiritualem
gratiam.

And herewith agrees S. Austin, saying, Sacramentum signum est, quod praeter
speciem quam ingerit sensibus facit quicquid in cognitionem venire.

The Council of Florens treating upon the Sacrament of Confirmation, have
resolved that all Sacraments must consist of matter and form: there must be an
outward sign, to signify the inward grace. Wherefore I wonder that the
Papists can for shame deny that the matter of bread and wine should remain in
the Eucharist: for, by this means they deny it to be a Sacrament, destroying
the end of Christ's holy institution; which was, That it should be had in
remembrance of him. And they generally gainsay the public profession of their
Church, by the contradictory practices in private and particular Masses and
Altar-Sacrifices. And they likewise go against Christ, who says, This bread is
my body: He did not say. This is no bread, but my body. And certainly, if
Christ would have had us to think the substance of the elements were changed,
he would not have called them bread, and the fruit of the vine. Nay, he would
not, when he explained the words of giving his flesh to eat, and his blood to
drink, have said, his words were spirit and life. And S. Paul therefore to
witness this truth with the Church of England, says, The bread which we break,
is it not the communion of the body of Christ? He thereby explaining Christ's
saying, Hoc est corpus meum, to be meant of a spiritual eating, and of a
communion of his body we being hereby made one with Christ; he dwelling in us,
and we in him.

Besides, when Christ bade them drink all of the Cup, it was wine he bade them
drink: for the words of consecration follow. And therefore, if the Apostles
drank any thing else, they did not fulfill the precept; or else Christ commanded
them to drink that that was not there; which were impious to imagine. And as
for the bread, it is called bread after consecration: for S. Paul calls bread
the communion of Christ's body; which must needs be understood of bread
consecrate, otherwise it is not the communion of his body. So that it is
evident, that the elements of bread and wine remain in the Sacrament, and are
not materially changed. And this the Monks which administered to King John of
England, and to Henry the seventh the Emperor, knew well enough: which
Princes, the better to further the holy designs of the Pope, were dispatched
hence out of this world by the poisoned elements of the Eucharist; which
elements Christ ordained Sacramentally to be received, for our nourishment;
thereby signifying our communion with Christ, by the bread and wine, made of
many ears and many grapes; and our growing up by faith in Jesus: even as those
elements turn into our flesh and blood by natural digestion, so Christ is
spiritually conveyed unto our souls, which are fed by his flesh and blood,
which every faithful and worthy receiver is, by the receiving of this
Sacrament, made partaker of.

The Doctor would persuade us, fol. 327. that if, by denying the bodily
presence, we mean only not with accidents of his body, as quantity, figure,
and the like; and that Christ is ^ot so bodily in the Sacrament, but
spiritually; Then we agree with the Catholics. But then in the same leaf ^e
would again persuade us that Christ cannot be really there unless his body be
there; and that it must be as well corporally as spiritually there, or else we
deny Christ's being there.

To which I answer, The error of Transubstantiation.
We by maintaining a spiritual eating and drinking of the body and blood, do
not divide the spirit from the body, as the Church of Rome does, by maintaining
a bodily presence; because, according to their doctrine, the wicked receive the
body, and not the Spirit, as I have already proved: we by taking the bread and
wine, which tend to the nourishment of our outward bodies, the thing signified
by them, to wit, Christ Jesus, is hereby conveyed unto us, to be the food of
our souls, and becomes spirit and life to us; he living in us, and we in him:
and this is only to the worthy receiver, who by faith feeds upon him, and lays
hold of the benefits of his Passion: The ungodly, they only receive the bread
and wine, not discerning the Lords body. And if the Church of Rome mean that
his body is significantly there present, then they agree with us: but if really
in the bread, then we do not concur in opinion with them, for the reasons before
in pare rehearsed, and for other reasons hereafter following.

I might instance many particular reasons against this Romish error of
Transubstantiation; as that,

1. Nothing was broken, eaten, drunken, and chawed, but the accidents of the
body, (because they deny the bread and wine to be the visible elements) which
is against Reason, and all authority: or else if they will have a body there,
That it is without accidents; and so they must either make accidents without
substances, or substances without accidents.

2. When the bread mouldeth, and turns into worms; or the wine sowreth, or
turns into vinegar; it is the bread mouldeth, and the wine that sowreth:
Christ is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever: Therefore are the bread and
wine substantially there: and if they were but accidents, then no body could be
made thereof, as worms, or material vinegar.

3. Let a dog, or cat, etc. eat of that bread, and he is nourished thereby:
which could not be, if the substance remained not.

4. The Scripture calls them bread and wine, after consecration; which are
names of substance, not of accidents; which if substance remained not, it were
a mere illusion of our senses; and so we with the Jews make Christ a Jugler,
making things appear to our outward senses, which are not.

5. The Sacrament had a beginning, and has an end put to it: it is to be
received in remembrance of Christ's death, till he come, and then to cease.
Wherefore there can be no real transubstantiated presence of Christ: for he is
from eternity to eternity.

6. If there be a transubstantiated body of Christ, then is Christ every day
new made; and as many Wafers, as many Christ's: which is impossible for his
substantial body to be in several places either in the several Wafers or the
several places of consecration at one and the same instant of time.

7. This doctrine does impugn the consent of the ancient Catholic Church,
which de fide professes and believes Christ to be made of the nature and
substance of his blessed mother, and therefore not every day to be made anew of
the substance of bread and wine: for if it were so, then the same body that was
crucified, is not eaten; or else, that body which was crucified, was made of
bread and wine: which is flat blasphemy against the holy Ghost, by whose
operation Christ was made and born of the flesh of his mother, and suffered
upon the Cross for the salvation of all believers. Which Christ is no otherwise
joined to the elements in this Sacrament, but Sacramentally, as the holy Ghost
in Baptism is joined to the water; not that the holy Spirit is made of the
substance of the water, or the water turned into the holy Ghost.

8. It is against the express Scripture, and Symbol of Faith grounded upon
that Scripture; which teaches that Christ, concerning his body and humane
nature, is in heaven. We believe that he was conceived of the holy Ghost, born
of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and
buried; that he descended into hell; the third day he rose again from the dead,
and ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the Father; from
whence he shall come to judge both quick and dead. Christ said to his
disciples, I leave the world, Joh. 16. and Mat. 26. Ye shall ever have poor
folks with you, but me ye shall not have always. Mark 16. He was taken up into
heaven, and sits at the right hand of his Father, Col. 1.3. Heb. 8. and Heb.
10. He sits continually at the right hand of God. And Saint Peter, Act. 3.
faith, that the heavens shall contain him until the time that all things shall
be restored. And Christ himself gave warning of this error aforehand, in
Matthew. 24. saying, The time will come, when there shall be many deceivers in
the world, which shall say, Here is Christ, and there is Christ, but believe
them not.

Thus the whole current of the Scripture makes against this Romish error of
Transubstantiation.

And because the Papists may not object against us, that it is a novel
interpretation, or our misunderstanding of Scripture in this point; I will
make it manifest, that the Primitive Church never taught this doctrine of
Transubstantiation, but were utterly against it, as may appear by the testimony
of these ancient Fathers.

Origin upon Matthew, Tract. 33. The Fathers against Transubstantiation.
says, Christ has two natures, God and Man: as God, he is with us always,
unto the end of the world; as man, he is not: He is gone hence and absent in
his Humanity, but is always present in his Divinity.

S. Austin, in his Epist. 55. ad Dardanium: Christ, as concerning his Manhood,
is now there, from whence he shall come to judge both quick and dead: and as he
ascended, so shall he come, in the self-same form and substance to the which he
gave immortality, but thereby did not change the nature. Now, says he, after
this form, we must not say that he is everywhere: for we must take heed, says
he, that we do not so stablish his Divinity, that we take away the verity of
his body.

Cyril upon S. John, lib. 6. cap. 14. Christ took away from hence the presence
of his body; but, in the majesty of his Godhead, he is everywhere: he,
according to his promise, is with his disciples, even unto the end of the world.

S. Ambrose upon Luke, lib. 10. cap. 24. We must not seek Christ upon earth,
but in heaven, where he sits at the right hand of God.

And S. Gregory in Hom. Pasch. says, Christ is not here in the presence of his
flesh; and yet, as he is God, he is absent nowhere by the presence of his
majesty; all unanimously and Apostolic being of one consent in this, that
Christ, as touching his humanity, is only in heaven, at the right hand of God.
And particularly, these Fathers following are absolutely against this very
point of Transubstantiation.

Justinus, The Fathers against Transubstantiation.
an ancient Writer, and holy Martyr, who wrote about an hundred years after
Christ, in his second Apology, says, that the bread and wine in the Sacrament
are not to be taken as other meats and drinks be; they being purposely ordained
to give thanks to God in, and therefore be called Eucharistia, and be called
the body and blood of Christ; and yet the same meat and drink be changed into
our flesh and blood, and nourish our bodies. By which it is plain, that the
substance of the elements remain, because, says he, they are changed into
flesh and blood, and nourish our bodies.

Irenaeus contr. Valent. lib. 1. c. 4. who wrote about 150 years after Christ,
and was a disciple of Polycarpus, who was a disciple of John the Evangelist,
says, The bread wherein we give thanks to God, has two things in it; one
earthly, another heavenly: by the heavenly, understanding the sanctification
which comes by the invocation of the name of God; and by the earthly, the
substance of bread which does nourish our bodies.

Shortly after Irenaeus, was Origin, about 200 years after Christ, who affirms,
in Matthew. cap. 15. that the material bread remains, whose matter avails
nothing but goes down into the belly, and is voided downward: but the Word
spoke upon the bread, is it that avails.

Eusebius Emissaenus, who wrote about 300 years after Christ, de consecrat.
did. 2. says, that outwardly was nothing changed; all the change was inwardly.
As man made new in Baptism, does visibly remain in the same measure receiving a
new inward, without making any change in the outward man, not seen, not felt,
but believed: so likewise, when thou do go up to the altar, to receive the
spiritual meat in thy faith, look upon the body and blood of Christ, and feed
upon him with thy inward man. By which it is plain, that it is only a
spiritual change by faith, not an outward and corporal change.

Epiphanius contra Haereses, lib. 3. tom. 2. The bread, says he, is meat; but
the virtue that is in it, gives life.

Chrysostom, who wrote about 420 years after Christ, ad Caesarium Monachum:
The bread, says he, before it is consecrate, is called bread; but after it is
consecrate, it is delivered from the name of bread, and exalted to the name of
the Lords body, although the nature of the bread does still remain.

S. Austin, who lived about the same time, in Sermon ad Infantes: That which
you see on the Altar, is the bread; and the cup which your eyes show you, is
the wine: but faith shows you that that bread is the body, and that cup the
blood of Christ.

Gelasius Bishop of Rome, contra Eutichem and Nestorium, proving the Godhead
and Humanity of Christ, he enforces it with two reasons; the one drawn from
the example of Man, who, being but one, is made of two parts, and has two
natures, the Body, and the Soul: the other drawn from the Sacrament of the body
and blood of Christ; which, says he, is a godly thing, and yet the nature of
the bread and wine do not cease to be there still.

This was the opinion of the Fathers of those days; and thus,
Transubstantiation is a new doctrine.
and no otherwise, held the Church of Rome, for a thousand years after Christ;
there being never so much as question made about this point, for a thousand
years complete; (the time of Satan's being let at large, Apoc. 20.) at which
time, by reason of some pretended miracles, this doctrine was by the private
opinion of some men set abroach: which being once published, (it being the
nature of evil weeds to spread and grow fast, if once they get rooting in any
garden) it presently got abettors and champions to justify it against all
opposers; some out of curiosity of Wit striving to blind Truth with subtle
reasons; others, out of dullness of apprehension, (God having withdrawn his
Spirit from them) were given up to this delusion: so that in 60 years, this new
bantling wanted not foster-fathers to nourish it up to a greater and fuller
growth.

A among the rest, one Paschasius was one that first publicly maintained it;
and after him, the Popes inclined to this opinion; insomuch that Berengarius a
Frenchman, and Archdeacon of Anjou, opposing this Heresy, was himself
censured of, that he urged against the then Pope of Rome; and was the first
that ever was questioned for maintaining against this doctrine of
Transubstantiation: and the Pope adhering to the adverse party, which was for
Transubstantiation, Berengarius was forced to recant, the Council of
Vorcellense, held 1051. swaying against him: which opinion of his he again
resumed, and did recognize the Truth again, after that the then-Pope was dead;
which when Pope Nicolas 2. heard of, he sent his busy agent, and
Cardinal-Chaplain, Hildebrand, into France, to bring Berengerius under coram
nobis: who being sore troubled and molested, and seeing by the faction of the
Pope and Hildebrand, that the current was against him, through the treachery of
a base timorous nature, he suffered his noble parts, his intellects, to be
clouded with the mists of the times error, and tamely did recant his former
tenants, and did therefore take an Oath never to oppose that doctrine of his
Holiliness in this point of Transubstantiation. And thus this doctrine began.
And although Pope Nicolas did avouch this doctrine in a Council at Laterane,
held anno 1059. Ante, chap. 14.
and there framed the term of Transubstantiation; yet, notwithstanding this
pretty Papal babe of Heresy was Christened and put forth to nurse, yet
nevertheless it grew not to be free, and to bear rule, till 1215. when Pope
Innocent the third manumitted the stripling, and, by another Lateran-Councel,
did decree this doctrine as a point of Catholic Faith, enjoining all to the
obedience thereof upon pain of Hetesie.

Johannes Scotus, who was called Duns, lib. 4. writing of this matter, says,
that the words of the Scripture might be expounded more easily and plainly,
without Transubstantiation: but it pleased the Church to choose this sense which
is more hard, being moved thereunto, most chiefly, because that of the
Sacraments men ought to hold as the holy Church of Rome does hold.

Which kind of blind obedience, Blind obedience.
makes the Popish Religion in no better condition then the State of Athens was
whilst it was governed by the arbitrary power of a standing Legislative
Council, which daily gave new Laws unto the people; so that the people could
not, by any known Rule, say their clothes were their own; all the Law by which
they derived any property being under an arbitrary power; insomuch that as they
were not secure by walking after any known Law, so neither was it safe for them
to rely upon such new Laws as the Council it self proposed; the Council
altering every day her own Laws, as time administered occasion for
self-advantage: so that Athens was in a miserable condition, during this
slavery of her Legislative power, not dissolvable by any Authority; the people
not having liberty to dissolve it, and to call, as occasion shall require, a
Council to redress grievances, and not otherwise to continue, but to be
dissolved, that so in the intervals they might know what Law stood good and
unalterable amongst them.

Even so stands the Religion of the Papists: Now that the Pope is declared
above Councels, and that he may continually prescribe Rules of Faith, by virtue
thereof, their Religion is a mere nose of wax, alterable at his will and
pleasure; who has a faithful tribe of Ignations, which will blandish his new
doctrines, and make the people believe they are but growings in faith, whenas
they are diametrically opposite to the Catholic Faith of the Primitive Church:
but if it stand for convenience or advantage to the Pope and his creatures, it
must be believed as a matter of faith, and that upon pain of damnation; as
witness this novel point, and some others which are of later times crept into
that Church.

And when any thing of Papal will and interest must be held forth to the other
Churches, then is the Lateran at Rome pitched upon, Ante, chap. 14.
as I have formerly said, as the only convenient place to have the matter
debated, it being there likely to receive the least opposition, by reason his
Holiness is at hand, to take notice of his enemies, and to punish them; and to
flatter and promote such as stand for his Papal pleasure.

In this Council of Laterane, The Council of Laterane, chap. 17.
likewise, was hatched that other Cockatrice, that strange brazen-faced and
staring opinion of deposing Kings; from which root of bitterness springs many
tart branches of dangerous and poysonful Errors; the nauseating juice of whose
sour grapes being given to some other Churches to drink, it has intoxicated
them, making their Vertigious heads turn after the Laterane Weathercock, and,
in their brainsick fit, conceit that her high-reared Spire is the only
supporter of the heavenly Pole: whilst the sober and discreet Christian knows,
that her proud top being exalted to that height, is but so much the neere^ the
pattern of Babels Tower.

And whilst they think she is dignified before others, her head being lifted
above them; others know she has not whereof to boast, unless in this, That
she has the upper room in Satan 's airy principality; which how much the
higher she is lifted, she is but thereby rendered more subject to be muffled
with the black contractions of the Devil's Cimerian clouds of Errors. And
though the top thereof be forged out of that material Sword (as is by the
Romish Legends maintained) which cut off Saint John Baptist's head, it should
not therefore arrogate to be the only decolling instrument of Principality and
Temporal power. But I return to the subject matter of this Chapter.

That I may the further lay open the errors of the Church of Rome in this
particular, Miracles the cause of Transubstantiation.
and that the Papists shall not have whereof to boast, in that I said they were
induced by Miracles to maintain this doctrine, should I pass those Miracles by
in silence; I will let the Reader know what they were.

It is reported that a Bishop of Canterbury, about the time of this change, did
show unto some, for their conversion, the Host turned into flesh, and blood in
outward appearance dropping into the Chalice; and that thereupon they believed
Transubstantiation.

Another is reported by Paschasius of one Plegildus a Priest of Almain, who did
see and handle visibly the shape of a child upon the Altar; and after it
turned into bread, and he was to receive it.

Another is reported of a Jew-boy, who coming into the Church with another boy
which was a Christian, he saw upon the Altar a little child torn in pieces,
and afterward by portions distributed: which he reporting was condemned to be
burned; but was after rescued from the flame by the Christians.

These Miracles were the only arguments used against Berengarius, and the
convincing persuasions of the facile consciences of those days: which how it
stands with the doctrine of Christ. Joh. 6.63. the practice of the Apostles,
the profession of the Primitive times, and the faith and doctrine of the
ancient Fathers, let any judge. S. Paul says, 1 Cor. 11. That which he had
received of the Lord Jesus, that he delivered; That as often as they did eat
the bread, and drink the cup, they showed the Lords death till he came. Saint
Paul calls it bread, and the Evangelist wine, and that after consecration: and
the Fathers of the Church taught that doctrine with them: and Christ himself
calls them bread, and fruit of the vine; and S. Paul, The communion of the
body. And this being the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, though an Angel
from heaven should come and teach any other doctrine, let him be accursed, Gal.
1.

Wherefore, these miraculous apparitions were no ground for Rome to change her
faith in this point. If these stories be true, they ought to be considered as
extraordinary apparitions, like the light from heaven which shone about S.
Paul. These external miraculous apparitions, were but to persuade the
consciences of Infidels and Heathens to turn to the faith of Christ, and to be
persuaded of the truth of that Sacrament; and not to make the true and
already-grounded Christians to change the nature of their faith, which is the
ground of things hoped for, and the evidence of things which are not seen, Heb.
11.1. This was to persuade the mis-believing Jew of Christ, and of the truth of
this blessed Sacrament, whereby he was to be made partaker of the benefits of
his precious death and passion; not to teach the Christian any new doctrine
concerning the same. These miracles should rather confirm him in his faith
received, that it was a spiritual banquet; in respect that after the apparition
(as the story runs) at the receiving, that which was received was become bread
again; and not to ensnare him into this novel error which was contrary to
Christ's doctrine, the Apostles preaching, and the practice of the Primitive
Church.

But I will no longer insist upon this point. I submit to any good Christian,
whether it be safer to follow Christ's explanation of this mystery to be
spiritual, (with which S. Paul and the ancient Fathers do concur) then to
humor the times, and to be observant to the late Popes; which, about the time
of this change, were grown great, and since have, by cunning practices,
enlarged that power; insomuch that now they are declared above Councels; and
whatsoever they propound, must de fide be received, upon the score of their
infallibility, be it never so contrary to the truth of Gods Word. And they by
this doctrine receiving advantage by their Altar-Sacrifices, will not easily be
induced to renounce the error thereof: and though never so palpably against
the Truth of God, yet the Jesuits will maintain it for their Masters
advantage; this doctrine tending more to his avail, then any good to the souls
of his flock. Wherefore, the Church of England having a right to reform errors
in her own Province, has chosen to cast off this blind tenent of the Pope and
his Parasites: and she having the warrant of Christ, the rules of the Apostles,
the practice of the Primitive Church, and the consent of the ancient Fathers,
for her doctrine in this point, has therefore made choice with them, in unity
of Spirit, firmly to hold and maintain that Christ in his humanity is not
really and corporally in the Sacrament, but figuratively in the outward
elements being thereby signified; and is spiritually eaten and drunken of the
worthy receiver.

CHAP. XVI. Against Communion in one kind.
That the Church of Rome's withholding the Cup from the Layty is a novelty,
against Christ's precept, and the ancient practice of the Church. That the
Sacrifice upon the Altar is superstitious: and, The authority of the Church no
excuse to change the administration of the Lords Supper into one kind.
THe Church of Rome having thus gained a general consent (though at first
forced upon many, by the power and domineering of the Popes) to her doctrine of
Transubstantiation; she stuck not long in this station, but, partly to make
good what she had introduced into the Church, and partly to show to the world
the divine Legislative power of her Head, she soared a pitch higher: and
whereas before this she but maintained an opinion (which but to some weak
capacities did convince, all not being satisfied with the sincerity of her
doctrine) concerning the nature and quality of this Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, which Christ himself instituted, and by his last Will and Testament
left it as a Legacy to his faithful servants; her Popes now take upon them
(after their former opinion was confirmed by Council, and generally received
and believed as an Article of Faith) to dispense with that Sacrament of Christ
Jesus, and have in stead thereof instituted one of their own making;
administering in one kind, and denying the Cup to the Lay People: which is a
novel trick of Papal invention, and never practiced in the Churches upon earth,
till they forced it upon some over which the Popes did without control rule at
will and pleasure.

Christ Jesus did institute this Sacrament in both kinds. Paul enjoins both;
the whole Church did administer in both; and the Fathers teach, that as well
the wine, as the bread, is to be received; and did think wine so necessary,
that it could not be administered in water, much less in the cake alone, in
which there is no liquid element to represent the shedding of Christ's blood;
for which end it was ordained.

Cyprian, who wrote 260 years after Christ, in his 3 Epist. ad Cecilium, lib.
2. Forasmuch (says he) as Christ said, I am the true vine, and the Cup is his
blood; it cannot be thought that his blood is in the cup, if wine be not in the
cup, whereby the blood is signified unto us.

Chrysostom. in Matthew. cap. 26. Hom. 83. Christ used wine as well before his
Resurrection, as after.

S. Hierome in Sophon. cap. 3. does witness that in his time the Priest did
administer the Eucharist, and divide the blood unto the people.

In the Canon of Pope Gelasius, and in the Popes Decrees de Consecrat* a strict
Injunction is laid, that all receive in both kinds, for that the dividing of
that Sacrament is sacrilege.

I need not instance in this any more particulars, in respect that none can
deny but that anciently it was in both kinds administered. I will therefore
examine the reasons the Church of Rome gives for her alteration from this
ancient way, and for administering in one kind; and in so doing, I shall plainly
lay open her errors in this point.

The Council of Constance held 1414. Council of Constance.
Ses. 13. decreed Quod nullus Presbyter, sub condition excommunicationis,
communicet populo sub utroque specie Panis and Vini. Which notwithstanding, the
Council of Basil did after restore to the people again, Anno 1431. So that in
this new doctrine of hers, Rome has met with much controversy even in her
self. Gelasius the Pope decreeing it to be sacrilegious to omit either kind; by
which it is evident, that the Church of Rome has erred de fide: For Gelasius
taught that judicially as Pope, and the Council of Constance was approved by
Pope John 23. and this Council of Basil by Eugenius the 4. Which proceedings
wound the infallibility of the Church of Rome, and spoils her unity; one Pope
being against another, and one Council against another: To decide which
strivings, the late Prerogative Royal of the Popes being above Councels was
therefore decreed; which notwithstanding by that means the Church of Rome is
made infallible, yet it spoils her of her marks of antiquity and constant
visibility, and therefore absolutely spoils her for being taken to be the
only Catholic Church; for if so, then the Catholic Church was once utterly
extinguished from off the earth; which is against Gods promise, and impious to
imagine.

The Pope being thus grown above Councels, he now (as he pleases) declares this
Council void, the other to be of force; and by virtue of this his Prerogative,
he has approved the Council of Constance, and yet but in part, for he only
takes as much out of that Council as makes for his turn; he only confirms
their Decree prohibiting the Cup to the Laity; but their other Decree of the
power of Councels to be above the Pope, that is abominable; and his Holiness
commands that Decree to, be believed to be Heretical. By this is to be noted,
that the Popish Religion is a nose of wax, as pleases his Holiness to set it
forth: it must be received upon the score of his infallibility: though it be
never so destructive to former Christian principles, to the ruin of Councels,
and overthrowing of the true ancient Catholic Faith; yet such is the condition
of the Pope, that his will can guide him into no tenent, (though never so
contrary to truth) but his faithful Papal servants the Jesuits will dawb over
his rotten Doctrine with the smooth plasters of humane reason, and think with
subtle Sophistry to beguile the simple; the deluding of whom, does not in
their uneven hands counterpoise the pleasing of their Master the Pope; and
therefore did they strive to varnish over this new point of Communion in one
kind, with some counterfeit Paint: Will you please to take a view thereof, and
I hope I shall so far convince their reasons, that the case will merely stand
upon the Popes will; and if so, I presume none will be so irreverent to their
Master Christ, to forsake his institution, and to adhere to the Popes
institution, lest they may be said with the Jews to reject Christ, and choose
Barabbas.

The Doctor would persuade that it was no precept to receive in both kinds;
but only being of institution, and not precept, the Church has power to alter
it as occasion may serve.

To which I answer: 2. It was christ's precept to receive in both kinds.
It was enjoined us by way of command, to receive in both kinds: for Christ, in
the 6 of John, v. 53* says, Except ye eat the flesh, (...) ^rink the blood of
the Son of man, ye have no life in you: Christ took the Bread and said, Take,
eat: And also he took the Cup and said, Drink ye all of it, Matthew. 26. This is
an absolute precept as well for the Cup as the Bread; and Saint Paul delivered
it so to the Corinthians, according as he had received of the Lord; he likewise
enjoining it to them as a precept probet seipsum, let a man examine himself,
let him eat, let him drink; the Commandment extending to the one as well as to
the other; which Commandment is drawn from the example of Christ's precept, who
himself gave the Cup as well as the Bread, and bade them drink as well as eat,
the one being the outward element to signify his flesh, the other his blood;
and Christ having said, Unless ye eat the flesh, and drink the blood, ye have
no life in you; it follows of necessity, and in obedience to the precept, that
both be given, that both be received. Wherefore the Doctor might well have
spared his twit against the Protestants* who do not by that place of John*
^^derstand bare faith, as he says, without the outward elements, fol. 340. but
they do thereby understand the holy Sacrament of Christ's body and blood; which
by the receiving of those outward elements, (according to Christ's institution
and the operation of faith) is conveyed to the spiritual nourishment of the
soul. Such weak objections as these against the Protestants, gives occasion to
the world to suspect the Doctor did not understand the Protestant Religion, and
that his going to the Romish Church, proceeded of ignorance; and if so, he is
less to be blamed for choosing Rome for his Mother Church; for unless she
reform, he may (according to such humor) be shaddowed under her wing, and
spend the rest of his days in blind obedience, and make his own ignorance
mother of his devotion.

The Doctor would persuade that these words import no precept, because in
respect Christ intended to enjoin no more but the substance, to wit, really to
receive his body and blood; which (says he, fol. 341.) may be done under one
kind.

It Is a strange presumption to argue this against the express words of Christ
and Saint Paul. Do this, drink of this: Except ye eat the flesh and drink the
blood etc: Which certainly they would never have practiced according to these
words, had it been needless to receive the Cup as well as the Bread, whenas
they are thereby made all to drink into one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13.

Plutarch reports that Pericles had such skill in wrestling, that though he
received a fall, he would persuade the standers by and the wrastler that cast
him, that he himself was the Conqueror: and such art does the Doctor use in
denying this to be a precept; and yet beside the overthrows that Christ and
Saint Paul have given him, he has crossed legs with himself, and given himself
the fall. So fol. 338. he says, the Priests receive in both kinds, because
they offer a sacrifice upon the Cross, which (says he) is not perfect without
that: and if that be not a perfect sacrifice of Christ that suffered without
the Cup, I desire to know how it came to pass to be a perfect Transubstantion
of perfect Christ in the Cake, only to the people, and not to the Priest;
unless he will confess the people receive nor the same body the Priest does
offer, I for my part know not how this should be, and desire to be better
informed herein, otherwise to persist to maintain the Cup to be necessarily
given to the people.

We do not (when we receive his flesh by the Bread, and his blood by the Wine)
receive dead Christ (as the Doctor would infer, fol. 342.) because we separate
the blood from the flesh: for this were to tax Christ of giving, and the
Apostles of receiving dead Christ, which is gross and impious: Besides, he
himself has answered himself as to that objection, fol. 338. for (says he) the
Priest receiving under both, does not receive two Sacraments, because the
Sacrament is essentially and entirely contained under either kind; and being
received both at once, they make but one refection, signifying one thing, and
producing one effect; no more (says he) then 6 or 7 dishes of meat make but
one dinner. Now as the Priest does not divide the flesh and blood, and receive
two Sacraments, no more do we; and if the Doctor would have advisedly
considered with himself, when he taxed us in this, he might easily have
perceived that he did through our sides wound Christ and his Apostles, nay the
Church of Rome it self, for that she administered, and her people received in
both kinds, and after the same manner; and unless he can show stronger reasons
then these for her change, the Church of England desires her not to censure too
severely of her, for not conforming with her; for that she is not easily
induced to forsake the practice of Christ and his Apostles, and for that the
Sacrament is to be administered in remembrance of Christ, she conceives we ought
not to forget the manner of Christ's institution, were there no precept for it;
but especially since we are enjoined so to do, we desire to drink the blood, and
to eat the flesh, that we may have eternal life thereby.

We must drink his blood, Eating and drinking.
as well as eat his flesh; and although as the Doctor affirms, (admitting
Transubstantiation) we may be said to drink that that is drinkable, and eat
that that is eatable, yet we are to remember the end for which we are commanded
to drink that blood, which is, in remembrance that Christ's blood was shed; This
Cup is my blood in the new Testament, which is shed for many for the remission
of sins, Matthew. 26.28. And Saint Paul witnessing, that it was Christ's will it
should be drunk in remembrance thereof, 1 Cor. 11. which cannot be properly
signified in the Cake, there being no outward Element to represent the shedding
of Christr blood, and precious price of our redemption, and for which end this
Sacrament was ordained. Besides, Christ calls himself the Vine as well as the
Bread, and we hereby become Branches, lively, growing, and budding upon our
ever-living Root Christ Jesus; whose holy institution whilst we follow, and
reject any other rule of humane institution, we may truly say, We bear not the
Root, but the Root bears us, Romans 11.18.

The Doctor, 3. And taken for or by the Doctors construction.
to avoid the precept of Christ in relation to the Cup takes upon him to
construe and for or, Joh. 6.53. Except ye eat the flesh, and drink the blood,
(he reads it, or drink the blood) ye have no life in you: And this he would
have done, for avoiding of contradiction; because that in the same Chapter,
eternal life is promised to them that eat only.

To which I answer: The Bread is not Sacramentally so often in Scripture
mentioned alone, as it is with the Cup jointly; wherefore if avoiding
contradiction be the reason, then must we not admit or for and in that of John
and 1 Cor. 11.27. For if so, then we contradict 1 Cor. 10. Our Fathers did eat
the same spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink, (Saint Cyprian,
lib. 2. Epist. 3. says this was prefigured by the bread and wine which
Melchizedek gave to Abraham, Genesis 14.) and likewise that text of the 1 Cor.
11.28. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat and drink etc. And we
further do hereby contradict all the Evangelists, who witness with one consent,
that Christ took the Bread, and also (or after the same manner) he took the
Cup; we must not say that he took the Bread or the Cup: for so we destroy the
Sacrament, as being of incertainty, and having no certain ground either for its
institution, or the precept for the administering thereof. Wherefore for the
Doctor here to construe and, or, is to multiply contradictions, and so his
reason is become invalid, in respect that the general scope of the Scripture
is, that this Sacrament is to be administered under both kinds; therefore it is
more safe to construe those few places where Sacramental Bread alone is
mentioned without the Cup, to be understood of the whole Sacrament, rather then
in many places to wrest and into or: For the mentioning of Bread only, does
not exclude the Cup negatively, but rather (according to Cyprians speech) by
the naming of part of the action, the whole is to be understood; and herewith
agrees Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 10.17. And we that are many, are one bread, and one
body, because we are all partakers of one bread. We must not think, that
because here Saint Paul names bread only, that therefore the Corinthians did
not communicate in the cup; for that is against the precedent verse, where he
says, The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood
of Christ? and the bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of
Christ? Besides, in the ensuing Chapter he enjoins both to be received, and
that to the people; so that where the breaking of Sacramental bread is only
mentioned, we are not thereby to exclude the cup; for the Hebrew phrase is
(under the breaking of bread) to signify the whole feast; as in the Prophet
Esaias, Frangere esurientis panem, is as well to give drink as bread.

Besides, should we admit of any other construction, as that when bread is
mentioned alone, thereby to understand communion in one kind, we should in that
change Saint Luke in Act. 2. to teach contrary to the practice of Christ, and
the rest of the Apostles, which did both receive and deliver to the people
under both kinds; which were an impious and presumptuous charge. Wherefore let
the Church of Rome for shame confess her errors herein, and let her not longer
wrest, mangle, and misconstrue Scripture contrary to Christ's rules herein,
contrary to the sense of the Primitive Church, and contrary to the judgment
and practice of the ancient Fathers, and her own ancient Bishops; and that but
for self-interest, to maintain a new doctrine of her own framing, taken up upon
a light score, and never heard of or believed in the Church for a thousand
years after Christ; and let her confess the truth with us herein, by which
means she shall neither alter the sense, nor wrest any particular word, to
maintain her doctrine herein: and if she will not for unity sake, and for
communion with us, yet for avoiding an absurdity against her own principles,
let her never construe that place of Luke to signify an entire Sacrament; for
then she makes the whole Sacrament only breaking of bread, and destroys
Transubstantiation.

As for the Doctor, if he be not herewith satisfied, but that he will persist
notwithstanding, that it must be understood of communion in one kind; and
furthermore, to maintain that opinion, will here construe and for or, I must
tell him, that he has hereby wiped off one error which he elsewhere, fol. 337.
taxed our Translators with, 1 Cor. 11.27. which if it be mis-translated, it
makes nothing for communion in one kind; but whether we receive the one or the
other, that we should take heed to receive with due reverence so Heavenly a
banquet: and it does further illustrate to us, that though we receive the bread
worthily, yet if we receive the cup unworthily, we are guilty of the body and
blood; which is an argument (and indeed an absolute proof) that they both make
but a perfect Sacrament of the body and blood; therefore I incline to think
with the Doctor, that it is a corruption in our printed Bibles, rendering and
for or; I find it various from the old copies: and I will not presume upon the
Doctors rule to justify it: however, it is something excusable, for that in
the very same Chapter, 26, 28, and 29. verses, eating the bread, and drinking
the cup is expressed, and not eating the bread, or drinking the cup; which upon
the Doctors rule (for avoiding contradiction) should be construed or: but
whether it be taken or, or and, yet notwithstanding it makes nothing for the
Popish communion in one kind.

The Doctor lays down for the Priests receiving in both kinds, Of the
sacrifice offered upon the Altar by the Priest.
because he offers up a sacrifice; I will therefore a little consider of that:
I hope I shall give satisfaction to any reasonable soul, that the Priest and
the people offer up one and the same sacrifice; and if so, then by the Doctors
rule, they are to receive in both kinds; because (says he) Christ's sacrifice
upon the Cross is not perfectly represented but by both kinds, as it was
prefigured in Melchizedek's sacrifice of bread and wine.

For the better explaining of this point, it is to be understood, that there
are two kinds of sacrifices; one is a perpetual sacrifice, pacifying Gods
wrath, whereby mercy and forgiveness of sins is obtained; which is only the
death of Christ, prefigured by the sacrifices under the Law. The other is a
sacrifice of laud and thanksgiving, which does not reconcile us unto God, but
is offered up of such as be already reconciled unto him, by faith in him, which
is the reconciliation for our sins, even Christ Jesus. By the first, Christ
offered us unto the Father; by the second, we offer our selves and all that we
have unto him and his Father; according as David says, Psalm. 50. A sacrifice
to God, is a contrite heart: and Hebr. 13. Always we offer up to God a
sacrifice of laud and praise by Jesus Christ: and Saint Peter says of all
people, that they are A holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

The Papists object that saying of Saint Paul. Heb. 9. Every Highpriest is
ordained to offer up gifts and sacrifices for sins, To prove thereby their
sacrifice of the Altar offered up in their Mass; which who please to read, may
plainly discover, that that saying is meant of the Priests under the Law, who
did offer Bullocks and Goats for the sins of the people; and therefore in the
old Testament such sacrifices are sometimes called Propitiatory sacrifices,
being indeed but shaddows and types of Christ's sacrifice which was to come,
which was the true and perfect sacrifice for the sins of the whole world:
wherefore in the very same Chapter S. Paul says, it were impossible our sins
should be taken away by the blood of Oxen and Goats, verse 1^. By his own blood
entered he once into the Holy place, and obtained Eternal Redemption for us.

Christ was such an High Priest, that he once offering himself, by once
effusion of his blood, did cleanse the sins of all that believe; he took unto
himself, not only their sins which many years before were dead, and put their
trust in him; but likewise the sins of those that (until his coming again)
should believe in his Gospel; so that we look for no other Priest or sacrifice
to take away our sins, but only his sacrifice made once for all. If he should
have made any oblation for sin more then once, he should have died more then
once; but he has made a full and plenary oblation for sin by his death; by the
will of God are we sanctified by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once
made, Heb. 10.10. For with once offering, has he consecrated for ever them
that are sanctified. If Christ then have taken upon him the burden of our sins,
and become a reconciliation not only for our sins, but the sins of the whole
world; if he himself have made a full oblation for our sins, by the offering of
his body once made how shall the Popish Priests be excused, who presume daily
to persuade the people they offer in their Mass a Propitiatory sacrifice, and
the same that was offered by Christ himself upon the Cross? Which if it be so,
then may we say of them, that they crucify again the Lord of life; whereas the
Scripture tells us plainly, he was not to be offered often, as the High Priest
offered every year, but only once did put away sin by the sacrifice of
himself, Heb. 9.26. For as a man must once die, so Christ was once offered, to
take away sins for many; and to them that look for him, shall he appear the
second time without sin unto salvation; for, Heb. 10. Every Priest appears
daily ministering, and offers ofttimes one manner of offering, which can never
take away sins; but Christ (after he had offered one sacrifice for sins) for
ever sits at the right hand of God.

It is a rule in Logic, Dato uno absurdo, mill sequuntur; the Papists deduce
this Doctrine from their other errors of Transubstantiation, and so they
proceed from iniquity to iniquity: they hereby, when they have made the people
believe their transubstantiated god, that now they may as well rob God of his
office, and their Priest may make a Propitiatory sacrifice upon the Altar for
the sins of the people, which S. Paul says was only proper to Christ himself;
He himself entered into the holy place by his own blood: It was the office of
himself, to offer himself the satisfactory oblation for our sins by the will of
the Father, he being the High Priest of good things to come, having an
everlasting Priesthood, being holy, harmless, separate from sin, made higher
then the heavens, which needed not daily to offer up sacrifice, as the other
High Priest did, first for his own sins, and then for the peoples; for that did
he once, when he offered himself up once for all.

Moreover, when the Popish Priests take upon them to offer up satisfactory
sacrifice at their Altar, it must either be understood such a sacrifice as the
Priest under the Law offered, which were but typical of the Messiah, and so
they become Jews, denying Christ to be already come, or else if they think
they offer Christ upon the Altar for quick and dead, and make the same oblation
which Christ made upon the Cross, they do hereby either deny the sufficiency of
Christ's oblation, as if his offering once for all, did not satisfy without
their daily offering and crucify again the Lord of life; or else, if that
sacrifice of Christ was sufficient, they must needs confess that this of theirs
is vain and needless, being added to the sacrifice which is already sufficient
and perfect; or if this of theirs be requisite, they make the death of Christ
of none effect, or in vain, because this their offering is satisfactory for the
sins of the people.

This doctrine is very well known to have sprung up of lucre, the Priests by
this doctrine finding a means to sell Masses for the quick, and promising, for
and in consideration of such and such Legacies, to say so many Masses for the
dead, whereby they should be released from pains in Purgatory; and finding the
sweet benefit that does arise by this doctrine to the Priests and to his
Holiness, by this doctrine and the other of Indulgences, they bend all their
wits, and wholly apply themselves to darken the truth, with the mists of
subrile sophistry and fleshly interpretations of the word, to gain grateful and
liberal Proselytes to this their new doctrine.

I do not deny that this Sacrament is by some Fathers called a sacrifice; it is
so properly called: but it must not be therefore understood to be a sacrifice
for sin, only a sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving; or else it is called a
sacrifice, to put us in mind of the sacrifice which Christ himself has made,
and so is significantly a sacrifice, as the bread is called his body, and the
cup his blood: And herewith agrees Saint Austine in his 33. Eplstle to
Boniface, and in his book de civitate Dei, lib. 10. cap. 5. That (says he)
which men call a sacrifice is a figure and representation of the true
sacrifice. And Magist. Sentent. lib. 4. distic. 12. That which is offered and
consecrated of the Priest, is called a sacrifice, because it is the memory or
representation of the true sacrifice of Christ, and that holy oblation made in
the Altar of the Cross. And Chrysostom upon the Hebr. That which we offer, is
but in remembrance of Christ's sacrifice: he himself in his own Person made a
sacrifice for our sins upon the Cross, by whose wounds all our diseases are
healed, all our sins pardoned, and so did never any man or creature but he; the
benefit whereof, is in no man's power to give unto another, every man must
receive it at Christ's hands, himself, by his own faith and belief: we are made
one body, as many as are partakers of one bread. If then this be a
representation of Christ's sacrifice, which sacrifice (by the Doctors own
confession) is not perfect without the cup, then must the people either receive
both kinds, or else they do not sufficiently commemorate Christ's sacrifice,
which they ought to do, in respect the Priest does not, nor can offer up a
Propitiatory sacrifice for the Reasons aforesaid.

As this Sacrament has the name of a sacrifice, it is to be understood
significantly of Christ's sacrifice; or else as it is in it self a sacrifice of
praise and thanksgiving: if it be significantly a sacrifice, the people ought
to be partakers of it as it is a perfect sacrifice in both kinds: and if it be
a sacrifice of praise and laud unto the Lord, then the people (as well as the
Priest) are required to, and concerned in that service, as it is made manifest
in the ensuing Chapter: The humble confession of all penitent hearts, their
acknowledging of Christ's benefits, their thanksgiving for the same, their faith
and consolation in Christ, their humble submission to his will, is a sacrifice
of laud and praise acceptable unto God, no less then the sacrifice of the
Priest.

Christ did not ordain this Sacrament, that any one might receive it for
another; but that every one for himself is to be made partaker of this mystery
of his salvation: For, as one may not be baptized for another (for the
Godfathers answering for the child, say he has faith, because he has the
Sacrament of faith by the outward element of water; which as it self cleanses,
so the child thereby is born again of water and of the Spirit to newness of
life; Baptism.
the infant spiritually receiving regeneration by the outward element of the
water, according to the effectual working of the holy Spirit, unto newness of
life; the infant being thereby made a member of Christ, by faith in Jesus given
unto him in that Sacrament of Baptism. So may not one receive this holy
Sacrament for another: Let every man be baptized, Act. 2. here is spiritual
regeneration to every man by himself. And Mat. 26. Christ said to the
multitude, Take, and eat, and drink ye all of this: and here is spiritual
growth and living in Christ every man by himself; and by this means, we that
are many branches, become one Vine, being baptized into one Spirit, and all
made to drink into one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13.

Whereas the Doctor urges, that those words, Drink ye all of this, were spoken
to the Apostles, and that therefore the cup is not to be given to the people;
He might as well conclude they shall not have the bread, because Christ gave
that to his Apostles: whereas all Divines agree, that what was spoken to them,
was thereby meant of the whole Church upon earth, which are all the Saints of
God upon earth and of particular Churches, whenever assembled into a Society:
which is manifest by S. Paul, who delivered to the Corinthians that which he
had received formerly of the Lord Jesus, to wit, both the bread and the cup;
enjoining every one to examine himself, and so let him eat, and so let him
drink. By which it is plain, that it was to be delivered to the people in both
kinds. And if one kind had been sufficiently significant of Christ's flesh and
blood offered by himself upon the Cross for our redemption, sure Christ would
never have added the cup as part of that Sacrament, thereby to signify his
blood, if already it had been sufficiently signified in the bread. Wherefore,
unless the Papists will charge Christ to be superfluous in his institution of
this Sacrament, they must allow the cup unto the people, as well as bread; and
both as well as one.

Lastly, the Doctor would justify the change of the Church of Rome in this
particular, upon the authority of the Church given by Christ to his Apostles so
to do. And for this he urges S. Austin, who was dead five hundred and fifty
years before ever this doctrine of Rome was heard of.

S. Austin stood much for the significancie of the bread and wine, that this
Sacrifice was but a representation of Christ's Sacrifice; and that which you see
on the Altar (or Table) is the bread; and the cup which your eyes show you, is
the wine: but, says he, faith shows that that bread is the body, and that
cup is the blood of Jesus Christ. It was the practice of the Church in his
time, to administer in both kinds: he, when he lived, taught the necessity of
wine, against those that mingled water: and so did Cyprian, and others: and now
that they are dead, the Doctor will have them teach another doctrine. S. Austin
might say, that Christ left authority to his Apostles to make such appointments
in what order this Sacrament should be received; as, whether sitting, kneeling,
how often, or the like; but not that they should institute a new Sacrament:
Christ gave both Elements, Saint Paul delivered both, according as he had
received, and it was to be done in remembrance of Christ, and they were
commanded to be imitators of him, Ephesians. 5.1. Christ left this as a Legacy to
his Church, and he made the Apostles Executors of this his last Will and
Testament; which they were to discharge, by dispensing that Legacy to Christ's
faithful Saints and People. Wherefore for them to withhold part of the thing
bequeathed, to wit, the participation of the cup: which is by S. Paul called
The Communion of his blood, is to forfeit that trust Christ has reposed in
them, and to forget his precept he enjoined them, commanding to teach all
Nations whatsoever he had commanded them.

We are bound to hold fast the traditions we have learned. If then the
Scripture tell us, that Christ with his Apostles did communicate in both kinds,
and Saint Paul administering to the Corinthians, said, Traditi vobis quod accepi
a Domini. how comes the Church of Rome to forsake this tradition which Christ
himself taught and practiced, and the Primitive Church for a thousand years
held for faith? if it ought to be reduced to one kind, how came it to pass to
be let alone so long? and by what Authority does Rome claim this power? since
the ancient Fathers and the Primitive Church, did not only use to administer
to the people in both kinds, but maintained and defended the necessity of Bread
and Wine, the outward elements of this Sacrament; as may appear by the
Testimony of the aforecited Fathers; and particularly it was the profession of
the Church of Rome, as Gelasius Bishop thereof witnesses.

Shall but the Church of Rome prescribe any new rule of faith or manmers, and
shall any disobey, he is straightwaies anathematized for casting off the
Tradition of the Church: and the Catholic Church upon earth communicated in
both k nds; and shall the late Popes of Rome alter this and escape the
censures? Were there nothing for it but the bare usage of the Primitive
Churches, it were enough to convince the Church of Rome; but whenas there is
Christ's precept and institution for it, how does the Church of Rome justly
incur the condemnation of the Pharisees teaching for doctrines the commandments
of men, and laying aside the commandments, of God, follow their own traditions?
Mark 7. But such was the transcendent wickedness of the Church of Rome in these
days, that scarce any Apostolic Rule but has suffered some alteration by his
Holiness, and his Legislative conclave of Cardinals; who being soared to a
height above Councels, Princes, and all other Powers on earth, stick not to
wrestle against these commandments of the God of Heaven; witness their
additions to the Baptism, as if the Baptism wherewith Christ was Baptized*
were not sufficient, without the Romish spittle and salt; and as if this
Sacrament of Bread and Wine were superfluous as to the cup, the Church of Rome
administers in one kind, as if nothing were perfect and to be received in the
Catholic Church, but what his Holiness please to teach and allow. And their
reasons are so weak they offer for such their alterations, that any one may
plainly discern it is Will, not Reason, brings her into such changes. Who but
knows that Christ as he was man, and the Apostles likewise, were obnoxious to
the same inconveniences of spilling the Wine (as the Doctor alleges) or part
sticking upon their beards, as the people of these days are? But they knowing
that it was Christ's order to separate the cup from the bread, and give it to be
divided amongst them, (thereby denoting to them how his blood should be
separated from his flesh) and by Christ left as a pattern for them to follow,
and to have continuance till his coming again, they, by eating the bread, and
drinking the cup, show the Lords death till he come; and for that the same was
to be continued in remembrance thereof; and they being commanded likewise
hereunto, Drink ye all of this: Let a man examine himself, and let him eat, and
let him drink; They would not (and we dare not) admit of Romes alteration, but
desire of God to hold fast this truth we have received, and that it would
please him to confirm us herein, that we may be blameless in the day of the
Lord Jesus; praying that all other Churches, as in this, so in all other points
of faith and doctrine, may be of one consent, and firmly united together in one
mind and one judgment; that we may all proceed in one Rule, and walk together
as followers of Christ and his Apostles, having them for an ensample to us,
that we may with one mind and one mouth praise God, even the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, Amen.

CHAP. XVII.
That the Lyturgie and private Prayers, ought not to be in an unknown Language,
which the Congregation does not understand.
WHereas Saint Paul in the 1 Cor. 14. is against giving of thanks, or praying
without understanding, because the hearer is not edified, nor can say Amen to
he knows not what; the Doctor (to help the lame Dog over the style and to
clear his new stepmother the Church of Rome, from the errors which other
Churches lay to her charge, for that she restrains her Prayers and her Lyturgy
universally to the Latin tongue) would needs have us to understand that S.
Paul does not hereby impugn the Lyturgie of the Church of Rome, which (says
he) was for the service and praise of God, and he to whom it is directed,
understands any tongue: but it is meant (says he) of Church-meetings, which
were only for instruction and edification of the Auditors, and not at all to
be understood to gainsay the Lyturgie of Romes Church.

To which I answer,

1. S. Paul's meaning is as well meant of the one, as of the other: for verse.
26. When ye come (says he) together, according as every one has a tongue, or
has interpretation, let it be done to edifying. By which it is plain; that
both praises and prayers, Psalms as well as doctrine, ought to be with
understanding. For, verse. 28. If any man has an unknown tongue, let him keep
silence in the Church, and speak to himself and to God. That man that has the
spirit of Tongues, may speak to God and himself; but he must be silent to
others, unless they can understand him: for how shall they say Amen to they
know not what?

God requires from us the heart: Give me thine heart. David desired to praise
the Lord in soul and spirit: Praise the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within
me praise his holy Name. We must not think that a little lip-labor, to say
Amen to we know not what, can be acceptable unto God. 1 Samuel 1. Hannah prayed
in her heart to the Lord. Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall be saved,
Matthew. 7. God does not require lip-service: he condemned the Scribes and
Pharisees, who drew near unto him with their lips, but their hearts were far
off, Matthew. 15. We are commanded to serve God with all our heart and soul,
Josh. 24. We must sing and make melody to the Lord in our hearts, Ephesians. 5. We
must approve that which is pleasing to the Lord, verse. 10. God is King of all
the earth: sing ye praises therefore with understanding. By all which and many
more places of Scripture, it is plain, that the service of the Congregation it
must be with the heart, that is, with the understanding. We must not think that
God is well pleased with the peoples devotion that proceeds not from the heart.
I will, for the better satisfaction of those that seem to be satisfied with the
Doctor's exposition of S. Paul, offer these reasons to his consideration,
against those he has propounded, to justify the Roman Lyturgie universally.

Platina writes, La^ne service first set up.
that the first Latin Service that ever was at Constantinople, was anno 687.
whenas the sixth Council, there held was assembled: for, before that, it was
never had in the Latin, but in the Greek or Hebrew Tongue. But now was the
Pope grown to be universal, by the late donation of Phocas, for countenancing
his murder of Mauritius: and it did not stand with his new-acquired honor and
dignity, that the Language of any other Church should be preferred before that
of Rome; and therefore at a General Council (the representative of the several
Churches) must the Language of the Roman See be preferred before any other.
For as the Pope was universal Head, he must needs have an Universal Tongue,
otherwise his Universality were dumb. And this was the true ground of composing
the Latin Lyturgie; and not (as the Doctor would persuade us because it was
the most general Tongue: for whenas this was consented unto by many other
Bishops, to please the Lordly Pope, the Emperors great favorite, it gave
occasion for the spreading of that Language, because the Service began to be in
many places in it; not that it was so copious or known a Tongue before. Nor
does the reason the Doctor brings, justify, but rather condemn the Latin
Lyturgie: for, says he, the Lyturgie of the Eastern Churches was used in
Greek, though all the Eastern parts spoke not that Language; therefore why may
not Rome prescribe a Lyturgie in Latin to the Western Churches? To which I
answer: It was thought fit, by the Fathers of the Primitive Church, to have one
uniform Lyturgie in all the Churches upon earth; and ^o that end, did those
then-visible Churches use the Greek Tongue: Why has the Church of Rome set up
another form? By this, the Doctor contradicts her Antiquity, and the other
mark, that she should never have separated from a Society more ancient then her
self; or else den^es her Universality, in that she is but to prescribe a Latin
Lyturgie to the Western Churcbes: and so he makes those marks by which he would
have her distinguished to be a true Church, to become Brands and Stigmatizings
of her errors, and falling from the Primitive Church.

3. Another reason the Doctor enforces, is this; that there are many words in
peoples Languages, which are hard to be understood; and therefore they may as
well have all in Latin, for that the common people do not understand every
word they speak.

This seems to me a very strange Argument: whilst he thus strives to clear this
point, he does more condemn it, or obscure the truth; for this is ignotum per
ignotius, because the common people do not understand all the words of their
Language, therefore they shall understand none at all; he may perchance
persuade some fool that is blind of the one eye, to put out the other, to make
them both alike: but he must bring stronger reasons, and prove himself a better
Scholar* else it will be hard for him to turn our English into Latin, and make
the Lyturgie of other Churches to speak the Roman tongue.

When Vitalianus decreed the Latin service, Greek was more generally known
then the Latin; insomuch that in several parts of Italy, the Latin was not
spoken; as in Calabria the Greek was spoken, in Itruria the Tuscan, in Apulia
the Mesapian tongue, the Latin being only the proper language of the
territories of Latium, in which Rome is situate: neither was any thing general
wrote but in the Greek tongue: so that if it was convenient to have the
Lyturgie in one tongue universally, the alteration from the Greek into Latin
was at first unlawful, in respect of the narrowness of the language in those
days; it being done only out of ostentation, and for the glory of the Roman
See, to make others receive the Latin Lyturgie, after she had surreptitiously
acquired the title of Universality.

4. Whereas the Doctor alleges, If the Lyturgie should be in distinct proper
languages of several people, whether could the Church of Rome understand the
errors therein, nor they be sure there were none in it? This argues Romes
intolerable arrogance, as if none could be Christians, which had not received
the faith from her; whenas the Apostles were sent to all Nations, and preached
the Gospel in their own languages; and having received the faith by Apostolical
plantation, it is equally just with them, to correct Rome, as she to correct
them; both being herein bound to the Discipline of a general Council, sending
thither some one or other, which shall in some general language there, make
known their case. Besides, this argument of the Doctors has given Rome a most
deadly blow: for if Rome be the only Catholic Church, and her Bishop have all
Apostolical power devolved upon her own head, certainly she is either enabled
to teach all Nations, or else it will follow, that those people which have not
yet received the faith, must still remain in darkness, because Rome wants the
gift of interpretation of tongues, and knows not how to make them understand
the Gospel of Jesus: and for that faith comes by hearing, not by dumb shows,
unless Rome be able to make such people understand service and prayer, they
will think her Priests are mad. It is not his praising God with an
understanding heart that can edify them: though the Priest should praise the
Lord upon the Harp, they will but think as the Negroes did when they first
heard Bag-pipes, that they were living creatures, and ascribe Deity to them;
and so instead of preaching Jesus, or offering praise to him, they would make
the people commit Idolatry, if the Priest knew not how to persuade them of
their errors, much less to make them sensible of the Church of Rome's
prescribed rules; and so by this means the Doctor has confessed the people to
want Brains correspondent to his universal head.

And whereas the Doctor alleges, The difference of languages.
that all Languages are not of equal extent, and therefore incongruities would
arise; Besides (says he) the inconvenience of having it in Latin, is but in
part, and that to the ignorant: I conceive these reasons make rather against
it, then otherwise.

It is true, all Languages are not of the same latitude; in some Languages one
word comprehending several word in another language; God has given to every
Nation several gifts of tongues. Reason taught men to reduce out of confused
and indictinct sounds articulate sillables and peculiar words, to signify
their own meaning; and time and Art has perfected those beginnings: so that
now every Nation abounds in its own language, the languages of the Nations
being at first made different, according to the different imaginations of
several people, at the first composing of such languages; but yet nothing that
is imaginable, but they have, or can give a name whereby to represent to their
senses the nature of the thing: or if they already have a name for any thing,
and do not know the reason of that denomination, yet they rest satisfied with
the articulate sound of the words which brings, unto their mind the thing
intended and meant. Now because of those several Nations and people, which at
first invented several different languages, (insomuch that in the language of
one Country, one word may comprehend a parephrasis of another) that therefore
such a Countries language is too short, it must not be imagined: For though to
strangers it seem imperfect, yet amongst themselves, it is sufficiently to
describe the thing intended; wherefore I should think, that (understanding the
Doctors objection) it were fit that every Nation had a Lyturgie in its own
proper language: it perchance may seem to some to breed incongruities, but
indeed it does not; it denotes the difference of languages in respect of
latitude or extent, but it retains a royal and concuring sense and
understanding of the thing presented to their fancy; without which, the people
must for ever remain in darkness, and locked up in ignorance; which was not Gods
will: he commanded his Apostles to teach all Nations, and sent them especially
to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, Matthew. 10. God is light, and Jesus is
the tender dayspring from on high, which has visited us; to give light to
them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and to guide our feet in
the way of peace: Wherefore for Rome to take away this light, to let this
inconvenience, (as the Doctor says to be upon the ignorant) is not to discharge
the office of Peter and Paul, who were sent out to bring into light them that
sit in darkness, Matthew. 4. To them that sat in darkness, is light risen up.
Jesus came into the world a light, says S. John, John 12.46. that whosoever
believes in him, should not abide in darkness. Whether Jews or Gentiles, we
are one sheep under one Shepherd, Christ Jesus. John 10.16. Wherefore for the
Doctor (to extenuate this error of Rome) to say, that the inconvenience is
only to the ignorant, is to me a strange Divinity; for, The whole have no need
of a Physician, but the sick, Matthew. 9. Christ having sent his Apostles to
preach him, that is, light unto them that sit in darkness, and to bring them
unto this mavelous light: So that it is the principal part of the Priests
duty, to propagate the Gospel to them that yet remain in darkness, and not to
keep them in ignorance, and seclude them from this light by clouding their
Intellects with a Vail of dark language: a Candle ought not to be set under a
Bushel; let your light shine before men, that others seeing, may glorify God
which is in heaven: give then to the several people their Lyturgie in their own
tongue, that they may understandingly, and with a contrite heart, offer up
their sacrifice of Prayer and praise, which is a reasonable sacrifice, and
acceptable service to God; for if a people ignorant of the Latin, must have
their Lyturgie in that tongue, these inconveniences and absurdities do from
thence arise:

1. If the praise and service of God said by the Minister, (who knows what he
says) be sufficiently acceptable unto God: it is to no purpose for the people
(which understand it not) to come to hear it; which to assert, were Diabolical,
in respect that God has commanded all to draw near unto him, whether Jew or
Gentile; as many as believe in Jesus, shall be saved. Who being consecrate, is
made the Author of salvation unto all them that obey him, Heb. 5. There is no
difference between the Jew and the Grecian; he that is Lord of all, is rich
unto all that call upon him, Romans 10. And Saint Peter tells us, that In every
Nation he that fears him, and works righteousness, shall be saved, Acts 10.
Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden, and I will ease you, Matthew. 12. Call
upon me in trouble, and I will hear you, Psalm. 17.6. He is nigh unto all them
that call upon him faithfully, Psalm. 145.18. And more especially is he to be
found in his house, the house of Prayer, of them that seek him: Where two or
three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them*
Matthew. 18.

Now as all are enjoined to this duty, so is it requisite that they perform it
with due reverence; knowing to whom they speak, and not with rash lips, nor
ignorantly; for the word must be in thy heart, as well as thy mouth, Romans 10.8.
The men of Athens worshipped an unknown God, but Saint Paul rebukes them Acts
11. Be ye not strangers from the life of God, through ignorance, (was S. Paul's
rule to the Ephesians) but understand what the will of the Lord is. So that as
all people are commanded to serve and praise God, so must they do it in heart
and mind, and with understanding; wherefore it is not sufficient only for the
Priest to understand when he prays or praises God, but the people likewise
must concur in the understanding of the present service: If it be sufficient
for the Priest alone to know and understand the prayer and praises offered to
God, then need not the people come; or if the coming of the people be
necessary, then must they understand what the Priest prays or says: For if a
man pray Pater noster, etc. as the Doctor says, fol. 339. and may not measure
his thoughts Mathematically with his words, it is no more than if a Parat were
taught it; his understanding is without fruit: in a Rational soul, the heart is
to declare to the tongue, otherwise, whilst he speaks, he either babbles like a
Bruit, without understanding, ( A good man out of the good treasure, brings
forth good; an evil man, out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth
evil: For out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks; Luke 6.) or
otherwise, if there be no concurrence between the heart and the mouth, he
speaks with feigned lips, not uttering what he thinks. It is not sufficient for
a man to suppose it is the Lords prayer, because he has heard so, and that he
knows the Lords prayer in English, or that his thoughts go along with the
Latin: For suppose he should be saying Da nobis panem quotidianum, and he was
supposing he was praying for the Kingdom to come, how shall God answer such a
prayer?

2. The Doctor (whilst he goes about to set up the Church of Rome above her
fellows, and to magnify her Lyturgie, he) does indeed destroy Christ's
Church, by excluding the people who are Members of the Church, and make a
Church, as I have showed in the third Chapter. For it is not the practice at
Rome only in Quires, and in Collegiate Chapels, which are only for societies
of such as understand that tongue, this were t^l^rable; but it extends to all
Congregations, excluding the people, which is abominable: For, the Church of
Rome, though she be Head, she cannot say unto the Members, I have no need of
you: We all make but one body in Christ, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, bond
or free: We are all by one Spirit baptized into one body and have been all made
to drink into one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. So then, if the society of the Saints do
make the Church, it is fit that this society serve and praise the Lord in heart
and spirit, for as God is a spirit, so he will be worsh pped in spirit and in
truth. Wherefore, to say, that it is sufficient for the Priest to understand,
because he alone offers the sacrifice of praise; that is to destroy the Church,
by excluding the Saints from this duty: and therefore, that they may do this
with heart and spirit, it is requisite for the people to have this Lyturgie in
a tongue they understand, that they may praise the Lord with all their heart,
according as the Lyturgie enjoins then, bidding them lift up their heart unto
the Lord. And I much wonder, that these words escaped razing, when Vitellianus
about the year 666. (the number of the Beast) did command* that the service in
all Churches should be in Latin; but Nihil simul est inventum and perfectum:
and now that it remains still, having escaped the Index expurgatorius, it
stands to the condemnation of the Church of Rome, to show from what she is
fallen; from truth, to error; from Apostolic practice, to let all things be
done to edifying 1 These. 5.11. to follow her own inventions, hood-winking the
people in ignorance, that she may the better tyrannize over them. For whereas
the Doctor would persuade us, fol. 329. that Peter and Paul used a Lyturgie in
one of the learned languages, which could not be known to all; he must prove
that, before it be to be believed: It may be they used amongst themselves one
constant language in their service, which might not be understood by others, by
chance bystanders; but when they preached or prayed with others, in a public
Assembly, we do not find but that the people understood them in their own
language.

3. Our prayer and praise ought to be in faith, Whatsoever ye ask, if ye
believe, ye shall receive it, Matthew. 21.22. We must come unto the Father in the
Sons Name, and he will hear us; ask, and he will do it, John 14.14. By faith in
Jesus, we have boldness and entrance with confidence, Ephesians. 3.12. So that
Whatsoever we desire when we pray, believe that we shall have it, and it shall
be done unto us Mark 11.24. But without faith it is impossible to please God:
For He that comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder
of them that seek him, Heb. 11. And without faith, our prayer turns into sin;
for, Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, Romans 14.23. So then, for any society
to come to Divine service in a Tongue they do not understand, their prayer and
praise cannot be of faith, in respect they know not what they ask; their Priest
is their mouth, and they cannot in heart go along with him, because they
understand not what he says; and their saying Amen to they know not what,
cannot be acceptable unto God; according as S. Paul writes to the Romans, Romans
10.14. How shall we call on him in whom we have not believed? and how shall we
believe in him, of whom we have not heard? We must believe in him, and by him,
and by him offer the sacrifice of praise to God; we must draw near unto him
with a pure heart, in the assurance of faith, Heh. 10.22. This was the Doctrine
of the Apostles, and this was the practice of the Primitive Churches.

Theodoret, lib. 5. de Graec. affect. curat. page 521. tells us, that in his
time (which was about 440 years after Christ) the Scriptures were translated
into all manner of languages, and that they were not only understood of
Doctors and Masters of the Church, but of Lay People and common Artificers;
Hebraici libri non modo in Graecum Idioma conversi sunt, sed in Romanam,
Aegyptam, Persicam, Judicam, Armenicam, and Scyithicam linguam; semelque ut
dicam in omnes linguas quibus ad hunc diem nationes utuntur. It was then the
practice, that every Nation should have the Scriptures in their own Tongue;
(which Bellarmine unawares confessed, Bellarm. Chap. 106.
Tom. 1. col. 191. lib. 4. de verb. Dei Script. cap 11.) But such is the pride
and vainglory of the Popes of Rome, that they will not admit this in these
latter days; for since the Bishop of Rome grew up to be the Universal head,
all Churches must receive anew the Scriptures in their own Tongue; and not
only so, but their Lyturgies too; burning such Scriptures as the people
understand in their own vulgar Tongue, and excommunicating all persons of the
Laity, (be they never so well learned) that shall reason of matters of faith,
or dispute of his power; commanding Latin Service, and Latin Homilies to the
vulgar; and though they cannot understand it. yet he has Decreed it shall be
so, 6 Decret. lib. 5. cap. quicunque. By which means he thinks to gain an
opinion of being the only Planter of those Churches; whenas indeed, he is but
a busy intruder upon the Apostolical foundations of others: and in this his
Holiness has a further reach, for by this means, he pleads Authority to rule
over them, producing this in evidence against them, (should they oppose him)
that Conqueror-like, he has given them a Law in the proper language of Rome.
And if any questions should arise concerning any points taught in those
Translations, he likewise did (by this means) obtain the privilege to be the
Interpreter; it being more proper to Rome to unfold the sense of that language,
than to any other place. And thus and for those ends, did the Popes of Rome
obtrude the Latin Lyturgies upon several Churches, which, how it agrees with
the Law Divine, for the work of the Ministry, for the gathering of the Saints,
and for the edification of the body of Christ, till we all meet together in the
unity of the faith, and knowledge of the Son of God, let the holy Spirit of
that God, and the Angels of the several Churches witness.

CHAP. XVIII. The Conclusion.
Wherein the Reformation of England is justified, notwithstanding the
Objections of Rome against it; and that the Pope was the cause of the
Protestant Churches their separations from the Church of Rome.
I Have briefly touched most of those points which the Doctor has urged
against the Protestants; wherein (I conceive) the Church of England does differ
from the Church of Rome: and for that it is not my desire to make the breaches
wider, but (if possible) to reconcile them into one, and to make up the gap of
separation betwixt them, I now hasten to a conclusion. Yet let not any one
censure me, as if I were weary of my enterprise, because to some particular
Chapters I have not given particular answers: for I conceive, that the scope of
their matter is sufficiently refuted in this discourse; and those Chapters not
concerning any points of controversy betwixt us, any further than I have
already answered, I did therefore forbear to multiply words against the Doctor,
but hastened to the conclusion.

The Doctor in his 22. and 23. Chapters, does flutter with the Lapwing, and
makes most bussle, when he is furthest off the Nest: He had formerly cast his
sting, and there (in conclusion) ends with buzzing and noise only; he rolls up
himself in Rhetoric, and with the Seriphian Froggs (of which Pliny writes,
lib. 8. cap. 85.) he is clamorous in invectives; he, (like an untamed Colt)
having leaped the Pale, which kept him in a safe and fitting Pasture, ranges up
and down the miry paths, throwing up dirt behind him: till at length (having
run himself out of breath) he becomes tame, and is content to take scraps at
the Jesuits hands: he feeds upon the Orts of Parsons, Saunders, and such like
Renegadoes; he has turned away his face from England's Sion, in whose true
mirror of divinity, he might have seen the image of Christ himself, and his own
face beauteous, as a Son of that Church; but now having turned aside, he has
forgot what manner of man he was, or what before he had beheld by the help of
the reflections; and now he altogether contemplates upon a false gloss, which
does present unto him deceiving objects: on the one hand is the Church of
England, presented to him black and ugly, being transformed by the false Vail
they (and such like) have put upon her; for which they are (with all
indulgence) cherished and encouraged by his Holiness, according to the saying
of Solomon, Prove. 26.22. The words of a Talebearer are as flatterings, and
they go down into his belly. But on the other hand, the Church of Rome is set
out. with all the Art imaginable; so that any who will give up himself unto the
speculative Religion of Popery, is cheated into an opinion of Romes beauty and
comeliness, and into a ^a^^en and de^^^tation of the Protest^nt Religion,
because of her spots and defor^mity* whereas, if any please to seaken them
both, he shall find, that Englands Church (which is thus presented to him, is
black but comely; and, like the curtains of Solomon, is set all with precious
Stones and Jewels on her inner side, Cant. 1.4. I am black, but comely; as the
curtains of Solomon. And if he please to make inquisition into the Church of
Rome, he will find, that she has only a glorious outside, she is a painted
Jezebel, that cares not to venture through a Sea of blood, to take possession of
her Neighbors Vineyards, causing the Prophets of the Lord to be slain, 1 Kin.
18. She is Harpy-like, with a fair face, and a foul heart; and in that fair
face (were but the Ignatian paint taken off) would rivelled brows, and wanworn
cheeks appear. How much therefore is the Doctors case to be lamented, who has
joined himself to the Heathen, to open his mouth that he may praise the power
of the Idols, and to magnify a fleshly King for ever, Esth. 5.10.

Hence is it, that in his second and third Chapters, taking for granted that
Rome is the only Catholic Church, and her Bishop Peter's Successor, and
absolute and sole possessioner of all Apostolical Power and Jurisdiction; he
does hereupon conclude, that the Protestant Churches are heretical
Conventicles, and that they know not the Scriptures, without the Tradition of
Rome; nor can disperse and teach them without Commission from thence.

Now for that it is my desire, not to multiply words, I will forbear any
particular answer to these Assertions; and refer the Reader to my second
Chapter, where his Holiness Universality is fully refuted.

And as touching that Assertion of his, concerning the Scriptures, my 2.8.11.
and 12. Chapters are sufficient answers: where first I have proved equal
Commission; then, that the Scriptures are to judge the truth of themselves,
Traditions, and Councels; and that other Churches had the Scriptures, and not
from Rome; that the Provincials of Apostolical plantation, have equal power,
having the same Spirit to guide them, as by the outward means the visible sign
of the invisible grace given in the Sacrament of order, is in Christian charity
to be presumed; and therefore may as well judge of those points of Scripture,
which admit of explanation, as the Church of Rome.

And the many arguments used by the Doctor in those Chapters, are not only
grounded upon false suppositions, but in themselves are injurious, wrongfully
accusing the Church of England, laying opinions to her charge concerning the
ways and means to understand the meaning of those Scriptures, which she does
not profess as Doctrinal.

And then in the 22. Chapter, he would disprove our ground of separation from
Rome; as to this, I have in part touched in the 2.4. and 6. Chapters: and in
the 11. Chapter I have proved aright in Provincials to reform Schisms and
Heresies: And whereas he says we ought not to have separated from Rome, hecase
(says he) we pretending the truth of our opinions, ought to have demonstrated
them to the world, whereby to have reformed Rome, and not to have separated our
selves: To this I answer.

The first occasion of the separation, was about the difference of the Popes
Supremacy; and he having in a high way got the upper hand of many Churches,
which were vassallized under his power, and the Councels being so abused, and
made invalid by the late Lateran Prerogative; it was to no purpose to offer the
difference to a general Council, which must either act for, or not against his
Holiness; having no power to decree any thing against his Holiness, as I have
proved in the tenth Chapter. This gave occasion to other Provinces, (which
could get opportunity) to back the right and privilege proper to their own
Sees, to cast off any further appealing, either thither or to Rome. And they
knowing this to be an usurpation in Popes, it gave them occasion to suspect the
truth of many other of her Doctrines; and betaking themselves to the holy word
of God delivered to them, and approved through all ages for the verities of God
himself; and searching into the Primitive Churches, and practices of the
ancient Fathers, they found Rome to have changed her faith, as those
particulars I have already treated on make mention.

Vincentius adversus Hereticos says, that Doctrine is to be accounted
Catholic, quod semper and ab omnibus credendum est; and if this must be the
rule, then are neither we Heretics, nor Rome Catholic: Rome cannot be said
Catholic, in respect the faith of Christ was at other places professed, when
it was not at all at Rome; nor may we be by her called Heretics, because she
has changed.

The Doctor (upon Saint Austin's rule, fol. 120.) says, that Doctrines without
known beginnings, are not to be disputed against; but those Doctrines of Rome,
of which I have treated, I have fairly proved them to be innovations; and
therefore by that we are not to be censured for opposing them.

And whereas the Doctor says that Rome must either be the true Church, or else
there is none, he hereby proves himself to be in darkness: he has confessed it
in Aethiopia without her planting, and in several other places, I have proved
it to have been planted, and not from Rome; wherefore it is not necessarily to
be concluded (upon the score of her only dispensing the Gospel) that she is
the visible Church: if the Gospel be hid, it is hid to those that are lost; the
lost s^eep's gone to Rome to idolize the pontifical Pope, whom the God of this
world has blinded, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, which is
the Image of God, should not shine unto him; for (says Saint Paul) We preach
not our selves, but Christ Jesus our Lord; and our selves your servants for
Jesus sake: Which is neither the Jesuits Doctrine, (who teach nothing but the
infallibility of his Holiness) nor the Popes profession, who would every where
be a Master, but no servant to the Saints and people of God. We therefore,
because of his change from this Doctrine, and because of his intolerable pride
and usurpations, and as the other Churches shake him off, but do not change
from the Primitive faith taught by the Apostles, and forms maintained by the
Church of Rome it self.

And though we lay long under Romes innovation, yet this is no Argument for the
Doctor to urge against us, that we should not at all reform; Christ has
withdrawn his Spirit for a time from several Churches, as I have proved in the
5. Chapter. Magna est veritas, and praevalebit: Truth is stronger than all the
power of man, as I have proved by Zerubbabel, 1 Esdr. 4. And though the Pope
(with the inventions and polices of his Cardinal conclave) had so warded the
several Churches of the West, that he thought them absolutely mastered, and
under his command, to be servants to do his drudgery; he did (as we say) reckon
without his Host, he did consult with flesh and blood, whilst a Divine hand
mastered his humane polices, and their works of darkness were brought into
light, when least suspected to have them laid open to the world.

And though the persons (the outward Instruments of this separation and change
from Romes errors) were not in all things approvable, touching Moral
conversation; yet this does not absolutely disprove the truth of their
Doctrine, as I have proved in the 6. Chapter. Bellarmin accounted Pope Sixtus
an Heretic; and the Jesuits hold, Hominem non Christianum posse Romanum esse
Pontificem, quodlib: 4, art. 2. page 100. And it is unequal dealing, to censure
others of that, of which they themselves will not be condemned. God made use of
Balaam's Ass to open the eyes of Balaam; and Luther (I crave pardon for the
comparison) retorting upon his Master the Pope, who smote him and his Princes
with Romes Thunderbolts, was a means to open the eyes of the English Clergy,
who saw the Angel of the Lord standing in the way; and I hope none can blame
them for harkening to his voice: we do not in all things approve of Luther,
Calvin, Beza, etc. In those things wherein we do not differ from Rome, she
cannot blame us; and in those things wherein we differ, we can prove, that not
any one point, but was for 600. years after Christ by the Church of Rome it
self professed; and since has (by the pride and arrogance of wicked and
aspiring Popes) by little and little been forsaken, and by her deserted: so
that who please impartially to consider of what I have in this Treatise fairly
laid down, may plainly perceive, that it is Rome, not England, has forsaken the
Primitive truth; and whilst the Doctor, or any other shall strive against the
truth of England's Church, they do but wound their own soul; by backbiting
her, they bring a staff to their own head; all the injury and mischief they
frame against her, falls down on their own Pates; they themselves are caught in
the Net, which they have privily laid for others; all the Arguments and
strength of Reason they bring against her in this point, being but so many
domestic witnesses to their own condemnation. I need not study reproofs for
Romes Apostasy: it is sufficient that I have proved her to have changed her
faith; and by that means I have returned all the Doctors ingenious upbraidings
against the Church of England, upon the Church of Rome's own score; so that I
will declaim no longer upon this Theme; I will deliver the rest with sighs and
groans (the prolocutors of an o'refraight heart,) and in anguish of spirit,
weep out the rest of this sad Scaene; and hanging my Harp (with David) upon the
Willowes, I will forbear to run any more divisions upon these discourses:
heartily beseeching the Almighty God, to reconcile us into one faith, by the
Spirit of his Son Jesus; and shall from my very soul pray,

That it would please God to open the heart of the Roman Clergy, to see their
own errors; and that he would in mercy turn unto them, and turn them unto him,
and would graciously cause them to remember from whence they are fallen, and to
do their first works: and likewise, that it would please him, to put courage
and strength into the hearts and hands of Christian Princes and Ministers, that
they might thereby be emboldned (by the operations and effectual workings of
his holy Spirit) to reprove the present Bishops of Rome of the errors of their
ways; knowing this, that if a man rebuke a wise man, he will love him; Give
admonishment to the wise, and he will be wiser, Prove. 9. and plainly to let him
know how the Church of Christ suffers violence, under his Tyrannical
persecution, whilst he sits above her Councels, and exercises a Legislative
power over her heavenly treasure, her Scriptures, left to her by the Apostles,
and over her Apostolical traditions, moulding them into new forms, for to
promote thereby the interest of the Papal Chair: and likewise to let him know,
that Councels were the only means to keep the several Churches in unity; and
that these being invalid by the late usurpations of the Popes, all our discords
do arise from thence; and that till this be freely and satisfactorily
abandoned, there is no hopes of uniting the neighboring Churches with her; and
that in the mean time, the Pope himself is the occasion of the separations
made: and though it be necessary that offenses come, that there be Heresies
amongst you, (as Saint Paul says, 1 Cor. 11.) that they which are approved may
be known; yet for that the Pope is the cause of these divisions and offenses,
by reason of those his unjust proceedings toward the several Christian
Churches, that he might expect the woe denounced by the Evangelist, Matthew. 7.
It must needs be that offenses shall come, but woe be to that man by whom the
offense comes; and that therefore he would no longer tempt God, by his wilful
persisting in his new-taken-up errors; but that he would (as his Predecessors
the Ancient Bishops of Rome have done before him) cast himself upon a general
Council, utterly renouncing his late Trent and Laterane-Prerogatives, and the
injunction of obedience to his Papal Canon Law; without which there is no hope
of reconciling our differences; and by whieh means (by the blessing of God) the
multitude of Believers may be of one heart, and one soul, Act. 4. Pray for the
peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love her.

Now that we may all with one mind, and one mouth praise God, even the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, (Romans 15.6.) that there may be no dissentions amongst
us, but that we may be knit together in one mind, and one judgment, (1 Cor.
1.10.) that we may proceed in one Rule, that we may mind one thing, and have
the Apostles for our ensample, Phil. 3. that as Christ's coat was seamless, as
his Legacy was Peace, so we may all be clothed with Righteousness, and keep
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4. Grant* O Lord, for thy
only Son our Savior Christ his sake, Amen.

Glory in the Highest to God, on on Earth Peace to men of good will

FINIS.
The Printer to the Reader.
THe injury done to this work through my many misprisions, (occasioned by the
difficult and uncouth Character of the Authors hand, whose remote abode
admitted of no intercourse to instruct me therein, nor had I any in Town
acquainted therewith to perfect my reading thereof) makes me (as I have already
by the intercession of a friend begged the Authors pardon, so) now by my self
gentle Reader) humbly to implore yours. I must confess in some places I was
forced to guess at the Authors meaning, I not being able to read many of his
words, by which means I have distorted his style, and obscured his ingenious
phancies, sometimes by inserting some Linsey-wolsey lines of my contexture, in
this far purer Volumne, otherwhiles, by omitting whole sentences of the
Authors: yet these variations of mine from the Original, not admitting of
correction (as the Author certifies) without ravelling the whole piece, and (to
use his own phrase) picking out those knotty ends of mine. The Stationer having
made a large progress in the work, before the Author knew thereof, has
prevailed with him to let it pass with its present imperfections, both he and I
engageing to rectify all such mistakes in the next Edition: It now remains to
crave your friendly acceptance hereof, and with the help of these noted
Erraat's, to make a candid construction of the mistaken places.

Errata.
Page. 5. line 23. read fanes. p. 23. l. 29. polipus. p. 24. l. 12. Rome. p.
26. l. 26. dele only. p. 30. l. 6. shall contain Christ till he come. p. 31. l.
17. are. p. 32. l. 24. Paschalis. p. 33. l. 15. fourteenth. p. 34. l. 14.
fourth. p. 36. l. 2. birds. l. 20. Homagers. l. 21. imperious. p. 38. l. 12.
their. p. 40. l. 14. with Timothy. p. 43. l. 17. ninth. p. 44. l. 24. they that
they might. p. 46. l. 29. veruntamen Episcopus Constantinopolitanus habeat
honoris primatum post Romanum, propteria quod, etc. p. 48. l. 14. appointed. p.
63. l. 10. seas. p. 65. l. 20. his. p. 71. l. 26. and. p. 25. cannot do it. p.
76. l. 2. and although difference. p. 90 l. 5. not. l. 6. thereby note the
difference. l. 12. to give obedience to the head. p. 91. l. 16. by setting. p.
93. l. 1. qui. l. 15. Ecclesiae quae licet, etc. p. 94. l. 15. true. p. 99. l.
18. rites. l. 29. sons. p. 100. l. 15. lost. p. 102. denoted. p. 104. l. 18.
the thing. p. 106. l. 16. the, and Marcian. l. 12. Boniface the first. l. 18.
453. p. 108. l. 1. Pope Parasites. l. 10. the appointing the Pope. l. 29. quod
ab in^ito non valet, in tractu temporis non convalescat. p. 109. l. 24.
Vatican. l. 26. new additions to prove the Bishop. p. 112. Vicarius summus. p.
114. present. p. 119. l. 24. for by this peace. p. 121 l. 1. clasped. l. 11.
in England which who please. p. 123. l. 26. Ignatian. p. 124. l. 1. and. l. 23.
and. p. 126. received. p. 127. nos zelo fidei, etc. p. 130. l. 13. their. l.
16. are by some called holy. p. 134. l. 25. so. p. 135. l. 24. and there were
others in orders which, etc. p. 137. hypocrites, p. 139. l. 20. did. p. 140. l.
20. he pleads it visible in Aethiopia. p. 141. l. 21. Tame. l. 24. Oracle. l.
28. Proselytes. p. 143. l. 12. and l. 15. the. l. 17. Belinus. p. 149. Geminis.
p. 151. l. 21. stood. p. 155. l. 6. have. l. 20. vide utrum, etc. p. 150. l.
14. looks. p. 157. l. 1. Con^arenus. l. 7. pasce. l. 9. tame. l. 24.
constitutions. p. 160. l. 2. failings, and in the marg. read thus: Against
railing at Princes. p. 172. l. 6. worth. l. 11. principi. l. 13. approves. p.
173. l. 5. she hereby draws. l. 26. he. l. 29. Bolseck. p. 175. l. 26. of the
Bishops. l. 6. Vrbane. p. 176. l. 18. aliaco. p. 177. l. 21. Guiciardine. p.
178. strange mazes. p. 179. l. 3. Bozius de signis. l. 15. lewd. p. 181. these
stories, he strains at a Gnat. l. 9. he leaps over blocks. p. 182. Chapter of
traditions. p. 113. l. 29. smiles. p. 184. l. 23. so slightly over. p. 188. l.
9. Bank. l. 10. Zactan. p. 161. l. 8. Plantations. p. 193. l. 15. patronize. p.
194. l. 1. bibulus. l. 23. of this counterfeit. l. 26. theirs. p. 196. l. 26.
those points wherein we differ upon, which, etc. p. 200. Delphicus, and minos,
and Faunus, and fuisse. p. 202. l. 24. Gentiles. p. 203. l. 23. communicate
with the Gentiles: p. 206. Cheregatus. p. 213. Tabescimus. l. 12. Oh. p. 215.
l. 24. communion, and though. p. 216. and. l. 13. rules. l. 26. is. p. 214. l.
26. into which Rome's Solomon enters. p. 233. statutis, and videamur. p. 234.
have this privilege. p. 237. l. 5. Constance. p. 239. l. 2. did. l. 17.
irruptious. p. 241. l. 3. and cause. p. 242. l. 2. destroys, and Constance. p.
246. l. 24. that can lay open all. l. 26. and expound. p. 249. an excuse. p.
251. l. 2. contrary to that Council. l. 11. with Euliches. p. 254. l. 14.
these. p. 267. l. 22. error and negligence. p. 282. l. 1. are the only
infallible. p. 283. l. 13. Austin Tom. 6. contra Donatistas, cap. 3. p. 287. l.
19. immediately. p. 294. l. 15. as appears by that Council. p. 297. l. 12.
suit. p. 307. l. 18. Greek. p. 312. (...). p. 313. l. 19. our ancient Fathers.
p. 319. her. p. 316. l. 18. which. p. 321. l. 3. Theodoret. p. 322. totum jam,
and dicatur. l. 29. and Dei docentis imperium. p. 324. l. 2. Scriptures. l. 8.
the word (...) o^^tted. l. 21. one of the Churches Saints. p. 327. l. 14. but
not bodily on earth. p. 333. l. 2. knacks. l. 12. our. p. 335. Vicar General.
l. 14. equal with the Bishop in order to the derivation. p. 348. hair-loomes.
p. 353. pro se. p. 373. l. 11. my. p. 374. l. 22. pater. p. 376 moron. p. 377.
l. 24. till Shilo come again. p. 378. l. 24. perch. p. 383. l. 26. thought. p.
388. l. 18. summi. l. 26. Aaron. p. 393. l. 20. to claim an eigne portion. p.
394. Totilas, and Belli^arius. p. 399. l. 24. of. p. 401. l. 2. step. p. 403.
l. 18. Empire. p. 410. are latum, and miltiades. p. 415. l. 21. agreeing. p.
416. l. 9. testamur. p. 417. l. 24. Parsons. p. 442. passio Christi, and causa
formalis, and gratia, and causa finalis. p. 457. vercella. and l. 15.
intualects. p. 461. Cimmerian. p. 470. l. 10. utraque. p. 482. ^surienti. and
l. 10. charge. p. 497. tradidi. p. 499. l. 13. in these latter days. p. 504.
l. 29. their. p. 508. l. 26. neither. p. 510. l. 17. Pope. p. 512. l. 5.
sufficient. and l. 7. notwithstanding, and l. 15. real. p. 521. l. 28.
Aegyptiam, and A^m^ni^m, and Indicam. p. 522 l. 13. in the Roman. p. 526. l.
9. sheep. l. 29. formerly.


