Christian Consolations Taught from FIVE HEADS IN RELIGION.

I. Faith. II. Hope. III. The Holy Spirit. IV. Prayer. V. The Sacraments.
Written by a Learned PRELATE.

Isaiah 40.1, 2. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says your God:

Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is
accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned --

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to his most Excellent Majesty, 1671.

TO THE READER.
THIS Manual of Christian Consolations derived from Five Heads of great
importance in Religion, was written by a late R. Prelate of our Church, and is
now Printed according to his own Copy.

The Papers were presented by him to a Person of Honor, for whose private use
they were designed: But, as the Noblest Spirits are most communicative, that
Noble and Religious Lady was pleased to impart them for the good also of others.

We read in the Evangelists how that the Holy Jesus, who went about doing good
(that is the short, but full, Character which Acts 10.38.
Saint Peter gives of him) did by a Miracle of Mercy bless five Loaves to the
feeding of a very great multitude. And may the same Almighty Goodness bless and
prosper whatsoever Spiritual good is contained in these Five Helps and
Directions for a Christian's Comfort, to the refreshing and strengthening of
such Souls as truly hunger and thirst after God. May the serious and devout
Readers taste and see how good the Lord is, that his Loving kindness is better
than Life, and that the Light of his Countenance, the sense of his favor, is
infinitely more Heart-cheering, and brings with it a truer and larger
satisfaction than the increase of Corn, Psalm. 4.
and Wine, and Oil does to the men of this world, who only or chiefly mind
Earthly things, and unwisely place their felicity in the fading and empty
enjoyments of this present life.

It is good then that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the Salvation
of the Lord; Lam. 3.
for he is good to them that wait for him, to the Soul that seeks him. He who
is the God of Love, and even 1 Jo. 4.
Love it self; He who is the ever-flowing Fountain of Goodness, will not fail
to fill the hungry with good things. Such a Christian has meat to eat which
the world knows not of; he feeds on the hidden Manna: he has (as S. Austin
said of S. Ambrose) occultum os in cord ejus, and with this he does sapida
gaudia de pane Dei ruminare.

The Father of the World, who opens his hand, and satisfies the desire of
every living thing, Psalm. 145.
giving to all their meat in due season; he is as ready to fulfill the desire of
them that fear him; he will give grace and glory, Psalm. 84.
and no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly. And here
from the character and qualification of the Persons [ them that fear him, and
them that walk uprightly] it highly concerns us to observe and to lay it to
heart, That a Sincere desire and Serious endeavor to fear God and walk
uprightly is a necessary and indispensable Condition to qualify and make us
meet for the receiving of the best of Divine favors and blessings. We must
first walk in the fear of the Lord, if we would walk in the Comfort of the Holy
Ghost; as these two are set together in Acts 9.31. If we would have the Spirit
to be our Comforter, we must follow the Spirit as our Guide and Counselor. If
we would find rest unto our Souls, we must take Christ's yoke upon us, Matthew.
11.
the yoke of his Precepts, which are all holy, and just, and good. A state of
inward Comfort and true Tranquillity of Spirit can never be secured and
preserved, but by a continued care to walk before God in a faithful obedience
to his Will in all things.

For there is no peace to the wicked; as is Chap. 48. 22. Chap. 57. 21.
twice expressed by the noble Prophet Isaiah; But Great peace have they that love
thy Law, Psalm. 119.165.
says the Royal Psalmist, the man after God's own heart, who herein spoke his
own experience; and elsewhere, Psalm. 37.37.
Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is
peace. While he lives, he lives in peace, his Soul dwells at ease; he feels an
unspeakable joy and pleasure within, upon the sense of his doing his duty, and
being faithful in obedience to his Lord and Master in Heaven. And when he dies,
he departs in peace, and shall Isa. 57.
enter into peace, and Mat. 25.
into the joy of his Lord. Here he tastes how sweet the Lord is, but there he
shall be abundantly satisfied with the plenty of God's House, Psalm. 37.
and made to drink of the River of his pleasures. The meek shall eat and be
satisfied; and their heart shall live for ever. Psalm. 22.
And so full and complete shall be their joy and satisfaction, that they shall
neither hunger nor thirst any more; Rev. 7.
for the Lamb shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living Fountains of
waters; and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. This is the happy
Portion of those Souls, who have the Lord for their God, with whom there is
fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are pleasures most pure and
permanent for evermore.

The Contents of the Chapters.
THe Introduction. CHAP. I. Of Faith. That Faith is the Ground and Foundation
of a Christian's Comfort. Several doubts and scruples about Believing,
answered. Page 1. CHAP. II. Of Hope. That a Christian's Comfort flows from the
Grace of Hope. The object of Hope is, 1. That which is Good. 2. A Good absent.
3. Though absent, yet possible; and that for Three Reasons. 4. Though possible,
yet difficult. An account of two sorts of difficulties, with particular
encouragements against them. Page 13. CHAP. III. Of the Holy Spirit. How a
Christian's Comforts flow from the Inhabitation and Testimony of the Holy
Ghost; as also from the Sanctification of the Spirit unto all Obedience, and
the fruits of Righteousness. Page 67. CHAP. IV. Of Prayer. Prayer is the great
Instrument of a Christian's Comfort. Concerning Prayer three things to be
considered: I. The Substance or Matter of Prayer, in three Heads. 1.
Thanksgivings. 2. Supplications. 3. Intercessions. II. The Qualification of
them that Pray. III. The fitness of Time for Prayer. Page 99. CHAP. V. Of the
Sacraments. How the Sacraments minister to a Christian's Comfort. A general
Survey of Sacraments. Five Reasons why God ordained Two Sacraments under the
Gospel. What Comforts flow from the Grace of Baptism. What Comforts flow from
the Lord's Supper. Page 155.
Christian Consolations taught from five Heads in Religion.
THE INTRODUCTION.
THE work of the Ministry consists in two things; in Threatenings or Comforts:
The first is useful for the greatest part of Christians, who are led by the
Spirit of bondage, and fear to do evil, because of wrath to come; which grows
out of love to themselves. The second is fit for the best Christians, that are
led by the Spirit of love; who endeavor to do righteousness, because they love
righteousness, and to be like unto God, who, they know, is only good (which
grows out of the spirit of adoption) and obey as sons and daughters, and not as
servants.

Our Savior and his Apostles insist sometimes upon the former way, threatening
the impenitent, yet qualifying it with tidings of peace, if they return and
amend their lives. For sharpness must be applied, according to the power which
the Lord has given for edification, and not for destruction, 2 Cor. 13.10. The
same Apostle propounds both in the former Epistle, Chap. 4. Verse 21. Shall I
come unto you with a rod? or in love, and in the spirit of meekness? Which
latter is most suitable to the Gospel, to proclaim peace on earth, and good
will toward men. And when James and John would have had fire to come down from
Heaven upon the Samaritans, Christ reproved them, saying, The Son of man is not
come to destroy men's lives, but to save them, Luke 9.56. and St. Paul, 1 Thessalonians.
5.9. God has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord
Jesus Christ.

And surely there is cause to apply a cluster of consolation against a few
grains of terror; 1. Because we are all concluded under sin, and the guilt is
ever present unto us. 2. Because of the weakness of the Graces that are in us:
not that they are weak, but that humane corruption is mixed with them. 3.
Because of the strength and manifoldness of temptations. 4. Because we are to
be exercised with the sufferance of the Cross, and we are infirm to bear it.
Lastly, Because little is communicated to us at the present of that Reward we
look for; least of all is any share of it present and before our eyes.
Forasmuch then as there are so many in-draughts that break into our heart, to
make us sick of sorrow and fear, let us seek comfort from God, who has left no
disease without a remedy to cure it, who heals all thy diseases, Psalm 103.3.
I say it is to be sought from God, lest we light upon them that tell false
dreams, and comfort in vain, Zach. 10.2. The right place for it must be the
Word of God, as it is Romans 15.4. That we through patience, and comfort of the
Scripture might have hope. Which comfort scattered up and down in that Holy
Book, and not cast all into a lump together, by searching it diligently, we may
draw our Consolation out of five things, Faith, Hope, The in-dwelling of the
Spirit, Prayer, and the Sacraments.

Coronata Fides

Dux viae

prudens simplicitas



CHAP. I. That Faith is the Ground and Foundation of a Christian's Comfort.
Several doubts and scruples about believing, answered.
FAITH is the Root of all blessings. Believe, and you shall be saved: Believe,
and you must needs be sanctified: Believe, and you cannot choose but be
comforted: Believe that God is true in all his promises, and you are the seed
of faithful Abraham, and shall inherit the promises made to Abraham. Believe
that you are Christ's, and Christ is yours; and then you are sure that none can
perish, whom the Father has given to him. There is no condemnation to them
that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. And as Martha said, Lord, if thou had
been here, my brother had not died, Jo. 11.21. So let all say that groan, and
pine away in sorrow, Lord, if thou had been here, if thou had appeared to
my soul in thy goodness, I had not fainted in my trouble. Isaiah foretells,
Chap. 61.3. that it should be Christ's office to give the oil of joy for
mourning, and the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness. For St. John
saw in the spirit, that they that follow Christ, are clothed in white
garments, in garments of joy, in the livery of gladness. Solomon describing the
provident Mistress of a Family, Prove. 31.21. says, She is not afraid of the
snow for her household, for all her household are clothed with scarlet: So the
household of Christ are not afraid of frost and snow, nor of any bitter blast,
they have put on the garment of dependence on Christ, which protects them, and
do resolve never to put off their privy-coat of confidence in their Savior.
With this did Christ encourage the poor woman, being under confusion, who had
secretly touched the hem of his garment, Be of comfort, thy Faith has made thee
whole, Matthew. 9.22.

The first time that the word [Comfort] is found in Scripture, is Genesis 5.29.
upon the birth of Noah; his Father says, This Son shall Comfort us: so when God
did give Christ to be made man, he did as it were say unto us, This Son shall
Comfort you, for his name is Jesus, and he shall save his people from their
sins. He that gave us him, has given us all things with him. As it is true to
say, that Matthew left all to follow Christ, so it is as true, that he got all
that can be wished by following him.

It is the Chemistry of Faith (let me use that word) to turn all things into
good and precious Ore. It is Abraham's Country in a strange land: Jacob's wages
when Laban defrauded him: Moses's honor, when he refused to be the son in law
of Pharaoh's daughter: Rahab's security, when all Jericho beside did perish:
David's rescue, when there was but a step between him and death: The power of
the Apostles to be able to cast out Devils: Mary Magdalen's sweet ointment to
take away the ill savor of her sins. Plead therefore with the Oratory of
Faith, and say, Lord, I have no life but in thee, I have no joy but in thee, no
salvation but in thee: but I have all these in thee; and then how can my Soul
refuse to be Comforted?

But some will say perhaps, Faith is a powerful Comforter: but I, poor wretch,
had need to be Comforted concerning my Faith. I find the pulse of it weak, and
sometimes it intermits, as if it beat not at all. Methinks I am not drawn near
to Christ, or that I am so far off, that I cannot embrace him. Some such
infirmity may seem to have been in the Thessalonians; and therefore St. Paul
says, I have sent Timotheus to establish you, and to comfort you concerning
your Faith, 1 Epist. Chap. 3. Ver. 2.

Now to turn this water into wine, and the trembling of this Objection into
peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, conceive as if these questions were put to
you; Do you often accuse your self of a weak Faith in secret unto God? I like
it for a good symptom; for an hypocrite does not use to accuse himself. And do
you bewail your want to the Lord, because you would have it better supplied?
that is a good sign too, for it is the same as to thirst for the living God.
They that have not the gift of Faith, do not miss it: but they that have it,
though but in a little, do insatiably desire the increase of it.

But do you find that the more you put forward to come to Christ, the more you
are put back by doubts and temptations? It is right the resemblance of him that
was sick of the palsy, Mark 2.4. fain he would have been brought to Christ,
but could not come at him for the press. This press that stops you, are the
snares of the world, vain imaginations, nay, perhaps humility, a broken heart,
and a tender conscience: Yet find out a way to come to your Savior, though the
throng be cumbersom. If there be no other way, untile the house, break down the
roof to be brought unto him: call unto the Lord to dissolve this house of clay,
that thy Soul may see him clearly without all impediment.

But, at the worst of all, do you lie in a swoon as it were? do you think there
is no life, no motion in your Faith? do you fear the light of grace is so
eclipsed, that you have lost all communion with Christ? Remember, and be
assured, that you could not miss Christ so much, unless Christ were in you.
Because God loves you, he seems to leave you; and withdraws out of the way for
a time, because he would be found; and makes you desire to seek him, that you
may hold him the surer to you when you enjoy him.

A mother that has conceived, may think not long after, that she perceives
some tokens of her conception; in a while she doubts of it again, and wishes
some signs of better satisfaction: she hangs long under many assays of fear and
persuasion: at last she finds the babe spring in her womb, and is utterly
confirmed. So it is with them in whom Christ is born anew, they have found the
Lord, yet sometime, as it is in the Canticles, He is behind the lattice, that
we miss him with a spiritual jealousy, and fall into many of these fits, as if
he were quite departed. And in this state of trepidation we must be exercised,
that we may know, that holy fear and a troubled spirit are heavenly qualities
that may consist with Faith.

Yet I have more to ask. Do you look dejectedly upon your Faith, because you
apprehend it is not full of life in the root, nor laden with fruit in Godly
practice? Woe be to them that are not sensible of those infirmities. It is one
of the best lessons in the New Testament, 2 Timothy 2.1. Be strong in the grace
that is in Christ Jesus; but it is one of the hardest. God gives a measure of
Faith to all in the Covenant that call upon him; but we have this gift in
earthen vessels, and taint it with the affections of our carnal mind. The best
Faith is weak, wavering, short-sighted, rises and falls like a tune in music.
Therefore to encourage a perplexed mind, hearken to Isaiah, Chap. 35.4. Say to
them that are of a sorrowful heart, be strong, fear not. For though it be but
an Infant-faith, it is a true Faith: as an Infant is a true man in the essence
of a man, though not a man in growth; perfect in the real being, though not in
the degrees, wherein we must strive to grow up more and more. To prove the
truth of it, believe all the Word of God, and it can be no wider: and for the
soundness of it, believe in Christ, and look for salvation in him alone, then
it is as legitimate and true born, as is the Faith of any Saint that is far
more noble. A dim, or a blear-eye, that looked upon the brazen Serpent, did
procure a remedy for a wound, as much as a clear and well-condition'd Eye. And
a little Faith, casting its weak beams upon Christ and his death, will go far.
The quantity of a grain of Mustard Seed has warmth and virtue in it to spread
abundantly. If any Faith on earth had shaken off all frailty, and comprehended
the joys of Heaven, without casting its eye aside to the love of this world, I
do not conceive how the body could subsist any longer here, but that the Soul
in that ecstasy would be dissolved and fly away.

Lastly, as God sees such sins in you, as you cannot see, so he sees such
Graces in you as you cannot perceive. The charitable, to whom Christ speaks
when they are at his right hand, Matthew. 25. do deny such good things to be in
them, as Christ did profess they had. The Canaanitish woman found no better in
her self than the vileness of a Dog, that waited for crumbs under the table, but
Christ commends her for her great Faith. The Centurion, Matthew. 8. saw nothing
but unworthiness in his person: but Christ gave him the praise above all those
to whom he had preached in Israel. Confess then, and be not ashamed to say, Lord
I believe, help my unbelief; and take consolation, that watersprings shall flow
out of a barren ground, which suspected it self to be parcht and dry. Though
you see but little by your own light, it is because it is put into the Lanthorn
of humility. And let these be the consolations of Faith.

CHAP. II. That a Christian's Comfort flows from the Grace of Hope. The object
of Hope is, 1. That which is Good. 2. A Good absent. 3. Though absent, yet
possible; and that for three Reasons. 4. Though possible, yet difficult. An
account of two sorts of difficulties, with particular encouragements against
them.
YET know that Faith never rides single, but it carries Hope before it. Faith
is the substance of things Hoped for, Heb. 11.1. No Scripture does better
contain them both in a little than Titus, Chap. 1. Verse 1, 2. The Apostle
says, That the Faith of Gods Elect, first, acknowledges the Truth. Secondly,
That it is according to Godliness. Thirdly, It is in hope of Eternal life,
which God that cannot lie, promised before the world began. When you see a
weight of iron tied to a line, wound up on a wheel from the ground to the top
of an house, remember it is like the heart of a sinner, leaden and heavy, lying
upon the ground, and wound up in this Text with the line of Hope to the top of
Heaven. Heaven then is the express and fair object of Hope, and God in his
promise is the procurer. Promise I say: For we do not grope for Heaven
blindfold; and fall upon it out of our own head without a warrant: but our
assurance is incomparably the best that can be given, and in the best manners a
Promise made before the world began, that is, freely, unrequested, when we
could have no being to ask it: and made over to Christ the Mediator, that it
should be put into his hand to perform it to us. And it is unchangeable, as is
all the truth of God: for he cannot lie, neither is there any shadow of change
in him. What can we desire more? Carry this evidence along with you, and show
it to your self upon every disquietness and deep plunge of heart: and how can
you choose but convince your self, that your melancholy and distrust is
causeless? The hope of the righteous shall be gladness, Prove. 10.26. And we
rejoice in hope, Romans 12.12.

The design of Hope is considered four ways. First, it intends unto that which
is good, which makes a difference between Hope and Fear: for we hope for that
which is good, we fear that which is evil. Secondly, It is not that good which
is present, but absent; and this makes a difference between Hope and Fruition.
Romans 8.24. Hope that is seen, is not hope: for what a man sees, why does he
yet hope for? Thirdly, Though it be a good absent, and not yet obtained, yet it
is possible; which is the difference between Hope and Despair: but we have no
color for despair, since all things are possible to God. Fourthly, It is a
possible good, but bonum arduum, to be gotten with difficulty and pains: which
puts a difference between the diligence of Hope, and careless Security. These
are the four promontories of Hope, and a good wind blows from every quarter.

I. First, It is good for a man to Hope, since we hope for that which is good,
so good, that it exceeds all that Eye has seen: for as yet we see not God, but
in his creatures. Nor Ear has heard it, that is, in its full, unutterable
excellency, which the words of Holy Scripture cannot express to our imperfect
reason. Then neither can it enter into the heart of man: for things can seem no
greater than words can utter. We know as yet but in part, hereafter we shall
know as we are known. If we have boasted to the Heathen that we look for a
Kingdom and a Crown of glory, we are sure we shall not be ashamed of that hope,
Romans 5.5. We may be ashamed that we have doted upon petty things, out of which
we have devised felicity, and they have failed, and deceived us: but our
treasure laid up in the Heaven is so sure, that in the end, and in the day of
trial none shall insult over our hope, and say where is now the Lord your God?
If a mortal man detain the wages of the labourer, it is a sin: Therefore it
cannot be incident to God, who is not unrighteous to forget our work, and
labor of love, Heb. 6.10. We shall not always be forgotten: our Expectation
shall not perish for ever, Psalm. 9.18. The judgment of a good eyesight is to
see afar off; so is the judgment of a good hope to remark the unspeakable
reward of a better age to come. Whereupon it has sufficient satisfaction and
content to leave, or to lose all it has, things not worthy to be compared to
the glory which is revealed in us, Romans 8.18. The rich Mines and Golden trade
of both the Indies are on the other side the Line: so the rich trade of Hope is
in the other world. Change your poor fraught, which is your lading in this
vessel of clay, and barter it for an immortal possession.

Hope that is not under the embers, but mounts up in a trembling flame, reckons
not what it is worth by a very little which it has in hand, but by its share
which is reserved in the storehouse of God's eternal recompense. Now I am
abased, but there is mine honor, a far abundant exceeding weight of glory. Now
I carry about a crazy sickly body, there it shall be immortal, and incident to
no distemper. Now my neighbors and acquaintance despise me, and run far from
me; there I shall be enrolled with Angels and Saints, and with the Church of
the first born, and with the Spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.23. Now
I live in all disorder of Church-ordinances, in distraction of Schisms, in the
filthy stanch of old and new heresies: but there is the new Jerusalem, where
all things set forth the glory of the Lamb in beauty, and holiness, and truth.
Now I must die, and deliver up my body unto the dust; but Christ died and rose
the third day, and will bring again with him in due time all those that sleep:
and comfort one another with these words, says St. Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. And as
when Christ ascended into Heaven, He went up with a merry noise, and the Lord
with the sound of the trumpet, Psalm. 47.5. So let every heart break out into
praise and gladness, whose hope flies up unto the Lord in his holy places:
Holding fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of hope firm unto the end, Heb.
3.6.

II. Stay yet, and consider it is a good which is absent that we hope for: When
it is come and brought to pass, Hope is at the journeys end. Say to the
righteous, it shall be well with him, for they shall eat the fruit of their
doings, Isa. 3.10. It shall be well, Dixit erit. It is not paid down, as we
say, in ready money, but we have a good bond for assurance.

Let me object upon this, Does not Hope deferred afflict the Soul? Yet be not
disheartened: it is better than so. For first we have somewhat in hand; because
that which Faith lays hold of, is really and actually its own: now Hope is
Faith's rent-gatherer, and takes up that which Faith claims upon the bargain
which Christ has made for us.

To be clearer yet: Ephesians. 1. verses 13, 14. We are sealed with the holy Spirit
of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance. You see then, that though
we have not the inheritance as yet, we have the earnest of it; and an
earnest-penny is more than nothing. Here I must distinguish between a pledge
and an earnest. A pledge is laid down for assurance to repay that which was
lent: but an earnest is given upon a bargain, to keep that till the rest be
brought in. Now the earnest that we receive of the Kingdom to come, is the seal
of the Spirit, an imprinted comfort that it shall be ours: A seal that cannot
be defaced, a comfort that cannot be taken from us. So much as you have of that
seal, so much you have of the earnest: therefore you cannot say that Hope has
quite nothing to stay its longing. The blossoms of the Spring do not only
promise, but are God's earnest, to represent the fruits which will wax ripe in
Autumn.

I will make it out in another similitude. He that is in a Merchants
warehouse, where spices are stored up, shall have some taste of them in his
palate by their strong scent, though he put not one corn into his mouth: so we
taste Heaven, because the Spirit that comes from Heaven dwells in us, and gives
many delightful signs of a glorified reversion.

But to go forward; it may not be denied but that Hope is anxious, and restless
till it come to enjoy. How tedious a thing it is to stay long without the
company of them, whom we entirely love? And can it be otherwise than irksom, to
be so long absent from the vision of God, and of Christ compassed with
innumerable Angels? St. Paul says no less, Romans 8.23. We, that have the first
fruits of the Spirit, groan within our selves, waiting for the adoption, to
wit, the redemption of the body. Here are groans and sighs indeed; but we shall
never be Sea-sick with that easy tossing, having Hope as an anchor of our
Soul, Heb. 6.19. Hope of the right stamp looking for the appearance of God, and
the reward that he brings with him, has a good Mate that goes together with
it, and that is Patience. In the saddest book of the Scripture, Lamen. 3.26. it
is written, It is good that a man should hope, and quietly wait for the
salvation of the Lord. Which that it may not be wanting, we must contend for it
in prayer, as it is 2 Thessalonians. 3.5. The Lord direct your hearts into the love of
God, and the patient waiting for Christ. And it is no difficult thing to be
persuaded. For when we are held off for a while from the inheritance of Heaven,
do we not attend God's leisure? and will the handmaid wait for her Mistress,
being in some degrees of place above her; and shall not the Creature stay the
leisure of the Creator so infinite above us? Beside, the patient expectation of
the recompense will increase the recompense, and make it more superlative:
therefore let not him that believes, make haste, Isa. 28.16. Nay, so your
Spirit will be patient, the Lord will allow you your importunity to call upon
him to hasten; My strength, haste thee to help me, Psalm. 22.19. Finally, stay
for that contentedly, which when it comes, it comes but once, and shall abide
for ever.

III. Another degree upon which Hope steps higher is this, that her aim is
possible. I have said how that which is proposed to it is good: that it is not
disconsolate, though it be in futurition, and not yet obtained; (for it is too
good to be yet obtained) if patience have its perfect work, it can attend
cheerfully. My soul wait thou only upon God, for my expectation is from him,
Psalm. 62.5. Strike we therefore pleasantly upon this third string, that the
past object of divine Hope is to be accomplished. For I run not as uncertainly,
I fight not as one that beats the air, 1 Cor. 9.26. Paul did do all things,
and suffer all things, for that which is seizable, and might be achieved.

The covetous is a projector for so much wealth, as can never be gotten. The
Epicure longs for so much pleasure, as can never be enjoyed. Great Clerks and
Philosophers seek for so much knowledge, as can never be found: which in
Isaiahs words, is to spend money for that which is not bread, and to labor for
that which does not satisfy, Chap. 55.2. This is able to break the brain, and
to break the heart: for there is no labor to lost labor. But the fruit of the
righteous is a tree of life, Prove. 11.30. His Hope stands upon a sound bottom:
it is all comfort for three Reasons. First it is possible, because it comes
from an Infinite power. 2. Because it is derived from Infinite love and
goodness. 3. It has abundant satisfaction from long and constant experience:
and what can we desire more?

1. The first pillar that props it up is the Almightiness of God. Abba Father,
all things are possible to thee, says our Savior, Mark 14.16. Talk not to me
how the Seas should be turned into dry Land, or how the poor can be raised up
to be set with the Princes of the people: or how stones can be raised up to be
children of Abraham: or how palsies and fevers can be cured with a word. I will
stop all gaps of infidelity with this one bush, That God is able to do it. He
that is made by no Cause, cannot be confined in his Being: and he that has no
bounds in his Being, can have no bounds and restriction in his Power. And if
any fancy start out of our weak brain, to cavil that somewhat is impossible to
God, it is soberly spoken by one, that it were better to say that this could
not be done, than that God could not do it. There is no possibility therefore
for Christian Hope to despair, because all things are possible to God. There is
no Horizon under Heaven, or above Heaven, that Hope cannot look beyond it. For
that comfort, that is commensurable with the strength and power of God, is as
large as can be contained in the heart of a creature.

But if you lean upon the help of men, and hosts, and Angels, they are slender
reeds, and will give you a fall: as God said of the vain trust of the Jews,
They shall be ashamed of Ethiopia their expectation, Isa. 20.5. How many do I
see to sink under a little sorrow, because they have too much temporal comfort?
the world is too liberal to them: it has given them of all things so largely,
that they have not the patience to want any thing. As God told Gideon, that he
had too much of Man in his Army to depend upon the Almighty for victory, and he
bad him retain but the thirtieth part, and his foes should fly before him,
Jud. 7.4. Throw all the miserable comforts of the world out of doors for
rubbish, and cast your self upon the strength of God, and upon that alone, and
then say, Lord receive me, for I have driven all other solace from me, that I
might enjoy thee alone: now I am ready for my Savior, for there is none to
help me, but only thou O Lord.

2. Secondly, That which holy Hope has in its prospect is possible, not only
for the Infiniteness of power, but for the Infiniteness of the mercy of our
God. It Is easy to get the favor of a gracious and a gentle nature among the
sons and daughters of men: and the most generous are the most reconcilable.
Then what possibility, nay what readiness will Hope find to be reconciled to
God, merciful, gracious, long-suffering, abundant in goodness and truth? Exodus
34.6. The Devil is not more frequent, nor more strong in any temptation, than
to undermine Hope in this point, that it is too forward, and too peremptory to
expect remission of sins: fain he would have a tender Conscience stick in this
mire, and never get out of it. Some Reverend writers go so far to teach, that
Satan himself at first, when he began his mischief in Paradise, was of opinion,
that sin could not be forgiven, it being his own case: and that he would never
have tempted Eve to disobedience, if he had imagined the eating of the
forbidden fruit could be pardoned; not suspecting that God would have given his
only Son to die for our redemption. Which I pass by, because it depends upon a
grave question, whether God could pardon sin by his absolute power, without
satisfaction made to his Justice? Deep disputings will yield but shallow
comforts: Of this we are assured, that the means which the Father appointed are
excellent (into which, 1 Pet. 1. the Angels desire to look) to give us
redemption and forgiveness of sins through the blood of Christ, according to
the riches of his grace, Ephesians. 1.7. We have trespassed against our God, but
there is hope concerning this thing, Ezra 10.2. Forgiveness of sins is put into
our Creed: he that does not believe it, has no Creed nor Christianity in him.
Do you believe a Catholic Church? that is the dowry of that Church, which
Christ espoused to him in his blood. Do you believe a Communion of Saints? this
is it in which we are baptized, in which all our communion does join, That
through Christ is preached forgiveness of sins, and by him all that believe are
justified from all things, from which we could not be justified by the law of
Moses, Acts 13. verses 38, 39. So also it is put into our prayer, as well as
into our Creed. And he that taught us to pray, Forgive us our sins, has taught
us this comfort, that sins are pardonable.

Yet an afflicted Conscience will receive suggestion, that some sins indeed are
pardonable, but not all, not the sin of the evil Angels, not the sin against
the Holy Ghost: and there is a sin unto death, I do not say ye should pray for
it, says St. John, 1 Ep. 5.16. These verily are set out for instances of
irreversible judgment, to deter us from committing crimes of a vast magnitude.
But mark, the Holy Scriptures have not unfolded it clearly and explicitly,
wherein the hainousness of these sins did consist, that we may not accuse our
selves of them, and fall into despair, as if we had committed them. Since you
know not expressly what these are, how can you lay them to your own charge? Nay,
if you lay them to your own charge, you must be mistaken: for he that condemns
himself, shall not be condemned of the Lord. Such incurable cast-aways have
their Consciences seared, and are not sensible of their guilt. Who more like to
be of that number than the Pharisees, who justified themselves, saying, Are we
also blind?

Well, says a forlorn sinner, my sins then are not the forenamed, nor out of
possibility of mercy; but it is almost as bad, that they are in an unlikelihood
to mercy; for they are very heinous. As unto that confession that your
trespasses are very heinous, conceive so of them, and spare not: true
repentance thinks no sin to be a little one. So St. Hierom spoke to the
commendation of the Lady Paula in her Funeral Sermon, that she was wont to
bewail every fault she had committed, as if it were one of the most
presumptuous crimes. But be it so really, that God has let you incur no small
delinquencies: as Aaron was not free from idolatry, nor David from adultery,
nor Peter from abjuration of Christ, nor Paul from persecuting the Church, nor
Manasses from witchcraft, nor Mary Magdalen from indefinite scandal, well, I
know not what; who yet all obtained mercy, for a pattern to them who hereafter
should believe in Christ to everlasting life, 1 Timothy 1.18. They were called
Novatians, who blotted out the beginning of the Eighth Chapter of St. John's
Gospel because the story tells us, that Christ dismissed the woman taken in
adultery with a gracious gentleness. Why should not his procedure in judgment
be like his doctrine? did he not preach that Publicans and Harlots should go
into Heaven before proud Justiciaries? Be merciful unto my sin, for it is
great, says David, Psalm 25.11. This is not the way to deal with mortal Judges,
when we stand at their bar; but this is the way to obtain propitiation from our
God; Heal me, for I am sore wounded; cure me, for I am very sick; be merciful
to my sin, for it is very great. Zozimus a Pagan that envied the honor of
Constantine the Great, makes this tale to discredit him in his History; that
Constantine had put his wife Fausta, and his son Crispus to death: after which
being haunted with an ill Conscience that gave him no quiet, he sought among
the Heathen Priests for expiation, and they could give him no peace: but he was
told that the Religion of Christians was so audacious, as to promise pardon to
all sins, were they never so horrible. Is not this to commend the Emperor and
his Religion under the form of a dispraise? for what rest could a troubled mind
attain to, from the Rites and Superstitions of Idol-gods? But in the immense
value of the price of the blood of Christ there is redemption for every sinner,
that repents and believes. Whatsoever ye loose on Earth, shall be loosed in
Heaven, says Christ to his Apostles, Matthew. 18.18. O lose not a syllable of
such comfort in this discomfortable world. Quodcunque is all manner of sin,
great and little. And if Christ has given such commission to men on Earth, to
unloose every sin by the power of their office, and the word of consolation,
then how unbounded is his own clemency? No sins can super-abound his grace, if
we do not sin presumptuously, because grace abounds.

Yet the poor Publican will beat his breast, and cry out dolefully, My sins are
many, they are more in number than the hairs of my head. The bill of endictment
is a true bill: who can tell how often he offends? Scarce any sin we act but
has a nest of sins in it: then think we what a heap will they make, when they
are put all together? Peter, it seems, misdoubted, that if a man were forgiven,
that had trespast often, it would be scandalous, and encourage the offender,
therefore he thought it fit to stint indulgence to some mediocrity, as it is,
Matthew. 18.21. Lord, how often shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him?
until seven times? Jesus answers, I say not unto thee, Until seven times,
but, until seventy times seven times: so that Christ commends a boundless
forgiveness in a finite number for an infinite. And doubtless himself would not
stick with us for the same number. God forbid we should think he taught to be
more merciful, or of greater perfection than himself. Her sins which are many,
are forgiven, Luke 7.47.

Be thankful and admire the mercies of our Father, both for nailing our great
sins to the Cross of Christ, and for acquitting us from the innumerable fry of
Minim-sins, those of daily incursion; because when one of the least is
remitted, all are remitted together. Mark that considerately. One that
committed some soul and leprous sin, goes mourning upon the deep sense of it,
and especially the horror of it makes him fear damnation: yet he greatly
deceives himself, if he think his other sins are past over, and this great one,
or a few such do remain to his perdition. For do you hope comfortably that some
faults of omission, some idle words, some garish and customary fashion of pride
are remitted to you? with the same affiance, leaning on Christ, you may hope
that you are discharged from your greatest enormities. For all unrighteousness
is covered at once to them with whom God is well pleased. No sin is forgiven to
him that is not in Christ, and against him that is in Christ there is no
condemnation. They are the sons of God, to whom the Lord does graciously remit
any fault: but where any fault is not remitted, they are his enemies. He that
is justified from any sin, must be truly penitent: but a true penitent is sorry
for all sins together; hates them, eschews them all alike. Then follows a
plenary absolution from all iniquity through Christ our Lord.

And beware that you overlook not these multitudes of sins of the under size,
as if little grief or anxiety would serve for them: are they not numberless
corns of sand? and may not a weight of too much sand sink a ship, as soon as a
burden of too much iron? The dailiness of sin must be bewailed with the
dailiness of sorrow. And then when thou lie down, thou shall not be afraid,
yea thou shall lie down, and thy sleep shall be sweet, Prove. 3.24. Now tell me
if this balm be not enough to heal the bleedings and bruisings of despair?
Talents of sin, and sins in small money, you may hide them all in the wounds of
Christ. It is possible for God to do the benefit, and possible for thee to
receive it. Let Israel hope in the Lord: for with the Lord there is mercy, and
with him is plenteous redemption; and he shall redeem Israel from all his
iniquities, Psalm 130. verse ult.

3. It must now be added, how that which Hope waits for is possible, since it
may find satisfaction from long and constant experience. In the younger days of
the world somewhat might be said to excuse the backwardness of Hope: they
wanted proof and demonstration in those times. Even Cain was the sooner
overtaken with despair, crying out, My sin is greater than can be forgiven me:
He had not lived so long to be taught the contrary by experience. But every age
has given advantage to Hope to be satisfied better and better. O God, we have
heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us the noble works that
thou did in their days, and in the old time before them, Psalm 44.1. The
records of God do tell us how the Armies of aliens have been discomfited before
his Children, how the rocks have given them drink, and the barren wilderness
bread; how the Church has been scattered and recollected: the righteous
continually supported either with deliverance or patience: that the dead have
been raised up to life: nay, that Enoch and Elias were taken up alive into
Heaven, to implant into our minds, that both they that are in the graves shall
hear the voice of Christ, and come forth; and that such as shall be found
living at that day shall be caught up in the clouds, and be translated into
Heaven. And I challenge Hope to instance, if it can surmise that any thing is
impossible to be brought to pass, since there is a president in every thing to
demonstrate, that the right hand of the Lord has brought mighty things to
pass. There is one thing, I confess, for which there is no example, neither can
be evidenced, till all things be accomplished, that is the coming of the Lord
Christ with the new Heavens and the new Earth: and yet, to confirm us in that
mystery to come, St. John did see the Idea or glimpse of it in his Revelation.

The use of all this is to remember the transactions of God in the times that
are gone before. Who ever saw the righteous forsaken? or the wicked flourish
long? was there ever any persecution of the Church, which has not ended in its
triumph? But stay for it, and pray for it, and condole for the delays of God's
providence, till you may say in earnest, My soul faints for thy salvation,
Psalm 119.31. How easy is it for a Christian, that has any nostril, to run
after God in the odor of his sweet ointments, and trace his steps from point
to point? and then to say with David, I have remembered thy judgments of old, O
Lord, and have comforted my self, Psalm 119.52. and from another Prophet, Ezekiel.
14.22. Ye shall see their way, and their doings, and shall be comsorted
concerning all the evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem.

The great storehouse of Consolation is Hope; therefore all this, and more
must be said to keep it fresh, like a green Olive Tree, having never a sear or
withered bough upon it. I come now to complete it; I have shown it aims only at
good, and that which is only and excellently good: at such a good whose harvest
is not brought in all in a year, but still there is more and more to be had,
and the most to come: It is possible through the greatness of Gods power and
mercy, as all ages have witnessed.

IV. But lastly, that which may seem to pinch is, that it is Bonum arduum, a
good not easily attained, but with great labor and diligence, to give warning
against sloth and security. It were not worth our longing to say we hope for
petty things, easy, and at hand; but for things of value, for which we must
struggle with many lets and impediments to possess them. No man need to hope to
find Cockle-shells on the shore: but to find Pearls in the Sea, that is an
object for the adventure of a Jeweller. Neither is the Jewel of Christian Hope
easily purchased. But as Elijah said to Elisha, Thou have asked a hard thing:
nevertheless if thou see me, when I am taken from thee, it shall be so unto
thee, 2 Kings 2.10. Much after that sort I commune with my heart, and say, It
is good to seek for eternal life, pursue it as the Heart brayeth after the
rivers of waters: there will be much a-do to get it, for many shall seek to
enter in, and shall not be able, Luke 13.24. Nevertheless, if thou can see
the Lord, as if he were continually before thee, thou shall not miss of that
thou desire: for all things are possible to him, whose eyes are ever toward
the Lord.

These difficulties upon which I strike, are either in our selves, or in our
adventure: in our selves partly through natural imbecility, partly through
contracted impotency.

1. Our natural languor is that of original contagion, which makes us so weak,
that there is none that does good, no not one. Which is not to be extenuated,
as if the malignity of it might be suppressed with a little resistance. It is
good to know the power of so strong an enemy, that we may be fortified against
it. It is a root of bitterness never to be dug up out of corrupt nature: a
coal of fire spitting out sparks of temptations continually: as inward to us as
the marrow is in our bones. Yet there is hope in Christ to slake this fire,
though not utterly in this life to quench it. It is a body of death, a whole
body, consisting of all the members of sin; yet a body is but flesh, and a
Spirit is mightier than flesh. Apply that of the Prophet Zachary to it, as we
may read it by the direction of our Margent, and keep to the Original, Chap. 8.
Verse 6. If it be difficult in the eyes of this people, shall it be difficult
in mine eyes, says the Lord? Therefore since God is our help against the
insurrection of this rebellious sin, let us be comforted in his help, and not
in excuses. For we must not plead our personal maladies, and natural
inclinations, and think that God will take it for an answer, and ask no more.

I am dull of understanding, says one, and what I am taught I cannot bear it
away. I am suddenly transported with indignation, and cannot choose but break
out: I am retentive of an injury, and cannot easily be reconciled. All this,
and the like is no better than the answer of those ill manner'd guests in the
Gospel, which were invited to a Feast made by a King, We cannot come, I pray
you have us excused: which sounds like confession and humility, but it is
denial and defiance. Spend your breath in a better way, and cry out often and
affectionately, Give me not over to my self O Lord, take away from me my stony
heart, and give me an heart of flesh. Drop down upon this barren earth, and it
shall bring forth quite against the bias of nature. The high minded will grow
meek as a Lamb, the covetous will begin to disperse and scatter abroad, the
lying lips will confess the truth, bitter cruelty will melt into pity,
newfangled braveries will be laid aside and blush at vanity. To what purpose
are the pourings in of the Spirit, but that what is wickedly inbred from our
conception, should be shaken off from the tree, and a better fruit spring up in
the place from the increase of God?

Mark the rain that falls from above, and the same shower, that dropped out of
one cloud, increases sundry plants in a garden, and severally according to the
condition of every plant: in one stalk it makes a Rose, in another a Violet,
diverse in a third, and sweet in all. So the Spirit works its multiformous
effects in several complexions, and all according to the increase of God. Is
thy habit and inclination choleric? why, try thy self, if thou be very apt to
be zealous in a good cause, and it turns thy natural infirmity into holy heat.
Is melancholy predominant? the grace of God will turn that sad humor into
devotion, prayer, and mortifying thy pleasures to die unto the world. Is thy
temperature sanguine and cheerful? the goodness of God will allow it unto thee
in thy civil life in a good mean; but over and above it will make thee
bountiful, easy to pardon injuries, glad of reconciliation, comfortable to the
distressed, always rejoicing in the Lord. Is a man phlegmatic and fearful? if
this freezing disease, which is in thee from thy mothers womb, be not
absolutely cured, yet the Holy Ghost will work upon it, to make thy Conscience
tender, wary to give no offense, to make thee pitiful, penitent, contrite,
ready to weep for thy transgressions. There are two handles to take hold of
every thing, says a Heathen: A dissolute man takes hold of original frailties,
and makes them Serpents: a holy man declines their Serpentine nature, and
catches them by that part, which may conduce to all manner of virtue. This is
the comfort of Hope against original inquination, that this great enemy, by the
operation of the Spirit, shall be made our friend, or our footstool. O
wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from this body of death? I thank
God through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 7.24.

What is stronger than a Lion? yet, if the Lion be killed, out of the strong
comes forth sweetness, Jud. 14.14. For all this the worst is not past: beside
natural pronity to sin, we have contracted much more evil by custom, education,
strong habits, noxious examples, bad enticements and infusions. The
Cockatrice-egge was laid, when we were in our mothers womb, but it proves more
venomous being hatched, and grown able to fly abroad. There are seventy sons of
Ahab, who shall kill thee? Even the sword of the Spirit: There is none like it,
as David said of that of Goliath, 1 Samuel 21.9. This is sufficient, not merely to
cut down grass and briars, but to hew down the tree, to cut off the branches,
to shake the leaves, to scatter the fruit, to fright away the fowls from the
branches, and the beasts from grazing under it, Dan. 4. verse 14. or as the
Apostle comforts us in plain words, without a Parable, I can do all things
through Christ that strengthens me, Phil. 4.13.

If you be over-toiled and heated too much, you know how to cool: cast off some
garments, wipe away the sweat, sit still and stir not, lest you inflame your
self with motion. Follow the same method, lay aside the burden of sin, that
enflames you, cast off the weight and the superfluity of naughtiness: bear in
mind that Christ sweat drops of blood in his Agony, to make you ashamed of
toiling and sweating in Satan's drudgery. Take ease in a Sabbath of holy rest,
and moil not in the unprofitable works of darkness. Try what refrigeration this
will give unto your Conscience: else take heed that you be not put to a
terrible sweat of fear, lest God take you away in his wrath, and give you up
for ever to Satan, whom you have served so willingly.

To the Law, and to the Testimony: mind no examples, but when they are wrapped up
therein. Be not conformed to this world, but be ye transformed by the renewing
of your mind, Romans 12.2. What a case had Noah been in, if he had framed his
life by common practice, when all flesh had corrupted their way? Choose better
company, as Enoch did to walk with God, Genesis 5.24. And can two walk together,
unless they be agreed? Amos 3. verse 3. It is more than agreement: it imports
endearment, benevolence, friendship with God. No title can be greater, or
sweeter: what can match that honor of Abraham and the Apostles, to be called
the friends of God, and Christ? No league in the world more sought for, or more
willingly accepted: no amity less burdensome, or more beneficial. St. Austin 8.
Confess. Cap. 6. brings in a couple that served the Roman Emperor thus debating
upon it. What can we look for in this Palace, more than to be called the
friends of our Sovereign? When we have got this, it is no sure and unchangeable
favor. And how long shall we attend before we be promoted to it? But let us
turn to God in this hour, and sue to be his friends, and it shall be done
instantly, and remain eternally. Ask and it shall be given, seek and we shall
find. And as we trespass by sins of daily prevention, there is a dailiness of
mercy to comfort us. But as you love Christ, and would be beloved, struggle
with temptations, do not yield upon the first enticement, no nor upon the
second or third assault. Resist the Devil, and he will fly from you: quit your
self like a man, fight like a Christian: The flesh is weak, but the Spirit is
willing, ready, able to assist you, Matthew. 26.41. Thus Hope waxes valiant, and
assures it self of victory against customs, habits, and all contracted
impotencies.

2. Lay now our adventure, the toil and peril of our labor, wherein we are
employed, in another balance, and more difficulty will appear. For Hope is
wise, and does not flatter it self, as if the Kingdom of Heaven were accessible
with little pains. What carefulness ought this to work in us? what self-denial?
what fear? what zeal? what unblamable conversation? I run, I fight, I keep
under my body, and bring it into subjection, 1 Cor. 9.27. For Christ Jesus I
have suffered the loss of all things, Phil. 3.8. Christ, having overcome the
sharpness of death, has opened the kingdom of Heaven to all believers: yet to
put us to our skill and labor to follow, mark what he has taught us, Matthew.
7.14. Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few
there be that find it.

And therefore is it so strait and narrow? a question worthy to be resolved, to
teach us, and to comfort us.

First, a very religious life is said by a Metaphor to go in at a strait gate,
because it is our masterpiece to find the door, or to begin well; therefore it
is called to be born again. For as to be born into the world needs more art,
and skilful Midwifery, than to bring us up: so to be regenerate, to begin to
live the life that is in Christ, is exceeding irksom to flesh and blood: so
many are the enticements that throng about the way, to keep us from the door,
and to hold us in love with those sins, which have been our companions. As an
Orator will be more timorous to deliver the first period of his speech, than
all that follows; so we stick long at the first onset to reform, to be strict,
to pass away with so much vanity as must be forsaken. The penitent thief could
not find the door till he was going out of the world: St. Paul, as some
compute, was twenty eight years old before he left to be a blasphemer. But rush
on, and make way through all resistances: he that has one foot over the
threshold, and has cast the world behind him, is well advanced into the courts
of our God.

Secondly, A Heavenly mind gathers it self up into one wish, and no more. One
thing have I desired of the Lord, which I will require, Psalm. 27.4. Grant me
thy self, O Lord, and I will ask no more. The new creature asks nothing of God,
but to enjoy God: give me this, O Lord, and for the rest let Ziba take all. I
will part with all to buy that one Pearl, the riches of Heavenly grace. The
servant of sin has all manner of pleasures under Heaven to trade in. Can he
ask for a shop with more variety of ware? why may he not have these, you will
say, and life eternal to boot? Some of them are inconsistent with life eternal;
but all are not, so they be added, and not sought for; as our Savior
distinguishes, First seek the kingdom of God, and these things shall be added,
Matthew. 6.33. But if you seek them, (which is to love them for themselves) and
above the kingdom of God, it is like a man that carries a piece of timber at
breadth upon his back; there is no door wide enough for a man to get in with
such an impediment upon his shoulders. It is not the gate that excludes him,
but he thrusts himself out with his own improvidence.

Thirdly, There are thousands of scandals, millions of errors to be avoided,
but truth and holiness are in the middle, in a little compass; and happy is he
that shuns extremes, and falls perpendicularly upon the golden mean. The
Commandments of God are but ten words, Deuteronomy. 4.13. the inventions of men, and
the forms of will worship are innumerous. Pray, Fast, give Alms, Christ
comprehends much external duty under those three Heads, but the Traditions of
men are more than can be put into a Catalogue. Call upon God in the time of
trouble, that and no more is the Pole Star of Faith in Prayer; but what a
compass does Monkishness take in, to drop beads in the invocation of Angels and
Saints? Profaneness neglects the honor of God: Superstition falls into
needless excesses about it: the true fear of God is in the center, as far from
the one extreme as from the other. As in an accurate Song you must keep
Minim-time, or else you will put the whole Quire out; so look that you sing the
new song of the Lord with trembling and accurate observation, miss neither
Cliff nor Note, that is, neither sound doctrine, nor pious practice.

These are the Reasons why it is so hard to get access to Christ in a narrow
way, and through a strait gate. If these difficulties be not discerned by some,
it is because they take up Christianity as it is in use among men, and as they
are born to it. But they that came to it in their years of understanding, and
were trained up in Church Discipline many years before they were baptized, and
all that time were put to exact trial what they would prove, and were taught it
over and over, how the Laws of Christ were far stricter than any other Laws in
the world; these were preacquainted with the Covenant which they must perform,
and then received it, with the largest, and hardest conditions. Yet they were
brought on with two special comforts: First, that God did behold from Heaven
the mightiness of the task which we took upon us, the troubles of persecutions,
the dangers of temptations, the infirmities of man to resist them: He knows
whereof we are made, he remembers we are but dust: it puts him to admire the
performances of his Saints, as Jesus marvelled at the Centurion's Faith, Matthew.
8.10. Secondly, when we are under our hazards, we shall have an answer from the
Lord, as St. Paul had, My grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made
perfect in weakness, 2 Cor. 12.11. Therefore as the Lord said of David when he
had chosen him, I have laid help upon one that is mighty, Psalm 89.19. So we
casting our selves upon the help of God, upon one that is Almighty; though of
our selves we have gathered little into our Omer, the blessing of God upon it
will not let us lack. Every hard matter that rose among the people was to be
brought to Moses, Exodus 18.16. so in every hard cause desire the Lord to plead
it, and to judge it; bring it to him, leave it in his Court, and he will end
it. These are the Cordials to revive Hope, touching the difficulties it finds,
in the way to obtain that Good which is set before it.

CHAP. III. How a Christian's Comforts flow from the Inhabitation and Testimony
of the Holy Ghost; as also from the Sanctification of the Spirit unto all
Obedience, and the fruits of Righteousness.
I Have insisted with so much length, and variety upon Hope, because it is the
largest inlet of Christian Consolation. Yet in the third place, that which
carries it on, nay, that which causes it, is the Holy Ghost. As the Air is the
medium through which the Eye does see all things, yet it is the light that
shines in it that makes all things visible: so Hope is the principal means,
enlivened by Faith, through which we rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of
glory; yet it is the Spirit inhabiting that kindles it, that enlightens it,
which makes it affect its object, and cleave unto it. Our Savior left the
world, and ascended into Heaven for many reasons, one was to give gifts unto
men; which gifts, though very many, are all united in their Fountain, the Holy
Ghost. Of which legacy Christ gave warning before his death, Jo. 14.16. I will
pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide
with you for ever. Verse 17. The world knows him not, because it sees him not:
but ye know him, for he shall dwell with you, and shall be in you. Verse 18. I
will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you. Chap. 16. verse 7. If I go
not away, the Comforter will not come unto you: but if I depart, I will send
him unto you. This Comforter, the everlasting Spirit, to speak after the phrase
of men, is the Proxy of Christ, his representative in our hearts. And so it was
fulfilled: for when the Spirit descended in great abundance upon the Church,
Acts 2. says St. Peter, This is that which is come to pass. Verse 28. Thou have
made known to me the ways of life; thou shall make me full of joy with thy
countenance. And for the evidence of it, it is said, Acts 9.31. The Churches
were edified, walking in the fear of God, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost.
Which Text begets this note, That Christian solace consists in two things,
which we may call the Root and the Fruit. The Root is the Holy Ghost taking up
his Tabernacle in us, so that our Body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost which is
in us, 1 Cor. 6.19. To walk by it in the fear of God is the Fruit of
Sanctification in all manner of obedience.

1. Unto the former, The indwelling of the Spirit, let this be premised. When
we speak of any one dwelling in safety, the great question is, Who keeps the
house? When David fled from Jerusalem for fear of Absalom, there was no
likelihood that his Palace would hold out, for he left ten women, that were
Concubines to keep the House, 2 Samuel 15. verse 16. So if we leave our
Concubines, our lusts and carnal desires to keep our Conscience, they will
betray us to Satan to get the possession. But who can take the City, if the
Lord keep it, Psalm 127.1. How impregnable are we, if he dwell in us, and we in
him, because he has given us of his Spirit, 1 Jo. 4.13.

All that one can say unto this, who is doubtful in Faith, will be, Show me
that the Father of mercies, and that the God of all comfort is entered into me,
and it suffices. I answer, I cannot show, that is, demonstrate it to another,
that this eternal life is in him; but I can persuade an apt Scholar to stir up
the Grace which is in him, that he may show it to himself. I say he may do it,
if he give his mind to it. Else St. Paul made a question to no purpose, Know ye
not that ye are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, and that the Spirit of God
dwells in you? 1 Cor. 3.16.

I deny not but the Devil has a way to fetch it about, to make you mis-know,
and take no heed of that you do perceive, if he did not stagger you with
delusions. This is the first lesson that he reads out of his Morals, That
distrust is a high point of wisdom; and be not over-reacht with opinion: you
are sure of that you see, and of no more. But to meet with this fallacy: Is
nothing certain, or at least so certain as that which may be seen? Why, the
Wind will blow away this objection, the Air will confute it. What can you make
up so close that the Air and the Wind will not get into it? Yet you see it not,
you know not whence it comes, it is an invisible messenger: So is every one
that is born of the Spirit, Jo. 3.8. Breath is an imperceptible expiration,
therefore Christ breathed on his Apostles, and said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost,
Jo. 20.22. Some gales of Western winds in the Spring make the Earth glad with
their gentle blast, and open the Buds and Flowers: so there is a breath of
Omnipotent virtue which fans the heart that was hot in sin with its coolness,
which carries away the Caterpillars that eat up the tender leaf of our first
greenness: which widens our blossoms to make their expectation show it self
openly: which perfumes the evil scents of scandals that annoy us, as it is
express to that intent in the mystical Song, Cant. 4.16. Awake thou North wind,
and come thou South, and blow upon my Garden, that the spices thereof may flow
out.

I bring the case again to be examined: Is no witness so competent to depose
for truth, unless it be sensible, and chiefly discerned by the Eye? then what
ail all Sects of Philosophers to say, That the Sun, and all the Stars above
work upon these Bodies below by heat and light, and likewise by influence? An
invisible virtue that does enter into the production of many effects; which
seems to have God's approbation with his own voice, Job 38.31. who mentions
there the sweet influences of Pleiades, and the bands of Orion. And can the
Constellations of the Firmament drop down good upon Minerals and Plants, upon
Man and Beast, and by a secret derivation? What an error, or rather what a
madness is it then, to scruple whether he that made the Heavens can dart
Celestial beams into man's Soul, without a sensible perception? And this is all
I will say more unto it: Is not the Soul of Man above a material apprehension?
Pliny, or Galen, or whosoever unadvisedly deny the Immortality of it, will
yield there is a Soul in our composition, that holds all the parts of the Body
together, and moves, and acts in them: yet they can as soon take a Pensil, and
paint an Echo, as describe the intelligible nature of a Soul, by species drawn
out in our sensitive fancy. Therefore it concerns us in maintenance of the
dignity of our own nature to say, That the Spirit of God can inform our Soul,
as well as our Soul can inform our Body. I know not what temptation may rise to
gainsay the truth, That the Soul is known by her powers and operations, that
it justifies it self to be an Immaterial substance, a spark kindled in us by
God, from Reason, and Will, and Memory. But what evidence is there that there
is a Divine cause that works in, and is more than these natural Faculties?

It is requisite to work close unto this question: and I answer. First, because
the bounds of nature are known, beyond which nature cannot reach forth it self:
as it works in its own sphere to preserve it self in being, and in well-being,
in health, in wealth, in fame and glory, in extending our selves unto ages to
come by leaving a posterity, in preserving our Country where we are born, and
the like. But to have our conversation in Heaven, at this present in Heaven, to
ascend thither in our desires, and in the tendencies of all our actions, to
aspire to live in blessedness for ever, to long to be at that rest, where there
is no sin; to look for a Church which has neither spot nor wrinkle: this could
not enter into us to prosecute it all industriously, constantly, cheerfully,
but by a supernatural elevation, (far above the vigor of a Soul pressed down by
a corruptible Body) that is, by the power of the Holy Ghost.

Secondly, I feel the pulse of that Divine Spirit beating in me by delighting
in tribulations for Christ's sake, and taking pleasure in infirmities upon the
same score, 2 Cor. 12.10. And again, I am filled with consolation, I am
exceeding joyful in all our tribulations, 2 Cor. 7.4. An obstinate Pagan might
arm himself with patience and resolution to vex his persecutors, and rather
fall into them, than decline them, out of spite and contumacy. But Self-love
being spun out of our bowels, bred in the bone; who could rejoice to endure
anguish upon anguish, that God might be glorified, but by strength which we are
not born unto, but which is given us, because we are born again of the Spirit.

Go farther yet. How much is the content of a natural man laid aside, when a
good Christian in his deliberate thoughts sometimes prays to have the
rebellions of his heart kept under by some expedient cross? wishes, for
wholesome correction to beat down the rankness of his sins? expects God's fan to
winnow the chaff from the wheat? For he knows, that as too much light dazles
the Eyes, so too much prosperity surfeits the mind. Therefore a good
practitioner in Repentance perceives, there is no better way to bring him in
from his wanderings, than to be scourged home with the gentle hand of God. To
which some Expositors say the Spouse alludes, Cant. 6.5. (reading one word as
it is right in our Margent) Turn away thine eyes from me, for they have puffed
me up. If we be puffed up, it is time to pray that the eye of God's outward
mercy be for a little turned from us. But where had nature learnt that Lesson,
if the Holy Ghost had never taught it.

Thirdly, As the Apostle says, No man hates his own flesh. Every man, not
overcome with a phrenzy of melancholy, loves his own being, and would preserve
his life. The Devil, that cannot die, knows how loath we are to die: All that a
man has will he give for his life, Job 2.4. But how many Saints have
undergone, how many more are willing to undergo the fiery trial, and offer up
their bodies for the testimony of the Lord Jesus? not to be cried up in
popularity: not to be enrolled in the same of an History, as there was such a
sprinkling among the Heathen. But they have died like Lambs in the midst of
Wolves, when they have been hated, and evil spoken of in excess, because they
would die for the truth of the Gospel, which their persecutors accounted to be
blasphemy against the Gods which they worshipped. If Parents, or Wives, or
Children hung upon their arms, and besought them with tears to spare
themselves, they threw them off as Christ did Peter, Get thee behind me, Satan,
thou art an offense unto me, Matthew. 16. verse 22. To see a Martyr at the point
of death feel no horror in his fleshly nature, but to be raised up as high as
the third Heavens with zeal; what humane power could bring him to it? nothing
but the Holy Ghost did, as I may say, lure his Soul out of the Body, with a
bait of a Crown of Glory.

Fourthly, The fruits of the Spirit are love, joy, peace, goodness, faith,
temperance, etc. Gal. 5.22. Is not the Tree known by the fruit? Such a cluster
hanging all together, growing constantly, and being fair and sound (Tota, in
toto tempore, cum toto cord) it is not possible that they should grow like a
Bull-rush out of the mud of corrupt nature. No man can say that Jesus is the
Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12.3. that is, say it effectually, and from
true allegiance to serve him as a Lord; for else Christ will say, Why call you
me Lord, Lord, and do not the thing which I say, Luke 6.46. This is the Spirit
that acts not only in prophesies and miraculous gifts, but in every child of
God. Even in the old Testament, Nehem. 9.20. Thou gave thy good Spirit to
instruct them: them, that is, those that were led out of Egypt by Moses, and
hearkened to him. And much more in the state of the New Testament, Romans 5.5.
The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given
unto us.

This might be extended into a great length, that the Holy Ghost is the
Comforter, called so by appropriation, though it belong to every person of the
Holy Trinity, and is well expressed in the first Divine Song, which is Printed
before the Psalms of David in Meeter, Thou art the very Comsorter
in all woe and distress;
The Heavenly gift of God most high
which no tongue can express.


This is the Unction, which we have from the Holy One, 1 Epist. Jo. 2.20. The
anointing which we have received of him that abides in you, Verse 27.
Anointing-oil is an oil to cure the sick, James 5. An oil of gladness, Psalm
45. A fomentation to mitigate aches and torments in the bones, and in the heart.

2. And can the Fruits choose but be answerable to the Root? they must needs
partake of it. First, because all that we do to the honor of God must be done
with gladness, willingly, and cheerfully: else it comes not from the Spirit of
sons, but either from the Spirit of bondage, or rather from the Spirit of the
world. The new Disciples received the word gladly, and were baptized, Acts
2.41. They continued with one accord daily in the Temple with gladness, and
simplicity of heart, Verse 46. I was glad when they said unto me, we will go
into the house of the Lord, Psalm 122.1. Sing Psalms, make a joyful noise unto
God, Psalm 66.1. Let us come with assurance in our supplications that we shall
be heard, praying with Faith in the Holy Ghost, Jud. verse 20. And then the
prayer of the upright shall be Gods delight, Prove. 15.8. and why God's delight,
but because his servants delight in prayer? He that shows mercy, let him do
it with cheerfulness, Romans 12.8. And he that gives, offers a blemished
sacrifice, if he do it grudgingly: For God loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9.7.
Not so much but our losses and tribulations must be sustained with gladness.
Thy rod and thy staff do comfort me, Psalm 23.4. Enter into the combat
willingly, and the continuance will be a pleasure. Our consolation abounds by
Christ: for as ye are partakers of the sufferings, so shall ye be also of the
consolation, 2 Cor. 1.7. Therefore the Apostles did change the name of a famous
Disciple, called Joses, into a notion of this Theme, and called him Barnabas,
which is being interpreted, The son of consolation, Acts 4.36. The Rabbis of
the Jews hold themselves very close to this doctrine, and would have it
observed, that the merrier the heart is in the Lord, the more capable it is of
the Spirit of God. Partly because Miriam, when she prophesied of the mighty
acts of Jehovah, took a Timbrel in her hand and danced, Exodus 15.20. Partly
because that Samuel, after he had anointed Saul to be King over Israel, told
Saul, Thou shall meet a company of Prophets coming down from the high place,
with a Psaltery, a Tabret, a Pipe, and a Harp; and they shall prophecy, and
the Spirit of the Lord will come upon thee, and thou shall prophecy with them,
and shall be turned into another man, 1 Samuel 10. verses 5, 6. More
emphatically, when Jehosaphat called for Elisha to enquire of the Lord, says
Elisha, Bring me a Minstrel, and it came to pass when the Minstrel played, that
the hand of the Lord came upon him, 2 Kings 3.15. That by the ravishing strains
of Music his mind might be exalted into Heavenly contemplations. Which is a
great check to that drowsy dullness in devotion, which our late Reformers have
brought in, and have excluded the solemn melody of the Organ, and the raptures
of warbling and sweet voices out of Cathedral Quires. They that miss that
harmony, can best tell, how it was wont to raise up their Spirit, and as it
were to carry it out of them to the Quire in Heaven. And beside, cheerfulness
is not only an adjunct, or companion with all the works of grace, in that time
they are bringing forth: but being done and finished, that which is post-nate,
the afterbirth, as I may call it, comes with such a gleam gliding over all the
Soul, with such serenity and peace of mind as cannot be expressed; our Conscience
bearing us witness that we have been conversant in doing the pleasure of the
Lord, as it is 2 Cor. 1.12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our
Conscience, that in simplicity, and Godly sincerity we have had our
conversation in the world.

Here I shall find work to heal the broken in heart, who look upon the fruits
of their lives with no content in themselves, but are unsolaced, and cast down,
because neither in number, nor in weight have they brought in that which the
Lord required: they look on their ways, and they find them crooked: they look
on their heart, and they find it is not constant to good purposes. To whom I
rejoyn; If this proceed from penitence, from quick sense of sin, from humility,
which is opposite to a self-justifying, they have cause to praise God, that
they are thus affected. Let them look narrowly if this Gold (for it may prove
no worse) be current, when it is brought to the touchstone; then they may lift
up their eyes, and look cheerfully toward Christ; for it is no flattery to
say, they are under his grace and mercy. Deal clearly, that you are astonished
at your frailties, because you think you can never work enough, never shun sin
enough; and though your Conscience condemn you, God will afford you equity
against the rigor of Conscience: for he that searches the heart, knows what
is the mind of the Spirit, Romans 8.22. We are conceived in sin, and it is so
intimate unto us, that we have no promise to be so spiritualized in this life,
that we shall not often trespass. God has concluded all in sin, all in
unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all, Romans 11.32. But it is one thing to
fall into sin, another thing to run into it. One thing to be carried away by
the passions of it, another to covet, and desire it. One thing to be overtaken
in a fault, another thing to abide in it without repentance. And great odds
between those that are given over to please themselves in filthiness, and
between them that labor and desire to please God, though many times they
attain not to perfect that willingness. The scope of the Seventh Chapter to the
Romans, as I apprehend the mind of the Apostle, is, to refresh our guilty
Consciences, that a regenerate man is not obnoxious to condemnation, though his
flesh upon some temptations make him the servant of sin, because still in his
mind he serves the law of God. And I am confirmed in that sense, because
without all contradiction He teaches the like doctrine, Gal. 5.17. The flesh
and the Spirit are contrary one to another, so that we cannot do the things
that we would.

And will the righteous God require more of a sick and feeble servant than his
best endeavor? Will not Christ accept from us the same that he did from Mary,
that broke the Box of Ointment over his head; She has done what she could?
Mark 14.8. Let a contrite heart, that would fain be righteous, remember the
prayer of Nehemiah, Chap. 1. verse 10. Let thine ear be attentive to the prayer
of thy servants, who desire to fear thy name: or the protestation of St. Paul,
Heb. 13.18. We trust we have a good Conscience, in all things, willing to live
honestly. But this desire and willingness must be without hypocrisy; not like
iron that is gilded, base metal within, and rich without: It must be steady,
industrious, instant to perform. Vehement holy desire is a great degree to
perfection in our state. For the beginning of wisdom is the desire of
discipline, Wisd. 6.18. but a lazy careless desire is a great token of
imperfection. The Soul of the sluggard desires, and has nothing, Prove. 13.4.
And again, The desire of the slothful kills him, for his hands refuse to
labor, Prove. 21.25. Like Vagabonds, that when an Officer catches them, will
feign that they desire a service, and to be set at work: but take them at their
word, and they will run away, that they may live in loitering, and upon other
men's labors. St. Paul provoking both rich and poor to liberality, according to
their respective abilities, frames a rule upon that occasion, which is
applicable to all good works, 2 Cor. 8.12. If there be a willing mind, it is
accepted according to that which a man has, and not according to that which he
has not. Yea, in some cases, when I desire a good thing I am at my furthest. I
desire the appearance of the Lord Jesus at the great day. Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly. I can do no more. I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. I
must do no more: for I must not attempt my own dissolution. I wish for the
conversion of the Jews to the Faith, I must not compel them. This holds in a
few things. In the most, willingness must show some practice; as in the same
Chapter, Verse 11. Now therefore perform the doing of it: that as there was a
readiness to will, so there may be a performance also of that which you have.
But to desire to do, and to do little, is a sign that there was little desire.
This has overthrown many, that they desire not to reach high. But we know that
God gives his Grace by Talents, and not in petty sums; yet a lukewarm
professor can be content with mites. Could such a one get a moderate competency
of righteousness, knowing that without holiness no man shall see God, then he
would sit down, and let others strive, if they like it, to be the tallest
Cedars in the house of the Lord.

There are many such indifferent Disciples, that would be always babes, and
never come to a manly growth: wrap themselves about with as many fig leaves as
would cover their shame, and think they want no more apparel. These if they
knew what it were to a dram, that would serve them to attain salvation, they
would reach so far if the grace of God would assist them; but would put
themselves to no trouble to purify their body and Spirit any further. Here Is a
pretense of a desire to serve God, but with so much laziness, with so much
lethargy, that the Lord disdains it as dead carrion. He would serve God, and he
would serve Mammon. He approves much prayer, but he cannot attend it. He would
not for all the world but be a Christian: yet a small share in profit, or a
snap at a little pleasure will pervert him to be a dishonest Christian. But
real and holy desire stands up for much, though it cannot do so much honor to
God as he would: like the disease Ephialtes, that oppresses us in the night
between sleeping and waking, we would turn to the other side of the bed, and
cannot. But to shake off this Incubus, it listens after all the noble exploits
that the Saints of God have done, and would exactly follow them; or, if it were
possible, run before them: if not, it will be heartily sorry that frailty makes
it come short of the best. It would compound for no less than to pay all, if it
were able. Then you shall find the heart pant often with these inward earnings;
Sweet Savior, should any of thy servants love thee better than I? should any
of thy Disciples be more obedient than I? No Lord: for none of thine are so
much endebted to thy passion, because none had so many sins to be forgiven. How
amiable are thy Commandments O Lord of hosts? my Soul thirsts to be the
nearest of them that shall stand before the presence of the living God. Lord
let me love thee as Peter did, Lord let me love thee more than these.

So I have revealed the First comforts flowing from the Holy Ghost by his
Inhabitation, and inward Testimony: and the next Comforts by the Fruits of
Righteousness, and those sincere desires of Godliness, which by Christ's
merciful interpretation supply our failings. All which I conclude out of our
Church-Song made to the Holy Ghost.

Visit our minds, and into us
Thy Heavenly Grace inspire,
That in all Truth and Godliness
We may have true desire.
CHAP. IV. Prayer is the great Instrument of a Christian's Comfort. Concerning
Prayer three things to be considered: I. The Substance or Matter of Prayer, in
three Heads. 1. Thanksgivings. 2. Supplications. 3. Intercessions. II. The
Qualification of them that Pray. III. The fitness of Time for Prayer.
THE order laid down in the beginning carries me to the Fourth part of
Christian Consolation, The Heavenly delight of Prayer. It is the lively
expression of Faith, the Ambassador which Hope sends to God, the comfort of
Love, the fellowship of the Spirit, our Advocate unto our Advocate Christ
Jesus: our Incense, whose smoke ascends up, and is sweet in the nostrils of the
most High: which promises such abundant success, that humility had rather
conceive than utter it, lest we should seem to boast. A lowly supplicant to God
never rose up from his knees, without some stirrings of gracious expectation,
nor without a prophetical instinct that the mercy of the Lord was nigh at hand.
Which fortunate presage Isaiah confirms unto us, Chap. 56.7. I will make them
joyful in my house of Prayer. And how readily may we use this mighty Ordinance
of God? how soon it may be done, if we have a mind to it? What freedom have we
(no man can deny it) to utter a brief Prayer (and very often if we will) in the
greatest toil and business? The tongue of the stammerer shall be ready to speak
elegantly, Isa. 32.4. It is so facile a part of Religion, as he that has a
tongue can scarce miss it. It is as easy to say Our Father which art in
Heaven, as to see Heaven which is always in our eye. Every Sect of Pagans and
Idolaters were taught by instinct to fly unto it ex tempore: as the Heathen
Mariners cried every man to his God, Jon. 1.5. An Atheist falling into a sudden
danger, as suppose a Pistol were put to his breast, would cry out as soon to
God to help him, as any true believer. And he that upon deliberation did say
there was no God, will break out into a confession, before he is aware, that
there is a God, by natural impulsion. A poor Whelp has found a way to lick its
own sores whole with its tongue: so when we are oppressed with misery, whether
the evil of sin, or the evil of punishment, we are prompted by the natural
notions of our Soul to lick the sore with our tongue, that is, to call for help
from Heaven. That Soul, which God did breath into man, cannot shake off this
principle, That all succor comes from above, for which it must breath out it
self unto God. No creature among Beasts, but, being smitten, will fall upon the
way to relieve it self, except a blind incogitant sinner. Such as have written
upon their sagacity in that kind, tell us, That the Fishes in the fresh waters
being struck with a tool of Iron, will rub themselves upon the glutinous skin
of the Tench to be cured. The Heart wounded with an Arrow runs to the Herb
Dittany to bite it, that the shaft may fall out, that struck in his body. The
Swallow will seek out the green Tetterwort, to recover the eyes of her young
ones, when they are blinded. Only a stupid sinner forgets how to redintegrate
his miserable estate, by throwing himself down prostrate before God in humble
petition. He walks forlorn, lost to himself, lost to his right wits, because he
has no knowledge, or no good opinion of the comfort of Prayer. Which is my
purpose to make him learn by that which follows, looking upon the Substance or
Matter of Prayer, The Qualification of him that Prays, and the fitness of
Time when Prayer is to be made.

I. The Matter of Prayer is as copious as all occasions that can be named: it
shall suffice for my purpose to treat of three Heads, Glorifications with
Thanksgivings, Supplications, and Intercessions.

1. The first is bent to magnify the Almighty, to extol his Name, to praise
him for his Goodness. This is the Hallelujah of David, and of the Saints in
Heaven, that is, give glory to Jah, or the great Jehovah: which is followed
with a rare variety in the Song of the three Children; O all ye works of the
Lord, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for ever. It is a ditty
that is balsamed all over with a perfusion of delight, to praise God from all
things that he has made, from the center of the Earth to the top of Heaven.
And this is most divinely expressed in that which is called St. Ambrose his Hymn
in our Common Prayer; We praise thee, O God, we knowledge thee to be the Lord
-- And let the servant of God that will listen to me repeat it often and often.
For it is a piece of devotion so sweetly spread out into the branches of
Heavenly praise, Confession of Faith, and devout Petitions, that the like did
never come forth, since the time it was penned. Let me speak to others out of
the sense of my own heart, and I may safely profess, that in the service and
worship of God, I find nothing so delightful, as to continue in the praise and
honor of the Lord. If another contradict it, and say, that there are some
means more aptly calculated, as I may speak, for the high Meridian of Comfort;
He is He, and I am I, and I appeal from him to my self, what I find in my own
motions, and feelings. And what man knows the things of a man, save the
Spirit of a man, which is in him? 1 Cor. 2.11. And I observe that in the
prudent institution of our Church, to hold forth the Consolation we have in
Christ, after the participation of his Body and Blood in the blessed Sacrament,
it teaches us to break out all together into a Jubilee, Glory be to God on
high -- We praise thee, we bless thee, we glorify thee, etc. For when we are
full of that holy Feast, and have eaten Angels food, we fall into the tune of
Angels, and signify immediately before we depart, how much our Spirit
rejoices in God our Savior.

But who knew better the mind of the Lord, than the Spirit it self in those
admirable exstacies of David? Sing praises unto God: for it is pleasant, Psalm
135.3. Sing praises unto our God: for it is pleasant, and praise is comely,
Psalm 147.1. Sing aloud unto God our strength: make a joyful noise unto the God
of Jacob, Psalm 81.1. Every furrow in the book of the Psalms is sown with such
seeds. I know nothing more certain, more constant to expel the sadness of the
world, than to sound out the praises of the Lord as with a Trumpet: and when
the heart is cast down, it will make it rebound from Earth to Heaven. This was
the wisdom of the holy Church throughout all the world (till distempers put us
out of the right way not long since) to solemnize the praise of our Savior
upon the Feasts of Christmas, Easter, etc. that we might celebrate the great
works which God has done for us, with the voice of joy, and praise, and with a
multitude that kept Holy Day, Psalm 42.4. O give thanks unto the Lord, be
telling of his mercy and salvation from day to day: Give thanks unto him with
cheerfulness, for a joyful and pleasant thing it is to be thankful. Who is a
just man, and fair conditioned, that would not pay a debt, and be exonerated of
it? He that can say he has paid what he owed, is it not a quietness to his
mind to be discharged?

It goes further a great deal, and brings more advantage, when we offer up the
sacrifice of retribution, the incense of Thanksgiving unto the Lord; for we
draw on more benefits, when we declare the goodness of the Lord upon the
receipt of the old. And the gratuitum which God gives, is a thousand fold
greater than the present which we bring. This proposed to them that will fly
high from the pinnacle of the Lord's Prayer, the first Petition, Hallowed be thy
Name.

2. Neither let them faint that stoop low in Supplication: for mercy will
embrace them on every side.

Two things being put together are of much weight: we pray with God's Spirit,
and by his Word. He invites us in his Word to pray: and he gives the gift with
which we pray. I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of
Jerusalem the Spirit of Grace and Supplications, Zach. 12.10. Did He pour upon
us his Grace? and have we received a Commandment, the outward sign of his Will?
and can we suspect after all this, that He will put us off, and deny us? Is his
Grace given in vain? or has He sent his Word to delude us? He has kindled a
fire in our breasts, and it is an Heavenly flame that burns within us. Lord,
though we are vile and despicable, thou can not despise the acting of thine
own Spirit, nor frustrate thine own operations. Or do we come unbidden when we
cast our selves down in thy presence? Nay Lord, thou have beckned, and called
us, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden. Hold fast to these two,
and who can forbid us to be comforted? the Lord bids us pray, and he gives us a
heart to pray. For it is not strange to his mercy (perhaps it is strange to
man's conceit) to give us strength to bring forth that obedience, both to will
and to do, which himself has commanded. As he gave the Blessed Virgin strength
to bring forth the Babe, who was conceived, and formed in her womb by the Holy
Ghost.

This I do the rather enforce, because we can see no comfort in our selves:
therefore as I derive all the virtue and spirituality that is in Prayer from
the efficacy of Grace. So I refer all the success to Christ, in whom we are
blessed with all spiritual blessings, Ephesians. 1.3. Whatsoever ye ask the Father in
my Name, he will give it, Jo. 15.16. But He and his Father are one, therefore
he says, If ye shall ask the Father any thing in my Name, I will do it, Jo. 14.
verse 14. If we had no better means to God than our selves, and our own merits,
there were no hope to speed: nay our hearts would be as faint and dead, as if
we heard our selves denied before we had opened our lips. But we conclude, as
it is to the most of our Collects, through Christ our Lord. When we bring that
Name in the rear, and quote him for our Merit and Mediator, then I know it will
be well, and that the Lord will hear the petitions of his servants. Should we
not put our requests into Christ's hand to offer them to his Father, Sion might
spread forth her complaints, and there would be none to comfort her: and we
might remain for ever in that heavy plight, Psalm 77. verse 3. I remembered God,
and was troubled: I complained, and my Spirit was overwhelmed. But if we
renounce our wretched selves, and imagine not the least intrinsecal perfection
to be in our Prayers, do we sail then by the Cape of Good Hope? yes, because
God is contented to yield upon such addresses. Jacob may wrestle with the Angel
all night, and protest he will not let him go till he have blessed him. But
Victus est quia voluit: God was overcome, because he would be overcome of
Jacob: he lets us prevail, because he is willing to yield: but there is no
strength is us to win, if he would not suffer himself to be vanquished.

There is no other person but Christ, in whom the Father (I know not what kind
of necessity to call it) cannot but be well pleased. Which made him say before
his Disciples, Jo. 11.41. Father, I thank thee that thou have heard me, and I
know that thou hear me always: As it is also, Heb. 5.7. Who in the days of
his flesh, when he had offered up Prayers and Supplications, with strong crying
and tears, was heard for his piety. This is the pre-eminence of our High
Priest, who is an Orator for us all, that the Lord cannot reject his Prayers.
Therefore committing our daily Oraisons to our High Priest, to bear them into
the Holy of Holies before his Father, they are in a sure hand: and they that
know his Name will put their trust in thee, Psalm 9.10. Much more they that
know his Office perfectly. Wherefore let Prayer carry on these considerations
with it; That we are invited by God to that duty: That the Spirit instigates us
unto it, and helps our infirmities, Romans 8.26. That it is presented to the
Father by the mediation of the Son; then how can thou be sad, O my Soul, and
fear to miscarry? Is not the lot fallen unto thee in a pleasant field? and
may thou not promise to thy self a very goodly heritage?

Without all dispute then proceed unto Prayer, and for a beginning, 1. Ask in
Faith, James 1.6. that is, attribute unto God that he is Almighty, and can do
above all that we ask, or think: Consent to his truth, that he is faithful in
his promises: for he that believes not those, makes God a liar. Acknowledge
his goodness and mercy through Christ, that He will withhold no good thing from
them that lead a Godly life. Let there be no wavering, no disputing about these
Attributes of God, lest we be condemned out of our own mouth. So much Faith, so
much efficacy, so much confidence, so much comfort in Prayer.

Then will a solicitous Christian reply, What will become of me? I have not
that plenitude of Faith: at least in sundry occasions I have it not to
ascertain my self that I shall prevail with God. No more had Abraham himself a
perfect Faith without any flaw. Excellent things are spoken of him, Romans 4.18.
Who against hope believed in hope: and that he staggered not at the promise,
but was strong in Faith, Verse 20. Yet see how he stoopt a little, Genesis 17.18.
Shall a Son be born unto him that is an hundred years old? and shall Sarah that
is ninety years old, bear! O that Ishmael may live? God is not extreme to mark
what is done amiss in every convulsion of Faith: which appears, Psalm 31. verse
22. I said in my haste, I am cast out of thine eyes: nevertheless thou heardest
the voice of my supplication, when I cried unto thee. You must be sure that in
general David subscribed to the power, and truth, and goodness of God: but
there was a temptation upon him at that time in some particular case, in which
he distrusted, or doubted that there was no likelihood to prevail. But if there
be such a one that says, I will pray, but I know I shall be never the better,
he is an infidel, and mocks God: in that bad mind he did well to say he should
be never the better: for he did usurp a form of Godliness, and denied the power
thereof.

He is the right Supplicant, but a very rare one, that has no staggering or
diffidence in his heart, that comes close up to our Savior's rule, Mark 11.24.
What things soever ye desire when ye Pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye
shall have them. Yet the Lord will not cast them off, who are but in the next
form, and do not resolutely promise success unto themselves in the instant of
their present Supplications: but bear it thus between Faith and doubting,
whether I shall succeed in this or that I am not confident, but of this I am
most assured, that I shall be the better for my Prayers. And I would it were
thus and thus, because I conceive it would be best for me: but I am certain it
will be better than the best that I can imagine, which the Lord knows to be
most expedient.

Another perhaps may wrangle himself into an error, and say, How do the Heathen
and the wicked obtain good things, if nothing will prevail with God but the
Prayer of Faith? Consider that even a Pagan and Idolater would ever Pray, but
that they have some kind of belief to obtain fruit by their Prayers. The King
of Nineveh bad a solemn Fast at the hearing of Jonah's prophecy; For, says he,
Who can tell if God will turn, and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger,
that we perish not? Jon. 3.9. None but a Lunatic would ask for relief from
them, that had neither knowledge of his case, nor power to redress it. O but
the prayers of such are not grounded on the Faith that we speak of. It is true:
such a Faith as possessed Idolaters, is not that which impetrates mercy from God.
Then I say, neither Jews, nor Mahumetans, nor wicked men get any thing by that
Prayer, to which the promise is made, Ask, and ye shall have. For whether they
Pray or not, all that they obtain had come to pass, though they had held their
peace. It is for our sins, and to scourge us, that they have kingdoms, and
victories, it is not their motley-faith that did purchase them. And for all
manner of store and plenty that the Earth yields to them, it is but as God
gives fodder to the Cattle, and meat to the young Ravens that call upon him.

2. The Prayer of Faith then is only available: but out of the mouth of an
humble suitor. For who will give an alms to a proud beggar? Thus says the high
and lofty one, that inhabiteth Eternity, I dwell with him that is of a contrite
and humble Spirit, to revive the Spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart
of the contrite ones, Isa. 57.15. Let the comparison between the Publican and
the Pharisee remain for ever in our memory, Luke 18. The Prayer of the poor
destitute, the contrite, the penitent, the bleeding heart is a sacrifice well
seasoned with the salt of anguish and misery. Away with high looks, and high
words. Lord, thou do hear the desire of the humble, and do prepare their
heart, Psalm 10.17. And God comfort those that are cast down, 2 Cor. 7.6.
Put your self back, who are but dust and ashes in a great distance from the
Lord, that you may behold him the better in his infinite greatness. And a lowly
heart will never spare to deject the body. O come let us worship and fall down,
and kneel before the Lord our Maker. Solomon prayed upon his knees, 1 Chronicles. 6.
so did Daniel, Chap. 6. so did Peter, when messengers came to him from
Cornelius, Acts 9. so St. Paul: For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father
of our Lord Jesus, Ephesians. 3.14. And not only men upon Earth, but the glorious
Spirits in Heaven, cast themselves and their Crowns down before him that
sits on the Throne, Revel. 4. Nay the Son of God fell down upon his knees,
and prayed unto his Father, Luke 22.41.

And Fasting, which is a pregnant circumstance of humiliation, was much in use
with Prayer; the instances are innumerous: to signify we had no part in any
comfort, nor any delight in the Creatures, till we were reconciled to the Lord.
So was Sackcloth used; and all apparel of beauty, all ornaments of riches and
pride were put off for that time. Let them be no more than outward
circumstances; yet they are significant.

But that which is a sure companion, and most intimate to humility in Prayer,
is Patience. It breaks not away in a pet, because it is not answered at the
first or second asking: that is disdainful and arrogant. It holds on, and
attends, and cries till the throat is dry: I waited patiently for the Lord,
Psalm 40.1. And there must be patient continuance in them that seek for Glory
and Immortality, Romans 2.7. Faith is the foundation of Prayer: and, to continue
the Metaphor, Patience is the Roof. The winds blow: look to the foundation, or
the building will fall. Rain and storms will descend: but if they light upon a
Roof that is close and compact, they run aside, and are cast upon the ground.
He that expects God's pleasure from day to day, will neither faint, nor fret,
that his suit hangs long in the Court of Requests: such storms as proceed from
murmuring, cannot beat through a solid Roof. Says Habbak. Chap. 2. Verse 3. A
great thing will the Lord bring to pass, but not presently says the Lord: The
Vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak, and not
lie: though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come. Many diseases
will never be cured well, unless they be long a curing: and many deliverances
will never be thoroughly settled, unless they be long a preparing: and many
mercies are hid like seed in the ground, and will be long a growing.

I give God thanks that every blessing of worldly Comfort that I Prayed for,
the longer I was kept from it, and the more I prayed for it, I found it the
greater in the end.

Observe that there is nothing of moment, yea be it of lesser and vulgar size,
with which the Providence of God has not interwoven a thousand things to be
dispatched with it, which requires time, perhaps seven years to finish them.
Expect therefore from the Divine wisdom to do all things in their order: and
give honor to the Supreme Majesty to wait his leisure. For yet a little, and
he, that shall come, will come, and will not tarry, Heb. 10.37.

3. The third thing which gives assurance of Comfort to Prayer is Zeal,
Devotion, Fervency, which will pluck on Patience further and further. For he
that is zealous in any thing will not easily give over, till he have brought
his ends to pass. Zeal is a continual and an earnest supplicant, it Prays
without ceasing, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Prays exceedingly, 1 Thessalonians. 3.10. Asks with
confidence, seeks with diligence, knocks with perseverance. A swarm of Bees,
that is, many thousands must gather into a Hive to fill it with Hony-combs: and
a swarm of Prayers is sweeter before the Lord than the Honey, and the Honeycomb.
Likewise it is as vehement as it is assiduous, laboring fervently for you in
Prayers, Coloss. 4.12. Stir up your wit, and diligence, and memory, and
meditations, when you come to spread out your wants before your Father: but if
you yawn out heedless, heartless petitions, you shall depart with
discouragement, as it is Psalm 80.4. O Lord God of hosts, how long will thou be
angry with the Prayer of thy people? The Laodiceans were lukewarm, neither hot
nor cold in the worship of God: therefore the Spirit said to the Angel of that
Church, Be zealous, and repent, Revel. 3.19. Zeal is defined to be a vehement
and inflamed love. There must be an ardour, and a flame in Prayer, as if we
would mount it up like fire to Heaven. Then we may say that a Seraphin has
laid a coal from the Altar upon our mouth, and touched our lips, Isa. 6.7. Zeal
takes away the Soul for a time, and carries it far above us. I write to them
that have felt it, that it darts a man's Spirit out of him like an arrow out of
a bow. This is it which infallibly begets Hope, Comfort, Patience, all in a
Sheaf, as they are divinely put together, Romans 12. verses 11, 12. Fervent in
Spirit, serving the Lord, rejoicing in Hope, patient in Tribulation, continuing
instant in Prayer.

The transportment of Zeal will excuse, or rather commend some Ejaculations of
Prayer, which seem to be too bold with God; as Psalm 44. How long will thou
turn away the face from us O Lord? and forgettest our misery and trouble: So
Jer. 14.9. Why should thou be as a man asleep? and as a mighty man that
cannot save us? And we do but follow our Savior's pattern in it upon the
Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Tell not a troubled heart
that is in anguish, tell it not of modesty: it is a complement it will not be
tied to. The Shunamite swallowed up in sorrow for the loss of her child, runs
to mount Carmel to Elisha, and before she said any thing, she caught him fast
by the feet: Gehazi thought it irreverent and unwoman-like behavior, and laid
hold to thrust her away: Let her alone, says the Prophet, for her Soul is vexed
within her, 2 Kings 4.27. The passions of an afflicted Soul have much
indulgence to break out far. They are not in good compass, till vehemence of
Zeal carry them beyond ordinary rule and fashion. Mary Magdalen did more than
this, the first time she came to our Savior, Luke 7.37. she came into a
strange house without leave and admittance: into the house of a Pharisee, and
those hypocrites would not admit suspected sinners: she takes opportunity to
come at dinnertime, being a guest unbidden: she gives no salutation to the
company, but falls down at our Saviors feet, and lays her kisses thick upon
them: says a holy writer to it, it is Gregory the Great, Have thou no forehead,
woman? has modesty quite lest thee? And he answers himself, Minime, pudor
intus erat. That which she was ashamed of was within her, she was so ashamed of
her sins, that she forgot all other shamefacedness. You see that Zeal will
pardon boldness, and will give authority to prayer to expostulate with God, and
has a toleration, as it were, to quarrel with his mercy.

Now a Christian, sensible of many imperfections, will cry out, O that I could
attain to some degrees of Zeal! I am no Shunamite, no Mary Magdalen, no Paul
fervent in Spirit. I am carried away with distractions, when I speak unto the
Lord in Prayer; and through the multitude of various thoughts I forget what I
am about. O Christ help our frailties, and keep our minds fixed upon thee, when
we ask any thing in thy Name. One body cannot be in two places at once: and one
heart cannot be in Heaven and Earth together. O let us cover our faces with the
wings of the Cherubims, Isa. 6.2. that we may not see enticements to distract
us. Watch, and Pray: watch this wandering heart, that it may not be stolen away
by fancies, that move in our mind continually, like motes in the beams of the
Sun. Defy Satan, and bid him abandon. As they that have committed a robbery
run away from a Hue and Cry: so the Devil will run away from the noise of your
Supplications, when you challenge him for sacrilege, that he has robbed you
of your Devotion.

To do more yet, I will assay to prescribe a remedy to a disease, I fear, not
quite to be cured. But first feel your own pulse, and your fitness for the
Heavenly work of Prayer before you begin it. See that you be not drowzy and
slothful: for a sluggard will be encumbered with various and recurrent thoughts.
Neither would I have you to protract Prayer to that length, which otherwise you
would have done, when your mind and devotion fail you. Short and pithy Prayers,
Collects well filled with words and matter, and not protracted till they may be
censured for babbling, are more prevalent with God, when Zeal does manage them,
than to spend out time without a fervent and well fixed intention. The Prayers
of the great Saints in Scripture are compendious, they are strong in sense, and
speak home. A rose is sweeter in the bud, than in the blown flower: and what
your abate at one time in length to anticipate distraction, you may fill up the
measure when you will by using them the oftener. I have known some servants of
God, very circumspect in their ways, that use for the most part to read their
Prayers either Printed or Written, that seeing the matter of them before their
eyes, they might the better contain themselves from all extravagancies. To
which end it is prescribed in the Church of Rome, though a Priest can say the
Mass by heart, yet he must read it out of his book, to keep the closer to the
intention of his duty. But when all is said, happy are they that offend least
in this kind: for all offend.

And who can we blame but our selves, that are remiss, and not half so earnest
as we should be to prevail with God? which I demonstrate thus: Let there be any
thing in our Prayers, which we are more eagerly set upon to obtain, than all
the rest, we will never start aside, nor run out of our circle when we come to
that petition. Animus est ubi amat, The mind is with that, and in that which it
loves. If we did long for every member of our Prayer, as much as for that
special thing, which we did so eminently desire, we would continue from the
beginning to the end of Prayer with little or no diversion.

This bottom is not wound up, till I give a warning to Zeal, as it is Gal.
5.18. It is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing. Look that
your petitions be modelled into such things, as the Word and Spirit do appoint,
and stir you up to ask, and you shall not be ashamed of your sacrifice, Hos.
4.19. But if you be frivolous, the Prophet will tell you again, Ye have sown
the wind, and ye shall reap the whirlwind, Hos. 8.7. or the Apostle tells you
plainly, Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, James 4.3. Ask for the
kingdom of Heaven, for the maintenance of God's glory, for newness of life, and
obedience to the will of God; ask for pardon of sins in Christ Jesus, for grace
in the Holy Ghost to resist temptations; ask our offended Father for mercy, to
be delivered from the wrath which we have deserved: and let the seventh part of
our Prayer be for the things of this life, and for them with moderation,
according to that port and person which we bear in the world, and be contented
with the portion allotted to you: aim by this level, and you hit the mark. What
mighty blessings did fall upon Solomon, because he desired not the advantages
of pomp and luxury, when God put it to him in a dream what to ask? he desired
an understanding and a wise heart: and the speech pleased the Lord, that
Solomon had asked this thing, 1 Kings 3.10.

3. Intercessions, that is, Prayers wherein we mediate to God for others, must
now be thought of, and the Comfort redounding from them. The duty is strictly
commanded to Pray for one another, James 5.16. And, I will that Intercessions
be made for all men, for Kings and all that are in Authority, 1 Timothy 2.1. when
we do so, we have done what we are bidden: and having done that, albeit we are
unprofitable servants to God, we are not uncomfortable to our selves. For it is
the first part of the reward of a good deed, that we can say to our Conscience
we have done it. Beside, the work of love is delightful to the Spirit; and to
help others in our Prayers is the largest and widest work of Charity, willing
to do good to all upon the face of the Earth, and stretching forth its hands
that the whole world may be the better for the calves of our lips. Chiefly
commending the whole state of Christ's Church to Gods mercy, yet also, (as may
be seen in our Collect used on Good Friday) not forgetting to remember Christ
for Jews, Turks, Infidels, Heretics, to take from them ignorance, hardness of
heart, and contempt of the Word: not only that the Sheep of Christ's pasture
might be blessed, but that it might be well with Nero, and such as he, that were
the Lions that devoured us. This is Charity not only to have Communion with all
the Saints, but compassion for all the world. Therein we follow the footsteps
of Christ in his mediatorship, as far as we are able, who has an unchangeable
Priesthood, and ever lives to make Intercession for us, Heb. 7.25. And who bare
the sins of many, and made Intercession for the transgressors, Isa. 53.12.

Likewise it is the office of those that have great interest in God's favor,
to bless others with their Prayers, as the Lord told Abimelech King of Gerar,
Abraham is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and thou shall live, Genesis
20.7. So he said to Eliphaz the Temanite, and to his other two friends, My
servant Job shall Pray for you, for him will I accept, Job 42.8. All Israel had
been destroyed for worshipping the Calf in Horeb, had not Moses his chosen
stood before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath, Psalm 106.23. What?
says an old writer, art thou Moses more merciful than God? art thou more
pitiful to the people, than he that saves us from all evil? No, says he, thou
art infinite short of the loving kindness of the Lord; but he put thy Charity
to the proof, to see what vehement entreaties thou would make for the
deliverance of the Nation. When the same people were like to be overrun by the
Philistines, what course did Samuel take? says he, Gather all Israel to Mizpah,
(which was a Proseucha, or place for public Prayer) and I will Pray for you to
the Lord, 1 Samuel 7.5. And you shall find most victorious success upon it, Verse
10. What comfortable Orators are the mighty Saints of God? what a safeguard it
is unto us all, when they live among us? A wise man is the price and redemption
of many fools, says a Heathen: so a Mediator, that is very dear to God, is a
protection not only to the good, but to the wicked that are about him. Have we
not cause then to Pray for the continuance of such, that they may live long to
Pray for us? Should Paul need to desire the Prayers of the Thessalonians? 1
Epist. 5.25. or of the Hebrews? Chap. 13.18. Could they forget that, which so
much concerned their welfare? Now the worthy servants of the Lord may prevail
much one by one: others of the common rank had need to meet by hundreds, and by
thousands, in great congregations, that every single man's Prayer may be a drop
in a shower, that while every man Prays for all, all may Pray for every man. So
great is the opinion of good consequents from the Intercession of Gods
servants, that infidels and ungodly, who thought it would be labor in vain to
speak to God for themselves, have sued unto the Saints on Earth to prefer
petitions for them. Darius, that worshipped false Gods, sent to the Jews at
Jerusalem to Pray for the life of the King and his Sons, Ezra 6.10. And they
that persecuted Jeremy besought him, Pray for us unto the Lord our God, Jer.
42.20. And Simon Magus turned himself to Peter and the Apostles to intercede
for him, Pray unto the Lord for me, that none of these things which you have
spoken, come upon me, Acts 8.24. This is the sum, that Intercession of Prayer,
whether active or Passive, whether it be to give, or to receive a blessing, is
exceeding full of Consolation.

II. To go in order to the next Head, Who they be that shall get benefit, and
comfort by Prayer, is quickly defined. We know that all things work together
for good to them that love God, Romans 8.28. to none other, you may be sure. He
that does not truly call the God of Heaven his Father, as Christ begins his
Prayer, shall have no share in the portion of Sons. We may intercede for
profane and impenitent men, and our Prayer shall return into our own bosom.
But while they remain such, the mercies of the Lord will be strange unto them.
They are not of the body of the mystical Church, and all the fresh Springs are
derived unto them that are within the Sanctuary. While the Jews continued under
the hardness of their heart, God discharged the Prophet for appearing in their
behalf. Pray not thou for this people, neither lift up cry, nor Prayer for
them, neither make Intercession to me, for I will not hear thee, Jer. 7.16. And
with no less, or rather more severity, Ezekiel. 14.14. Though these three men,
Noah, Job and Daniel, were in the land, they should deliver none but their own
Souls. And if the wicked commence a suit in their own name, the Lord will not
be entreated of them. What have they to do with holy Ordinances, that have no
fellowship with holy practices? To come before the Lord with a lap full of
sins, and a mouth full of prayers, what an Heterogeneal Sacrifice is it? will
the Mediator Christ Jesus bring it for them before his Father? If I regard
iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me, Psalm 66.18. And the throne of
iniquity shall have no fellowship with thee, Psalm 99. verse 20.

Many in our land, and in our days Pray for the confusion of them that brought
all to confusion; but themselves are in pursuance of notorious crimes, and
rebellion against God. They would advance that government to which we have
sworn to be faithful by the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance: but they make no
conscience to break their Oaths and Covenants which they have made to God. It
is not to suppress sin, and tyranny, and injustice, that they are instant with
God; but to be revenged for their own injuries and losses. Their Prayers are
compounded with such sins as quite mar them. So many a pair of Beads have
been dropped in corners for the extirpation of the Protestant Religion. Many a
Mass has been said for the good success of Jesuitical Treasons. Many a Rosary
was run over to bring the Powder Treason to its bloody birth. If they have no
better stuff than this in their Mattins, they had as good Pray to Devils as to
Saints. I will that men Pray always, or every where, lifting up holy hands,
without wrath, 1 Timothy 2.8. Let go wrath, and malice, and bitterness. Holiness
becomes the house of Prayer, and holiness becomes the mouth of Prayer. If any
man be a worshipper of God, and does his will, him he hears, Jo. 9.31. Do
justly, live chastely, give charitably, walk circumspectly, and then Pray
confidently. For whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his
Commandments, and do those things which are pleasing in his sight, 1 Epist. Jo.
3.22.

But then will the trembling Christian say, woe is me, for I am a great sinner,
woe is me, for I am filthy, and polluted, and of unclean lips, Isa. 6.5. then
how shall I turn me to my God in Prayer? O thou that fallest low upon the
Earth, oppressed with the burden of thy sins, stand up, and be cheerful before
God: none is fit for Prayer in the Militant Church, but such an humble sinner.
God draws thee, and none but those that are like unto thee, near unto his
mercy. Though thy sins do cleave unto thee, be comforted that thou do not
cleave unto thy sins. Elkanah gave a more worthy portion to Hannah that was
barren, but meek and devout, than to Peninnah that bare him sons and daughters,
but was proud and scornful, 1 Samuel 1.5. God has heard his beloved Son, when he
made Prayers for sinners, will hear those sinners that are his Sons, when they
ask any thing in the name of Christ.

III. Good fruit must be brought forth in a good season, which only remains to
be thought upon, and to be added to the Consolation of Prayer. For every thing
there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the Heaven, Eccles. 3.1.
But neither days, nor hours, nor seasons did ever come amiss to faithful
Prayer. Evening, and morning, and at Noon will I Pray, and cry aloud, and He
shall hear my voice, Psalm. 55.17. which includes all the space of duration. For
all time is included in Morning, Noon, and Night. Pray without ceasing, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Praying always with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit, and
watching thereunto with all perseverance, Ephesians. 6.18. Short passes, quick
ejections, concise forms and remembrances, holy breathings, Prayers like little
posies, may be sent forth without number on every occasion, and God will note
them in his book.

But all that have a care to walk with God, fill their vessels more largely as
soon as they rise, before they begin the work of the day, and before they lie
down again at night. Which is to observe what the Lord appointed in the
Levitical ministry, a morning, and an evening Lamb to be laid upon the Altar.
So with them that are not stark irreligious, Prayer is the key to open the day,
and the bolt to shut in the night. But as the skies drop the early dew, and the
evening dew upon the grass: yet it would not spring and grow green by that
constant and double falling of the dew, unless some great showers at certain
seasons did supply the rest. So the customary devotion of Prayer twice a day is
the falling of the early and the latter dew: but if you will increase and
flourish in the works of grace, empty the great clouds sometimes, and let them
fall into a full shower of Prayer: choose out the seasons in your own
discretion, when Prayer should overflow like Jordan in the time of harvest.
keep strictly, as much as you are, able, to those times of the day, which you
have designed to appear in before the Lord: for then you offer up not only your
Prayers, but the strict observation of set times, which is a double sacrifice,
and an evidence that you will not dispense to pretermit that holy work for any
a vocation. He that refers himself at large to Pray when he is at leisure,
gives God the worst of the day, that is, his idle time. I account them prudent
therefore, that are precise in keeping Canonical hours of Prayer, as they call
them, so they Pray to God alone, who alone knows their heart: and so they Pray
with the Spirit, and with the Understanding, 1 Cor. 14.15. that is, in a tongue
wherein they know what they say, and understand the language wherein they vent
the meditations of their Spirit. This was the milk that the Church of England
gave every day out of her breasts, to praise God in Common Prayer at set hours,
before noon and after, in the assemblies of her devout children. How many have
rejoiced to hear the Chiming of the Bells to call them together, and would
never miss their station? As Peter and John went together to the Temple at the
hour of Prayer, being the ninth hour, Acts 3.1. O when will these profane days
come to an end, that we may again so orderly, so delightfully appear before the
living God?

Of one thing the Devil disappointed us many years past in the time of Prayer,
which was the Night-offices of prayers, called Vigils, which are disused, because
it was feared they grew incident to scandal and uncleanness. And though they be
left off (I believe for good reason) in a concourse of open meeting, yet let
not God lose his tribute of Prayer, which should be paid him in the still and
quiet opportunity of the night. The day is God's, and the night is God's, the
darkness and light to him are both alike: let not so many hours, as run out
from our lying down to our rising up again, pass away without any Prayer. Says
David, O Lord I remembered thee in my bed, and meditated on thee in the
night-watches, Psalm 63.6. It seems, while the Tabernacle of Moses stood, that
the Priests did some duties in it all night long. Psalm 134.1. Bless the Lord
ye servants of the Lord, which by night stand in the house of the Lord. The
Apostles allowed widows must continue in Supplication and Prayers night and
day, 1 Timothy 5.5. And Anna the widow-prophetess served God with Fasting and
Prayers night and day, Luke 2.37. The Lord has foretold that he will come as a
thief in the night at the great day, 2 Pet. 3.10. Therefore, O Lord, with my
Soul will I desire thee in the night, and at midnight will I think upon thee,
and call unto thee; that if it shall be this night, even now, when Christ Jesus
will come to judge the world, my Soul may find mercy from him, and both Body
and Soul may be glorified, and so continue with him for ever.

All this about the opportunity of time shall shut up with one Instruction of
the Psalmist, Psalm. 32.6. Every one that is Godly shall Pray unto thee, O Lord,
in a time that thou may be found. When you find stirrings and impulsions
more than ordinary to provoke you to Prayer, follow the admonition of the
Spirit, and let not such a time slip. You know not whether such a divine
presage may roll in your thoughts again. I make no question but there are some
Critical moments, wherein God offers more than he will do again; if you neglect
him when he courts you with so great advantage. But now change the case from
mine to the whole Nations, from private to public, then thus I will be
peremptory in my resolution: There is no time too late for any Christian that
lives, in his single person, to beseech God to be merciful to him: he may find
the same propitiousness that the penitent thief did. But there may be a time
too late to save a Kingdom, or a state from ruin, when the Lord has decreed
the period of it. Therefore when confusions threaten and begin to peep out,
watch them betimes, and let the whole Land Pray for peace, and let the
Governors prepare conditions for it, to avert public calamity. If we let
tumults and conspiracies grow to a head, it will be in vain to struggle by
monthly or weekly humiliations, when our destiny is unavoidable. Plutarch says,
that a discontented person challenged the Oracle of Delphos that it never gave
a comfortable answer. That Is your fault says the Oracle, for none of you come
to me till your case is past help. Venimus huc lapsis quaesitum oracula rebus,
says the Poet, that ever keeps decorum in his Verses. Therefore awake right
early: seek the Lord in the first season, that the course of misery may not wax
too strong and remediless. Otherwise the Prophet will say, The days of
visitation are come, the days of recompense are come, Israel shall know it,
Hos. 9.7. and then whither will ye fly for help to be delivered. But prevent
such dismal tribulations, while it is called To day. For nothing is more
Consolatory than seasonable Supplication.

CHAP. V. How the Sacraments minister to a Christian's Comfort. A general
Survey of Sacraments. Five Reasons why God ordained Two Sacraments under the
Gospel. What Comforts flow from the Grace of Baptism. What Comforts flow from
the Lord's Supper.
THough by that which hitherto has been set forth, I trust I may assume, that
every one, that sets his heart to make use of it, has drunk well, yet as the
Ruler of the Feast said at the Marriage in Cana of Galilee, I have kept the
good, that is, the best, Wine until now, Jo. 2.10. The water of life in
Baptism, the wine that delights the Spiritual thirst in the Lord's Supper.
Other things in the Word report unto us what a good land the Lord has promised
to his Israel: but these two Sacraments are Caleb and Josuah, spies that have
seen, and searched the land, and bring us sensible and sure tidings, that it is
a noble land, flowing with Milk and Honey: by the Grapes which they have brought
with them, and by their ocular and diligent survey, they yield evident
testimony that God has provided a gracious Country for us in the Kingdom of
Heaven. To put all my work of Consolation into one prospect together, Prayer,
the best comfortable Grace is married to Hope, the Holy Ghost gives it in
marriage, Faith is the Priest that joins them together; and the two Sacraments
are the outward signs, by which they have declared their consent, as it were,
by giving and receiving a Ring, and by joining of hands.

First I will treat of Sacraments in general, then of each in particular by it
self.

A Sacrament being a visible sign of inward grace, as a means whereby we
receive the same, and a pledge to assure us thereof; or more at large, (which
comprizeth the end of all such outward signs) a token to confirm men's Faith in
the promises of God: observe first, That God has condescended above all
expression to our weakness, that He would have us to take notice of his mercies
in gross and sensible things: A way that is framed to our level, and dull
apprehension. For God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him
in Spirit and Truth, Jo. 4.24. that is, purely a Heavenly way. But some
alterations have been admitted, to bring us forward in our own pace, that is,
after humane and bodily fancies. Deus quandoque insantilia loquitur. For our
sakes the Lord speaks in the Scriptures in a plain and vulgar Emphasis,
strangely beneath his Infinite wisdom, as a nurse uses to babble to her
Infant. So He is pleased to give himself to our hands, to our eyes, to our
taste in common and obvious matter, but out of his surpassing wisdom, to make
us more spiritual, by clothing Religion in a bodily attire.

The Church began in innocence, and yet it began with a Sacrament, the Tree of
life, instituted to keep mankind on Earth immortal by tasting it, if Adam had
not ambitiously eaten of the Tree of knowledge.

When the old world was drowned, and repaired again, God told Noah, Genesis 9. I
do set my Bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a tokken of a Covenant between
me and the Earth; that the waters shall no more become a flood, to destroy all
the Earth. This is the World's Covenant, and not the Church's, a Covenant to
save all the Earth from a total deluge. And God is to be perceived, and to be
thought of in that sign, Ezekiel. 1.28. The glory of the Throne of God was as the
appearance of the Bow that is in the cloud in the day of rain: this was the
appearance of the likeness of the glory of the Lord: and so the same glory is
figured in the Rainbow, Revel. 4.3.

After this, it being not discovered who did openly and entirely profess the
worship of the true God; Abraham was called out of Chaldea, and he and his
family were imbodied into a Church, and received the sign of Circumcision, as a
mark stamped upon them, to be known to be those whom God had called out for his
own, and did admonish them to circumcise the foreskin of their heart, Deuteronomy.
10.16. Chiefly to imprint into them that the promised seed should come from
that stock, in whom all Nations should be blessed.

When Abraham's seed became a National Church, before they could get out of
Egypt, the blood of a Lamb was sprinkled upon their doors, with a statute given
upon it, that from thenceforth every family at that time of the year should
give account for a Lamb slain, and be eaten within their houses, till John
Baptist's Lamb was slain to take away the sin of the world.

Under the like discipline they were trained up for a while in the wilderness,
when Moses set up the figure of a Serpent upon a Pole, that they might look
upon it, and live that were stung by Serpents, Numb. 21. verse 9. The Author of
the Book of Wisdom writes Divinely upon it, That they might be admonisht for a
small season it was a sign of Salvation, -- And he that turned himself toward
it, was not saved by the thing he saw, but by thee that art the Savior of the
world, Wisd. Chap. 16. Verses 6, 7.

Neither are we such perfect men under the New Testament, to be taught only by
the words of holiness and truth, but we are received into the Covenant of
Grace, and preserved in it by Mysteries signifying wonderful things to our
outward senses, that we may suck and be satisfied with the Churches two breasts
of Consolation, Isa. 66.11. And be filled with the two golden pipes, that empty
the golden oil out of themselves, Zach. 4.12.

I stand upon the number of Two, because they are put together, 1 Cor. 10.3.
The Israelites were all baptized in the cloud, did all eat the same spiritual
meat, and all drank of the same spiritual drink. As good account for it is, 1
Cor. 12.13. By one spirit we are all baptized into one body, and have been all
made to drink into one Spirit. Or learn it from St. John 1 Epist. 5.6. Christ
came not by water alone, but by water and blood -- And there are three that
bear witness, the Spirit, that is, the ministry of the Gospel; the water, that
is Baptism; and the blood, that is the Lord's Supper. I will not promise a
precise testimony out of Antiquity, which shall say there are but two
Sacraments under the Gospel, and no more; but learned men have produced out of
the Fathers as much as amounts unto it, to them that will not be contentious.
Justin Martyr 2. Apol. to the Emperor speaks of these Two marks, or professed
signs of Christianity, and no other. Tertullian against Marcion, lib. 3. c. 51.
bring them that are married to Baptism, and the Lords Supper. St. Cyprian lib.
2. Ep. 1. to Stephen, Then they are sanctified, when they are born again by
both Sacraments. St. Cyril and St. Ambrose writing purposely of Sacraments,
speak but of Two. St Austin Ep. 118. to Januarius, Christ has subjected us to
a light yoke, to Sacraments of the smallest number, easy in observation,
excellent in dignity; Baptism in the Name of the Holy Trinity, and the
Communion of Christ's Body and Blood; and if any thing else be commanded in
Scripture. And many allude to that number from Cant. 4.5. Thy breasts are like
two young Roes that are twins. Here is a brief survey, how God in all Ages has
Communicated with us in Sacraments.

May the reason of it be discovered? nay, Who has known the mind of the Lord?
or who has been his Counselor, Romans 11.34. Yet it is no trespass against the
sobriety of wisdom to ask, why Christian Religion depends so much upon visible
Sacraments?

1. First, it is to give Faith a third manner of corroboration: and a threefold
cord is not easily broken. First God has promised us all blessings in Christ:
Secondly, he gave an Oath for it unto Abraham; that by two immutable things, in
which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation,
Heb. 6.18. Thirdly, after He had plighted both Oath and Promise, he has given
us holy Signs to confirm it. When God had both promised, and sworn, durst we of
our selves have asked a Sign to confirm it, to make us more believing? No truly,
we durst not: for an evil, and an adulterous generation seeks after a Sign:
It were a great blemish in Faith, if we should appoint God to lend us a crutch
to lean upon. But God has prevented us herein; and, as we say in the
Common Prayer, That which for our unworthiness we durst not ask, He has
supplied of his own accord, and has instituted Sacred Signs, wrapped up in the
Creatures, of most ordinary use, to make it more easy to lay hold of the Hope
that is set before us.

2. Secondly, Every great deliverance in Gods Book, was accompanied with some
outward Sign, to make it more comfortable upon so remarkable an impression. As
Moses being appointed to be the Captain to lead Israel out of Egypt, was bade
to cast his Rod before the People, and to let it turn into a Serpent, and
return into a Rod again: to make his hand leprous and whole again in an
instant, by putting it into his bosom, and by drawing it out. And Moses showed
these Signs in the sight of the People, and they believed, Exodus 4.31. It would
be tedious to recite the stories of Asa, Hezekiah, Joash, etc. these were
persuaded by the Signs of God, that he would visit them with a mighty
deliverance. But there is no deliverance like unto that, which is brought to
pass for us through the Death and bloody Passion of Christ. And the two
Sacraments are the Remonstrance of that great Salvation, which has set us free
out of the hands of all our enemies.

3. Thirdly, It is meet that great benefits should be fastened to our memories
by a sure Nail. Therefore God, distrusting man's memory represents his greatest
works of mercy in the Ordinances of manifest Signs to prevent forgetfulness.
The help of some outward mark does avail by experience, to bring that to mind,
that else would have slipped away. As upon occasion we use to tie a thread about
our fingers, or to unloose the gemmal of a Ring to make us mindful of a
promise, or some weighty business.

4. Fourthly, though all our worship must hold its tenure, as it were in
capite, from the Spirit, if we hope to have it acceptable to God, yet we are
better capable of such worship by the opportunity of material conveyances. Only
Angels and Blessed Souls in Heaven can serve God in the pure and immaterial
zeal of their mind. But while we are clothed with flesh, the mind receives all
it takes in from bodily objects: and which passes in by the pipes of the
senses, it is connatural to us to apprehend it with mare tenacity and fasthold.

Finally, As Christ descended into the womb of his Mother, and to walk with us
upon Earth; so God has vouchsafed to offer his Word and Promise to us in the
Creatures of the Earth: setting a Seal unto the Word, which makes the Patent
very valid, and of force and comfort. For if a Commandment of promise were
remarkable, that of honoring our Parents, the first Commandment of promise in
the second Table, Ephesians. 6.2. much more is a Seal and Sacrament of promise
remarkable. Doubt not then, but as Faith is our hand to receive Christ, so the
Sacraments are, as it were, God's hands to give Him unto us.

Being past the general Survey of visible Sacraments, it is time to enter into
the consideration of Baptism. Which God has exalted to mavelous Virtue and
Consolation by his Omnipotent appointment. The Jews, that first received it,
will teach us, that they expected this New and Gracious Ceremony upon the
coming of Christ. For Jo. 1.25. The Priests and Levites sent to ask John, why
Baptizest thou if thou be not the Christ? etc. It seems they had a Tradition,
that Baptism should come into the Church with the Messiah: which they learnt,
as I take it, from two of the Prophets. Isa. 4. states out a famous praise of
Christ's Kingdom, then it brings in this, Verse 3. In that day shall the branch
of the Lord be beautiful and glorious -- When the Lord shall have washed away
the filth of the daughters of Sion, and shall have purged the blood of
Jerusalem from the midst thereof. The other place is Ezekiel. 36. a plain
prophecy of Christ's Kingdom, and Verse 25. he thus describes it, Then will I
sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be cleansed from all your
filthiness. John made way unto this Sacrament, and it came from Heaven:
therefore the Pharisees rejected the counsel of God, being not Baptized of
John, Luke 7.30. But in the fullness of the Gospel Christ confirmed it. For he
that made them promise, was the only able person to set the Seal to ratify it.
Except his admired doctrine, and his miracles, all things else about Christ did
make no show to outward appearance: so he would go no higher in the institution
of an outward Sign of cleansing and regeneration, than to bring the people to a
River to be washed, or to a Vessel of water to be sprinkled. For Faith is drawn
through these narrow and abject means, that like himself have no comeliness in
specie; and when we see them, there is no comeliness that we should desire
them, Isa. 53.2.

Nevertheless it is fit we should be well taught in the Contemplation of the
hidden virtue enclosed in Baptism, or else we could never think it worth our
labor and obedience. Our Common Prayer Book (a storehouse of rare Divinity)
tells us what is to be expected at that Laver, for them that come to be
Baptized.

1. That God has promised to be the Father of the faithful and of their seed,
and will most surely perform, and keep his promise with them: and by this
introduction we are incorporated into the holy Congregation. Behold, they whom
we love above all others by nature, our Children, are naturalized to be the
Citizens of the Heavenly Kingdom, and enter into it through this door of Grace.

2. Secondly, As God did save Noah and his Family from perishing by water, and
safely led the Children of Israel through the Red Sea, while their enemies were
drowned: so the millions of the Nations whom God has not given to Christ for
his inheritance, are drowned in their own lusts and corruptions. But O what a
privilege it is, to be among those few that are received into the Ark of
Christ's Church, to be exempted from the common deluge, and to be the faithful
seed of Abraham, led through the Chanel of the Sea, and Baptized in the Cloud,
that went along with them, when the Armies of the mighty are mightily consumed?

3. Thirdly, We may gather out of our Church-office for Baptism, that the
everlasting benediction of Heavenly washing affords two Comforts: it signifies
the blood of Christ to cleanse us Per modum pretii, as the price that was paid
to ransom us from death: and the sanctifying of the Holy Spirit to cleanse us,
per modum habitus, by his In-being, and Celestial infusion; and both are put
together in one Collect, That all that are Baptized may receive remission of
sins by spiritual regeneration. There is no remission of sin without blood,
says the Apostle, Heb. 9.22. meaning the invaluable blood of the Lamb of God,
Verse 14. And the Heavenly thing is represented by the visible Element of
Water: (for there must be some aptitude between the Sign and the Thing
signified, else it were not a Sacrament) that as Water washes away the filth
of the body, so the Blood of Christ delivers our Souls from the guilt and
damnableness of sin. The Blood of Christ, his Son, cleanses us from all sin, 1
Epist. Jo. 1.7. The metaphor of cleansing must have respect to Baptismal-water.
Again, Who loved us, and washed us from our sins in his Blood, Revel. 1.5.
Where the Scripture speaks of washing from sin, it must be taken from the water
of Baptism, figuring the virtue of Christ's Blood, that in the sight of his
Father makes us white as Snow. The Scriptures indeed strike most upon the other
string, and more directly, as Ephesians. 5.25. Christ loved the Church, and gave
himself for it, that he might sanctify, and cleanse it with the washing of
water, by the Word. Titus 3.6. He saved us by the washing of regeneration, and
the renewing of the Holy Ghost. And in many other places. Therefore our Liturgy
falls most upon the purifying operation of the Spirit, to be shadowed in the
outward washing of water. As when it prays, Send thy Holy Spirit to these
Infants, and grant that they may be Baptized with Water and with the Holy Ghost
-- And, Grant that all that are Baptized, may receive the fullness of thy Grace.
Spiritual Regeneration is that which the Gospel has set forth to be the
principal correlative of Baptism. O happy it is for us to be born again by
Water and the Holy Ghost! For better it were never to be born, than not to be
born twice.

God put a good mind into us, and reform one great fault in us; which is, that
our Baptism being past over a great while ago, we cast it out of our memory,
and meditate but little upon the benefits and comforts of it. We are got into
the Church, and do in a sort forget how we got in. Whereas the whole life of a
Christian man and woman should be a continual reflection how in Baptism we
entered into Covenant with Christ, to believe in him, to serve him, to forsake
the Devil, the vanities of the world, and the sinful desires of the flesh.
Water is a pellucid Element to look through it to the bottom: So look often
through the sanctified Water, to see what Christ has done for you, and what
you have engaged to do for Christ. And there is no heart so full of blackness
and melancholy, but will recover upon it, and be as fresh in sound health, as
if it were filled with marrow, and fatness. Well did St. Paul put Baptism among
the principles and foundations of Christian doctrine, Heb. 6.2. For all the
weight of Faith, Sanctification, and Mercy does lie upon it. Recount this by
particulars.

1. The first thought that my Soul has upon it is, That I am no longer a
stranger and foreigner, but a fellow-Citizen with the Saints, and of the
household of God, Ephesians. 2.19. I am no more a-far off, but made nigh by the
Blood of Christ, partaker of the privileges of the Church, and called by the
new Name, which the mouth of the Lord shall name, a Christian, Isa. Chap. 62.
Verse 2.

2. Secondly, I find that I have gained to have the highest point of Faith
unfolded to me, which was but darkly discerned in the Old Testament, to confess
the Holy Trinity, in which Faith I was Baptized. For because that mystery was
revealed at Christ's Baptism, it goes ever along with this Sacrament. All
Nations being Baptized in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

3. Thirdly, I observe that my Christian engagement allows me not the liberty
of sinning after the custom of the world; but obliges me to the strict
discipline of my Lord, to live holily, justly and soberly, to walk in newness
of life, as planted into the likeness of Christ's death, so to die unto sin: for
he that is dead, is freed from sin, Romans 6.7. In every thing, and at all times
I must remember what the Sureties at the Font, called Godfathers and
Godmothers, did promise for me in my Name; which the Liturgy of Geneva retains
in these words, Do you promise to warn this Child to live according to God's
Word, and make the Law of God the square of his life to live by? It Is a binding
Ceremony, and we are brought up from our tender years in the knowledge of it,
that we continually may feel the work of the Ordinance, to have our hearts
sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and our bodies washed with clean Water, Heb.
10.21, 22. And as many as are Baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, Gal.
3.27. To put on Christ is to follow Christ in the Law of a new Creature, and to
perfect holiness; without which no man shall see God.

4. Fourthly, I have assurance that the Spirit is not disjoined from the Water:
for Christ's Word cannot sail, that we shall be Baptized with the Holy Ghost.
But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of
the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, 1. Cor. 6.11. The power given to
keep the Covenant makes it a Covenant of Grace: else we shall administer but
the Letter, and not the Spirit. The outward act of man, unless we make our
selves unworthy, is certainly assisted with the increase of God. If the good
effect ensue not, the Sacrament does not want its virtue, but the receiver
marred it. Very much its to be ascribed to the Word preached: it is a powerful
means to convert us, and to save us. 1 Timothy 4.15. Take heed unto thy doctrine,
for in doing this thou shall save thy self, and them that hear thee. And 1 Pet.
1.23. Being born again not of corruptible seed, but incorruptible, by the Word
of God, which lives and abides in you. The Word disposes, and prepares: God
is the efficient cause of our Regeneration. Now this Sacrament, whether we
speak of Infants, they are to call to mind how they received the outward Seal
of Grace; or whether we speak of Converts of ripe years, who at the same time
were taught the virtue of it, it has reason to work more powerfully and
effectually upon their knowledge and affections, than doctrine alone: because
Christ and his Benefits are manifested in a sensible operation, which himself
did dignifie in his own person at the waters of Jordan, and afterward institute
it to be used by all his Disciples.

5. The fifth thing that I draw from hence gives me exceeding Consolation in
Christ, that no man who is made the Child of God is in the damnable state of
sin; therefore in Baptism, being made the adopted Child of God, I have obtained
the pardon of all sins, Original and Actual: as Naaman was cured of all his
leprosy. Who saved us by the washing of Regeneration, Tit. 3.6. Be Baptized
every one of you, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, for the remission of sins,
Acts 2.38: So Ananias said to Paul, Acts 22.16. Arise, and be Baptized, and
wash away thy sins. Yea, but some will cavil, Infants have not Faith; and God
has set forth Christ to be a propitiation through Faith in his Blood: and he
that believes and is Baptized, shall be saved, Mark 16.16. I will not contend
about it, whether Baptized Infants have a secret imperceptible habit of Faith:
I am sure there is Innocence of life in them instead of Faith. They that are of
Age to come to the knowledge of Faith, must bring their own Faith with them to
the Font: but for Infants, they have privilege to be in Church Communion, by
the Faith of the Church, wherein they were born. There is another contest made
by some, that, notwithstanding Baptism, Original sin remains in us all the days
of our life. True: the sin is not blotted out in the Infant, but it is blotted
out of the Book of God. And as Actual sins are pardoned for Christ's sake, yet
it cannot be brought about that they should never be done, which are done and
past, but it is enough that they shall not be imputed: so Original sin cleaves
unto us, it is not cast out, for I feel it in me; but it is remitted.

6. For the complement of this subject, the largest and the longest Comfort
flowing from the Grace of Baptism is, That we are to rely upon the Covenant,
made between God and us therein, for the remission of all our sins, which we
commit after Baptism unto the end of our life. Far be it from me to say, that
it suffices us to cast our eyes back to the Covenant then made, as if the bare
and historical memory of it did suffice to blot out sins; that is but an empty
flash, and a vapor of presumption. But this I say, Build upon the Eternity and
Infallibility of God's Truth: and then by a true and sure-grasping Faith,
joined with Repentance, renew your self in God's mercies by the promise of the
Old Baptismal Covenant. Repentance is a condition never to be omitted to lift
us up again, when we have been overtaken with sins. But Faith does not comfort
it self in the sincerity of Repentance, which in us is ever imperfect, but in
Christ's merits once for all consigned to us in Baptism. For the Scriptures
speak indefinitely, that the Laver of Regeneration purges away all our sins;
it does not speak restrictively of sins past, as if it did operate no longer
than in that moment, when the water is sprinkled. For Baptism does now, at the
very present time save us, 1 Pet. 3.21. And some collect it out of that
figurative place, Ezekiel. 49.9. Every thing where the Waters do come, shall live.
After a shower of rain is fallen, and cease, the grass continues to grow. By
grievous and presumptous sins we debar our selves from the sense, and comfort
of the Covenant for the present: yet when we repent, we come not to make a new
Covenant with God, but to beseech him to be gracious to us for the old
Covenants sake. As an Adulteress, if she be received again, and pardoned by her
Husband, is not new married, but accepted for a wife upon the first contract of
marriage.

Take some examples of those in the New Testament, that sinned against God, and
in their return again, did not suppose the first Covenant of Baptism to be
abolisht, but they comforted themselves that the mercies promised then would
hold firm, and not fail them. St. Paul challenges the Corinthians, Chap. 6.
Epist. 1. that they had been Adulterers, Effeminate, and much of the like. Yet
Verse 11. he speaks thus to them, Ye are washed, sanctified, justified in the
Name of the Lord Jesus. In the same manner he deals with the Galatians, who had
embraced much false doctrine, mingled Judaism with the Gospel; yet Chap. 3.
Verse 27. As many of you as are Baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. Can
any thing equal all these heart-refreshings that swim in the pool of Baptism?
Therefore in many Ages past, the joy of the Neophytes was excessive that came
to be Baptized. Many Torches were lighted, and carried before them; to show it
was the day of their illumination. They came in white garments, and wore them
constantly eight days together, a most Festival habit. Yet they affected too
much to defer their Baptism till their elder, nay their latest years, out of
the erroneous principle, that Baptism was the healing water for the remission
of sins past: and they rather relied upon Repentance, than upon the Baptism,
which they had received, for the remission of sins that did follow. Whereas
Repentance is not a new paction with God, but a return to the use of the old: a
restitution as it were to our blood, when we had been tainted by committing
Treason against God; that is, repossession of mercy endangered to be forfeited.
But were it a new Covenant, we should have some new visible Sign for it, which
never was. Therefore this is the very Soul of mine and every ones Baptismal
Consolation, that being once done, it Seals pardon for all our sins through
Christ's blood unto our life's end.

BUT as if many Spouts should open into one Cistern, so all Comforts conspire
to meet in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. Nothing else but the actual
enjoying of Heaven is above it. The Church, which dispenses all the mysteries
of salvation, can bring forth no better. Children that are come to Age, can ask
no more than the whole portion of their Father's goods that come unto them: and
what is that but the Blood of Christ? and this is the New Testament in that
Blood. Christ is mine, his Body is mine, his Blood is mine, all is mine. O be
glad and rejoice, and give honor to the Lord God Omnipotent, for the marriage
of the Lamb is come, Revel. 19.7. And the Spirit says, write, Blessed are they
that are called to the marriage-supper of the Lamb, Verse 9. It is much to be
received into a Covenant with God by the former Sacrament: is it not more to be
kept in Covenant by the other? It is much in Baptism to be brought from death
to life: but what is life without nourishment to preserve it? This keeps us in
the Lease of the old Covenant, that the Years of it shall never run out, and
expire. This is food to keep us in health and strength, that we never decay and
faint. By it we lay hold of the promise, Isa. 54.10. My kindness shall not
depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my peace be removed, says the
Lord that has mercy on thee. Then why should I not embolden my heart with holy
security against all fears; for the Lord has put himself into my hand, and
into my mouth, and into my Spirit: of what then should I be afraid? This is
that courage which our Liturgy sounds forth, as with a shrill Trumpet, to all
that come to this Banquet well prepared: It begins, that it is a comfortable
thing to all them that receive it worthily; it bids us come with a full trust
in Gods mercy, and with a quiet Conscience: it proclaims aloud, Hear what
comfortable words our Savior Christ says unto all that truly come unto him,
So God loved the world, etc. Come unto me all ye, etc. This is a true saying,
etc. It has gathered the Sallies of spiritual joy, as it were, into a bundle
of Myrrh. It adds, Christ has instituted and ordained holy mysteries, as
pledges of his love, and for a continual remembrance of his death, to our great
and endless comfort. And if all this put together will not blandish our
Conscience, and stablish our joy, we would be dull and spirit-broken, though an
Angel from Heaven should come and say unto us, as he did unto Gideon, The Lord
is with thee, thou mighty man of valor, Jud. 6.12. For an Angel of the Lord
cannot plead so much to the solace of the heart, as the great Angel of the
Covenant has done in these great demonstrations of love, as follows.

1. First, As Baptism was the former, so this is the second visible publication
of God's apparent mercy. It is not a bare message, but a lively apprehension of
them by palpable means: not in a vision, or a dream, but in a real Object. Call
to mind that the Lord was angry with Solomon, because his heart was turned from
the Lord God of Israel, who had appeared unto him twice, 1 Kings 11.39. Once
the Lord has appeared unto us in the token of his love by Water: and once
again he appears unto us in the Elements of his Holy Table. Twice he has
appeared to bless thee. Therefore eat thy Bread with joy, and drink thy Wine
with a merry heart, Eccles. 9.7. For if you turn away from Comfort, when the
Lord has appeared twice unto you to give it you, he will be angry, and leave
you to a thick darkness of sorrow, such as fell upon the land of Egypt.

2. Secondly, The Lord can appear Comfortably unto us, though with a Sword in
his hand, and in the midst of a Camp, as he did to Josuah, Jos. 5.13. Or in a
flame of fire, as he did to Manoah, Jud. 13.20. Or in a tempest upon the Sea,
as he did to the Apostles, Matthew. 14.27. Or at the Graves mouth, as he did to
Mary Magdalen, Jo. 20.14. But here he appears unto us in a Feast, which is a
time of innocent delight. The glory of God, which we look for, is set out unto
us in that which our senses apprehend for sweetness and pleasure: as Luke
22.29. I appoint unto you a Kingdom -- that ye may Eat and Drink at my Table in
my Kingdom: which is translated from bodily pleasure to spiritual, that in the
Heaven of blessedness the Soul shall feed continually as at a Banquet: of which
we have now a taste in the Kingly provision of Christ's Supper. It is a Kingly
Feast, although imparted in a little pittance of Bread and Wine: yet it is more
costly and precious to that which it signifies, than Solomon and all his Court
had for their diet day by day, 1 Kings 4.22. We are brought to Eat at the
King's Table, as Mephibosheth was, like one of the Kings Sons, 2 Samuel 9.11. To
Eat together is a Communion of more than ordinary acquaintance: do you note the
endearing favor of God in that? And what are we, that are not thrust, as our
kind might look for it, to gather up Crumbs under the Board, but to Eat our
portion before the Lord, with the Lord, out of the hands of the Lord? For he
that brake Bread, and gave it to the Apostles, gives it to Us, as our High
Priest, though he be in Heaven. I exhort you therefore to enter into the
Guest-chamber with a quiet, and unshaken heart: for the Lord has not invited
us as Absalom did Amnon, to kill us: nor as Esther did Haman, to accuse us; but
as Melchisedech brought forth Bread and Wine to Abraham to bless us. He gives
us Asher's portion, Bread that shall be fat, and Royal dainties, Genesis 49.20.
Only the case is altered, if Christ shall say, the hand of him that betrays me,
the hand of him that loves me not, the hand of him that believes not in me, the
hand of him that will not keep my sayings, is on the Table. That wretch shall
be thrown out, and be fed with Bread of sorrow, and Water of affliction, nay,
where there shall not be a drop of Water to cool his Tongue.

Thirdly, That which astonisheth the Communicant, and ravisheth his heart is,
that this Feast affords no worse meat than the Body and Blood of our Savior.
Those he gave for the life of the world, these are the repast of this Supper,
and these we truly partake. For there is not only the visible reception of the
outward Signs, but an invisible reception of the thing signified. There is far
more than a shadow, than a type, than a figure. Christ did not only propose a
Sign at that hour, but also he gave us a Gift, and that Gift really and
effectually is Himself, which is all one as you would say, Spiritually himself:
for Spiritual Union is the most true, and real union that can be. That which is
promised, and Faith takes it, and has it, is not fiction, fancy, opinion,
falsity, but substance and verity. Being strengthened with power by the Spirit
in the inward mind, Christ dwells in our hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 3.17. As by
a Ring, or a meaner instrument of conveyance, a man may be settled in Land, or
put into an Office: and by such conveyances the Ratification of such Grants are
held to be real. How much more real is the gift and receipt of Christ's Body
and Blood, when conveyed unto us by the confirmation of the Eternal Spirit? For
observe, it is the same Spirit that is in Christ, and that is in Us, and we are
quickened by one and the same Spirit, Romans 8.11. Therefore it cannot choose, but
that a real Union must follow between Christ and Us: as there is a Union
between all the parts of a Body, by the animation of one Soul. But Faith is the
mouth wherewith we Eat his Body, and Drink his Blood; not the mouth of a man,
but of a Faithful man: for we hunger after him, not with a Corporal appetite,
but a Spiritual; therefore our Eating must be Spiritual, and not Corporal. Yet
this is a real, a substantial partaking of Christ crucified, broken, his flesh
bleeding, his wounds gaping: so he is exhibited, so we are sure we receive him,
which does not only touch our outward senses in the Elements, but pass through
into the depth of the Soul. For in true Divinity real and spiritual are
aequipollent: although with the Papists nothing is real unless it be corporal:
which is a gross way, to defraud us of the Sublime and Soul-ravishing virtue of
the mystery. A mystery neither to be set out in words, nor to be comprehended
sufficiently in the mind, but to be adored with Faith, says Calvin, lib.
Instit. c. 17. Sect. 5. But herein we pledge Christ in the Cup of love, herein
we renew the Covenant of forgiveness strongly assured by the sprinkling of
Blood: the life is in the Blood: and without shedding of Blood is no remission
of sins. Because death is the wages of sin. Sin is the greatest dishonor that
can be done to God: and death in Christ's person is the greatest satisfaction
that can be made. He died, and gave himself for me: he died and gave himself to
me, as he was dead in his gored and pierced body, that his sacrifice might be
in me, and in all those that are redeemed by it. We read of some Mothers, that
in a great famine have eaten their own Children, 2 Kings 6. but what Mother in
the time of famine did ever give her own flesh to save the life of her Child?
But Christ has given himself for us, that we might not perish. O Lord, I owe
all my life to thee, because thou have laid down thy life for me. O let me
bleed out my sins, that thy Blood may fill all the veins of my Spirit. O let my
Body be transfigur'd to be Heavenly by cleanness and chastity, by being used
only for thy worship and service, that the Body of my Savior may come under
the roof of it. Then when the King shall let forth his Table, and give himself
to me in his wonderful Feast, my Spicknard shall send forth a sweet smell,
Cant. 1.12. My Soul shall magnify the Lord, and my Spirit shall rejoice in
Christ my Savior.

We have found the Messiah, says Philip to Nathaniel: And where have we found
him? at a Feast: a Feast of his own Body and Blood, but set out with no more
cost and show than a piece of Bread, and a sip of Wine. In this manner it is
brought to pass by the Omnipotency of God's pleasure to institute it, with the
efficacy of a strong Faith concurring to receive it. The Church had done very
ill, if of its own head it had made so mean a representation of Christ: but the
Lord must be obeyed, and ought to be admired in the humility of his Ordinance,
who has not given us rich Viands, and full Cups, but made the Feast out of the
fragments of the meanest Creatures. Let them understand this that will make
themselves fit to be his guests, bring a preparation of humility suitable to
the exility of those oblations. The meek shall Eat and be satisfied, they shall
praise the Lord and seek him, Psalm 22.26. And at that season let the riotous
remember his fullness of Bread, and excess of Wine. God is honored in a little,
and his liberality is abused in the excess of his creatures. And it is worth
the noting, that the Elements, which we are invited to take, are of fruits that
grow out of the Earth; to show that the Earth, which was cursed for Adam's
sake, is blessed for Christ's sake. As it brings forth Thorns and Thistles to
call to mind our rebellion, so it brings forth Bread and Wine to call to mind
our redemption. Neither does God supply us with Bread only out of the furrows
of the Earth, but sometime it has fallen out of the clouds of Heaven. Behold,
says God, I will rain Bread from Heaven for you, Exodus 16.4. This was Manna,
called the Corn of Heaven, Psalm 78.24. This was the Spiritual meat, or Angels
food, in which the old believers in the Wilderness did Eat Christ with an
implicit Faith. Our outward Sign is the Bread of the Earth, true Bread that
grows in the Fields, yet the Bread signified is that which the Father has
given us from Heaven, Jo. 6.31. Bread is a great part of man's nourishment; so
Christ crucified is the sole refection of Faith. Bread is champed in the mouth
to make it fit for the stomach: so the Body of Christ was ordained to be slain,
before it could profit us. If the Corn of Wheat fall not into the ground and
die, it abides alone; but if it die, it brings sorth much fruit, Jo. 12.24.
By his life we learn to live, and by his death we are made alive. Bread when it
is grounded between our teeth, and eaten, is turned by concoction into the
substance of our Body: which explains our mystical union with Christ, that we
are made one Spirit with him by Faith, as this sensible food is converted into
our flesh and bone.

Beside, in the several parts of the outward Signs, it is God's meaning we
should conceive how he loves the gathering together of many into one: which is
thus to be qualified. At a common Supper, or any Meal, all that are at the
Board feed of the same Meats; yet every one feeds to himself, and to none
beside: So every Communicant Eats Christ to himself, and the just shall live by
his own Faith. Nevertheless it is a Sacrament to combine, and to knit together,
holding us fast into one Communion, that there may be no breaking asunder of
the parts and members. Many grains of Wheat are kneaded into one Loaf, many
Grapes are trodden, that their liquor may be pressed into one cup. We being
many are one Bread, and one Body: for we are all partakers of that one Bread, 1
Cor. 10.17. Now natural learning will teach us, what a Comfort there is in
Union, and that fractions and dissolutions are painful and grievous. Behold,
how good and pleasant a thing it is! behold, what a strengthening to the
mystical Body to continue in one fellowship and breaking of Bread, to link
Faith and Love together in Jesus Christ! It was but one deliverance common to
all Israel, whose solemnity was kept at the Passover, though every Lamb was
Eaten by it self in a several family: So it is one Cup of salvation which God
has given us to Drink, though distributed to the faithful according to the
multitude of persons: and it is one Bread of which all do Eat, though some have
one share of it, and some another. It is necessary that many pieces be broken
off from one Loaf, to typifie the Body of the Lord broken for us, and that the
benefits of his Passion are distributed among us.

There are many instances that are pregnant to prove, how pieces of something
broken, and divided into many shares do import a Communication of somewhat
among the dividers. The Heathen, at the making of a League, did now and then
break a Flint-stone into pieces; and they that entered into a League kept the
parts in token of a Covenant. Some upon a contract of marriage will break a
piece of Gold, and the two halfs are reserved by the contractors. Shall I go
further, and yet come nearer to our case? The Roman Soldiers parted our
Savior's garment among them, and in that Symbolical accident is shown, that
the Gentiles should share in the satisfaction of his death. So Peter takes this
morsel of the Bread, John another, etc. yet Christ is not divided. The same
Ticket, as it were, in words in substance is put into every hand, on which is
written, Take and Eat it in remembrance of me.

Take it, says Christ, and be not afraid, as Saul was, to take a Kingdom, since
Christ has appointed it: be not afraid, as David was, to be the Kings Son,
since such honor is predestined to thee. Take it, and fear not, as Peter
did, saying, Depart from me, Lord, for I am a sinful man; it is the Lord's
delight to seek and to save that which is lost. Take it, and take heed you let
not go your hold; the thing is fast and firm, if you do not let it go, and lose
it. Take it, but not to hold the pleasures of the world, and your sinful lusts
in your gripe together: if your hands be full of those things, you can never
hold this. Take it, and take Christ with it: for He that made the Testament in
his Blood, has set the Seal unto the Testament, which gives you interefs and
possession of the Redemption by his Blood. Take it, and reach out your hand, to
signify that you receive Christ with the hand of Faith. They are too nice, for
fear of I know not what in the Roman Church, of losing a crum, or so forth,
that they put the Body of Christ into the mouth of their Disciples: and in
pretense that they give it as a Mother does her breast into the mouth of her
Child: whereas we receive this Sacrament, not as Babes, but as those that are
grown to the measure of a good Age. And if we be not worthy to take it into our
hands, we are not worthy to receive it in our mouth. Take it, and eat it: for
it is not enough to be sprinkled without, but to feed on Christ, and to digest
him within. If upon the supply of Corn, and Beasts, and Cattle, Paul might say,
that God had filled our hearts with food and gladness, Acts 14.17. If we are
glad of that which sustains us for a time, and yet we must die: How glad will
we be to Eat of that, as will give us such a life, that will endure for ever?
Eat of the forbidden Tree, says the Serpent to Eve, and you shall not die; but
he lied unto her. Therefore to dissolve the works of the Devil, our Savior
has appointed that which we shall Eat, and assured the promise of Everlasting
life unto it. Eat as Jonathan did of th Honeycomb, that you may be lusty to
pursue your enemies; and though Satan has sworn your death, as Saul did
Jonathan's, 1 Samuel 14.44. the Lord will deliver you. Pine not away with the
consumption of an evil Conscience; but Eat, and be strong in the Lord, and in
his mercy. As the Spirit of the Egyptian, who was half dead, came to him
again, when he had Eaten a little, 1 Samuel 30.12. Eat, and grind the Bread
between your teeth, to show the Lord's death. For Christ could have said, This
is my Body slain, This is my Body crucified, but he had rather say, This is my
Body broken for you, to show the great injuries of his sufferings. Eat then,
and remember you Eat the Body as it was broken, and remember that you Drink the
blood as it flowed out of his wounds.

To keep these things in remembrance is the great design of the Sacrament: an
object which keeps the fancy of the Soul waking, that otherwise, it may be,
would fall asleep. In the sixth of St. John Christ Preaches over and over of
Eating his Flesh, and Drinking his Blood without a Sacrament, by the power of
Faith. But to keep it in fresh and frequent meditation, the Lord has given us
a palpable and signal token, as if he would engrave it upon the palms of our
hands, and upon the roof of our mouth, upon the membranes of our brain, and
upon the foreskin of our heart. This is a blessing twice, and twenty times
given, because it is given that it may never be forgotten. They that love
others, would live in the memory of those they love: it is because Christ loves
us entirely, that he would be remembered of us. And no friend will say to
another, Remember me when I am gone, but that he means reciprocally to remember
his friend, to whom he spoke it. If you will remember Christ, he will remember
you. And the Thief on the Cross will teach you, that it is good to continue in
his memory; Lord, remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom. O blessed
Christ! thou art good, and do good: thou have not only provided an invaluable
benefit for thy Church, but do put it into our hands, that we may not lose
it; and do bring it into our eyes by clear ostension, that we may not forget
it. We are apt to remember injuries, and to forget benefits: unthankfulness
will undo us, if we take not heed of it. O rub over your memory, and consider
the noble works of the Lord, especially this great work, how he suffered for us
unto Death. Remember seriously this one thing as you ought, and God will let
you forget nothing that will do you good. There is no grievous sin which we
incur, but for the present Christ is forgotten, as if he had never come to
charge us to keep our selves unspotted from the world. But look upon his wounds
which bleed for our transgressions, and it will stanch the flux of sin, and
make our hearts bleed, because we have forgotten obedience. In our distresses,
our sickness, and losses, we cry out that God has forgotten us, he has
forgotten to be gracious, and shuts up his loving kindness in displeasure. But
distrust him not: a Mother cannot forget her Child: much-less such a Father.
Every tribulation which he inflicts, is but a Thorn in our sides to prick us,
and awake us, because we have forgotten God.

And remember the Death of Christ, not only casting your eyes back to the large
Histories of it in the Gospels, as if that would suffice: but affectingly,
practically, zealously: and then every thing else will come to mind to perfect
holiness. When we remember his Death, we are sure he is past Death, and Risen
again, now to Die no more, and that he is Ascended into Heaven, and makes
Intercession for us. We have obtained that Faith that we partake in the New
Testament of his Blood, and that our Names being found in the Testament, we are
heirs of God, coheirs with Christ. The custom of the world will teach us, that
an Heir is bound to execute the Will of the Testator, to see every thing
performed that he has charged and bequeathed. Do your part like a true
Executor, with a righteous Administration in remembrance of him. But
forgetfulness cannot creep upon us, when there is so visible a Monument before
us to bring it often into our thoughts. Luther says, it will help a man more in
the study of Piety, to meditate profoundly upon Christ's Passion one day, than
to read over all the Psalms of David. A bold comparison: It will indeed ravish
the Soul with trembling, to consider how much Christ loved us, by how much he
suffered for us: it will make us look upon sin with horror, which begat such
torment and ignominy to the innocent Lamb of God: it will Comfort our weak
Faith, that he who has done so great things for us, will not abandon us; and
having subdued our Enemies, will not let them renew the Battle to overcome us:
it will encourage us to lay down our life for him, who has laid down his life
for us. My meditation of him shall be sweet, I will be glad in the Lord, Psalm
104.34. He has drunk up the Cup of sorrow, that I might drink of nothing but
the Cup of Salvation. This is the Wine, Prove. 31.6. which being given unto him
that has a heavy heart, confutes all the objections of Infidelity, Despair, an
evil Conscience, or whatsoever the tempter can suggest against the Hope of my
Glorifications. Says the Son of Syrach, Chap. 49.1. The remembrance of Josias
was sweet as Honey in all mouths, and as Music at a Banquet of Wine. If the
Name of Josias was so precious for restoring Religion, what melody is there in
the remembrance of Christ's Name, what Music in his Banquet, which is the very
Mercy-seat, from whence the voice of the Lord gives the principal Oracles of
Consolation? Whose Definition I have reserved to be the last words of all;
Consolatio est conveniens Vnio potentiae cum Objecto, as our best Scholars have
it; Consolation is a convenient Union of any Faculty with its Object. As when
the Eye meets with light, it is the Comfort of the Eye. When the Ear meets with
harmony, it is the Comfort of the Ear. What is the most transcendent
Consolation therefore, but the Union of the Soul with God, the best Object, in
a real and most significative manner, the Union of the Spirit with Christ in
the Sacrament of his Holy Supper. To whom be Praise, and Glory, and
Thanksgiving. Amen.

ERRATA.
PAge 39. line 21. read taught us: p. 54. l. 18. r. these: p. 59. l. 18. r.
wherefore: p. 146. l. 5. r. God that: p. 187. in the Title, read the Sacrament
of Baptism.

THE END.
Some Books Printed for R. Royston since the Fire.
A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Testament. The
third Edition: by H. Hammond, D. D. Ductor Dubitantium, Or the Rule of
Conscience, in Four Books, Folio. The second Edition: by Jer. Tailor, Chaplain
in Ordinary to King Charles the First, and late Lord Bishop of Down and Conner.
The Sinner Impleaded in his own Court: The third Edition: Whereunto is now
added, The love of Christ planted upon the very same Turf, on which it once had
been Supplanted by the extreme Love of Sin: in 4o. A Collection of Sermons upon
several occasions: by Tho. Pierce, D.D. and President of St. Mary
Magdalen-Colledge in Oxon. A Discourse concerning the true Notion of the Lords
Supper, to which are added two Sermons: by R. Cudworth, D. D. in 4o. The
Unreasonableness of the Romanists, requiring our Communion with the present
Romish-Church: in 8o.

