AN EPITOMY OF History. Wherein is shown how several Princes and Nations, came
to their particular Countries and Dominions; also many great affairs in Judea,
Tartaria, Russia, Poland, Swethland, Germany, Italy, Piedmont, Scotland,
England, and many other places throughout the world, from the birth of our
Savior to this present time.

LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons in Aldersgate-streete. 1661.

TO THE READER.
YOu have here an Epitomie of the lives of the Emperors, the patient sufferings
of Christians, the State of the Jews, much of the Turks war, also Tamerlanes
with the Duke of Musco and Sulton of Egypt, the troubles of France, revolt of
Portugal, States of Holland, the Spanish invasion, an account of the Two King
Charle's of England, with many other material affairs by Sea and Land, up and
down the World, from the beginning of the Roman Monarchy; wherein I have
endeavored to give the truth of things impartially, and in the same order as
they were performed in the world. I have also closely compacted matter without
needless glosses, that you may the better remember the actions for your
benefit; and certainly it must needs be granted, that such Histories as this,
(which is real) is of all other most useful, the Reading of which yields
solid delight, where you may observe Providence, learn Experience, and gain
that knowledge which may truly improve you. Vale.

H. C.

AN EPITOMY OF HISTORY.
POmpey a Roman General, having subdued Jerusalem, and other Cities divided by
the ambition of the Princes of the Jewish Commonwealth; Aristobulus
endeavoring to get Cities from Jaxus's Kingdom, who was high Priest, and having
quieted all in France, and overcame Tygranes who was chose King by the Sirian
Princes, (which had their Countries allotted them by Alexander, son of Philip of
Macedon, who overcame Darius, and brought the Empire into Greece,) Pompey then
returned to Rome in Italy, part of Europe supposed to be built by Romulus who
killed his brother Rhemus his copartner, which City is said at first to have been
fifty miles round, but was laid in heaps by the Goths, now it stands lower
upon the bank of Tiber, and is narrower in its bounds, it was built upon seven
hills, and has had seven changes of Government, Kings, Consulls, Dictators,
Senators, etc. It was a place where the heathen Wits and Philosophers resorted.
Pompey fell after to Wars with Julius Caesar his kinsman, another Roman
general, both striving for sole power, and Pompey not laying down arms at the
Senates decree, Caesar overthrew him, who fled into Egypt, where the King
fearing to harbor him, slew him.

Julius Caesar getting the power after he had overcome Pompey's sons, chose
Senators, conferred honors and offices upon his party, but this bred him hatred
of the Senate, many conspired against him; a Soldier being taken by him, was
asked how he durst go against his Oath, who told Caesar, I was as faithful to
you as any, before you became so bad, that I saw there was no way to mend you
but to rid you out of the world; at last hew as thrust threw in the Senate, by
those he had showed most kindness to, the Senate burning his body.

Octavius Austus, Caesar's sisters son, was adopted, he is joined with two
Consulls, with a Proconsulls power, he overcame Antonius that obtained the
government of France, in which fight Caesar's two Consulls was slain, after
which he gets higher, and overcoming Brutus and Antonius again, Caesar's Navy
being above three hundred Ships, he became Emperor of Reme; Tiberius obtained
to be Tribune for five years. In the two and forty year of Julius Caesar Christ
came into the world, at which time the Temple of Janus was shut up, Judea now
paid Tribute, and Herod was made Kings, the Scepter departing from Judah, at
Messiah coming is foretold, which Herod was an Idumean, a Jew by profession,
but not by stock, first set up Leftenant in Gallilee by Caesar, whose
Solicitor was Herod's father; and Herod's brother Aristobulus was made high
Priest: Herod dying obtained the Tetrarchy of Judea for his son Archelaus, when
Joseph returned from Egypt, and dwelt at Nazereth.

Tilerius Nero the formers son in Law, was chose by the Senate, who at first
seemd hard to be persuaded to it; he acted with his Senate, but after ruled
with robbery, lust and arrogance, killed a Senator that made him his Heir to have
his goods, sent and ordered Piso, as is supposed, to poison Germanicus, who did
brave exployts for the Romans, and sent a letter to the Senate against one he
had made Knight, who was thrown down from a high place headlong. In the
fifteenth year of Tiberius Christ was baptized, lead into the wilderness,
fasted forty days, and began to preach. About four years after, Christ
suffered voluntary pains on the Cross, which Pilate deputy of Judea signified,
and his miracles to the Senate, but they would not acknowledge him God, because
the people had worshipped him so before. When Christ was carried back to Heaven,
and the Holy Ghost fell upon his Disciples, who openly preached what they had
seen, the Jews waxt hot and stoned Stephen, but Saul, stricken down, became an
eminent servant of Christ.

Caius Caligula hated the Jews, because they would not build Temples, Altars,
and offer sacrifice to him, his dependers was great haters of the Christians,
Pilate that past sentence on Christ fell into a tormenting disease; and to end
his miserable life killed himself. Herod that beheaded John the Baptist was
banished, and died in penury at Lions in France. Caius was killed by his own
guard.

Claudius reduced many Countries by war, to the Roman Monarch, among others
England, marrying his daughter to the King thereof; he punished with death two
of the former Emperors guard or servants for killing their master: There was a
Council in his time, where was Peter and Paul and the Elders of Jerusalem: He
was poisoned by his wife to prepare for her son Nero.

Domitous Nero at first past his time well, but after became abominably wicked,
tormented to death his own mother begun the persecution of Christians; now
Peter and Paul suffered Martyrdom, at which time the Gospel spread abroad, when
it is said Joseph of Arimathea came into England. Nero's cruelty caused
troubles in the Senate* and diverse Countries to rise up against him, especially
the Jews; he put many Noble men to cruel death, at last the Senate condemned
him to be whipped to death, upon which he fled and killed himself.

Flavius Vaspasian, While others contending to be Emperor, who were cut off, he
was chose by the Roman Army: Now there was a Comet and several signs appeared
of the Jews coming calamities; his forces spoild the Jews at Alexandria, then
at Damascus, after besieged and brought Jerusalem to the desolation foretold;
but the Christians warned of God fled beyond Jordan, and dwelt at Decapolis,
only Timothy and other Christians at Ephesus was put to death; but the Jews
was some fold, some tore in pieces by wild beasts, others by infection and
famine was dreadfully devoured.

Titus Vaspasian was an enemy to extortors, a lover of liberality; that day he
had not done some good in, he accounted lost. He gently admonisht two that had
conspired against him, and used them so lovingly* that they repented: the Jews
being subdued, he had much peace.

Flavius Domitian persecuted Christians, banished John to Patmos, hearing of
Christ's kingdom he feared, but seeing two of Judas's nephews discoursing of
the world to come to be poor, he contemned them; he was so impatient of labor,
arm, government, that he would use to be in a gallery pricking flies; one
asikng what company was with the Emperor, was answered, not a fly; some of his
friends and others conspired his death, one pretending business stabbed him, at
which the Senate rejoiced, ordering his name should not be remembered.

Nerva was for his wisdom chose by the Senate, he released many Christians,
John returned from Patmos, he took away impositions, forbad slanders, as also
making Eunuchs, he brought up poor men's childdren, restored goods unjustly
gotten, died of a sweat, through collar against a Senator.

Trajanus the adopted son of Nerva a Spaniard, was fair in carriage at first,
and beloved, yet persecuted the Christians with great pains, which they bore
with much patience, one was Simon the Apostle. The Deputy of Bithanie troubled
in mind for slaying Christians, informed the Emperor how holily the Christians
lived, and zealously they worshipped Christ, which mitigated the Emperors fury.

Adrian, A Bishop, and an Orator writing for the Christian Religion, the
Emperor made a new edict for persecution; the Jews followed a pretended Messiah
one Barcohebas, the Emperor banished them from their native soil, he at last had
a mind to build a Church for the Christians void of Images, but was hindered by
his friends.

Antonius Verus took much care of his people in famine: Justin Martyrs writings
for the Christian Religion was read in the Senate: This Emperors death was much
lamented, the Romans sacrificed to him, and canonized him for a God.

Marcus Aurelius was for wisdom esteemed a Philosopher, yet Martyrd Policarpus
and Justinius, but was molified a little by the Bishop of Lions, and God
sending rain to his army in distress, upon the prayers of his Christian
soldiers, and fire and thunder upon his enemies, he wrote to the Senate to
deal gently with the Christians,

About this time William Duke of Normandy Conquered England, the Danes came and
Conquered Etheldred, the ninth Saxon King, and the King of Denmark left his son
to rule, but Edmond called Ironside, Etheldreds son set up himself after his
fathers death, and warred with Canutus the new King of the Danes, after many
bloody battles, the two Kings fighting hand to hand, they divided the Nations,
but Etheldred was murdered by one that thought to be preferred by Canutus, who
caused him to be tormented to death, and Canutus married Etheldreds widow, and
had a son by her called Hardy, and was now King of England, Scotland, Denmark,
and Norway, but Hardy residing in Denmark, another son of Canutus by a former
wife, sets up himself, who displaced the English out of offices, banished his
Mother-in-Law, and put her youngest son to death, after, this King dying, his
brother Hardy possesses the Crown, but died in the midst of his Cupps at a
marriage feast. Edward the remaining son of Etheldred was brought into England,
married the Earl Bodwins daughter, but died without issue, he left the Crown to
Edgar, grandchild to Edmund Ironside, and swore Bodwins son now Regent to be
true to him, but Harold, Bodwins son; got himself Crowned, upon which the King
of Norway came to encounter them with a great Army, at which time William Duke
of Normandy with a complete Army came into England claiming a right to the
Crown by Edward the Confessors gift; Harold having the better of the King of
Norway, yet wasting his Army, William in a battle (where fell 66654. English
with Harold, having reigned not four months) Conquered him and the kingdom, in
whose Line the Crown continued till King Richard the second, who by
desoluteness of life entertaining bad Counselors, lost the love of his
Subjects, against whom his Nobles took Arms, but he consenting to bring the
evil Counselors to be punished by law, the Barrons cashier their forces. The
King apprehended several on a conspiracy; the Duke of Norfolk and Hartford
impeaching one another ready to fight a Dewell was banished, but after when the
King was subduing his enemies in Ireland, Hartford now Duke of Lancester by his
fathers death, came into England, the Nobility and Gentry resorting to him, who
summoned a Parliament, the King not able to resist them, yielded the Crown to
the Duke, the King being sent to Ponfret Castle and dispatched, which bred woeful
wars; after three or four Kings reigns, Edward the fourth of the house of York,
by a war where was slain thirty six thousand men, got the kingdom, where it
continued till Henry the seventh killed Richard the Third, and he marrying the
Heir of York, reconsiled both houses

Commodus put many Christians to death, even of noble birth; he had three
hundred Concubines, some of which conspiring his death was executed, but after
by a pretended friend he was poisoned, to the joy of the Romans.

Pertinax was an enemy to riot; and merely for brideling of disorders, a
tumultuous company with halberds went and slew him.

Didius Julianus bought the Emperors Throne of the soldiers, who offered it to
sail, but one pretending a title, he that pretended to it was proclaimed, and
Julian slain by command from the Senate.

Severius persecuted the Christians, charging them with sacrilege and
Rebellion, being stird up to this by the Jews; the father of Origin was
beheaded, and many in Carthage: a Captain going to execute a Virgin, who prayed
to God to turn his heart, died himself for the Faith, this Emperor was slain
at York by the Northern men.

Bassinus and Geta, the first slew the other his brother, put to death a lawyer
for not justifying his Murder, married his mother in Law, was slain by
Macrimus.

Macrimus was chose Emperor, took his son for his companion, but not coming to
Rome to govern, and living in lust, was beaten, fled, and pursued, was found
sick, void of all favor, he and his son was put to death, and the Conqueror
made Emperor.

Heliogabalus was a belly God, worshipped and built a Temple to the Sun, and
would have had the Christians who was now grown numerous to make their prayers
there: He appointed a Senate of women about obscene matters, had followed him
many Chariotts of Bands and harlots; he ordered that business which should be
done by day, to be done by night; he studied to find out untasted dain^ies; for
his lewd courses the Pretorian soldiers murdered him, drew his dead body
through the streets, and flung it into Tiber.

Alexander Severus the adopted Son of the former, delighted in wise
Counselors, punished a flatterer with smoke, yet martyrd many Christians* some
of them Senators: The Judge that past sentence against Agapetus died suddenly:
The Emperors mother was instructed in the Faith by Origin, who obtaind favor
for the Christians, afterward the Emperor was inclined to receive the Faith of
Christ, but persuaded from it by his Priests: he was much taken with that
saying of the Christians, do as you would be done by.

Maximinus was of base parentage, huge and strong, eating forty pound weight of
flesh a day, drinking six gallons of wine; he was promoted to honor by the
Emperor Severus: This Maximinus was saluted by the Army without the Senate; he
was more cruel to the Citizens of Rome, then their enemies, he persecuted the
Christian Teachers. Origin wrote a book de Martyr, and dedicated it to the
Pastors of Caesaria. This Emperor at a siedge was slain, and his Son, by his
own Soldiers, who he got before to kill Severius and his Mother.

Gordianus and his Son having reigned not two months, was both slain; the
Emperor, it is supposed, poysond by his Captain General: in his time a
Earthquake destroyed many Cities.

Philip was Baptized by the Bishop of Rome, he put himself among the penitents,
and bewailed his having a hand in the former Emperors death: Decius one of his
Captains flew him, and reigned.

Decius put to death diverse Christians, banished the Bishops of Jerusalem and
Carthage; Origin fearing, offered to the Idol, but bitterly repented, was
excommunicated the Church of Alexandria. This Tyrant Emperor persecuted in
Africa and Europe, but being overcome by the Scythians or Goths, flying, cast
himself into a pit and died.

Gallus followed Dcius in persecution, about which time great desolation was
made in the world by the pestilence; one of his Captains behaving himself
valiantly in an overthrow against the Goths, being puffed up, and the Emperor
scorned, got himself to be Proclaimed Emperor, and slew Gallus and his Son, who
had reigned about three months.

Walerin and Galeuus Val: at first was very favorable to Christians, but
seduced by a Sorcerer, put to death three Bishops of Rome; Lawrence a Deacon
endured patiently to suffer on a broyling Iron. This Emperor at last was
delivered into the hands of a King that trampled upon his neck; his Son ordered
the return of the banished Christians, who used to meet in plain places, knowing
no Images but from the Gentiles or Pagans; they used to visit their sick
enemies, whenas the Pagans was ready to thrust out their half dead friends.

Claudius and Quintillian, the first much reformed the Commonwealth, was huge
prosperous against the Goths, dying of a natural death, was placed by the
Senate among the Gods: The second hearing of Aurelianus being chose Emperor,
and perceiving he could not make his party good against him, died voluntarily
of bleeding.

Aurelianus was of a sour nature, something moderate at first, but after fell
to persecute Christians; yet being frighted with a thunderbolt coming near him,
he assisted the Bishops of Antioch in deposing the heretic Samosatanus,
electing Domns in his room, who, as also the Bishop of Antiocha, was married
and had Children This Emperor subdued Germany, Gothicus, Siricus, and brought
Zenobia prisoner to Rome in Chains of gold: This Emperor threatening his
Secretary, was slain by him when the Emperor went with a small guard; the
Secretary after was cast to the dogs.

Anius Tacitus was elected by the Senate, he was moderate in diet, he abolisht
abuses at Rome, but dying, his brother Florian named himself Emperor; but
another being chose, Florian died voluntarily of bleeding.

Aurelius Probus subdued three others that named themselves Emperors, one of
which hanged himself: This Emperor bringing peace to Rome, employed his
soldiers in planting and other labors, but they Traitorously murdered him, to
the grief of the Senate and people.

Carus, Carianus, and Numerianus, all continued but three years; Numerianus was
slain by his Father-in-law, Carus by thunder, and Carianus in battle by
Dioclesian, whom the Army declared Emperor, when Carianus lived.

Dioclesian chose Maximinus his assistant, The Christians now enjoying both
peace and credit, but yet abounding in sin, in the 19. year of Dioclesians
reign, the tenth bloody persecution broke out against the Christians, these
Emperors setting themselves utterly to exterpate the Christian profession, one
in the East, the other in the West, which persecution lasted ten years.
Dioclesian would be counted a God, commanded the people to kiss his feet, he
made Edicts for burning the Scriptures, imprisoning Christian Bishops,
displacing Christian Magistrates, deprived the people of liberty, commanded the
soldiers to lay down arms or offer to Idols, who said they would lay down
their lives too, rather then sacrifice, but some he forced to impure offering,
tormented and put to death twenty thousand Christians, who died singing of
Psalms; he beheaded the Bishop of Antioch, many he burnt in a Church, hung
women with their heads downward, burnt also a whole Town with all sorts in it.
He slew the Bishop of Sidon, Presbyter of Tirus, spilt much blood in Germany,
France and Italy, even to the coloring of Rivers, at last gave over killing,
yet commanded Christians right eyes to be put out, and left legs maimed, they
at last gave over their power to two others, one of which chose his son to him,
the other his two sons; these two new Emperors divided their Domions; one had
France, Spain, Britain, Maximinus was slain by Constantine.

Constantius and Galarius; Constant: accounted Christians his best Subjects, he
commanded the Soldiers to worship Idols, but turned all out that did, saying,
they that will be false to God, will be so to him: But Galarius in the East
part of the world cruelly persecuted the Christians, but God sending a disease
of vermin stayed his hand; and he desired the Christians should pray for him,
but after again ingraves Edicts against them in brass, puts to death the Bishop
of Emisa and many others; the people was again visited with woeful diseases, at
last he made a law for the preservation of Christians, he being persuaded by
his charmers to make, war with Lisinus, and discomfited put to death his
charmers; he died of sickness, and the soldiers chose Maxentius, who abused
Senators wives, one killed her self rather then would go to him; but the people
sent for Constantine, who got an Army in France and Britain, came and overcame
Maxentius, but Galarius Max: made Le^inus Emperor, who by fair pretenses sought
to take away the life of Constantine, that had made Edicts for the Christians,
but failing, forced the Christians to fly into woods, by his cruel Edicts,
some he cut in pieces, some almost starved with cold he then burnt, but Lisinus
being at last overcome, yielded to Constantine.

Constantine the great was careful to procure the peace of Christians, as well
abroad as in his own Dominions, wishing Sapores the King of Persia (who put
several to death) to be friendly to Christians, in whose religion nothing was
to be blamed, intimating in his letter how ill it faired with eight persecuting
Emperors; the King of Iberia craved of him to send Preachers thither; he locked
up the Idols Temples, and built Churches, discharged sensing before the people,
suppressed whores, pulled down an Altar, the Pagans used to sacrafice on at Fairs;
being in peace, he built Constantinople in Thracia, and called it Nova Roma, was
baptized in the suburbs of Bithynia, fell sick at Nicomedia.

Constantius, Constans, and Constantine jun: Constantius governed the East, the
other two the West, Constantine was slain after he had governed three years;
Constans after thirteen years was slain in France by the Tyrant Magnentius, who
Constantius forcing after to fly, Magnen: killed his Mother, Brother and self.
Constantius was infected with Arianism by a Priest at Court: and he sent to
slay Athanasius who passed the amidst of his Army undiscernd; but Georgius an
Arian Bishop was seated in Alexandria, and fourteen Bishops more was banished,
and many Christians cruelly tortured by Georgius; the Jews reballed against
this Emperor, but he leveld Diocesaria to the ground, the Germans rebelling,
his Cosen Julian having subdued them, got himself saluted Emperor, against
whom Constantius going died, sorrowing he had changed the Nicene Creed.

Julian was brought up in the Christian Religion, but perverted by a
Philosopher; he opend the doors of the heathen Gods, releiv'd those he had
before imprisoned, he took away Christians schools, laid taxations upon them,
telling them when they complained, that Christ had told them, happy are them
that suffer for righteousness sake, He was vexed to see how patiently they bared
all wrong; he set up his own Image by the gods, that he might charge those that
would not bow with irreverence to him; he caused victuals to be sprinkled with
heathenish holy water: some Christians had their bellies ripped up; one was
anointed with Honey, and exposed to wasps: One that for revenge chawd a peace of
liver of a Christians that broke Images in the former Emperors time, had his
teeth fell out of his mouth, and became blind. For in hatred of the Christians,
the Emperor gave leave for the Jews to build the Temple at Jerusalem to offer
daily sacrifice, but they was hindered by an earthquake, fire, mighty wind, and
tempest: This Emperor in War with the Persian, was shot with a dart, saying,
thou Christ of Galilee have overcome me.

Jovinian was chose by the Roman Army, he would not accept of the Empire till
the Army owned the Christian Religion, he made peace with the Persian, yielding
some parts of Syria, though Julians weakening of his forces, reduced the Bishops
which was forced to lurk in holes, followed Athanatius Counsel, going to
Constantinople died.

Valentian was a great sufferer in Julians time, chose now by the Army, he
chose his brother Valience to govern in the West, favored the Arians, shipped
some other Christians away, and cruelly caused them to be fired; he caused two
Captains to have their bodies rent in pieces, by bowing down trees to the
ground, for causing to be delivered their General, though a Tyrant that rose up
against him; his brother refused to help him against the Goths, because of his
being an Arian; the Samaritans now invaded the Roman empire.

Gracianus gave the Empire of the West to his brother Valentian, he reduced
those Bishops that the Arian persecutor Valens had banished, he was slain by a
usurper, his brother was seduced by his Mother to be for the Arians; but in the
East, Theodosius that was chose to assist Gracianus in his time fights, with
Maximus, who was delivered into his hand, after with the Tyrant Eugenius, but
by a mighty Tempest of wind, the darts of Eugenius Army were turned upon their
own faces, upon which Eugenius fell down at Theodosius feet, and begged pardon.
Theodosius was a lover of Christians, and made a Law against Heretics.

Arcadius governed in the East, was a meek and good Emperor, but not
courageous, he was by an Arian Bishop persuaded to banish Christians, whom the
peoples affection caused him to recall, Gaina a private Soldier, was made
General of Arcadius Army, who grew insolent and affected the kingdom.
Honarius the Emperors brother who reigned in the West, met with a great deal of
trouble, by reason of his Lieftenant affecting the kingdom in Afric; and his
father in law stirring up the Vandalls, and Burgundians to invade France, also
200000 Goths and Hunnes came to Italy, but their General was surprised, there
arose another party of the Goths, which the Emperor made peace with, after
which the Emperors father-in-law on purpose of ill to the Emperor fell upon
them, which caused the Goths to return again to Rome, and the Emperor being
without a General, he having slain his father in law for Treason, they took
Rome, but in the midst of burning, slaying, robbing, and military outrage, they
saved such as fled to Christian Churches, afterward they went toward France
and Spain.

Theodosius the second had the whole Government, he collected a great library
of good books, was a meek person, in his house was red the Scriptures, and
prayer, the Vandalls who were partly Pagans, and partly Arians cruelly
persecuted the Christians in Afric and the Hunnes much encumbered the Roman
Empire, and the Emperor was fain to covenant with the Vandalls, and to assign
them some places: There was a great fight betwixt the Western Goths and the
King of the Hunnes, the Hunnes flee, the Goths who was now joined with
Valensian, pursewing the Hunnes, Valensians general hindered them, who for it
was put to death, the Hunnes encouraged came back to Italy, but was persuaded
by the Bishop to spare Rome. Theodosius put a general to fight Tyrant John, but
the general and Ship was driven into a Town of John's, but the generals Son
passing a place never before dry, took the Town, slew the Tyrant, and releeved
his father.

Martianus (after the Goths, Vandalls and other strangers had much disquieted
the Roman Empire) was advanced by means of Theodosius sister, but reigned not
long, his uncle Leo came next up, who interposed his power for the suppressing
of the error of the Eutysians, which Eutysians were very cruel to many
Christian Bishops; about this time was an earthquake that destroyed part of
Antiocha.

Zeno, used to be dead drunk, an efeminate and irreligious man; favored the
aforesaid error, restored their Bishops, Basiliscus forces the Emperor to fly,
and not out of love to truth, but hatred of him, undoes all he had done, the
King of the Vandalls was an Arian, persecuted the Christian faith; many Jews
now followed on Moses, but was destroyed, the King of the Vandalls was
tormented with venomous boyles.

Anastius was a favourer of the Entysians was stured up (contrary to his own
inclination) by an heretical Bishop, to slay many Christians, the people of
Antioch vexed hereat, fell upon some Entysian Monks, by which means they had an
Entysian Bishop put in their place.

Justinius the elder was a godly Emperor, restored good, banished bad Bishops,
cut out the tongue of an Entysian, the King of the Goths killing among other
Christians a Roman Senator, he imagined he saw his face in a Fish-head at
dinner, and was much terrified at it.

Justinian, was strong for the Christian faith of the four Counsels, he by
Bellisarius overcame the Persians, recoverd what his predecessors had lost in
Asia, Africa, Europe, also Carthage, from the Vandalls, drove the King of the
Goths out of Italy, recoverd Sicile; but the Goths chose another, King and
recoverd Italy, but was beaten out again, one of the Emperors Captains angry
with the Emperors Sons wife, sends for the Longabards out of Panamia, who
possessed themselves of that part of Italy called Lumbardie. This Emperor
abridged the Roman Laws, called a counsel about disputations, moved Origens
and Theodorus writings.

Justinus Jun: having his Dominions wasted, put on the Emperial robes on
Tiberius, wishing him wisely to govern the Roman Empire; the King of Persia
was now so high, that he would not admit of the Emperors Ambassadors, but was
subdued by the Emperor, who subdued also the Goths and Vandals; the King of
Goths put to death his own Son for turning from Arianisme.

Maritius (to whom Tiberius gave his Daughter and Kingdom) suffered twelve
thousand soldiers to be slain, through not parting with a little money to
ransom them, for which the soldiers brought him before Phocus, who they had
chose, who killd the Emperor and his Wife and Children.

Phocus reigned in Cruelty and Drunkenness; the Roman Empire was weakened by
diverse enemies; the Patriarch of Rome perceiving that the Patriarch of
Constantinople was like to be the chief, he wrote against Supremasie, but
afterward being in great favor with the Emperor, he got him to ordain the
Bishop of Rome to be universal Bishop, and the Church of Rome head over all
Churches, which dignity was importunately begged, and with much contention
obtained: This Emperor was overome by his Son-in-law and others, and brought to
Heraclianus, who commanded his head and feet to be cut of, and stump burnt.

Heraclianus, the King of Persia had now taken Jerusalem, who gave the Jews
leave to kill many thousand Christians, and would not have peace with the
Emperor, without the Emperor would turn Pagan, but the Emperor subdued him, and
regaind Jerusalem; after this he fell into the heresy of the Monotholites, and
was given to insest and curious arts: At this time begun the Monarchy of the
Sarasens, a people of Arabia, who fought under the Emperor against the Persian,
but craving wages for their services, was called Arabian dogs by the Emperors
Treasurer, upon which they chose Mahomet their Captain, took Damascus,
conquered Syria, Palestina, Egypt, Persia, and consulted with an Apostate
Bishop, and some Jews, and set up a mixed Religion or Alcoran of Judaisme,
Christianisme, and Paganism, commanding all people that could be conquered by
fire and sword, to receive this doctrine; he overthrew a great army of the
Emperors, the Emperor about renewing his Army died with grief.

Constantius was soon poisoned by his fathers second wives advise, that her Son
might reign, but the Senate cut out her tongue, and her beautiful Sons nose,
and banished them; about this time the Sarasens took Caesaria, and slew therein
7000 Christians.

Constans revenged himself on them that conspired his fathers death, and
subdued one whom the Army chose Emperor, cut off the noses of his two brothers,
because their beuty should not commend them; the Sarasens was now brought to
pay tribute unto the Emperor, who though he was something Heretical, yet called
a Counsel that utterly condemnd the Monotholites.

Justinian was cruel to the Citizens of Constantinople, but a Nobleman took
him, cut off his nose and banished him, and burnt two of his Counselors in the
belly of a brazen Bull, but the Soldiers being inconstant they cut off the
Noblemans nose and put him into a Monastery, and chose another, but the first
Emperor by another Princes help recovers his power, slew both the other
Emperors, and continuing cruel still Philipicus got him slain by a servant.

Philipicus was declared Heretic by the Bishop of Rome, for rasing pictures
out of a Temple, had his eyes put out by Artemius his Secretary.

Artemius deposes the Patriarch of Constantinople, for not keeping the Faith.
Theodosius taking the Emperor, forced him to take the habit of a Monk, and
Theodosius reigned in his stead, but hearing of Leo's being chosen, went to a
Monastery and gave over his governing.

Leo Isaurus destroyed Images; the Bishop of Rome forbad tribute to be paid
him, excommunicated and disauthorised him, sent out curses against him, and hot
wars there was between Emperor and Pope: This Pope Gregory the second was
reckoned a Conjurer, though the Lumbards had joined with him in routing the
Emperor, yet in sharing he casts to clear Italy to the Roman Sea; and to engage
Charles of France, he sent him the keys of the holy Sepulcher, and St. Peter's
Chain: This Pope decreed in a Senod that all that would not do religious
honor to Images, should be cut off from the body and blood of Christ. The
Sarasens utterly destroyed the Goths in Spain, but was beaten out of France
with the loss of three hundred thousand.

Constantius Copronymus fighting against the Arabians, (the Senate, great
favorers of Images) gave out the Emperor was dead, and chose another, but he
returned and won Constantinople, he gathered a general Counsel which condemned
worshipping of Images. The Turks and Scythians now invaded the Arminians and
Sarasens, but the agreement was, that the Turks in Persia, should be called
Sarasens, who also embrased the Mahomitan Religion; the Pope and King of France
overcame the Lombards.

Leo the former's son was zealous against Images, punished those near him for
worshipping of them.

Irene the wife of Leo was deposed by her son Constantius, but she plucked out
both his eyes, and imprisoned him, where he died for grief; she persecuted
those that was not for Images of Saints and Fathers, she was at last banished*
and deposed by Nicephorus, who reigned eight years after her; but now the
famous Empire of the East was in a manner extinguished. Nicephorous treats with
Charles the great, and contents himself with small Dominions, besides the Turks
and Goths in the West, and Hunnes and Lumbards had continued long in their
several Dominions got from the old Empire.

Charles the great, he was first King of France, but declared and crowned by
Leo the third Bishop of Rome, a prudent Emperor, a detester of worshipping of
Images, he fought against the King of Denmark and Bohemia, enemies to
Christians, he appointed his kinsman over Italy, and left his son Lodovicus
Emperor.

Lodovicus called for his meekness pious, was crowned by the fourth Bishop of
Romet Barnard governor of Italy rebelled, but was beheaded, his sons also
rebelled, whom the Emperor pardoned; the Sarasens from Egypt invade Sicily,
burning towns, and killing Priests; the Emperor with the Bishop of Romes help,
drove the Sarasens, away: the Bishop of Vtrech, threatened to excommunicate the
Emperor, if he would not leave his wife, because she was his kinswoman; this
Emperor gave over his right in choosing Pope to the Clergy and people of Rome.

Lotharius was anointed in St. Peter's Church by the Pope; his Brothers fell
out about their fathers lands, which civil war so weakened the Nobility of
France, that the Danes and Normans entered and troubled them for many years.

Lodovicus the Second, dying without Issue, his brother Charles King of France
by liberal gifts obtained to be Emperor, but was poisoned by his Physician a
Jew; from the formerly great now small Empire of the East, Michael Emperor of
Constantinople, slew his brother, and thrust his Mother and sisters into a
Monastery.

Carolus Crassus the Son of Lewis King of Germany, was forced to yield to the
Normans (who was very potent in France) that place toward the British Sea
called Normandy; the Emperor for negligence and ill government was deposed, and
Arnalphus his Nephew declared Emperor.

Arnalphus fought with the Duke of Spoleto, who flying, the Emperor besieges
his Wife who hired some of the Emperors servants to poison him.

Lodovicus the third, in his time the Sarasens invaded Italy, and the Hungers
France; the King of the Sarasens in besieging Consentia was killd by thunder,
and the rest returned to Afric.

Conradus desired his brother to deliver after his death the Emperial Ornaments
to the Duke of Saxony, as most fit for it, for wisdom, it being a troubled
State, which desire of this Emperor his brother preferred before the Throne,
and performed his will.

Henry Duke of Saxony was busy a hunting, when the news came of his being made
Emperor, he made Peace with the Hungers for nine years, after obtained a
victory over them; and in thanks to God purged his Dominions of the sin of
Simonie; he fought also with the people of Dasmatia and Bohemians, and made
them tributaries; he was called Pater Patriae.

Otho the first, the former* Son called a Council, deposed the Pope, the
Romans making a sedition, he returned and punished them, after ordered that none
should be chose Pope without the consent of the Emperor; he was buried in a
Church himself built. In the East Constantine had recovered his Empire from the
Romans again.

Otho the second prevails against the King of France, recovered Lorraigne, but
the Sarasens and Grecians with Constantine came to recover Apulia, and overcame
the Emperor, who hardly escaped, who after vented his wrath upon the Italians
for deserting him.

Otho the third pardoned Crescensius twice, who the Italians preferred to be
Emperor, but the third Rebellion of his he hanged him: the seditious Romans
also advanced John 18 to be Pope, rejecting Gregory the fifth made by the
Emperor, whith John had his eyes plucked out, and himself thrown headlong from
the Capital; this Emperor with the Pope now instituted seven Electors of the
Emperor, the Bishop of Mentz, Cullen, and Tryes, Count Palatine, Duke of Saxony
Marquess of Brandenburgh, and in case of contrary opinions the King of Bohem'n,
this Emperors wire was the widow of the rebel he hanged, who poisoned him
with a pair of gloves.

From the East those Emperors lives was but short, by reason of the continuing
of the old barbarous course of making them away

Henry the second, Duke of Bavaria was chose Emperor by the Electors, receiving
the Crown from the Pope, he subdued all his rebels, expeled the Sarasens out
of Italy, the King of Denmark a savage Prince came into England to root out
the Christian profession, one of the Saraseu Princes at this time destroyed
some Temples in Jerusalem; and massacred all the spiritual officers.

Conradus the second made a Law to punish with death the troublers of the peace
in Germany: about this time a war grew between the Christians and Sarasens, but
a peace was made in a short time after, and liberty granted to rebuild the
Christian Temples in Jerusalem.

Henry the Third, In his time three Bishops contended for the Popedom, but the
Emperor placed Clemens the second, at this time the estate of Christians was
most lamentably afflicted by the Turks and Sarasens.

Henry the Fourth was a good wise Emperor, but excommunicated twice by the
Pope, who stird up the Germans against him, under the Duke of Sweve, who being
taken had his right arm cut off, which he held up, at his Oath of Allegiance,
and he acknowledged Gods hand.

Henry the Fifth the Pope would not Crown, till he would give over his right of
Election of the Pope, and of investing of Bishops by Staff and Ring, but the
Emperor compelled the Pope and Cardinals to perfect his Coronation, and
confirm his privileges, which the Pope covenanted to, by breaking a piece of
the Hostie, notwithstanding the Pope revoked, and cursed the Emperor, but
before the Emperor as I told you, forced the Pope, the Pope (being admired in
the world) called a Counsel of the Bishop of Mentz, Trier and Worms, to insite
the Emperor to war with his own father.

Lotharius the second Duke of Swene was elected, two contending for the
Popedom, he gave it to Innocent, and coming to Rome with an Army, made the
other Pope Peter a Citizen, and the Count of Sicilly his friend say nothing
more.

Conradus Tertius subdued the Duke of Saxony and Bavaria, Winsperg besieged,
the women begged leave to come out with what they could carry on their backs,
which granted, they brought forth their husbands, which the Emperor thought
would have been Treasure, but performed his promise* This Emperor going against
the Turks, and wanting provisions accepted of some meal from the Emperor of
Constantinople, but it being mingled with Lime poisoned his Army, upon which
the King of France joining with the King of Jerusalem, besiedged Damascus, but
the Christians in Asia and Siria was so decayed, that Turks and Infidells, had
almost got all.

Frederick the first, coming to Coronation, he alighted to salure the Pope, and
when the Pope mounted, he held the Stirrup; and mistaking the Stirrup, angered
the Pope, the Pope incited him and the Duke of Bavaria to fight with the Duke
of Apula for recovering his Terrtiories to the Chair of Rome; the Pope also
stirred up the Emperor of Constantinople, to drive Apula out of Italy, the Duke
begged on fair terms peace, but the Pope rejected him, the Duke overcoming the
Emperor of Constantinople, marches toward the Pope, who then sued to him for
Peace. Frederick taking into consideration the Popes ambition, prefixed his own
name before the Popes; and ordered there should be no appeal to Rome, upon
which the Pope stirred up the people of Germany, and elsewhere against the
Emperor, and excommunicated him; a fly entering the Popes throat, choked him,
the Emperor subdued Millan quickly; two now contending for Popedom, Alexander
not meeting the Emperor at Counsel he chose Victor Pope, upon which Alexander
falls a cursing, and warring, and joining with the Venetians took the Emperors
son, upon which the Emperor came to Alexander for absolution, and kneeling down
the Pope trod on his neck, saying, thou shall tread upon the Adder and the
Aspe, etc. I said the Emperor that is to St. Peter, I said the Pope to me and to
St. Peter.

The Kings of England and France go now to the last help of the Christians
about Jerusalem, they took one place, but, falling out about honor, return
home and the King of the Turks takes Jerusalem, and other places possessed by
the Christians.

Henry the sixth was the son of Frederick, the Pope gave him in marriage one
out of a Monastery, and both Ciciles for a dowery; the Emperor, Pope, and other
Princes went to help the poor Christians in Palastina, but the Emperor dying,
they returned doing nothing

Philip the second, by the help of the Saxons and Bavarians, took upon himself
to be Emperor, but the Pope and Electors went to wars with him, but the people
of Germany got them to agree; the Emperor marries the Popes Nephew; the Emperor
was murdered in his Chamber by Count Palatine. Now begun the Tartarian
Kingdom, they came from the Mountains of the Indies with wives and Children, a
fierce people against Christians and others, they overrun the Meads, Parthians,
Arminians, Samaritan, Asirians, Persians, and seated at Meotidis Paladis.

Otho the fourth refused to give gifts to the people at Coronation, which bred
commotions, he invaded the Popes territories was excommunicated; from the East
the Venetians and French overcoming the Emperor, they set up Baldwin of France,
Count of Flanders, and when it descended to Robert his son, he was crowned by
the Pope, as the German Emperors.

Frederick the second King of Cicile and Naples, gave the Dukedom of Fundanus
to the Church; he yielded to the Popes Canon of prescription to what the Pope
would, several made commotion against the Emperor, the Pope joins with them,
excommunicates the Emperor, but the poor Christians in Asia, desiring help, the
Emperor and Pope agree, but the Emperor sending to the Pope news of his armies
success against the Sarasens, the Pope trampled upon his letter stirred up the
Emperors son against his father, to get some Dominions to the Church, the
Emperor returns, subdues his enemies, but gave a great sum of moneys before the
Pope would absolve him; the Emperor goes against Traitors in Italy, the Pope
writes to all Towns, to stand out, stirrs up the Venetians legates, cursed him
by a Bull, deprived him of his dignities, charged him with heresy, the Emperor
sends his Secretary to clear himself of those things and the Bishops of Germany
was true to him; the Pope sent for a Counsel to depose the Emperor, the Emperor
took by Sea three Legates Monks soldiers and Treasure: the Tartars come and
destroy places adjacent, and the Christians sent to the Emperor for help, who
wished the Pope to consider Christendom, but while the Emperor was engaged for
the Christians, the Pope proceeded to depose him, which put the Emperor to
employ his strength against him, and he so brought him under, that in anger and
desparing the Pope died, after the Emperor drove the Tartars out of Hungary,
but the next Pope forced the Emperor to more war in his own Dominions, and two
great parties there was, the Emperors called the Gibilins, and Popes the Guelts.

Conradus the fourth, endeavoring to regain Apula, his brother the Duke
thereof got him poisoned, the Pope sent two Armies to gain Cicily, but he was
beaten and died; but the next Pope got Count Angow the King of France's brother
to fight with the Duke of Apula, that beat the former Pope, and the Duke was
overcome by Angow. Young Conradus their sought to get his fathers Dominions,
was beaten by Angow, and beheaded by the Popes advice: So the Kingdom of
Naples came into the hands of the French.

Radulph was chose at Frankford by the Electors, he was afraid to go to Rome
for Coronation, because of the Popes Tyranny, it was seven years after the
former Emperor before he was chose, he overthrew the King of Bohemia, who in
time of vacansie invaded Austridg, and called himself Emperor, these gave their
daughters to each others son.

Adolph borrowed money of King Edward of England to fight against France, but
wanted it for his own house, he sought to win Austridg, but the Duke thereof
slew him, and reigned in his stead; in the East a Christian Army of Germans and
Hungarians was overcome by the Sultane of Egypt, who let in Sluices near Nilus
upon them; a second Army under Frederick regained Jerusalem, made a Peace with
the Sarasens, which the King of Navor by the Popes consent broke, but was beat
back, and the Savages regained Jerusalem, put all Christians to death, and
spoiled the Sepulcher of Christ: Another Army came under the King of France,
but a forward commander venturing upon the Sarasens and Sulton with a part of
the Army was overcome, and after the whole Army, the King being taken, who
wanted assistance from the Emperor, the Pope keeping him in war at home. The
King of Tartarian, was baptized, and he overcame Syria, Persia, and took
Damascus from the Sarasens, but this Kings son at his fathers death left a
commander that apostatized, and set fire on Sesaria, the next Army was of the
Kings of France and England, the French took Carthage and in Cicily brought the
Prince of Cicily to give way to the profession of Christian religion: Prince
Edward of England was wounded by a venomed knife, by a deceitful Sarasen
pretending letters, yet recovered, but failing of fores from the Emperor) the
Pope stirring up the Duke of Angow to destroy Fredericks posterity) he
returu'd. The last Army again the Sarasens was by the Emperor, who the enemy
circumvented as they was lading a great prey, took the Christian general, and
after utterly destroyed in Asia their Towns and Holds, but the Prince of
Tartars restored Syria again, but he returning home, his commander revolted to
the Sulton of Egypt, because (the Pope warring with France) no succor came to
him.

Albertus after ten years reign, was killed by his brothers son; now sprang up
the first Othoman King of the Turks, a courageous warrior that enriched himself
with spoils, he subdued great part of Bithynia and other places.

Henry the seventh was a Prince of excellent properties, wise, just, and
beloved, neither proud in prosperity, or dejected in adversity; a Monk mingling
poison with the bread of the Eucharist poisoned him.

Lewis the fifth was next, but some of the Electors chose Frederick, who was
subdued, but yet being Duke of Austria vexed the Burgesses of Vren Swits for
helping the other Emperor, which places and others, made a league among
themselves, and are called Switzers or Cantons, or Pages of Helvetia, the Pope
being displeased with Lewis sent to the Electors to choose another, which they
did.

Charles the fourth, In his time the Turks passed the Helespontus, and took
several Towns, which was their Conquest over those regions in Europe they now
possess Charles procured of the Electors, that his son should be King of the
Romans.

Vinseslaus was sluggish and given to voluptuousness, and was deprived of his
dignity. About this time Tamerlane Captain of the Tartars, the Pr. of Og's son
slaying 30000 in a battle of the Muscovites, who entered the Tarters Country,
grieved to see the slaughter of his enemies. The great Cham of Tartaria gives
him his daughter, and stirred him up against the King of China, that styled
himself Lord of the world: Tamerlane going against this King, falling sick, a
Counselor drew away part of his soldiers, who Tamerlane overcome, and then on
his march made a speech to his soldiers, which ended, his soldiers cried out,
one God in Heaven, one Emperor on Earth, he first forces a great wall the
Chinaes made for defense of their Country, and took great spoil. The King of
China summons his Priests to pray to the Sun, a Lord came to Tamerlane to
direct him; to whom he gave a frontire Province, and was very courteous to the
people, and he endeavors to get a great City for the comfort of his Army before
he fight more; he won the Suburbs by storm, but considering the riches of the
City might spoil his Soldiers for fighting, took it on conditions, the King of
China marches toward Tamerlane, the King rode in a Chariot, whereof every part
shone with Gold, Pearls, Rubies, and Diamonds, and his whole Army with Gold and
precious stones: Tamerlane took another place for refreshment, and then sent
out a party of 6000 horse telling the commander, if they come upon you, retire
back, and bring that great cloud to me, which I hope to disperse he likewise
ordered a great body to receive the enemy upon the formers retirement; and
another body ready to help the last, if worsted, reserving still another body
with himself; the Chinaes come on with his horse trappings as well as armor
decked with gold and silver, he had likewise many armed Chariots, they came
altogether without any vantguard; but Tamerlan's commander being wounded and
retired, another great body engaging, beat the enemy within the Kings Chariots,
but the King had yet about his person 150 thousand men; then came on Tamerlane
and broke through, even within a second rank of Chariots, where was 40000 men,
the King at last remained wounded with Tamerlane; the battle being won, which
lasted eight hours, there was slain two Kings alleys to the King of China, who
had diverse strange weapons and ensigns, wonderful riches was taken in golden
vessels, precious stones, and and rich Chariots; the next day Tamerlane looked
upon his Army, and took care of the King of China, whose Army was at first 200
thousand foot, and 150 thousand horse. Tamerlane refreshed himself with water,
never drinking wine, thanked God, never in the least vaunted, and went and
saluted the King again, who said to Tamerlane, well let it suffice thee, seeing
thou fightest for honor, that the Lord of the World and Child of the Sun, is
in thy power. China has two hundred famous Cities in it, and abounds with
Silk, Linen, Fish, Foul, and Mines of Gold and Silver; Tamerlane overthrew
also the King of China's brother, upon which Cities yielded a pass, but at
length he made a peace with him, enjoying most of the Cities in China, beating
down all Idols; and so delivered the King to go home. After this the Emperor
of Greece, desired his aid against the Turk, that would attempt his Country;
Tamerlane sends to the Turk to warn him not to meddle with Greece, but the Turk
bids him enjoin laws to his own Subjects; Tamerlane with what force his uncle
and other Lords helped him to, sets forward, sending victuals by Sea, and his
Camp was like a well governed City, not the least wrong permitted: Bajazet the
Turks King forbad all prayers for Tamerlane, and comes furiously to meet him,
and after as furiously joyns' battle with great noise, and cries; the first
that fought on Tamerlanes side, was a Prince, who charged so home, as to come
among the Janazaries, and put them to great disorder, but was slain there;
another great body was sent, both sides fought so stoutly, that it lasted long,
and many was slain, and yet the battle doubtful; at last, when Tamerlanes side
was ready to give back, he made room by a charge upon the Janazaries, and some
Tartars of the Turks side revolted, and with much ado at a fresh charge, the
Turks great number was overcome, and the King a prisoner and wounded; and
coming before Tamerlane showed not the least submission; said Tamerlane, what
if you had took me? then said he, I would have carried you about in a Cage,
so, said Tamerlane, shall you be served; and he was fed with fragments like a
dog. Tamerlane marches against the Sulton of Egypt that assisted the Turks,
fought him near Alepo, with courage on both sides, but the Sulton fled, though
his Army was about 170 thousand; after Tamerlane took Damascus and other
places, and set down before Cair, assaulted it with fifty thousand, the City
was only ditcht, not walled, the Sulton opposed his passage, but was forced to
retreat into a second Trench. The next day the Sulton was forced to leave the
City, and was pursued toward Alexandria, where a party of Tamerlanes went
first to prevent the Sulton gathering forces, but the City desired to submit to
Tamerlane, and that the Sulton would not make that place a seat of war, so the
Sulton not knowing what to do went away with tears in his eyes; and then
Tamerlane returned home, and after his unkles death was Emperor of Tartaria.

Rupert Duke of Bavaria was chose by the Electors, in his time Mahomet the
Turk, after Tamerlane died, regained his fathers Dominions, and killed his
brother.

Sigismund King of Bohemia and Hungary, he was a wise Prince, called a
Counsel for union; Husse was now burned for preaching against the Pope, as
also Jerome of Prague, which caused the people to choose a general, who beat the
Emperors Army, but the Emperor and Pope came again, yet shamefully fled from
the Hussites against all persuasion that could be used.

Albertus the second subdued the Bohemians, by means of the King of Polands
help, a Peace was made with the Turk; when the Turk was gone, the Pope sent a
dispensation to break faith, but the Christian forced was beaten to their shame
and hurt.

Frederick the second Duke of Austria, upon Petition promised to free the
Germans as the King of France had his subjects from the Popes Tyranny, at this
time Scandenberg doing great things for the Turk, being denied the Turks
Dominions in Ipeus, which he asked of the young Turk at his fathers death, he
turned against the Turk, got several Towns by letters, maintaind his own, and
beat the Turks armies many years; he was a Princes son, first given in hostage
to the Turk. Mahomet the second took Constantinople, cruelly handling the
Christians, caused an Image to be held up, saying in derision, this is the God
of the Christians, and so here ended the Christian Empire in the East, the
Emperor of the Turks now making Constantinople his seat.

Maximilian the first was taken prisoner in Flanders, but releived by his
father; being yet in government with him, he writ in Latin of his fears; the
second Emperor of the Turks, caused all the Noblemen of Moden, which he took to
be slain cruelly in his presence.

Charles the fifth King of Spain was chose, he took the King of France, but
made peace with him, which the Pope caused the King of France to revoke; the
Emperor sent the Duke of Burbon, who sacked Rome and besieged the Pope and
Cardinals in a Mount, the Duke was slain, but the Emperor fearing
excommunication, sent to have the Pope go out. Luther now writ for the
reformed Religion, the Emperor summons him to a Counsel he had convened, he
refused to recant, yet was let go, but soon after was apprehended, and his
books against Popery burnt; the Pope pressed for execution of former Edicts,
but the German Princes presented to the Emperor; that the Church of Rome
prohibited that which the word of God did not, and that by reason of the Popes
pardoning sins for a little money, much villainy and murder was committed and
desired a free Christian Counsel. Diverse Princes met at Spires, declaring that
Ministers should teach according to the interpretation of the Church, the Duke
of Saxon and diverse other Princes withstood this, who and those that joined
with them, was called Protestants, unto whom cleaved diverse Cities appealing to
the Emperor: but he used their Ambassadors rufflie, fearing to displease the
Pope, threatening to punish those that would not yield to the convension of
Spire, the Protestants Covenant, to defend themselves if invaded for Religion,
but the Emperor (who had sworn to defend the Romish Church) called a convention
of Estates, learned men on both sides was brought, but he commands the
Protestant Princes to come to Mass, which they desired may be determined
first, The Protestants brought a Confession of Faith, which was answered, but
the Emperor would not admit of a reply, and made a decree, the Protestants
should have time to return to the Church of Rome, which their Princes and
Cities declared they could not keep with good conscience, upon which a Decree
was made to confirm the doctrine of the Church of Rome, and to proceed in
judgment against Protestants, who stood close by one another; but after some
time the Emperor offered them Peace, to assist him against the Turk. Swinglius
now preached down pardons, and disputes there was, but the Romanists put off all
to a Council; many Cities threw off the Mass, Alters, and Images; the Emperor
was this while in war with France, some other Cities joined against the
Protestants, and ready to give battle, a moderating City parted them, but
afterward the Switsers and Pages of Helvetia gave the Protestants of Berne an
overthrow; The Emperor agrees with France, but against the reformed Religion,
upon which a French general fell on the Waldenses, killing many, driving
others into the woods, which General died of a rotten stinking disease; the
Emperor and Pope come against the Protestant Princes in Germany, pretending
against Rebels, but with Spaniards and Venetians, subdues the Duke of Saxony,
telling him he must die or turn, the first he willingly chose, but the
Marquess of Brandenburg begging for him, he only lost his hands; upon this
several others yielded: The Emperor sent to the Council of Bishops to remove to
Trent, who refusing, he consulted with the Princes about some alteration of
Religion, that Priests should many, the Sacrament be used in both kinds, and
some other things; some Protestants accepted of this with an exception, but
Buser fled upon it, and the Romanists abominated it. The Duke of Saxony taxing
the King with breach of promise, joins with the Marquess of Brandenburgh and
King of France against the Emperor, at last Peace was made with some liberty
for the Protestants. In England, the Mass in Latin was abolisht, common
Prayer established, and Bishop Bonner imprisoned; But Mary restored the Popes
supremasie, and the Mass, and caused the Parliament to be absolved by Cardinal
Poole; she put to death many Bishops and others resolute for the Faith; the
Turks took Rhodes, but this Emperor recovered Tunis, and releived twenty
thousand Captives.

Ferdinand King of Bohemia was next elected Emperor, the Mass was omitted for
some of the Electors sake; some of the Parliament in France were now
Protestants, the King of France told a great Counselor that he would see him
burnt, but the King in Armor being run at in jest, and by his choice with a
sphere, a splinter of it breaking, entered the Kings eye and killed him, but his
son who married the Queen of Scotland, where many was against the Romish way,
and the Guizans allied to the Queen, came over into Scotland, but was beaten
back, the Queen of England helping Scotland, the Prince of Condie a Protestant
was taken by the Kings guard, the King died of putrefaction in his ears, and
Condie cleared then the Kings of Navarre and Queen Mother, with the estates,
had a dispute before them of almost a hundred Bishops and Doctors of a side,
but no agreement; the Protestants of Piedmont was cruelly persecuted for not
owning the Mass, who defended themselves with stones. In France there was an
Edict for the Protestants, to hear the word in Peace, but the Pope puts the
King in hope, Navar shall be restored him by the King of Spain if he turn
Catholic, which turning him, the Duke of Guize takes arms, first he killed
1500 men and women at a sermon, after seiseth on the King and Queen at Paris,
many Nobles resort to the Prince of Condie to free the King, and defend the
Gospel, the Queen sent letters also to Condie to free them, many Towns was
taken on both sides, the Guizans took Roan again, in the siege whereof the King
of Navar was slain, the Guizans hanged Marloret a Minister; Guize gave Condie
battle, as he was going to join with some English, where Guize was slain, upon
which an Edict was made, but not so strickt as before, for liberty for the
Protestants.

About the year 1550. the Romanists that they may (with the Turk) maintain that
by might, which they cannot by right, did thrust the Iron Inquisition (at first
appointed against Jews and Moors) into the sides of many worthy Christians:
one Julian for dispersing Bibles was brought to the Stake, who with his smiles,
incouraig'd twenty more, who was roasted to death, also Consalvo a studious
Priest being true to truth against the adoration of the host, doctrine of
merit, and other Phanatick innovations, was with his two sisters, mother and
brother put to death; take a taste of this sour business by which the Papists
hold fast deceit; when there is the least information given against any one, an
Officer called a familiar, is suborned to insinuate into his company, who taking
occasion to meet the party accused, says, I being by accident at the Lords
Inquisitors, they commanded me to summon you before them, if he says he knows
nothing of that Court or the Church, they dismiss him at present, still
appointing one to feel him out, and then send for him again, wishing him to
confess, if the party be a stranger like to escape, they clap him up where many
die; they have many devices also to find one escapt, if one be arrested they
take an inventory of all he has, as soon as he enters prison, the Joaler asks
him whether he has knife, money, or ring, which are his fees; when the party
has been imprisoned in a little place two months he comes to a hearing, if he
confesses the thing accused for, then woe to him, if he denies, he is sent
back; sometime after they send again for him, and tell him if he confess not,
he shall find them severe Justices; they send for him a third time, if he
confess any thing, they say they are not yet satisfied, then they hold a
Crucifix, requiring an Oath, if he refuse, they lay a large indictment against
him, of what they can imagine, supposing he will confess some of it, though they
never heard any such thing of him, and by thus amazing him; they try if they
can trip him in his answers, and then require him to write down his answer, if
he confess, they ask who he learnt it of, and so bring in others, then they
give him an advocate, who tells him that confessing the truth is best in that
Court; and it may be two years before he appears again, when depositions very
intricate are produced, after that they tell him they must extort the truth
from him; and bringing him to a rack, standing in a dark Dungeon, where the
skreeks of the tormented may not be heard, the Executioner appears all in
black, only peeping holes for his eyes, then the Inquisitors order the
business, the party is stripped naked, having his or her hands bound, and a
great wait fastened to his or her heels,, the party is hoysed up, and let down
with a jerke, ready to disjoynt all his parts, they calling him heretic dog;
then they hang double wait, and hoyse him up again, and confess or not, they
hale up yet another time, and ask whether his other torments are ready, bidding
the executioner to bring them to morrow; and then three days after when the
parties bodies is grevious full of pain, they rack some again, requiring them
to peach whom they had conference with, then they bind their thighs so close,
as the cord is so in the flesh as cannot be seen, they have another torment
whereby they almost stop their breath with a cloth, and yet threaten worse,
after they set a pan of Char-chole against the souls of the parties feet, if
all this will not do, then one of the inquisitors will seem to pity and weep
over the party, as they did by a Matron in Civil, by which they extorted from
her the betraying of her mother and sister, who was put to death: These
Inquisitors have also flies, that for gain will endure hunger and Chains in
prison, only to get something out of other Prisoners, their Prison is like a
grave, little and dark, the Prisoners are allowed 3 pence a day, out of which
they pay for Landress and other necessaries, if any releeve them, they are
whipped as favorers of Heretics; in some time they come as 'twere to a Goal
delivery, some are brought forth with a garment pictured with devils, and a
cleft piece of wood on their tongue, and with every one that is to die, there
comes two Friars to importune him to deny the doctrine he has professed; the
Inquisitors pass in great pomp to the Scaffold, where there is a Sermon
preached in commendation of the holy house, and in reproaching the truth with
its professors, then are the sentences past against some to die without mercy,
against others to be whipped, but so as they seldom escape with their lives,
others are condemned to the galley, others to forfeit their estates, they read
more in the crimes, then ever was brought against the party to make him odious,
if any be to be degraded, they scrape their lips, hands, and head till blood
came, to get off the holy oil wherewith he was anointed at his ordination:
They who the inquisitors order to die, have their neck broak suddenly at the
stake, and its given out they repented and so felt no pain in the fire; and
those who are let go, they charge them not to utter their secrets under the
severe penalty for relapsers.

Maxamilian the second was chose Emperor, Ferdinands Son, who was King of
Hungary, he gave his two daughters to the Kings of Spain and France;
abundance professed the reformed Religion in the Low Countries; the Popish
Prelates put the inquisition in execution; the Duke de Alva goes against the
Protestants, who defend themselves under Nasaw Prince of Orange, who though
often worsted, yet most of Holland and Zealand was freed from the Spaniards
tyranny. In France the Edict for liberty was observed only to some few Nobles;
and the Kings of Spain and France with Cardinal Lorain enter a league against
the Protestants Condie and others complain and go to the King, and for their
safety go in arms; the King withdraws, Condie besieges Paris, overcame their
forces, joins with some Germans, but upon fair promises of the Queen lays down
arms, but after cruelty was used every where upon the Protestants; Condie flies
to Rochell who passed over a ford, not known before to be dry, all other
passages being stopped, the Duke of Anion the Kings brother was made General for
the King; Condie complains of the Cardinal Lorain, as the cause of the stir,
Condie receives help from Britain, they fight with loss on both sides, Condie
slain, the young King of Navar, and young Condie take the charge of the
Protestant Army, the King marries, seems very peaceable, but the Protestants
Admiral was shot, upon which Condie and Navar withdraws, but the King seemed
desirous to punish those that shot the Admiral: A little after was the great
Massacre at Paris; the Dukes of Anion and young Guise, having soldiers ready,
who upon a sign from St. Germans Church, rusht into the Admiralls house, and
threw him out of Window, upon which Guise said its a good beginning, it is the
Kings command, the Soldiers also fell a killing men, women, and children; Guise
(not moved by the dreadful cries of the poor people) animated the soldiers to
rout up the seed of Protestantisme; they went to the Lower, where the King was,
and threatened Navar and Condie, who was willing to choose death rather then
part with their Religion, which they had from God, but yet begged the King to
consider his bond of friendship: Diverse in Count Mongomeries house fled before
the Masacre came; there was reckoned slain thirty thousand, for all which the
Romanists pretended a plot, to confess which they tortured two Nobles, who died
with abhorrance of any such thing, yet the Romanists published a confession in
their names of treason against the King, many now terrified fled to Rochel,
which the King besieged by Sea and Land, in which place came a bundance of
fish, that after went away, but Ambassadors came from Poland for Anion, who
they had chose King, who agreed that Rochel and two other Towns should have
liberty of Religion within their own bounds, but the King dying, the
Queen Mother sent for her other Sone out of Poland, then condemned Mountgomerie
but now several Catholics join with Condie for the Countries good; the
Cardinal Lorain walking barefoot with penitentiaries, contracted a disease that
killd him; after several bickerings Ambassadors come to the King from England,
the Cantons and elsewhere, and a peace was made for more liberty for the
Protestants.

Radulph was next chose Emperor of Germany, he was King of Bohemia and
Hungaria, he called a Diet at Ratisbone, about reforming Religion: the Turk in
a fight lost eighteen thousand, for fifty two of the Christians. Transylvania
joining with the Emperor, the Turk was often sent back with loss, and upon the
Ambassadors coming from Hungary to Vienna, it was agreed that Catholic,
Lutheran, and Calvenist, and no other should exercise their Religion; the
Protestants of Austria being abused, they take arms, but by the help of the
Moravians they obtain peace, the Emperor died, all was quieted, and both accuse
the Jesuits as authors of their broils. In France the Catholics fearing if
the King should die, Navar might be King, confederated in Arms, pretending
against the Hugonites, who was in Rochell, but they go to Paris; the King made
an offer of Land to give the Catholic General, but these Leagers prospering,
moved the King to be o^ them, and root out the Protestants; Navar and Condie
declare against these things, join with the German forces, fight the King (who
seemed to comply with Guize, and ordered all to profess the Catholic way)
Condie overthrew the King, but Guize came into Paris suddenly against the
Kings command, upon which the King set forth a fierce Edict against the
Protestants, bestowed a great place on Guize, declared Cardinal Burbone of the
Royal blood, excluded Navar, all which Guize would have confirmed by
Parliament* but jealousy being among the Grandes, Guize was slain, the people
cried out of the King, saying they ought to support the Church, and was free
from their Oath, the King then joins with Navar, wars with the Leagers,
repulsed de Main that intended to surprise him, besieged Salaize, beat Count
Brissac that came to relieve it: He also goes against Paris, which so put the
Leagers to it, that they got a Jockabine Monk who coming demurely to the King
pretending letters, gaining through his subtilty, the Kings retirement in the
Chamber where the Masaker was concluded, reading letters, he stob'd the King,
upon which the attendance coming in killd the Murderer; this Monk was
canonized St. Jeques; the King named Navar his successor, the Leageurs
proclaimed another, but King Henry the fourth and young Navar goes toward
Paris; Demain the Leagers general daily lost men, but the King got a great
victory, Demain fleeing, plucking up a bridge, drowned many of his men; the
King stopping provisions to Paris, 100 thousand dyed with famine, the Duke of
Parma came to relieve it, but durst not attempt the Kings Army, and the Leagers
went to ruin apace everywhere; the Duke of Savoys Army was also overthrown,
also the King slew 700 Romans of 2000 and sent the rest to Italy; also the Duke
of Parma being invited to come once more into France was discomfited; and
another Duke being beaten out of the field, said farewell my Cannons, and
further most blasphemously said, I renounce God, and run this day a hie
fortune, plunging himself and horse into a River, at last the Bishops turned
the King, who came to Mass, Paris now yields, but yet many of the Leagers was
inveterate still against the King; a youth that was told the King could be no
King if the Pope consented not to it, stabbed the King, but not mortal, but the
young Scholar was torn in pieces by horses, the Jesuits was ordered to
depart, who after Petition to be restored, the Protestants Petition for an
Edict to prevent what they suffered.

A woman attempts to poison the King, she was burnt for it, two others that
attempted him mischief he only said, God will punish them: The Duke of Savoys
forces came suddenly to Geneva, got the word, kill the Sentinel, was above an
hour in the streets, but beaten out, and some hanged. A Synod at Gat declared
the Pope Antichrist, the Jesuits was admitted at Berne to the grief of the
People. A Turk was now baptized a Citizen of Geneva; was burnt for a plot
against it. There was now a great plague after great cold. The King of France
one day was very sad, could not sleep, rose and prayed, some Nobles going in
Coach with him abroad, being cheerful, the King said we may weep yet by
Sunday, but there met the Kings Coach when it stood in a street, a Layer, who
when the King stooped stabbed him on his leftside, who spit blood, lost his
apprehension, and by the time he came home died; the Murderer was rackt and
condemned, his hands was put into a Furnace flaming with fire and brimstone,
after there was colups of flesh taken from him, by red hot pinchers, and burnt,
and scalded Pitch and Rosine was poured into those wounds, also melted lead was
poured on his Navell, he had his papps pincht off, and was torn in pieces by
horses, then his parts burnt, and his ashes thrown in the air: The Kings Son
Lewis was crowned by the Cardinal, many Nobles of France was Protestants, some
now wrote against Belarmine about the popes Temporal power. Now in the
Netherlands, Don John of Austria the King of Spains governor endeavored to
bring in the Inquisition, the General Estates call Mathias of Austria, who was
of the blood to govern them; and Proclaimed John an enemy to the Kings
Neatherlands: The Pope promised eternal life to all that would help John
against the Neatherlands. Mathias chooses for his Leiftenant, Nassaw Prince of
Orange, upon which some of the Nobles mutined, so that John got a victory over
Mathias; the Duke of Anion assists the States; Amsterdam (besieged) by the
Spaniords, made an agreement with the States of Holland; and a little after,
the Friars, Monks, and Priests went out, the States sitting at Antwerp,
published a Decree for to entertain the pacification of Gant, which the Jesuits
refusing to swear was thrust out; at Gaunt was some Friars sentenced for
Sodomie, Mathias and States complain to the Assembly of Princes in Germany of
the Spaniards cruelty, the States called the Duke of Anion their Defendor: One
Captain Pont of the Dukes Army abusing a maid, and boasting of it, she stabbed
him, the States at last Decree that neither Catholic or Protestant shall
attempt any thing upon one another; this the Catholics would not brook, and no
small stirrs was at Aras, Don John died, to whom succeeded the Prince of Parma.
Anion returns to France, many fell for money from the States, the Prince of
Orange was made governor of Flanders; Ambassadors from the Emperor and King of
Spain could not effect peace, the Romish would have no Religion but theirs
exercised, the reformed not be deprived of theirs, the States choose Anion
their Sovereign, and so agreed with him on Articles, but the King of Spain
desiring the life of the Prince of Orange, puts out an Edict of prescription
against him, Orange apologis'd, the Estate approved of it, cause their
Magistrate to abjure the King of Spain. Anion was made Duke of Brabant, he
received at Antwerpe both Romanists and Protestants into his protection. One
Anestroes boy watching his time, and being persuaded by a Friar, that by
characters he gave him, he should pass invis^bly, shot the Prince of Orange in
at the Chap, but not mortal, which boy was immediately run through with a
Halbard, and after hanged; Parma had also dealt with some to kill Anion and
Orange, but La Bordo discovering something, saved himself, another killed
himself in prison, another was drawn in pieces with horses. Anion sends a
Commander to seize on Dunkirk for himself; and put out the States Garrison
intended against Bruges and Antwerpe, but at Antwerpe, the King of France
crying kill, kill, the Town is our own, was beaten out with the loss of above
1500, the Duke excused all this, yielded up again the Towns to the States; two
more by the Spaniards order attempts to kill Orange, but faild, one of which
was strangled, the States of Holland having now taken the Government upon
themselves; Newport, Dunkirk, Sas, Hulst, Gant, and several other places was
lost, the Prince of Orange sent to England to help them; Bruges was reconciled
to the Spaniard, Anion died, and in his sickness would not admit a Priest, and
was troubled much for his revolt. A high Burguion that lived at Delf a whole
year, traitorously shot the Prince of Orange, who praying God to pity his poor
soul, and the poor people, died, the Murderer was executed after a terrible
manner, who confessed that one of the Prince of Parmaes Counselors promised him
great rewards, diverse places now yields to Parma, even Brussels and Antwerpe;
Morris, Nassaws Son is made Governor, the distressed States got Queen Elizabeth
of England to assist them on conditions to have Flushing and other places
security for moneys, the Queen declared the reasons hereof; the Earl of
Leicester was accepted Governor, swore to defend them against the Spaniards;
but he hindering all Traffic with France also, complaint was made against him;
in Spain all English Ships was arrested, and goods confiscated, many of the
English Ships had commission from the Queen, and took several prizes from the
Spaeniards. Parma now going to besiege Nuys, hanged a Minister and two
Captains, at Clost, and spoild the Town, a hallowed sword was brought him from
the Pope, with remission of sins, to those that should be at saying Mass, at
its first coming: Leicester marched to Zutphen, where Sir Philip Sidney was shot
and died; at Linter it reigned blood. Zutphen where Leceister had left a
Governor, and another place where was a Scotts Governor were sold to the
Spaniards; the King of Spains Provinces was troubled with dearth and wolves,
the States discontented (though not all) at Leicester, he by the Queens order
resigned his Government; there was a Treaty between the Queen and Parma, but
nothing effected, Breda was surprised for Morris, Parma died, Arnestus Arch
Duke of Austria succeeded, who entered Brussels, but Solme prosperd for the
States in Flanders, and Cramberg in Frezeland was yielded to Count William; the
Duke sent two to the States to treat, but Groaning now yielded to Orange; a
Soldier once under Morris his guard, was executed for Treason against him, the
Duke died with grief: Albertus Cardinal of Austria came in his room, he takes
Callis from the French, but Peace was quickly made, he took Hulst from the
States, with about the loss of 5000, but Morris in the dead of Winter overcame
the Cardinals Army, slew his General and 2000 men, with the loss of nine of
Orange his side; after Groll and diverse places more yielded to Prince Morris.
One Pan that came from Dowway had undertaken to kill the Prince, the King of
Spain died, Albertus his Army turned out Ministers, and put in Priests at
Weezel, but the States thrive at Sea by their Fleet, Creucaeur yields to
Morris, the States go against Flanders; the Prince besieging Newport, but
Albertus after marrying the King of Spains Daughter, came against the Prince,
the Prince having sent a party to keep a pass, which the Dukes Army had passed
before, was forced to fight, Morris lost 800 men, after the Armies engage where
Sir Francis Vere under Morris utterly rooted the Spaniards, slaying 6000,
Morris lost 800, but most English, Slucegrave, Berke, and diverse places was
after taken by the Prince, who with some English ships had the best of it in
two Sea fights, in one was slain 300 of the Spaniards, 36 of the States, and in
another 2000 Spaniards, and 50 of the States, but Ostend yielded to the Duke,
but a truce was made for 12 years.

In England Queen Elizabeth sets out a Proclamation against Childrens being
brought up in Popish Seminaries beyond Sea, the King of Spain and Pope prepare
a great Army against her, but was imployd through the death of the King of
Perrugall another way; a Rebellion now broke out in Ireland, by the Spaniards
instigation, the chief was slain, and 700 Italians yielded themselves, the King
of France comes to England about matching his brother to the Queen. A Jesuit
and another was executed for Treason and Sedition, and coming from Rome, after
by Parliament there was an Act against seducing the Queens Subjects, and saying
Mass; the Scaffold one Sabbath day at the Beargarden fell down, killing some
of the people: King James works himself out of Dowers hand, and pardoned him,
one Brown writing that the Church of England was no true Church, and two of
his followers was put to death; one Lewis denying the Godhead of Christ was
burnt; Gowery about to take the King again was beheaded; one Paris on
confession of his intentions against the Queen was executed. Letters was taken
at Sea, intimating a great design of the Spaniard against England, the
Parliament made an Act for preservation of the Queen against Popish Priests,
the Earl of Northumberland conscious of ill designs, laid violent hands upon
himself.

The Queen concludes a stricter amity with the King of Scots; she sends a Fleet
to the West Indies; which returned with great booty; Dr Geford and others
conspire the Queens death, one his conscience terrifying, told it to Secretary
Walsingam, and several was executed; the French Ambassador sets one to kill the
Queen, who revealing it, the Ambassador was soundly rebuked: now in 1688 the
Spaniards invade England with an Navy called invincible of 130 Ships, 20000
Men, 172 Ensigns 6320 bushells of Pease and Beans, with great store of
Biscate, Oil, Bacon, Wine, and other provisions, many thousand Arms in store,
with Pickaxes for Pioneers, under the Duke of Modena, assisted with twenty two
Lords, they lost by storm three Galleys as soon as out of Sea; coming near
England, a Fleming informed the English Admiral and Sir Francis Drake, who
quickly with what Ships they had, put the Spaniards Ships to disorder, and
took one with instructions in it, what the Spaniards should do if they
conquered, wherein was part of their Treasure also; the Spaniards Anchord at
Callis, the English send fire Ships, besmeared with Rozume and Brimstone among
them in dead of night, which made them put to Sea in confusion toward Ireland,
which Sea being tempestuous, many of their Ships run upon sands, scarce
fourteen got safe home, for which there was appointed thanksgiving to God. The
Scots was dealt with toward entering an Army that way, but King James prevented
it; the King married the King of Denmarks Daughter, Drake now took several
places from the Spaniard; the Popish Lords in Scotland made no small stir for
their Interest. And a Cardinal wrote against King James, but all was crushed;
the Queens Physician was put to death, for plotting her death: Balls was sent
to fire the English Fleet, a Navy from England takes Cadis, vanquished the
Spanish Fleet, releiv'd prisoners, the Spaniard answered it with another fleet,
the greatest part of which was cast away. One Walop came to poison the Queens
saddle, with the benediction of a Jesuit, who would pawn his Soul for him: The
Queen sent another Fleet under Essex, to take the Spaniards Indie Fleet, but
storms gave leave only for Essex to return safe, who was after sent Deputy
in Ireland with an Army, with whom the Queen was displeased, and he came into
England unlookt for, and was beheaded, but Tyrone in Ireland, and the Spaniards
which was sent thither by the Popes advice was all subdued: Brute came from
Rome against King James; Priests was Proclaimed to depart the Realm; Queen
Elizabeth dying, King James was proclaimed King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, several was found in a conspiracy against him, two Priests was
executed, one affirming the King no King till Crowned, the Jesuits was now
banished, but a little after the great design of Gunpowder Treason was laid
for blowing up King and Parliament, by putting barrels of Powder in a vault,
where the Plotters went with dark Lanthorns, which was discovered by a
Messenger, carrying a letter to a rong person; Hawks and others was hanged for
it.

There was another Proclamation against Roman Priests, and an Order that all
that came from beyond Sea should take the Oath of Allegiance, which Garrat
refusing he was executed; after the Oath was imposed on all, now in 1612 died
Prince Henry, whose sister married the Palsgrave.

The Jews continue hardened in their unbelief, scatterd about the world, many of
them are rich and cunning Merchants, but enjoy not Land or Majestracy; in some
places they are admitted with their Synagogues in other places, only to trade,
but in Spain and elsewhere, if they be known, they lose life and estate, but if
they cannot get enough to transport themselves, they seem to live and die
Christians. About this time Ninety thousand Moros was driven out of Spain.

Mathias, In his times great wars was between the Duke of Austria, who by
conditions from the Emperor, was K. of Bohemia, also with the Protestant people
of Bohemia, upon the account of Religion; Mathias reigned but about 6 years.

Ferdinand the second, what remarkables in and after his time, he vigorously
prosecuted the war with the Bohemian Protestants. Frederick Elector Palatine K.
of Bohemia Brother to K. Charles of Engl. K. of Bohemia, was in Fight under
Prague, overcome and fled to Holland; the Bohemian Provinces now returning to
the obedience of the Emperor, who restored the Jesuits in Prague; several other
places yielded also to the Emperor. Breda was taken by the Spaniard. Rochell
now calls forth the English, who under the Duke of Buckingham with about 120
Ships possessed the Island of Ree, all but the Castle, but sucker coming from
the King of France, they was driven out again, the King after besieges Rochell,
which brought to extremity veelded, and was turned to a kind of Village.
Gustanus King of Sweathland, and the Lutheran Princes gave the Catholic Army
under Tillie a great blow, slaying near 10000. The Swedes subdued all
Franconie, the Saxon also a friend of the Sweede invaded Bohemia, and also
Prague, the Swedes went through Alsatia and Bavaria, but some of the Emperial
Princes desire the King of Frances aid; Vulsteine now Captain of the
Catholics recovers Prague, and at Lutzen fights with the Swede two days, in
which the King was slain, the Chancellor still undertook the war, the Duke of
Bavaria was now the Commander of the Emperors party, several fights passed,
Frankford was taken two or three times, and Luna four times, the Emperor
displaced his general, made his son the King of Hungary, who took Hedleburgh,
Spain assists him, he takes also several towns in lower Franconie; the Sweeds
confer with the Protestants, the Duke of Newburgh desires to be Newter, for
which the Sweede after afflicts him.

The Dutch in the West Indies; take 2 Ships with sixty Tun of gold, and at
Ginnie 1044 pound wait of gold; and bring the Island of Pacunia under their
yoke: In the East Indies they took seven Ships, possess the best Island for
Salt, also Paraibus, in Poland the King could not assist the Emperor, because
the States which chose him would not consent.

In England now was a great fire on London Bridge, the wind turning suddenly
from Thames-streete, where much Pitch and Tarr was. Aturne Noy set on foot
Ship Money, and now was several Patents of Commodities granted, Hambden had a
Trial with the King about Shipmoney.

The Sweeds beats the Emperor.

In England Prin wrote against Stage Plays, and Burton wrote against Bishops,
who were censured in Star Chamber, loosing their ears, and was exild: The
Scots now refused to admit of the Liturgy and Bishops.

The Spaniard punish the Dutch at Dunkirk, but the Dutch Admiral Trump so beat
the Spanish Fleet, that fifteen scarce escapt of fifty Ships.

The Scots raise an Army to prevent any to hinder them of what they engage for;
the King marches to them, the Scots declare they intend not the least hurt to
the King, the English refusing to fight the Scots, they had good conditions;
the Palatinate receiving help from the King of England, takes in Westphalia,
but the Emperor, Ferdinand the second scatters his forces, takes his brother
Rupert, who getting his liberty goes to help his uncle against the Parliaments
forces.

In May 1630 the Merchants of London sent the Ship Salutation for Green-land,
arived there in June, following with two other Ships, all commanded by Captain
Goodlier; the Ship where the Captain was meeting with store of Whales, sent for
the Salutation to take in part of the Trane Oil, as they went, meeting with
cross winds, the Master sent eight men a shore to kill Venison, who took with
them a brace of dogs, A Snaphance, two Lances, and a Tinderbox, they quickly
laid fourteen Dear on the ground, and then rested, the next day being fogie,
and the Ice keeping their Ship off the Coast, they hauled toward Green-harbor;
intending to stay aboard a Ship there, till their own came, in the way they
killed eight Dear more, but coming laden to Green-harbor, they found the Ship
departed, upon which having but three days limited for their departure out of
the Country, they cast much Venison out of the Shallop, and hasted toward
Bellsound to their Captain, but a fog increasing, and they having no compass,
they wandered till the Ships there was gone, which filled them with
astonishment, knowing none ever inhabited those clymates, nor would undertake
for any rewards to winter in those parts, though allowed great provisions; yea,
they; had heard that Malefactors chose rather to return to satisfy the Law,
then (after they had viewd the desolateness of the place) be pardoned to stay
there one winter; they remembered also that there was nine men formerly left
there, who was devoured by the Bears, they wanted clothes, food, and a house to
keep themselves from the extremiry of cold, they went again toward
Green-harbor to kill Venison for winter, the first day they killd seven, after
twelve more Dear, and finding another Shallop left behind there, they laded it
with graves of Whales, and with the food in their own they hasted to their Tent
at Bell-sound; in their way they were forced to stay at Bottel-Cove, where the
wind blowing hard, and Anchor coming home, their Shallop sunk, and wet their
provision, upon which they run into the high wrought Sea, to their Shallops, to
save the rest of their provision, and they brought their Shallops to shore, and
took the Venison swiming, and got to Bell-sound, the Tent there was built of
Timber and boards, and covered with Flemish tiles, the use of it was for the
Coopers to make Casks to put in Train oil; they took down an other little
Tent where the Oil used to be made, to make a Tent within the great one, they
found also four Hogsheads of Lime, which mingled with sand made mortar, which
they had much ado to keep from freezing, they raised a wall of one brick
thickness against the inward planks of the great Tent, but the bricks failing,
they nailed the other sides with boards, their Chimnie whence was their light,
was four foot high, sealing all very close, their beds were Dear skins, they
stowed seven old Shallops, two Coffers, breaking them for fire, now having
scarce any day; they spied two Sea horses a sleep on Ice, and with an harping
Iron slew them, and roasted and eat them, but the nights and cold increasing,
they perceived their provision short, and so stinted to one meal a day, and to
fast a Wensdays, only to eat graves or fritters of the Whales, a loathsome
meat, their clothes torn, they made thread of rope yearn, and needles of
Whalebone, but their Whale-graves grew mouldie, and they found that their Bear
and Venison could not afford them five meals a week; from the fourteenth of
October, to the second of February, they never saw the Sun peep above the
Horizon, not knowing day from night, but the Moon as in England, but they made
a Lamp of some Sheet lead, they found in the Coopers Tent, and some Oil and
rope yearne; in January when a duskish light appeared, it was so cold as it
raised Blisters on their flesh, after this they melted the snow with hot Irons
for water, and with Pickaxes broake the Ice; about the beginning of February
the days were about seven hours long, but their victuals not like to last them
six weeks, but they spying a Bare and Cub coming toward their Tent, went out
with Lances, upon whom the great Bare greadily came, but was soon tumbled on
the ground biting the snow for anger, the young one fled, this Bare served them
twenty days, but eating her liver their skins peeled of, many more Bares came
to the Tent, seven of which they killed, one of them six foot high, and the
days lengthning, several fowled resorted to them, upon which came the Foxes
also, before in their burrow under the Rocks, for to catch them, they devised
traps baiting them with fowls skins, which foul they caught by making springs
of Whalebone, laying them on the fleshie side of Bearskins, they roasted and
eat fifty Foxes, when the weather was warm enough, to go further and oftener
out, they met with diverse Willcoks eggs; after came two Hull Ships, which sent
a Shallop near the shore, knowing men was left there, crying haie, to which
one in the Tent answered hoe, and so welcomed the new comers with long before
roasted Venson and cold water, and after were entertained in the Hull Ships;
then came the London Fleet with Captain Goodlier, who refreshed them with
clothes and victuals, with whom they returned safely to the River of Thames.
Greene-land is very Mountanious which all the year is covered with Ice and
Snow, the planes in part are bare in summer, there growing neither Tree or
herb except Scurveygrass and Sorrill, the Sea is as barren affording no fish
but Whales, Seals, Sea-horses, and some few small fish.

The Turk gets Babylon from the Persian, with the loss of 40000, runs his Navy
to the Red Sea, to the Cawsacks and Hungary, but the Plague about Alepo
frighted them back.

In England the King disavowes the paper the Scotts avouched, the Scotts
prepare to come toward England, the King calls a Parliament, and seeing they
had little mind to raise money, he desolved them, but the King gathered
contributions of the Clergy, went with an Army to the North, where was a small
skirmish, but the Lords on both sides composed the business, and the King calls
another Parliament 1641 who get an Act not to be disolv'd without their own
consent, fall to bring such as they judged offenders to trial, persuaded the
King to consent to the condemnation of Strafford, which he grieved for
afterward; the Parliament call in Commissioners from Scotland, send for
Bastwick and Burton who was exild, imprisoned the Arch Bishop of Canterbury;
the Londoners Petition against Bishops, twelve of the Bishops leave the house,
and protest, ten of which was imprisoned by the Parliament, the King takes a
journie toward Scotland. The Irish Rebellion broak forth, where about 200000
Protestants was murdered; Dublin was to have been surprised, but discoverd by
some discourse of the Lord Mackhoone, who was sent into England and hanged, the
King returns sumptuously in London, exhibites Articles against six Parliament
men, and came with some in Arms to Westminster, and entered the House himself,
and demands the six Members, who was not there, upon this the people came
thrunging to Westminster in discontent; and the Parliament judged their
privileges broken, the King went to Hampton Court, people Petition that the
Malitia may be put into the hands of the Parliament; the King refuses it, and
went to York, sending the Parliament word he would go over Sea against the
Irish; and would arm a lifeguard of 220 horse and foot; but by letters
intercepted from the Lord Digbie, the Parl. suspected something else, and
appoint Hotham not to yield Hull to the King, the K. summond the Country as
being in danger of the Parliament, the Parliament declared such extraordinary
arming of men to be against the Laws, many of the Lords and Commons went to the
King; the Parliament sent propositions to him, who not consenting, they order
money and Plate to be brought in, for Religion the King and Laws, the King did
the like Proclaming against their Warrants for the Malitia, they forbid raising
arms by the Kings warrant, and get an Army under Essex, of fourteen thousand,
the King besieges Hull, looses twenty one men in a retreat, the King sets up
his Standard for men, sends for a Composure, but the Parliament would not treat
till he had revokt his Proclamation, calling them Rebels, the Armies at
Edgehill fight, both sides took prisoners, 5000 was slain, most of the Kings,
and Ruthen his general a prisoner died of his wounds.

The French gets Tarine from the Spaniards, and many Victories, the Pirates of
Argier take a Spanish Ship, valeu'd at about three hundred thousand pound. A
Countryman killing a hogg before three of his Children, one of which being six
years old, the other two killed their brother in their fathers absence, and
boast of it, their Mother threw her self for grief in a Well, and her husband
hanged himself. The Emperor Fard, beheads some of his commanders for not
fighting, makes peace with the Turks for twenty years.

In England many victories and places are got, some by the King, some by the
Parliament, who raised excise; tried and executed Chalanor for a plot against
them.

About this time was the revolt of Portugal, a place of 800 miles Circute, 400
miles by the Sea, this once belonged to the King of Casteel, and was under an
Earl, whose Son gaining much from the Moors, was made General, fought with
five Mahomitan Kings, their Army being about 400 thousand, the King of Casteel
made this Earl the first King of Portugal, who was confirmed by the Pope, at
last the King of Casteel and Portugal fell to wars, and moreover a Cardinal
coming to be King, and dying without Issue, many pretending right to it, the
people, the Pope also as Doner of Crowns in controversies, but the Duchess of
Burgance was supposed the true Heir, but the King of Spain also pretended a
title, which being supported by arms, in two battles assisted by the French,
he subdues Portugal, but ruling of them hardly by impositions, and listing
yearly four thousand Portugizes, they was weary of the Spanish Government, and
both Priests and People sought deliverance; the King of Spain sends for the
Duke of Burgance, Count Oliverz excuses his coming to Court, but assures the
King of the Dukes affection, the K. makes him chief over his Malitia; the
Nobilty and Arch Bishops meet and tell the Duke of Burgance, of their desire to
make him King, who seemed to desire time to consider of it, but the business
was so unanimously carried on, that on a set day by the sign of a shot from
Lisbone, they fell on upon the guards in several places by Land and Sea,
killing only one Swise, and threw the Kings Secretary (their great enemy) out
of a window, and sacked his house, but in about two hours all the shops was
open, and all quiet, rejoicing in their King John, who promised to run all
hazards, for his Countries good; the plot took effect at the same time in other
places and Castles also in the Indies, and elsewhere abroad, the Spaniards being
quietly sent home without blood. The Lords spiritual and temporal and Commons
in Parliament confirmed the King, the Marquess of Furara gave the oath of
allegian;e to the Clergy and others; the King was after Crowned by the
Archbishop of Lisbone, attended with the Nobility; the King had put into his
hand a Crystal Scepter, he altered but very few officers of State; the
Parliament would have enacted him some moneys, but he rather chose to accept of
the peoples benevolence, which amounted to four millions of gold, this news
astonished the Court at Madrid, that a Kingdom should be lost by lights and
fireworks, and ever since they have continued in war with Portugal.

Rome fortified, fearing the Spaniard, for receiving a Portugal Ambassador.
The Queen of France upon a vow to the Lady Lauretta for health restored to the
Dolphin, sends twelve hundred weight of silver, and an Image of Jesus. The
Emperor redeemes the Image of Marie of the Sweedes with 10000 Florenes, after
the Sweede fights him for 8 hours, took 289 officers, after took in eight
places. Wrangle also beats the Dane, but the Dane makes peace with both Sweede
and Dutch.

In England the Parliament get assistance of the Scots, the King by a cessation
in Ireland, gets some thence, who were quickly broaken, but the Scots took in
many places, weakened Newcastles army in the North, with whom at Marston-More,
the Parliaments army, Manchester and Fairfax being now made chief commanders
fight, the Parliaments left wing was first worsted, but Cromwell who commanded
under Fairfax, broke the Kings left wing, Lashly the Scot pursuing, and Cromwell
coming about again with his horse, releev'd the left, and got the victory, took
bag and baggage, and 100 Ensigns, after the Scots took Newcastle. In Cornewal,
Essex being encompassed, the foot submitted to the King, the horse forcing
their way, and escaping as they could, Essex flying to Plymouth; Propositions
was sent by the Parliament to Oxford about Religion, Ireland Malitia, but
nothing done, Fairfax is voted General, a new Army is modeld, foreigne
Ambassadors sought to agree the King and Parliament. The King and Prince Rupert
fight the new Army, routed their left wing, Cromwell did the like by the King,
and Skippon weakening their foot, Cromwell forcing the Ks. horse to flight, the
foot was taken, and 4000 brought prisoners through London, about 600 on both
sides slain, most of the Conquerors: Fairfax's Army by Crumwels means, lose
not an hour, takes in many places, and Hopton was spoiled by Waller in the
West: The Parliament would not accept of the Kings offers made to their
Commissioners at Vxbridge; the Scots was to hard for Montross, though sometimes
vexed by him, but at last they utterly overthrew him, tried and executed him.

The French take Graveline by a laborious siege, the great Vizor presents
himself, armed before the Turk, complaining of disaffected persons, but he is
stabbed; the Dutch pass through the Danish Seas whether they will or no, but a
Tower giving light to Mariners being removed, fourteen of their ships was
dashed against rocks, there was burnt at Constantinople 1000 houses, 15000 ware
houses.

In July 1647. The Duke of Arots, Viseroy of Naples, for the King of Spain
imposed taxes among other commodities upon fruits, upon which the people gave
out mutenous words; the Viseroy consulted with the precincts of the City, who
some of them advanced much money upon the gabell or tax, the noise was that if
this was taken off another would be set upon Corn, one Masianello a spritely
fellow of a middle Stature, in a blew Wastcoat, and barefoot, with a Mariners
cap, an Anglier for little fish, advised the Fruiterers to tell the Country
Fruiterers in the Market place, that they would buy no more Gabel fruit; the
next day the shopkeepers refused to buy, but one of the Citizens persuaded them
to buy for the present, but Masianello went up and down, cried avaunt Gabel,
Let the King of Spain live, and the ill Government die, many boys and others
being got together, he told them, I will free you from all your slaveries, if
you will be ruld by me, and he listed 2000 against a Festival, with a stick in
every ones hand, upon which day the people set up a Castle of wood, and
battered it down with sticks and fruit; an Officer at the same time threatening
the Fruiterers, a Cosen of Masianello saying, God gives plenty, and ill
Government gives dearth, through his fruit down among the people. Masianello
hit one of the City Officers on the breast with a stone, and cried no Gabel no
Gabel, the people increased with arms, to whom Masianello said, be merry
companions, this poor Fisherman shall release Naples from Tyranny; upon which
the people fier'd the house with accounts, next to the Tolehouse, then the
Gabel houses for other commodities, after above 10000 went to the Viseroys
Palace with loaves of bread on their Pikes, and cried, they would be freed
from all taxes, the Viseroy promised that of fruit should be wholly abolisht,
and part of that of Corn, but they not satisfied, forced upon his lodgings
through the Soldiers, but he escaped to a Church; and the Archbishop promised
them they should be fully satisfied, but they desiring that some may be inrol'd
to see this done; the Viseroy got to St. Elmo's Castle, the people now about
fifty thousand disarm all guards, and routed a regiment of Germans going to the
Viseroy, who sent some Lords to tell the people they should have what they
desired, but they demanded the Original of the old grants, that no new tax
should be imposed without consent of the Pope, a Copy of this being brought by
a Duke, they found a fault, and cried out they was cheated, and so imprisoned
the Duke; then they went and burnt several Officers of the Custom houses, and
many rich embroyderies, Pearls, precious stones, was cast into the fire,
Masianello hanging many that kept several things to themselves, and he searched
diverse houses for Arms: The Viseroy sent an instrument to them to take off all
taxes, and to pardon them, but the pardon they said was not full; the third day
they went to the Secretaries house, burnt his writings, Coaches, Pictures, and
Jewels of all kinds; they demanded the Tower where the bell hung to sound to
war, and quickly forced the Soldiers out, and straightened the Castle, where the
Viseroy was; the Archbishop brought the Original, and pardon, but they cried
out, they was the Kings good Vassals; and so went on with their Malitia, and
made Masianello their captain, who erected a place to hear Petitions: the
fourth day he sent to have the Duke of Caivanons house destroyed, which the
people did, spoiling the Marble Statues in his garden, while a Treaty was held,
and the Instrument brought again, one Parone an assistant of Marsianello, with
consent of the Duke of Matalonie brought 500 of the Bandati, pretending for the
people, which Parone would have stay together on horseback, but Masianello
commanding them to be disperc'd among the foot, some of them shot at him, upon
which they missing him, the people seized on the soldiers, and Parones head was
cut off, who confessed a plot of powder against the people; Masianello missing
the Duke Matalonie, beheaded his brother Caraffa, he searched and found much
powder in vaults, now he had above 100 thousand with him armed, who obeyed him
at a minute; he set Centinells and spies, mad an order that none should go
with upper garments, least they carry arms, which the Nobility, Cardinals,
and all obeyed, now the Viseroy assuring them they should have all their
privileges, and be accounted the Kings Children, Masianello went in cloth of
silver, as the Archbishop advised him to the Viseroy, who embraced him, and
both coming to a belcony, the people cried, let the King of Spain live, but he
putring his finger to his mouth, all was silent; he punished with death any
robbery by his soldiers, and went the next day (the Streets being hung with
rich Tapestery to confirm Articles) which the Officers of State swore to get
the King of Spain to confirm, after Music, and the Ordinance playing, he
returned to the people pulling off his rich, and putting on his fishers
clothes, he gave the Bishop of Severine a pass, and five hundred double
pistols to bare his charges, after he spent a day in mirth, drinking to his
hurt, the next day he insolently struck his Captains without cause, sent for 2
Lords to come to him, who complaining to the Viseroy, it was thought good to
persuade the people now to depend no more on Masiauello, but the Viseroy, and
after Masianello being inflamed in Drink, playing mad tricks, was laid hold of,
but escaping told the Archbishop that he now perceived the people to hate him
he desired a procession to the most holy Lady for him, after a while he went
into the Hall where some rusht upon him; and killed him

In England Oxford was besieged, one of the Kings last refuges, he gets out to
the Scots Army, who receiving 400000 l. delivers his person to the Parliament;
Oxford yielded some time after; the Army complain they had not what they
fought for, and they removed the King, impeached 11 Members; the Parliament
passed voates against the Army, and Adjourned four days, many members going to
the Army, a preparation was making to oppose the Army, which soon vanished at
the Armies approach to London, the Army restored the Members that came to them,
and declared they was willing to close with the King; the Scots desire to have
him out of their hands, he was admited to Hampton Court, he refused to consent
to propositions sent him, and gets privately to the Isle of Wight, and sends to
treat at London with safety.

The Parliament then sends four Propositions, which the King refusing, they
vote no more Adresses, which causes a rising about Colchester, and a great Army
under Hambleton comes out of the North, which Cromwell beat; the Parliament yet
treat, the Army cry for Justice upon offenders, but the Parliament Vote* the
Kings consessions satisfactorie, the Army put out some Members, bring the King
to Windsor, then the Parliament, Vote the Commons the supreme Authority, make
a Court to try the King, who appearing, desired to speak with both Houses, but
the Court sentenced him to lose his head; after Hambleton and Capel lost their
lives also.

The Pope wars with the Duke of Parma, but being beaten, lays it to a
Marquess. The French in fight took 6000 prisoners, and 40 great guns; and the
Spaniards also yields Ipre; the Tartars and Cossack, over run Poland, took 2000
in fight, after destroyed 8000 Jews, 20000 natives; the Pole yields them the
Ceremonies and demands they crave after quaraling again was beaten. The
Venetian beating the Turks at Dardenel, the Governor and three Bashaws was
slain at Constantinple, on pretense of cowardice or falsness.

In England the Parliament Voted a Commonwealth Government, make Cromwell;
Deputy of Ireland, the young King comes over Sea by agreement into Scotland,
and is Crowned by them; Fairfax refused co go against the Scots, but Cromwell
was Voted General, who at Dunbar with a weak sickly Army overthrew the Scots,
took 15000 Arms; Kings, Bishops, and banished persons Lands was sold, money was
Coined with the States Arms, and Edinburgh yielded.

In Holland, the Prince of Orange attempted to seize Amsterdam by horse and
foot, coming in the night, but it was frustrated by Post letters, giving
knowledge, and the Sluices let open. A civil war overspread France, by some
Princes standing up for the servile people therein; Cardinal Mazarine was
banished, but after the stir he was admitted, and Condie slited; the Venetian in
the haven of Fogio takes from the Turk 72 Oaregallies, 18 other ships, and 60
laden, also a Bashaw, and 7000 men, all with the loss of 9 men: upon which the
Turk brings the Christians to whips and chains but by the French Orator apeased
him, but he stops English Ships, comes again, but the Venetian slew 1500: This
year the Sulton had seven sons in one month borne to him.

The King of Britain gets a great Army in Scotland, but some English landing
at Queens Far, beat a party of the Scots of about 4000, and took B^r^twood;
the King steered toward Worcester with about 15000 the Presbyterian joynd with
the Northern Army, and Love taken at a meeting in London, was after beheaded by
a high Court of Justice; the King was Proclaimed King of great Britain at
Worcester, Cromwell leaving Monck in Scotland, hasted to Worcester, where
several forces met him, after he had with a sharp conflict gained a pass over
Severn and Powick bridge, overthrew the Scots, who fought stoutly, then he run
into the Town killing in the streets and elsewhere about 3000, took ^000,
Hambleton dying of his wounds, the King got into an Oak in a wood, 500 l. was
offered to any that should detect him, but cutting his hair and disguised in
habit, he with the assistance of a Lady got beyond Sea; the Earl of Darby who
had got about 1400 was routed by Lilburnes Regiment; and after beheaded, many
of the Nobility in Scotland was apprehended; the Parliament reward Cromwell,
make an Act of Navigation, which enrageth the Dutch.

In France, Condie arms, could not be appeased, who with the Parliament of
Paris urged the Decree against Cardinal Mazarine; the Cardinal with Arms
opposes him by the Kings order.

The English fight with the Dutch at Sea, for refusing to strike the Topsail,
and to allow the tenth herring; while an Ambassador from Holland, and a Treaty
was at London, Trump came with 42 sail toward the British Sea, where he lost
one and forty men by the English, after which followed several more fights, in
one of which Trump was slain, above 20 men of War sunk, 1000 prisoners. About
this time the French going to relieve Dunkirk, was by the English, by reason of
the breast men taking English Ships by the Kings Commission scatterd, and
Dunkirk yielded to the Spaniard; Cromwell dissolved the Parliament, fearing
their too long sitting, declared a Counsel of State, nominated a Parliament,
many of which being high for Tyhes, and against toleration, the other part
incenst went out of the house with the Speaker, delivering their received power
into the hands of Cromwell, who the Officers of the Army made Protector, with a
Council of 21 who made peace with the Dutch, put the Papists in Ireland all to
one Province. Powel and Gerrard was executed for a plot to sease the guards; he
summons another Parliament, agreeing with the Sheriffs that they should not
alter the Government, reserving liberty to Adjourn them at such a time, after
which he dissolved them, broke with Spain, sent an Army to Hispaniola, who
grew faint when they landed, and was easily repulsed, but after seized Iamaica
Island. There was several risings now in Arms; Penruduck and others was
executed, Cromwell appointed Major Generals in the Countries, who took the tenth
part of the Estates of those that assisted the King; Cromwell makes a peace with
the French, that they exclude the King of England.

Condie for hatred of Cardinal Mazarine, falls from the French Court and joynd
with the Spaniard. The Moscovite falls upon the Pole, upon matter of honor,
the Pole desired the Swedes assistance, upon which he would not lay any claim
more to Swedeland; the Queen of Swedeland resigned up her Crown to her Cosen,
and was by the Popes Nuntio in the Duke of Tyrolls Country, upon her owning the
Catholic Religion, with a deal of Pomp and ceremonies absolved of all her
sins. At Cullen in Germany many was distraind for not strowing flowers on a
Sacrament day. Colonel Doylie wrote of the good condition of Iamaica; the
English hd surprised there 6000 Spaniards who had hid themselves.

In the Magulls Country there is a City called Nagracus, where there is a
Chapel paved of Plate of pure gold, where is placed an Idol called Matta,
visited yearly by thousands of Indians, who cut off part of their tongus to
offer in sacrifice to it. Also in the same Province they go to Iallamack,
where out of cold springs, and hard Rocks are daily seen uncessant eruptions of
fire, before which they fall down and Worship.

In the year 1655. the Duke of Saxony condemned a man for stealing a Deer, to
be bound in chains upon a Stagg, his feet fast under the beasts belly, with an
Iron Chain soldered, and his hand also in the same manner chained to the
horns, and so set loose to run away with him; the Stagg having run near a
hundred English miles, upon a direct line, in twenty six hours time, coming
near some waggoners who came out of Silesia, fell down, wherefore the poor man
sitting on his back, told them the business, and earnestly begged of them to
shoot him, to put him out of his pain, but they durst not, fearing the Duke; in
the mean time the Stagg getting up run away with all his might, so the miseries
that poor creatures undergone, if the Stagg killed him not in running, cannot
be expressed.

In England the Protector calls another Parliament, who would have made him
King, but he could not take it upon him: The English Fleet much spoiled the
Spanish Indian silver Fleet. Sir Henry Slingsby, and Dr. Hewit was now beheaded
for a conspiracy.

Cromwell according to agreement with the King of France, sent over into
Flanders 6000 foot, which did the French great service in taking Mountmedi, St.
Venant, and the fort of Mardike: Now the King of England had 2000 English,
Scots, and Irish unimployed, which the King of Spain with consent sends with
some others commanded by the Duke of York to assault Mardike, but they after
six hours conflict was forced to retire, upon which the English and French
straightly besieged Dunkirk; to oppose them, the Dukes of Austria, and York, and
Condie assembled 16000 horse and foot; 300 English foot gave the first onset,
who routing the Spanish foot, the horse fled, and the French pursued them, till
the Duke of York resisted, but he was overpowered, and 2000 of the Spaniards
fide was prisoners: after which, the Governor of Dunkirk, the Marquess of Leda
being slain in a sallie, Dunkirk was surrendered upon conditions, and by the
King of France and Cardinal in person, put into the hands of the English.

About this time the Protestants of Piedmont was by their Duke of Savoy,
through the instigation of the Priests, cruely forced into the woods; the
Protestants in many parts, especially England, contributed largely to them, and
at last Cromwell Protector of England got the King of France to mediate with
the Duke for peace with them.

The Swede gathers a great Army, having made a league with Brandenburgh comes
into the Poles Country, taking diverse places as far as Wsee without a blow; the
Pole rendezvous 36 miles from Warsow, had a hallowed sword sent him, but the
Swede giving him a great overthrow, the King of Poland fled to Cracovia, which
yielded to the Swede; and the Pole fled toward Hungary. An Envoy came from
the King of Polands Standardbarer, in his name, and other of the Nobility, that
seeing their King was fled out of his Country, they submitted to the King of
Swedeland as their Sovereign. Elbin yielded, and the King of Swed. made his
Chancellor Governor of Prussia; the Swede followed the King of Poland in
Silesia, beats him, taking seven Standards, and sends to block up Danzick,
gives the Pole a great overthrow at Warsovia, and now when the Pole in a manner
lost all, the Moscovite comes into Liesland against the Swede, and besieges
Riga, and the Emperor of Germany became the Swedes open enemy; the Dane also
came against him by Sea and Land, and besieged Bremerverden, from whence (the
Swede coming) quickly drove him to Iutland, the Swede goes then to Hulsten,
also takes Fredericks Ode, after by the frost gets Funen Island, the Poles now
took Lisna, destroyed many Protestants, went into Prussia to Thorn: the Swede
and Dane make peace; an Envoy came to the Swede from Cromwell Protector of
England, to assure him the Swedes enemies should be his enemies.

The pretended Lord Protector of England with fourteen days sickness died, the
Ducth demanded of the Portugal the Isle of St. Thomas, and commerce with
Brazeel. The Turk demands double custom of the Christians at Jerusalem.

The French and some English enter Ostend on a surprise, but are beaten out.

The Swede return upon the Dane, get into Zealand, and besiege Copenhagen
where was the King and Nobles of Denmark, Corenburgh Caslte was yielded to the
Swede; the Dane in a sally had 1500 dispersed; the Dutch fought for the Dane
near Shoven, where they lost eight Ships, 100 men, with Witty Wittiens that
died of his wounds, the Swede only loosing two Ships, but attempting to storm
Copenhagen lost many valorous Officers and Soldiers, in the tedious time of the
Legure; the King of Swedeland fell sick and died, advising his Counsel to
peace.

The K. of France marries the K. of Spains daughter, and concludes a peace, who
had been long enemies. Ambassadors come to the King of England from France,
Venice, Holland, to desire Amity; and Peace is supposed to be between England
and Spain; war being made only by Cromwell.

The Turks with an Army of 80 thousand Tatrars now marches toward Germany,
subdues Transylvania, places Soloni Gaber Prince, carries away many thousand
Christians Captives.

King Charles the Second of England, his Restoration.
Richard Cromwell immediately after his Fathers death, was by the Council
Proclaimed the Lord Protector, who not long after summond a Parliament, which
was very ready to settle the Government by a single person; but in their
proccedings, being much for Tithes, settling the Church, and the Presbyterial
Ministry, without the liberty others expected, the Officers of the Army in
consultation with some others; resolve to bring again the Government to a
Commonwealth, which Richard, Colonel Goff and others sought to oppose, by
drawing forces together, who presently instead of fighting with, run to
Desboroughs and Lamberts party, then the Officers of the Army put out the
Parliament, dethroned Richard also, the Soldiers in Ireland falling in with
those in England, Henry Cromwell is deprived of his Deputyship, then the Army
bring in the remaining part of the long Parliament of the year 41 excluding the
secluded Members still, who preently place all Officers for a Commonwealth, put
out others, but people being now weary of the tossings of Government inclined
to arms; Sir George Booth appeard with an Army of above 6000, but the
Parliament sent Lambert who subdued him, he endeavoring to escape in women's
apparel was taken prisoner; the Parliament upon Lamberts return gave him 1000
pound; not long after Lamberts and Desboroughs friends in the Army Petition to
the Parliament for a general, for which (the Parl. percieving a single person
again aimed at) put out Lambert, Desborough, and seven Officers of the Army
more; Colonel Morlie guarding the Parliament, Lambert with a party stops their
going to the house, Morlie requires their admition, they stood one against
another with their guns cockt, ready to fight, but the Counsel of State,
perceiving that the Soldiers would all be of Lamberts side, ordered the guards
to go home; the Parliament sitting no more, the Officers of the Army at
Walingford house, make Fleetwood General, Lambert Lieftenant General,
Desborough Major-Generall of the horse, and Monk of the foot, and erected a
Committee of Safety; but upon dissatisfaction, by letters Monck complained of
their turning out the Parliament; Lambert goes with an Army of 10000 against
him, Monk sent Commissioners to treat at London, but on their return being not
satisfied with what his Commissioners had done, he marching toward England
desired another Treaty at Newcastle, and called a convention in Scotland, who
assisted him in his motion.

Hazlerig and Morley sease on Portsmouth, with whom many of the Soldiers
joined, for the Parliament and the Navy also declare against Lambert, the
Soldiers about London fell in also for the Parliament, the Parl. now sitting,
Lamberts Army, deserted him; Monk marches toward London, the Counties and
London by Commissioners hinted their desire privately to him, the Parliament
sent Commissioners to him, who satisfied the Parliament in him, he gave
uncertain hopes by his carriage and letters to all, but promised he would be
for the Parliament, and against Lambert; the Parliament entertain him coming to
London, and grant his desire that the old soldiers may go out of London, of
which City the Common Council not long after Vote to pay no more taxes without
a free Parliament, upon which the Parliament imprison some, and ordered Monk to
pull down the gates, Monck his Commission being within a day or two out, draws
up his forces by Morefields, came into the City, telling them his intentions,
and writ a letter to the House about filling them up, but they tedious in the
qualifications of Members, the Members formerly secluded pressing Monk, he
admitted them to sit, who made Monk General, released Sir George Booth,
appointed a Council of State to govern till a new Parliament came as they had
provided, and so dissolved themselves; the Parliament assembled, the Lords also
sat, who, as also the General received letters from the King at Breda, about a
general pardon and liberty, the Parliament invite the King to return to his
Kingdoms, ordered General Mountague to attend his commands, Proclaimed him
sumptuously in London, and sent diverse Lords and Commons, and of London
several Aldermen and others go beyond Sea to him; the King ariving, General
Monk met him at Dover, who kneeling to kiss the Kings hand, the King took him
up into his Coach; at Canterbury, the Majestrates presented the King with a cup
of Gold; Major General Brown, and the Lord Major with diverse Citizens with
Gold Chains, went to bring him into London, where rich Tapestry was hung out;
with the Companies Streamers, and the Conduits run with Wine; at White Hall the
Speakers of both Houses congratuled his well coming home to his Throne, and the
King assuring them that they should not be more ready to ask what is fitting,
then he to grant, it retired to his lodgings.

The Parliament proceeded on an Act of Indemnity; the King makes Proclamation
for all those to come in that had a hand in his fathers death, at last, the Act
past to pardon all but the Kings Judges, and those that came in upon the Kings
Proclamation not be executed without the Parliaments consent; after which all
in possession was tried, Harrison, Scot, Scroop, Peter's, Jones, Carry, and
others was hanged and quartred. Martin, Titchburne, Lilburn, Penington, and
others that came in reserved in the Tower, Okey, Holland, Hewson, Lile, Goffe,
Whalie, was never taken; the Parliament having also past an Act for disbanding
the Army, one for Rolemony, and about twenty more, the King in his Speech at
dissolving them, called them a healing Parliament. In London about seventy
persons rose in arms one night to pull down the Monarks of the earth, as
Antichristian, who meeting with resistance, fled to a wood, yet came two days
after early in the morning when the City guards was five times stronger, but
was soon scatterd, but above twenty killed first and last, most themselves, and
those who were taken was tried and hanged. The King sends out writs for another
Parliament, before they met, he was Crowned, making General Monk Duke of
Albemarle, Mountague Earl of Sandwitch, Hollis, Sir George Booth, and others
Barons, the first day of Coronation besides the Judges, the Nobles rod from the
Tower before the King in rich gilt embroidered Suits of apparel and
hors-trappings, with rich Pages and Liveries; the second day the Peers went on
foot from Westminster Hall to the Abbey, Barrons, Viscounts, Earls, Marquesses,
Dukes, with their Robes, and distinct Coronets, some of the Bishops in rich
Copes; after assembled the Kings second Parliament, who passed an Act to
confirm several Acts of the former Parliament, who was not summoned by the
Kings writts, news came of the trial and execution of the Marque of Argile,
and Goutherie a Minister in Scotland: The Parliament of England passing an Act
for the preservation of the King, and another for a free present of moneys,
another for repealing an Act for disabling persons in holy Orders, to exercise
Temporal jurisdiction, and several other Acts, and proceeded on an Act about
conformity, and using the common prayer, was adjorn'd 3 months; about 7 weeks
after a Proclamation was made in the Kings name for establishing Bishops in
Scotland, another for appointing the money Stamped with the Cross and Harp, the
States Arms, in the time of the late Commonwealth, to be brought to the Mint
for other money, allowing for Coinage.

Collonell Hewson one of the Kings Judges, died in Holland.

In October 1661. Malaga was visited with a rain that swelled to such a height
that it carried away whole Bridges of B^ick and Stone, whole houses with the
people in them, and abundance of wood and other materials were driven into the
Sea; and a part of the City wall was overthrown, the houses spoyld were about
twelve hundred, the people that perished thirteen hundred, the damage of Oil,
Wine, and Rasons and otherwise, to the value of about three millions of Gold.

About the same time at St. Malo happened (its uncertain how) a fire which burnt
three days, and consumed three hundred houses.

About this same time the Spanish and French Ambassadors Coaches skirmishing
for precedence, at their attendance, of a Swede Ambassador through London, the
Spaniard getting the better, and about five of the French slain, the King of
France sent to the Court of Spain for satisfaction, but receiving little, and
the Marquess of Cartena being informed of the French Commissioners not
proceeding in the limits according to the new peace, took Rantie, but the
Governor of Aras by a small fight, many being wounded, regained the former
post, but the King of Spain sending a great present to his Daughter the Queen
of France, and the newborn Dolphin. The King of France resented this gift so
kindly as that he declared there should be no war, but wrote thanks to his
Catholic Majesty, for the twelve China dishes and Diamonds sent to the Queen
and Dolphin worth 50000 Crowns; but the Prince of Spain now died
notwithstanding the body of St. Diego was brought from Lizna to his Chamber,
who as one wisely or other wisely observes, has done great cures for the
Princes of Spain.

About this time the Turks pretended to the Emperor of Germany if he believe it
that he will come no further then Transylvania, and is ready to make peace with
the Emperor: its supposed only because he finds the Christians gathering so
great strength against him, that he had better then to come on toward Germany,
join with the confederate rebellious Army of the Popish Subjects against their
King, and make shure if he can that Kingdom.

In England King Charles the Second being sure to the Infanta of Portugal, she
is generally prayed for in the Churches under the name of Queen Catherine.

In Spain there is a Prince borne to Comfort against the loss of the new
diseased Prince.

In England the King appoints several learned persons of the Episcopal and
Presbyterian persuasions to reveiw the Liturgy, who after long debating about
the Common Prayer and Ceremonies, come no nearer one another then at the
beginning.

The Confederate Army in Poland under their Marshall Lurumbskie have sent
Articles to the King of Poland, that they intend not to employ their Arms
against the King or Country, but against the Usurpers of public liberty: and
secondly, do exhort the King and Gentry to defend themselves. Thirdly, that the
Estates of the Gentry shall be freed from Winter quarters. Fourthly, the
confederates will deliver up to the King, those that have administered the Kings
revenew, who have been naught but thieves: Fifthly, all taxes agreed on by the
Country, are not to come to the King, but to their use. Sixthly, They will
deprive Prince Radzivill of all his Lands except Beirse^ and Keidaw, and they
will have Collonell Bremer and Remer called to give an account why they
delivered Mitow to the Duke of Curland: Seaventhly, the confederates if their
be no necessity will not be obliged to keep the Camp longer then Martins Mass.
Eighthly, if peace be not concluded according to the confederates wishes then
they shall have power to agree upon a cessation of Arms; But the King of
Poland will rather use all means to subdue the confederates, then to condecend
to such demands.

In England, on the twentieth of November 1661. the Parliament comes again to
Westminster, after their three months Adjournment, when sat with the Lords in
their house, the Bishops of England, as of old, who went first into the Painted
Chamber, and put on lawn sleeves on their black silk Gowns, and their scarlet
Robes faced with rich white fur, after that black Capps, and so went into the
house, and took their places, several of the Lords congratulating them, their
coming thither; after this his Majesty came by barge with Trumpets sounding
from Whitehall to Westminster, where being seated with his Impepiall Crown on
his head in the house of Peers, the Commons coming thither with their Speaker,
the King presented them with their ensuing Speech.

My Lords and Gentlemen of the House of Commons.

I Know the Visit I make you this day is not necessary, is not of course; yet
if there were no more in it, it would not be strange that I come to see what
you and I have so long desired to see, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
the Commons of England met together, to Consult for the Peace and safety of
Church and State, by which Parliaments are restored to their Primitive Luster
and Integrity: I do heartily congratulate with you for this day. But, My Lords
and Gentlemen, as My coming hither at this time is somewhat extraordinary; so,
the truth is, the occasion of My coming is more extraordinary; it is to say
something to you on My own behalf, to ask somewhat of you for My Self, which is
more then I have done of you, or of those who met here before you, since My
coming into England: I needed not have done it Then, and upon My Conscience I
need not do it Now; they did, and you do upon all occasions express so great an
affection and care of all that concerns Me, that I may very well refer both the
matter and manner of your doing any thing for Me, to your own Wisdoms and
Kindness; And indeed, if I did think that what I am to say to you now, did
alone, or did most concern My self; if the Uneasy condition I am in, if the
Straits and Necessities I am to struggle with, did not manifestly relate to the
public Peace and Safety, more then to My own particular, otherwise then as I
am concerned in the Public, I should not give you this trouble this day; I
can bear My Necessities which merely relate to My self, with Patience enough.

Mr. Speaker, and you Gentlemen of the House of Commons, I do not now importune
you to make more haste in the settling the constant Revenue of the Crown, then
is agreeable to the Method you propose to your selves, to desire you seriously
to consider the insupportable Weight that lies upon it, the Obligations it
lies under, to provide for the Interest, Honor and Security of the Nation, in
another proportion, then in any former times it has been obliged to: I know
well you have very affectionately and worthily taken all this into your
Thoughts, and will proceed in it with as much Expedition as I can reasonably
wish; But I come to put you in mind of the Crying Debts which do every day
call upon Me, of some necessary Provisions, which are to be made without delay
for the very Safety of the Kingdom, of the great some of Money that should be
ready to discharge the several Fleets when they come home, and for the
necessary preparations that are to be made for the setting out new Fleets to
Sea against the Spring; that Revenue being already anticipated upon as
important Services, which should be assigned to those Preparations; These are
the pressing Occasions which I am forced to recommend to you with all possible
Earnestness, and do Conjure you to provide for as speedily as is possible, and
in such a manner as may give Us security at Home, and some reputation Abroad. I
make this Discourse to you with some Confidence, because I am very willing and
desirous that you should thoroughly examine, whether these necessities I mention
be Real or Imaginary, or whether they are fallen upon Us by My fault, My own
ill Managery, or Excesses, and provide for them accordingly. I am very willing
that you make a full Inspection into My Revenue, as well the Disbursements as
Receipts; and if you find it has been ill managed by any corruption in the
Officers I trust, or by My own Unthriftiness, I shall take the Information and
Advice you shall give Me very kindly; I say, If you find it; For, I would not
have you believe any loose Discourses, how confidently soever urged, of giving
away Fourscore thousand pounds in a Morning, and many other Extravagancies of
that kind. I have much more reason to be sorry that I have not to Reward those
who have ever faithfully served the King My Father, and My Self, then ashamed
of any Bounty I have exercised toward any man.

My Lords and Gentlemen, I am sorry to find that the general Temper and
Affections of the Nation are not so well composed, as I hoped they would have
been, after so signal blessings from God Almighty upon Us all, and after so
great Indulgence and Condescensions from Me toward all Interests, There are
many wicked Instruments still as active as ever, who labor night and day to
disturb the Public Peace, and to make all People jealous of each other: It
will be worthy of your Care and Vigilance to provide proper Remedies for the
Diseases of that kind; and if you find new Diseases, you must study new
Remedies. Let Us not be discouraged, if We help one another, We shall with Gods
blessing master all Our difficulties: Those which concern Matters of Religion,
I confess to you, are too hard for Me, and therefore I do commend them to your
Care and Deliberation which can best provide for them. I shall not need to
recommend, or put you in mind of the good correspondence that ought to be kept
between you, for the good of your selves and Me, and the whole Kingdom; and I
may tell you, It is very necessary for Us all: You will find, whoever does not
love Me, does not love you; and they who have no Reverence for you, have little
kindness for Me. Therefore I pray let us adhere fast to each other, and then We
shall, with the help of God, in a short time, persuade, or oblige all men to
that Submission and Obedience to the Law, as may constitute a full measure of
happiness to Prince and People, and persuade Our Neighbors to that esteem and
value they have formerly had for Us.

The next day after the Speech, the Parliament Voted Twelve hundred thousand
pounds to be speedily raised; and ordered the pretended Judges of the late King
to be brought before them, to show what cause they can, why they should not be
executed, who generally alleged nothing but the Kings Proclamation.

FINIS.
Short Stories escaping the Book.
THE Emperors of Constantinople on their Coronation day, had a Mason to present
to them Marble Stones, useing these words, Choose Mighty Sir under which of
these Stones,
Your pleasure is ere long to lay your Bones.


Panopion flying, his Bondsman changed apparel with him, and lay down in his
bed; I willingly yielding the Soldiers should stay him (as they did) for his
Master.

A Court Parasite commending the Emperor Sigismond to his face, the Emperor
gave him a sound box on the ear.

In China they use to whip their Gods, if they help them not when they pray
unto them.

Francis King of France consulting how to lead his Army over the Alps, his Fool
sprang from a Corner, saying, rather take care how you shall bring your Army
back again.

The Romans ready to join battle with the Albanes, three Champions was chose
on both sides (to avoid bloodshed) to end the battle, two of the Romans being
slain, the other fled, but the three Albanes pursuing him slowly by reason of
their wounds, and being at a distance from one another, he returned and slew
one after anonother, so the day fell to the Romans.

Solon was so humble, as he could not by the Athenians and friends be persuaded
to accept of the honor of Sovereignty.

The Cretans brought up their sons from their youth in difficult labors to
prevent idleness Scandenbtrg used to sleep but two hours in a night.

Mithridates King of Pontus killed his Mother, Brother, Three Sons and three
Daughters to get the Crown, who was after slain by another Son.

Alexander most ingratefully in a Feast slew Clitus whose mother had been his
nurse, and who a little before saved Alexanders life: and Muleases King of
Tunis tortured to death Mes^ar, and Maenifet, by whose means he had obtaind
the Kingdom, grieving to see them alive, to whom he was so much beholding.

Vortigar King of the Britains, being in Wine was ensnared by the Daughter of
Hengist the Saxon, to the undoeing of the British Nation.

Lewis King of France used three days in a week publicly to hear grevances,
and right the wrongs of his people.

The King of Poland when his servant lost his hand in the wars, he sent him a
golden hand.

Two of Dr. Vshers Aunts was blind from the Cradle, and never saw Letter, yet
taught him to read, and could repeat any part of the Bible.

When many Turks in assaulting Alba Regalin had got upon a fort, a Hungarian
woman thrust in among the soldiers, and with a Scithe struck off two Turks
heads, which so encouraged the soldiers, that the Turks was repeled.

The Daughter of Tarpia betraying her Father, and Tower that he was Governor
of, to the King of Sabins, for all the Sabin soldiers wore upon their left
arm, aiming at their bracelets, coming for her reward, King Tatius ordered the
soldiers to throw bracelets and shields both from their arms upon her, and so
crushed her to death.

Among the Turks, the grand Signeuor is not exepted from a trade. Mahomet the
great made wooden spones; another Sulton made notches for Bows. The Egyptians
made a law that those which could not show how they lived should be put to
death.

King Perses being overcome by Emelus, grew into such passion as to slay two of
his Nobles that came to comfort him.

A German falling into the hands of Thieves, said to a company of Crows, you
are witnesses of my death, the Thieves three years after being merry together,
seeing some Crows, said, yonder be the witnesses of our Murder, which words
overheard, they was examined and executed.

In the East India they use to sing the praises of the King when he goes
abroad, calling him Lord of the Sun and Moon, King of Land and Rivers, in every
thing great, great witch great lion, and so great any thing.

In the first year of King Charles of England 1625. died in London of the
Plague, within the Bill of mortality, threescore and three thousand persons.

Many Dutch men in Joppa being drunk on St. Martins day, the Turks came
suddenly upon them, and cut the throats of twenty thousand.

Alexander the great drank himself to death.

A young King of France scoffing at William the Conquerors great belly, when he
was sick, saying he lay in at Roan: William recovered, marched to Paris, to show
him his up rising, also sacked Nants. Henry the third of France would have his
jester between him and Cardinal, at solum processioning.

Caesar Burgia used to say, aut Caesar, aut Nullus, but not long after was
slain, and Menorates a Physician curing some desperate diseases, would be
called Jupiter.

One Averny forswaring himself, could not speak a word till by inward
repentance, his tongue untied.

Pope John the 22. left in his treasury to his Heirs two hundred and 50 tuns of
Gold.

The ancient Romans used when the Moon was eclipst to make a great noise with
basins and panns to call her again.

Becket a Traitor to King Henry the second being murdered, was first obscurely
buried, but after was made Martyr by the Pope, and laid in a sumptuous shrine,
to which many great persons came in Pilgrimage with most rich offers, the
prints of their kneeling to his Tomb is to be seen at Canterbury to this day.

Philip King of France ordained that men that swore or blasphemed should be
drowned.

Cicero, though he was not rich would not take a fee at pleading any cause.

The Spaniards will be rich in apparel, though poor in purse, and if he has
a Capon to supper, the feathers must be strowed before the door next morning.

Titus said, he had rather perish by others, then destroy them; and two of the
Senators convinced of affecting the Empire, he told them that was at Gods
disposal, but if they asked any thing else he would give it them.

Dionysius the Tyrant punished a Physician because he could sing, and Plato the
Philosopher because he could dispute better then himself.

Cineus the Orator won for the King of Ipyrus more Towns by his eloquence,
then the King himself by the sword.

The son of Craesus seeing one running at his father with a drawn sword,
through strong affection, though dumb all his life before, cried O kill not the
King.

The rich Cardinal of Winchester that procured the death of the good Duke of
Gloucester, King Henry the sixth being struck with an incurable disease, cried
fie will not death be hired, will money do nothing.

An Earl that used commonly to say, let me be drowned in a privy, if such a
thing be not so, was so drowned at St. Peter's Monastery at Erford.

Sila put to death all he could remember and caused it to be regestred, that he
had precribed and put to death 4700 Citizens of Rome.

Contentions was so great in Constantius time between the Bishops, that they
brought whole bundles of Petitions against one another to the Emperor, who
(desirous of Peace) burnt them without reading.

Cardinal Langi acknowledged that formation of the Mass was needful and
liberty of meats convenient, but that Lather should reform all that was not to
be endured.

Catos Daughter being married to Brutus, who conspiring against Julius Caesar,
being troubled in mind, and not imparting it to his wife observing it, she
being grieved, took a rasor and wounded her thigh, and losing much blood fell
into a Fever, and after, at hearing of her husbands death, killd her self.

The first Christian King in the world was Lusius of the Britains. The first
Christian Emperor Constantine was borne in England. England is called the
Granery of the Western world, the Pope formerly received yearly from hence more
then Ten tuns of Gold.

Cleobis and Bilon brethren in Greece loved their mother so dearly as they
harnessed themselves to draw her Coach when she was to go to Junoes Temple.

Some Elephants the Magull keeps to execute Malefactors, some they pash to
death presently, others they break their joints by degrees as they are bid.

William the Conqueror gave a manor and certain yard-lands in Buckingamshire,
to one upon this condition, that the possessor thereof should find litter for
the Kings Bed when he came that way.

Rubenius Celer would needs have it engraven on his Tomb, that he had lived
with his wife Ennea forty three years, and yet they never fell out.

In a battle when the Persians was overthrown by the Turks, many women was
slain that being armed followd their husbands in the battle.

Cleopatra Queen of Egppt, at a banquet drunk up a pearl dissolved worth fifty
thousand pounds, and one dish at second course was valued at two hundred and
fifty pieces of gold.

When the bloody Danes raged in England, they coming to a Nunnery at Coldington
in Scotland, Ebba the proresse with the rest of the Nuns, cut off their own
noses and lips, chosing rather to preserve their virginity, then their beauty,
yet the Danes burnt the Monastery, and them in it.

Godfrie of Bulligne with his followers in four years conquered all the
goodliest Provinces of Asia, in one fight his men stood in blood to the
anckles; in another he slew a hundred thousand Turks or Infidells.

Two brothers, followers of Phythagoras loved so entirely that Dionysius
condemning one, the other offered to dye in his stead, which the Tyrant seeing,
desired to be a third in their affection.

Pericles was so patient as he dispatched much business, and after came softly
to his house at night, and ordered his man to light home a fellow that had been
railing at him all the day.

Theomesticles by the strength of his memory, could call all his soldiers by
name.

King Romulus was first a Shepherd, Priscus a banished stranger, and Servius a
Bond slave as his name imports.

Calvin an eye witness testifies that when Geneva embrased the Gospel, the
Magistrates found by visiting the relics, that what was adored as the brain
or St. Peter, was a Pummis stone, and Anthonies arm was the sinew of a Stag:
the parcel of wood in Europe which the Papists say, are parts of Christ's
Cross, will load a ship, though the Cross was no more then a man could bare.

Boca di porco or Swinsmouth being chose Pope, changed his name Sergius, which
president his successors follow, if one be a Tyrant, he is called Clemens, if
unjust, Inosent.

Micypsa on his deathbed caused all his sons to write this sentence in golden
letters, by concord small things are increased, by discord, great things are
overthrown.

Ten Noble virgins delivered by the Romans as hostages to Parsonna, upon Peace
with him, being abroad without guard, escapt home, but Publica Consul to the
Romans returned them again, though his own Daughter was one of them.

De Thermes a French General knighted a soldier for first mounting a bulwark,
and an hour after hanged him for doing it without command.

Henry the fourth K. of England, when his eldest son Prince of Wales was
committed by the Lord chief Justice for afronting him on the Bench thanked God
he had a Judge so impartial, and a son so obedient to submit to Justice.

The Egyptians being releeved with Corn by King Apis, and the Corn being done
by the labor of the Ox, they worshipped Apis under the form of a pide Ox.

In Poland there was bred a stinking disease, by reason of a vicious humor,
glewing together the hair of the head, in the form of little Serpents full of
nastiness, yielding if pricked blood, and the cutting of this hair at first
would cause the humor to torter some other part of the body.

Erostratus a young man, to make himself famous, and to perpetuate his name,
set on fire Diana's Temple at Ephesus, one of the Stateliest fabrics of the
world.

Eunomius the heretic, boasting he knew God, Basil to convince him of his
ignorance, graveld him in twenty one questions about the pismire.

A Spanish Cobbler lying on his deathbed, laid a special charge upon his eldest
son, to retain the Majesty worthy his family.

The Mahomitans pray with a still voice, useing many words, which set forth the
omnipotency, eternity, and other atributes of God, and acknowledge themselves
burdens to the earth, poison to the Air, dareing not to look to heaven, but
comfort themselves in Mahomet, and pray five times a day, at 6.9.12.3. and 6.
at night.

King Sapores straightly besieging Nisibis, upon the prayer of a devout man God
sent an Army of Gnatts and Flies that tormented away the Persians.

A Varlot betraying the Isle of Rhodes to the Turk, to have his daughter, was
after told by the Turk, that if he should be his son in law, he must not be a
Christian, but a Musleman within and without, and so fleyed off his baptized
skin; and put him in a bed strewed with salt, to get a new skin, killing him
with shame and torment.

Judge Morgan Lord chief Justice of the Common pleas, refusing any witness to
speak, or any other matter to be heard in favor of the adversary, her Majesty
being party, the Queen declared that her pleasure was, that whatever could be
brought in favor of the Subject should be admitted.

Micithus servant to Tyrant Aneuxilus was left by his dying master to be
Viceroy during his childrens minority, who behaved himself so gently and
justly, that the people thought him fit to rule, but notwithstanding he
resigned to the Children at age his power, and therewithal the Treasures he by
providence had heaped up, and contenting himself with a small pittance, he went
and lived privately, but with great respect.

Aristides the Athenian would not favor any man's cause, because he was his
friend, or do injustice to any, because he was his enemy, once seeing an enemy
that the Judge was so angry with as to hear no more of his cause; Aristides
begged at the Judges feet, that his offender might make his defense. Aristides
being at another time Judge between two private men, one of them said, Sir,
this man has done you wrong also, to whom Aristides replied, friend I am here
to do thee right, not my self.

M. Cato prised every Citizens goods, and rated their apparel, coaches, wives
chains, and Jewels, to the end that those which were so superfluous in those
things, should pay the more subsidy to defray the charge of the Commonwealth.

Demosthenes being banished by his ungrateful Citizens departing out of the
City, persuaded the young men, not to meddle with matters of State, assuring
them that if they had offered him two ways at first, the one to go into the
assemblies, to make Orations to the people, the other to be put to death
presently, and that he had known as he now did the troubles that man suffers
that medles in the affairs of the Commonwealth together with the fear, envy,
accusations, that attend the same, he would have chosen death rather then the
other.

Archimedes was so hard at his Mathematical study when Syracuse was taken
that he heard not the noise, yea, not heeding even when the soldiers broke upon
his study, they thinking he slited them, a soldier run him through.

Pithagorus lived a whole year in a Cave, that being sequestered from the
society of men, he might the better study philosophy.

Cato Vlisensis did so industriously adict himself to the study of Greek
Authors, that as he set in the Senate house shadowing his books with his
gown, he was upon all oportunities reading of them.

King James coming into the Library at Oxford, seeing the chains by which the
books was fastened, wished that if ever it was his destiny to be a prisoner, that
the library might be his prison.

Philip King of Macedon besieging Abidus when the people saw that they could
not escape, they first cast their goods into the sea, and then killed their wives
and children and themselves, leaving an empty City for him.

Antigonus observing one of his soldiers very valiant, ready to adventure on
desperate services, and yet looking pale and lean, would know what he ailed,
and finding he had a dangerous disease, Antigonus using all the means he could,
got him recovered, but perceiving after he was less forward then formerly, the
King demanding of him the reason, he ingenuously confessed that he now felt the
sweetness of his life, and therefore was loath to loose it.

Zalucus the lawmaker having made a law that the Adulterer should lose both his
eyes, not long afar his own son was proved guilty before him of than sin,
whereupon to show the love of a Father, and sincerity of a Judge, he put out
one of his sons eyes, and one of his own.

Mercurius Trismigistus was in such respect among the Egyptians, that in
reverence of him, it was not lawful to pronounce his name commonly and rashly,
how then should we never use Gods name, but to purpose and with seriousness.

If any of us Jews (says Josephus) be asked of any point of the Law, we
answer it as readily as if we had been asked our own name.

The Venetians punish with death those that misimploy but a small matter of the
public stock to their own private profit.

Phil: Melancthon tells of a play that was to be acted of the death and passion
of Christ, he that acted Christ's part on the Cross, was wounded to death by
one that should thrust his sword into a bladder of blood, and he with his fall
killed one that acted a woman's part, lamenting under the Cross, his brother
that was first slain, seeing this, slew the murderer, for which himself by
the order of Justice was hanged.

Theodorick and Frederick slew their own brother Thrasima^d King of the
Visigothes, to get his kingdom, and after Theod: had reigned thirteen years,
he was served in the same kind by his own brethren, who slew him to get his
kingdom.

Cato Major accused (threw envy) for his virtue was forced to plead for himself
forty six times before the people.

Charles the fifth, bestowed (when the King of Tunis came to him) such perfume
upon his dishes, that one Peacock, and two Pheasants dressed, cost 100 Ducats.

Balisarius having obtained many great victories against the Vandalls, and
engraven them on a pillar he erected of 100 pound weight of gold, had after
through the malice of the Empress, his eyes put out, and driven to such want
as to beg in the way side, pray give a halfpenny to poor Balisarius.

Mahomet the great being murmured at by his Captains, as doting upon a Lady, a
wondrous beauty, he called them to see her in most rich attire, who they
admired, but he to show he preferred not his private affection before the
public, drew out his cemiter, and immediately cut off her head.

In the Magulls country, where men's bodies dead are burned, many of their wives
to gain the repute of loving ones, will burn with them, and will not be
persuaded from it by great proffers, from the King.

The Mahometans by their law are enjoined to make restitution of ill gotten
goods, if they cannot presently satisfy, they give bills, if they know not to
whom to restore, they bequeath it to Hospitalls, Bathes, or Churches.

Cyrillus loving an only son unmeasurerably giving him liberty to do what he
list without correction, at last his son came to be so vile, as to offer
violence in his drunken humor to his Mother with child, killed his Father, and
woundead two sisters to death.

Morgan Bishop of St. Davis, who condemned Martyr Farras, and usurpt his
Bishopric; not long after stricken by Gods anger, his meat would not go down,
but pict up again, either at his mouth or nose, in a horrible manner till
death.

There was such a Tempest at Cardinal Wolsies Funeral, as blew out all the
Torches, and his black body so stunck, that they was fain to throw his body in
his Tomb, and there leave him.

Alexander besieging an Indian City, the people within set fire of it; and the
soldiers breaking in labored not more to quench it and save the people, then
they did to increase the flame, rather then be captives.

Madam Charlot de Vrsnes a French Lady published at Paris her homilies, as they
are called upon the obscure Epistle on the Hebrews, with the approbation of two
Doctors, Marois and Tenot, and with the privilege of the King.

Mazentius the barbarous Tyrant would tie dead and living bodies together, and
say let men fell themselves die.

Dead bodies to the quick he joined, and
Composing face to face and hand to hand.
Flowing with putred filth (strange torment) by
Embraces foul he slowly caused to die.
A Governor under the Duke of Normandy not effecting his desire in abusing a
gentlewoman imprisoned her husband, and cut off his head, upon which, complaint
being made to the Duke, he sent for both parties, and the Governor tremblingly
confessing the truth, the Duke asked him if he would marry the Gentlewoman, and
give her his estate, who yielded to it, then asked the Gentlewoman if she was
willing, who advised by her friends, the Governor being a great man in his
Princes favor, she consented, and the Duke saw them married, and then asked the
Gentlewoman whether she was satisfied, yes said she, but said the Duke so am
not I; and so sent the Governor to prison and beheaded him.

Dyogenes the conceited Philosopher, being one day washing of herbs was told
by Plato, if you could court Dyonisius you need not wash herbs; Dyogenes
replied, if you could wash herbs you need not Court Dyonisius, and seeing an
untoward wrestler, undertake to cure diseases, asked him whether he had now
means to cast those to the ground, who had before worsted him.

The invention of Printing.

Lawrence Jans a rich Citizen at Harlem in the Low Countries, walking into
woods for recreation, cut in pieces of wood the letters of his name, printing
them on the back of his hand, which pleasing him, he cut three or four lines,
and putting Ink upon them he printed them upon paper, and joining hereat, he
determined to find out an Ink more fastening, and with his Cosen Tho: Petresse
got a way to print whole sheets, but of one side only, after he changed his
letters of wood into lead.

A profane wretch swaring he believed not that the Soul survived the body,
and that he would sell his Soul, which after the Devil in man's shape buying
of him for wine, he was in the presence of several persons carried away and
never heard of.

FINIS.

