Indago Astrologica: OR, A brief and modest Enquiry into some Principal Points
OF ASTROLOGY,

As it was delivered By the FATHERS of it, And is now generally received By the
SONS of it.

By Joshua Childrey of Feversham in Kent.

LONDON: Printed for Edward Husband, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign
of the Golden Dragon in Fleetstreet, near the Inner Temple Gate. 1652.

The Preface.
LEt the Reader first of all favor me so far, as to give me leave to deprecate
his severe censure for my laying down that for a Foundation and Principle
demonstrable, which to him seems to need proof as much as any thing else I
shall say: For though in former times the motion of the Earth has been
exploded as absurd, and in this last Age by Noble Verulam himself (whose
profound Philosophy I no less admire, then I do at their unworthy slighting of
it, who proud of their own high soaring Fantasies, contemn experiment as below
them; and though they demolish the airy Castles of the Stagirite, do it, but to
make their own more spectable) condemned as vain; yet it is by Galileo,
Philolaus in his De Systemate Mundi, and other accurate Observers and Comparers
of the Phenomenon of Heaven, so plainly demonstrated ad oculum, that it must
now no longer pass for Opinio, but in the Language of the Schools under the
Notion of Scientia. Neither can I attribute the error of the Ancients, and the
Lord Verulam touching this point, to any thing so much as this, That they were
not sufficiently versed in Astronomy: For the Phenomenon and reasons whereon
this piece of truth hangs, are for the most part such, that besides those who
are well acquainted with the Theoriques of the Planets (absit dicto invidia)
few or none, either know, mark, or can understand them, as I might instance in
Particulars: but that is no part of my task. For that which follows, the
moderate Reader will find it to be Sphaera plumbea, though dully penned, yet
of more weight then length: Had some Mercuries had so much News to have told
the world, three or four quire of Paper would have been too strait a girdle for
their Tympany; which disease is grown so much into fashion, that the smalness
of my Book tells me, I must expect no other welcome for it into the world but
Tush, and no other name but a Trifle.

Indago Astrologica.
Sect. 1.
THe old Hypothesis of the World according to to Ptolomey is found to be false,
and that new one of Copernicus (where the is the immovable Center of the
Universe, and the Earth moved in the said Orb which Ptolomy gave the) is
evinced to be the only true one.

Sect. 2.
Notwithstanding this eviction in behalf of Copernicus, the Aspects are by all
Astronomers yet calculated according to the old Systeme of Ptolomy, as if the
Earth were the Center, which the motions of the Planets, and by consequence the
Aspects did respect. So that though Astronomy be corrected, yet Astrology
(which judges mostly by Aspects) remains yet uncorrected. Inasmuch as

Sect. 3.
The Aspects ought to be calculated (as the Schools speak) as they are, not
quoad nos, but quoad naturam (A distinction that suits marvellously well with
our present p^^pose, better a great deal then with their priority and
notiority.) For

If a Line drawn from the Center of the Earth through the Center of a Planet
(this being supposed and granted that the Earth moves in an Orb above) and so
continued do intersect the Zodiac (for examples sake) in the 22 degree of;
again, if a Line drawn from the Center of the through the Center of the same
Planet, and continued do intersect the Zodiac in the 29 degree of; certainly
the place of that Planet is rather to be accounted the 29 degree of then the
22, since this determines but his apparent place and quoad nos, that his true
place and quoad naturam: And if so, then his point of will be not the 22 but 29
of, his of and his of and, and his not the 22 but 29 of and. And if so too,

Sect. 5.
We shall assume the boldness to begin the correction of the Arabian Astrology
after this sort. 1. Let the motions of all the Planets and their places be
calculated, as they relate to the (an easier and more expedible piece of
Arithmetic, then to relate them to the Earth.) And when this is done,

Sect. 6.
2. Let their Aspects be collected thence according to the common custom of our
Ephemerides that are now in request: After which done, you will perceive this
wide difference between this and the old Astrology.

Sect. 7.
First, In the 3 superior Planets and, that which in the Ephemerides is now
called, will be found to be of the Earth (whose Character for brevity and
distinctions sake may be this [^]) and their will be found to be ^, their to be
a ^, their a, and their and ^, dexter for sinister, and sinister for dexter.

Sect. 8.
Further, not only the species of the Aspect will be altered, but the time
too: For only the ^ and ^ will exactly agree with the times of and; The and of
will differ somewhat from the times of the and of ^, and the will differ most
from the time of ^.

Sect. 9.
More then this, all their Aspects that they have each to other, will be found
different from the old ones (now received) quoad tempus, non quoad speciem,
proportionably to their distance from the seeming place of the.

Sect. 10.
Secondly, The place of the ^ in the Zodiaque will be found in the point
opposite to the place of the in our now Ephemerides.

Sect. 11.
Thirdly, the only (seeing the Earth is the Center of her Orb, and to it
therefore her motion and place must be referred) must keep her old place in the
Zodiaque according to our Ephemerides, without any alteration at all. And yet
this something improperly too, seeing the Zodiaque and her Orb have not a
common center: for the is the center of the one, and the ^ of the other.

Sect. 12.
Fourthly, for and the two Inferiors, their seeming in the middle of their
direction will be found to be a real ^* and their in the middle of their
Retrogradation a real ^, yet without any difference in the time.

Sect. 13.
More then this, they will be found to have a and to the Earth, even as the
three Superiors have, besides a and each to other, all which Aspects our
Ephemerides would make them incapable of. Many other particular deductions and
differences I might name; which because these will light you to the corner
where they are, and I have circumscribed my self into a narrow room, I shall
omit. So that hence it will plainly appear in all reason, That

Sect. 14.
This which we here propound to be calculated and collected, although hitherto
it has not (I may say through negligence) been put in practice, is the only
true doctrine of Aspects, and the only sound foundation of Astrology.

Sect. 15.
I am the more inclined to believe this, that so much reason does already
dictate and confirm, when I consider the weakness and shifts of the old
Astrology.

Sect. 16.
Weakness, in that all the Predictions (or at least 99 in a hundred) of the old
Astrology, which notwithstanding is so cried up in this Age, deduced from the
Ptolemaick Aspects, are so consciously doubtful, so obscurely delivered, and
many of them so fallible, that it has notoriously proved the scandal of
Astrology, and possessed the grave and sober breasts of the world with a conceit,
That Astrology is but a higher degree of Lieger de main, and Astrologers but
liberal Juglers. Nay so pur-blinde it is (I mean the old Astrology) that in the
very matter of the weather it self, it is fain to confess it self unable to do
any more then give a probable conjecture of it; and not without good cause,
since it is oftentimes far enough from doing that too.

Sect. 17.
Shifts; in that, when it has found the weather fall out different or contrary
to the promises or threats of their Aspects (which is no wonder, for many times
there is above a Months difference between the apparent and true Aspects; as
for example, the, which our Almanacks this year all say happens about the
latter end of May, really falls about the Tenth day of April, and was no doubt
the cause of that cold, rainy weather that then happened; to say nothing of the
^, that happened two or three days before, as they shall find who will take
the pains to calculate this easier way) and not only the weather, but other
accidents too; it has been forced to introduce a number of whimsical Aspects
(as Semisextiles, Tredeciles, Quintiles, Biquintiles, Octiles, Vigintiles,
Quincunces, Quindreiles, Deciles, Semiquadrates, Sesquiquadrates, and the like)
not so much to keep the other five old ones company, as to furnish it ready
with a good and bad Aspect, that so it may make either (as occasion serves) the
Father of fair or foul weather.

Sect. 18.
To the foregoing reasons we shall add another, although but a weaker, That
the truth of this doctrine of Aspects is wonderfully confirmed by observation,
which should have been more particular and exact, had not my profession so
strictly engaged engaged me to a daily and conscientious attention upon it:
For, having calculated the places of the Planets (Minerva aliquanto crassiore,
I confess for want of time to altar my Tables) in relation to the as Center for
some Months past; I found the events all the way very audibly to answer my
expectations, even at such time when they were dumb, or gainsayed the Aspects
in the Almanacks. Let him that lists, make trial to satisfy his mind by his
own observation; and he will (I dare confidently warrant him) find that this
is truth which I tell him, besides an additional recompense for his pains.

Sect. 19.
If any one ask how it should come to pass that Haly, Guido, and many
Astrologers both before and since, never lighted on this way. His answer must
be, That they all received and were sincerely persuaded of the old System, and
upon this persuasion sat down and sought no further; whereas this is a
Consectary of the new. And

Sect. 20.
If he ask again how the Ancients thus erring both in the kind and time of the
true Aspects, could come to know so well, not only the nature of the Planets,
that some are benevolent, as and; some malevolent, as and; and some of a middle
nature, as the other three, but also of the Aspects, that some are frowns, as
and; some smiles, as and, etc. His answer is ready for him, That it is most
probable they came to this knowledge by those Aspects which they had each to
other, when they were at or near or of the, as also by their or to the himself;
which Aspects (as I told you) differ, some very little, and some nothing at all
in time from the true Aspects. As for example, it might so fortune that and
might be in, near about the time (that is, within a day or two) of his
conjunction with the, and at that conjunction they might observe cold, missing,
rainy weather to happen. Hence they gathered, that (consideratis considerandis)
was the cause of a cold mis^ing rain. And so in others, not that I think this
uncertain guide (blind on one eye, and pur-blinde on the other) could lead
them into a perfect and infallible knowledge of their influence; for I am
persuaded, that in some matters they will be found very wide: And what those
matters are, this that I here propose is the most likely way to discover.

Sect. 21.
This that I speak touching the places and Aspects of the Planets to be
altered, I would have to be understood not only to be altered in Almanacks for
the weathers sake, but likewise in all figures, whether Horary, Revolutional,
or Genethliaque, and all other Judgments whatsoever depending upon Aspect or
Direction. For it is not to be doubted, but that it will at length appear, That
the greatest part of that batch of essential and accidental Dignities and
Debilities, as House, Exaltation, Triplicity, Term, Face, Detriment, Fall,
Peregrinity, Reception, Conformity of Hain and Quarter, combustion, in centro,
and the like; together with part of Fortune, life and death, and the divisions
severally of the Houses and Signs, deserve no other place but to be ranked
among those Shifts which I spoke of before, being invented for the same end, as
is probable enough.

Sect. 22.
And since I have been hitherto so to bold to correct that Astrology which has
been received by all Mathematicians till now: I shall venture a little further
in the prosecution of it, seeing there are other things fit to be considered in
Astrology which are not, because men generally hold Authority to be reason.

Sect. 23.
First then let the Aspects of those Planets whose Orbs are immediately
contignate, be ranked in a degree of more powerful, because Vis unitior fortius
agit: such are the Aspects of and, and, and, and, when she is opposite to the,
^ and, and the, when she is about the change; and and. And as the Orbs of the
configurated Planets are farther asunder or nearer together, so let their
Aspects be accounted less or more forcible.

Sect. 24.
Secondly, Let the Aspects of the with the other Planets be little reckoned
upon (unless in the cases abovenamed) since they move about diverse centers, and
their Aspects therefore are properly not Aspects, but seeming so: The most
considerable thing in the motion of the is her age, or relation to the.

Sect. 25.
Thirdly, Let no Astrologer henceforward disparage the fortune of his Native,
because his Almuten is stationary or retrograde, nor flatter it any thing the
more because he is direct; seeing these passions are not real, but (as they are
fitly called) Phenomenon: But let him rather judge by the Planets Apogaeosis,
Perigaeosis, Hypergaeosis, and Hypogaeosis his culmination, his rising and
setting, his Northern or Southern Declination and Latitude, things not hitherto
much regarded.

Sect. 26.
Fourthly, (but herein I give but my judgment) whereas our now-Astrology
begins the year at the his entrance into on this side of the Equator, and
erects its figure of Revolution for that time; it seems more congruous to begin
it in December, when the enters; and for this reason, because at that point of
time the has just finished his furthest Southern progress, and begins to come
toward us again, from that time (to use the common Argument) instilling life
by degrees into the Plants of the Earth by his approach; which, though it be
most palpable in March, when he enters, yet has it a being and measure while
he is in, and though be the birth of vegetables, yet is their conception.

Sect. 27.
Fifthly, for the very same reason whereas Astrologers accommodate always their
Scheme to the time of exclusion, and by that judge of the future lot of the
Native; it would better agree with reason (me thinks) to apply it to the time
of the conception (if it may be known) because that is most properly the first
instant of being: for such is in many things our stupidity, that we think a
thing is not, because we cannot see it be. And

Sect. 28.
Lastly, for the more full assurance and attaining to perfection in Judgment
of the weather, I could wish that a course might be contrived (if it were
possible) for observing the weather in some place under or near the Equator,
and in the same Longitude with London, where there are the same noons, nights,
mornings and evenings (such as are Axum, Mina or Biamba in Guinea, in 5 or 6
degrees of North Latitude) and that for half a year or more (places near the
Equator I choose, because ob propinquitatem astrorum vim citius purius and
evidentius sentiunt) while the like observations are made at London at the same
time and for by the same space; that by the collation of these Observations
(together with the Principles here delivered) that dark Riddle of Nature may be
solved. And

Sect. 29.
Here, by being so near, I shall take occasion to presume little farther, and
tell some Astrologers who account it their glory to have their hearers tremble
at their Oracles, that they betray both their own credit, and (as in them lies)
the truth of Gods Word, by telling the world that this Eclipse past in March,
and that other to come in 1654. are certain Signs of the day of Judgment: For
(though it be true that Eclipses of the (as we call them) are more dreadful and
effectual to us, then those of the; for this reason, because the one sort are a
privation of original Light, the of other a derivative only, yet) seeing that
every year there happen sometimes two, sometimes three, sometimes more, but
never fewer Eclipses, visible in one Horizon or other, though our own be no
witness of them; the World by their Logic would have been by this time
dissolved a hundred times over and over. And by this means too we can expect no
less, then that credulous and cavilling heads, when they shall have survived
that other Eclipse as well as this, and shall see the Universe in statu quo,
notwithstanding these outrageous fantasies had turned all into ashes, will be
apt enough to think, That sacred Prophecies are us empty Terrors, as those bold
Sooth-saying; and, That doomsday is but a dream. A help which in these days we
need least, since too many already have leaped into Hell without this staff.
That the end shall be, is an Article of the Catholic Faith; but when it shall
be (since the Ephemerides of Heaven speaks nothing of it; and not only the
Stars of the Caelum Empiraeum know nothing of it, but the Son of Righteousness
himself confesses as much for them and himself too) is more then curiosity to
ask, more then madness to determine, and more then folly to believe.

Sect. 30.
Astrologers in general take it upon trust from the Ancients, that Eclipses
operate not presently, but after a time, and content themselves with their
Authority: But the thing is so adverse to reason, that it might justly be
suspected to have been brought into Astrology upon the same score, and for the
same reason that those other ceits were mentioned before in the 17 and 21
Sections. Indeed (let me not wrong any man) some of the Science are doubtful,
that this Maxim is not so sound as ancient.

Sect. 31.
Many particular things I have omitted, which might have pertinently been
summoned in, but dismissed they are, because (being consequents of that which
has been generally laid down) they are hard at hand, and will quickly hear
whenever discourse shall call to them to answer: And prolixity is vain, but
then most of all, when it is not certain that the thing it self simply is
accepted.

FINIS.

