A True DISCOVERY Of the Ignorance, Blindness, and Darkness Of those Who are
called Magistrates about Carlisle in Cumberland, who call Light Darkness, and
Truth Error, and judge them blasphemers who are sent of the Lord to declare the
eternal word of truth amongst them, but the Lord has made himself manifest in
the hearts of his people, and opened their eyes here in the northern parts,
whereby they plainly see the Tyranny, Oppression, and Cruelty of those who are
called Magistrates and Rulers, who do imprison the servants of the most high
God, for declaring against sin and abomination, held up in Markets and
Steeple Houses, and so they that depart from iniquity and stand in obedience to
the Commands of the Lord, makes himself a prey to that generation; but the Lord
is risen for Sions deliverance, all Praise and Glory be to him for evermore. J.
C.

LONDON, Printed for G. Calvert, 1654.

A true discovery of the Ignorance, Blindness, and Darkness, of those who are
called Magistrates about Carlisle in Cumberland.
HIm whom the world calls George Fox, was moved of the Lord God of Heaven and
Earth, to go into Cumberland, and the Lord let him see he had a people in it,
and was moved to go into Carlisle, and was moved to go into the Market, and
stepped upon the side of the Cross, and a grief came upon him to see the deceits
and filthiness that the people lived in, and he was moved to bid them lay away
all deceitful Merchandise, and cozening and cheating, and bad them repent for
the judgment day of the Lord is coming, and other words as he passed up the
streets; afterward he was moved to go up to the Castle to speak to the
soldiers to show them where their Teacher was, and their condemnation was the
light of Christ that hated it; then upon; the first day he was moved to go to
the Steeple-house, and he stayed till the Priest had done; and the Priest
passed aaway, and then the rude multitude rose, and there was a cry, Down with
the Roundheaded rogues.

ANd upon the second day of the week, the Magistrates thereabouts, they sent
for him the said George, and examined him, and sent him to prison, as the
examination follows,

Oh the oaths that is in the Land, the Land mourns because of oaths and
fighters, strikers and drunkards, and all manner of wickedness, so that men if
they can but have a kind of a custom of preaching and telling what the
Prophets and Apostles spoke, And to have a fellow to have so much in the year
to read it and expound it, or preach it as they call it, and people to come
once a week to hear him, so then after, some to the Alehouse drinking, and
some fighting and swearing and cursing, when many has been moved of the Lord
to go into their Assemblies, and to speak what they have been moved of the Lord
to speak in the time of their speaking, some striking with Bibles, some with
fists, some with stones, and some haled to the stocks and before Magistrates,
and so to prison, and say they have broken Queen Mary's Law, which Law guarded
all the Papists and Jesuits, which Law guards the Priests in England now, so
then you are under the popish act and his power, which is to be condemned with
the unlimited power which power should limit the spirit of the mighty God of
Heaven and Earth, who is setting up his own Law, who will give liberty to the
righteous seed, I am moved to warn you to take heed how you make Laws to limit
the holy Spirit of God, if you do, God will turn his sword against you, and cut
you down.

A friend of them whom the world calls Quakers, when he was brought before the
Rulers and Magistrates, they asked him what was his name, and he said it was
hid from the world, and the world knew it not, and they asked him what his name
was, and he said they should never know it, and then he was free to tell them
what the world called him, else he saw their deceit. And he asked whether they
should overcome sin as long as they were here upon the Earth, and they said no:
so then he put them among the Papists in the Purgatory after death.

The Examination and Accusation of Geo. Fox.
THe Accusation of George Fox, being the name as the world calls him by, late
of Drayton in Leicestershire, taken at Carlisle the first of August, says, as
the world says, He was born in Leicestershire, and that he is in perfect
memory at this time, and that he has attained to perfection, and that he has
been in Heaven, and that there is but one Son of God, and that he is risen and
speaks to us now here, and that he does not commit sin, for he that is born
of God sins not, neither can he have any remorse for sin, he that is born of
God neither can he, because he is born of God and the seed of God remains in
him, and that the Saints upon the Earth does judge the hearts, and that Thomas
Cresters did sin in tempting him, by propounding some Questions to him. And he
says, That the Bible is a Decsaration of the word of God, and not the Word,
but God is the Word, and that which he speaks is true Scripture, and there is
but One, and that which he speaks is Truth and Eternal, you shall witness it,
speaking to Wilfro Lawson and others then present. And being demanded why he
came into the place, he said he was moved of the Lord of Heaven and Earth to
speak to the Consciences of men, and that particularly the words that he did
speak did harden Thomas Cresters heart, and that he now sees the face of God as
well as the faces of them that were present at this Examination, he being asked
why he continued. in the meeting place after he was wished to depart, he said,
Whether is it better to obey God or man, by the means to avoid tumuits and
disorder, being demanded likewise whether he would stay in this place, he says
he must stay lo long as his Fathers Will is: And when I began to declare
against the deceits of the Priests, and how they acted contrary to Christ, I
heard, Make him a Mittimus. And what I was moved of the Lord to come thither
for, where every one might have his Teacher, and that in all Consciences should
witness me eternally.

The Rulers wives were the first that persecuted in the Steeple-house, and
stirred up the rude multitude.

A Prisoner of the Lord at Carlisle, and standing accused for witnessing forth
that which the Saints witnessed. And having a cloud of Scriptures to maintain
nhe same, that the ignorant and simple may see that it was the righteous seed
that ever suffered by the unrighteous seed of evil doers which suffers so.
Accusation 1.
ANd for that I am accused for saying I was in Heaven, which I have many
witnesses in the Scriptures as follows, Paul said he was caught up into the
third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12.21. And David says, Whom have I in Heaven but thee,
Psalm. 73.25. And thou have made us sit together in heavenly places, Behold I
looked, and behold a door was opened in Heaven, Rev. 4.1. And the seventh Angel
sounded there was great voices in Heaven, Rev. 11.15. And I saw another Angel
fly in the midst of Heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them
that dwell upon the earth, saying with a loud voice, Fear God and give glory to
him, for the hour of his judgments is come, Rev. 14.6, 7. And I saw another
sign in Heaven great and mavelous, Rev. 15.6, 7. And after I saw these things
I heard a voice of much people in Heaven saying, Hallaluiah salvation and glory
and honor, and power unto the Lord our God: now if any come to witness this
fulfilled, ye imprison them, and so would ye do to John if he were here, and so
be witness against your selves, that ye are in the same generation that ever
persecuted, for John and the Apostles was persecuted with the same generation.

Accusation 2.
Ye accuse me for confessing the Son of God and saying, I am the Son of God, as
many as received him to them he gave power to become the sons of God, which
were born not of blood nor of the will of the flesh, nor of man but of God,
Joh. 1.12, 13. and must not the son which is born of God and not by the will of
man speak, Behold what manner of love is this, that we should be called the
sons of God, Therefore the world knows us not, because it knows him not,
and marvel not my brethren if the world hate you, we know that we have passed
from death to life, because we love the brethren, the world ever hated the son
of God, 1 John 3.1, 2, 13, 14. And we know we are of God, and the whole world
lies in wickedness, and we know that the Son of God is come, and has given us
an understanding that is true, and we are in him that's true, even in his son
Jesus Christ, this is the true God and eternal life, 1 John 5.19, 20. God
called Israel his son, Exodus 4.22. and the son of God was an Israelite indeed,
in whom there was no guile, Psalm. 2.7. Thou art my son this day have I begotten
thee. And Isa. 9.6. unto us a son is given, A virgin shall bear a son and this
is my well-beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, no man knows the Son but the
Father, neither knows any man the Father save the Son, and him to whomsoever
the Son shall reveal him, and where he is revealed must he not speak, no man
has seen God at any time, the only begotten son which is in the bosom of the
Father, he has declared him, where this son is made manifest, declares the
Father now, which no man can, for he has not seen God, and he that has the
Son has life, and he that has not the Son has not life; and here you have
cleared your selves from God.

Accusation 3.
I said I saw Gods face: The Lord spoke to Moses face to face as a man speaks
to his friend, Exodus 33.11. and might not he confess it, now if any confess he
sees the face of God you imprison them, showing ye take counsel against the
Lord and against his Anointed. And Jacob whose name was changed Israel, saw God
face to face, Genesis 32.30. And might not he confess it where Jacob or Israel is
risen sees the same as he saw, but Esau does not, but seeks to slay Jacob, now
Esau who was a fornicator and a profane person, who for one morsel of meat
sold his birthright, for the lust, and all who lives in the lust, fornication
and profaneness are in the same nature now, and such are they that persecutes
Jacob and Israel now which sees God face to face, and here the Scripture is
fulfilled, And Job said I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now
my eyes see thee; and must he deny that he saw God. Now he who confesses he sees
God ye imprison, ye show your selves to be in the generation that ever
persecuted the righteous seed in all ages and generations, which seed is
Christ. Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made, he says not to
seeds as of many, but to one and to thy seed which is Christ, as if there be
10000 one seed which is Christ in all, and must not this seed speak, or the
seed of the serpent? Whether Christ or the Serpent? And if Christ be in you the
body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is life, because of righteousness;
and the pure in heart sees good. And ye have showed forth your corrupt hearts.

Accusation 4.
Because I said I did not commit sin, he that believes is born of God,
whosoever is born of God does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him,
and he cannot sin because he is born of God, in this the children of God are
manifest and the children of the devil, for this purpose the Son was made
manifest to destroy the works of the devil, where the son of God is not made
manifest, the works of the devil are standing, and he that sins has not
seen nor known him, Cain was that wicked one which slew his brother, and
wherefore did he slay him, because his works were evil, and his brothers
righteous: now thou Cain appears against the righteous seed where it is brought
forth, the second birth, 1 John 3. he that is dead is free from sin, now if we
be dead with Christ we shall also live with him, knowing that the old man is
crucified with him, that the body of sin should be destroyed, that henceforth
we should not serve sin, being then made free from sin ye became the servants
of righteousness, but now being made free from sin and become servants to God,
ye have your fruit unto holiness and the end everlasting life, Romans 6.18, 20,
22. ye are circumcised with the Circumcision made without hands, in putting off
the body of sin of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ, but ye are not in
the flesh but in the spirit, if so the spirit of God dwells in you, now if
any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his, and if Christ be in
you the body is dead because of sin, and must not this Christ speak where he is
made manifest, and kill the body of sin, which Christ is but one yesterday to
day and for ever, and is there any Christ but this which kills the body of sin,
and Christ in you the hope of glory.

Accusation 5.
As the same Christ as ever was made manifest.

Christ said to his Disciples I will come again to you, that your joy may be
full, the same Christ that suffered, and when he is come which the Pharisees
and Jews will not have to rule and speak, which ruled over the Disciples and
spoke to them, and taught them, and when he is come again must he not speak?
and where he is made manifest, and be King and rule; That Christ that dyed at
Jerusalem, and, if it be any other Christ but that Christ, he is Antichrist,
for Christ is but one in all his Saints, the same Christ yesterday to day and
for ever. And Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me, for it was that Christ that
was risen that said he was persecuted, he is the Lamb slain from the foundation
of the world, I was in prison, and I was sick, and ye visited me not, hungry
and naked and ye clothed me not, but as much as ye did it not to one of these
little ones ye did it not unto me. And its the spirit of your Father that
speaks in you, and except ye have the same spirit, that raised up Christ from
the dead ye are none of his. And if you have the same spirit must not that
spirit speak Christ in you the hope of glory, which is the mystery which is hid
from Ages and Generations, but now is made manifest the same Christ as ever
was, and must not this Christ speak where he is made manifest, or must he be
dumb? The son of perdition in man which is exalted above all that is called
God, he would not have the one Christ to regn and speak which is in all his
Saints, who is the head of the man, and must not the head of the man speak but
where the Prince of the Air rules, and the Son of perdition above all that is
called God, they have a prison to put Christ into where he speaks, who disobeys
the light of Christ in them, and imprisons it, they are the hypocrite
Pharisees, Rulers and chief Priests, which under color and profession of
Christ and God, yet they are the enemies to the Son of God and imprisons him
thus, where he is made manifest, and they that were then against Christ, they
are the same against him now in Nature, for Christ to day yesterday and for
ever, is witnessed.

Accusation 6.
Because I said the Bible was not the word of God, God is the Word, Joh. 1.1.
it is but a declaration of the Word, and the word was God, and the word was
made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, This was not the Letter, and the Letter says
the word is sharper then a two-edged sword, he does not say the Bible is
sharper then a two-edged sword, Heb. 4.12. And Jeremiah says the word is as a
hammer and a fire, but he does not say the Letter is a hammer and a fire, but
the Letter says the Word is so, so you blaspheme in saying the Bible is the
Word, and sets it up before God who is the Word, and was before the Letter was.

Accusation 7.
Because I said I had no remorse for sin, and that the Saints judged the hearts.

He that is born of God sins not, what remorse for sin can there be in him,
which does not commit sin, love thinks no evil, so it cannot have remorse for
that it thinks not, and a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, and as he
is so are we in this present world, and he that does righteousness is
righteous, even as he is righteous, Heb. 10.17, 18. Their sins and iniquities
will I remember no more, now where remission is there is no Sacrifice for sin,
and here you show your selves ignorant of the Scripture, as you may, 1 Cor.
14.24.25. Job 21.27.

Christ says judge not by outward appearance but with righteous judgment: and
the Apostle says the Saints shall judge the world, and Solomon says he has
set the work in their hearts, Hos. 4. they set their hearts on iniquity, there
he judged their iniquity, Ezekiel Judges the heart, 14.13. the Lord let him see
their hearts, Stephen judged their hearts, Act. 7. and here you show your
selves ignorant of the Scripture and the life that gave them forth.

Examination 8.
And whereas I said my words hardened Cresters heart, which the event of it did
show forth, when the Apostles did speak of the things concerning the Kingdom of
God, diverse were hardened and believed not, but speak evil of that way, Act.
19.8, 9. As you do now, is this Scripture fulfilled, and was not Cresters and
the rest hardened, Pharoah-like, who imprisoned the just for telling the truth.

Accusation 9.
Because I said I was perfect, Noah was perfect in his Generation, Genesis 6.9.
And that ye stand perfect and complete in the will of God, for by one Offering
he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified, The Apostle said he spoke
wisdom among them that were perfect, as many as are perfect be thus minded, the
Apostle did not bid imprison them, now see how contrary you walk to Scripture
rule, who imprisons him that says he is perfect, if they which gave forth the
Scriptures were here, you would imprisom them; and Christ says be you perfect
as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect, and every one that is perfect
must be as his Lord, and as he is so are we in this present world, Coll. 4.12.
Heb. 10.4. 1 Cor. 2.9. Phil. 3.15. Matthew. 5.48.

And for saying there was but one son of God.
The Son of God is but one in all the Saints male and female, Christ all in
all. And the son it is that makes free, and all that is made free by this son,
and all that has the Son of God has life, and all that has not this Son of
God has not life, and here you show that you are ignorant of the Scriptures
and of this Christ this Son of God which you have long professed in words that
makes so many Sects amongst you but, now persecutes him and imprisons him where
he is manifest, why persecutest thou me, says Jesus? for them that witnessed
Jesus was brought out of the Jewish Synagogues and Temple, and they haled them
out and persecuted them as you do no now who witnessed the substance. And they
must come of the Priests and witnessed the unchangable Priesthood Christ Jesus,
so now they who do witness the unchangeable Priesthood, and are brought of the
worlds Assemblies which has the form, and to them holds forth the power, such
as are haled forth of the Synagogues and imprisoned, with you who have the form
as your Fathers had.

And for that which was said, the Son of God spoke to them there and is risen.
Where the Son of God is made manifest must he not speak, here you have showed
forth your selves, he that is born after the flesh persecutes him that is born
after the Spirit and persecntes him, and prisons him, and here you yave showed
that you prison the son of God, here see if your Laws be not your Wills as the
Jews was against Christ, and be ye witnesses against your selves, know ye not
that Christ is in you except ye be reprobates.

And as for saying Thomas Crester tempted him, did not they who was out of the
Truth tempt the son of God, who had the form of the Prophets and Holy men of
God, conditions but not the life as you have now, the form of Christ the
Prophets and Apostles, for had you had the life of Jesus Christ you would have
owned him whom you persecuted, but kept peace, or had you owned the Law of God
which was made for sinners, you would not have imprisoned the just who in love
for your souls good came to declare the Truth to you, whom you put him under a
cruel Tyrant Jaylors hand who struck him in prison when he spoke not a word to
him.

And as for speaking to Willfro Lawson and them that was present what he spoke
was true Scripture, and the Scripture was but one, it all being given forth by
the inspiration of the Spirit, and the Spirit is but one that gave it forth,
and the holy Ghost is but one, which the holy men of God was moved to speak it
from: now you that have not this Spirit and the holy Ghost, persecute them who
are in the one Life, and with the one Spirit, owns it to be one, and such as
you persecute them that witness it, as your fathers did, which gave it forth.

To the light which Christ has enlightened every one of you withal I speak
which lets you see your evil deeds, which you love it, it will bring you to
repentance of what you have done, which light will guide your minds up to God,
which if you hate it, you hate God and Christ, then this light is your
condemnation, and to you this is true Scripture, and the light in your
conscience will witness what I speak: for you that hate it, hate me, but it is
no marvel, for the world ever hated the son of God where he was made manifest,
as you may read in John, there let the Scripture it self judge you.

And as for saying, He was moved of the Lord to speak to that in the
consciences of men, Holy men of God spoke as they was moved by the holy Ghost:
and the Ministers of God are made manifest to that of God in man's consciences.
And here again you have cleared your selves from the holy Ghost and the
Ministers of the Spirit, which ministers to the spirit in prison. Oh that ever
men should profess the Scripture, and persecute the life where it is made
manifest! but no other fruit is looked from such trees, but the Lord is coming
to hew down all tree that have cumbred the ground, but with the life that gave
forth the Scriptures, shall you all be judged that act contrary to that in your
conscience: for to that I speak, and that is it which shall witness me, and
condemn you that hate it.

As for saying, It was better to obey God and man: Did not the Apostles ask the
same question when they was brought before Magistrates, which witnessed forth
Christ: and they was haled out of the Synagogues, and Prisoned, and haled
before Magistrates: And have not you Magistrates showed your selves to be in
the same nature, to prison and persecute, and slander the innocent: And let all
see that you have acted contrary to the Scripture, and that your wills would be
obeyed, who prisons him that does obey God, and let the Scripture it self judge
you.

And for asking him, How long he could stay in that place? his Answer was, As
long as his Fathers will was. And there again you do show you are acting
contrary to the Scripture and the Apostles doctrine who taught the people to
say, If God will: and to stand in his will let the Scripture it self judge you.
And for saying to avoid disorder where is the power, that is, terror to evil
doers, where is the Authoty that keeps in order: Oh for shame never profess
your selves to be Magistrates, had you heard him spoken or acted any thing
contrary to the Law, then your Law might have been said upon, but you, but you
prisoned him contrary to Law, but only your own wills, so the just Law of God
will take hold upon you, and vengeance is the Lords, and he will repay it.

A Discovery of the present practice of the Profession in ENGLAND.
OH England, thou that have professed the Scripture, that which Moses wrote,
the Law, that which the Prophets which was sent of the Lord spoke forth; that
which John Baptist preached, which was a burning and shining light; that which
Christ Jesus, the substance of all, when he was upon earth, and that that he
spoke after his Resurrection, and that that the Apostles spoke, which was sent
of him to preach unto all Nations: And thou makes a Profession of what the
Apostles wrote to the Saints of God, which was come out of the world, and which
was not of the world, of whom the end of the world was come: And of them that
was come to the General Assemblies of the Firstborn, which are written in
heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made
perfect; all these you make a profession of in words, and your Teachers give
meanings to them with their carnal minds of the outward Letter, which was
spoken from the life: For those that did speak them did possess and enjoy what
they spoke, but you are ignorant of the life of them; for where the life of
them is made manifest, them you do persecute, beat, and stock, and hail to
prison, as all your generation of professors of an outward thing ever did, who
knew nothing of the inward, O be ashamed and blush, and tremble before the Lord
God, who has so long worshipped the beast, and given all your glory and honor
to the beast, not knowing the living God, nor the first principle that leads to
life. And that your Leaders and Teachers denies the light, which Christ Jesus
says he has enlightened every one that comes into the world with all. And that
the power of the Lord which causes trembling and quaking, which all the holy
men of God that ever heard the voice of God, which is terrible, which shakes
the earth, ever witnessed while the earth was standing in them. And this you
call Impostures and Delusions, and of the Devil, which makes manifest that you
know nothing of God, nor never heard his voice, nor seen his face. Oh woeful and
miserable is your condition, which wars against the living God, your condition
is more miserable then any that ever went before you. You say, you have the
word of God, and that which you call your word is a Declaration of the eternal
Word, which Christ and the Apostles spoke forth. Christ Jesus said, I go and
prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive you unto my self, that
where I am, there you may be also: Jesus Christ says, I am the resurrection
and the life; and he said, Glorify thy son, that thy son also may glorify
thee, and as thou have given him power over all flesh, that he may give eternal
life to as many as thou have given him: Now if any come to witness the
Resurrection of the dead or eternal life, or witness Christ come again, or the
Holy Ghost, as the Apostles did, or witness the Son of God made manifest, him
you beat, stock, stone, imprison, hale before Magistrates, persecute as
vagabonds and wanderers, and many says, that whosoever kills them, they do God
good service; and there the Scripture is fulfilled on you: And see now what
your faith is, in this you call your word, when you do not believe it, when you
see it fulfilled; nay, ye are more cruel then the Scribes and Pharisees was,
which crucified Jesus Christ; for they looked for a Christ, because the
Prophets had prophesied on him, but when he came they did not know him; but
asked him, If he was the Christ: but now you profess Christ come in the flesh,
and Christ's Resurrection, and the Resurrection of the body, as the Scripture
mentions, and you say, it is so, because the Letter says it is so, though you
know nothing of the Resurrection of the dead, but denies the first principle,
the light that leads to life, and to the Resurrection; and death reigns in you
that has passed over all men, and you are looking without you, saying, Lo here
is Christ, and lo there, contrary to Christ's Command, and there that prophecy
of Christ is fulfilled upon you, who says, the Kingdom of heaven comes not
with observations, but the kingdom of heaven is in you; and you are persecuting
them whom Christ has enlightened, and who witnesses the Scriptures as as they
speak, who bears testimony to the truth of them. And here you are found liars,
and sayers, but not doers, as the Scribes and Pharisees were that Christ cried
woe against; and here you are without all example or president that ever was
since the creation, that a people should profess a thing and persecute and
imprison those that possesses the same that you profess: And here you are
above all cruelty and tyranny that ever was, but you are given up to hardness
of heart, and blindness, and your Leaders and Teachers have erred from the
Lord, though they have professed the words of Christ, where it will make for
their own ends and purposes; yet they deny the light which Christ says he has
enlightened every one with that comes into the world, which is the light of the
conscience, which is in every man, which they say is natural; and here they
keep people from the first principle that leads into truth and into obedience
of the Lord. And they deny Revelations, and so denies Jesus Christ; though
Jesus Christ says, That none knows the father but the son, and he to whom he
does reveal him; and so you keep poor people strangers from the life of God:
and they deny perfection and cleansing from sin while they are here; though
Jesus Christ says, Be ye perfect, as your heavenly father is perfect; and, by
one offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified; and the
Scripture witnesses the cleansing of the Saints all along, and the perfecting
of them according to their growth, but poor people are kept in blindness and
ignorance, with harkening to their filthy inventions and blind imaginations and
meanings that they give to the Scripture, when no prophecy of it came not by
the will of man, but the Lord God of power and life is found true, and all them
are found to be liars, eternal praises be unto his name for ever: For Christ
Jesus is risen, and the Son is revealed, and the blood of Jesus Christ is
witnessed, which cleanses from all sin. And the Eternal Spirit of Life is
witnessed, which all the blind guides are ignorant of praises, praises be to
the Lord God for ever. Therefore all people every where, if you would know the
living God, hearken to the light in your consciences, which convinces you, and
lets you see sin and evil, and checks you when you do wrong, let that lead and
guide your mind and that will lead you to God, who is the Father of light, turn
your minds within, and keep close to the light in your conscience, there is
your Teacher, and that is it; and if you do not obey it, that will be your
eternal condemnation, so if you love your souls, hearken diligently unto that,
and your soul shall live; and spend not your money for that which is not bread,
nor go not after your blind Guides, for they know not what the soul is, nor
where it is, but one says, this is the soul; another says, that is the soul;
nor none of them knows that they have a soul, nor cannot witness a living soul,
but they are them that makes merchandise of souls. Therefore beware of them, as
you love your souls and go not after them, now you have time prize it, and if
you love the light which Christ has enlightened you withal, you love your
souls: and if you hate this light which would keep your minds up to God, you
hate your souls.

IF any one in Westmerland or Cumberland, or elsewhere, that owns the truth,
have a love to Christ, and owns his light which he has enlightened every one
that comes into the world with all, and has a love to God; and are not
satisfied in the things of God, with him whom the world calls George Fox has
spoken and declared forth, let them declare it, and publish it in writing; and
not to backbite nor lie, nor persecute in secret, this I demand and command of
you all in the presence of the living God, as you will answer it in the
presence of the living God. For the exaltation of the truth, and the
confounding of the deceit, is this given forth, that truth may be exalted, and
deceit confounded, to that of God in the Consciences I speak, declare or write
it to any of them whom you call Quakers, that truth may be exalted, and all
things come to the light which Christ has enlightened every one with that comes
into the world: and that nothing should be hid in darkness, prisons or holes,
or corners, that all things may come to the light of Christ, and tried with the
light of Christ: this was I moved of the Lord to write forth, to be set on the
Crosses in Westmerland, and elsewhere: To the light of Christ in you I speak,
that none of you may speak evil of the things of God you know not, lest you be
found fighters against God, and the hand of the Lord be turned against you, and
not to act contrary to the light that gave forth the Scriptures.

FINIS.

