THE Church Defended, AGAINST Mr. SKINGLE's Assize-Sermon AT HERTFORD. IN A
LETTER to a FRIEND. By a True Lover of the Orthodox Clergy.

LONDON, Printed in the YEAR MDCXCIX.

SIR,
YOU expect my Sentiments of this Sermon, and the Author. I have fairly
considered the Subject, Style, Arguments, and Design; have amended all the
Printer's Errata, (that the Discourse might appear with the best Advantage:)
But found many more and worse of his own, that require Correction. To deal in
reality with my Friend, and all Mankind, I must say, it has very little or
nothing of any Value, except its Brevity: And this, one would think, but a
slender Reason to recommend it to the long-winded and long-ear'd Presbyterians;
the only Persons (I Am told) that give any tolerable Allowance of it. The
Judges, and other Learned Men, saw no more Cause to thank him, than I do: And
the Dissenters, who came to listen at the Doors and Windows, though extremely
pleased with this Jingling Piece of Vulgar Oratory, are herein represented as
Men of the smallest Reason and Judgment in the World, by making and continuing
a Separation from the Church, upon no material or substantial Ground; only for
some fanciful, extraordinary, scrupulous NOTHING. I have no Acquaintance with
the Author, and therefore do not pretend to give a Character of him: But if we
may believe some serious Persons, he deserves no very honorable Esteem; though
it is to be hoped, that he does not live so loosely as he writes. But, perhaps
the Saints may think his Sermon a sufficient Proof, that he has a Conscience
void of Offense both toward God and toward Man, since he inveighs so
zealously against the Vices of the Age: Yet for my part, I (who differ from
them in much more weighty Matters) cannot agree with them in this. For, although
heretofore an Exemplary Conversation, and a close way of Arguing, were looked
on as necessary Qualifications in a Reformer; yet nowadays no body is so
forward to take that Office upon him, as he that wants Both. And that our
Author is guilty, at the least, of the latter of these, I think will be obvious
to every one that peruseth his Sermon with but a little more Care than it
deserves.

And that this may not seem any great Wonderment to the impartial Reader, I
shall desire him to take notice of, 1. The Impropriety of the Subject. 2. His
Illogical Proceeding. And, 3. The Impertinence and Insufficiency of his
Arguments.

The Text, Psalm. 126.3. The Lord has done great Things for us.

The Title is, REFORMATION and UNION.

Another Preacher would have chosen a more suitable Text for an Assize-Sermon;
or, at least, would have made the Body of the Discourse to agree with the Sense
of his present Subject. I don't deny Reformation and Union to be very great and
necessary Blessings; (none more desirous of them, none do more heartily
endeavor after 'em, than true Churchmen:) But he was a cunning Man, to spy
Reformation and Union in this Text. I expected to have read God's Mercy and the
Churches Duty judiciously recommended; and then, not directly, but by Inference
or Application, our Gratitude to our most admirable Benefactor, our Respect and
Obedience to the Laws of God and his Church, might more fitly be enforced from
the Words of the Psalmist, than Reformation and Union.

He begins with a Grecian Deliverance; tells not How, nor What; but applies it
to the Presbyterian Liberty. A Wonderment indeed! That this magnified Liberty,
without Restriction or Limitation, (a Liberty that opens a Door to all Error,
Heresy, and Schism; to all Irreligion, Immorality, and Profaneness; to all the
Mischiefs and Disorders in Church and State) should be looked upon as so vast a
Blessing in any Christian Government, or as a proper Means to preserve Religion
in the Life and Power of it! [Vid. Epist. Dedic.] This unbounded Liberty (after
all that can be said in its Defense) is not a more justifiable Project to this
purpose, than 'twould be to talk of securing a Vineyard by pulling down the
Fence, laying it wide open to the Mercy of Boars and Foxes; presuming that this
Liberty would civilize and soften their wild and savage Natures, render 'em so
just and inoffensive, as not to root up or tear down the Vines; merely, because
these brutish Creatures were left to their own Liberty. Our Author was not
aware of this Absurdity, or concealed all Apprehensions of Danger, from our
present Circumstances: But in a Page or two, designing to make sweet Music in
the Dissenters Ears, boldly touches again upon the same String, and joins
himself in Consort with them, page 1, 3. Their Sufferings were remembered, but
not the Cause for which they suffered, nor that of his own Suspension.

After the Grecians, he bethinks himself of the Jews, (to whom by his Text he
owed a peculiar Reference) gives this Account of them, as of the former, That
they were like Men in a Dream. Doubtless, the Preacher was so, when he
delivered this Sermon; and not well awake when he printed it. Page 2.

In the same Page we have his wise Observation, viz. That God is pleased to
work in a very eminent manner for the Welfare of his People: And when he does
so, it is their Duty to take notice of it. I would not here be mistaken, as if I
blamed him for asserting so evident Truths: That which I esteem him culpable
for, is the making of that to be but One Observation, which is so plainly Two.
But perhaps this must pass for a very excusable Mistake, being easily betrayed
into it by his Love of Union.

At Page 3. he tells us, That all the Desires and Attempts, by just and due
Methods, to make us happy, were frustrated; and the Strugglings of Honest Men
were but like those of Slaves, which ended in a more cruel Bondage. This I must
own to be a sad Truth: But, as I take it, the Persons that chiefly, if not
solely, stood in the Gap, were Churchmen. Fanatics were favored with Smiles
and Commissions, when the Members of the University were thrown out of their
lawful Possessions: And at the same time that the Bishops were committed to the
Tower, many Sectaries were received in the Closet, and into the Bosom: So that
what immediately follows, I shall assent to, though possibly with a different Aim
and Meaning from him, viz. That though we had then to do with those who went
under the Name of Protestants, yet were our Lives and Liberties in the Hands of
Violence and Oppression. I disown not our late Dangers of Popery and Slavery;
nor would I undervalue the Mercy of a Deliverance: Yet if the Nation must be
ruined or enslaved, why not by Popery, as well as Presbytery? If we are to
suffer in Life or Estate, it matters not what Religion our Executioners
profess. If a Ship be in danger of Sinking, this Scylla, or that Charybdis, are
equally Fatal, and equally to be avoided, by steering in the Middle and Safe
Way of the Church of England.

At Page 4. he presents us with a mighty Harangue in Praise of the KING; but
perhaps not with overmuch Sincerity: For, that Party which he favors, and
hopes to be favored by, have an Invincible Prejudice to Crowned Heads, and
will always follow the Bent of their own Inclinations, which will not suffer
them to show any real Kindness to Monarchy; and therefore, notwithstanding
their fulsom Flattery, They are not presently to be trusted, for fear the Sting
should still be in them, and Safety and Opportunity might Encourage them to
thrust it out.

Page 5. None more likely to have that unworthy Carriage of the Refreshed
Traveller, than Presbyterians; who kneel to the King as the Fountain of
Refreshment, yet may soon turn their Backs, when they don't need him. What Sort
of Men so Fickle, or so Inconstant? Or where can we find a more Ungrateful
People? All the Kindnesses, all the merciful Concessions showed them in former
Reigns, were interpreted as Arguments of Weakness or Cowardice in the Prince;
and the Consequence of That, is too well known, to need a Remembrance. Only
this one Thing I would not omit, N. B.
being perhaps a Secret to most Men: That after the horrible Murder of King
CHARLES the First, when all his Friends were utterly disabl'd from making any
Opposition, (that there might be a sure Work of Reformation in the Land) 'twas
Voted in Parliament, to put all the King's Friends to Death in Cold Blood; and
it was carried in the Negative only by Two. Those of the Loyal Party who
survived that Danger, lost their Estates and Liberties; and 'twas a Wonderment
they escaped so. If the Reader would know the Presbyterian-Temper at this Day,
let him look into Scotland: Lay but the Old Covenant, or Common-wealth-Mouse
before this transformed Puss of Presbytery, she cannot but return to her own
Nature, and leap at the Bait.

At Page 5. that he might show his Reading, he quotes Mr. Charnock, for what he
might have learned out of Scripture, in several Places, viz. That the
Israelites had a Regret that they were brought out of Egypt: Which puts me in
mind of that Story of the Sorbonist, who being asked, Where he read such a
Thing in the New Testament? answered, That he had read it in St. Jerome, or in
the Decrees; but, for the New Testament, he knew not what it was.

I am not fond of exposing all the Misapplications of this Man of Uses; nor of
finding Fault with any Thing, wherein the Truth was not in danger to be
mistaken. It Is strange Ill-Fortune, if a Man shoots many Arrows, not to come
near the Mark with One or Two; and the Author would be vexed to have his whole
Sermon proved a Presbyterian Cant: Yet let the Reader consider, that Truths, as
well as Lies, may be spoken in hypocrisy, 1 Timothy 4.2.

At length he comes to his REFORMATION and UNION, p. 8, 9, 10, 11.

To the First, I answer, That if our Church needs purging from her Dregs, with
all our Hearts, we desire it should be so: But then, I doubt, (without gentle
Physic) Mr. S. will not long continue in our Communion, but must sink down to
the Common-shore, amongst the worst Presbyterians: Does he, or any Man believe,
that the Dissenters have no Cause to purge out their Dregs too? I Am sure their
Lives and Principles require it; it is as much wanting among the Presbyterians,
Independents, and all other Sectaries, and more by far, than in the Church.
This Universal Reformation we daily pray for; and it would be sooner done, all
Immoralities and Profaneness would cease to a great Degree, were not the proper
Means of Reformation so strenuously opposed by our open and secret Enemies.
These are chiefly in the Fault; We must expect to be more and more vitiated and
deformed, in our Manners, to see the Nation exposed to all Mischiefs; unless we
can fancy this to be the Golden Age, wherein Men will be Good and Virtuous of
themselves, without the Force of Law and Justice to govern them. So desirable a
Blessing, I am certain, cannot belong to this evil, crooked, and perverse
Generation.

It Is not to be doubted, but there is too much Swearing practiced in the Land:
But whether the Unjustifiableness of the Sin, or our Act of Parliament against
it, has occasioned a Reformation in this Particular, I know not; but am
willing to believe, That our Gentry are less guilty of it than formerly, and
that it is now sunk to the Bottom of the People; with whom, perhaps, this
Gentleman mostly converseth; and therefore judges of the Age, by the Company
that he himself keeps. But supposing that it reigned as much as ever, yet I
don't like his Expedient for suppressing it; which is, That Parish-Officers
should be most strictly required to take notice of it. If he means, in stead of
that Method which the Parliament has prescribed, (wherein the Accuser is so
much encouraged, and the Magistrate so much threatened, if he be remiss) then, I
think, our Change would be much for the Worse: But, if he means it as an
additional Help to the Statute, I fancy, the Parliament will scarce think it
worth their while to follow his Advice, and make a New Act, rather than lose
his Expedient; when every one that will, may put his helping Hand to the
Suppressing of the Vice; which may be somewhat more useful, than an Injunction
upon Parish-Officers is like to be.

In the same Paragraph he commends a very few Gentlemen of that County, for
their Zeal in this Matter; and at the same Breath, casts a Disrespect and
Contempt upon all the rest: And yet those mighty Men of Morals, those
Church-Presbyterians, whom he designed to complement, are too well known to be
trusted, have Infirmities of this kind, and as many as their Neighbors. This
forward, dissembled Zeal, is not unlike that of a passionate Schoolmaster,
about the Year 41, who would whip his Boys for Swearing, and at the same time
often swear violently, That he had rather spare 'em for any Vice than That.

One Thing more I observe upon this Head, That among all the Vices of the Age,
he durst not so much as touch upon Schism, Pride, Malice, and Disobedience (the
daily Service offered to their God:) Sins that lie too plainly at the
Dissenters Doors; Sins of as vile a Nature, and of as dangerous Consequence, as
any he had named: But he was careful to leave These out, for fear of losing his
Design; and what That was, let the Reader judge: It Is plain, if he favors or
excuses the Practice of any Sin, in vain does he talk of a Thorow-Reformation;
unless he means by This, as one did by the Thorow-passage of a Sermon, (i. e.)
when it goes in at one Ear, and out at to other.

Page 12, 13, 14. He proceeds next to Union: By which he seems not to intend,
that the Presbyterians should (for the Sake of Christianity and Public Peace)
leave off their Self-love, Will, and Humor, and return to the Communion of the
Church; but that We should forsake our Church, and join with Them, We'll, for
once, suppose it true, That some Dissenters disagree only in the
Circumstantials of Religion; That the Matters in Dispute, are not so great as
Salvation, Heaven, Life Eternal, or the Way to these; That our Contests are
about Things of very small moment, that may either be done, or omitted, without
Sin: Which Side now, in Reason and Duty, ought to comply? Must the Mother quit
all her just Authority over her stubborn, prodigal, and rebellious Children,
and give them leave to be undutiful? submit to, and approve their Disorders?
How miserable must be the State of such an unnatural Family! And shall our
Mother the Church (this Apostolical, Uniform, Well-establish'd Church, careful
to preserve her Children in Truth and good Order) must She be ruled by the
Dissenters? break all Order and Discipline, to gratify them that delight in
Confusion, and agree in nothing else? who, had they Power to govern in
Church Matters, would not grant us Liberty to use our own Prayers; nor those
Innocent Ceremonies of Decency and Order, which they once destroyed? Ought not
they rather to recede from their private Humor and Fancies, and gladly join in
our Communion? Let any sober, modest, impartial Considerer judge fairly between
the Mother and her Children, (a most compassionate Mother, willing to forgive
and forget Offenses, and with both Hands to embrace all that are sensible of
their Errors, and return to their due Obedience.) Shall those Men that allow
our Church to be in the Right, as to all essential and necessary Points of
Religion and Happiness, venture the Ruin of the whole Family, rather than
comply in some Things, which many of 'em confess, are not worth the disputing?

Or, if by Union, he means, a kind, charitable Agreement, in yielding to each
other in a few Indifferent Things; I would know, what one Step the
Presbyterians have made toward this Union? No Offer on our Part will suffice,
to this purpose, less than the Abolition of our whole Service, Canons, and
Discipline. These Men are by many undeniable Arguments (in Conferences and
Writings) convinced, That our Doctrine, Worship, and Ceremonies are good and
lawful; They have declared so, by their Occasional Communicating in our
Churches, and getting their Sons admitted into our Society, as Deacons and
Priests, (which, if sinful, I hope they would not do.) I may add, That before
the Toleration was obtained, few were the Dissenters in most Parishes, that
came not frequently to Church, and united in our Public Worship: But now, in
stead of uniting, they strive to divide us, multiply their Schism-Houses, and
set up as many Schools of Division, as they have Gifted-Men, fitted to delude
and squeeze the unthinking People.

However, I shall next examine his Five Arguments for Union.

1. The First whereof is, Because Infallibility is not lodged with any Men.
Which Argument would do mighty well in the Hands of the most abominable
Heretic: Suppose, for the present, a Socinian; May not he, by this way of
Reasoning, plead thus for himself, to the Orthodox? You say, that Christ is
truly God, and for this Doctrine you pretend the Authority of Scripture; but
there is no Passage that you quote, which we do not expound to a different
Sense from you, and think our selves in the right: And you know, you are but
Men, and therefore may err, as well as we. Let us therefore have no more Words
about the Matter, but leave it to the Last Day to clear all Doubts. But, what
if there be no Infallibility? Will he infer from thence, that there is no
Certainty? I suppose, he is sure, that he understands some plain Texts of
Scripture; and yet, I hope, he will not pretend to be Infallible. There is
nothing, that I know of, which can hinder a Man from believing some Accounts of
what was done in former Times, though he do not esteem the most Authentic
Historian to be endued with an Infallible Spirit. And I think Matters of
Religion are capable of as good Evidence, as Matters of Fact. So that,
notwithstanding it be true, That no Man is Infallible; yet still, in a
Controverted Point, one Side may be sure, that their Adversaries are in the
wrong.

But where Reason will not serve, Authority must help: And therefore we have
the Opinion of Dr. Wake in the Case, whom he has quoted fairly, but I think to
little purpose, unless his Judgment were more weighty and valuable, than really
it is. And if I might be permitted to deliver my Thoughts, I should say, That
our Author has done the Doctor much more Honor by quoting him, than the
Doctor has done him by his Concurrence. But against his, I shall oppose the
Opinion of the London-Divines, who in their Learned Tracts concerning the
Points in Controversy, have said enough to convince all People, except the
Dissenters, and Dr. Wake. Page 12.

2. The Second Argument for Union, is Mutual Forbearance: All the Dissenters
now declare for it, as the best Expedient. To this I answer, We may and ought
to have Charity for each other, even to our most implacable Enemies: But this
alone cannot possibly unite such a Medley of differing and contrary Religions
into one Church. For, if we offer never so good and convincing Reasons, every
Man is left to his own Choice, to admit or refuse them, as he thinks fit: So
that if there wants Power and Discipline, for the Encouragement of those who do
unite, and to discourage those who refuse their Communion, they cannot long
hold together. I heartily commend a tender and moderate Use of Church Censures,
and of those Laws that are necessary for the well-governing of us all: But no
Man can frame such a Scheme of Religion, in which so many opposite Parties can
concur, if there is not something more than Mutual Forbearance, to keep the
Body in Strength and Motion. Charity should soften, but not destroy Government.

3. The Third Argument. When the Dissenters have nothing else to say for their
unreasonable Divisions, then they call themselves Weak Brethren, and would be
treated as such. But, I marvel under what Pretense they can challenge any
Privilege belonging to Them, under that Notion. They take upon them to be
Teachers of others, wiser and better than their Neighbors, the only Sober and
Godly Party, and are apt to despise all other Christians, as Ignorant and
Profane. With what Color of Reason then can it be pleaded for them, to have
any Favor or Compliance showed to their Weakness? Though they love to argue
against us from the Example of St. Paul's Condescension to the uninstructed
Jews or Gentiles; yet it is apparent, that they do not in other Cases willingly
liken themselves to those Weak Believers, or Babes in Christ. They have really
better Thoughts of themselves, would be Leaders and Masters in Israel,
prescribe to their Governors, give Laws to all others; and do prefer their own
private Opinion (which they call their Conscience) before the Judgment of the
wisest Men, or the Determination of their lawful Superiors: And if, in all
Instances, we should deal with them as weak Persons, advise them to learn their
Catechism, they would think themselves highly wronged and injured. If the
Presbyterians, and others, did in good earnest look upon themselves as weak,
that is, ignorant, wavering, half-Christians; did they think the Dislike of the
Constitutions of our Church, to be the Effect of such Weakness; they would
either be more careful to hide it, or more diligently seek out for Remedy: They
would be more modest and humble, and not so forward to judge and condemn what
they don't understand: They would not encourage one another to persist in this
their Weakness, nor breed up their Children in it, nor so zealously endeavor
to instill the same Prejudices and Mistakes into all with whom they converse.
But the Truth is, they ordinarily look upon their Opposition to the Orders of
our Church, as the Effect of an higher Illumination, greater Knowledge than
other Men have attained to. -- They rather count us Churchmen the weak
Christians, if they will allow us so much: For, otherwise, if they do not take
us for the weaker and worse Christians, why do they separate from us? Why do
they associate and combine in distinct Congregations, as being purer, more
select Christians, than others? Now, though such Persons as these, may be in
truth very weak, of little Judgment or Goodness, notwithstanding this Conceit
of themselves and their Party; yet are they not to claim the Privileges of weak
Persons, since they are fond of their Ignorance and Mistakes, against all the
Means of Conviction offered to them. They can juggle in the Case, be either
weak or strong, according as it best suits with the Argument they are managing
against us.

4. The next Argument is, about the Mischiefs which the want of such Union, as
he would have, brings. The Public is deprived of the Labors of many Learned
and Godly Men. But he would have done well to have proved, That the Public
wanted the Labors of those Persons which he sets off with such a Character:
And, if it does not, I cannot imagine why they should be sought after, since
there are so many true Sons of the Church, who deserve to be provided for in
the first place, as being superior to them in point of Obedience, and at least
equal in all other Respects. -- He goes on, and tells us, That for want of this
Union, one Side cries out PERSECUTORS! and Men of cruel and bitter Spirits! But
it is strange to hear Men talk of Persecution, when there is a Toleration; and
complain of Hardships upon the Account of Religion, when they may do what they
list. The Great Persecution therefore must be Want of Preferment: For, though the
Church may be never so blameworthy upon the Account of her Discipline, there
is no Fault to be found with her Revenues; which if they could enjoy, it is not
unlikely but they would be able to satisfy themselves pretty well with being
within the Pale of the Church. But it seems, it is a grievous Crime, That these
Choice Men have not Choice Livings; and our Clergy are doubly faulty, First,
in being Beneficed Hirelings themselves; and next, in not endeavoring, that
these Learned and Godly Men, whose Labors are so much wanted, be not made
Hirelings too.

5. His last Argument for Union, is, to consider the Nature of the Things which
are and have been in difference: That they are not Things of absolute Necessity
to Salvation. Here our Author seems to me to write Booty, and to plead against
those, whose Cause he meant to defend (as before hinted.) For, if the Matters
in Controversy be not Sinful, but of an Indifferent Nature; then I would fain
know, why our Dissenters should refuse their Obedience? For, if there must be
some Rules appointed for the Manner of the Worship of God, and for the
Maintenance of good Discipline, the Power of Making these Rules must rather lie
in them that have the Government over us, than in those, whom none besides
themselves, think to be sufficiently qualified for the Exercise of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.

If it shall be here urged, That though the Things to which Conformity is
required, be not in themselves Sinful, yet they are so to them, and therefore
they must not do them, for fear, or rather because they know they shall offend
their Consciences. In answer to this, I say, That by this Rule, the Superiors
of the Church can have no manner of Authority, of what kind soever. For, if
they command any thing contrary to Gods Laws, it is ipso facto Null; and if
they command any thing which God had before enjoined, This owes not its
Obligation to Humane Authority, but Divine. It remains therefore, that either
the Church has no Power at all, or else She can exercise it only about such
Things as do not concern the Foundations of Faith or Worship.

I have said enough to answer this short, trifling, indigested Sermon; have in
some Places spared the Author; took off my Pen, rather than lean too hard upon
him. I never blame a Clergie-man, if he should want Quickness of Wit, Vivacity
of Fancy, or the Genteel Mien and Breeding of his Neighbors: I would not
despise him, if he is no Great Scholar, (Men have their different Talents, and
not always the same Advantages to improve them: A regular, plain, honest,
sober, and sedulous Man is ever acceptable with the Best and Greatest:) But if
he turns Knave, lays aside his Duty, forgets his Solemn Oaths, his Ordination,
Canonical Obedience, Subscriptions, and Conscience; preaches unsound Doctrine,
omits or alters the Divine-Service, and makes a Conventicle of his Church,
(misrepresenting our Religion to be as uncertain, as unconcluding, as are the
wild, erroneous, disconsonant Opinions and Doctrines of the several Dissenters)
such an insincere, irregular Clergie-man (picked out of the next County, not
found in This) might, as a senseless Tool, serve to some ill Purposes; but can
be true to no Religion, does not serve, but dishonor the Church, and ought to
hear of it before the Day of Judgment. -- I advise the Author, (if he has any
Remains of Good Humor and Ingenuity) to preach or write a Recantation; and
since he is very unlucky in his own Choice, I here propose a fit Subject for him
to insist on; Isa. 44.25. -- He frustrates the Tokens of the Liars, and makes
Diviners mad; turns wise Men backward, and makes their Knowledge foolish.

Or, if this disguised Presbyterian should be called to preach at the Funeral
of any Ringleader of that Party, the Text should be, By this time he stinketh,
St. John 11. and let him leave it to his Audience to make the Application.

If he thinks fit to publish his Composures on these or any other Subjects, I
shall as readily comply with my Friend's Command, in giving my Sense of them,
as I have done of this SERMON: And if any body, that reads these Animadversions
on it, should hope to excuse the Author, by consulting the Original, I do
assure him, 'twould be but Loss of Time; and to re-print the Whole, will not be
worth the Charges of the Press. If the Dissenters think otherwise, let them
produce all the Copies secretly conveyed into their Hands, and it will appear,
that this Author is now treated with far greater Respect, Justice, and
Integrity, than he has showed to the most Primitive and Apostolical Church in
the World.

I conclude in the Words of St. Cyprian, upon 1 St. Joh. 2.19. Vid.

Nemo aestimet Bonos de Ecclesia posse discedere.

Triticum non rapit Ventus; nec Arborem solida Radice fundatam, procella
subvertit. Cypr. lib. de Simplicit. Praelat.

FINIS.

