The Seals of ARMS of the Bishops of England, etc.


A COLLECTION OF ARTICLES Injunctions, Canons, Orders, Ordinances, and
Constitutions Ecclesiastical, with other Public Records OF THE CHVRCH of
ENGLAND; Chiefly in the Times of K. EDWARD. VIth. Q. ELIZABETH. and K. JAMES.

Published to Vindicate the Church of ENGLAND and to promote Uniformity and
peace in the same.

And humbly presented to the CONVOCATION

LONDON, Printed by R. Norton for Timothy Garthwait at the Little North-doore
of St. Paul's Church 1661.

THE TABLE.
Anno Domini Page KIng EDWARD'S Injunctions. 1547. 1. Order of Communion
Service 1547. 15. Arch Bp. CRANMERS Articles of visitation. 1548. 25. Bp
RIDLYES Articles of visitation. 1550. 33. ARTICLES of Religion agreed upon in
the Convocation. 1552. 39. The Latin Edition of those Articles. 1552. 51. Q.
ELIZABETH'S Injunctions 1559. 63. The Queens Articles of visitation 1559. 235.
An ACT for Uniformity of Common Prayer. 1559. 75. Celebratio Coenae Dom. in
Funebribus. in the 2. year of the Queen. 1560. 249. Book of ORDINATION. 1559.
96. Commendatio Benefactorum. 1560. ARTICLES of Religion agreed upon in the
Convocation etc. and compared with King EDWARD the VI. Articles. 1562. 86. The
Latin Edition of those Articles. 1562. *.1. ADVERTISEMENTS for Due order about
Ministers Apparel, the Communion etc. 1564. 86. Liber quorundam CANONUM 1571.
*15. ARTICVLI Provinciae Cantuariensis 1584. 243. Capitula, sive CONSTITUTIONES
Ecclesiasticae. 1597. 37. The OATHS of Supremacy, Allegiance, Canonical
Obedience, Residence. 88. The Oath against Simony. 90. Of Abrogate HOLIDAYS in
K. HENRY the 8ths. time. 1536. 225. Proclamation against the despisers of the
COMMON PRAYER etc. 1573. 227. Proclamation against the Sectaries of the Family
of Love. 1580. 229. Proclamation against Schismatical and seditious Books and
Libels. 1588. 231. Prayers at the Healing. 223.

In K. JAMES his time.
CANONS and Constitutions in Latin. 1603. 303. PRoclamation declaring the
proceedings in Ecelesiastical Courts to be according to the Laws of the Land.
91

A PREFACE to the Reader.
OUR great Lord and Master Christ, having purchased to himself, by his precious
blood, a peculiar people, his One mystical Body the Church, sanctified it with
the washing of water by the word, that he might present it to himself a
glorious Church, holy without spot, Ephesians. 5.27. not without all spot (there is
a spot of Gods children, of sins of frailty and infirmity, which the Church as
long as she is Militant will never be without,) but without spot of malice and
wicked lewdness; such spots and blemishes as were figured by the corporal
blemishes forbidden to the Priests and their sacrifices Lev. 21. and 22.20.
spots that will make the Church as abhorred in the sight of God, as those
bodily spots made the Priests and their sacrifices unto the eyes of men;
without such scandalous spots mentioned Gal. 5.9. all the members of this one
Body may and ought to be. That the Church may preserve her self in this purity
without spot, and in this unity without division, and continue one holy Church,
as it is in our Creed, a double power and Authority is needful, as to all other
Bodies politic, so likewise to this Society of Believers, the Church; one of
jurisdiction to correct and reform those impure members by spiritual censures,
whom counsel will not win, and if they be incorrigible, to cast them out of
this holy Society, lest their leaven should leaven the whole lump, 1 Cor. 5.6.
thus to preserve the Churches purity, and again to correct and reduce to unity
the contentious troublers of the Churches peace, if it may be, by charitable
admonitions, if not, to stop their mouths Titus 1.11. not by arguments alone,
for such will never prevail upon absurd, unreasonable and obstinate men, (and
such there always will be) but by spiritual Censures, even to the casting them
out of the Churches Society, so to preserve peace and unity. Besides this power
of Jurisdiction there is necessary also for the obtaining of those two high
ends, a Legislative power to make Canons and Constitutions upon emergent
occasions. For though our great Lord has already given to his Church most holy
and wise rules and Laws for the same purposes; yet because they are general,
not descending to every particularity of time, and place, and manner of
performanee, which yet are necessary to be determined for the preservation of
public peace and unity; and because there may, at least through the
perverseness of men of corrupt minds, arise some doubts and controversies about
the sense and meaning of those most holy rules of our Lord, for the determining
of which we are not now to expect any resolution from Prophet or Oracle or
other immediate voice from heaven; it does hereupon necessarily follow that
there must be Authority left to this Church and the Governors thereof to make
new Laws upon these emergent occasions, to determine these particularities, to
decide and compose these controversies, whereby to preserve the unity of the
spirit in the Bond of Peace. Whosoever shall think that all this may be done
by friendly persuasion, or learned disputes only will find himself deceived,
as experience of all Ages has shown, and will show as long as there be men of
perverse minds and corrupt affections. Without a definitive and Authoritative
sentence, controversies will be endless, and the Churches peace unavoidably
disturbed, and therefore the voice of God and right Reason has taught, that in
matters of Controversy the definitive sentence of Superiors should decide the
doubt, and whosoever should decline from that sentence, and do presumptuously,
should be put to death, that others might hear and fear and do no more
presumptuously Deuteronomy. 17. which is to be understood mystically also of death
spiritual by Excommunication, by being cut off from the living body of Christ's
Church. It being thus cleared by reason and Gods own rule that such power is
necessary for the preserving Peace and unity, it cannot be imagined with
reason, that our great Master should deny his dear bought body such
necessaries. But not to rest upon the reason why they should be given; it may
be made to appear that de facto He has given such power to the Church, and
that by reciting his gracious Commissions granted to the Church, with his
Apostles practice and exercise of those powers, who best knowing their Lords
will and pleasure must be, by their practice, the best Interpreters of his
mind and meaning. See then, how read we? For the power of Jurisdiction, we
find a large Commission, St. John 20. As my father sent me so send I you; and
one particular of Jurisdiction there expressed, Whosoever sins you bind in
Earth, they are bound in Heaven, a sharp and dreadful sentence, worse then that
of the Sword, by so much as the death of the Soul is worse then the death of
the Body, which in obstinate despisers of that correction does too certainly
follow.

This power of spiritual censures, St. Paul calls the rod of Discipline, 1 Cor.
4. ult. By virtue of this Power and Commission, S. Paul delivers the incestuous
Corinthian to Satan, and casts him out of the Churches Communion, 1 Cor. 5. and
the same St. Paul not only exercises this Jurisdiction himself, but also
directs his son, Bishop Timothy how to behave himself, in the ordering of these
Church censures, 1 Timothy 5.19. not to receive an accusation against a Presbyter
under two or three witnesses, and when he has heard, to rebuke or censure, as
the cause requires without partiality or leaning to either side, all which
speak plainly a Tribunal erected in the Church, and acknowledged by the
Apostle, enough to prove the power of Jurisdiction. Then the Legislative of
making Laws and Constitutions for regulating manners and determining doubts and
controversies, it cannot with reason be denied to be granted in that large
Commission forecited St. John 20. As my father sent me, so send I you. For
here, committing the Government of the Church to his Apostles, our Lord
Commissions them with the same Power that was committed to him for that
purpose, when he was on earth, with the same necessary standing power that he
had and exercised as Man for the good of the Church. Less cannot in reason be
thought to be here granted, then all power necessary for the well and peaceable
government of the Church, and such a power is this of making laws; this is a
Commission in general for making laws, then in particular for making Articles
and decisions of doctrines controverted the power is more explicit and
express. S. Matthew. 28. All power is given to me, Go therefore and teach all
nations, that is, with authority and by virtue of that power that is given to
me, and what is it to teach the truth with authority, but to command and oblige
all people to receive the truth so taught, and this power was not given to the
Apostles persons only, for Christ there promised to be with them in that Office
to the end of the world, that is, to them and their successors in that Pastoral
Office, to the Apostles or Bishops that should succeed them to the end of the
world. This will appear still more clear by S. Paul Heb. 13. where, after he
had commanded them not to be carried about with diverse and strange doctrines,
he prescribes this as the preservative against such errors and inconstancy,
Obey them that have the oversight over you, and watch for your souls, obey them
in the guidance and conduct of your souls, in their determinations and
decisions about such diverse and strange Doctrine, all which supposes in those
Guides a power to govern and rule us in such doubts and controversies about
doctrines and matters of belief, an authority to determine in controversies of
faith, as our Church teaches in her 20. Article; add to this that St. Paul
tells us 1 Timothy 3.15. that the Church is the ground and pillar of truth. And
whither then should we go in doubts and controversies, for the determination of
what is truth, but to the ground and pillar of truth? For the clearer
understanding of this power in the Church, know that to this one holy Church,
our Lord committed in trust the most holy faith and the whole stock of
necessary Christian truth, therefore called the ground and pillar of truth.
This truth she must endeavor to preserve, as by stopping the mouths of
obstinate gainsaiers, so by guiding and governing the meek, but weak doubters
into the truth, by determining their doubts and controversies. Not that the
Church can make Articles of faith and obtrude them upon the members, but that
she may and must (if the true sense of faith and holy Scriptures be called in
question) declare and determine what that sense is which she has received in
trust from Christ and his Apostles, commanding under penalties and censures,
all her children to receive that sense and to profess it in such expressive
words and form as may directly determine the doubt. Thus she did in the great
NICENE Council venerable over all the Christian world, when the Arrians had
perverted by subtle controversies and questions the true sense of the Creed
concerning our Saviors Divinity; she first declared what sense of the Creed
she had received by constant tradition from the Apostles and then enjoined all
Christians to profess that sense by the word (...) of the same substance with
the Father, a word directly determining the controversy in hand. Nor did the
Christian world ever question her* Authority in this particular. And in
controversies about doctrines, where she has received no such clear
determination of either part from Christ and his Apostles, she has power to
declare her own sense in the controversy and to determine which part shall be
received and professed for truth by her members, and that too under
Ecclesiastical penalty and censure, which they accordingly are bound to submit
to, not as an infallible verity, but as a probable truth, and rest in her
determination, till it be made plain by as great or a greater authority, that
this her determination (...) our, and if it shall appear to any of the members
to be an error, or if they shall think it so to be by the weight of such
reasons as are privately suggested to them, yet are they still obliged to
silence and peace, (where the Decision of a particular Church is against the
Doctrine of the Universal) not to profess in this case against the Churches
determination, because the professing of such a controverted truth is not
necessary, but the preservation of the peace and unity of the Church is. This
is not to assert infallibility in the Church, but authority. The sentence shall
bind to submission though the Superiors may err in the sentence. Thus God
ordered it Deuteronomy. 17. that in doubts the inferior were to stand to the decision
and sentence of the Priests and the Judge, and yet their judgment was not
infallible, (...) the whole assembly, the chiefest Senate might err, and sin
through ignorance, and a sacrifice is appointed for the expiation of their
error Lev. 4.13. Better that inferiors be bound to stand to such fallible
judgment (as to quiet submission) in such kind of controversies as before
mentioned, then that every man be suffered to interpret Laws, and determine
controversies, which will bring into the Church certain confusion. Nor will such
submission in the Inferiors be damnable, seeing in this submission to authority
they follow Gods method (obeying them that have the oversight over them. Heb.
13. and keep order, of which God is the Author, 1 Cor. 14.33. God is not the
Author of confusion but of order and peace, as in all Churches of the Saints.

This Authority in determining doubts and controversies the Church has
practiced in all Ages, and her constant practice is the best interpreter of her
right. We read not only of St. Paul's determining controversies about rites and
circumstances, 1 Cor. 14. but also of the Churches determining controversies of
doctrines and matters of belief in a full Council Act. 15. and requiring
submission to those determinations from inferior members. The like did the
Church afterward in her general Councils of NICE, CONSTANTINOPLE, EPHESUS and
CHALCEDON. And not only the General Councils have exercised this Authority,
but particular Churches also in National Councils, in the Council of ORANGE,
MILEVIS and others have used the same power over their children, whom they were
bound to teach and govern, and for whose souls they were to account to God, and
they did no more then was their right, so long as they did it with submission
to the general Church to whom they are subject; Christ said to the Apostles,
and by this, to all the guides of souls, that should succeed them in a lawful
Ordination, He that hears you hears me, and he that despises you despises me,
St. Cypr. ep. 69 From these premises it plainly follows, that our dear Mother
the Church of England in making these Canons and Articles for determining of
controversies in matters of belief, which you may see in the ensuing
Collection, did no more, then what was both her right and her duty to do, both
for the preservation of her peace, and the guidance and conduct of the souls
committed to her charge, and what her care has been in the exercise of this
power for the good of her members ever since the Reformation, will evidently to
her honor appear by this following Collection, made up not without great care
and industry of the Publisher. By which he has done our Mother this farther
right, that now, whosoever will, may easily see the notorious slander which
some of the Roman persuasion have endeavored to cast upon her: That her
Reformation has been altogether Lay and Parliamentary: for by the Canons and
articles following, which were formerly scattered and hard to be seen by every
one, now gathered together into a body, it easily appears to any that will but
open their eyes and read, that the Reformation of this Church was orderly and
Synodical by the Guides and Governors of souls, and confirmed by Supreme
Authority, and so in every particular as legal as any reformation could or
ought to be.

Anth. Sparrow.

Books sold by T. Garthwait.
THe Works of that Profound Divine Dr. Tho. Jackson president of Corp. Chr.
Coll. Oxon. in Folio. 3. Volumes. The Scholastical History of the Canon of the
Scripture by Dr. Cofin Ld. Bp. Duresme. in 4o. An Introduction to the Oriental
Languages by Dr. Walton Ld. Bp. of Chester. in 12o. The English Case, exactly
set down by Hezekiahs Reformation in a Sermon. at Paris before His Majesty by Dr.
Steward Dean of Westminster in 12o. A Rationale upon the Book of Com. Prayer by
Dr. Sparrow in 12o. A Defense of the Liturgy in answer to the Exceptions of
diverse Ministers in 12o. The Form of Consecration of a Church by Bp. Andrews.
Golden Remains of Mr. John Hales of Eton College with His Letters touching the
Synod of Dort in 4o. Dr. Pierce of the Positive being of sin, with a Postscript
touching Mr. Baxter in 4o. A Sermon of Lent preached before his Majesty by Dr.
Gunning etc. in 4o. Bp. Andrews his Sermons in fol.
INJUNCTIONS given by the most excellent Prince, EDWARD the Sixth,

By the grace of God King of England, France, and Ireland:

Defender of the Faith, and in earth under Christ of the Church of England and
Ireland, the supreme head: To all and singular his loving subjects, as well of
the Clergy as of the Laity.

Imprinted at LONDON by Richard Grafton, 1547.

Injunctions given by the most excellent Prince, Edward the sixth, by the grace
of God, King of England, France, and Ireland: defender of the Faith and in
earth under Christ, of the Church of England and of Ireland, the supreme head:
To all and singular his loving subjects, as well of the Clergy as of the Laity.
THE Kings most Royal Majesty, by the advice of his most dear uncle, the Duke
of Somerset, Lord Protector of all his Realms, Dominions and Subjects, and
Governor of his most royal person, and the residue of his most honorable
counsel, intending the advancement of the true honor of almighty God, the
suppression of Idolatry and Superstition, throughout all his Realms and
Dominions, and to plant true Religion, to the extirpation of all hypocrisy,
enormities and abuses, as to his duty appertains: does minister unto his
loving subjects, these godly Injunctions, hereafter following: Whereof part
were given unto them heretofore, by the authority of his most dear beloved
father, King Henry the viii. of most famous memory, and part are now ministered
and given by his Majesty. All which Injunctions, his highness wills and
commands his said loving subjects, by his supreme authority obediently to
receive, and truly to observe and keep every man in their offices, degrees and
states, as they will avoid his displeasure, and the pains in the same
Injunctions hereafter expressed.

1. The first is, that all Deans, Archdeacons, Parsons, Vicars, and other
Ecclesiastical persons, shall faithfully keep and observe, and as far as in
them may lie, shall cause to be observed and kept of other, all and singular
laws and statutes made as well for the abolishing and extirpation of the Bishop
of Rome, his pretensed and usurped power and jurisdiction, as for the
establishment and confirmation of the Kings authority, jurisdiction, and
supremacy of the Church of England and Ireland. And furthermore, all
Ecclesiastical persons, having cure of souls, shall to the uttermost of their
wit, knowledge, and learning, purely, sincerely and without any color or
dissimulation, declare, manifest, and open iiii. times every year at the least,
in their Sermons and other collations, that the Bishop of Romes usurped power
and jurisdiction; having no establishment nor ground by the laws of God, was of
most just causes, taken away and abolished, and that therefore, no manner of
obedience or subjection, whithin his Realms and Dominions, is due unto him. And
that the Kings power, within his Realms and Dominions, is the highest power
under God, to whom all men, within the same Realms and Dominions, by Gods laws,
owe most loyalty and obedience, before and above all other powers and Potentates
in earth.

Besides this, to the intent that all superstition and hypocrisy, crept into
diverse men's hearts, may vanish away: They shall not set forth or extol any
Images, Relics, or Miracles, for any superstition or lucre, nor allure the
people by any inticements, to the Pilgrimage of any Saint or Image: but
reproving the same, they shall teach, that all goodness, health and grace,
ought to be both asked and looked for, only of God, as of the very author and
giver of the same, and of none other.

Item, that they, the persons above rehearsed, shall make or cause to be made in
their Churches, and every other Cure they have, one Sermon, every quarter of
the year at the least, wherein they shall purely and sincerely declare the word
of God: and in the same, exhort their hearers to the works of faith, mercy; and
charity, specially prescribed and commanded in scripture, and that works
devised by men's fantasies, besides Scripture: as wandering to Pilgrimages,
offering of money, candels, or tapers, or relics, or Images, or kissing and
licking of the same, praying upon beads, or such like superstition, have not
only no promise of reward in scripture for doing of them: but contrariwise,
great threats and maledictions of God, for that they be things tending to
Idolatry and superstition, which, of all other offenses, God almighty does most
detest and abhor, for that the same diminish most his honor and glory.

Item, that such Images, as they know in any of their cures, to be, or to have
been abused with Pilgrimage or offering of any thing made thereunto, or shall
be hereafter censed unto, they (and none other private persons) shall for the
avoiding of that most detestable offense of Idolatry,, forthwith take down, or
cause to be taken down and destroy the same, and shall suffer from henceforth,
no Torches, nor candles, Tapers or Images of wax, to be set before any Image, or
picture, but only two lights upon the high altar, before the Sacrament, which
for the signification, that Christ is the very true light of the world, they
thall suffer to remain still: admonishing their Parishioners, that Images serve
for no other purpose, but to be a remembrance, whereby men may be admonished,
of the holy lives and conversation of them, that the said Images do represent:
which Images, if they do abuse for any other intent, they commit Idolatry in
the same, to the great danger of their souls.

Item, that every holy day throughout the year, when they have no Sermon, they
shall immediately after the Gospel, openly and plainly, recite to their
Parishioners in the pulpit: the Pater noster, the Credo, and x. Commandments in
English, to the intent the people may learn the same by heart: exhorting all
parents and householders, to teach their children and servants the same as they
are bound by the law of God, and in conscience to do.

Item, that they shall charge Fathers and Mothers, Masters and governors to
bestow their children and servants, even from their childhood, either to
learning or to some honest exercise, occupation or husbandry: Exhorting and
counseling, and by all the ways and means they may, as well in their sermons and
collations as otherways, persuading their said Fathers and Mothers, Masters,
and other governors, diligently to provide and foresee, that the youth be in
no manner of wise, brought up in idleness, least at any time afterward, for
lack of some craft, occupation, or other honest mean to live by, they be driven
to fall to begging, stealing, or some other unchriftinesse: Forasmuch as we may
daily see, through sloth and idleness, diverse valiant men fall, some to
begging, and some to theft and murder, which after brought to calamity and
misery, do blame their parents, friends and governors, which suffered them to
be brought up so idly in their youth, where, if they had been well brought up
in learning some good occupation or craft, they would (being rulers of their
own household) have profited as well themselves, as diverse other persons, to the
great commodity and ornament of the Common wealth.

Also, that the said Parsons, Vicars, and other Curates, shall diligently
provide, that the Sacraments be duly, and reverently ministered in their
Parishes. And if at any time it happen them in any of the cases expressed in
the statutes of this Realm, or of special license given by the Kings Majesty,
to be absent from their benefices, they shall leave their Cure, not to a rude
and unlearned person, but to an honest well learned and expert Curate that can
by his ability teach the rude and unlearned of their Cure wholesome doctrine, and
reduce them to the right way, that do err, which will also execute these
Injunctions, and do their duty otherwise, as they are bound to do in every
behalf, and accordingly may and will profit their cure, no less with good
example of living, then with the declaration of the word of God, or else their
lack and default shall be imputed unto them, who shall straightly answer for
the same, if they do otherwise. And always let them see, that neither they,
nor their Curates, do seek more their own profit, promotion, or advantage, then
the profit of the souls that they have under their Cure, or the glory of God.

Also, that they shall provide within three months, next after this
visitation, one book of the whole Bible, of the largest volumn in English. And
within one twelve months next after the said visitation, the paraphrasis of
Erasmus also in English upon the gospels, and the same set up in some
convenient place, within the said Church, that they have Cure of, whereas their
Parishioners may most commodiously, resort unto the same, and read the same.
The charges of which books shall be ratably born, between the Parson or
approprietary, and parishiones aforesaid, that is to say, the one half by the
Parson or proprietary, and the other half by the parishioners. And they shall
discourage no man (authorized and licensed thereto) from the reading of any
part of the Bible, either in Latin or in English: but shall rather comfort and
exhort every person to read the same, as the very lively word of God, and the
special food of man's soul, that all Christian persons are bound to embrace,
believe, and follow, if they look to be saved: whereby they may the better know
their duties to God, to their sovereign Lord the King, and their neighbor:
ever gently and charitably exhorting them, and in his Majesty's name,
straightly charging and commanding them, that in the reading thereof, no man to
reason or contend, but quietly to hear the Reader.

Also, the said Ecclesiastical persons shall in no wise, at any unlawful time,
nor for any other cause, then for their honest necessity, haunt or resort to
any Taverns, or Alehouses. And after their dinner or supper, they shall not
give themselves to drinking or riot, spending their time idly, by day or by
night at dice, cards, or tables, playing, or any other unlawful game: but at
all times, (as they shall have leisure) they shall hear and read somewhat of
holy Scripture, or shall occupy themselves with some other honest exercise,
and that they always do the things which appertain to honesty, with endeavor
to profit the common weal, having always in mind, that they ought to excel
all other, in purity of life, and should be an example to the people, to live
well and Christianly.

Item, that they shall in confessions every Lent, examine every person, that
comes to confession to them, whether they can recite the Articles of their
faith, the Pater noster, and the ten Commandments in English, and hear them
say the same particularly, wherein, if they be not perfect, they shall declare
then, that every Christian person ought to know the said things, before they
should receive the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, and admonish them to learn
the said necessary things more perfectly, or else they ought not to presume to
come to Gods board, without a perfect knowledge and will to observe the same:
and if they do, it is to the great peril of their souls, and also to the
worldly rebuke, that they might incur hereafter by the same.

Also, that they shall admit no man to preach within any their Cures, but such
as shall appear unto them, to be sufficiently licensed thereunto, by the Kings
Majeste, the Lord Protectors grace, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the
Archbishop of York in his Province, or the Bishop of the Diocese: and such as
shall be so licensed, they shall gladly receive to declare the word of God,
without any resistance or contradiction.

Also, if they have heretofore declared to their parishioners any thing to the
extolling, or setting forth of pilgrimages, relics or Images, or lighting of
Candels, kissing, kneeling, decking of the same Images, or any such
superstition, they shall now openly before the same, recant and reprove the
same: showing them (as the truth is) that they did the same upon no ground of
scripture, but were led and seduced by a common error and abuse, crept into
the Church, through the sufference and avarice of such as felt profit by the
same.

Also, if they do, or shall know any man within their parish, or elsewhere,,
that is a letter of the word of God, to be read in English, or sincerely
preached, or of the execution of these the Kings Majesty's Injunctions, or a
fautor of the Bishop of Romes pretensed power, now by the laws of this Realm
justly rejected, extirpated, and taken away utterly, they shall detect and
present the same to the King or his Council, or to the Justice of peace next
adjoining.

Also, that the Parson, Vicar, or Curate, and parishioners of every parish,
within this Realm shall in their Churches and Chapels, keep one Book or
Register, wherein they shall write the day and year of every wedding,
Christning, and Burial, made within their Parish for their time, and so every
man succeeding them likewise: And therein shall write every persons name, that
shall be so Wedded, Christened or Buried. And for the safe keeping of the same
book, the parish shall be bound to provide of their common charges, one sure
cofer, with two locks and keys, whereof the one to remain with the Parson,
Vicar, or Curate, and the other with the Wardens of every Parish church or
chapel, wherein the said book shall be laid up: which book they shall every
Sunday take forth, and in the presence of the said Wardens, or one of them,
write and record in the same all the Weddings, Christnings, and Burials, made
the whole week before, and that done, to lay up the book in the said cofer, as
before. And for every time that the same shall be omitted, the party that shall
be in the fault thereof, shall forfeit to the said Church. iii. s. iiii. d. to
be employed to the poor men's box, of that parish.

Furthermore, because the goods of the Church, are called the goods of the
poor, and at these days, nothing is less seen, then the poor to be sustained
with the same: all Parsons, Vicars, Pencionaries, Prebendaries, and other
beneficed men within this Deanery, not being resident upon their benefices,
which may dispend yearly xx.l. or above, either within this Deanery, or
elsewhere, shall distribute hereafter, among their poor parishioners, or other
inhabitants there, in the presence of the Churchwardens, or some other honest
men of the parish, the xl. part of the fruits and revenues of their said
benefices, lest they be worthily noted of ingratitude, which reserving so many
parts to themselves, cannot vouchsafe, to impart the xl. portion thereof among
the poor people of that parish, that is so fruitful and profitable unto them.

And to the intent that learned men may hereafter spring the more, for the
execution of the premises, ever Parson, Vicar, Clerk, or beneficed man within
this Deanery, having yearly to dispend in benefices and other promotions of the
Church an C.l. shall give competent exhibition to one Scholar: and for so
many.C.l. more as he may dispend, to so many Scholars more shall he give like
exhibition, in the University of Oxford, or Cambridge, or some Grammar schole,
which after they have profited in good learning, may be partners of their
patrons cure and charge, as well in preaching, as otherwise in the execution of
their offices, or may (when need shall be) otherwise profit the Common weal,
with their counsel and wisdom.

Also, that the proprietaries, Parsons, Vicars, and Clerks, having Churches,
Chapels, or Mansions within this Deanery, shall bestow yearly hereafter, upon
the same Mansions or Chancels of their Churches, being in decay the fifth part
of that their benefices, till they be fully repaired: and the same so repaired
shall always keep and maintain in good estate.

Also, that the said Parsons, Vicars, and Clerks, shall once every quarter of
the year, read these Injunctions given unto them, openly and deliberately,
before all their parishioners, to the intent, that both they may be the better
admonished of their duty, and their said Parishioners, the more moved, to
follow the same for their part.

Also, for as much, as by a law established, every man is bound to pay his
tithes, no man shall by color of duty omitted by their Curates, detain their
tithes, and so redubbe and requite one wrong with another, or be his own judge,
but shall truly pay the same, as he has been accustomed to their Parsons,
Vicars, and Curates, without any restraint or diminution. And such lack and
default, as they can justly find in their Parsons and Curates, to call for
reformation thereof, at their ordinaries and other superiors hands, who upon
complaint and due proof thereof, shall reform the same accordingly.

Also, that no person shall from hence forth alter or change the order and
manner of any fasting day that is commanded, or of Common prayer or divine
service, otherwise then is specified in these Injunctions, until such time as
the same shall be otherwise ordered, and transposed by the Kings authority.

Also, that every Parson, Vicar, Curate, Chauntery priest, and Stipendary,
being under the degree of a Bacheler of Divinity, shall provide and have of his
own, within three months after this visitation,, the New Testament, both in
Latin and in English, with the Paraphrase upon the same of Erasmus, and
diligently study the same conferring the one with the other. And the Bishops
and other ordinaries by themselves, or their officers, in their Synods and
visitations, shall examine the said Ecclesiastical persons, how they have
profited in the study of holy Scripture.

Also, in the time of high Mass, within every Church, he that says or sings
the same, shall read or cause to be read, the Epistle and Gospel of that Mass,
in English, and not in Latin, in the Pulpit or in such convenient place as the
people may hear the same. And every Sunday and holy day, they shall plainly and
distinctly, read, or cause to be read, one Chapter of the New testament in
English, in the said place at Matius immediately after the Lessons: and at
Even-song, after Magnificat, one Chapter of the old Testament. And to the
intent the premises may be more conveniently done: the Kings Majesty's
pleasure is, that when ix. Lessons should be read in the Church, three of them
shall be omitted and left out with the responds: and at Evensong time the
responds with all the memories, shall be left off, for that purpose.

Also, because those persons which be sick and in peril of death, be oftentimes
put in despair, by the craft and subtilty of the Devil, who is then most busy,
and specially with them, that lack the knowledge, sure persuasion, and steadfast
belief, that they may be made partakers of the great and infinite mercy, which
almighty God, of his most bountiful goodness, and mere liberality, without our
deserving, has offered freely to all persons that put their full trust and
confidence in him: therefore that this damnable vice of despair, may be clearly
taken away and firm belief, and steadfast hope, surely conceived of all their
parishioners, being in any danger, they shall learn and have always in a
readiness, such comfortable places and sentences of Scripture, as do set forth
the mercy, benefits, and goodness of almighty God, toward all penitent, and
believing persons, that they may at all times, (when necessity shall require)
promptly comfort their flock, with the lively word of God, which is the only
stay of man's conscience.

ALSO, to avoid all contention and strife, which heretofore has risen, among
the Kings Majesty's subjects, in sundry places of his Realms and Dominions, by
reason of fond courtesy, and challenging of places in procession, and also that
they may the more quietly hear that which is said or song to their edifying,
they shall not from henceforth, in any parish Church, at any time use any
procession, about the Church or Churchyard, or other place, but immediately
before high Mass, the Priests with other of the Quire, shall kneel in the midst
of the Church, and sing or say, plainly and distinctly, the Litany which is set
forth in English, with all the Suffrages following, and none other procession,
or Litany to be had or used, but the said Litany in English, adding nothing
thereto, but as the Kings grace, shall hereafter appoint: and in Cathedral or
Collegiate Churches, the same shall be done in such places as our Commissaries
in in our visitation shall appoint. And in the time of the Litany, of the
Mass, of the Sermon, and when the Priest reads the Scripture to the
parishioners, no manner of persons without a just and urgent cause, shall
depart out of the Church, and all ringing and knowling of Bells, shall be
utterly forborne for that time, except one Bell in convenient time, to be rung
or knowled before the Sermon.

ALSO, like as the people be commonly occupied the work-day with bodily labor,
for their bodily sustenance, so was the holy day at the first beginning godly
instituted and ordained, that the people should that day give themselves wholly
to God. And whereas in our time, God is more offended then pleased, more
dishonored, then honored, upon the holy day, because of idleness, pride,
drunkenness, quarelling and brawling, which are most used, in such days,
people nevertheless persuading themselves sufficiently to honor God on that
day, if they hear Mass and service, though they understand nothing to their
edifying: therefore all the Kings faithful and loving subjects, shall from
henceforth celebrate, and keep their holy day, according to Gods holy will and
pleasure, that is: in hearing the word of God read and taught: in private and
public prayers: in knowledging their offenses to God, and amendment of the
same: in reconciling their selves charitably to their neighbors where
displeasure has been: in often times receiving the Communion, of the very body
and blood of Christ: in visiting of the poor and sick: in using all soberness
and Godly conversation. Yet notwithstanding, all Parsons, Vicars, and Curates,
shall teach and declare unto their Parishioners, that they may with a safe and
quiet conscience, in the time of Harvest labor upon the holy and festival
days, and save that thing which God has sent. And if for any scrupulosity, or
grudge of conscience, men should superstitiously, abstain from working upon
those days, that then they should grievously offend and displease God.

ALSO, forasmuch as variance and contention, is a thing which most displeases
God, and is most contrary to the blessed Communion of the body and blood of our
Savior Christ: Curates shall in no wise admit to the receiving thereof any of
their Cure and flock, who has maliciously and openly contended with his
neighbor, unless the same do first charitably and openly reconcile himself
again, remitting all rancour and malice, whatsoever controversy has been
between them: and nevertheless, their just titles and rights, they may
charitably prosecute before such as have authority to hear the same.

ALSO, that every Dean, Archdeacon, Master of Collegiate Church, Master of
Hospital, and Prebendary, being Priest, shall preach by himself personally,
twice every year at the least, either in the place where he is entitled, or in
some Church where he has jurisdiction, or else which is to the said place
appropriate or united.

ALSO, that they shall instruct and teach in their Cures, that no man ought
obstinately, and maliciously, to break and violate the laudable ceremonies of
the Church, by the King Commanded to be observed, and as yet not abrogated. And
on the other side, that whosoever does superstitiously abuse them, does the
same to the great peril and danger of his souls health: as in casting holy
water upon his bed, upon Images, and other dead things, or bearing about him
holy bread, or saint John's Gospel, or making crosses of wood upon Palm Sunday,
in time of reading of the Passion, or keeping private holy days, as Bakers,
Brewers, Smithes, Shoomakers, and such other do, or ringing of holy bells, or
blessing with the holy candle, to the intent, thereby to be discharged of the
burden of sin, or to drive away devils, or to put away dreams and fantasies,
or in putting trust and confidence of health and salvation in the same
ceremonies, when they be only ordained, instituted and made, to put us in
remembrance of the benefits, which we have received by Christ. And if he use
them for any other purpose, he grievously offends God.

ALSO, that they shall take away, utterly extinct and destroy, all shrines,
covering of shrines, all tables, candlesticks, trindilles or rolls of wax,
pictures, paintings, and all other monuments of feigned miracles, pilgrimages,
Idolatry and superstition: so that there remain no memory of the same in walls,
glasses, windows, or elsewhere within their Churches or houses. And they shall
exhort all their Parishioners, to do the like within their several houses. And
that the Church Wardens, at the common charge of the Parishioners in every
Church, shall provide a comely and honest pulpit, to be set in a convenient
place within the same, for the preaching of Gods word.

ALSO, they shall provide and have within three months after this visitation,
a strong Chest, with a hole in the upper part thereof, to be provided, at the
cost and charge of the parish, having three keys, whereof one shall remain in
the custody of the Parson, Vicar, or Curate, and the other two, in the custody
of the Church wardens, or any other two honest men, to be appointed, by the
parish from year to year: which Chest you shall set and fasten near unto the
high altar, to the intent the parishioners, should put into it their Oblation
and alms, for their poor neighbors. And the Parson, Vicar, or Curate, shall
diligently, from time to time, and specially, when men make their testaments,
call upon, exhort and move their neighbors, to confer and give, as they may
well spare, to the said Chest, declaring unto them, whereas heretofore they
have been diligent, to bestow much substance otherwise then God commanded, upon
Pardons, Pilgrimages, Trentalles, decking of Images, offering of Candels,
giving to Friars, and upon other like blind devotions; they ought at this
time, to be much more ready to help the poor and needy, knowing that to relieve
the poor is a true worshipping of God, required earnestly, upon pain of
everlasting damnation: and that also, whatsoever is given for their comfort, is
given to Christ himself, and so is accepted of him, that he will mercifully
reward the same with everlasting life, the which alms and devotion of the
People, the keepers of the keys, shall at times convenient, take out of the
Chest, and distribute the same, in the presence of the whole Parish, or six of
them, to be truly and faithfully delivered, to their most needy neighbors:
and if they be provided for, then to the reparation of high ways next
adjoining. And also the money which rises of Fraternities, guilds, and other
stocks of the Church (except by the Kings majesty's authority it be otherwise
appointed) shall be put into the said chest, and converted to t^ said use, and
also the rents of lands, the profit of cattle, and money given or bequeathed, to
the studing of Torches, Lights, Tapers, and Lamps, shall be converted to the
said use, saving that it shall be lawful for them to bestow part of the said
profits, upon the reparation of the Church, if great need require, and whereas
the parish is very poor, and not able otherwise to repair the same.

And forasmuch as priests be public ministers of the Church, and upon the
holidays ought to apply themselves to the common administration of the whole
Parish, they shall not be bound to go to women lying in childbed, except in
time of dangerous sickness, and not to fetch any corse, before it be brought to
the Churchyard: and if the woman be sick, or the corse brought to the Church,
the priest shall do his duty accordingly, in visiting the woman, and burying
the dead person.

ALSO, to avoid the detestable sin of symony, because buying and selling of
benefices, is execrable before God: therefore all such persons as buy any
benefices, or coin to them by fraud or deceit, shall be deprived of such
benefices, and be made unable at any time after to receive any other spiritual
promotion. And such as do sell them, or by any color do bestow them, for their
own gain and profit, shall lose the right and title of patronage, and
presentment for that time, and the gift thereof for that vacation, shall
appertain to the Kings Majesty.

ALSO, because through lack of Preachers in many places of the Kings Realms and
Dominions: the people continue in ignorance and blindness: all Parsons,
Vicars, and Curates, shall read in their Churches every Sunday, one of the
Homilies, which are and shall be set forth for the same purpose, by the Kings
authority, in such sort as they shall be appointed to do in the Preface of the
same.

ALSO, whereas many indiscrete persons do at this day, uncharitably contemn and
abuse Priests and Ministers of the Church, because some of them, (having small
learning) have of long time favored phansies rather then Gods truth: yet
forasmuch, as their office and function is appointed of God: The Kings Majesty
wills and charge all his loving subjects, that from henceforth, they shall
use them charitably and reverently, for their office and administrations sake,
and especially, such as labor in the seting forth of Gods holy word.

ALSO, that all manner of persons, which understand not the Latin tongue,
shall pray upon none other Primer, but upon that, which was lately set forth in
English, by authority of King Henry the VIII. of most famous memory. And that
no teachers of youth, shall teach any other, then the said Primer. And all
those which have knowledge of the Latin tongue, shall pray upon none other
Latin Primer, but upon that, which is likewise set forth by the said
authority, And that all graces to be said at dinner and supper, shall be
always said in the English tongue. And that none other grammar shall be taught
in any school or other place, within the Kings Realms and Dominions, but only
that which is set forth by the said authority.

ITEM, that all Chauntery Priests, shall exercise themselves in teaching youth
to read and write, and bring them up in good manners, and other virtuous
exercises.

ITEM, when any Sermon or Homily shall be had, the Prime and hours shall be
omitted.

The form of bidding the Common Prayers.
YOU shall pray for the whole congregation of Christ's Church, and specially for
this Church of England and Ireland, wherein first I commend to your devout
prayers, the Kings most excellent Majesty, supreme head immediately under God,
of the spirituality and temporality of the same Church: and for Queen Katharine
dowager, and also for my lady Mary and my lady Elizabeth, the Kings sisters.

Secondly you shall pray for my Lord Protectors grace, with all the rest of the
Kings Majestes Council: for all the Lords of this Realm, and for the Clergy and
the commons of the same: beseeching almighty God to give every of them in his
degree, grace to use themselves in such wise, as may be to Gods glory, the
Kings honor, and the weal of this Realm.

Thirdly, ye shall pray for all them that be departed out of this world in the
faith of Christ, thath they with us and we with them at the day of Judgment,
may rest both body and soul, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of
heaven.

ALL which and singular Injunctions, the Kings Majesty ministers unto his
Clergy, and their successors, and to all his loving subjects: straightly
charging and commanding them to observe and keep the same, upon pain of
deprivation, sequestration of fruits of benefices, suspension, excommunication,
and such other coertion, as to Ordinaries, or other having Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, whom his Majesty has appointed for the due execution of the
same, shall be seen convenient: charging and commanding them to see these
Injunctions observed and kept of all persons, being under their jurisdiction,
as they will answer to his Majesty for the contrary, and his Majesty's pleasure
is, that every Justice of peace (being required) shall assist the Ordinaries
and every of them, for the due execution of the said Injunctions.

THE ORDER OF THE COMMUNION.

Imprinted at LONDON by Richard Grafton, 1547.

The Proclamation.
EDward by the grace of God King of England, France and Ireland, defender of
the faith, and of the Church of England and Ireland in earth the supreme head:
To all and singular our loving subjects, Greeting:
For so much as in our high Court of Parliament, lately holden at Westminster,
it was by us with the consent of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and Commons
there assembled most godly and agreeably to Christ's holy institution enacted,
that the most blessed Sacrament of the body and blood of our Savior Christ
should from thenceforth be commonly delivered and ministered unto all persons
within our Realm of England and Ireland, and other our dominions under both
kinds, that is to say, of bread and wine, (except necessity other ways
require) least any man phansying and devising a sundry way by himself, in the
use of this most blessed Sacrament of unity, there might thereby arise any
unseemly and ungodly diversity: Our pleasure is by the advice of our most dear
Uncle the Duke of Somerset, governor of our person, and Protector of all our
Realms, Dominions and Subjects, and other of our privy Council, that the said
blessed Sacrament be ministered unto our people only after such form and manner
as hereafter, by our authority, with the advice before mentioned is set forth
and declared: willing every man with due reverence and Christian behavior, to
come to this holy Sacrament and most blessed Communion, lest by the unworthy
receiving of so high mysteries, they become guilty of the body and blood of the
Lord, and so eat and drink their own damnation: but rather diligently trying
themselves, that they may so come to this holy table of Christ, and so be
partakers of this holy Communion, that they may dwell in Christ, and have
Christ dwelling in them: And also with such obedience and conformity to
receive this our ordinance, and most godly direction, that we may be encouraged
from time to time, further to travel for the reformation, and setting forth of
such godly orders, as may be most to Gods glory, the edifying of our subjects,
and for the advancement of true Religion.

Which thing, we (by the help of God) most earnestly intend to bring to effect:
willing all our loving subjects in the mean time, to stay and quiet themselves,
with this our direction, as men content to follow authority (according to the
bounden duty of subjects,) and not enterprising to run before, and so by their
rashness, become the greatest hinderers of such things, as they more
arrogantly then godly, would seem (by their own private authority) most hotly
to set forward. We would not have our subjects so much to mislike our
Judgment, so much to mistrust our zeal, as though we either could not discern
what were to be done, or would not do all things in due time: God be praised,
we know both what by his word is meet to be redressed, and have an earnest
mind, by the advice of our most dear uncle, and other of our privy Council,
with all diligence and convenient speed so to set forth the same, as it may
most stand with Gods glory, and edifying and quietness of our people: which we
doubt not, but all our obedient and loving subjects, will quietly and
reverently tarry for.

God save the KING.
The Order of the Communion.
First the Parson, Vicar, or Curate, the next Sunday or holy day, or at the
least, one day before he shall minister the Communion, shall give warning to
his parishioners, or those which be present, that they prepare themselves
thereto, saying to them openly and plainly as hereafter follows, or such like.

DEar friends, and you especially, upon whose souls I have cure and charge,
upon day next I do intend by Gods grace to offer to all such as shall be there
Godly disposed, the most comfortable Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ,
to be taken of them in the remembrance of his most fruitful and glorious
passion: By the which passion, we have obtained remission of our sins, and be
made partakers of the kingdom of heaven, whereof, we be assured and ascertained
if we come to the said Sacrament, with hearty repentance for our offenses,
steadfast faith in Gods mercy, and earnest minds to obey Gods will, and to
offend no more: wherefore our duty is, to come to these holy mysteries with
most hearty thanks to be given to Almighty God, for his infinite mercy and
benefits, given and bestowed upon us, his unworthy servants, for whom he has
not only given his body to death and shed his blood, but also does vouchsafe
in a Sacrament, and mystery to give us his said body and blood spiritually, to
feed and drink upon. The which Sacrament, being so divine and holy a thing, and
so comfortable to them which receive it worthily, and so dangerous to them that
will presume to take the same unworthily: my duty is to exhort you in the mean
season, to consider the greatness of the thing and to search and examine your
own consciences, and that not lightly, nor after the manner of dissemblers with
God: But as they which should come to a most godly and heavenly banquet: not to
come but in the marriage garment, required of God in Scripture, that you may so
much as lies in you, be found worthy to come to such a table: the ways and
means thereto is,

First, that you be truly repentant of your former evil life, and that you
confess with an unfeigned heart to almighty God your sins and unkindnesse
toward his Majesty committed either by will, word or deed, infirmity or
ignorance, and that with inward sorrow and tears, you bewail your offenses,
and require of almighty God mercy, and pardon, promising to him from the bottom
of your hearts, the amendment of your former life. And amongst all others, I am
commanded of God, especially to move and exhort you, to reconcile your selves
to your neighbors, whom you have offended, or who has offended you, putting
out of your hearts, all hatred and malice against them, and to be in love and
charity with all the world, and to forgive other, as you would that God should
forgive you. And if there be any of you, whose conscience is troubled and
grieved at any thing, lacking comfort or counsel, let him come to me, or to
some other discreet and learned Priest taught in the law of God, and confess
and open his sin and grief secretly, that he may receive such ghostly counsel,
advice and comfort, that his conscience may be relieved, and that of us as a
Minister of God and of the Church, he may receive comfort, and absolution to
the satisfaction of his mind and avoiding of all scruple and doubtfulness:
requiring, such as shall be satisfied with a general confession, not to be
offended with them that do use, to their further satisfying the auricular and
secret confession to the Priest, nor those also, which think needful or
convenient for the quietness of their own cons^iences, particularly to open
their sins to the Priest, to be offended, with them which are satisfied with
their humble confession to God, and the general confession to the Church: But
in all these things, to follow and keep the rule of charity, and every man to
be satisfied with his own conscience, not judging other men's minds or acts,
whereas he has no warrant of Gods word for the same.

The time of the Communion, shall be immediately after that the Priest himself
has received the Sacrament, without the varying of any other rite or ceremony
in the Mass (until other order shall be provided) but as heretofore usually the
Priest has done with the Sacrament of the body, to prepare, bless and
consecrate so much as will serve the people: so it shall yet continue still
after the same manner and form, save that he shall bless and consecrate the
biggest Chalice or some fair and convenient cup or cups full of wine with some
water put unto it. And that day, not drink it up all himself, but taking one
only sup or draught, leave the rest upon the altar covered, and turn to them
that are disposed to be partakers of the Communion, and shall thus exhort them
as follows.

DEarly beloved in the Lord, ye coming to this holy Communion, must consider
what S. Paul writes to the Corinthians, how he exhorts all persons
diligently to try and examine themselves, or ever they presume to eat of this
bread and drink of this Cup, for as the benefit is great, if with a truly
penitent heart and lively faith we receive this holy Sacrament, (for then we
spiritually eat the flesh of Christ and drink his blood: then we dwell in
Christ and Christ in us, we be made one with Christ and Christ with us) So is
the danger great, if we receive the same unworthily, for then we become guilty
of the body and blood of Christ our Savior, we eat and drink our own
damnation, because we make no difference of the Lords body, we kindle Gods
wrath over us, we provoke him to plague us with diverse diseases and sundry
kinds of death. Judge therefore your selves, (brethren) that ye be not judged
of the Lord. Let your mind be without desire to sin: Repent you truly for
your sins past, have an earnest and lively faith in Christ, our Savior, be
in perfect charity with all men, so shall ye be meet partakers of these holy
mysteries: But above all things you must give most humble and hearty thanks to
God the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost, for the redemption of the world, by
the death and passion of our Savior Christ both God and man, who did humble
himself even to the death upon the cross for us miserable sinners, lying in
darkness and the shadow of death, that he might make us the children of God
and exalt us to everlasting life. And to the end that we should always
remember the exceeding love of our Master and only Savior Jesus Christ thus
doing for us, and the innumerable benefits which by his precious bloodshedding
he has obtained to us, he has left in these holy mysteries as a pledge of his
love, and a continual remembrance of the same, his own blessed body and
precious blood for us spiritually to feed upon, to our endless comfort and
consolation. To him therefore with the Father and the holy Ghost, let us give,
as we are most bounden, continual thanks, submitting our selves wholly to his
holy will and pleasure, and studying to serve him in true holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life. Amen.

Then the priest shall say to them which be ready to take the Sacrament.

If any man here be an open blasphemer, adulterer, in malice, or envy, or any
other notable crime, and be not truly sorry therefore, and earnestly minded to
leave the same vi^es, or that does not trust himself to be reconciled to
Almighty God, and in charity with all the world, let him yet a while bewail
his sins and not come to this holy table, least after the taking of this most
blessed bread, the devil enter into him, as he did into Judas, to fulfill in him
all iniquity, and to bring him to destruction, both of body and soul.

Here the Priest shall pause a while, to see if any man will withdraw himself:
and if he perceive any so to do, then let him commune with him privily at
convenient leisure, and see whether he can with good exhortation, bring him to
grace: and after a little pause, the Priest shall say.

You that do truly and earnestly repent you of your sins, and offenses,
committed to almighty God, and be in love and charity with your neighbors, and
intend to lead a new life and heartily to follow the Commandments of God, and
to walk from hence forth in his holy ways, draw near, and take this holy
Sacrament to your comfort, make your humble confession to almighty God, and to
his holy Church, here gathered together in his name, meekly kneeling upon your
knees.

Then shall a general confession be made in the name of all those that are
minded to receive the holy Communion, either by one of them, or else by one of
the ministers, or by the Priest himself, all kneeling humbly upon their knees.

Almighty God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, maker of all things, judge of
all men, we knowledge and bewail our manifold sins and wickedness, which we
from time to time, most grievously have committed by thought, word, and deed,
against thy divine majesty, provoking most justly thy wrath and indignation
against us: we do earnestly repent, and be heartily sorry, for these our
misdoings: The remembrance of them is grievous unto us, the burden of them is
intolerable, have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us most mercyful Father, for
thy son our Lord Jesus Christ's sake: Forgive us all that is past, and grant
that we may ever hereafter, serve and please thee in newness of life to the
honor and glory of thy name, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Then shall the priest stand up, and turning him to the people, say thus.

Our blessed Lord, who has left power to his Church, to absolve penitent
sinners from their sins, and to restore to the grace of the heavenly Father
such as truly believe in Christ, have mercy upon you, pardon and deliver you
from all sins, confirm and strengthen you in all goodness, and bring you to
everlasting life,

Then shall the Priest stand up, and turning him toward the people, say thus:

Here what comfortable words our Savior Christ says to all that truly turn
to him.

COme unto me all that travel and be heavy laden, and I shall refresh you. So
God loved the world that he gave his only begotten son, to the end, that all
that believe in him, should not perish, but have life everlasting.

Hear also what S. Paul says.

THis is a true saying, and worthy of all men to be embraced and received, that
Jesus Christ came into this world to save sinners.

Hear also what St. John says.

IF any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, he it is that obtained grace for our sins.

Then shall the Priest kneel down and say in the name of all them that shall
receive the Communion, this prayer following.

WE do not presume to come to this thy table (O merciful Lord) trusting in our
own righteousness, but in thy manifold and great mercies: we be not worthy so
much as to gather up the crombs under thy table: but thou art the same Lord,
whose property is always to have mercy: grant us therefore gracious Lord so to
eat the flesh of thy dear Son Jesus Christ, and to drink his blood in these
holy Mysteries, that we may continually dwell in him, and he in us, that our
sinful bodies, may be made clean by his body, and our souls washed through his
most precious blood Amen.

Then shall the Priest rise, the people still reverently kneeling, and the
Priest shall deliver the Communion, first to the Ministers, if any be there
present that they may be ready to help the Priest, and after to the other. And
when he does deliver the Sacrament, of the body of Christ, he shall say to
every one, these words following.

THe body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for thee, preserve thy body
unto everlasting life.

And the Priest delivering the Sacrament of the blood, and giving every one to
drink once and no more, shall say,

THe blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was shed for thee, preserve thy soul
unto everlasting life.

If there be a Deacon or other Priest, then shall he follow with the Chalice,
and as the Priest Ministers the bread, so shall he for more expedition
Minister the wine, in form before written.

Then shall the priest, turning him to the people let the people depart with
this blessing.

THe peace of God which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds
in the knowledge and love of God and of his son Jesus Christ, our Lord.

To the which the people shall answer

Amen.

Note, that the bread that shall be consecrated shall be such as heretofore
has been accustomed. And every of the said consecrated breads, shall be broken
into two pieces, at the least, or more, by the discretion of the Minister, and
so distributed. And men must not think, less to be received in part, then in
the whole, but in each of them the whole body of our Savior Jesus Christ.

Note, that if it does so chance, that the wine hallowed and consecrate does
not suffice or be enough for them that do take the Communion, the Priest after
the first Cup or Chalice be emptied, may go again to the altar, and reverently
and devoutly, prepare, and consecrate an other, and so the third, or more
likewise, beginning at these words, Simili modo, postquam coenatum est, and
ending at these words, qui pro vobis and pro multis effundetur in remissionem
peccatorum, and without any levation or lifting up.

Articles to be enquired of, in visitations to be had within the Diocese of
Canterbury: in the second year of the Reign of our Dread Sovereign Lord Edward
the 6. by the grace of God, King of England, France, and Ireland defender of
the Faith, and in earth of the Church of England and also of Ireland the
supreme head.
FIrst, Whether Parsons, Vicars, and Curates, and every of them have purely and
sincerely, without color or dissimulation, four times in the year at the
least, preached against the usurped power, pretensed authority, and
jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome.

Item, Whether they have preached and declared likewise, 4. times of the year
at the least, that the Kings Majesty's power, authority, and pre-eminence,
within his Realms and dominions, is the highest power under God.

Item, whether any person has by writing, ciphring preaching, or teaching,
deed or act obstinately holden, and stand with to extol, set forth, maintain or
defend the authority, jurisdiction, or power of the Bishop of Rome, or of his
sea heretofore claimed and usurped, or by any pretense, obstinately or
maliciously, invented any thing for the extolling of the fame, or any part
thereof.

Item, Whether in their common prayers, they use not the Collects made for the
King, and make not special mention of his Majesty's name in the same.

Item, Whether they do not every Sunday and Holy day, with the collects of the
English procession, say the prayer set forth by the Kings Majesty for peace
between England and Scotland.

Item, Whether they have not removed, taken away, and utterly extincted and
destroyed in their Churches, Chapels and houses, all images, all shrines,
coverings of shrines, all tables, candelsticks, trindels or rolls of wax,
pictures, paintings, and all other monuments of feigned miracles, pilgrimages,
idolatry and superstition, so that there remain no memory of the same in walls,
glaswindowes or elsewhere.

Item, Whether they have exhorted, moved and stirred their parishoners to do
the like in every of their houses.

Item, Whether they have declared to their Parishoners, the Articles concerning
the abrogation of certain superfluous holy days, and done their endeavor to
persuade the said parishioners; to keep and observe the same Articles
inviolably, and whether any of those abrogate days has been kept as holy
days, and by whose occasion they were so kept.

Item, Whether they have diligently, duly and reverently ministered the
Sacraments in their Cures.

Item. Whether they have preached, or caused to be preached, purely and
sincerely the word of God, in every of their Cures, every quatter of the year,
once at the least, exhorting their parishioners to the works commanded by
Scriptures, and not to works devised by men's fantasies besides Scripture, as
wearing or praying upon beads, or such like.

Item, Whether they suffer any Torches, Candles, Tapers, or any other lights to
be in your Churches, but only two lights upon the high Altar.

Item, Whether they have not every holy day, when they have no Sermon,
immediately after the Gospel, openly, plainly, and distinctly recited to their
parishioners in the Pulpit, the Pater Noster, the Creed, and the Ten
Commandments in English.

Item, Whether every Lent they examine such persons as come to Confession to
them, whether they can recite the Pater Noster, the Articles of our Faith, and
the Ten Commandments in English.

Item, Whether they have charged fathers and mothers, masters and governors of
youth, to bring them up in some virtuous study or occupation.

Item, Whether such beneficed men, as be lawfully absent from their benefices,
do leave their Cure to a rude and unlearned person, and not an honest well
learned and expert Curate which can and will teach you wholesome doctrine.

Item, Whether in every Cure they have, they have provided one book of the
whole Bible of the largest volumn in English, and the Paraphrasis of Eras, mus,
also in English upon the Gospels, and set up the same in some convenient place
in the Church where their parishioners may most commodiously resort to the same.

Item, Whether they have discouraged any person, from reading of any part of
the Bible, either in Latin or in English, but rather comforted and exhorted
every person to read the same, as the very lively word of God, and the special
food of man's soul.

Item, Whether Parsons, Vicars, Curates, and other Priests, be common haunters
and resorters to Taverns, or Alehouses, giving themselves to drinking, rioting,
or playing at unlawful games, and do not occupy themselves in the reading or
hearing of some part of holy Scripture, or in some other godly exercise. Item,
Whether they have admitted any man to preach in their cures, not being lawfully
licensed thereunto, or have refused or denied such to preach, as have been
licensed accordingly.

Item, Whether they which have heretofore declared to their parishioners, any
thing to the extolling or setting forth of Pilgrimages, relics or Images, or
lighting of candles, kissing, kneeling, decking of the same Images, or any such
superstition, have not openly recanted and reproved the same.

Item, Whether they have one book or register safely kept, wherein they write
the day of every Wedding, Christening, and Burying.

Item, Whether they have exhorted the people to obedience, to the Kings Majesty
and his Ministers, and to Charity and love, one to another:

Item, Whether they have admonished their Parishioners, that they ought not to
presume to receive the Sacrament, of the body and blood of Christ before they
can perfectly rehearse the Pater noster, the Articles of the faith and the ten
Commandments in English.

Item, Whether they have declared and to their wits and power have persuaded
the people, that the manner and kind of fasting in Lent, and other days in
the year, is but a mere positive law, and that therefore all persons, having
just cause of sickness, or other necessity, or being licensed by the Kings
Majesty, may moderately eat all kind of meats, without grudge or scruple of
conscience.

Item, Whether they be resident upon their benefices, and keep hospitality, or
no, and if they be absent, or keep no hospitality, whether they do make due
distributions among the poor parishioners or not.

Item, Whether Parsons, Vicars, Clerks, and other beneficed men, having yearly
to dispend an hundred pound, do not find competently one Scholar in the
university, of Cambridg or Oxford, or Some Grammar school, and for as many
hundred pounds, as every of them may dispend, so many Scholars like wise to be
found by them, and what be their names, that they so find.

Item, Whether Proprietaries, Parsons, Vicars, and Clerks, having Churches,
Chapels or Mansions, do keep their Chancels, Rectories, Vicarages, and all
other houses appertaining to them in due reparations.

Item, Whether they have councelled or moved their Parishioners, rather to pray
in a tongue not known, then in English, or to put their trust in any prescribed
number of prayers, as in saying over a number of beads or other like.

Item, Whether they have read the Kings Majesty's Injunctions, every quarter of
the year, the first holy day of the same quarter.

Item, Whether the Parsons Vicars, Curates and other Priests, being under the
degree of a Bachelar of Divinity, have of their own the new Testament, both in
Latin and in English, and the paraphrase of Erasmus upon the same.

Item, Whether within every Church, he that Ministers has read or cause to be
read, the Epistle and Gospel in English, and not in Latin, either in the
Pulpit or some other meet place, so as the people may hear the same.

Item, Whether every Sunday and holy day at Matiues, they have read or cause to
be read, plainly and distinctly in the said place,, one Chapter of the new
Testament in English, immediately after the Lessons, and at Evensong after
Magnificat, one Chapter of the old testament.

Item, Whether they have not at Matius, omitted three lessons, when ix, should
have been read in the Church, and at Evensong the Responds with all the Memories

Item, Whether they have declared to their parishioners, that Saint Marks day,
and the evens of the abrogate holy days should not be fasted.

Item, Whether they have the Procession book in English and have said or song
the said Litany in any other place, but upon their knees in the midst of
their Church, and whether they use any other procession, or omit the said
Litany at any time, or say it or sing it in such sort as the people cannot
understand the same.

Item, Whether they have put out of their Church-books this word Papa and the
name and service of Thomas Bequet, and prayers having rubrics, containing
pardons or indulgences, and all other superstitious legends and prayers.

Item, Whether they bid not the beads according to the order appointed by the
Kings Majesty.

Item, Whether they have opened and declared unto you the true use of
Ceremonies, (that is to say) that they be no workers nor works of salvation,
but only outward signs and tokens, to put us in remembrance of things of
higher perfection.

Item, Whether they have taught and declared to their parishioners, that they
may with a safe and quiet conscience in the time of Harvest, labor upon the
holy and festival days, and if supersticiously they abstain from working upon
those days, that then they do greivously offend and displease God.

Item, Whether they have admitted any persons to the Communion, being openly
known to be out of charity with their neighbors.

Item, Whether the Deanes, Archdeacons, Masters of Hospitals, and Prebendaries
have preached by themselves personally, twice every year at the least.

Item, whether they have provided, and have a strong Chest for the poor men's
Box, and set and fastened the same, near to the high altar.

Item, Whether they have diligently called upon, exhorted and moved their
parishioners, and specially when they make their Testaments, to give to the
said poor men's Box, and to bestow that upon the poor Chest, which they were
wont to bestow upon Pardons, Pilgrimages, Trentalles, Masses satisfactory,
decking of Images, offering of Candles, giving to Friars, and upon other like
blind devotions.

Item, Whether they have denied to Visit the sick, or bury the dead, being
brought to the Church.

Item, Whether they have bought their benefices, or come to them by fraud or
deceit.

Item, Whether they have every Sunday, when the people be most gathered, read
one of the Homilies, in order as they stand in the book, set forth by the Kings
Majesty.

Item, Whether they do not omit prime and hours, when they have any Sermon or
Homily.

Item, Whether they have said or sung any Mass, in any Oratory, Chapel, or
any man's house, not being hallowed.

Item, Whether they have given open monition to their Parishoners, that they
should not wear beads, nor pray upon them.

Item, Whether they have moved their Parishoners, lying upon their deathbeds,
or at any other time, to bestow any part of their substance, upon Trentals,
Masses Satisfactory or any such blind devotions.

Item, Whether they take any Trentals or other Masses Satisfactory to say or
sing for the quick or the dead.

Item, Whether they have given open monition to their parishioners, to detect
and present to their Ordinary all adulterers and fornicators, and such men as
have two wives living, and such women as have two husbands living within their
parishes.

Item, Whether they have not monished their Parishoners openly, that they
should not sell, give nor otherwise alienate any of their Church goods.

Item, Whether they or any of them do keep more benefices, and other
Ecclesiastical promotions then they ought to do, not having sufficient license
and dispensations thereunto, and how many they be, and their names.

Item, Whether they minister the Communion any otherwise then only after such
form and manner, as is set forth by the Kings Majesty, in the book of the
Communion.

Item, Whether they hallowed and delivered to the people any Candles upon
Candlemas-day, and Ashes upon Ashe-Wednesday, or any Palms upon Palm Sunday
last past.

Item, Whether they had upon Good Friday last-past, the Sepulchers with their
lights, having the Sacrament therein.

Item, Whether they upon Easier-Even last past, hallowed the Font, Fire, or
Paschal, or had any Paschal set up, or burning in their Churches.

Item, Whether your Parsons and Vicars have admitted any Curates to serve their
Cures which were not first examined and allowed, either by my Lord of
Canterbury, Master Archdeacon or their officers.

Item, Whether you know any person within your parish, or else where, that is a
letter of the word of God to be read in English, or sincerely preached, or of
the execution of the Kings Majesty's Injunctions, or other his Majesty's
proceedings in matters of religion.

Item, Whether every parish have provided a Chest with two locks and keys for
the book of Wedding, Christining and Burying.

Item, Whether in the time of the Letany, or any other Common prayer, in the
time of the Sermon or Homily, and when the Priest reads the Scripture to the
parishioners, any person have departed out of the Church, without a just and
necessary cause.

Item, Whether any bells have been knowled or rung at the time of the premises.

Item, Whether any person has abused the Ceremonies, as in casting holy water
upon his bed, or bearing about him holy bread, St. John's Gospel, ringing of
holy bells, or keeping of private holy days, as Tailors, Bakers, Brewers,
Smithes, Shoomakers, and such other.

Item, Whether the money coming and rising of any cattle, or other movable
stocks of the Church, and money given or bequethed, to the finding of Torches
lights, tapers, or lamps, (not paid out of any lands) have not been employed to
the poor men's Chest.

Item, Who has the said stocks and money in their hands, and what be their
names.

Item, Whether any undiscreet persons do uncharitably contemn, and abuse
Priests, and Ministers of the Church.

Item, Whether they that understand not the Latin, do pray upon any Primer but
the English Primer, set forth by the Kings Majesty's authority, and whether
they that understand Latin, do use any other then the Latin Primer, set forth
by like authority.

Item, Whether there be any other Grammar, taught in any other school within
this Diocese then that which is set forth by the Kings Majesty.

Item, Whether any person keep their Church holy day, and the dedication day,
any otherwise or at any other time, then is appointed by the Kings Majesty.

Item, Whether the service in the Church, be done at due and convenient hours.

Item, Whether any have used to commune, jangle, and talk in the Church, in the
time of the Common prayer, reading of the Homily, Preaching, Reading or
declaring of the Scripture.

Item, Whether any have wilfully maintained and defended, any Heresies, Errors
or false opinions, contrary to the faith of Christ, and holy Scripture.

Item, Whether any be common drunkards, swearers, or blasphemers of the name of
God.

Item, Whether any have committed adultery, fornication, or incest, or be
common bands, and receivers of such evil persons, or vehemently suspected of
any of the premises.

Item, Whether any be braulers, slanderers, chiders, scolders, and sowers of
discord, between one person and another.

Item, Whether you know any that use Charms, Sorcery, Enchantments,
Witchcraft, Southsaying, or any like craft invented by the Devil.

Item, Whether the Churches, Pulpits, and other necessaries appertaining to the
same, be sufficiently repaired.

Item, Whether you know any, that in contempt of their own Parish Church do
resort to any other Church.

Item, Whether any Inholders or Alehousekeepers, do use commonly to sell meat
and drink, in the time of Common prayer, Preaching or Reading of the Homilies,
or Scripture.

Item, Whether you know any to be married, within the degrees prohibited by the
Laws of God, or that be separated or divorced without a just cause, allowed by
the Law of God, and whether any such have married again.

Item, Whether you know any to have made privy contratts of matrimony, not
calling two or more thereunto.

Item, Whether they have married solemnly, the banes not first lawfully asked.

Item, Whether you know any Executors, or Administrators of dead men's goods,
which do not duly bestow such of the said goods, as were given and bequeathed,
or appointed to be distributed among the poor people, repairing of high ways,
finding of poor Scholars, or marrying of poor Maids, or such other like
charitable deeds.

Item, Whether any do contemn married Priests, and for that they be married,
will not receive the Communion, or other Sacraments at their hands.

Item, Whether you know any that keep in their houses undefaced, any abused or
feigned Images, any Tables, Pictures, Paintings, or other monuments of feigned
miracles, Pilgrimages, Idolatry, or Superstition.

ARTICLES to be enquired of IN THE VISITATION OF THE DIOCES of LONDON, By the
reverend Father in God, NICOLAS BISHOP of LONDON,

In the fourth year of our Sovereign Lord King Edward the 6. by the Grace of
God King of England France and Ireland defender of the faith, and in earth, of
the Church of England and also of Ireland, the supreme head, next and
immediately under our Savior CHRIST.

Imprinted at LONDON by Reynold Wolf. M.DL.

St. PAUL.
I Testify therefore before God and before the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall
judge the quick and dead, at his appearing in his Kingdom, preach thou the
word, be fervent in season or out of season. Improve, rebuke, exhort, withal
long suffering and Doctrine.

2. Tim. 4. Articles of Visitation by Bishop Ridley Anno 1550.
WHether your Curates and ministers be of that cdnversation of living, that
worthily they can be reprehended of no man.

Whether your Curates and Ministers do haunt and resort to Taverus or
Alesouses, otherwise then for their honest necessity, there to drink and riot
or to play at unlawful games.

Whether your Ministers be common brawlers, sowers of discord rather then
charity among their parishioners, haukers, hunters, or spending their time
idly, or coming to their benefice by Simony.

Whether your Ministers or any other persons have committed adultery,
fornication, incest, baudry, or to be vehemently suspected of the same, common
drunkards, scolds, or be common swearers and blasphemers of Gods holy name.

Whether your Parsons and Vicars do maintain their houses and Chancels in
sufficient reparation: or if their houses be in decay, whether they bestow
yearly the fifth part of the fruits of the benefice, until the same be repaired.

Whether your Parsons, and Vicars absent from their benefice, do leave their
Cure to an able Minister. And if he may dispend yearly xx.l. or above in this
Deanery, or else where, whether he does distribute every year among his poor
parishioners there at the least, the forty part of the fruits of the same. And
likewise spending yearly C.l. Whether he does find one scholar, at either of
the universities, or some grammar School: and so for every other hundred pound,
one Scholar.

Whether every Dean, Archdeacon, and Prebendary, being Priest, does personally
by himself Preach twice every year at the least, either where he is entitled,
or where he has jurisdiction, or in some place united or appropriate to the
same.

Whether your Minister having license thereunto, does use to preach, or not
licenced, does diligently procure other to preach, that are licenced: or
whether he refuses those, offering themselves that are licenced, or absenteth
himself, or causes other to be away from the Sermon, or else admits any to
preach that are not licenced.

Whether any by preaching, writing, word or deed, has or does maintain the
usurped power of the Bishop of Rome.

Whether any be a letter of the word of God to be preached or read in the
English tongue.

Whether any do preach, declare, or speak, any thing in derogation of the book
of Common prayer, or any thing therein contained, or any part thereof.

Whether any do preach and defend, that private persons may make insurrections,
stir sedition, or compel men to give them their goods.

Whether the Curate does admit any to the Communion before he be confirmed, or
any that ken not the Pater Noster, the articles of the faith and ten
Commandments in English,

Whether Curates do Minister the Communion for money, or use to have trentals of
Communions.

Whether any of the Anabaptists sect, or other use notoriously any unlawful or
private conventicles, wherein they do use Doctrine, or administration of
Sacraments, separating themselves from the rest of the parish.

Whether there be any that privately in their private house have their Masses
contrary to the form and order of the book of Communion.

Whether any minister does refuse to use the Common prayers, or minister
Sacraments in that order and form, as is set forth in the book of Common prayer.

Whether baptism be ministered (out of necessity) in any other time then on the
Sunday or holy day, or in an other tongue then english.

Whether any speaks against baptism of Infants.

Whether any be married within degrees prohibited by Gods law, or separate
without cause lawful, or is married without banes thrice first asked 3. several
holy days or Sundays openly in the Church at service time.

Whether any curate does marry them of other parishes, without that curates
license and certificate from him of the banes thrice solemnly asked.

Whether any says, that the wickedesse of the Minister takes away the effect
of Christ's Sacraments.

Whether any says that Christian men cannot be allowed to repentance, if they
sin voluntarily after baptism.

Whether your Curates be ready to Minister the Sacraments, visit the sick, and
bury the dead, being brought to the Church.

Whether any minister uses wilfully and obstinately any other Right, Ceremony,
Order, Form, or manner of Communion, Mattens, or Evensong, Ministration of
Sacraments or open prayers then is set forth in the Book of Common prayer.

Whether your Curate, once in six weeks at the least, upon some Sunday or holy
day, before Even-song, do openly in the Church instruct and examine children
not confirmed, in some part of the Catechism, and whether Parents and Masters
do send them thither upon warning given by the Minister.

Whether any uses to keep abrogate holy days or private holy days, as
bakers, shoomakers, brewers, smiths, and such other.

Whether any uses to hallow water, bread, salt, bells, or candles upon
Candlemas day, ashes on Ashwenesday, Palms on Palmsunday, the Font on the
Easter even, fire on paschal, or whether there was any sepulcher on Good-Fryday,

Whether the water in the Font be changed every month once, and then any other
prayers said, then is in the book of Common prayer appointed.

Whether there be any images in your Church, Tabernacles, Shrines, or covering
of Shrines, candles or trindels of wax, or feigned Miracles in your Churches or
private houses.

Whether your Church be kept in due and lawful reparation, and whether there be
a comely pulpit set up in the same: and likewise a coffer for alms for the
poor, called the poor man's box or chest.

Whether any legacies given to the poor, amending high ways, or marrying poor
maids, be undistributed, and by whom.

God save the King.
ARTICLES agreed upon by the BISHOPS and other Learned and Godly men, In the
Last CONVOCATION at LONDON, In the year of our Lord 1552. to root out the
discord of Opinions, and establish the Agreement of true Religion.

Published by the Kings Majesty's Authority 1553.

Imprinted at LONDON by John Day.

ARTICLES agreed upon in the CONVOCATION and published by the KINGS MAJESTY
Of Faith in the holy Trinity.
THere is but one living and true God, and he is everlasting, without body,
parts, or passions; of infinite power, wisdom and goodness, the maker and
preserver of all things both visible and invisible. And in unity of this
Godhead there be three persons, of one substance, power and eternity; the
Father, the Son and the holy Ghost.

That the word or Son of God was made very man.
THe Son, which is the word of the Father took man's nature in the womb of the
blessed Virgin Mary of her substance: so that two whole and perfect natures,
that is to say, the Godhead and manhood, were joined together into one person,
never to be divided, whereof is one Christ, very God and very man, who truly
suffered, was crucified, dead and buried, to reconcile his Father to us. and to
be a sacrifice for all sin of man both original and actual.

Of the going down of Christ into hell.
AS Christ died and was buried for us; so also it is to be believed, that he
went down into hell, for the body lay in the Sepulcher until the Resurrection,
but his Ghost departing from him was with the Ghosts that were in prison or in
Hell and did preach to the same as the place of St. Peter does testify.

The Resurrection of Christ.
CHrist did truly rise again from death and took again his body, with flesh,
bones, and all things appertaining to the perfection of man's nature, wherewith
he ascended into Heaven, and there sits, until he return to judge men at
the last day.

The Doctrine of holy Scripture is sufficient to salvation.
HOly Scripture contains all things necessary to salvation: so that
whatsoever is neither read therein, nor may be proved thereby, although it be
some time received of the Faithful as godly and profitable for an order and
comeliness, yet no man ought to be constrained to believe it as an Article of
Faith or reputed requisite to the necessity of salvation.

The old Testament is not to be refused.
THe old Testament is not to be put away as though it were contrary to the New,
but to be kept still, for both in the Old and new Testaments everlasting life
is offered to mankind by Christ, who is the only Mediator between God and
man, being both God and man. Wherefore they are not to be heard, which feign
that the old fathers did look only for transitory promises.

The three Creeds.
THe three Creeds, Nicene Creed, Athanasius 's Creed, and that which is
commonly called the Apostles Creed ought thoroughly to be received: for they may
be proved by most certain warrants of holy Scripture.

Of Original or Birth sin.
ORiginal sin staudeth not in the following of Adam, (as the Pelagians do
vainly talk, which also the Anabaptists do now adays renew, but it is the
fault and corruption of the nature of every man, that naturally is engendered of
the offspring of Adam, whereby man is very far gone from his former
righteousness which he had at his creation, and is of his own nature given to
evil; so that the flesh desires always contrary to the spirit, and therefore
in every person born into this world, it deserves Gods wrath and damnation,
and this infection of nature does remain, yea in them that are baptized,
whereby the lust of the flesh, called in Greek (...) which some do expound the
wisdom, some the sensuality, some the affection, some the desire of the flesh,
is not subject to the Law of God. And although there is no condemnation for
them that believe and are baptized. yet the Apostle does confess, that
concupiscence and lust has of it self the nature of sin.

Of Free Will.
WE have no power to do good works pleasant and acceptable to God without the
grace of God by Christ preventing us, that we may have a good will and working
in us when we have that will.

Of Grace.
THe Grace of Christ or the holy Ghost by him given does take away the stony
heart and gives an heart of flesh and although those that have no will to good
things he makes them to will, and those that would evil things he makes them
not to will the same: yet nevertheless he enforces not the will: and
therefore no man when he sins can excuse himself as not worthy to be blamed,
or condemned by alleging that he sinned unwillingly or by compulsion.

Of the Justification of Man.
Justification by only Faith in Jesus Christ in that sense as it is declared
in the Homily of Justification is a most certain and wholesome Doctrine for
Christian men,

Works before Justification.
WOrks done before the grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his Spirit, are
not pleasant to God, forasmuch as they spring not of faith in Jesus Christ,
neither do they make men meet to receive grace, (or as the School-authors say)
deserve grace of cong^uity: but because they are not done as God has willed
and commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they have the nature of sin.

Works of Supererogation.
VOluntary works besides, over and above Gods commandments, which they call
works of supererogation cannot be caught without arrogance and iniquity. For by
them men do declare that they do not only render to God as much as they are
bound to do, but that they do more for his sake then of bounden duty is
required: Whereas Christ says plainly, When ye have done all that are
commanded you, say, We be unprofitable servants.

No man is without sin but Christ alone.
CHrist in the truth of our nature was made like unto us in all things (sin
only except) from which he was clearly void, both in his flesh and in his
Spirit. He came to be the Lamb without spot, who by sacrifice of himself made
once forever, should take away the sins of the world: and sin (as S John says)
was not in him. But the rest (yea, although we be baptized, and born again in
Christ) yet we offend in many things, and if we say we have no sin, we deceive
our selves, and the truth is not in us.

Of sin against the holy Ghost.
Every deadly sin willingly committed after Baptism is not sin against the
holy Ghost, and unpardonable. Wherefore the place for penitents is not to be
denied to such as fall into sin after Baptism. After we have received the holy
Ghost, we may depart from grace given, and fall into sin; and by the grace of
God (we may) arise again and amend our lives. And therefore they are to be
condemned, which say they can no more sin as long as they live here, or deny
the place for penitents to such as truly repent and amend their lives.

Blasphemy against the holy Ghost.
BLasphemy against the holy ghost, is, when a man of malice and stubborness of
mind does rail upon the truth of Gods word manifestly perceived, and being
enemy thereunto persecuteth that same, and because such be guilty of Gods
curse, they entangle themselves with a most grievous and heinous crime:
whereupon this kind of sin is called and affirmed of the Lord unpardonable.

Of Predestination and Election.
PRedestination to life is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby (before the
foundations of the world were laid) he has constantly decreed by his own
judgment, secret to us, to deliver from curse and damnation those whom he has
chosen out of mankind, and to bring them to everlasting salvation by Christ,
as vessels made to honor, Whereupon such as have so excellent a benefit of God
given unto them, be called according to Gods purpose by his Spirit working in
due season: they through grace obey the calling: they be justified freely, they
be made sons by adoption: they be made like the Image of Gods only begotten Son
Jesus Christ: they walk religiously in good works, and at length by Gods mercy
they attain to everlasting felicity.

As the godly consideration of Predestination and our Election in Christ is
full of sweet, pleasant and unspeakable comfort to godly persons, and such as
feel in themselves the working of the Spirit of Christ mortifying the works of
the flesh, and their earthly members, and drawing up their mind to high and
heavenly things, as well because it does greatly establish and confirm their
faith of eternal salvation, to be enjoyed through Christ, as because it does
fervently kindle their love toward God: So for curious and carnal persons,
lacking the Spirit of Christ, to have continually before their eyes the
sentence of Gods predestination, is a most dangerous downfall, whereby the Devil
may thrust them either into desperation, or into wretchlesnesse of most unclean
living, no less perilous then desperation.

Further more, although the decrees of Predestination are unknown unto us, yet
we must receive Gods promises in such wise as they be generally set forth to us
in holy Scripture: and in our doings that will of God is to be followed, which
we have expressly declared unto us in the Word of God.

We must trust to obtain eternal Salvation only by the Name of Christ.
THey also are to be had accursed and abhorred that presume to say that every
man shall be saved by the law or sect which he professes, so that he be
diligent to frame his life according to that law, and the light of nature. For
holy Scripture does set out unto us only the name of Jesus Christ whereby men
must be saved.

All men are bound to keep the Moral Commandments of the Law.
THe Law which was given of God by Moses although it bind not Christian men as
concerning the Ceremonies and Rites of the same, neither is it required that
the civil precepts and orders of it should of necessity be received in any
Commonweal, yet no man be he never so perfect a Christian is exempt and loose
from the obedience of those Commuadements which are called Moral, wherefore
they are not to be hearkened unto, who affirm that holy Scripture is given only
to the weak, and do boast themselves continually of the spirit, of whom they
say they have learned such things as they teach, although the same be most
evidently repugnant to the holy Scripture.

Of the Church.
THe visible Church of Christ is a congregation of faithful men, in the which
the pure word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered
according to Christ's ordinance, in all those things that of necessity are
requisite to the same.

As the Church of Jerusalem, of Alexandria, and of Antioch has erred: So also
the Church of Rome has erred, not only in their living, but also in matters
of faith.

Of the authority of the Church.
IT is not lawful for the Church to ordain any thing that is contrary to Gods
word written, neither may it so expound one place of Scripture, that it be
repugnant to another. Wherefore although the Church be a witness and a keeper
of holy Writ, yet as it ought not to decree any thing against the same, so
beside the same ought it not to enforce any thing to be believed for necessity
of salvation.

Of the Authority of general Councils.
GEneral Councils may not be gathered together without the commandment and will
of Princes. And when they be gathered (forasmuch as they be an assembly of men,
whereof all be not governed with the Spirit and word of God) they may err and
sometimes have erred, not only in worldly matters, but also in things
pertaining unto God. Wherefore things ordained by them as necessary to
salvation, have neither strength nor authority, unless it may be declared that
they be taken out of holy Scripture.

Of Purgatory.
THe Doctrine of School Authors concerning Purgatory, Pardons, worshipping and
adoration, as well of Images as of Relics, and also invocation of Saints is a
fond thing, vainly feigned, and grounded upon no warrant of Scripture, but
rather repugnant to the Word of God.

No man may minister in the Congregation except he be called
IT is not lawful for any man to take upon him the office of public preaching,
or ministering the Sacraments in the congregation, before he be lawfully called,
and sent to execute the same. And those we ought to judge lawfully called and
sent, which be chosen and called to this work by men, who have public
authority given unto them in the Congregation, to call and send Ministers into
the Lords vineyard.

Men must speak in the Congregation in such a tongue as the people
understands.
IT is most seemly and most agreeable to the word of God, that in the
Congregation, nothing be openly read or spoke in a tongue unknown to the
people, the which thing St. Paul did forbid, except some were present that
should declare the same.

Of the Sacraments.
Our Lord Jesus Christ has knit together a company of new people, with
Sacraments most few in number, most easy to be kept, most excellent in
signification, as is baptism and the Lords Supper.

The Sacraments were not ordained of Christ to be Gazed upon, or to be carried
about, but that we should rightly use them. And in such only, as worthily
receive the same; they have a wholesome effect and operation, and yet not that
of the work wrought as some men speak, which word as it is strange and unknown
to holy Scripture, so it engenders no godly, but a very superstitious sense;
but they that receive the Sacraments unworthily purchase to themselves
damnation, as S. Paul says.

Sacraments ordained by the word of God be not only badges and tokens of
Christian men's profession: but rather they be certain sure witnesses, and
effectual signs of grace and Gods good will toward us,, by the which he does
work invisibly in us and does not only quicken, but also strengthen and
confirm our faith in him.

The wickedness of the Ministers does not take away the effectual operation of
Gods Ordinances.
ALthough in the visible Church the evil be ever mingled with the good, and
sometime the evil have chief authority in the ministration of the Word and
Sacraments: yet forasmuch as they do not the same in their own name, but do
minister by Christ's commission and authority, we may use their ministry both
in hearing the Word of God, and in the receiving the Sacraments. Neither is the
effect of Gods ordinances taken away by their wickedness, nor the grace of Gods
gifts diminished from such, as by faith and rightly receive the Sacraments
ministered unto them, which be effectual, because of Christ's institution and
promise, although they be ministered by evil men.

Nevertheless, it appertains to the discipline of the Church, that enquiry
be made of such, and that they be accused by those that have knowledge of their
offenses: and finally being found guilty by just judgment be deposed.

Of Baptism.
Baptism is not only a sign of profession, and mark of difference, whereby
Christian men are discerned from others that be not Christened: but it is also a
sign and seal of our new birth, whereby as by an instrument, they that receive
Baptism rightly are grafted into the Church: the promises of forgivness of
sin, and of our adoption to be the sons of God, are visibly signed and sealed:
faith is confirmed, and grace increased by virtue of prayer unto God. The
custom of the Church to Christen young Children is to be commended, and in any
wise to be retained in the Church.

Of the Lords Supper.
THe Supper of the Lord is not only a sign of the love that Christians ought
to have among themselves one to another: but rather it is a Sacrament of our
redemption by Christ's death. Insomuch that to such as rightly, worthily and
with faith receive the same, the bread which we break, is a communion of the
body of Christ: likewise the Cup of blessing is a Communion of the blood of
Christ.

Transubstantiation or the change of the Substance of Bread and wine, into the
substance of Christ's Body and Blood, cannot be proved by holy Writ: but it is
repugnant to the plain words of Scripture, and has given occasion to many
superstitions

For as much as the truth of man's nature requires that the body of one and the
self same man, cannot be at one time in diverse places, but must needs be in
some one certain place, therefore the body of Christ cannot be present at one
time, in many and diverse places: and because as holy Scripture does teach,
Christ was taken up into heaven and there shall continue unto the end of the
World: a faithful man ought not either to believe or openly to confess the
real and bodily presence, as they term it, of Christ's flesh and blood in the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper was not commanded by Christ's ordinance, to
be kept carried about, lifted up, nor worshipped.

Of the perfect oblation of Christ made upon the Cross.
THe offering of Christ made once for ever, is the perfect redemption, the
pacifying of Gods displeasure, and satisfaction for all the sins of the whole
world both original and actual, and there is none other satisfaction for sin
but that alone. Wherefore the sacrifices of Masses, in the which it was
commonly said, that the Priest did offer Christ for the quick and the dead, to
have remission of pain or sin, were forged fables, and dangerous deceits.

The state of single life is commanded to no man by the word of God.
BIshops, Priests, and Deacons are not commanded to vow the state of single
life without marriage, neither by Gods Law are they compelled to abstain from
matrimony

Excommunicate persons are to be avoided.
THat person which by open denunciation of the Church, is rightly cut off from
the unity of the Church, and excommunicate, ought to be taken of the whole
multitude of the faithful as an Heathen and Publican, until he be openly
reconciled by Penance, and received into the Church by a Judge that has
authority thereto.

Traditions of the Church.
IT is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies be in all places one, or
utterly like, for at all times they have been diverse, and may be changed
according to the diversity of countries, and men's manners, so that nothing be
ordained against Gods word. Whosoever through his private judgment, willingly
and purposely does openly break the Traditions and Ceremonies of the Church,
which be not repugnant to the word of God, and be ordained and approved by
common authority, ought to be rebuked openly, (that other may fear to do the
like) as one that offends against the common order of the Church, and hurts
the authority of the Magistrate, and wounds the consciences of weak brethren.

Of Homilies.
THe Homilies of late given and set out by the Kings authority be godly and
wholesome containing Doctrine to be received of all men, and therefore are to be
read to the people, diligently, distinctly, and plainly.

Of the book of Prayers and Ceremonies of the Church of England.
THe Book which of very late time was given to the Church of England by the
Kings authority and the Parliament, containing the manner and form of praying
and ministering the Sacraments in the Church of England, likewise also the book
of ordering Ministers of the Church, set forth by the foresaid authority are
Godly, and in no point repugnant to the wholesome Doctrine of the Gospel, but
agreeable thereunto, furthering and beautifying the same not a little and
therefore of all faithful members of the Church of England and chiefly of the
Ministers of the word, they ought to be received and allowed with all
readiness of mind and thanksgiving and to be commended to the people of God.

Of Civil Magistrates.
THe King of England is Supreme head in earth next under Christ of the Church
of England and Ireland.

The Bishop of Rome has no jurisdiction in this Realm of England.

The Civil Magistrate is ordained and allowed of God, wherefore we must obey
him not only for fear of punishment but also for conscience sake.

The Civil Laws may punish Christian men with death, for heinous and grievous
offenses,

It is Lawful for Christians, at the commandment of the Magistrate, to wear
weapons, and serve in lawful wars.

Christian men's goods are not common.
THe riches and goods af Christians are not common, as touching the right,
title and possession of the same, as certain Anabaptists do falsely boast.
Notwithstanding, every man ought of such things as he possesses, liberally to
give alms to the poor according to his ability.

Christian men may take an oath.
AS we confess that vain and rash swearing is forbidden Christian men by our
Lord Jesus Christ, and his Apostle James: So we judge that Christian Religion
does not prohibit, but that a man may swear when the Magistrate requires, in a
cause of faith and charity, so it be done according to the Prophets teaching,
in justice, judgment and truth.

The Resurrection of the dead is not yet brought to pass.
THe Resurrection of the Dead is not as yet brought to pass: as though it
only belonged to the soul, which by the grace of Christ is raised from the
death of sin: but it is to be looked for at the last day. For then (as Scripture
does most manifestly testify) to all that be dead, their own bodies, flesh and
bone shall be restored: that the whole man may according to his works have
either reward or punishment, as he has lived virtuously or wickedly.

The Souls of them that depart this life do neither dye with the bodies nor
sleep idly.
THey which say that the Souls of such as depart hence do sleep being without
all sense feeling or perceiving until the day of judgment: or affirm that the
souls dye with the bodies, and at the last day shall be raised up with the
same, do utterly dissent from the right belief, declared to us in holy
Scripture.

Heretics called Millenarii.
THey that go about to renew the Fable of the Heretics called Millenarii be
repugnant to holy Scripture, and cast them selves headlong into a Jewish dotage.

All men shall not be saved at the length.
THey also are worthy of Condemnation, who endeavor at this time to restore
the dangerous opinion, that all men be they never so ungodly, shall at length
be saved, when they have suffered pains for their sins, a certain time
appointed by Gods Justice.

The End of the Articles.
Imprinted by John Day, 1553.

ARTICULI de quibus in SYNODO LONDINENSI Anno Dom. M.D.LII. ad tollendam
opinionum dissensionem and consensum verae religionis firmandum, INTER
EPISCOPOS Et alios Eruditos Viros convenerat, REGIA authoritate in lucem editi.

Excusum LONDINI, apud Reginaldum Wolfium, Regiae Majestatis in Latinis
Typographum. Anno Dom. M.D.LIII.

De fide in Sacrosanctam Trinitatem.
UNus est vivus and verus Deus, aeternus, incorporeus, impartibilis,
impassibilis, immensae potentiae, sapientiae, ac bonitatis, creator and
conservator omnium, tum visibilium tum invisibilium. Et in unitate hujus
divinae naturae tres sunt personae, ejusdem essentiae, potentiae, ac
aeternitatis, Pater, Filius, and Spiritus Sanctus.

Verbum Dei, verum hominem esse factum.
FIlius qui est verbum patris, in utero beatae Virginis, ex illius substantia
naturam humanam assumpsit, ita ut duae naturae, divina and humana, integre
atque perfect in unitate personae fuerint inseparabiliter conjunctae, ex
quibus est unus Christus, verus Deus and verus homo, qui vere passus est,
crucifixus, mortuus and sepultus, ut patrem nobis reconciliaret, essetque
hostia non tantum pro culpa originis, verum etiam pro omnibus actualibus
hominum peccatis.

De discensu Christi ad Inferos.
QUemadmodum Christus pro nobis mortuus est and sepultus, ita est etiam
credendus ad inferos descendisse. Nam corpus usque ad resurrectionem in
sepulchro jacuit, Spiritus ab illo emissus, cum spiritibus qui in carcere five
in inferno detinebantur, fuit, illisque praedicavit, quemad modum testatur
Petri locus.

Resurrectio Christi.
CHristus vere a mortuis resurrexit, suumque corpus cum carne, ossibus,
omnibusque ad integritatem humanae naturae pertinentibus, recepit, cum quibus
in coelum ascendit, ibique residet quoad extremo die ad judicandos homines
revertatur.

Divinae Scripturae doctrina sufficit ad salutem.
SCriptura sacra continet omnia quae sunt ad salutem necessaria, ita ut
quicquid in ea nec leg^tur neque inde probari potest, licet interdum a
fidelibus, ut pium and conducibile ad ordinem and decorum admittatur, attamen a
quoquam non exigendum est ut tanquam articulus fidei credatur, and ad salutis
necessitatem requiri putetur.

Vetus Testamentum non est rejiciendum
TEstamentum Vetus, quasi Novo contrarium sit, non est repudiandum, sed
retinendum, quandoquidem tam in veteri quam in novo per Christum qui unicus est
mediator Dei and hominum, Deus and homo, aeterna vita humano generi est
proposita. Quare non sunt audiendi, qui veteres tantum in promissiones
temporarias sperasse confingunt.

Symbola tria.
Symbola tria, Nicenum, Athanasii, and quod vulgo Apostolicum appellatur,
omnino recipienda sunt. Nam firmissimis divinarum scripturarum testimoniis
probari possunt.

Peccatum Originale.
PEccatum originis non est (ut fabulantur Pelagiani, and hodie Anabaptistae
repetunt) in imitatione Adami situm, sed est vitium and depravatio naturae
cujuslibet hominis ex Adamo naturaliter propagati: qua fit ut ab originali
justitia quam longissime distet, ad malum sua natura propendeat, and caro
semper adversus spiritum concupiscat: unde in unoquoque nascentium, iram Dei
atque damnationem meretur. Manet etiam in renatis haec naturae depravatio, qua
fit ut affectus carnis, graece (...), quod alii sapientiam, alii sensum, alii
affectum, alii studium vocant, legi Dei non subjicitur. Et quanquam renatis and
credentibus nulla propter Christum est condemnatio, peccati tamen in sese
rationem habere concupiscentiam fatetur Apostolus.

De libero arbitrio.
Absque gratia Dei, quae per Christum est, nos praeveniente ut velimus, and
cooperante dum volumus, ad pietatis opera facienda, quae Deo grata fint and
accepta, nihil valemus.

De gratia.
GRatia Christi, seu spiritus sanctus qui per eundem datur, cor lapideum
aufert, and dat cor carneum, Atque licet ex nolentibus quae recta sunt,
volentes faciat, and ex volentibus prava, nolentes reddat, voluntati
nihilominus violentiam nullam infert. Et nemo hac de causa, cum peccaverit,
seipsum, excusare potest, quasi nolens aut coactus peccaverit, ut eam ob causam
accusari non mereatur aut damnari.

De Hominis justificatione.
JUstificatio ex sola fide Jesus Christi, eo sensu quo in Homilia de
justificatione explicatur, est certissima and saluberrima Christianorum
doctrina.

Opera ante justificationem.
OPera quae fiunt ante gratiam Christi, and Spiritus ejus afflatum, cum ex fide
Jesu Christi non prodeant, minime Deo grata sunt. Neque gratiam (ut multi
vocant) de congruo, merentur: Imo cum non sint facta ut Deus illa fieri voluit
and praecepit, peccati rationem habere non dubitamus.

Opera Supererogationis.
OPera quae Supererogationis appellant, non possunt sine arrogantia and
impietate praedicari, nam illis declarant homines non tantum se Deo reddere
quae tenentur, sed plus in ejus gratiam facere quam deberent: cum aperte
Christus dicat, Cum feceritis omnia quaecunque praecepta sunt vobis, dicite:
Servi inutiles sumus.

Nemo praeter Christum est sine peccato.
CHristus in nostrae naturae veritate, per omnia similis factus est nobis,
excepto peccato, a quo prorsus erat immunis, tum in carne tum in spiritu. Venit
ut agnus absque macula esset, qui mundi peccata per immolationem sui semel
factam tolleret: and peccatum (ut inquit Ioannes) in eo non erat. Sed nos
reliqui etiam baptizati, and in Christo regenerati, in multis tamen offendimus
omnes, and si dixerimus quia peccatum non habemus, nos ipsos seducimus, and
veritas in nobis non est.

De peccato in spiritum sanctum.
NOn omne peccatum mortale post baptismum voluntary perpetratum, est peccatum
in spiritum sanctum and irremissibile: proinde lapsis a baptismo in peccata,
locus poenitentiae non est negandus. Post acceptum spiritum sanctum poffumus a
gratia data recedere atque peccare, denuoque per gratiam Dei resurgere ac
resipiscere. Ideoque illi damnandi sunt, qui se quamdiu hic vivant, amplius non
posse peccare affirmant, aut vere resipiscentibus poenitentiae locum denegant.

Blasphemia in Spiritum Sanctum.
BLasphemia in Spiritum Sanctum, est cum quis verborum Dei manifest perceptam
veritatem, ex malitia and obfirmatione animi, convitiis insectatur, and
hostiliter insequitur. Atque hujusmodi, quia maledicto sunt obnoxii, gravissimo
sese adstringunt sceleri. Unde peccati hoc genus Irremissibile a Domino
appellatur, and affirmatur:

De Praedestinatione and Electione.
PRaedestinatio ad vitam est aeternum Dei propositum, quo ante jacta mundi
fundamenta suo consilio, nobis quidem occulto, constanter decrevit eos quos
elegit ex hominum genere, a maledicto and exitio liberare, atque ut vasa in
honorem efficta, per Christum ad aeternam salutem adducere: unde qui tam
praeclaro Dei beneficio sunt donati, illi, spiritu ejus opportuno tempore
operante, secundum propositum ejus vocantur, vocationi per gratiam parent,
Justificantur gratis, adoptantur in filios, unigeniti Jesus Christi imagini
efficiuntur conformes, in bonis operibus sancte ambulant, and demum ex Dei
misericordia pertingunt ad sempiternam felicitatem.

Quemadmodum praedestinationis and electionis nostrae in Christo pia
consideratio, dulcis, suavis, and ineffabilis consolationis plena est vere
piis, and his qui sentiunt in se vim spiritus Christi, facta carnis, and membra
quae adhuc sunt super terram mortificantem, animumque ad coelestia and superna
rapientem, tum quia fidem nostram de aeterna salute consequeuda per Christum,
plurimum stabilit atque confirmat, tum quia amorem nostrum in Deum vehementer
accendit: Ita hominibus curiosis, carnalibus, and spiritu Christi destitutis,
ob oculos perpetuo versari praedestinationis Dei sententiam, perniciosissimum
est praecipitium, unde illos diabolus pertrudit vel in desperationem, vel in
aeque perniciosam impurissimae vitae securitatem. Deinde licet
praedestinationis decreta sunt nobis ignota, promissiones, tamen divinas sic
amplecti oportet, ut nobis in sacris literis generaliter propositae sunt: and
Dei voluntas in nostris actionibus ea sequeuda est, quam in verbo Dei habemus
diserte revelatam.

Tantum in nomine Christi speranda est aeterna salus.
SUnt and illi anathematizandi qui dicere audent, unumquemque in lege aut secta
quam profitetur esse servandum, modo juxta illam and lumen naturae accurate
vixerit: cum sacrae literae tantum Jesu Christi nomen praedicent in quo salvos
fieri homines oporteat.

Omnes obligantur ad Moralia legis praecepta servanda.
LEx a Deo data per Mosen, licet quo ad Caeremonias and ritus Christianos non
astringat, neque civilia ejus praecepta in aliqua Repub necessario recipi
debeant, nihilominus ab obedientia mandatorum quae Moralia vocantur, nullus
quantumvis Christianus est solutus: quare illi non sunt audiendi, qui sacras
literas tantum infirmis datas esse perhibent, and spiritum perpetuo jactant, a
quo sibi quae praedicant suggeri asserunt, quanquam cum Sacris literis
apertissime pugnent.

De Ecclesiae.
ECclesia Christi visibilis est coetus fidelium, in qou verbum Dei purum
praedicatur, and Sacramenta quoad ea quae necessario exiguntur, juxta Christi
institutum recte administrantur.

Sicut erravit Ecclesia Hierosolymitana, Alexandrina, and Antiochena, ita and
erravit Ecclesia Romana, non solum quoad agenda and caeremoniarum ritus, verum
in his etiam quae credenda sunt.

De Ecclesiae authoritate.
ECclesiae non licet quicquam instituere, quod verbo Dei Scripto adversetur:
neque unum Scripturae locum sic exponere potest, ut alteri contradicat: quare
licet Ecclesia sit divinorum librorum testis and conservatrix, attamen ut
adversus eos nihil decernere, ita praeter illos nihil credendum de necessitate
salutis debet obtrudere.

De authoritate Conciliorum Generalium.
GEneralia Concilia sine jussu and voluntate Principum congregari non possunt:
and ubi convenerint, quia ex hominibus constant qui non omnes spiritu and
verbis Dei reguntur, and errare possunt and interdum errarunt, etiam in his
quae ad normam pietatis pertinent: ideo quae ab illis constituuntur, ut ad
salutem necessaria, neque robur habent neque authoritatem, nisi ostendi possunt
e sacris literis esse desumpta.

De Purgatorio.
Scholasticorum doctrina de Purgatorio, de Indulgentiis, de veneratione and
adoratione tum Imaginum tum Reliquiarum, nec non de invocatione sanctorum, res
est futilis, inaniter conficta, and nullis Scripturarum testimoniis innititur,
imo verbo Dei perniciose contradicit.

Nemo in Ecclesia ministret nisi vocatus.
NOn licet cuiquam sumere sibi munus public praedicandi, aut administrandi
Sacramenta in Ecclesia nisi prius fuerit ad haec obeunda legitime vocatus and
missus. Atque illos legitime vocatos and missos existimare debemus, qui per
homines, quibus potestas vocandi ministros atque mittendi in vineam Domini
public concessa est in Ecclesia, cooptati fuerint and asciti in hoc opus.

Agendum est in Ecclesia lingua quae sit populo nota.
DEcentissimum est and verbo Dei maxim congruit, ut nihil in Ecclesia public
legatur aut recitetur lingua populo ignota, idque Paulus fieri vetuit, nisi
adesset qui interpretaretur.

De Sacramentis.
DOminus noster Jesus Christus Sacramentis numero paucissimis, observatu
facillimis, significatione praestantissimis, societatem novi populi colligavit,
sicuti est Baptismus and Coena Domini.

Sacramenta non instituta sunt a Christo ut spectarentur aut circumferrentur,
sed ut rite illis uteremur: and in his duntaxat qui digne percipiunt, salutarem
habent effectum, idque non ex opere (ut quidam loquuntur) operato; quae vox ut
peregrina est and sacris literis ignota, sic parit sensum minime pium, sed
admodum superstitiosum: qui vero indigne percipiunt damnationem (ut inquit
Paulus) sibi ipsis acquirunt.

Sacramenta per verbum Dei instituta, non tantum sunt notae professionis
Christianorum, sed certa quaedam potius testimonia and efficacia signa gratiae
atque bonae in nos voluntatis Dei, per quae invisibiliter ipse in nobis
operatur, nostramque fidem in se non solum excitat, verum etiam confirmat.

Ministrorum malitia, non tollit efficaciam institutionum divinarum
QUamvis in Ecclesia visibili, bonis mali sint semper admixti, atque inrerdum
ministerio verbi and Sacramentorum administrationi praesint, tamen cum non suo
sed Christi nomine agant, ejusque mandato and authoritate ministrent, illorum
ministerio uti licet, cum in verbo Dei audiendo, tum in Sacramentis
percipiendis: neque per illorum malitiam effectus institutorum Christi
tollitur, aut gratia donorum Dei minuitur quoad eos, qui fide and rite sibi
oblata percipiunt, quae propter institutionem Christi and promissionem
efficacia sunt, licet per malos administrentur. Ad Ecclesiae tamen disciplinam
pertinet, ut in eos inquiratur accusenturque ab iis, qui eorum flagitia
noverint, atque tandem justo convicti judicio, deponantur.

De Baptismo.
BAptismus, non est tantum signum professionis ac discriminis nota, qua
Christiani a non Christianis discernuntur, sed etiam est signum regenerationis,
per quod tanquam per instrumentum recte Baptismum suscipientes, Ecclesiae
inseruntur, promissiones de remissione peccatorum atque adoptione nostra in
filios Dei per Spiritum Sanctum visibiliter obsignantur, fides confirmatur, and
vi divinae invocationis, gratia augetur. Mos Ecclesiae baptizandi parvulos and
landandus and omnino in Ecclesia retinendus.

De Coena Domini.
Coena Domini non est tantum signum mutuae benevolentiae Christianorum inter
sese, verum potius est Sacramentum nostrae per mortem Christi redemptionis.
Atque adeo rite, digne and cum fide sumentibus, panis quem frangimus est
communicatio corporis Christi: Similiter poculum benedictionis, est
communicatio sanguinis Christi.

Panis and vini transubstantiatio in Eucharistia, ex sacris literis probari non
potest, sed apertis Scripturae verbis adversatur and multarum superstitionum
dedit occasionem.

Quum naturae humanae veritas requirat, ut unius ejusdemque hominis corpus in
multis locis simul esse non posset, sed in uno aliquo and definito loco esse
oporteat, idcirco Christi corpus, in multis and diversis locis, eodum tempore,
praesens esse non potest. Et quoniam, ut tradunt Sacrae literae, Christus in
Coelum fuit sublatus, and ibi usque ad finem seculi est permansurus, non debet
quisquam fidelium carnis ejus and sanguinis Realem and Corporalem (ut
loquuntur) praesentiam in Eucharistia vel credere vel profiteri.

Sacramentum Eucharistiae ex institutione Christi non servabatur,
circumferebatur, elevabatur, nec adorabatur.

De unica Christi oblatione in cruce perfecta.
O Blatio Christi semel facta, perfecta est redemptio, propitiatio and
satisfactio pro omnibus peccatis totius mundi, tam originalibus quam
actualibus: neque praeter illam unicam est ulla alia pro peccatis expiatio.
Unde Missarum sacrificia, quibus vulgo dicebatur, Sacerdotem offerre Christum
in remissionem poenae aut culpae pro vivis and defunctis, figmenta sunt, and
perniciosae imposturae

Coelibatus ex verbo Dei praecipitur nemini.
EPiscopis, Presbyteris and Diaconis non est mandatum ut coelibatum voveant:
neque jure divino coguntur matrimonio abstinere.

Excommunicati vitandi sunt.
QUi per publicam Ecclesiae denunciationem rite ab unitate Ecclesiae praecisus
est and excommunicatus, is ab universa fidelium multitudine, donec per
poenitentiam public reconciliatus fuerit arbitrio ludicis competentis,
habendus est tanquam Ethnicus and Publicanus.

Traditiones Ecclesiasticae.
TRaditiones atque caeremoniae easdem non omnino necessarium est esse ubique,
aut prorsus consimiles, nam and variae semper fuerunt and mutari possunt pro
Regionum and morum diversitate, modo nihil contra Dei verbum instituatur.

Traditiones and caeremonias Ecclesiasticas, quae cum verbo Dei non pugnant,
and sunt authoritate publica institutae atque probatae, quisquis privato
confilio volens and data opera public violaverit, is, ut qui peccat in
publicum ordinem Ecclesiae, quique laedit authoritatem Magistratus, and qui
infirmorum fratrum conscientias vulnerat, public, ut caeteri timeant,
arguendus est.

Homiliae.
HOmiliae nuper Ecclesiae Anglicanae per injunctiones Regias traditae atque
commendatae, piae sunt atque salutares, doctrinamque, ab omnibus amplectendam
continent: quare populo diligenter, expedite clareque recitandae sunt.

De libro Precationum and caeremoniarum Ecclesiae Anglicanae.
LIber quinuperrime authoritate Regis and Parliamenti Ecclesiae Anglicanae
traditus est, continens modum and formam orandi, and sacramenta administrandi
in Ecclesia Anglicana: Similiter and libellus eadem authoritate editus De
ordinatione Ministrorum Ecclesiae, quoad doctrinae veritatem, pii sunt, and
salutari doctrinae Evangelii in nullo repugnant sed congruunt, and eandem non
parum promovent and illustrant, atque ideo ab omnibus Ecclesiae Anglicanae
fidelibus membris, and maxim a ministris verbi cum omni promptitudine animorum
and gratiarum action recipiendi, approbandi, and populo Dei commendandi sunt.

De Civilibus Magistratibus.
REx Angliae est supremum caput in terris post Christum Ecclesiae Anglicanae
and Hibernicae.

Romanus Pontifex nullam habet jurisdictionem in hoc Regno Angliae. Magistratus
civilis est a Deo ordinatus atque probatus, quamobrem illi non solum propter
iram, sed etiam propter conscientiam, obediendum est.

Leges civiles possunt Christianos propter capitalia and gravia crimina morte
punire.

Christianis licet ex mandato Magistratus arma portare and justa bella
administrare.

Christianorum bona non sunt Communia.
FAcultates and bona Christianorum non sunt communia, quoad jus and
possessionem, ut quidam Anabaptistae falso jactant, debet tamen quisque de his
quae possidet, pro facultatum ratione, pauperibus eleemosynas benign
distribuere.

Licet Christianis jurare.
Quemadmodum juramentum vanum and temerarium a Domino nostro Jesus Christo and
ab Apostolo ejus Jacobo, Christianis hominibus interdictum esse fatemur, ita
Christianam religionem minime prohibere censemus, quin jubente Magistratu, in
causa fidei and charitatis jurare liceat, modo id fiat juxta Prophetae
doctrinam, in Iustitia, in Judicio and veritate.

Resurrectio mortuorum nondum est facta.
REsurrectio mortuorum non adhuc facta est, quasi tantum ad animum pertineat,
qui per Christi gratiam a morte peccatorum excitetur, sed extremo die quoad
omnes qui obierunt, expectanda est: tunc enim vita defunctis (ut Scripturae
manifestissime testantur) propria corpora, carnes and ossa restituentur, ut
homo integer, prout vel recte vel perdite vixerit, juxta sua opera, sive
praemia sive poenas reportet.

Defunctorum animae neque cum corporibus intereunt, neque otiose dormiunt
QUi animas defunctorum praedicant usque ad diem judicii absque omni sensu
dormire, aut illas asserunt una cum corporibus mori, and extrema die cum illis
excitandas, ab orthodoxa fide, quae nobis in sacris literis traditur, prorsus
dissentiunt.

Millenarii.
QUi Millenariorum fabulam revocare conantur, sacris literis adversantur, and
in Iudaica deliramenta sese praecipitant.

Non omnes tandem servandi sunt.
HIi quoque damnatione digni sunt, qui conantur hodie perniciosam opinionem
instaurare quod omnes, quantumvis impii, servandi sunt tandem, cum definito
tempore a justitia divina poenas de admissis flagitiis luerunt.

Excusum Londini, apud Reginaldum Wolfium, Regiae Majestatis in Latinis
Typographum. Anno Dom. M.D.LIII.

INJUNCTIONS Given by the QUEENS MAJESTY concerning both the Clergy and Laity
of this Realm. Published Anno Dom. 1559.

BEING The first year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lady Queen ELIZABETH.

London Printed 1559.

INJUNCTIONS Given by the QUEENS MAJESTY, As Well To the Clergy, as to the Laity
of this Realm.
The QUEENS most Royal Majesty, by the advice of her most honorable Council,
intending the advancement of the true honor of Almighty God, the suppression
of superstition throughout all her Highness Realms and Dominions, and to plant
true Religion, to the extirpation of all Hypocrisy, enormities and abuses, (as
to her duty appertains) does minister unto her loving Subjects these Godly
Injunctions hereafter following. All which Injunctions, her Highness wills
and commands her loving Subjects obediently to receive, and truly to observe
and keep, every man in their Offices, degrees and states, as they will avoid
her Highness displeasure, and the pains of the same hereafter expressed.

1. THe first is, That all Deans, Archdeacons, Usurped and foreign authority.
Parsons, Vicars, and all other Ecclesiastical persons, shall faithfully keep
and observe, and as far as in them may lie, shall cause to be observed and kept
of other, All and singular Laws and Statutes made for the restoring of the
Crown, the ancient jurisdiction over the state Ecclesiastical, and abolishing
of all foreign power, repugnant to the same. And furthermore all
Ecclesiastical persons having cure of Souls, shall to the uttermost of their
wit, knowledge and learning, purely and sincerely, and without any color or
dissimulation, declare, manifest and open four times every year at the least,
in their Sermons and other Collations, that all usurped and foreign power,
having no establishment nor ground by the law of God, is for most just causes
taken away and abolished: and that therefore no manner of obedience and
subjection within her Highness Realms and Dominions, is due unto any such
foreign power. And that the Queens power within her Realms and Dominions, is
the highest power under God, to whom all men within the same Realms and
Dominions by Gods laws owe most loyalty and obedience, before and above all
other powers and Potentates in earth.

2. Besides this, to the intent that all superstition and Hypocrisy crept into
diverse men's hearts, Images.
may vanish away, they shall not set forth or extol the dignity of any Images,
Relics or Miracles, but declaring the abuse of the same they shall teach, that
all goodness, health, and grace ought to be both asked and looked for only of
God, as of the very author and giver of the same, and of none other.

3. Item, That they the Parsons above rehearsed, shall preach in their
Churches, A Sermon every Month.
and every other cure they have, one Sermon every month of the year at the
least, wherein they shall purely and sincerely declare the word of God, and in
the same exhort their hearers to the works of faith, Works of faith.
as mercy and charity, especially prescribed and commanded in Scripture, and
that the works devised by man's fantasies, besides Scripture (as wandering of
Pilgrimages, setting up of Candles, Works of man's device.
praying upon Beads, or such like superstition) have not only no promise of
reward in Scripture for doing of them, but contrariwise great threatenings and
maledictions of God, for that they be things tending to Idolatry and
Superstition, which of all other offenses God Almighty does most detest and
abhor, for that the same diminish most his honor and glory.

Quarter Sermon or Homily.
4. Item, That they the Parsons above rehearsed, shall preach in their own
persons once in every quarter of the year at least one Sermon, being licenced
especially thereunto, as is specified hereafter: or else shall read some Homily
prescribed to be used by the Queens authority every Sunday at the least, unless
some other Preacher sufficiently licenced, as hereafter, chance to come to the
Parish for the same purpose of Preaching.

5. Item, That every Holiday through the year, when they have no Sermon, The
Pater Noster.
they shall immediately after the Gospel, openly and plainly recite to their
Parishioners in the Pulpit the Pater Noster, the Creed, and the Ten
Commandments in English, Creed and Ten Commandments.
to the intent the people may learn the same by heart, exhorting all Parents,
and Householders, to teach their Children and Servants the same, as they are
bound by the Law of God and conscience to do.

Also, that they shall provide within three months next after this visitation,
at the charges of the Parish, one book of the whole Bible of the largest volume
in English: and within one twelve months next after the said visitation, the
Paraphrases of Erasmus also in English upon the gospel, and the same set up in
some convenient place within the said Church that they have cure of, whereas
the Parishioners may most commodiously resort unto the same, and read the same,
out of the time of common Service. The charges of the Paraphrases shall be by
the Parson or Propriatory and Parishioners, born by equal portions, and they
shall discourage no man from the reading of any part of the Bible either in
Latin or in English, but shall rather exhort every person to read the same
with great humility and reverence, as the very lively word of God, and the
especial food of man's Soul, which all Christian persons are bound to embrace,
believe and follow if they look to be saved, whereby they may the better know
their duties to God, to their Sovereign Lady the Queen, and their neighbor,
ever gently and charitably exhorting them, and in her Majesty's name straightly
charging and commanding them, that in the reading thereof, no man to reason or
contend, but quietly to hear the Reader.

7. Also, Haunting of Ale houses by Ecclesiastical persons.
the said Ecclesiastical persons shall in no wise at any unlawful time, nor for
any other cause then for their honest necessities haunt or resort to any
Taverns or Alehouses. And after their meats they shall not give themselves to
drinking or riot, spending their time idly by day and by night, at Dice, Cards,
or Tables-playing, or any other unlawful game, but at all times as they shall
have leisure, they shall hear or read somewhat of the holy Scripture, or shall
busy themselves with some other honest study or exercise, and that they
always do the things which appertain to honesty, and endeavor to profit the
Commonwealth, having always in mind that they ought to excel all other in
purity of life, and should be examples to the people to live well and
christianly.

8. Also, Preachers not licenced.
that they shall admit no man to preach within any their cures, but such as
shall appear unto them to be sufficiently liceaced thereunto by the Queens
Majesty, or the Archbishop of Canterbury, or the Archbishop of York, in either
their Provinces, or the Bishop of the Diocese, or by the Queens Majesty's
Visitors. And such as shall be so licensed, they shall gladly receive to
declare the word of God at convenient times, without any resistance or
contradiction. And that no other be suffered to preach out of his own Cure or
parish, then such as shall be licensed, as is above expressed.

Letters of the word
9. Also, if they do or shall know any man within their Parish, or elsewhere,
that is a letter of the word of God to be read in English, or sincerely
preached, Fautours of the usurped power.
or of the execution of these the Queens Majesty's Injunctions, or a fautor of
any usurped and foreign power, now by the laws of this Realm justly rejected
and taken away, they shall detect and present the same to the Queens Majesty,
or to her Council, or to the Ordinary, or to the justice of peace next
adjoining.

10. Also, that the Parson, Vicar, or Curate, and Parishioners of every Parish
within this Realm, shall in their Churches and Chapels keep one Book of
Register, wherein they shall write the day and year of every Wedding,
Christning, and Burial made within their Parish for their time, and so every
man succeeding them likewise: and also therein shall write every persons name
that shall be so wedded, christened, and buried. And for the safe keeping of the
same Book, the Parish shall be bound to provide of their common Charges, one
sure Coffer with two locks and keys, whereof the one to remain with the
Parson, Vicar, or curate, and the other with the Wardens of every Parish Church
or Chapel, wherein the said Book shall be laid up. Which Book they shall every
Sunday take forth, and in the presence of the said Wardens, or one of them,
write and record in the same all the Weddings, Christnings, and Burials made
the whole week before: And that done, to lay up the Book in the said Coffer as
before, and for every time that the same shall be omitted, the party that shall
be in the fault thereof, shall forfeit to the said Church 3. s. 4. d. to be
employed the one half to the poor men's box of that Parish, the other half
toward the repairing of the Church.

Distribution of the fortieth part.
11. Furthermore, because the goods of the Church are called the goods of the
poor, and at these days nothing less seen then the poor to be sustained with
the same. All Parsons, Vicars, Pensionaries Prebendaries, and other Beneficed
men within this Deanery, not being resident upon their benefices, which may
dispend yearly twenty pounds or above, either within this Deanery, or
elsewhere, shall distribute hereafter among their poor Parishioners, or other
inhabitants there, in the presence of the Church wardens, or some other honest
man of the Parish, the fourtieth part of the fruits and revenues of their said
Benefice, lest they be worthily noted of ingratitude, which reserving so many
parts to themselves, cannot vouchsafe to impart the fortieth portion thereof
among the poor people of that Parish, that is so fruitful and profitable unto
them.

12. And to the intent that learned men may hereafter spring, Exhibition for
Scholars.
the more for the execution of the premises, every Parson, Vicar, Clerk, or
beneficed man within this Deauty, having yearly to dispend in Benefices and
other promotions of the Church an hundred pounds, shall give 3. l. 6. s. 8. d.
in exhibition to one Scholar in either of the Universities, and for as many C.
li. more as he may dispend, to so many Scholars more shall give like exhibition
in the University of Oxford or Cambridge, or some Grammar School, which after
they have profited in good learning, may be partners of their Patrons Cure and
charge, as well in preaching, as otherwise in executing of their offices, or
may, when time shall be, otherwise, profit the Commonweal with their Counsel
and wisdom.

13, Also that all Proprietaries, Parsons, Vicars and Clerks, The fifth part for
reparation
having Churches, Chapels, or Mansions within this Deanery, shall bestow yearly
hereafter upon the same Mansions, or Chancels of their Churches, being in
decay, the fifth part of that their benefi^es, till they be fully repaired, and
shall always keep and maintain in good estate.

14. Also, that the said Parsons, Vicars, and Clerks, Reading of the
Injunctions.
shall once every quarter of the year read these Injunctions given unto them
openly and deliberately before all their Parishioners at one time, or at two
several times in one day, to the intent that both they may be the better
admonished of their duty, and their said Parishioners the more moved to follow
the same for their part.

15. Also, For as much as by Laws established, every man is bound to pay his
Tithes: Payment of Tithes.
no man shall by color of duty omitted by their Curates, detain their Tithes,
and so requite one wrong with another, or be his own Judge, but shall truly pay
the same, as he has been accustomed to their Parsons, Vicars, and Curates,
without any restraint or diminution, and such lack and default as they can
justly find in their Parsons and Curates, to call for reformation thereof at
their Ordinaries, and other Superiors, who upon complaint and due proof
thereof, shall reform the same accordingly.

16. Also, that every Parson, Vicar, Curate, and stipendary Priest, being under
the degree of a Master of Art, shall provide and have of his own within 3.
months after this visitation, The New Testament and Paraphrases
the New Testament both in Latin and in English, with Paraphrases upon the
same: conferring the one with the other. And the Bishops and other Ordinaries
by themselves or their officers, in their Synods and visitations, shall examine
the said Ecclesiastical Persons, how they have porfited in the study of holy
Scripture.

Comfortable sentences for the sick.
17. Also, that the vice of damnable despair may be clearly taken away, and that
firm belief and steadfast hope may be surely conceived of all their
Parishioners, being in any danger, they shall learn and have always in a
readiness, such comfortable places and sentences of Scripture, as do set forth
the mercy, benefits and goodness of Almighty God, toward all penitent and
beleiving persons, that they may at all times when necessity shall require,
promptly comfort their flock with the lively word of God, which is the only
stay of man's conscience,

Procession to be left.
18. Also, to avoid all contention and strife which heretofore has risen among
the Queens Majesty's Subjects in sundry places of her Realms and Dominions, by
reason of fond courtesy, and challenging of places in the Procession, and also
that they may the more quietly hear that which is said or sung, to their
edifying, they shall not from henceforth in any Parish Church, at any time use
any Procession, about the Church or Churchyard, or at any place, but
immediately before the time of Communion of the Sacrament, the Priests with
others of the Quire shall kneel in the midst of the Church, The Letany
and sing or say plainly and distinctly, the Letanie which is set forth in
English, with all the suffrages following, to the intent the people may hear
and answer, and none other Procession or Letany to be had or used, but the said
Letany in English, adding nothing thereto, but as it is now appointed. And in
Cathedral or Collegiat Churches, the same shall be done in such places, and in
such sort, as our Commissioners in our visitation shall appoint. And in the
time of the Letany, Let of hearing of Divine service.
of the Common prayer, of the Sermon, and when the Priest reads the Scripture
to the Parishioners, no manner of persons, without a just and urgent cause,
shall use any walking in the Church, nor shall depart out of the Church: and
all ringing and knolling of bells shall be utterly forborne, at that time,
except one bell in convenient time to be rung or knolled before the Sermon. But
yet for the retaining of the perambulation of the Circuits of Parishes, they
shall once in the year at the time accustomed with the Curate and the
substantial men of the Parish, walk about the Parishes as they were accustomed,
and at their return to the Church, make their common prayers.

19. Provided, Perambulation of Parishes
that the Curate in their said common Perambulations, used heretofore in the
days of Rogations, at certain convenient places, shall admonish the people to
give thanks to God, in the beholding of Gods benefits, for the increase and
abundance of his fruits upon the face of the earth, with the saying of the Ciii
Psalm: Benedic anima mea etc. At which time also the same Minister shall
inculcate these or such sentences, Cursed be he which translateth the bounds
and dolles of his Neighbor. Or such other order of prayers, as shall be
hereafter appointed.

20. Item, All the Queens faithful and loving Subjects, Spending of the holy
day.
shall from henceforth celebrate and keep their Holyday according to Gods holy
will and pleasure, that is, in hearing the word of God, read and taught, in
private and public prayers, in knowledging their offenses unto God, and
amendment of the same, in reconciling themselves charitably to their neighbors
where displeasure has been, in oftentimes receiving the Communion of the very
body and blood of Christ, in visiting of the poor and sick, using all
soberness and Godly conversation, yet notwithstanding, all Parsons, Vicars,
and Curates shall teach and declare unto their Parishioners, that they may with
a safe and quiet conscience, after their common prayer in the time of Harvest,
labor upon the holy and festival days, and save that thing which God has
sent: and if for any scrupulosity or grudge of conscience, men should
superstitiously abstain from working upon those days, that then they should
grievously offend and displease God.

21. Also, Open contenders to be reconciled openly.
For as much as variance and contention is a thing that most displeases God,
and is most contrary to the blessed Communion of the body and blood of our
Savior Christ, Curates shall in no wise admit to the receiving thereof, any of
their cure and flock, which be openly known to live in sin without repentance,
or who has maliciously and openly contended with his neighbor, unless the
same do first charitably and openly reconcile himself again, remitting all
rancour and malice, whatsoever controversy has been between them. And
nevertheless, the just titles and rights they may charitably prosecute before
such as have authority to hear the same.

Contemners of laudable Ceremonies,
22. Also, that they shall instruct and teach in their Cures, that no man ought
obstinately and maliciously to break and violate the laudable Ceremonies of the
Church, commanded by public authority to be observed.

The abolishment of all things superstitious.
23. Also, that they shall take away, utterly extinct, and destroy all Shrines,
covering of Shrines, all Tables, Candlesticks Trindals, and Rolls of wax,
Pictures, Paintings, and all other Monuments of feigned miracles, Pilgrimages,
Idolatry and Superstition, so that there remain no memory of the same in walls,
glasse-windows, or elsewhere within their Churches and houses, preserving
nevertheless, or repairing both the walls and glass windows, and they shall
exhort all their Parishioners to do the like within their several houses.

The Pulpit.
24. And that the Churchwardens at the common charge of the Parishioners, in
every Church shall provide a comely and honest Pulpit, to be set in a convenient
place within the same, and to be there seemly kept for the preaching of Gods
word.

The chest of the poor.
25. Also, They shall provide and have within three months after this
visitation, a strong Chest with a hole in the upper part thereof, to be be
provided at the cost and charge of the Parish, having three keys, whereof one
shall remain in the custody of the Parson Vicar or Curate, and the other two in
the Custody of the Churchwardens, or any other two honest men, to be appointed
by the Parish from year to year, which Chest you shall set and fasten in a most
convenient place, to the intent the Parishioners should put into it their
oblations and alms for their poor neighbors. And the Parson Vicar and Curate,
shall diligently from time to time, and especially when men make their
Testaments, call upon exhort and move their neighbors to confer and give, as
they may well spare, to the said Chest: declaring unto them, whereas heretofore
they have been diligent to bestow much substance otherwise then God commanded,
upon Pardons, Pilgrimages Trentals, decking of Images, offering of Candles,
giving to Friars, and upon other like blind devotions: they ought at this
time, to be much more ready to help the poor and needy, knowing that to relieve
the poor is a true worshipping of God, required earnestly upon pain of
everlasting damnation, and that also whatsoever is given for their comfort, is
given to Christ himself, and so is accepted of him, that he will mercifully
reward the same with everlasting life. The which alms and devotion of the
people, the keepers of the keys shall at all times convenient take out of the
Chest, and distribute the same in the presence of the whole Parish, The
distribution of alms.
or six of them, to be truly and faithfully delivered to their most needy
neighbors. And if they be provided for, then to the reparation of high ways
next adjoining, or to the poor people of such Parishes near, as shall be
thought best to the said keepers of the keys. And also the money which rises
of Fraternities, Guilds and other stocks of the Church (except by the Queens
Majesty's Authority it be otherwise appointed) shall be put in the said chest,
and converted to the said use: and also the rents of Lands, the profit of
cattle, and money given or bequeathed to Obits, and Dirges, and to the finding
of Torches, Lights, Tapers and Lamps, shall be converted to the said use,
saving that it shall be lawful for them to bestow part of the said profits upon
the reparation of the said Church, if great need require, and whereas the
Parish is very poor, and not able otherwise to repair the same.

26. Also, To avoid the detestable sin of Simonie, Simonie
because buying and selling of benefices is execrable before God, therefore all
such persons as buy any benefices, or come to them by fraud or deceit shall be
deprived of such benefices, and be made unable at any time after to receive any
other spiritual promotion, and such as do sell them, or by any color do bestow
them for their own gain and profit, shall lose their right and Title of
patronage, and presentment for that time, and the gift thereof for that
vacation, shall appertain to the Queens Majesty.

27. Also, Homilies to be read.
Because through lack of Preachers in many places of the Queens Realms and
dominions, the people continue in ignorance and blindness, all Parsons Vicars
and Curates shall read in their Churches every Sunday one of the Homilies which
are and shall be set forth for the same purpose by the Queens authority, in
such sort as they shall be appointed to do in the Preface of the same.

28. Item. Whereas many undiscreet persons do at this day uncharitably contemn
and abuse Priests and Ministers of the Church, Contempt of Ministers.
because some of them (having small learning) have of long time favored fond
fancies, rather then Gods truth, yet forasmuch as their office and function is
appointed of God, the Queens Majesty wills and charge all her loving
Subjects that from henceforth they shall use them charitably and reverently for
their office and Ministration sake, and especially such as labor in the
setting forth of Gods holy word.

29. Item, Although there be no prohibition by the word of God, nor any example
of the primitive Church, but that the Priests and Ministers of the Church, may
lawfully for the avoiding of fornication, have an honest and sober wife, and
that for the same purpose, the same was by Act of Parliament in the time of our
dear brother King Edward the sixth made lawful: Whereupon a great number of the
Clergy of this Realm were then married, and so yet continue. Yet because there
has grown offense, and some slander to the Church, by lack of discreet and
sover behavior in many Ministers of the Church, both in choosing of their
wives, and in undiscreet living with them, the remedy whereof is necessary to
be sought: It is thought therefore very necessary, that no manner of Priest, or
Deacon, shall hereafter take to his wife, any manner of Woman without the
advice and allowance first had upon good examination by the Bishop of the same
Diocese, and two Justices of the peace of the same Shire dwelling next to the
place where the same woman has made her most abode before her marriage, nor
without the good will of the Parents of the said woman, if she have any living,
or two of the next of her kinsfolks, or for lack of knowledge of such, of her
Master or Mistress where she serves. And before she shall be contracted in
any place: he shall make a good and certain proof thereof to the Minister, or
to the Congregation, assembled for that purpose, which shall be upon some
holyday where diverse may be present. And if any shall do otherwise, that then
they shall not be permitted to Minister either the word or the Sacraments of
the Church, nor shall be capable of any Ecclesiastical benefice, and for the
manner of Marriages of any Bishops, the same shall be allowed and appo^ed by
the Metropolitan of the Province, and also by such Commissioners as the Queens
Majesty thereunto shall appoint, and if any Master or Dean, or any Head of any
College shall purpose to marry, the same shall not be allowed, but by such to
whom the Visitation of the same does properly belong, who shall in any wise
provide that the same tend not to the hindrance of their house.

Of apparel of Ministers
30. Item, Her Majesty being desirous to have the Prelacy and Clergy of this
Realm to be had as well in outward reverence, as otherwise regarded for the
worthiness of their Ministeries, and thinking it necessary to have them known
to the people in all places and assemblies, both in the Church and without, and
thereby to receive the honor and estimation due to the special Messengers and
Ministers of Almighty God; wills and commands, that all Archbishops and
Bishops, and all other that be called or admitted to Preaching or ministry of
the Sacraments, or that be admitted into vocation Ecclesiastical, or into any
society of learning in either of the Universities, or elsewhere, shall use and
wear such seemly habits, garments, and such square caps, as were most commonly
and orderly received in the latter year of the Reign of King Edward the sixth,
not thereby meaning to attribute any holiness or special worthiness to the
said garments, but as Saint Paul writes, Omnia decenter and secundum ordinem
fiant. 1 Cor. 14 cap.

31. Item That, Heresies.
no man shall wilfully and obstinately defend or maintain any Heresies, Errors,
or false doctrine, contrary to the faith of Christ and his holy spirit.

32. Item, That no persons shall use Charms, Sorceries, Charmers.
enchantments, witchcraft, sooth saying, or any such like divillish device, nor
shall resort at any time to the same counsel or help.

33. Item, that no person shall, Absent from Common Prayer.
neglecting their own Parish Church, resort to any other Church, in time of
Common prayer or preaching, except it be by the occasion of some extraordinary
Sermon in some Parish of the same town.

34. Item, That no Inholders, or Alehouse-keepers, Inholders and Alehouses.
shall use to sell no meat nor drink in the time of Common prayer, preaching
reading of the Homilies or Scriptures.

35. Item, Images in houses.
That no persons keep in their houses any abused Images, Tables, Pictures,
Paintings, and other Monuments of feigned Miracles, Pilgrimages, Idolatry, and
Superstition.

36. Item, Disturbers of Sermon or Service.
That no man shall willingly let or disturb the Preacher in time of his Sermon,
or let or discourage any Curate or Minister, to sing or say the divine Service
now set forth, nor mock or jest at the Ministers of such service.

37. Item, Rash talkers of Scripture:
That no man shall talk or reason of the holy Scriptures rashly, or
contentiously, nor maintain any false doctrine, or Error, but shall commune of
the same when occasion is given, reverently, humbly, and in the fear of God,
for his comfort and better understanding.

38. Item, That no man, woman, or child, Attendant to the Service.
shall be otherwise busied in the time of the Service, then in quiet attendance
to hear, mark and understand that is read, preached and Ministered.

39. Item, That every Schoolmaster, and Teacher shall teach the Grammar set
forth by King Henry the 8. The Grammar of King Henry the 8.
of noble memory, and continued in the time of King Edward the sixth and none
other.

Allowance of School masters.
40. Item, That no man shall take upon him to teach but such as shall be allowed
by the Ordinary, and found meet as well for his learning and dexterity in
teaching, as for sober and honest conversation, and also for right
understanding of Gods true Religion.

Duty of Schoolmasters. Sentences of scripture for Scholars.
41. Item, That all Teachers of children shall stir and move them to love and
due Reverence of Gods true Religion, now truly set forth by public authority.

42. Item, That they shall accustom their Scholars Reverently to learn such
sentences of Scriptures, as shall be most expedient to induce them to all
Godliness.

Unlearned Priests.
43. Item, Forasmuch as in these latter days, many have been made Priests,
being children, and otherwise utterly unlearned, so that they could read to say
Mattens and Mass: the Ordinaries shall not admit any such to any Cure or
spiritual Function.

The Catehisme.
44. Item, Every Parson, Vicar, and Curate, shall upon every Holiday, and every
second Sunday in the year, hear and instruct all the youth of the Parish for
half an hour at the least before Evening prayer, in the ten Commandments, the
Articles of the belief, and in the Lords Prayer, and diligently examine them,
and teach the Catechism set forth in the Book of public prayer.

The book of the afflictions for religion.
45. Item, That the Ordinary do exhibit unto our Visitors their books or a true
copy of the same, containing the causes why any person was imprisoned,
famished, or put to death for religion.

Overseers for service on the holy days.
46. Item, That in every Parish 3. or 4. discreet men which tender Gods glory,
and his true Religion, shall be appointed by the Ordinaries, diligently to see
that all the Parishioners duly resort to their Church upon all Sundays and
holidays, and there to continue the whole time of the godly service, and all
such as shall be found slack and negligent in resorting to the Church, having
no great nor urgent Cause of absence, they shall straightly call upon them, and
after due admonition if they amend not, they shall denounce them to the
Ordinary.

^nventories of Church goods.
47. Item, That the Churchwardens of every Parish, shall deliver unto our
Visiors the Inventories of Vestments, Copes, and other Ornaments, Plate, Books,
and specially of Grayles, Couchers, Legends, Processionals, Manuals, Hymnals
Portnesses, and such like appertaining to their Church.

48. Item, That weekly upon Wednesdayes and Fridayes, Service on Wednesdays and
Fridays.
not being Holidays, the Curate at the accustomed hours of service, shall
resort to Church, and cause warning to be given to the people by knolling of a
Bell, and say the Letany and prayers.

49. Item, because in diverse Collegiate, Continuance of singing in the Church.
and also some Parish Churches heretofore, there have been livings appointed
for the maintenance of men and children to use singing in the Church, by means
whereof the laudable service of Music has been had in estimation, and
preserved in knowledge: the Queens Majesty neither meaning in any wise the
decay of any thing that might conveniently tend to the use and continuance of
the said Science, neither to have the same in any part so abused in the Church,
that thereby the Common prayer should be the worse understanded of the hearers,
wills and commands, that first no alterations be made of such assignements
of living, as heretofore has been appointed to the use of singing or Music in
the Church, but that the same so remain. And that there be a modest and
distinct song so used in all parts of the Common prayers in the Church, that
the same may be as plainly understanded, as if it were read without singing,
and yet nevertheless for the comforting of such that delight in Music, it may
be permitted, that in the beginning, or in the end of Common prayers, either at
Morning or Evening, there may be sung an Hymn, or such like song to the praise
of Almighty God, in the best sort of melody and music that may be conveniently
devised, having respect that the sentence of the Hymn may be understanded and
perceived.

50. Item, because in all alterations, and specially in Rites and Ceremonies,
there happen discords amonst the people, Against slanderous and infamous words.
and thereupon slanderous words and railings, whereby charity the knot of all
Christian society is loosed: the Queens Majesty being most desirous of all
other earthly things, that her people should live in charity both toward God
and man, and therein abound in good works, wills and straightly commands
all manner of her Subjects, to forbear all vain and contentious disputations in
matters of Religion, and not to use in despite or rebuke of any person, these
convitious words, Papist or papistical Heretic, Schismatic or Sacramentary,
or any such like words of reproach. But if any manner of person shall deserve
the accusation of any such, that first he be charitably admonished thereof, and
if that shall not amend him, then to denounce the offender to the Ordinary, or
to some higher power, having authority to correct the same.

51. Item, because there is a great abuse in the Printers of Books, which for
covetousness chiefly, regard not what they Print, so they may vave gain,
whereby arises the great disorder by publication of unfruitful, vain, and
infamous Books, and papers; The Queens Majesty straightly charge and
commands, that no manner of person shall print any manner of Book or paper,
of what sort, nature, or in what Language soever it be, except the same be
first licensed by her Majesty, by express words in writing, or by six of her
privy Council: or be perused and licensed by the Archbishops of Canterbury and
York, the Bishop of London, the Chancellours of both Universities, the Bishop
being Ordinary, and the Archdeacon also of the place where any such shall be
printed, or by two of them, whereof the Ordinary of the place to be always
one. And that the names of such as shall allow the same, to be added in the end
of every such work, for testimony of the allowance thereof. And because many
Pamphlets, Plays, and Ballads, be oftentimes printed, wherein regard would be
had, that nothing therein should be either heretical, seditious, or unseemly
for Christian ears: Her Majesty likewise commands that no manner of person
shall enterprise to print any such, except the same be to him licensed by such
her Majesty's Commissioners, or three of them, as be appointed in the City of
London, to hear and determine diverse causes Ecclesiastical, tending to the
execution of certain Statutes, made the last Parliament, for uniformity of
order in Religion. And if any shall sell or utter any manner of books and
papers, being not licensed as is abovesaid: that the same party shall be
punished by order of the said commissioners, as to the quality of the fault
shall be thought meet. And touching all other books of matters of Religion, or
Policy, or Governance, that have been printed, either on this side the Seas,
or on the other side, because the diversity of them is great, and that there
needs good consideration to be had of the particularities thereof, her
Majesty refers the prohibition or remission thereof to the order which her
said Commissioners, within the City of London shall take and notify. According
to the which, her Majesty straightly charge and commands all manner of her
Subjects, and especially the Wardens and Company of Stationers to be obedient.

Provided that these orders do not extend to any profane Authors and Works in
any Language that have been heretofore commonly received or allowed in any of
the Universities and Schools, but the same may be printed and used as by good
order they were accustomed

52. Item, Reverence of Prayers.
Although Almighty God is al times to be honored withal manner of reverence
that may be devised: yet of all other times, in time of Common prayer, the same
is most to be regarded. Therefore it is to be necessarily received, that in
time of the Letanie, and all other Collects, and common Supplications to
Almighty God, all manner of people shall devoutly and humbly kneel upon their
knees, and give ear thereunto, and that whenever the name of Jesus shall be
in any Lesson, Sermon, Honor to the name of Jesus.
or other wise in the Church pronounced, that due reverence be made of all
persons young and old, with lowness of courtesy, and uncovering of heads of
the menkinde, as thereunto does necessarily belong, and heretofore has been
accustomed.

53. Item, That all Ministers and Readers of public Prayers, Curates to read
distinctly.
Chapters, and Homilies, shall be charged to read leasurely, plainly, and
distinctly, and also such as are but mean Readers, shall peruse over before
once or twice the Chapters and homilies, to the intent they may read to the
better understanding of the people, and the more encouragement of godliness.

An Admonition to simple men, deceived by malicious.
THE Queens Majesty being informed, that in certain places of the Realm, sundry
of her native Subjects, being called to Ecclesiastical Ministry of the Church,
be by sinister persuasion and perverse construction, induced to find some
scruple in the form of an Oath, which by an Act of the last Parliament is
prescribed to be required of diverse persons, for the recognition of their
Allegiance to her Majesty, which certainly never was ever meant, nor by any
equity of words or good sense can be thereof gathered: would that all her
loving Subjects should understand, that nothing was, is, or shall be meant or
intended by the same Oath to have any other duty, allegiance, or bond required
by the same Oath, then was acknowledged to be due to the most noble Kings of
famous memory, K. Henry the 8. her Majesty's Father, or K. Edward the sixth, her
Majesty's Brother.

And further her Majesty forbids all manner her Subjects, to give ear or
credit to such perverse and malicious persons, which most sinisterly and
maliciously labor to notify to her loving Subjects, how by words of the said
Oath it may be collected, that the Kings or Queens of this Realm, possessors of
the Crown, may challenge authority and power of Ministry of divine service in
the Church, wherein her said Subjects be much abused by such evil disposed
persons. For certainly her Majesty ^n either does, nor ever will challenge any
authority, then that was challenged and lately used by the said noble Kings of
famous memory, K. Henry the 8. and K. Edward the sixth, which is, and was of
ancient time due to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, that is, under God to
have the Sovereignty and rule over all manner of persons born within these her
Realms, Dominions and Countries, of what estate, either Ecclesiastical or
Temporal soever they be, so as no other foreign power shall or ought to have
any superiority over them. And if any person that has conceived any other
sense of the form of the said Oath, shall accept the same Oath with this
interpretation, sense or meaning, her Majesty is well pleased to accept every
such in that behalf, as her good and obedient Subjects, and shall acquit them
of all manner of penalties contained in the said Act, against such as shall
peremptorily or obstinately take the same Oath.

For Tables in the Church.
WHereas her Majesty understands, that in many and sundry parts of the Realm,
the Altars of the Churches be removed, and Tables placed for the administration
of the holy Sacrament, according to the form of the Law therefore provided: And
in some other places, the Altars be not yet removed, upon opinion conceived of
some other order therein to be taken by her Majesty's Visitors. In the other
whereof, saving for an uniformity, there seems no matter of great moment, so
that the Sacrament be duly and reverently ministered. Yet for observation of
one uniformity through the whole Realm, and for the better imitation of the Law
in that behalf, it is ordered, that no Altar be taken down, but by oversight of
the Curate of the Church and the Churchwardens or one of them at the least,
wherein no riotous or disordered manner to be used. And that the holy Table in
every Church he decently made, and set in the place where the Altar stood, and
there commonly. Covered as thereto belongs, and as shall us appointed by the
Visitors, and so to stand, saving when the Communion of the Sacrament is to be
distributed: at which time the same shall be so placed in good sort within the
Chancel, as whereby the Minister may be more conveniently heard of the
Communicants, in his prayer and ministration, and the Communicants also more
conveniently, and in more number Communicate with the said Minister. And after
the Communion done, from time to time the same holy Table to be placed where it
stood before.

Item, The Sacramental bread
Where also it was in the time of K. Edward the sixth used to have the
Sacramental bread of common fine bread, it is ordered for the more reverence to
be given to this holy Mysteries, being the Sacraments of the body and Blood of
our Savior Jesus Christ, that the same Sacramental bread be made and formed
plain, without any figure thereupon, of the same finenesse and fashion round,
though somewhat bigger in compass and thickness, as the usual bread and
water, heretofore named singing Cakes, which served for the use of the private
Mass.

The form of bidding the prayers to be used generally in this uniform sort.
YE shall pray for Christ's holy Catholic Church, that is, for the whole
Congregation of Christian people, dispersed throughout the whole world, and
specially for the Church of England and Ireland. And herein I require you most
specially to pray for the Queens most excellent Majesty, our sovereign Lady
Elizabeth, Queen of England France and Ireland, defender of the Faith, and
Supreme governor of this Realm, as well in Causes Ecclesiastical as Temporal.
You shall also pray for the Ministers of Gods holy word and Sacraments, as well
Archbishops and Bishops, as other Pastors and Curates. You shall also pray for
the Queens most honorable Counsel, and for all the Nobility of this Realm, that
all and every of these in their calling, may serve truly and painfully to the
glory of God, and edifying of his people, remembering the account, that they
must make. Also ye shall pray for the whole Commons of this Realm, that they
may live in true faith and fear of God, in humble obedience and brotherly
charity one to another. Finally let us praise God for all those that are
departed out of this life in the faith of Christ, and pray unto God, that we
may have grace for to direct our lives after their good example, that after
this life, we with them may be made partakers of the glorious Resurrection in
the life everlasting.

And this done, show the holy days and fasting days.
ALL and singular which Injunctions, the Queens Majesty ministers unto her
Clergy, and to all other her loving Subjects, straightly charging and
commanding them to observe and keep the same upon pain of deprivation,
sequestration of fruits and benefices, suspension, excommunication, and such
other correction, as to Ordinaries, or other having Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, whom her Majesty has appointed or shall appoint for the due
execution of the same, shall be seen convenient, charging and commanding them
to see these Injunctions observed and kept of all persons being under their
jurisdiction, as they will answer to her Majesty for the contrary. And her
highness pleasure, is that every Justice of peace being required, shall assist
the Ordinaries and every of them, for the due execution of the said Injunctions.

ARTICLES AGREED UPON By the ARCHBISHOPS and BISHOPS of both Provinces, and
the whole CLERGY; In the Convocation holden at LONDON, in the year, 1562.

For the avoiding of diversities of opinions, and for the establishing of
Consent touching true RELIGION.

Reprinted by His MAJESTY'S Commandment: with His Royal Declaration prefixed
thereunto.

LONDON, Printed by Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers to the Kings most
Excellcnt Majesty, 1630.

HIS MAJESTY'S DECLARATION.
BEing by Gods Ordinance, according to Our just Title, Defender of the Faith,
and supreme Governor of the Church within these Our Dominions, We hold it most
agreeable to this Our Kingly Office, and Our own Religious zeal, to conserve
and maintain the Church committed to Our charge in the unity of true Religion,
and in the bond of peace: and not to suffer unnecessary Disputations,
altercations, or questions to be raised, which may nourish faction both in the
Church and Commonwealth. We have therefore upon mature deliberation and with
the advice of so many of Our Bishops as might conveniently be called together,
thought fit to make this Declaration following; That the Articles of the Church
of England (which have been allowed and authorized heretofore, and which our
Clergy generally have subscribed unto) do contain the true Doctrine of the
Church of England, agreeable to Gods word: which We do therefore ratify and
confirm, requiring all our loving Subjects to continue in the uniform
profession thereof, and prohibiting the least difference from the said
Articles, which to that end We command to be new printed, and this Our
Declaration to be published therewith.

That we are supreme Governor of the Church of England: and that if any
difference arise about the external policy, concerning Injunctions, Canons, or
other Constitutions whatsoever there to belonging, the Clergy in their
Convocation is to order and settle them, having first obtained leave under Our
broad Seal so to do: and We approving their said Ordinances and Constitutions,
providing that none be made contrary to the Laws and Customs of the Land.

That out of Our Princely care, that the Churchmen may do the work which is
proper unto them; the Bishops and Clergy from time to time in Convocation, upon
their humble desire shall have license under Our broad Seal to deliberate of,
and to do all such things, as being made plain by them, and assented unto by
Us, shall concern the settled continuance of the Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church of England now established; from which We will not endure any varying,
or departing in the least degree.

That for the present, though some Differences have been ill raised, yet we
take comfort in this, that all Clergymen within our Realm, have always most
willingly subscribed to the Articles established, which is an Argument to Us,
that they all agree in the true usual literal meaning of the said Articles, and
that even in those curious points in which the present differences lie, men of
all sorts take the Articles of the Church of England to be for them, which is
an argument again, that none of them intend any desertion of the Articles
established.

That therefore in these both curious and unhappy differences, which have for
so many hundred years, in different times and places, excercised the Church of
Christ: We will that all further curious search be laid aside, and these
disputes shut up in Gods promises, as they be generally set forth to Us, in the
holy Scriptures; and the general meaning of the Articles of the Church of
England according to them. And that no man hereafter shall either print or
preach to draw the Article aside any way, but shall submit to it in the plain
and full meaning thereof: And shall not put his own sense or Comment to be the
meaning of the Article, but shall take it in the literal and Grammatical sense.

That if any public Reader in either Our Universities, or any Head or Master
of a College, or any other person respectively in either of them, shall affix
any new sense to any Article, or shall publicly read, determine, or hold any
public disputation, or suffer any such to be held either way, in either the
Universities or Colleges respectively; or if any Divine in the Universities
shall preach or print any thing either way, other then is already established
in Convocation with Our Royal assent: he, or they the offenders, shall be
liable to Our displeasure, and the Churches censure in our Commission
Ecclesiastical, as well as any other: and We will see there shall be due
execution upon them.

ARTICLES OF RELIGION.
Of faith in the holy Trinity.
THere is but one living and true God, everlasting, without body, parts, or
passions; of infinite power, wisdom and goodness, the maker and preserver of
all things both visible and invisible. And in unity of this Godhead there be
three persons, of one substance, power, and eternity; the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost.

2. Of the Word or Son of God, which was made very man.
THe Son, which is the Word of the Father, Haec notata non habentur in Edw. 6.
begotten from everlasting of the Father, the very and eternal God of one
substance with the Father, took man's nature in the womb of the blessed Virgin,
of her substance: so that two whole and perfect natures, that is to say, the
Godhead and manhood, were joined together in one person, never to be divided,
whereof is one Christ, very God and very man, who truly suffered, was
crucified, dead and buried, to reconcile his Father to us, and to be a
sacrifice, not only for original guilt, but also for actual sins of men.

3. Of the going down of Christ into Hell.
AS Christ dyed for us, and was buried: Nam Corpus usque ad resurrectionem in
Sepulchro jacuit, spiritus ab illo emissus cum spiritibus qui in carcere sive
in inferno detinebantut fuit, illisque praedicavit, quemadmodum testatur Petri
locus. Sic Artic. Edw. 6.
so also it is to be believed, that he went down into Hell.

4. Of the resurrection of Christ.
CHrist did truly rise again from death, and took again his body, with flesh,
bones, and all things appertaining to the perfection of man's nature, wherewith
he ascended into Heaven, and there sits, until he return to judge all men at
the last day.

5. Of the Holy Ghost.
Non habentur in R. Edward 6. Artic.
THe Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son, is of one substance,
Majesty and Glory, with the Father and the Son, very and eternal God.

6. Of the sufficiency of the holy Scriptures for salvation.
HOly Scripture contains all things necessary to salvation: so that
whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, Licet interdum a
fidelibus ut pium and conducibile ad ordinem and, decorum admittatur.
is not to be required of any man, that it should be believed as an Article of
the faith, or be thought requisite or necessary to salvation. In the name of
the holy Scripture, we do understand those Canonical Books of the Old and New
Testament, of whose authority was never any doubt in the Church.

Of the names and numbers of the Canonical Books. Non habetur in R. Edw. 6.
Artic.
GEnesis. Exodus. Leviticus. Numeri. Deuteronomium. Josue. Judges. Ruth. The 1.
Book of Samuel. The 2. Book of Samuel. The 1. Book of Kings. The 2. Book of
Kings. The 1. Book of Chron. The 2. Book of Chron. The 1. Book of Esdras. The
2. Book of Esdras. The Book of Hester. The Book of Job. The Psalms. The
Proverbs. Ecclesiastes, or Preacher. Cantica, or songs of Salom. 4. Prophets
the greater. 12. Prophets the less.
And the other Books (as Hierome says) the Church does read for example of
life and instruction of manners but yet does not apply them to establish any
doctrine; Such are these following.

The 3. Book of Esdras. The 4. Book of Esdras. The Book of Tobias. The Book of
Judeth. The rest of the Book of Hester. The Book of Wisdom. Jesus the son of
Sirach. Baruch the Prophet. The song of the three children. The Story of
Susanna. Of Bell and the Dragon. The prayer of Manasses. The 1. Book of
Maccabees. The 2. Book of Maccabees.
All the books of the New Testament, as they are commonly received, we do
receive and account them Canonical.

7. Of the Old Testament.
THe old Testament is not contrary to the New, Testamentum vetus, quasi novo
contrarium sit, non est repudiandum sed retinendum.
for both in the Old and New Testament, everlasting life is offered to mankind
by Christ, who is the only Mediator between God and man, being both God and
man. Wherefore they are not to be heard, which feign that the old Fathers did
look only for transitory promises. Although the Law given from God by Moses,
as touching Ceremonies and Rites, do not bind Christian men, Vid. haec Art.
18. notata e^ R. Edwardi^
nor the civil precepts thereof ought of necessity to be received in any Common
wealth: yet notwithstanding, no Christian man whatsoever, is free from the
Obedience of the Commandments, which are called Moral.

8. Of the three Creeds.
THe three Creeds, Nice Creed, Athanasius Creed, and that which is commonly
Called the Apostles Creed, ought thoroughly to be received and believed, for they
may be proved by most certain warrant of holy Scripture.

9. Of Original or Birth-sin.
ORiginal sin stands not in the following of Adam, (as the Pelagians do
vainly talk Et hodie Anabaptistae repetunt.
) but it is the fault and corruption of the nature of every man, that naturally
is engendered of the offspring of Adam, whereby man is very far gone from
original righteousness, and is of his own nature inclined to evil, so that the
flesh lusts always contrary to the spirit, and therefore in every person born
into this world, it deserves Gods wrath and damnation. And this infection of
nature does remain, yea in them that are regenerated, whereby the lust of the
flesh, called in Greek (...), which some do expound the wisdom, some
sensuality, some the affection, some the desire of the flesh, is not subject to
the Law of God. And although there is no condemnation for them that believe and
are baptized, yet the Apostle does confess, that concupiscence and lust, has
of it self the nature of sin.

De Gratia.
GRatia Christi seu S. spiritus qui per eundem datur, cor lapideum aufert and
dat cor carneum: Atque licet ex nolentibus quae recta sunt, volentes faciat;
and ex volentibus prava, nolentes reddat, voluntati nihilominus violentiam
nullam infert, and nemo hac de causa cum peccaverit, seipsum excusare potest,
quasinolens aut coactus peccaverit, ut eam ob causam accusari non mereatur aut
damnari. Artic. Edward 6. decimus

10. Of Free Will.
THe condition of man after the fall of Adam, is such, that he cannot turn and
prepare himself by his own natural strength and good works to faith and calling
upon God: Wherefore we have no power to do good works pleasant and acceptable
to God, without the grace of God by Christ preventing us, that we may have a
good will, and working with us, when we have that good will.

11. Of the Justification of man.
WE are accounted righteous before God, Haec non habentur in Reg. Edward 6.
Artic.
only for the merit of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ by faith, and not for
our own works, or deservings. Wherefore that we are justified by faith only,
is a most wholesome doctrine, and very full of comfort, Justificatio ex sola
Fide Jesu Christi, eo sensu quo in Homilia de justificatione explicatur est
certissima and saluberrima Christianorum doctrina, fie in Reg. Edward 6. Artic.
11.
as more largly is expressed in the Homily of Justification.

12. Of good works.
ALbeit that good works, which are the fruits of faith, Hic Artic. non habetur
in Reg. Edward 6. Articulis.
and follow after Justification, cannot put away our sins, and endure the
severity of Gods judgment, yet are they pleasing and acceptable to God in
Christ, and do spring out necessarily of a true and lively faith, in so much
that by them a lively faith may be as evidently known, as a tree discerned by
the fruit.

13. Of works before Justification.
WOrks done before the grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his Spirit, are
not pleasant to God, for as much as they spring not of faith in Jesus Christ,
neither do they make men meet to receive grace, (or as School-Authors say)
deserve grace of congruity: yea, rather for that they are not done as God has
willed and commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they have the nature of
sin.

14. Of works of Supererogation.
VOluntary works besides, over and above Gods Commandments, which they call
works of Supererogation, cannot be taught without arrogance and impiety. For by
them men do declare that they do not only render unto God as much as they are
bound to do, but that they do more for his sake, then of bounden duty is
required: Whereas Christ says plainly, When ye have done all that are
commanded to you, say, We are unprofitable servants.

15. Of Christ alone without sin.
CHrist in the truth of our nature, was made like unto us in all things (sin
only except) from which he was clearly void both in his flesh, and in his
Spirit. He came to be a Lamb without spot, who by sacrifice of himself once
made, should take away the sins of the world: and sin (as S. John says) was
not in him. But all we the rest (although baptized, and born again in Christ)
yet offend in many things, and if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves,
and the truth is not in us.

Blasphemia in Spiritum Sanctum.
EST cum quis verborum Dei manifest perceptam veritatem, ex malitia and
obfirmatione animi, convitiis insectatur, and hostiliter insequitur. Atque
hujusmodi, quia maledicto sunt obnoxii, gravissimo sese astringunt scelere,
unde peccati hoc genus irremissibile a Domino appellatur and affirmatur Artic.
16. Edvardi. 6.

16. Of sin after Baptism.
NOt every deadly sin willingly committed after Baptism, is sin against the
holy Ghost, and unpardonable. Wherefore the grant of repentance is not to be
denied to such as fall into sin after Baptism. After we have received the holy
Ghost, we may depart from grace given, and fall into sin, and by the grace of
God (we may arise again, and amend our lives. And therefore they are to be
condemned, which say they can no more sin as long as they live here, to deny
the place of forgiveness to such as truly repent.

17. Of Predestination and Election.
PRedestination to life, is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby (before the
foundations of the world were laid) he has constantly decreed by his counsel,
secret to us, to deliver from curse and damnation, those whom he has chosen in
Christ out of mankind, and to bring them by Christ to everlasting salvation,
as vessels made to honor. Wherefore they which be endued with so excellent a
benefit of God, be called according to Gods purpose by his Spirit working in
due season: they through grace obey the calling: they be justified freely: they
be made sons of God by adoption: they be made like the Image of his only
begotten Son Jesus Christ: they walk religiously in good works, and at length
by Gods mercy they attain to everlasting felicity.

As the godly consideration of Predestination and our Election in Christ, is
full of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable comfort to godly persons, and such as
feel in themselves the working of the Spirit of Christ, mortifying the works of
the flesh, and their earthly members, and drawing up their mind to high and
heavenly things, as well because it does greatly establish and confirm their
faith of eternal salvation, to be enjoyed through Christ, as because it does
frequently kindle their love toward God: so, for curious and carnal persons,
lacking the Spirit of Christ, to have continually before their eyes the
sentence of Gods predestination, is a most dangerous downfall, whereby the
Devil does thrust them either into desperation, or into wretchlesness of most
unclean living, no less perilous then desperation.

Furthermore, we must receive Gods promises, in such wise as they be generally
set forth to us in holy Scripture: and in our doings, that will of God is to be
followed, which we have expressly declared unto us in the Word of God.

Omnes obligantur ad moralia legis praecepta servanda.
LEx a Deo data per Mosen, licet quoad ceremonias and ritus Christianos non
astringat, neque civilia eis praecepta in aliqua Repub. necessario recipi
debeant, nihilominus ab obedientia mandatorum quae moralia vocantur, nullus
quantumvis Christianus est solutus: quare illi non sunt audiendi qui sacras
literas tantum infirmis datas esse perhibent, and spiritum perpetuo jactant a
quo sibi quae praedicant, suggeri asserunt: quanquam cum S. Scripturis
apertissime pugnent. Art. Edvard. 6. 19.

18. Of obtaining eternal salvation only by the Name of Christ.
THey also are to be had accursed, that presume to say, that every man shall be
saved by the law or sect which he professes, so that he be diligent to frame
his life according to that law, and the light of nature. For holy Scripture
does set out unto us only the name of Jesus Christ, whereby men must be saved.

19. Of the Church.
THe visible Church of Christ is a congregation of faithful men, in the which
the pure word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered,
according to Christ's Ordinance, in all those things that of necessity are
requisite to the same.

As the Church of Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch have erred: So also the
Church of Rome has erred, not only in their living and manner of ceremonies,
but also in matters of faith.

20. Of the authority of the Church.
THe Church has power to decree Rites or Ceremonies, and authority in
controversies of faith: And yet it is not lawful for the Church to ordain any
thing that is Contrary to Gods word written, neither may it so expound one
place of Scripture, that it be repugnant to another. Wherefore although the
Church be a witness and a keeper of holy Writ, yet as it ought not to decree
any thing against the same, so besides the same ought it not to enforce any
thing to be believed for necessity of Salvation.

21. Of the authority of general Councels.
GEneral Councels may not be gathered together without the commandment and will
of Princes; and when they be gathered together (for as much as they be an
assembly, of men, whereof all be not governed with the Spirit and Word of God)
they may err, and sometime have erred, even in things pertaining unto God.
Wherefore things ordained by them as necessary to salvation, have neither
strength nor authority, unless it may be declared that they be taken out of
holy Scripture.

22. Of Purgatory.
THe Romish doctrine concerning Purgatory, Pardons, worshipping and adoration,
as well of Images, as of Relics, and also invocration of Saints is a fond
thing, vainly invented, and grounded upon no warranty of Scripture, but rather
repugnant to the Word of God.

23. Of ministering in the Congregation.
IT is not lawful for any man to take upon him the Office of public preaching,
or ministering the Sacraments in the Congregation, before he be lawfully called
and sent to execute the same. And those we ought to judge lawfully called and
sent, which be chosen and called to this work by men, who have public
authority given unto them in the Congregation, to call and send Ministers into
the Lords vineyard.

24. Of speaking in the Congregation, in such a tongue as the people
understands.
IT is a thing plainly repugnant to the word of God. Haec clausula non habetur
in Edvard. 6. Artic.
[and the custom of the Primitive Church,] to have public prayer in the
Church, or to minister the Sacraments in a tongue not understanded of the
people.

25. Of the Sacraments.
SAcraments ordained of Christ be not only badges or tokens of Christian men's
profession: Dominus noster Jesus Christus, Sacramentis numero paucissimis,
observatu facillimis, significatione praestantissimis, societatem novi populi
colligavit, sicut est Baptismus and Coena Domini
but rather they be certain sure witnesses, and effectual signs of grace and
Gods good will toward us, by the which he does work invisibly in us, and does
not only quicken, but also strengthen and confirm our faith in him.

There are two Sacraments ordained of Christ our Lord in the Gospel, that is to
say, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord.

Those five commonly called Sacraments, that is to say, confirmation, Penance
orders, Matrimony, and extreme Unction, are not to be counted for Sacraments of
the Gospel, being such as have grown, Haec notata non habentur in Edv. 6, Artic.
partly of the corrupt following of the Apostles, partly are states of life
allowed in the Scriptures but yet have not like nature of Sacraments with
Baptism and the Lords Supper, for that they have not any visible sign or
ceremony ordained of God.

The Sacraments were not ordained of Christ to be gazed upon, or to be carried
about, but that we should duly use them. And in such only, as worthily
receive the same, Idque non ex opere (ut quidam loquuntur) operato: quae vox ut
peregrina est, Sacris literis ignota, sic parit sensum minime pium sed admodum
superstitiosum. Artic. Edvard. 6.
they have a wholesome effect or operation: but they that receive them
unworthily, purchase to themselves damnation, as S. Paul says.

26. Of the unworthiness of the Ministers, which hinder not the effect of the
Sacraments.
ALthough in the visible Church the evil be ever mingled with the good, and
sometime the evil have chief authority in the ministration of the Word and
Sacraments: yet forasmuch as they do not the same in their own name, but in
Christ's, and do minister by his commission and authority, we may use their
ministry, both in hearing the Word of God, and in the receiving of the
Sacraments. Neither is the effect of Christ's ordinance taken away by their
wickedness, nor the grace of Gods gifts diminished from such, as by faith, and
rightly do receive the Sacraments ministered unto them, which be effectual,
because of Christ's institution and promise, although they be ministered by evil
men.

Nevertheless, it appertains to the discipline of the Church, that enquiry
be made of evil Ministers, and that they be accused by those that have
knowledge of their offenses: and finally being found guilty, by just judgment
be deposed.

27. Of Baptism.
Baptism is not only a sign of profession, and mark of difference, whereby
Christian men are discerned from others that be not Christened: but it is also
a sign of Regeneration or new birth, whereby, as by an instrument, they that
receive Baptism rightly, are and grafted into the Church: the promises of the
forgiveness of sin, of our adoption to be the sons of God, by the holy Ghost,
are visibly signed and sealed: faith is confirmed, and grace increased by
virtue of prayer unto God. The Baptism of young children is in any wise to be
retained in the Church, as most agreeable with the institution of Christ.

28. Of the Lords Supper.
THe Supper of the Lord is not only a sign of the love that Christians ought
to have among themselves one to another: but rather it is a Sacrament of our
Redemption by Christ's death. Insomuch that to such as rightly, worthily, and
with faith receive the same, the bread which we break, is a partaking of the
body of Christ: and likewise the Cup of blessing is a partaking of the blood of
Christ.

Transubstantiation (or the change of the substance of Bread and Wine) in the
supper of the Lord, cannot be proved by holy Writ: Quum naturae humanae veritas
requirat, ut unius ejusdemque hominis Corpus in multis locis simul esse non
possit, sed in uno aliquo and definito loco esse oporteat, idcirco Christi
corpus in multis and diversis locis eodem tempore praesens esse non potest. Et
quoniam ut tradunt sacrae literae, Christus in coelum fuit sublatus, and ibi
usque ad finem seculi est permansurus, non debet quisquam fidelium carnis ejus
and fanguinis Realem and corporalem (ut loquuntur) praesentiam in Eucharistia
vel credere vel profiteri R. Edvardi 6. Artic.
but it is repugnant to the plain words of Scripture, overthrows the nature
of a Sacrament, and has given occasion to many superstitions.

The body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten, Haec notata non habentur in
Reg. Edvard. 9. Artic.
in the Supper only after an heavenly and spiritual manner, And the mean
whereby the body of Christ is received and eaten in the Supper, is Faith.

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper was not by Christ's ordinance reserved,
carried about, lifted up, and worshipped.

29. Of the wicked which eat not the body of Christ in the use of the Lords
Supper.
Non habetur hie Artic. in R. Edv. sexti.
THe wicked, and such as be void of a lively faith, although they do carnally
and visibly press with their teeth (as St. Augustine says) the Sacrament of
the body and blood of Christ: yet in no wise are they partakers of Christ, but
rather to their condemnation do eat and drink the sign or Sacrament of so
great a thing.

30. Of both kinds.
THe Cup of the Lord is not to be denied to the Lay People. For both the parts
of the Lords Sacrament, by Christ's ordinance and commandment, ought to be
ministered to all Christian men alike.

31. Of the one oblation of Christ finished upon the Cross.
THe offering of Christ once made, is that perfect redemption, propitiation,
and satisfaction for all the sins of the whole world, both original and actual,
and there is none other satisfaction for sin, but that alone. Wherefore the
sacrifices of Masses, in the which it was commonly said, that the Priest did
offer Christ for the quick and the dead, to have remission of pain or guilt,
were blasphemous fables, and dangerous deceits.

32. Of the marriage of Priests
Non habentur haec notata in R. Edvard. 6. Artic.
BIshops, Priests and Deacons are not commanded by Gods law, either to vow the
estate of single life, or to abstain from marriage: "therefore it is lawful
also for them, as for all other Christian men, to marry at their own
discretion, as they shall judge the same to serve better to godliness.

33. Of excommunicate persons, how they are to be avoided.
THat person which by open denunciation of the Church, is rightly cut off from
the unity of the Church, and excommunicated, ought to be taken of the whole
multitude of the faithful as an Heathen and Publican, until he be openly
reconciled by Penance, and received into the Church by a Judge that has
authority thereunto.

34. Of the traditions of the Church.
IT is not necessary that Traditions and ceremonies be in all places one or
utterly like, for at all times they have been diverse, and may be changed
according to the diversity of countries, times, and men's manners, so that
nothing be ordained against Gods Word. Whosoever through his private judgment,
willingly and purposely does openly break the Traditions and Ceremonies of the
Church, which be not repugnant to the Word of God, and be ordained and approved
by common authority, ought to be rebuked openly, (that other may fear to do the
like) as he that offends against the common order of the Church, and hurts
the authority of the Magistrate, and wounds the consciences of the weak
brethren.

Every particular or national Church, has authority to ordain, Non habentur
haec notata in Edv. 6. Artic.
change and abolish Ceremonies or Rites of the Church, ordained only by man's
authority, so that all things be done to edifying.

35. Homiliae nuper Ecclesiae Anglicanae per injunctiones Regias editae atque
commendatae piae sunt atque salutares, doctrinamque ab omnibus amplectendam
continent.
Of Homilies.
THe second Book of Homilies, the several titles whereof we have joined under
this Article, does contain a godly and wholesome Doctrine, and necessary for
these times, as does the former book of Homilies, which were set forth in the
time of Edward the sixth: and therefore we judge them to be read in Churches by
the Ministers diligently and distinctly, that they may be understanded of the
people.

Of the names of the Homilies.
1 OF the right use of the Church. 2 Against peril of Idolatry. 3 Of repairing
and keeping clean of Churches. 4 Of good works, first of Fasting. 5 Against
gluttony and drunkenness. 6 Against excess of apparel. 7 Of Prayer, 8 Of the
place and time of prayer. 9 That common Prayers and Sacraments ought to be
ministered in a known tongue. 10 Of the reverent estimation of Gods Word. 11 Of
alms doing. 12 Of the nativity of Christ. 13 Of the Passion of Christ. 14 Of
the Resurrection of Christ. 15 Of the worthy receiving of the Sacrament of the
Body and Blood of Christ. 16 Of the gifts of the holy Ghost. 17 For the
Rogation days. 18 Of the state of Matrimony. 19 Of Repentance. 20 Against
Idleness. 21 Against Rebellion.
De libro precationum and ceremoniarum Ecclesiae Anglicanae.
LIber qui nuperrime authoritate Regis and Parliamenti Ecclesiae Anglicanae
traditus est, continens modum and formam orandi and Sacramenta administrandi in
Ecclesia: similiter and libellus eadem autoritate editus de ordinatione
ministrorum Ecclesiae, quoad doctrinae veritatem, pii sunt, and salutari
doctrinae Evangelii in nullo repugnant sed congruunt, and eandem non parum
promovent and illustrant, atque ideo ab omnibus Ecclesiae Anglicanae fidelibus
membris, and maxim a ministris verbi cum omni promptitudine animorum and
gratiarum action; recipiendi, approbandi, and populo Dei commendandi sunt.
Artic. R. Edvard. 6.

36. Of Consecration of Bishops and Ministers.
THe book of Consecration of Archbishops, and Bishops, and ordering of Priests,
and Deacons, lately set forth in the time of Edward the sixth, and confirmed at
the same time by authority of Parliament, does contain all things necessary to
such Consecration and ordering: neither has it any thing, that of it self is
superstitious and ungodly. And therefore, whosoever are consecrated or ordered
according to the Rites of that book, since the second year of the aforementioned
King Edward, unto this time, or hereafter shall be consecrated, or ordered
according to the same Rites, we decree all such to be rightly, orderly, and
lawfully consecrated and ordered.

37. Of the civil Magistrates.
THe Queens Majesty has the chief power in this Realm of England, and other
her Dominions, Rex Angliae est supremum caput in terris post Christum Ecclesiae
Anglicanae and Hiberniae Artic. Edv. 6. Haec notata non habentur in Artic.
Edverd. 6.
unto whom the chief government of all estates of this Realm, whether they be
Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all causes does appertain, and is not, nor ought to
be subject to any foreign Jurisdiction.

Where we attribute to the Queens Majesty the chief government, by which titles
we understand the minds of some dangerous folks to be offended: we give not
our Princes the ministering, either of Gods word, or of the Sacraments, the
which thing the Injunctions also lately set forth by Elizabeth out Queen do
most plainly testify: but that only prerogative which we see to have been
given always to all godly Princes in holy Scriptures by God himself, that is,
that they should rule all estates and degrees committed to their charge by God,
whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with the civil sword
the stubborn and evil doers.

Magistratus eivilis est a Deo ordinatus atque probatus, quamobrem illi non
solum propter iram, sed etiam propter conscientiam obediendum est. Artic. R.
Edv. 6.
The Bishop of Rome has no jurisdiction in this Realm of England.

The Laws of the Realm may punish Christian men with death, for heinous and
grievous offenses.

The Laws of the Realm may punish Christian men with death, for heinous and
grievous offenses.

It is Lawful for Christian men, at the commandment of the Magistrate, to wear
weapons, and serve in the wars.

38. Of Christian men's goods, which are not common.
THe riches and goods of Christians are not common, as touching the right,
title and possession of the same, as certain Anabaptists do falsely boast.
Notwithstanding every man ought of such things as he possesses, liberally to
give alms to the poor, according to his ability.

39. Of a Christian man's oath.
AS we confess that vain and rash swearing is forbidden Christian men by our
Lord Jesus Christ, and James his Apostle: So we judge that Christian Religion
does not prohibit, but that a man may swear when the Magistrate requires in a
cause of faith and charity, so it be done according to the Prophets teaching,
in justice, judgment and truth.

R. Edv. 6. Art. 39. Resurrectio mortuorum nondum est facta.
REsurrectio mortuorum non adhuc facta est, quasi tantum ad animum pertineat,
qui per Christi gratiam a morte peccatorum excitetur, sed extremo die quoad
omnes qui obieruut, expectanda est: tunc enim vita defunctis (ut scripturae
manifestissime testantur) propria corpora, carnes and ossa restitnentur, ut
hemo integer, prout vel recte vel perdite vixerit, juxta sua opera, sive
praemia sive poenas reportet. Art. R. Ed. 6.

R. Ed. 6. Art. 40. Defunctorum animae neque cum corporibus intereunt, neque
otiose dormiunt.
QUi animas defunctorum praedicant usque ad diem judieii absque omni sensu
dormire, aut illas asserunt una cum corporibut mori, et extrema die cum illis
excitandas, ab orthodoxa fide, quae nobis in sacris literis traditur, prorsus
dissentiunt.

R. Edv. 6. Art. 41. Millenarii.
QUi Millenariorum fabulam revocare conantur, sacris literis adversantur, and
in Judaica deliramenta sese praecipitant.

R. Edv. Art. 42. Non omnes tandem servandi sunt.
HIi quoque damnatione digni sunt, qui conantur hodie perniciosam opinionem
instaurare, quod omnes, quantum vis impii, servandi sunt tandem, cum definito
tempore a justitia divina poenas de admissis flagitiis luerunt.

The Ratification.
THis Book of Articles before rehearsed, is again approved, and allowed to be
holden and executed within the Realm, by the assent and consent of our
Sovereign Lady Elizabeth by the grace of God of England, France and Ireland
Queen, Defender of the Faith, etc. Which Articles were deliberately read, and
confirmed again by the subscription of the hand of the Archbishop and Bishops
of the upper House, and by the subscription of the whole Clergy in the
neither house in their Convocation, in the year of our Lord 1571.

THE TABLE.
1 OF faith in the Trinity. 2 Of Christ the Son of God. 3 Of his going down
into hell. 4 Of his Resurrection. 5 Of the holy Ghost. 6 Of the sufficiency of
the Scripture. 7 Of the old Testament. 8 Of the three Creeds. 9 Of the original
sin. 10 Of free will. 11 Of Justification. 12 Of good works. 13 Of works before
justification. 14 Of works of supererogation. 15 Of Christ alone without sin.
16 Of sin after Baptism. 17 Of Predestination and Election. 18 Of obtaining
salvation by Christ. 19 Of the Church. 20 Of the authority of the Church. 21 Of
the authority of the General councels. 22 Of purgatory: 23 Of ministering in the
Congregation. 24 Of speaking in the Congregation. 25 Of the Sacraments. 26. Of
the worthiness of Ministers. 27 Of Baptism. 28 Of the Lords Supper. 29 Of the
wicked which eat not the body of Christ. 30 Of both kinds. 31 Of Christ's one
oblation. 32 Of the marriage of Priests. 33 Of excommunicate Persons. 34 Of
traditions of the Church. 35 Of Homilies. 36 Of consecration of Ministers. 37
Of civil Magistrates. 38 Of Christian men's goods. 39 Of a Christian man's oath.
40 Of the Ratification.
Anno primo Reginae Eliz. cap. 2. There shall be Uniformity of Prayer, and
Administration of Sacraments.
WHere at the death of our late Sovereign Lord King Edward the 6th. there
remained one uniform Order of Common Service and Prayer, and of the
Administration of Sacraments, Rights and Ceremonies in the Church of England,
which was set forth in one Book, entitled, The Book of Common Prayer and
Administration of Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies in the Church of
England, authorized by Act of Parliament, holden in the 5th. and 6th. years of
our said late Sovereign Lord King Edward the 6th. entitled An Act for the
Uniformity of Common Prayer, Stat. 5. and. 6. Ed. 6. 1.
and Administration of the Sacraments; the which was repealed and taken away by
Act of Parliament, in the first year of the reign of our late Sovereign Lady
Queen Mary, to the great decay of the due honor of God, Stat. 1. M. 2.
and discomfort to the professors of the truth of Christ's Religion: A Repeal of
the Statute 1 M. 2. and the book of Common Prayer shall be of effect.


Be it therefore enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, That the
said Statute of repeal, and every thing therein contained, only concerning the
said Book, and the Service, Administration of the Sacraments, Rites and
Ceremonies, contained or appointed in or by the said Book, shall be void and of
none effect, from and after the feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist next
coming, And that the said Book, with the Order of Service, and of the
administration of Sacraments, Rites and Ceremonies, with the Alteration and
Additions therein added and appointed by this Estatute, shall stand and be from
and after the said feast of the Nativity of St John Baptist, in full force and
effect, according to the Tenor and effect of this Estatute; any thing in the
foresaid Estatute of repeal to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted by the Queens Highness, with the assent of the
Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of
the same, That all and singular Ministers in any Cathedral or Parish or Church,
or other place within this Realm of England, The Book of Common Prayer shall be
used, 8. Eliz.
Wales, and the Marches of the same, or other the Queens Dominions, shall from
and after the feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist next coming, be bounden
to say and use the Mattens, Evensong, Celebration of the Lords Supper, and
Administration of each of the Sacraments, and all the Common and open Prayer,
in such order and form as is mentioned in the said Book so authorized by
Parliament, in the said 5. and 6. years of the reign of King Edward the 6th.
with one alteration or addition of certain Lessons, The alteration of the book
set forth 5, and 6. Ed. 6.1.
to be used on every Sunday in the year, and the form of the Letanie altered
and corrected, and two sentences only added in the delivery of the Sacrament
to the Communicants, and none other, or otherwise.

The forfeiture of those which use any other Service than the Book of Common
Prayer.
And that if any manner of Parson, Vicar, or other whatsoever Minister, that
ought or should sing or say Common Prayer mentioned in the said Book, or
Minister the Sacraments from and after the feast of the Nativity of St. John
Baptist next coming refuse to use the said Common Prayer or to Minister the
Sacraments in such Cathedral or Parish Church, or other places, as he should
use to minister the same, in such order or form as they be mentioned and set
forth in the said Book, or shall wilfully or obstinately, standing in the same,
use any other Rite, Ceremony, Order, Form or manner of Celebrating the Lords
Supper, openly or privily, or Mattens, Evensong, Administration of the
Sacraments, or other open Prayers, then is mentioned and set forth in the said
Book, (open Prayer in and throughout this Act, is meant that Prayer which is
for others to come unto, or hear, either in Common Churches, or private
Chapels, or Oratories, Commonly called the Service of the Church) or shall
preach, The penalty for depraving the Book of Common Prayer.
declare or speak any thing in the derogation or depraving of the said Book, or
any thing there in contained, or of any part thereof, and shall be thereof
lawfully convicted, according to the Laws of this Realm, by verdict of 12. men,
or by his own Confession, or by the Notorious evidence of the Fact, shall lose
and forfeit to the Queens Highness, her Heirs and successors, for his first
offense, the profit of all his spiritual Benefices or Promotions, coming or
arising in one whole year next after his conviction. And also that the person
so convicted, shall for the same offense, suffer imprisonment for the space of
6. months without Bail or mainprise.

And if any such person once convict of any offense concerning the premises,
shall after this first conviction eftsoons offend, The penalty for the second
offense.
and be thereof in form aforesaid lawfully convict, that then the same person
shall for his second offense suffer imprisonment by the space of one whole
year, and also shall therefore be deprived, ipso facto, of all his spiritual
Promotions, and that it shall be lawful to all Patrons or Donors of all and
singular the same spiritual Promotions, or of any of them, to present or
collate to the same, as though the person or persons so offending were dead.

And that if any such person or persons, The penalty for the third offense.
after he shall be twice convicted in form aforesaid, shall offend against any
of the premises the third time, and shall be thereof in form aforesaid
lawfully convicted, that then the person so offending, and convicted the third
time, shall be deprived, ipso facto, of all his spiritual Promotions, and also
shall suffer Imprisonment during his life.

And if the person that shall offend, The penalty of an offender having no
spiritual Promotion.
and be convicted in form aforesaid, concerning any of the premises, shall not
be Beneficed, nor have any spiritual Promotion, that then the same person so
offending and convict, shall for the first offense suffer Imprisonment during
one whole year next after his said conviction, without Bail or Mainprise.

And if any person, not having any spiritual Promotion, after his first
conviction shall eftsoons offend in any thing concerning the premises, and
shall in form aforesaid be thereof lawfully convicted, that the same person
shall for his second offense suffer Imprisonment during his life.

And it is ordained and enacted by the Authority aforesaid, The forfeiture of
them which do any thing or speak in the derogation of the book of Common Prayer.
That if any person or persons whatsoever, after the said Feast of the Nativity
of St. John Baptist next coming, shall in any Enterludes, Plays, Songs, Rymes,
or by other open words, declare or speak any thing in the derogation, depraving
or despising of the same book, or of any thing therein contained, or any part
thereof, or shall by open fact, deed, or by open threatenings, compel or cause,
or otherwise procure or maintain any Parson, Vicar or other Minister, in any
Cathedral or Parish Church, or in Chapel, or in any other place, to sing or
say any Common or open prayer, or to minister any Sacrament, otherwise, Causing
other Prayer to be said or sung, Coke pla. fol. 312.
or in any other manner and form than is mentioned in the said book, or that by
any of the said means shall unlawfully interrupt, or let any Parson, Vicar, or
other Minister in any Cathedral or Parish Church, Chapel, or any other place,
to sing or say common and open prayer, or to Minister the Sacraments, or any of
them in such manner and form, The forfeiture of an hundred Marks for the first
offense Dyer fol. 203.231.323. The forfeiture of four hundred marks for the
second offense.
as is mentioned in the said book: That then every such person being thereof
lawfully convicted, in form above said, shall forfeit to the Queen our
Sovereign Lady, her Heirs and Successors, for the first offense an hundred
marks.

And if any person or persons being once convict of any such offense, eftsoons
offend against any of the last recited offenses, and shall in form aforesaid be
thereof lawfully convict, That then the same person so offending and convict,
shall for the second offense forfeit to the Queen our Sovereign Lady, her Heirs
and Successors, four hundred marks.

And if any person, after he in form aforesaid shall have been twice convict of
any offense, The forfeiture of the third offense.
concerning any of the last recited offenses, shall offend the third time, and
be thereof in form abovesaid lawfully convict, That then every person so
offending and convict, shall for his third offense forfeit to our Sovereign
Lady the Queen, all his goods and Chattels, and shall suffer Imprisonment
during his life.

And if any person or persons, that for his first offense concerning the
premises shall be convict in form aforesaid, The penalties if the party
convicted do not pay his forfeiture within the time limited.
do not pay the sum to be paid by virtue of his conviction, in such manner and
form as the same ought to be paid, within six weeks next after his conviction,
That then every person so convict, and so not paying the same, shall for the
same first offense, in stead of the said sum, suffer Imprisonment by the space
of six months without Bail or mainprize.

And if any person or persons, that for his second offense concerning the
premises shall be convict in form aforesaid, do not pay the said sum, to be
paid by virtue of his Conviction and this Estatute, in such manner and form as
the same ought to be paid, within six weeks next after his said second
conviction, that then every person so convicted, and not so paying the same,
shall for the same second offense, in the stead of the said sum, suffer
Imprisonment during twelve months without bail or mainprize.

And that from and after the said Feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist
next coming, Every person shall resort to the Church upon the Holy days.
all and every person and persons, inhabiting within this Realm, or any other
the Queens Majesty's Dominions, shall diligently and faithfully, having no
lawful or reasonable excuse to be absent, endeavor themselves to resott to
their Parish Church, or Chapel accustomed, or upon reasonable let thereof, to
some usual place where Common Prayer and such service of God shall be used, in
such time of let upon every Sunday, and other days ordained and used to be
kept as holy days, and then and there to abide orderly and soberly, during the
time of the Common Prayer, Preaching or other service of God, there to be used
and ministered, The forfeiture for not coming to Church 32. Eliz. 1.
upon pain of punishment by the censures of the Church. And also upon pain that
every person so offending, shall forfeit for such offense twelvepence, to be
levied by the Churchwardens of the Parish where such offense shall be done, to
the use of the poor of the same Parish, of the goods, lands and tenements of
such offender, by way of distress.

And for due Execution hereof, the Queens most excellent Majesty, the Lords
Spiritual, and all the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, do in Gods
name earnestly require and charge all the Archbishops, Bishops and other
Ordinaries, that they shall endeavor themselves to the uttermost of their
knowledges, that the due and true Execution hereof may be had throughout their
Diocese and Charges, as they will answer before God, for such evils and
plagues wherewith Almighty God may justly punish his people, for neglecting
this good and wholesome Law.

And for their Authority in this behalf, The Ordinary may punish Offenders by
the Censures of the Church
be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and singular the
said Archbishops, Bishops, and all other their Officers, exercising
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as well in place exempt, as not exempt, within
their Diocese, shall have full power and authority by this Act, to reform,
correct and punish by Censures of the Church, all and singular persons which
shall offend within any their Jurisdictions or Diocese, after the said Feast
of the Nativity of St. John Baptist next coming, against this Act and Statute:
any other Law, Statute, Privilege, Liberty or Provision, heretofore made, had
or suffered, to the contrary notwithstanding.

And it is Ordained and enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Which Justices may
punish their offenses.
That all and every Justices of Oyer and Determiner, or Justices of Assize,
shall have full power and Authority in every of their Open and general
Sessions, to enquire, hear and determine, all and all manner offenses, that
shall be committed or done, contrary to any Article contained in this present
Act, within the limits of the Commission to them directed, and to make Process
for the Execution of the same, as they may do against any person being indicted
before them of trespass, or lawfully convicted thereof.

A Bishop may join with the Justices to enquire of offenders.
Provided always, and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all and
every Archbishop and Bishop, shall or may at all time and times, at his liberty
and pleasure, join and associate himself by virtue of this Act, to the said
Justices of Oyer and Determiner, or to the said Justices of Assize, at every of
the said open and General Sessions to be holden in any place within his
Diocese, for and to the enquiry, hearing and determining of the offenses
aforesaid.

At whose charges the books of Common prayer shall be gotten.
Provided also and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the books
concerning the said Services, shall at the Costs and charges of the
Parishioners of every Parish and Cathedral Church, be attained and gotten
before the said Feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist next following; and
that all such Parishes and Cathedral Churches, or other places, where the said
books shall be attained and gotten before the said Feast of the Nativity of
Saint John Baptist, shall within three weeks next after the said books so
attained and gotten, use the said Service, and put the same in Ure, according
to this Act.

And be it further enacted by authority aforesaid, That no person or persons
shall be at any time hereafter Impeached, Within what time offenders shall be
Impeached.
or otherwise molested, of, or for any of the offenses abovementioned,
hereafter to be committed or done contrary to this Act, unless he or they so
offending be thereof Indicted at the next General Sessions to be holden before
any such Justices of Oyer and Determiner, or Justices of Assize, next after any
offense committed or done contrary to the tenor of this Act,

Trial of Peers
Provided always, and be it ordained and enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That all and singular Lords of the Parliament, for the third offense above
mentioned, shall be tried by their Peers.

Chief Officers of Cities and Boroughs shall enquire of offenders.
Provided also, and be it Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
the Major of London, and all the Majors, Bailiffs, and other head Officers, of
all and singular Cities, Boroughs, and Towns Corporate, within this Realm,
Wales, and the Marches of the same, to the which Justices of Assize, do not
commonly repair, shall have full power and authority by virtue of this Act, to
enquire, hear and determine the offenses abovefaid, and every of them, yearly
within fifteen days after Easter, and St. Michael the Archangel, in like
manner and form as Justices of Assize, and Oyer and Determiner may do.

The Ordinaries Jurisdiction in their Cases.
Provided always, and be it Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
that all and singular Archbishops and Bishops, and every of their
Chancellours, Commissaries, Archdeacons, and other Ordinaries having any
peculiar Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, shall have full power and authority by
virtue of this Act, as well to enquire in their Visitation, and elsewhere
within their Jurisdiction at any other time and place, to take accusations, and
informations, of all and every the things above mentioned, done, committed, or
perpetrated within the Limits of their Jurisdictions and authority, and to
punish the same by Admonition, Excommunication, Sequestration or Deprivation,
and other Censures and Process, in like form as heretofore has been used in
like Cases, by the Queens Ecclesiastical Laws.

Provided always and be it Enacted, None shall be punished above once for one
offense.
that whatsoever persons offending in the Premises, shall for their offenses,
first receive a punishment of the Ordinary, having a Testimonial thereof under
the said Ordinaries seal, shall not for the same offense eftsoons be convicted
before the Justices; And likewise receiving for the said first offense,
punishment by the Justices, shall not for the same offense eftsoons receive
punishment of the Ordinary: Any thing contained in this Act to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, Ornamens of the Church and Ministers
that such ornaments of the Church, and of the Ministers thereof, shall be
retained and be in use, as was in this Church of England, by Authority of
Parliament, in the second year of the Reign of King Edward the sixth, until
other order shall be therein taken by the Authority of the Queens Majesty,
with the advice of her Commissioners appointed and Authorized under tho Great
Seal of England for causes Ecclesiastical, or of the Metropolitan of this Realm.

And also, that if there shall happen any contempt or irreverence to be used in
the Ceremonies or Rites of the Church, by the misusing of the orders appointed
in this book, the Queens Majesty may by the like advice of the said
Commissioners or Metropolitan, ordain and publish such farther Ceremonies or
Rites, as may be most for the advancement of Gods Glory, the edifying of his
Church, and the due reverence of Christ's holy mysteries and Sacraments.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforsaid, All Laws and Ordinances
made for other service, shall be void.
That all Laws, statutes, and ordinances wherein or whereby any other service,
administration of Sacraments, or Common Prayer, is limited, established, or set
forth to be used within this Realm, or any other the Queens Dominions or
Countries, shall from henceforth be utterly void and of none effect Coke pla.
fol 352.

A Clause Anno 8. Eliz. cap. 1.
A confirmation of the Stat. of 1 Eliz. 2. touching the book of Common Prayer,
and Administration of the Sacraments.
WHerefore, for the plain declaration of all the premises, and to the intent
that the same may the better be known to every of the Queens Majesty's
subjects, whereby such evil speech, as heretofore has been used against the
High state of Prelacy, may hereafter cease; Be it now declared and enacted by
the Authority of this present Parliament, that the said Act and Statute made in
the first year of the reign of our said Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty,
whereby the said book of Common Prayer, and the Administration of Sacraments,
with other Rites and Ceremonies, is authorized and allowed to be used, shall
stand and remain good and perfect to all respects and purposes: And that such
order and form for the Consecrating of Archbishops, A Confirmation of the Stat.
of 5. and 6. Ed. 6. 1: touching the form of consecrating Archbishops, etc.
and Bishops, and for the making of Priests, Deacons, and Ministers, as was set
forth in the time of the said late King Edward the sixth, and added to the said
Book of Common Prayer, and authorized by Parliament in the fifth and sixth
years of the said late King, shall stand and be in full force and effect, and
shall from henceforth be used and observed in all places within this Realm, and
other the Queens Majesty's Dominions and Countries.

Anno 13. Eliz. cap. 12. Reformation of Disorders in the Ministers of the
Church, etc.
THat the Churches of the Queens Majesty's Dominions, may be served with
Pastors of sound Religion: Be it enacted by the Authority of this present
Parliament, That every person under the degree of a Bishop, which does or shall
pretend to be a Priest, or Minister of Gods holy Word and Sacraments, by reason
of any other form of Institution, Consecration, or ordering, than the form set
forth by Parliament in the time of the late King of most Worthy Memory, King
Edward the sixth, 3. Edw. 6.12. 5. Edw. 6.1. Dyer f. 377.
or now used in the Reign of our most gracious Sovereign Lady, before the
Feast of the Nativity of Christ next following, shall in the presence of the
Bishop or Guardian of the Spiritualities of some one Diocese where he has or
shall have Ecclesiastical living, declare his assent, Every Ecclesiastical
person shall subscribe to the Articles touching the Confession of the Faith,
and declare his assent thereunto.
and subscribe to all the Articles of Religion, which only concern the
Confession of the true Christian Faith, and the Doctrine of the Sacraments,
comprised in a book imprinted, entitled, Articles; Whereupon it was agreed by
the Archbishops and Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy in the
Convocation holden at London in the year of our Lord God a thousand five
hundred sixty and two, according to the computation of the Church of England,
for the avoiding of the diversities of opinions, and for the establishing of
consent touching true Religion, put forth by the Queens Authority; and shall
bring from such Bishop or Guardian of Spiritualties, in writing under his Seal
Authentic, a testimonial of such assent and subscription, and openly on some
Sunday in the time of some public service afternoon, Reading of the Articles
and testimonial.
in every Church where by reason of any Ecclesiastical living he ought to
attend, read both the said testimonial, and the said Articles, upon pain that
every such person which shall not before the said Feast do as is above
appointed, shall be (ipso facto) deprived, and all his Ecclesiastical
promotions shall be void, as if he were then naturally dead.

And that if any person Ecclesiastical, or which shall have Ecclesiastical
livings, shall advisedly maintain or affirm any Doctrine directly contrary or
repugnant to any of the said Articles, The penalty of maintaining of Doctrine
against the Articles.
and being convented before the Bishop of the Diocese, or the Ordinary, or
before the Queens Highness Commissioners in causes Ecclesiastical shall
persist therein, or not revoke his error, or after such revocation eftsoons
affirm such untrue Doctrine: such maintaining or affirming, and persisting, or
such eftsoone affirming shall be just cause to deprive such person of his
Ecclesiastical promotions: And it shall be lawful to the Bishop of the Diocese,
or the Ordinary, or the said Commissioners, to deprive such persons so
persisting, or lawfully convicted of such eftsoons affirming, and upon such
sentence of deprivation pronounced, he shall be indeed deprived.

Several things required in him which shall be admitted to a Benefice.
And that no person shall hereafter be admitted to any Benefice with Cure,
except he then be of the age of three and twenty years at the least, and a
Deacon, and shall first have subscribed the said Articles in presence of the
Ordinary, and publicly read the same in the Parish Church of that Benefice,
with declaration of his unfeigned assent to the same. And that every person
after the end of this Session of Parliament to be admitted to a Benefice with
Cure, except that within two months after his Induction he do publicly read
the said Articles in the same Church whereof he shall have Cure, in the time of
Common Prayer there, with declaration of his unfeigned assent thereto, and be
admitted to minister the Sacraments within one year after his Induction, if he
be not so admitted before, shall be upon every such default, ipso facto,
immediately deprived.

And that no person now permitted by any dispensation, or otherwise, shall
retain any Benefice with Cure, being under the age of One and Twenty years, or
not being Deacon at the least, or which shall not be admitted, as is aforesaid,
within one year next after the making of this Act, or within six months after
he shall accomplish the age of twenty four years, on pain that such his
dispensation shall be merely void.

The age of a Minister or Preacher, and his testimonial.
And that none shall be made Minister, or admitted to Preach or Administer the
Sacraments, being under the age of four and twenty years, nor unless he first
bring to the Bishop of that Diocese from men known to the Bishop to be of sound
Religion, a testimonial, both of his honest life, and of his professing the
Doctrine expressed in the said Articles; nor unless he be able to answer and
render to the Ordinary an account of his faith in Latin, accord-to the said
Articles, or have special gift and ability to be a Preacher: nor shall be
admitted to the Order of Deacon or Ministry, unless he shall first subscribe to
the said Articles.

And that none hereafter, Who may have a Benefice of the yearly value of xxxl.
All Admissions, Inductions, Tolerations.

No Lapse upon deprivation but after. notice. Dyer. fo. 377. 346. 369. Cok. li.
6. fol 29.


shall be admitted to any Benefice with Cure, of or above the value of thirty
pounds yearly in the Queens books, unless he shall then be a Batchellour of
Divinity, or Preacher lawfully allowed by some Bishop within this Realm, or by
one of the Universities of Cambridge or Oxford.

And that all Admissions to Benefices, Institutions, and Inductions to be made
of any person contrary to the form or any Provision of this Act, and all
tolerations, dispensations, qualifications, and licenses whatsoever to be made
to the contrary hereof, shall be merely void in Law, as if they never were.

Provided always, That no title to confer or present by a Lapse, shall accrue
upon any deprivation, ipso facto, but after six months notice of such
deprivation given by the Ordinary to the Patron.

ADVERTISMENTS partly for due order IN THE PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION OF THE HOLY
SACRAMENTS, AND Partly for the apparel of all persons Ecclesiastical, by virtue
of the Queens Majesty's letters commanding the same; the 25. day of January in
the seventh year of the reign of our Sovereign Lady ELIZABETH, by the grace of
God, of England, France and Ireland Queen, defender of the Faith etc.

LONDINI, Cum privilegio ad imprimendum solum. Anno Dom. 1564. Anno 7. Eliz. R.

The Preface.
THe Queens Majesty of her godly Zeal calling to remembrance how necessary it
is to the advancement of Gods glory and to the establishment of Christ's pure
Religion, for all her loving subjects, especially the state Ecclesiastical, to
be knit together in one perfect unity of doctrine, and to be conjoined in one
uniformity of Rites and manners in the ministration of Gods holy word, in open
prayer and ministration of Sacraments, as also to be of one decent behavior in
their outward apparel, to be known partly by their distinct habits to be of
that vocation (who should be reverenced the rather in their offices as
Ministers of the holy things whereto they be called) has by her letters
directed unto the Archbishop of Canterbury and metropolitan, required,
enjoined and straightly charged, that with assistence and conference had with
other Bishops, namely such as be in commission for causes Ecclesiastical, some
orders might be taken, whereby all diversities and varieties among them of the
Clergy and the people (as breeding nothing but contention, offense and breach
of common charity, and he against the laws, good usage and ordinances of the
Realm) might be reformed and repressed, and brought to one manner of uniformity
throughout the whole Realm, that the people may thereby quietly honor and
serve almighty God in truth, concord, unity, peace, and quietness, as by her
Majesty's said letters more at large does appear. Whereupon by diligent
conference and communication in the same, and at last by assent and consent of
the persons beforesaid, these orders and rules ensuing, have been thought meet
and convenient to be used and followed: not yet prescribing these rules as laws
equivalent with the eternal word of God, and as of necessity to bind the
consciences of her subjects in the nature of them considered in themselves: Or
as they should add any efficacy, or more holiness to the virtue of public
prayer and to the Sacraments, but as temporal orders mere Ecclesiastical,
without any vain superstition, and as rules in some part of discipline
concerning decency, distinction and order for the time.

Articles for Doctrine and preaching.
FIrst, that all they which shall be admitted to preach shall be diligently
examined for their conformity in unity of doctrine, established by public
authority: and admonished to use sobriety and discretion in teaching the
people, namely in matters of controversy, and to consider the gravity of their
office, and to foresee with diligence the matters, which they will speak, to
utter them to the edification of the audience.

Item, That they set out in their preaching the reverent estimation of the holy
Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, exciting the people to the often
and devout receiving of the holy Communion of the body and blood of Christ, in
such form as is already prescribed in the book of Common Prayer, and as it is
further declared in an Homily concerning the virtue and efficacy of the said
Sacraments.

Item, That they move the people to all obedience, as well in observation of
the orders appointed in the book of Common service, as in the Queens Majesty's
injunctions. as also of all other civil duties due for subjects to do.

Item, That all licenses for preaching, granted out by the Archbishop and
Bishops within the province of Canterbury, bearing date before the first day of
March 1564 be void and of none effect: and nevertheless all such as shall be
thought meet for the office, to be admitted again without difficulty or charge,
paying no more but iiii. pence for the writing, parchment and wax.

Item, If any Preacher or Parson, Vicar or Curate so licensed, shall fortune to
preach any matter tending to dissension, or to the derogation of the Religion
and Doctrine received, that the hearers denounce the same to the Ordinaries, or
the next Bishop of the same place: but no man openly to contrary or to impugn
the same speech so disorderly uttered: whereby may grow offense and disquiet of
the people, but shall be convinced and reproved by the Ordinary after such
agreeable order, as shall be seen to him according to the gravity of the
offense. And that it be presented within one month after the words spoken.

Item, That they use not to exact or receive unreasonable rewards or stipends
of the poor Pastors, coming to their Cures to preach, whereby they might be
noted as followers of filthy lucre, rather then use the office of preaching of
charity and good zeal, to the salvation of men's souls.

Item, If the Parson be able, he shall preach in his own person every three
months, or else shall preach by an other, so that his absence be approved by
the Ordinary of the Dioces in respect of sickness, service, or study at the
Universities Nevertheless yet for want of able Preachers and Parsons, to
tolerate them without penalty, so that they preach in their own persons, or by
a Learned substitute, once in every three months of the year.

Articles for Administration of Prayer and Sacraments.
FIrst, That the Common prayer be said or sung decently and distinctly, in such
place as the Ordinary shall think meet for the largeness and straightness of
the Church and quire, so that the people may be most edified.

Item, That no Parson or Curate not admitted by the Bishop of the Dioces to
preach, do expound in his own Cure or other where, any Scripture or matter of
doctrine or by the way of exhortation, but only study to read gravely and
aptly, without any glossing of the same, or any additions, the Homilies already
set out, or other such necessary doctrine as is or shall be prescribed for the
quiet instruction and edification of the people.

Item, That in Cathedral Churches and colleges the holy Communion be ministered
upon the first or second Sunday of every month at the least. So that both
Dean, Prebendaries, Priests and clerks do receive: and all other of discretion
of the foundation, do receive four times in the year at the least.

Item, In the ministration of the holy Communion in Cathedral and collegiat
Churches, the principal Minister shall use a cope, with gospeller and epistoler
agreeably, and at all other prayers to be said at that Communion table, to use
no copes but Surplesses.

Item, That the Dean and Prebendaries wear a surples with a silk hood in the
quire: and when they preach in the Cathedral or Collegiat Church, to wear their
hood.

Item, that every minister saying any public prayers or ministering the
Sacraments or other Rites of the Church, shall wear a comely surples with
sleeves, to be provided at the charges of the Parish: and that the Parish
provide a decent table standing on a frame, for the Communion table.

Item, They shall decently cover with Carpet, silk or other decent covering,
and with a fair linen cloth at the time of the ministration, the Communion
table, and to set the ten Commandments upon the East w^ll over the said table.

Item, That all Communicants do receive kneeling, and as is appointed by the
laws of the Realm, and the Queens Majesty's Injunctions.

Item, That the font be not removed, nor that the Curate do baptize in parish
Churches in any Basins, nor in any other form then is already prescribed,
without charging the parent to be present or absent at the Christning of his
child, although the Parent may be present or absent, but not to answer as
Godfather for his child.

Item, That no child be admitted to answer as Godfather or Godmother, except
the child has received the Communion.

Item, that there be none other holidays observed besides the Sundays, but
only such as be set out for holidays, as in the Statute Anno quinto and sexto
Edwardi sexti, and in the new Calendar authorized by the Queens Majesty.

Item, That when any Christian body is in passing, that the Bell be tolled, and
that the Curate be specially called for to comfort the sick person: and after
the time of his passing, to ring no more but one short peal: and one before the
burial, and another short peal after the burial.

Item, That on Sundays there be no shops open, nor artificers commonly going
about their affairs worldly. And that in all Faires and common Markets,
falling upon the Sunday, there be no showing of any wares before the Service be
done.

Item, That in the Rogation days of procession they sing or say in English the
two Psalms beginning Benedic anima mea, etc. with the Letany and suffrages
thereunto, with one Homily of thanksgiving to God, already devised and divided
into four parts, without addition of any superstitious ceremonies heretofore
used.

Articles for certain orders in Ecclesiastical policy.
FIrst, against the day of giving of orders appointed, the Bishop shall give
open monitions to all men to except against such as they know not to be worthy,
either for life or conversation. And there to give notice, that none shall sue
for Orders, but within their own Diocese where they were born, or had their
long time of dwelling, except such as shall be of degree in the Universities.

Item, That no Curate or Minister be permitted to serve without examination and
admissidn of the Ordinary or his deputy, in writlng, having respect to the
greatness of the Cure, and the meetness of the party: and that the said
Ministers if they remove from one Diocese to another, be by no means admitted
to serve, without testimony of the Diocesan from whence they come, in writing
of their honesty and ability.

Item, That the Bishop do call home once in the year any Prebendary in his
Church, or beneficed in the Diocese which studieth at the Universities, to know
how he profits in learning: and that he be not suffered to be a serving or
waiting man dissolutely.

Item, That at the Archdeacons visitation, the Archdeacon shall appoint the
Curate to certain taxes of the New Testament, to be con'd without book. And at
their next Synod to exact a rehearsal of them.

Item, That the Church wardens once in the quarter declare by their Curates in
bills subscribed with their hands to the Ordinary or to the next officer under
him, who they be which will not readily pay their penalties for not coming to
Gods divine service accordingly.

Item, That the Ordinaries do use good diligent examination, to foresee all
Simonical pacts or covenants with the Patrons or presenters for the spoil of
their glebe, tithes or mansion houses.

Item, That no persons be suffered to marry within the Levitical degrees
mentioned in a table set forth by the Archbishop of Canterbury in that behalf,
Anno Domini 1563. and if any such be, to be separated by order of law.

Articles for outward apparel of persons Ecclesiastical.
FIrst, that all Archbishops and Bishops do use and continue their accustomed
apparel.

Item, That all Deans of Cathedral Churches, Masters of Colleges, all
Archdeacons and other dignities in Cathedral Churches: Doctors, Bachilers of
Divinity and Law, having any Ecclesiastical living, shall wear in their common
apparel abroad, a side gown with slieves straight at the hand, without any cuts
in the same. And that also without any falling cape: and to wear tippets of
Sacrenet, as is lawful for them by that act of Parliament, Anno 24. Henrici
octavi.

Item, That all Doctors of Physic, or of any other faculty, having any living
Ecclesiastical, or any other that may dispend by the Church one hundred marks,
so to be esteemed by the fruits or tenths of their promotions: and all
Prebendaries whose promo^ions be valued at twenty pound or upward, wear the
like apparel.

Item, That they and all Ecclesiastical persons, or other having any
Ecclesiastical living, do wear the cap appointed by the Injunctions. And they
to wear no hats but in their journying.

Item, That they in their journying do wear their cloaks with sieeves put on,
and like in fashion to their gowns, without gards, welts or cuts.

Item, That in their private houses and studies, they use their own liberty of
comely apparel.

Item, That all inferior Ecclesiastical persons shall wear long gowns of the
fashion aforesaid, and caps as before is prescribed.

Item, That all poor Parsons, Vicars and Curates do endeavor themselves to
conform their apparel in like sort, so seon and as conveniently as their
ability will serve to the same. Provided that their ability be judged by the
Bishop of the Dioces. And if their ability will not suffer to buy them long
gowns of the form before prescribed, that then they shall wear their short
gowns, agreeable to the form before expressed.

Item, That all such persons as have been or be Ecclesiastical, and serve not
the ministry, or have not accepted or shall refuse to accept the oath of
obedience to the Queens Majesty, do from henceforth abroad wear none of the
said apparel of the form and fashion aforesaid, but to go as mere lay men, till
they be reconciled to obedience: and who shall obstinately refuse to do the
same, that they be presented by the Ordinary to the Commissioners in causes
Ecclesiastical, and by them to be reformed accordingly.

Protestations to be made, promised and subscribed by them that shall hereafter
be admitted to any office, room or Cure in any Church, or other place
Ecclesiastical.
IN primis, I shall not preach or publicly interpret, but only read that which
is appointed by public authority, without special license of the Bishop under
his seal.

I shall read the service appointed, plainly, distinctly and audibly, that all
the people may hear and understand.

I shall keep the Register book according to the Queens Majesty's Injunctions.

I shall use sobriety in apparel, and specially in the Church at Common
prayers, according to order appointed.

I shall move the Parishioners to quiet and concord, and not give them cause of
offense, and shall help to reconcile them which be at variance, to my uttermost
power.

I shall read daily at the least one Chapter of the old Testament, and an other
of the New, with good advisement, to the increase of my knowledge.

I do also faithfully promise in my person, to use and exercise my office and
place to the honor of God, to the quiet of the Queens subjects within my
charge, in truth concord and unity. And also to observe, keep and maintain such
order and uniformity in all external policy, rites and ceremonies of the
Church, as by the Laws, Good usuages and orders are already well provided and
established.

I shall not openly intermeddle with any artificers occupations, as covetously
to seek a gain thereby, having in Ecclesiastical living to the sum of twenty
nobles or above by year.

Agreed upon and subscribed by, Commissioners in causes Ecclesiastical.
Matthaeus Cantuariensis. Edmondus Londoniensis. Richardus Eliensis. Edmondus
Roffensis. Robertus Wintoniensis. Nicolaus Lincolniensis.
With others.

Imprinted at LONDON by Reginald Wolf.

The OATHS of ALLEGIANCE, SUPREMACY, AND Canonical Obedience.
The Oath of ALLEGIANCE.
I A. B. Do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify and declare in
my conscience before God and the World, that our Sovereign Lord King Charles is
lawful and rightful King of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's
Dominions and Countries; and that the Pope, neither of himself, nor by any
authority of the Church or Sea of Rome, or by any other means with any other,
has any power or authority to depose the King, or to dispose any of his
Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions or to authorize any Foraign Prince to invade or
annoy him or his Countries, or to discharge any of his Subjects of their
Allegiance and obedience to his Majesty, or to give license or leave to any of
them to bear Arms, raise Tumults, or to offer any violence or hurt to his
Majesty's Royal Person, State or Government, or to any of his Majestyes
Subjects within his Majesty's Dominions.

Also I do swear from my heart, that notwithstanding any declaration or
sentence of Excommunication or Deprivation made or granted, or to be made or
granted by the Pope or his Successors, or by any Authority derived or
pretended to be derived from him or his Sea, against the said King, his Heirs
or Successors, or any Absolution of the said Subjects from their Obedience; I
will bear faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors,
and him and them will defend to the uttermost of my power, against all
conspiracies and attempts whatsoever which shall be made against his or their
Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason or color of any such Sentence or
Declaration or otherwise; and will do my best endeavor to disclose and make
known unto his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors all Treasons and Traitorous
Conspiracies which I shall know or hear of, to be against him or any of them.

And I do further swear, That I do from my heart abhor, detest and abjure, as
impious and heretical, this damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes which
be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their
Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

And I do believe and in [Conscience am] resolved, that neither the Pope nor
any person whatsoever has power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part
thereof which I acknowledge by good and full authority to be lawfully
administered unto me, and do renounce all pardons and dispensations to the
contrary. And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge, and
swear according to these express words by me spoken, and according to the
plain and common sense and understanding of the same words, without any
equivocation, or mental evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever: And I do
make this Recognition and acknowledgement heartily, willingly and truly, upon
the true faith of a Christian. So help me God. etc.

The Oath of SVPREMACY.
I A B. Do utterly testify and declare in my conscience, that the Kings
highness is the only supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his
Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
things or causes, as Temporal; And that no Foraign Prince, Person Prelate,
State or Potentate, has or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power Superiority,
Preeminence or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual with in this Realm: And
therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all Foraign Jurisdictions, Powers,
Superiorities and authorities, and do promise from henceforth I shall bear
faith and true Allegiance to the Kings Highness, his Heirs and lawful
Successors, and to my power shall assist and defend all Jurisdictions,
Privileges, Preeminences and Authorities granted, or belonging to the Kings
Highness, his Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the Imperial
Crown of this Realm. So help me God, and by the Contents of this book.

The Oath of SIMONY.
I A. B. do swear that I have made no Simoniacal payment, contract, or promise
directly or indirectly by my self, or by any other to my knowledge, or with my
consent to any person or persons whatsoever for, or concerning the procuring or
obtaining of the R. or V. of A in the Dioces of London. Nor will at any time
hereafter perform or satisfy any such kind of payment, contract or promise
made by any other without my knowledge or consent. So help me God through Jesus
Christ.

Juramentum de CANONICA OBEDIENTIA.
EGO A. B. juro quod praestabo veram and Canonicam Obedientiam Episcopo
Londinensi ejusque successoribus in omnibus Licitis and honestis. Sic me Deus
adjuvet.

Juramentum de continua Residentia in Vicaria.
EGO A. B. Juro quod ero residens in Vicaria mea nisi aliter dispensatum fuerit
a Diocesano meo.

By the KING A PROCLAMATION Declaring That the proceedings of his Majesty's
Ecclesiastical Courts and Ministers, are according to the Laws of the Realm.
WHereas in some of the Libellous books and Pamphlets lately published, The
most Reverend Father in God, the Lord Archbishop and Bishops of this Realm,
are said to have usurped upon his Majesty's Prerogative Royal, and to have
proceeded in the high Commission and other Ecclesiastical Courts, contrary to
the Laws and statutes of this Realm; It was ordered by his Majesty's high Court
of Star Chamber, the Twelfth day of June last, that the opinion of the two
Lords chief Justices, the Lord chief Baron, and the rest of the Judges and
Barons should be had and certified in those particulars. viz. Whether Processes
may not issue out of the Ecclesiastical Courts in the Name of the Bishops?
Whether a Patent under the great Seal be necessary for the keeping of the
Ecclesiastical Courts, and enabling Citations, Suspensions, Excommunications
and other censures of the Church. And whether Citations ought to be in the
Kings name, and under his Seal of Arms, and the like for Institutions and
Inductions to Benefices, and correction of Ecclesiastical offenses? Whether
Bishops, Archdeacons and other Ecclesiastical persons may or ought to keep any
visitation at any time unless they have express Commission or Patent under
the great Seal of England to do it, and that as his Majesty's Visitors only,
and in his name and Right alone.

Whereupon, his Majesty's said Judges having taken the same into their serious
consideration, did unanimously concur and agree in opinion, and the first day
of July last certified under their hands as follows, That processes may issue
out of the Ecclesiastical Courts in the name of the Bishops; and that a Patent
under the great Seal is not necessary for the keeping of the said
Ecclesiastical Courts, or for enabling of Citations; Suspensions,
Excommunications and other Censures of the Church; And that it is not necessary
that Summons, Citations, or other Processes Ecclesiastical in the said Courts,
or Institutions, or Inductions to Benefices, or correction of Ecclesiastical
offenses by Censure in those Courts, be in the Kings name or with the style of
the King, or under the Kings Seal, or that their Seals of office have in them
the Kings Arms; And that the statute of Primo Edvardi sexti, cap. secundo,
which enacted the Contrary, is not now in force: And that the Bishops,
Archdeacons and other Ecclesiastical persons, may keep their Visitations as
usually they have done, without Commission under the great Seal of England so
to do: which opinions and resolutions being declared under the hands of all his
Majesty's said Judges and so certified into his Court of Starchamber, were
there recorded: and it was by that Court further ordered the fourth day of the
said month of July, that the said certificate should be enrolled in all other
his Majesty's Courts at Westminster, and in the High Commission, and other
Ecclesiastical Courts, for the satisfaction of all men, That the proceedings in
the high Commission and other Ecclesiastical Courts are agreeable to the Laws
and Statutes of the Realm.

And his Royal Majesty has thought fit, with advice of his Council, that a
public Declaration of these the opinions and resolutions of his Reverend and
Learned Judges, being agreeable to the Judgment and resolutions of former
times, should be made known to all his Subjects, as well to vindicate the legal
proceedings of His Ecclesiastical Courts and Ministers, from the Unjust and
scandalous imputation of Invading or entrenching on his Royal prerogative, as
to settle the minds and stop the mouths of all unquiet Spirits, that for the
future they presume not to censure His Ecclesiastical Courts or Ministers in
these their Just and warranted proceedings: And hereof his Majesty admonishes
all his Subjects to take warning as they shall answer the contrary at their
perils.

Given at the Court at Lyndhurst, the 18th. day of August, in the 13th. year of
his Majesty's Reign.
God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty and by the Assigns of John Bill. 1637.

THE FORM and MANNER OF MAKING and CONSECRATING BISHOPS, PRIESTS, AND DEACONS:
According to the APPOINTMENT OF THE Church of England.

LONDON, Printed by Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty 1629.

THE PREFACE.
IT is evident unto all men, diligently reading holy Scripture, and ancient
Authors, that from the Apostles time, there has been these Orders of Ministers
in Christ's Church, Bishops, Priests and Deacons: which Offices were evermore
had in such reverent estimation, that no man by his own private authority might
presume to execute any of them, except he were first called, tried, examined
and known to have such qualities, as were requisite for the same, and also by
public prayer, with imposition of hands, approved and admitted thereunto. And
therefore, to the intent these orders should be continued, and reverently used
and esteemed in this Church of England, it is requisite that no man, (not being
at this present Bishop, Priest, nor Deacon) shall execute any of them, except
he be called, tried, examined and admitted, according to the Form hereafter
following. And none shall be admitted a Deacon, except he be twenty one years
of age at the least. And every man which is to be admitted a Priest, shall be
full four and twenty years old. And every man which is to be consecrated a
Bishop, shall be fully thirty years of age. And the Bishop knowing either by
himself, or by sufficient testimony, any person to be a man of virtuous
conversation, and without crime, and after examination and trial, finding him
learned in the Latin tongue, and sufficiently instructed in holy Scripture,
may upon a Sunday or Holiday, in the face of the Church, admit him a Deacon, in
such manner and form as hereafter follows.

The form and manner of ordering DEACONS.
Fifth, When the day appointed by the Bishop is come, there shall be an
Exhortation, declaring the duty and office of such as come to be admitted
Ministers, how necessary such Orders are in the Church of Christ, and also how
the people ought to esteem them in their Vocation.

After the Exhortation ended, the Archdeacon or his Deputy, shall present such
as shall come to the Bishop to be admitted, saying these words.

REverend Father in God, I present unto you these persons present, to be
admitted Deacons.

The Bishop.

TAke heed that the persons whom ye present unto us, be apt and meet, for their
learning and godly conversation, to exercise their ministry duly, to the honor
of God, and edifying of his Church.

The Archdeacon shall answer.

I Have enquired of them, and also examined them, and think them so to be.

And the Bishop shall say unto the people.

BRethren, if there be any of you, who knows any impediment, or notable
(...), in any of these persons presented to be ordered Deacons, for the which
he ought not to be admitted to the same, let him come forth in the Name of God,
and show what the crime or impediment is.

And if any great crime or impediment be objected, the Bishop shall surcease
from Ordering that person, until such time as the party accused shall try
himself clear of that crime.

Then the Bishop commending such as shall be found meet to be Ordered, to the
prayers of the Congregation, with the Clerks and people present, shall say or
sing the Letany, as follows, with the prayers.

The Letany and Suffrages.
O God the Father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Son Redeemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Son Redeemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the Son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O God the holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the Son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed and glorious Trinity, three Persons and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers, neither
take thou vengeance of our sins: Spare us good Lord, spare thy people whom thou
have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for ever.

Spare us good Lord

From all evil and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the
devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all blindness of heart, from pride, vainglory, and hypocrisy, from
envy, hatred, and malice, and all uncharitableness.

Good Lord deliver us.

From fornication and all other deadly sin, and from all the deceits of the
world, the flesh and the devil.

Good Lord deliver us.

From lightning and tempest, from plague, pestilence and famine, from battle
and murder, and from sudden death.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all sedition and privy conspiracy, from all false doctrine and heresy,
from heardnesse of heart, and contempt of thy word and commandment.

Good Lord deliver us.

By the mystery of thy holy Incarnation, by thy holy Nativity and Circumcision,
by thy Baptism, Fasting and Temptation.

Good Lord deliver us.

By thine Agony and bloody Sweat, by thy Cross and Passion, by thy precious
death and burial, by thy glorious resurrection and ascenson, and by the coming
of the holy Ghost.

God Lord deliver us.

In all time of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth, in the hour o^
death, and in the day of judgment.

Good Lord deliver us.

We sinners do beseech thee to hear us (O Lord God) and that it may please thee
to rule and govern thy holy Church universally in the right way.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the true worshipping of thee,
in righteousness and holiness of life, thy servant CHARLES, our most gracious
King and Governor.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to rule his heart in thy faith, fear, and love, and
that he may evermore have affiance in thee, and ever seek thy honor and glory.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to be his defender and keeper, giving him the victory
over all his enemies.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord,

That it may please thee to bless and preserve our gracious Queen Mary, Prince
James Duke of York, and the rest of the Royal Progeny.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers of
the Church, with true knowledge and understanding of thy Word, and that both by
their preaching and living, they may set it forth, and show it accordingly.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to edue the Lords of the Council and all the Nobility,
with grace, wisdom and understanding.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep all the Magistrates, giving them
grace to execute Justice and to maintain truth.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give to all Nations, unity, peace and concord.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and
diligently to live after thy commandments.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give to all thy people increase of grace to hear
meekly thy Word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth the
fruits of the Spirit.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth, all such as have erred
and are deceived.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort and
help the weak hearted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat down
Satan under our feet.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to succor, help and comfort all that be in danger,
necessity, and tribulation.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to preserve all that travel by land or by water, all
women laboring of child, all sick persons and young children, and to show thy
pity upon all prisoners and captives,

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to defend and provide for the fatherless children and
widows, and all that be desolate and oppressed.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecuters and slanderers,
and to turn their hearts.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give and preserve to our use the kindly fruits of
the earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us true repentance, to forgive us all our
sins, negligences, and ignorances, and to endue us with the grace of thy holy
Spirit, to amend our lives according to thy holy Word.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us.

Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us.

O Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world.

Grant us thy peace.

O Lamb of God: that take away the sins of the world.

Have mercy upon us.

O Christ hear us.

O Christ hear us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

And lead us not into temptation.

But deliver us from evil. Amen.

The Versicle.

O Lord deal not with us after our sins.

Answer.

Neither reward us after our iniquities.

Let us pray.
O God merciful Father, that despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart, nor
the desire of such as be sorrowful, mercifully assist, our prayers that we make
before thee in all our troubles and adversities, whenever they oppress us,
and graciously hear us, that those evils which the craft and subtilty of the
devil or man works against us, be brought to naught, and by the providence of
thy goodness they may be dispersed, that we thy servants being hurt by no
persecutions, may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy Church, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thy names sake.

O God, we have heard with our ears, and our Fathers have declared unto us, the
noble works that thou did in their days, and in the old time before them.

O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thine honor.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, etc.

From our enemies defend us, O Christ.

Graciously look upon our afflictions.

Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts.

Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.

Favorably with mercy hear our prayers.

O Son of David have mercy upon us.

Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us, O Christ.

Graciously hear us, O Christ, graciously hear us, O Lord Christ.

The Versicle.

O Lord, let thy mercy be showed upon us.

Answer.

As we do put our trust in thee.

Let us pray.
WE humbly beseech thee, O Father, mercifully to look upon our infirmities, and
for the glory of thy Names sake turn from us all those evils that we most
righteously have deserved: and grant that in all troubles we may put our whole
trust and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in holiness and
pureness of living, to thy honor and glory, through our only Mediator and
Advocate, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

ALmighty God, which have given us grace at this time with one accord to make
our common supplications unto thee, and do promise that when two or three be
gathered together in thy Name, thou will grant their requests: fulfill now, O
Lord, the desires and petitions of thy servants, as may be most expedient for
them, granting us in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to
come life everlasting. Amen.

Then shall be said also this that follows.
ALmighty God, which by thy divine providence have appointed diverse orders of
ministers in the Church, and did inspire thine holy Apostles, to choose unto
this Order of Deacons, the first Martyr S. Stephen with other: mercifully
behold these thy servants now called to the like office and administration,
replensh them so with the truth of thy doctrine, and innocence of life, that
both by word and good example, they may faithfully serve thee in this office,
to the glory of thy Name, and profit of the Congregation, through the merits of
our savior Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns with thee and the holy Ghost,
now and for ever. Amen.

Then shall be sung or said the Communion of the day, saving the Epistle shall
be read out of Timothy, as follows.
LIkewise must the ministers be honest, not double-tongued, not given unto much
wine, neither greedy of filthy lucre, but holding the mystery of the faith,
with a pure conscience: and let them first be proved, and then let them
minister, so that no man be able to reprove them. Even so must their wives be
honest, not evil speakers, but sober, and faithful in all things. Let the
Deacons be the husbands of one wife, and such as rule their children well, and
their own households: For they that minister well, get themselves a good degree,
and a great liberty in the faith which is in Christ Jesus.

These things write I unto thee, trusting to come shortly unto thee: but and if
I tarry long, that then thou may yet have knowledge how thou ought to
behave thy self in the house of God, which is the congregation of the living
God, the pillar and ground of truth. And without doubt, great is that mystery
of godliness, God was showed in the flesh, was justified in the spirit, was
seen among the angels, was preached unto the Gentiles, was believed on in the
world, and received up in glory,

Or else this out of the sixth of the Acts.
THen the twelve called the multitude of the disciples together, and said, It
is not meet that we should leave the word of God, and serve tables: Wherefore
brethren, look you out among you seven men of honest report, and full of the
holy Ghost and wisdom, to whom we may commit this business: but we will give
our selves continually to prayer, and to the administration of the word. And
that saying pleased the whole multitude. And they chose Stephen, a man full of
faith, and full of the holy Ghost, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and
Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicholas, a convert of Antioch. These they set before
the Apostles, and when they had prayed, they laid their hands on them. And the
word of God increased, and the number of the disciples multiplied in Jerusalem
greatly, and a great company of the Priests were obedient unto the faith.

And before the Gospel, the Bishop sitting in a chair, shall cause the Oath of
the Kings supremacy, and against the power and authority of all foreign
Potentates, to be ministered unto every of them that are to be ordered.

The Oath of the Kings Sovereignty.
I A. B. do utterly testify and declare in my conscience, that the Kings
Highness is the only supreme governor of this Realm, and of all other his
Highness dominions and Countries, as well in all spiritul or Ecclesiastical
things or causes, as temporal, and that no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State or Potentate, has or ought to have any jurisdiction, power, superiority,
preeminence, or authority Ecclesiastical, or Spiritual within this Realm, and
therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all foreign jurisdictions, powers,
superiorities, and authorities, and do promise that from henceforth I shall
bear faith and true Allegiance to the Kings Highness, his Heirs and lawful
Successors, and to my power shall assist and defend all jurisdictions,
privileges, preeminences and authorities, granted or belonging to the Kings
Highness his Heirs, and Successors, or united and annexed to the Imperial
Crown of this Realm, so help me God, and the Contents of this Book.

Then shall the Bishop examine every one of them that are to be ordered, in the
presence of the people, after this manner following.

DO you trust that you are inwardly moved by the holy Ghost to take upon you
this office and ministration, to serve God, for the promoting of his glory, and
the edifying of his people?

Answer.

I trust so.

The Bishop.

DO you think that ye truly be called according to the will of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the due order of this Realm, to the Ministry of the Church?

Answer.

I think so:

The Bishop.

DO you unfeignedly believe all the Canonical Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament?

Answer.

I do believe.

The Bishop.

WIll you diligently read the same unto the people assembled in the Church
where you shall be appointed to serve?

Answer.

I will.

The Bishop.

IT appertains to the office of a Deacon in the Church, where he shall be
appointed, to assist the Priest in Divine service, and specially when he
Ministers the holy Communion, and to help him in distribution thereof, and to
read holy Scriptures and Homilies in the Congregation, and to instruct the
youth in the Catechism, to Baptize and to Preach, if he be admitted thereto by
the Bishop. And furthermore, it is his office, where provision is so made, to
search for the sick, poor, and impotent people of the parish, to intimate their
estates, names, and places where they dwell unto the Curate, that by his
exhortation they may be relieved by the Parish, or other convenient alms: will
you do this gladly and willingly?

Answer.

I will do so by the help of God.

The Bishop.

WIll you apply all your diligence to frame and fashion your own lives, and the
lives of your family, according to the doctrine of Christ, and to make both
your selves and them, as much as in you lies, wholesome examples of the flock
of Christ?

Answer.

I will so do, the Lord being my helper.

The Bishop.

WIll you reverently obey your Ordinary and other chief Ministers of the
Church, and them to whom the government and charge is committed over you,
following with a glad mind and will their godly admonitions?

Answer.

I will endeavor my self, the Lord being my helper.

Then the Bishop laying his hands severally upon the head of every of them,
shall say,

Take thou authority to execute the office of a Deacon in the Church of God
committed unto thee: In the Name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.
Amen.

Then shall the Bishop deliver to every one of them the new Testament, saying,

Take thou authority to read the Gospel in the Church of God, and to preach the
same, if thou be thereto ordinarily commanded,

Then one of them appointed by the Bishop, shall read the Gospel of that day.

Then shall the Bishop proceed to the Communion, and all that are ordered,
shall tarry and receive the holy Communion the same day with the Bishop.

The Communion ended, after the last Collect, and immediately before the
Benediction, shall be said this Collect following.

ALmighty God, giver of all good things, which of thy great goodness have
vouchsafed to accept and take these thy servants unto the Offices of Deacons in
thy Church: make them we beseech thee (O Lord) to be modest, humble and
constant in their ministration, to have a ready will to observe all spiritual
discipline, that they having always the testimony of a good conscience, and
continuing ever stable and strong in thy Son Christ, may so well use themselves
in this inferior Office, that they may be found worthy to be called unto the
higher Ministeries in thy Church, through the same thy Son our Savior Christ,
to whom be glory and honor world without end. Amen.

And here it must be showed unto the Deacon, that he must continue in that
Office of a Deacon, the space of a whole year at the least (except for
reasonable causes it be otherwise seen to his Ordinary) to the intent he may be
perfect, and well expert in the things appertaining to the Ecclesiastical
administration, in executing whereof, if he be found faithful and diligent, he
may be admitted by his Diocesan to the Order of Priesthood.

The form of ordering of Priests.
When the exhortation is ended, then shall follow the Communion. And for the
Epistle shall be read out of the twentieth Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles,
as follows.

FRom Mileto Paul sent messengers to Ephesus, and called the elders of the
congregation: which when they were come to him, he said unto them, Ye know that
from the first day that I came into Asia, after what manner I have been with
you at all seasons serving the Lord with all humbleness of mind, and with
many tears and temptations, which happened unto me by the lying in wait of the
Jews, because I would keep back nothing that was profitable unto you, but to
show you, and teach you openly throughout every house, witnessing both to the
Jews and also to the Greeks, the repentance that is toward God, and the faith
that is toward our Lord Jesus. And now behold, I go bound in the spirit unto
Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall come on me there, but that the
holy Ghost witnesses in every City, saying, that bands and trouble abide me.
But none of these things move me, neither is my life dear unto my self, that I
might fulfill my course with joy, and the ministration of the word which I have
received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God. And now
behold I am sure that henceforth ye all (through whom I have gone preaching the
kingdom of God) shall see my face no more. Wherefore I take you to record this
day, that I am pure, from the blood of all men: For I have spared no labor:
but have showed you all the counsel of God. Take heed therefore unto your
selves, and to all the flock among whom the holy Ghost has made you overseers,
to rule the congregation of God, which he has purchased with his blood, For I
am sure of this, that after my departure shall grievous wolves enter in among
you, not sparing the flock. Moreover, of your own selves shall men arise,
speaking perverse things to draw disciples after them.

Therefore awake, and remember that by the space of three years, I ceased not
to warn every one of you night and day with tears.

And now brethren I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace which is
able to build further, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are
sanctified. I have desired no man's silver, gold or vesture: Yea, you know your
selves, that these hands have ministered unto my necessities, and unto them that
were with me. I have showed you all things, how that so laboring ye ought to
receive the weak, and to remember the words of our Lord Jesus, how that he
said, It is more blessed to give then to receive.

Or else this third Chapter of the first Epistle to Timothy.
1 Timothy 3. This when Deacons and Priests are made both in one day.
THis is a true saying, If any man desire the Office of a Bishop, he desires an
honest work. A Bishop therefore must be blameless, the husband of one wife,
diligent, sober, discreet, a keeper of hospitality, apt to teach, not given to
overmuch wine, no fighter, not greedy of filthy lucre, but gentle, abhorring
fighting, abhoring covetousness, one that rules well his own house, one that
has children in subjection with all reverence. for if a man cannot rule his
own house, how shall he care for the congregation of God? he may not be a young
scholar, lest he swell, and fall into the judgment of the evil speaker. He
must also have a good report of them which are without, lest he fall into
rebuke and snare of the evil speaker.

Likewise must the Ministers be honest; not double tongued, not given to much
wine, neither greedy of filthy lucre, but holding the mystery of the faith,
with a pure conscience: and let them first be proved, and then let them
minister, so that no man be able to reprove them.

Even so must their wives be honest, not evil speakers: but sober and faithful
in all things. Let the Deacons be the husbands of one wife, and such as rule
their children well, and their own households: For they that minister well, get
themselves a good degree, and great liberty in the faith, which is in Christ
Jesus. These things write I unto thee, trusting to come shortly unto thee: but
if I tarry long, that then thou may have yet knowledge, how thou ought to
behave thy self in the house of God, which is the congregation of the living
God, the pillar and ground of truth.

And without doubt, great is that Mystery of godliness: God was showed in the
flesh, was justified in the spirit, was seen among the angels, was precahed
unto the Gentiles, was believed on in the world, and received up in glory.

After this shall be read for the gospel, a piece of the last Chapter of
Matthew, as follows.
JEsus came and spoke unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in heaven
and in earth: go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo, I am with you
always, even to the end of the world.

Or else this that follows out of the tenth Chapter of Saint John.
VErily verily I say unto you, He that enters not in by the door into the
sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a murderer.
But he that enters in by the door, is the shepherd of the sheep: to him the
porter opens, and the sheep hear his voice, and he calls his own sheep by
name, and leads them out. And when he has sent forth his own sheep he goes
before them, and the sheep follow him, for they know his voice. A stranger will
they not follow, but will flee from him, for they know not the voice of
strangers, This Proverb spoke Jesus unto them, but they understood not what
things they were which he spoke unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again,
Verily, verily I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep: and all (even as
many as came before me) are thieves and murderers, but the sheep did not hear
them. I am the door: by me if any man enter in, he shall be safe and go in and
out, and find pasture. A thief comes not but for to steal, kill, and to
destroy. I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more
abundantly. I am the good shepherd. A good shepherd gives his life for the
sheep. An hired servant and he which is not the shepherd (neither the sheep are
his own) sees the wolf coming, and leaves the sheep and flees, and the wolf
catches and scatters the sheep. The hired servant flees because he is an
hired servant and cares not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd and know my
sheep, and am known of mine. As my Father knows me, even so know I also my
Father. And I give my life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not
of this fold: them also must I bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there
shall be one fold and one shepherd.

Or else this, of the 20. Chapter of John.
THe same day at night, which was the first day of the Sabboths, when the doors
were shut (where the disciples were assembled together, for fear of the Jews)
came Jesus, and stood in the midst, and said unto them, Peace be unto you. And
when he had so said, he showed unto them his hands and his side. Then were the
disciples glad when they saw the Lord. Then said Jesus unto them again, Peace
be unto you: As my Father sent me, even so send I you also. And when he had
said those words, he breathed on them, and said unto them, receive ye the holy
Ghost. Whosoevers sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them: and whosoevers
sins ye retain, they are retained.

When the Gospel is ended, then shall be said or sung,
COme holy Ghost, eternal God, proceeding from above:
Both from the Father and the Son, the God of peace and love.
Visit our minds, and into us thy heavenly grace inspire,
That in all truth and godliness, we may have true desire.
Thou art the very Comforter, in all woe and distress:
The heavenly gift of God most high, which no tongue can express.
The fountain and the lively spring, of joy celestial;
The fire so bright, the love so clear, and unction spiritual.
Thou in thy gifts art manifold, whereby Christ's Church does stand,
In faithful hearts writing thy law, the finger of Gods hand.
According to thy promise made, thou give speech of grace:
That through thy help the praise of God may found in every place.
O holy Ghost into our wits send down thy heavenly light,
Kindle our hearts with fervent love to serve God day and night.
Strength and stablish all our weakness, so feeble and so frail:
That neither flesh, the world, nor devil, against us do prevail.
Put back our enemy far from us, and grant us to obtain
Peace in our hearts with God and man, without grudge or disdain.
And grant O Lord, that thou being our leader and our guide,
We may eschew the snares of sin, and from thee never slide.
To us such plenty of thy grace, good Lord, grant we thee pray:
That thou may be our Comforter at the last dreadful day.
Of all strife and dissension, O Lord dissolve the bands:
And make the knots of peace and love, throughout all Christian lands.
Grant us O Lord, through thee to know, the Father most of might.
That of his dear beloved Son, we may attain the sight.
And that with perfect faith also we may acknowledge thee:
The Spirit of them both always, one God in persons three.
Laud and praise be to the Father, and to the Son equal:
And to the holy Spirit also, one God coeternal.
And pray we that the only Son, vouchsafe his Spirit to send.
To all that do profess his Name, unto the worlds end. Amen.
And then the Archdeacon shall present unto the Bishop, all them that shall
receive the Order of Priesthood that day, the Archdeacon saying,
REverend Father in God, I present unto you these persons present, to be
admitted to the Order of Priesthood.

Cum interrogatione and responsione, ut in ordine Diaconatus.

And then the Bishop shall say to the people.
GOod people, these be they whom we purpose, God willing, to receive this day
unto the holy office of Priesthood: For after due examination, we find not to
the contrary, but that they be lawfully called to their function and ministry,
and that they be persons meet for the same: But yet if there be any of you
which knows any impediment or notable crime of any of them, for the which he
ought not to be received into this holy ministry, now in the name of God
declare the same.

And if any great crime or impediment be objected,

Vt supra in Ordine Diaconatus, usque ad finem Litaniae, cum hac Collecta.

ALmighty God giver of all good things, which by thy holy Spirit have appointed
diverse Orders of Ministers in the Church, mercifully behold their thy servants
now called to the office of Priesthood, and replenish them so with the truth of
thy doctrine and innocence of life, that both by word and good example, they
may faithfully serve thee in this office to the glory of thy Name, and profit
of thy congregation, through the merits of our Savior Jesus Christ, who lives
and reigns with thee and the holy Ghost, world without end. Amen.

Then the Bishop shall minister unto every one of them the Oath concerning the
Kings supremacy, as it is set forth in the Order of Deacons. And that done, he
shall say unto them which are appointed to receive the said office, as
hereafter follows.

YOu have heard, brethren, as well in your private examination, as in the
exhortation, and in the holy lessons taken out of the Gospel, and of the
writings of the Apostles, of what dignity, and of how great importance this
office is (whereunto ye be called.) And now we exhort you in the Name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to have in remembrance into how high a dignity, and to how
chargeable an office ye be called, that is to say, the messengers, the
watchmen, the pastors and the stewards of the Lord, to teach, to premonish, to
feed and provide for the Lords family, to seek for Christ's sheep that be
dispersed abroad, and for his children which be in the midst of this naughty
world, to be saved through Christ for ever. Have always therefore printed in
your remembrance, how great a treasure is committed to your charge: for they be
the sheep of Christ, which he bought with his death, and for whom he shed his
blood. The Church and Congregation whom you must serve, is his Spouse and his
body.

And if it shall chance the same Church, or any member thereof, to take any
hurt or hinderance, by reason of your negligence, you know the greatness of
the fault, and also of the horrible punishment which will ensue. Wherefore
consider with your selves the end of your ministry toward the children of
God, toward the spouse and body of Christ, and see that you never cease your
labor, your care and diligence, until you have done all that lies in you,
according to your bounden duty, to bring all such as are, or shall be committed
to your charge, unto that agreement in faith and knowledge of God, and to that
ripeness and perfectness of age in Christ, that there be no place left among
you either of error in religion or for viciousness of life.

Then for as much as your office is both of so great excellency, and of so
great difficulty, ye see with how great care and study ye ought to apply your
selves as well that ye may show your selves kind to that Lord who has placed
you in so high a dignity, as also to beware that neither you your selves
offend, neither be occasion that other offend. Howbeit, ye cannot have a mind
and a will thereto of your selves, for that power and ability is given of God
alone. Therefore ye see how ye ought and have need earnestly to pray for his
holy Spirit. And seeing that you cannot by any other means compass the doing of
so weighty a work pertainig to the salvation of man, but with doctrine and
exhortation taken out of the holy Scriptures, and with a life agreeable unto
the fame: Ye perceive how studious ye ought to be in reading and in learning
the Scriptures, and in framing the manners both of your selves, and of them
that specially pertain unto you, according to the rule of the same Scriptures:
And for this self-same cause, ye see how ye ought to forsake and set aside (as
much as you may) all worldly cares and studies.

We have good hope, that you have well weighed and pondered these things with
your selves, long before this time, and that you have clearly determined by
Gods grace, to give your selves wholly to this vocation, whereunto it has
pleased God to call you; so that (as much as lies in you) you apply your
selves wholly to this one thing, and draw all your cares and studies this way,
and to this end. And that you will continually pray for the heavenly assistance
o the holy Ghost from God the Father, by the mediation of our only Mediato^
and Savior Jesus Christ, that by daily reading and weighing of the Scriptures,
ye may so wax riper and stronger in your ministry: and that ye may so
endeavor your selves from time to time, to sanctify the lives of you and
yours, and to fashion them after the rule and doctrine of Christ: And that ye
may be wholesome and godly examples and patterns for the rest of the
Congregation to follow: and that this present Congregation of Christ here
assembled, may also understand your minds and wills in these things: and that
this your promise shall more move you to do your duties, ye shall answer
plainly to these things, which we in the name of the Congregation demand of you
touching the same.

Do you think in your heart that you be truly called according to the will of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Order of this Church of England, to the Ministry
of Priesthood?

Answer.

I think it.

The Bishop.

BE you persuaded that the holy Scriptures contain sufficiently all doctrine
required of necessity for eternal salvation, through faith in Jesus Christ? And
are you determined with the said Scriptures to instruct the people committed to
your charge, and to teach nothing (as required of necessity to eternal
salvation) but that you shall be persuaded may be concluded and proved by the
Scripture?

Answer.

I am so persuaded, and have so determined by Gods grace.

The Bishop.

WIll you then give your faithful diligence always so to Minister the doctrine
and Sacraments, and the Discipline of Christ, as the Lord has commanded, and
as this realm has received the same, according to the Commandments of God, so
that you may teach the people committed to your cure and charge, with all
diligence to keep and observe the same?

Answer.

I will do so by the help of the Lord.

The Bishop.

WIll you be ready with all faithful diligence to vanish and drive away all
erroneous and strange doctrines, contrary to Gods word and to use both public
and private monitions and exhortations, as well to the sick as to the whole,
within your Cures, as need shall require, and occasion be given?

Answer.

I will, the Lord being my helper.

The Bishop.

WIll you be diligent in prayers, and in reading of the holy Scriptures, and in
such studies as help to the knowledge of the same, laying aside the study of
the world and the flesh?

Answer.

I will endeavor my self so to do, the Lord being my helper.

The Bishop.

WIll you be diligent to frame and fashion your own selves, and your families
according to the doctrine of Christ, and to make both your selves and them (as
much as in you lies) wholesome examples and spectacles to the flock of Christ?

Answer.

I will apply my self, the Lord being my helper.

The Bishop.

WIll you maintain and set forwards (as much as lies in you) quietness, peace
and love among all Christian people, and specially among them that are, or
shall be committed to your charge?

Answer.

I will so do, the Lord being my helper.

The Bishop.

WIll you reverently obey your Ordinary and other chief ministers, unto whom
the government and charge is committed over you, following with a glad mind
and will their godly admonitions, and submitting your selves to their godly
judgments?

Answer.

I will so do, the Lord being my helper.

Then shall the Bishop say.

ALmighty God, who has given you this will to do all these things, grant also
unto you strength and power to perform the same, that he may accomplish his
work which he has begun in you, until the time he shall come at the latter day
to judge the quick and the dead.

After this, the Congregation shall be desired secretly in their prayers, to
make humble supplications to God for the foresaid things: for the which prayers
there shall be a certain space kept in silence.

That done, the Bishop shall pray in this wise, Let us Pray.
ALmighty God, and heavenly Father, which of thine infinite love and goodness
toward us, have given to us thy only and most dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ
to be our redeemer, and author of everlasting life, who after he had made
perfect our redemption by his death, and was ascended into heaven, sent abroad
into the world his Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Doctors, and Pastors, by
whose labor and ministry he gathered together a great flock in all the parts
of the world, to set forth the eternal praise of thy holy Name. For these so
great benefits of thy eternal goodness, and for that thou have vouchsafed to
call these thy servants here present, to the same office and ministry of
salvation of mankind; we render unto thee most hearty thanks, we worship and
praise thee, and we humbly beseech thee, by the same thy Son, to grant unto
all, which either here or elsewhere call upon thy Name, that we may show our
selves thankful to thee for these and all other thy benefits, and that we may
daily increase and go forwards, in the knowledge and faith of thee and thy Son,
by the holy Spirit. So that as well by these thy Ministers, as by them to whom
they shall be appointed Ministers, thy holy Name may be always glorified, and
thy blessed kingdom enlarged, through the same thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ,
which lives and reigns with thee, in the unity of the same holy Spirit,
world without end. Amen.

When this prayer is done, the Bishops with the Priests present, shall lay
their hands severally upon the head of every one that receives Orders: the
receivers humbly kneeling upon their knees, and the Bishop saying,

REceive the holy Ghost: Whose sins thou do forgive, they are forgiven: and
whose sins thou do retain, they are retained: and be thou a faithful
dispenser of the word of God, and of his holy Sacraments. In the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Amen.

The Bishop shall deliver to every one of them the Bible in his hand saying,

TAke thou Authority to preach the word of God, and to minister the holy
Sacraments in this Congregation, where thou shall be so appointed.

When this is done, the Congregation shall sing the Creed, and also they shall
go to the Communion, which all they that receive Orders, shall take together,
and remain in the same place where the hands were laid upon them, until such
time as they have received the Communion.

The Communion being done, after the last Collect, and immediately before the
Benediction, shall be said this Collect.

MOst merciful Father, we beseech thee to send upon these thy servants thy
heavenly blessing, that they may be clad about with all justice, and that thy
word spoken by their mouths, may have such success, that it may never be
spoken in vain. Grant also that we may have grace to hear and receive the same
as thy most holy word, and the means of our salvation, that in all our words
and deeds we may seek thy glory, and the increase of thy Kingdom, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

And if the order of Deacons and Priesthood be given both upon one day, then
shall all things at the holy Communion be used, as they are appointed at the
ordering of Priests, saving that for the Epistle, the whole third Chapter of
the first to Timothy shall be read, as it is set out before in the order of
Priests. And immediately after the Epistle the Deacons shall be ordered. And it
shall suffice the Letany to be said once.

The form of Consecrating of an Archbishop, or Bishop. At the Communion.
The Epistle.
THis is a true saying, If a man desire the office of a Bishop, he desires an
honest work. A Bishop therefore must be blameless, the husband of one wife,
diligent, sober, discreet, a keeper of hospitality, apt to teach, not given to
over much wine, no fighter, not greedy of filthy lucre, but gentle, abhorring
fighting, abhoring covetousness, one that rules well his own house, one that
has children in subjection with all reverence. For if a man cannot rule his
own house, how shall he care for the congregation of God? He may not be a young
scholar, lest he swell, and fall into the judgment of the evil speaker. He
must also have a good report of them which are without, lest he fall into
rebuke and the snare of the evil speaker.

The Gospel.
JEsus said to Simon Peter, Simon Iohanna, love thou me more then these? He
said unto him, Ye Lord, thou know that I love thee: he said unto him, Feed
my Lambs. He said to him again the second time, Simon Iohanna, love thou me?
He said unto him, Yea Lord, thou know that I love thee: he said unto him,
Feed my sheep. He said unto him the third time, Simon Iohanna, love thou me?
Peter was sorry because he said unto him the third time, Love thou me. And he
said unto him, Lord thou know all things, thou know that I love thee.
Jesus said unto him, Feed my sheep.

Or else out of the tenth Chapter of John, as before in the Order of Priests.

After the Gospel and creed ended: first the elected Bishop shall be presented
by two Bishops, unto the Archbishop of that Province, or to some other Bishop
appointed by his commission: the Bishops that present him, saying,

MOst reverend Father in God, we present unto you this godly and well learned
man to be consecrated Bishop.

Then shall the Archbishop demand the Kings mandate for the Consecration, and
cause it to be read, and the Oath touching the knowledge of the Kings
Supremacy, shall be ministered to the persons elected; as it is set out in the
order of Deacons. And then shall be ministered the Oath of due obedience unto
the Archbishop, as follows.

The Oath of due obedience to the Archbishop.
IN the Name of God, Amen. I. N. chosen Bishop of the Church or See of N. do
profess and promise all due reverence and obedience to the Archbishop, and to
the Metropolitical Church of N. and to their successors: so help me God through
Jesus Christ.

This Oath shall not be made at the Consecration of an Archbishop.

Then the Archbishop shall move the Congregation present, to pray, saying thus
to them.

BRethren, it is written in the Gospel of St. Luke, that our Savior Christ
continued the whole night in prayer, or ever that he did choose and send forth
his twelve Apostles. It is written also in the Acts of the Apostles, that the
disciples which were at Antioch did fast and pray, or ever they laid hands
upon, or sent forth Paul and Barnabas. Let us therefore, following the example
of our Savior Christ and his Apostles, first fall to prayer, or that we admit
and send forth this person presented unto us, to the work whereunto we trust
the holy Ghost has called him.

And then shall be said the Letany as before in the Order of Deacons.

And after this place, That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, etc.

That it may please thee to bless this our brother elected, and to send thy
grace upon him, that he may duly execute the office whereunto he is called, to
the edifying of the Church, and to the honor, praise, and glory of thy Name.

Answer.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord,

Concluding the Letany in the end with this prayer.

Almighty God, giver of all good things, which by thy holy Spirit have
appointed diverse orders and Ministers in thy Church, mercifully behold this thy
servant now called to the work and ministry of a Bishop, and replenish him so
with the truth of thy doctrine, and innocence of life, that both by word and
deed he may faithfully serve thee in this Office, to the glory of thy Name, and
profit of thy Congregation, through the merits of our Savior Jesus Christ, who
lives and reigns with thee and the holy Ghost, world without end Amen.

Then the Archbishop sitting in a chair, shall say to him that is to be
consecrated.

BRother, forasmuch as holy Scripture, and the old Canons commands, that we
should not be hasty in laying on hands and admitting of any person to the
government of the Congregation of Christ, which he has purchased with no less
price than the effusion of his own blood: before I admit you to this
administration, whereunto you are called, I will examine you in certain
articles, to the end the Congregation present may have a trial, and bear
witness how you be minded to behave your self in the Church of God.

Are you persuaded that you be truly called to this ministration according to
the will of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the order of this Realm?

Answer.

I am so persuaded.

The Archbishop.

ARe you persuaded that the holy Scriptures contain sufficiently all doctrine,
required of necessity for eternal salvation through the faith in Jesus Christ?
And are you determined with the same holy Scriptures, to instruct the people
committed to your charge, and to teach or maintain nothing as required of
necessity to eternal salvation, but that you shall be persuaded may be
concluded and proved by the same?

Answer.

I am so persuaded, and determined by Gods grace.

The Archbishop.

WIll you then faithfully exercise your self in the said holy Scriptures, and
call upon God by prayer for the true understanding of the same, so as ye may be
able by them to teach and exhort with wholesome doctrine, and to withstand and
convince the gainsayers?

Answer.

I will so do, by the help of God.

The Archbishop.

BE you ready with all faithful diligence to banish and drive away all
erroneous and strange doctrine contrary to Gods word, and both privately and
openly to call upon and encourage others to the same?

Answer.

I am ready the Lord being my helper.

The Archbishop.

WIll you deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this world, that you may show your self in all things
an example of good works unto others, that the adversary may be ashamed, having
nothing to lay against you?

Answer.

I will so do, the Lord being my helper.

The Archbishop.

WIll you maintain and set forward (as much as shall lie in you) quietness,
peace and love among all men: and such as be unquiet, disobedient and criminous
within your Diocese, correct and punish according to such authority as ye have
by Gods word, as to you shall be committed by the ordinance of this Realm?

Answer.

I will so do, by the help of God.

The Archbishop.

WIll you show your self gentle, and be merciful for Christ's sake to poor and
needy people, and to all strangers destitute of help?

Answer.

I will so show my self by Gods help.

The Archbishop.

ALmighty God our heavenly Father, who has given you a good will to do all
these things: grant also unto you strength and power to perform the same, that
he accomplishing in you the good work which he has begun, ye may be found
perfect and irreprehensible at the latter day, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

Then shall be sung or said, Come holy Ghost, etc.

As it is set out in the Order of Priests.

That ended, the Archbishop shall say,

Lord hear our prayer.

Answer.

And let our cry come unto thee.

Let us Pray.
ALmighty God, and most merciful Father, which of thine infinite goodness have
given thy only and most dear beloved Son Jesus Christ to be our Redeemer and
author of everlasting life, who after that he had made perfect our Redemption
by his death, and was ascended into heaven, poured down his gifts abundantly
upon men, making some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors
and Doctors, to the edifying and making perfect his Congregation: grant we
beseech thee, to this thy servant such grace, that he may evermore be ready to
spread abroad thy Gospel, and glad tidings of reconcilement to God, and to use
the authority given to him, not to destroy but to save, not to hurt but to
help: so that he as a wise and faithful servant giving to thy family meat in
due season, may at the last be received into joy, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
who with thee and the holy Ghost, lives and reigns one God world without
end, Amen.

Then the Archbishop and Bishops present, shall lay their hands upon the head
of the elected Bishop, the Archbishop saying,

TAke the holy Ghost, and remember that thou stir up the grace of God which is
in thee, by imposition of hands: for God has not given us the spirit of fear,
but of power and love, and soberness.

Then the Archbishop shall deliver him the Bible, saying,

GIve heed unto reading, exhortation and doctrine. Think upon these things
contained in this book. Be diligent in them, that the increase coming thereby,
may be manifest unto all men. Take heed unto thy self, and unto teaching, and
be diligent in doing them: for by doing this thou shall save thy self, and them
that hear thee. Be to the flock of Christ a shepherd, not a wolf: feed them,
devour them not: hold up the weak, heal the sick, bind together the broken,
bring again the outcasts, seek the lost, be so merciful, that ye be not too
remiss: so minister discipline, that you forget not mercy, that when the chief
Shepherd shall come, you may receive the immarcescible crown of glory, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Then the Archbishop shall proceed to the Communion, with whom the new
consecrated Bishop, with other shall also Communicate. And for the last Collect
immediately before the Benediction, shall be said this Prayer.

MOst merciful Father, we beseech thee to send upon this thy servant thy
heavenly blessing, and so endue him with thy holy Spirit, that he preaching thy
word, may not only be earnest to reprove, beseech, and rebuke, with all
patience and doctrine, but also may be, to such as believe, an wholesome
example, in word, in conversation, in love, in faith, in chastity, and purity:
that faithfully fulfilling his course, at the latter day he may receive the
crown of righteousness laid up by the Lord the righteous Judge, who lives and
reigns, one God with the Father and the holy Ghost, world without end. Amen.

AT THE HEALING.
THE GOSPEL Written in the XVI. Chapter of St. MARK, beginning at the 14. verse.
JESUS appeared unto the Eleven as they sat at meat, and cast in their teeth
their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they believed not them which had
seen that He was Risen again from the dead. And he said unto them, Go ye into
all the world, and preach the Gospel to all Creatures: He that believes and is
Baptized, shall be Saved: but he that believes not, shall be damned; And these
Tokens shall follow them that believe: In my Name they shall cast out devils,
they shall speak with new tongues, they shall drive away serpents, and if they
drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them: Here the infirm persons are
presented to the KING upon their knees, and the King lays his Hands upon them.
They shall lay their hands on the Sick, and they shall recover. So when the
Lord had spoken unto them, he was received into Heaven, and is on the right
hand of God. And they went forth, and preached every where, the Lord working
with them, and confirming the word with Miracles following.

THE GOSPEL Written in the I. Chapter of St. JOHN, beginning at the first verse.
IN the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and God was the
Word. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by it, and
without it was made nothing that was made. In it was Life, and the Life was the
Light of men, and the Light shined in the Darkness, and the darkness
comprehended it not. There was sent from God a man whose name was JOHN. The
same came as a witness, to bear witness of the Light, that all men through
him might believe. He was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of the
Light. Here they are again presented unto the KING upon their knees, and the
KING puts his Gold about their necks.
That light was the true light, which lights every man that comes into the
world. He was in the World and the world was made by him, and the World knew
him not. He came among his own, and his own received him not. But as many as
received him, to them gave he power to be made Sons of God, even them that
believed on his Name: which were born not of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor yet of the will of man, but of God. And the same Word became Flesh,
and dwelt among us, and we saw the Glory of it, as the Glory of the only
begotten Son of the Father, full of grace and truth.

THE PRAYERS.
Verse. Lord have mercy upon us.

Resp. Lord have mercy upon us.

Verse. Christ have mercy upon us.

Resp. Christ have mercy upon us.

Verse Lord have mercy upon us.

Resp. Lord have mercy upon us.

OUr Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, And
forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead
us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, Amen.

These Answers are to be made by them that come to be Healed.
Verse. O Lord Save thy Servants.

Resp. Which put their trust in thee.

Verse. Send help unto them from above.

Resp. And evermore mightily defend them.

Verse. Help us O God our Savior.

Resp. And for the Glory of thy name deliver us, be merciful unto us sinners
for thy Names sake.

Verse. O Lord hear our Prayer.

Resp. And let our Cry come unto thee.

O Almighty God, who art the Giver of all health, and the aid of them that seek
to Thee for succor, we call upon thee for thy help and goodness mercifully to
be showed unto these thy servants, that they being Healed of their infirmity,
may give thanks unto thee, in thy holy Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
AMEN.

THe Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost, be with us all evermore.

AMEN.

A copy of thacte made for thabrogacion of certain holy days, according to
the transumpte late sent by the kings hyghnes to all bishops with his graces
straight commandment, to signify his farther pleasure to all Colleges,
religious houses and Curates, within their diocese for the publicacion, and
also effectual and universal obsercion of the same. Anno 1536.
FOr as much as the nombre of holy days is so excessyuely grown and yet daily
more and more by men's devotion, yea rather supersticyon was like further to
increase, that the same was and should be not only prejudicial to the common
weal, by reason that it is occasion as well of much sloth and ydelnes, the
very nouryshe of thieves, vacaboundes, and of diverse other unthryftynesse and
inconuenyencies, as of decay of good mysteryes and arts, vtyle and necessary
fort the common welthe, and loss of man's fode many times, being clean
destroyed through the supersticious obseruaunce of the said holidays, in not
taking thoportunitie of good and serene wheather offered upon the same in time
of harvest, but also pernicyous to the souls of many men, which being entysed
by the lycencyous vacacyon and liberty of those holy days, do upon the same
commonly use and practyse more excess, ryote and supersluite than upon any
other days. And since the Sabbath day was ordained for man's use, and therefore
ought to give place to the necessite and behoue of the same when soever that
shall occur: mouche rather any other holyday institute by man. It is
therefore by the kings hyghnes auctority, as supreme head in earth of the
Church of England, with the Common assente and consent of the prelates and
clergy of this his realm in Convocacyon laufully assembled and congregate,
among other things decreed ordained and establyshed.

First that the feast of Dedicacyon of the church shall in all places
throughout this realm be celebrated and kept on the first sunday of the month
of Octobre for ever, and upon none other day. Item that the feast of the
patron of every church within this realm, called commonly the Church holyday,
shall not from henceforth be kept or observed as a holyday, as heretofore has
been used, but that it shall be laufull to all and singular persons, resydent
or dwelling within this realm to go to their work, occupacyon or mystery, and
the same truly to excercyse and occupy upon the said feast, as upon any other
workyeday, except the said feast of the Church holyday be such as must be else
universally observed, as a holy day by this ordinance following.

Also that all those feestes or holy days, which shall happen to occur,
either in the harvest time which is to be compted from the fiyst day of July
unto the xxix. day of Septembre, or else in the term time at westmynster,
shall not be kept or observed from henceforth as holidays, but that it may be
laufull for every man to go to his work or occupacion upon the same as upon any
other workyeday, except always the feestes of the apostles, of our blessed
lady, and of saint George. And also such feesles as wherein the kings Judges at
westmynster hall do not use to sytte in Judgment, all which shall be kept
holy and solemn of every man, as in time past have been accustomed. Provided
always, that it may be laufull unto all priests and clerks, as well secular
as regular in the foresaid holidays now abrogate, to sing or say their
accostomed service for those holidays in their churches: so that they do not
the same solempnely, nor do ring to the same after the manner used in high
holidays, ne do command or indict the same to be kept or observed as
holidays.

Finally, that the feast of the Nativity of our lord, of Easter, of the
Nativity of saint John the baptyste, and of saint Mychaell, shall be from
henceforth compted, and accepted and taken for the iiij. general offering
days.

And for further declaracyon of the premysses, be it known that Easter term
begyneth always the xviii day after Easter, reckenyng Easter day for one, and
ends the monday next after thascencyon day. Trinity term begins always
the wednesday next after thoctaues of Trinity sunday, and ends the xi. or
xii. day of July. Myhgelmas term begins the ix. or x. day of October, and
ends the xxviii. or xxix. day of November.

Hillary term begins the xxiii. or xxiiii. day of January, and ends the
xii. or xiii day of February.

In Easter term upon thascencyon day. In Trinite term upon the Nativity of
saint John Baptyst. In Myghelmas term upon Alhallon day. In Hillary term upon
Candelmas day, The kings Judges at westmynster do not use to sit in Judgment,
nor upon any sondayes.

Imprynted at London in Fletestrete. at the sign of the Son, by me John
Byddell. Cum priuilegio. Anno 1536.

By the Queen. A Proclamation against the despisers or breakers of the orders
prescribed in the book of Common prayer.
THE Queens Majesty being right sorry to understand that the order of common
prayer, set forth by the common consent of the Realm, and by authority of
Parliament in the first year of her reign, wherein is nothing contained but the
Scripture of God, and that which is consonant unto it, is now of late of some
men despised, and spoken against, both by open preachings, and writings, and of
some bold and vain curious men, new and other Rites found out and frequenced,
whereupon contentions, sects, and disquietnesse does arise among her people:
and for one godly and uniform order, diversity of Rites and Ceremonies,
disputations, and contentions, schisms, and divisions already risen, and more
like to ensue. The cause of which disorders, Her Majesty does plainly
understand to be the negligence of the Bishops and other Magistrates, who
should cause the good Laws and Acts of Parliament made in this behalf to be
better executed, and not so dissembled and winked at, as hitherto (it may
appear) that they have been.

For speedy remedy whereof, Her Majesty straightly charge and commands all
Archbyshops and Bishops and all Justices of Assizes, and Oyer and Termyner, and
all Majors, head officers of Cities and Towns corporate, and all other who have
any authority to put in execution the Act for the uniformity of common prayer
and the administration of the Sacraments made in the first year of Her gracious
reign, with all diligence and severity, neither favoring, nor dissembling with
one person nor other, who does neglect, despise, or seek to alter the godly
Orders and Rites set forth in the said Book: But if any person shall by public
preaching, writing or printing, contemn, despise, or dispraise the Orders
contained in the said Book, they shall immediately apprehend him, and cause him
to be imprisoned, until he has answered to the Law, upon pain that the chief
Officers, being present at any such preaching, and the whole Parish, do answer
for their contempt and negligence. Likewise, if any shall forbear to come to
the Common prayer, and receive the Sacraments of the Church, according to the
order in the said book allowed, upon no just and lawful cause: all such persons
they shall enquire of, present, and see punished, and ordered according as is
prescribed in the said Act, with more care and diligence then heretofore has
been done: the which negligence has been cause why such disorders have of late
now so much and in so many places increased and grown.

And if any persons shall either in private houses, or in public places, make
assemblies, and therein use other Rites of Common prayer and Administration of
the Sacraments then is prescribed in the said Book, or shall maintain in their
houses any persons being notoriously charged by Books or preachings to attempt
the alteration of the said orders, they shall see such persons punished with
all severity, according to the Laws of this Realm, by pains appointed in the
said Act.

And because these matters do principally appertain to the persons
Ecclesiastical, and to the Ecclesiastical government, her Majesty gives a most
special and earnest charge to all Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, and
Deans, and all such as have ordinary jurisdiction, in such causes to have a
vigilant eye and care to the observation of the Orders and Rites in the said
book prescribed, throughout their cures and Diocese, and to proceed from time
to time by ordinary and Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, as is granted them in the
said Act, with all celerity and severity, against all persons who shall offend
against any of the Orders in the said Book prescribed, upon pain of her
Majesty's high displeasure for their negligence, and deprivation from their
dignities and benefices, or other censures to follow, according to their
demerits.

Given at Grenewich the 20. day of October 1573. in the fifteenth year of the
Queens Majesty's reign.
God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London by Newgate Market, next unto Christ's Church, by Richard
Jugge, Printer to the Queens Majesty.

Cum privilegio Regiae Majestatis.

By the Queen. A Proclamation against the Sectaries of the Family of love
WHereas by report of sundry of the Bishops of this Realm, and others having
cure of souls, the Qeens Majesty is informed, that in sundry places of Her said
Realm, in their several Diocesses, there are certain persons which do secretly
in corners, make privy assemblies of diverse simple unlearned people, and after
they have craftily and hypocritically assured them to esteem them to be more
holy and perfect men then other are, they do then teach them damnable heresies,
directly contrary to diverse of the principal Articles of our Belief and
Christian faith, and in some parts so absurd and fanatical, as by feigning to
themselves a monstrous new kind of speech never found in the Scriptures, nor
in ancient Father or Writer of Christ's Church, by which they do move ignorant
and simple people at the first rather to marvel at them, then to understand
them: but yet to color their sect withal, they name themselves to be of the
family of love, and then as many as shall be allowed by them to be of that
family, to be elect and saved, and all others of what Church soever they be, to
be rejected and damned: And for that upon conventing of some of them before the
Bishops and Ordinaries, it is found that the ground of their sect is maintained
by certain lewd, heretical and seditious books first made in the Dutch tongue,
and lately translated into English, and printed beyond the seas, and secretly
brought over into the Realm, the author whereof they name H. N, without
yielding to him upon their examination, any other name, in whose name they have
certain Books set forth, called Evangelium Regni, or a joyful Message of the
Kingdom. Documental sentences. The prophecy of the spirit of love. A
publishing of the peace upon the earth, and such like. And considering also it
is found, that these Sectaries hold opinion, that they may before any
Magistrate Ecclesiastical or Temporal, or any other person not being professed
to be of their sect (which they term the family of love) by oath or otherwise
deny any thing for their advantage, so as though many of them are well known to
be teachers and spreaders abroad of these dangerous and damnable sects, yet by
their own confession they cannot be condemned, whereby they are more dangerous
in any Christian Realm: Therefore Her Majesty being very sorry to see so great
an evil by the malice of the Devil first begun and practiced in other
countries, to be now brought into this Her Realm, and that by her Bishops and
Ordinaries, She understands it very requisite, not only to have these
dangerous Heretics, and Sectaries to be severely punished, but that also all
other means be used by Her Majesty's Royal authority, which is given Her of God
to defend Christ's Church, to root them out from further infecting of Her Realm,
She has thought meet and convenient, and so by this Her Proclamation, She
wills and commands that all Her Officers and Ministers temporal, shall in
all their several vocations, assist the Archbishops and Bishops of Her Realm,
and all other persons Ecclesiastical, having cure of souls, to search out all
persons duly suspected to be either teachers or professors of the foresaid
damnable Sects, and by all good, means to proceed severely against them being
found culpable, by order of the Laws either Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and
that also search be made in all places suspected for the books and writings
maintaining the said Heresies and Sects, and them to destroy and burn. And
wheresoever such books shall be found after the publication hereof, in custody
of any person, other then such as the Ordinaries shall permit, to the intent to
peruse the same for confutation thereof, the same persons to be attached and
committed to close prison, there to remain, or otherwise by Law to be
condemned, until the same shall be purged and cleared of the same Heresies, or
shall recant the same and be thought meet by the Ordinary of the place to be
delivered. And that whosoever in this Realm shall either print, or bring, or
cause to be brought into this Realm, any of the said books, the same persons to
be attached and committed to prison, and to receive such bodily punishment and
other mulct, as fautors of damnable Heresies. And to the execution hereof, Her
Majesty charge all Her Officers and Ministers both Ecclesiastical and
Temporal, to have special regard, as they will answer not only before God,
whose glory and truth is by these damnable Sects greatly sought to be defaced,
but also will avoid Her Majesty's indignation, which in such cases as these
are, they ought not escape, if they shall be found negligent and careless, in
the Execution of their authorities. Given at Our Manor of Richmond the third
of October, in the two and twentieth year of our Reign.

God save the Queen.

Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
Excellent Majesty.

By the Queen. A Proclamation against certain seditious and schismatical Books
and Libels etc.
THe Queens most excellent Majesty, considering how within these few years
past, and now of late, certain seditious, and evil disposed persons toward her
Majesty, and the Government established for causes Ecclesiastical within Her
Majesty's Dominions, have divised, written, printed, or caused to be
seditiously and secretly published and dispersed, sundry Schismatical and
seditious books, diffamatory Libels, and other fantastical writings amongst
her Majesty's Subjects, containing in them doctrine very erroneous, and other
matters notoriously untrue, and slanderous to the State, and against the godly
reformation of Religion and Government Ecclesiastical established by Law, and
so quietly of long time continued, and also against the persons of Bishops, and
others placed in authority Eccesiastical under Her Highness by her authority,
in railing sort, and beyond the bounds of all good humanity: All which Books,
Libels and writings tend by their scope, to persuade and bring in a monstrous
and apparent dangerous Innovation within Her Dominions and Countries, of all
manner of Ecclesiastical Government now in use, and to the ab^idging, or rather
to the overthrow of her Highness lawful Prerogative, allowed by Gods Law, and
established by the Laws of the Realm, and consequently to reverse, dissolve,
and set at liberty the present Government of the Church, and to make a
dangerous change of the form of Doctrine, and use of Divine service of God, and
the ministration of the Sacraments now also in use, with a rash and malicious
purpose also to dissolve the Estate of the Prelacy, being one of the three
ancient estates of this Realm under her Highness, whereof her Majesty minds
to have such a reverend regard, as to their places in the Church and Common
wealth appertains. All which said lewd and seditious practices do directly
tend to the manifest willful breach of great number of good Laws and Statutes
of this Realm, inconveniences nothing regarded by such Innovations.

In consideration whereof, her Highness graciously minding to provide some good
and speedy remedy to withstand such notable dangerous and ungodly attemps, and
for that purpose to have such enormous malefactors discovered and condignely
punished, does signify this her Highness misliking and indignation of such
dangerous and wicked enterprises, and for that purpose does hereby will and
also straightly charge and command, that all persons whatsoever, within any her
Majesty's Realms and Dominions, who have or hereafter shall have any of the
said seditious Books, Pamphlets, Libels or Writings, or any of like nature
already published, or hereafter to be published, in his or their custody,
containing such matters as above are mentioned, against the present Order and
Government of the Church of England, or the lawful Ministers thereof, or
against the Rites and Ceremonies used in the Church, and allowed by the Laws of
the Realm: That they, and every of them do presently after, with convenient
speed bring in, and deliver up the same unto the Ordinary of the Diocese, or
of the place where they inhabit, to the intent they may be utterly defaced by
the said Ordinary, or otherwise used by them. And that from henceforth no
person or persons whatsoever, be so hardy, as to write, contrive, print, or
cause to be published or distributed, or to keep any of the same, or any other
Books, Libels, or Writings of like nature and quality, contrary to the true
meaning and intent of this ^er Majesty's Proclamation. And likewise, that no
man hereafter, give any instruction, direction, favor, or assistance, to the
contriving, writing, printing, publishing, or dispersing of the same, or such
like Books, Libels, or Writings whatsoever, as they tender her Majesty's good
favor, will avoid Her high displeasure, and as they will answer the contrary
at their uttermost perils: and upon such pains and penalties, as by the Law any
way may be inflicted upon the offenders, in any of these behalfs, as persons
maintaining such seditious actions, which her Majesty minds to have severally
executed. And if any person have had knowledge of the Authors, Writers,
Printers, or dispersers thereof which shall within one month after the
publication hereof, discover the same to the Ordinary of the place where he had
such knowledge, or to any of her Majesty's privy Council: the same person
shall not for his former concealment be hereafter molested or troubled. Given
at her Majesty's Palace at Westminster, the xiii. of February, 1588. In the
xxxi. year of her Highness reign.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty 1588.

ARTICLES to be enquired in the VISITATION, IN THE First year of the reign of
our most dread Sovereign LADY ELIZABETH, By the grace of God, Of England,
France, and Ireland, Queen, defender of the Faith etc.

Anno Domini 1559.

Articles etc. Anno 1559.
FIrst, whether any Parson, Residency.
Vicar or Curate be resident continually upon his Benefice, doing his duty in
preaching, reading, and duly ministering the holy Sacraments.

Item, Whether in their Churches and Chapels, all Images, False miracles
Shrines, all Tables, Candlesticks, Trindals, and rolls of Wax, Pictures,
paintings, and all other monuments of feigned and false miracles, Pilgrimages,
Idolatry, and Superstition, be removed, abolished, and destroyed.

Item, Whether they do not every holy day, The Lords prayer.
when they have no Sermon, immediately after the Gospel, openly plainly, and
distinctly, recite to their Parishioners in the Pulpit, the Lords prayer, the
Belief, and the ten Commandments in English.

Item, Whether they do charge Fathers and Mothers, Masters, To bring up youth.
and Governors of youth, to bring them up in some virtuous study and
Occupation.

Item, Whether, such beneficed men, Curates.
as be lawfully absent from their Benefices, do leave their cures to a rude and
unlearned person, and not to an honest, well-learned, and expert Curate, which
can and will teach you wholesome doctrine.

Item, Reading the Scriptures.
Whether they do discourage any person from reading of any part of the Bible,
either in Latin or English, and do not rather comfort and exhort every person
to read the same at convenient times, as the very lively word of God, and the
special food of man's soul.

Item, Whether Parsons, Vicars, Curates, and other Ministers, Taverns and games.
be common haunters and resorters to Taverns or Alehouses, giving themselves to
drinking, rioting, and playing at undlawful games, and do not occupy
themselves in the reading or hearing of some part of holy Scripture, or in some
other godly exercise.

Item, Preachers.
Whether they have admitted any man to preach in their cures, not being
lawfully licenced thereunto, or have been licenced accordingly.

Item, Whether they use to declare to their Parishioners, Superstition.
any thing to the extolling or setting forth of vain and supersticious
Religion, Pilgrimages, Relics, or Images, or lighting of Candles, kissing,
kneeling, or decking of the same Images.

Register.
Item, Whether they have one book or register kept, wherein they write the day
of every Wedding, Christning and Burying.

Obedience
Item, Whether they have exhorted the people to obedience to the Queens
Majesty, and Ministers, and to charity and love one to another.

The Sacrament.
Item, Whether they have admonished their Parishioners, that they ought not to
presume to receive the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, before they
can say perfectly the Lords prayer, the Articles of the faith, and the ten
Commandments in English.

Hospitality.
Item, Whether they be resident upon their Benefices, and keep hospitality, or
no; whether they do relieve their Parishioners, and what they give them.

Reparations.
Item, Whether Proprietaries, Parsons, Vicars and Clarks, having Churches,
Chapels and Mansions, do keep their Chancels, Rectories, Vicarages, and all
other houses appertaining to them, in due reparations.

Prayer in English.
Item, Whether they do counsel or move their Parishioners, rather to pray in a
tongue not known, then in English, or put their trust in any certain number of
prayers, as in saying over a number of Beads, Beads.
or other like.

Defamed persons.
Item, Whether they have received any persons to the Communion, being openly
known to be out of charity with their neighbors, or defamed with any notorious
crime, and not reformed.

Poor men's box.
Item, Whether they have provided, and have a strong chest for the poor men's
box, and set and fastened the same in a place of the Church most convenient.

Testament.
Item, Whether they have diligently called upon, exhorted and moved their
parishioners, and especially when they make their Testaments, to give to the
said poor men's Box, and to bestow that upon the poor, which they were wont to
bestow upon Pilgrimages, Pardons, Trentalls, and upon otherlike blind
devotions.

Sick. Burial.
Item, Whether they have denied to visit the sick, or bury the dead being
brought to the Church.

Simony,
Item, Whether they have bought their Benefices, or come to them by fraud,
guile, deceit, or Simony.

Adulterers.
Item, Whether they have given open monition to their Parishioners, to detect
and present to their Ordinary all Adulterers and Fornicators, and such men as
have two wives living within their Parishes.

Item, Whether they have monished their parishioners openly, Church goods
that they should not sell, give, nor otherwise alienate any of their Church
goods.

Item, Whether they, Many Benefices.
or any of them do keep more Benefices and other Ecclesiastical promotions then
they ought to do, not having sufficient licenses, and dispensations thereunto,
and how many they be, and their names.

Item, Whether they minister the holy Communion any otherwise, Communion.
then only after such form and manner, as it is set forth by the common
authority of the Queens Majesty and the Parliament.

Item, Letters of the word or preaching.
Whether you know any person within your Parish or else where, that is a letter
of the word of God to be read in English, or sincerely preached in place and
times convenient.

Item, Whether in the time of the Letany, Goers out of the church.
or any other Common prayer, in the time of the Sermon or Homily, and when the
Priest reads the Scriptures to the Parishioners, any person have departed out
of the Church without just and necessary cause, or disturbed the minister
otherwise.

Item, Whether the money coming and rising of any Cattle, Church money.
or other moveable stocks of the Church, and money given and bequeathed to the
finding Torches, Lights, Tapers, or Lamps, not paid out of any lands, have not
been employed to the poor men's chest.

Item, Who has the said stocks and money in their hands, Keepers of the Church
money.
and what be their names.

Item, Contempt of Priests.
Whether any undiscreet person do uncharitably contemn and abuse Priests and
Ministers of the Church.

Item, The Kings Grammar.
Whether there be any other Grammar taught in any School within this Diocese,
then that which is set forth by the authority of King Henry the eight.

Item, The time of Service.
Whether the service of the Church be done at due and convenient hours.

Item, Whether any have used to commune, jangle, Talkers in the Church.
and talk in the Church in the time of the prayer, reading of the Homily,
preaching, reading or declaring of the Scripture.

Item, Heresies.
Whether any have wilfully maintained and defended any Heresies, errors, or
false opinions, contrary to the faith of Christ and holy Scripture.

Item, Whether any be common drunkards, Drunkards.
swearers or blasphemers of the name of God.

Adulterers.
Item, Whether any have committed Adultery, fornication, or incest, or be
common Bawds, or receivers of such evil persons, or vehemently suspected of any
of the premises.

Brawlers.
Item, Whether any be brawlers, slanderes, chiders, scolders, and sowers of
discord between one person and another.

Sorcerers.
Item, Whether you know any that do use Charms, Sorceries Enchantments,
Invocations, Circles, Witchcrafts, Soothsaying, or any like crafts or
imaginations invented by the Devil, and specially in the time of women's travel.

Pulpits.
Item, Whether Churches, Pulpits, and other necessaries appertaining to the
same, be sufficiently repaired, and if they be not, in whose default the same
is.

Resorters to other Churches.
Item, Whether you know any, that in contempt of their own Parish Church do
resort to any other Church.

Inholders
Item, Whether any Inholders, or Alehouse keepers, do use commonly to sell meat
and drink in the time of common prayer, preaching, reading of the Homilies, or
Scripture.

Divorce.
Item, Whether you know any to be married within the degrees prohibited by the
laws of God, or that be separated or divorced without the degrees prohibited by
the law of God, and Whether any such have married again.

Privy contracts.
Item, Whether you know any to have made privy contracts of Matrimony, not
calling two or more witnesses thereunto, nor having thereto the consent of their
parents.

Banes:
Item, Whether they have married solemnly the banes not first lawfully asked.

Executors.
Item, Whether you know any Executors, or Administrators of dead men's goods,
which do not only bestow such of the said goods, as were given and bequeathed,
or appointed to be distributed among the poor people, repairing of High ways,
finding of poor scholars, or marrying of poor maidens, or such other like
charitable deeds.

Images.
Item, Whether you know any that keep in their houses any undefaced Images,
Tables, Pictures, Paintings, or other Monuments of feigned and false miracles,
Pilgrimages, Idolatry and superstition, and do adore them, and specially such
as have been set up in Churches, Chapels and Oratories.

Books.
Item, What books of holy Scripture you have delivered to be burnt, or
otherwise destroyed, and to whom ye have delivered the same.

Bribes.
Item, What bribes the Accusers, Promoters, Persecutors, Ecclesiastical Judges,
and other the Commissioners appointed within the several Diocesses of this
Realm, have received by themselves or other, of those persons which were in
trouble, apprehended, or imprisoned for Religion.

Item, What goods moveable, ^ands, fees, offices, Loss of goods
or promotions, have been wrongfully taken away in the time of Queen Mary's
Reign, from any person which favored the Religion now set forth.

Item, How many persons for Religion have died by fire, How many burnt.
famine, or otherwise, or have been imprisoned for the same.

Item, Certificat of the dead.
That you make a true presentment of the number of all the persons, which died
within your Parishes, sithence the feast of St. John the Baptist, which was in
the year of our Lord God One thousand five hundred fifty and eight, unto the
feast lost past, making therein a plain distinct declaration, how many men,
women, and men-children the same were, and the names of the men.

Item, Whether you know any man in your Parish, secretly, Secret Masses.
or in unlawful conventicles, say or hear Mass, or any other service
prohibited by the Law.

Item, Whether you know any person in your Parish, False rumors. Unlawful books.
to be a slanderer of his neighbors, or a sower of discord between party and
party, man and wife, parents and their children, or that has invented, bruted,
or set forth any rumors, false and seditious tales, slanders, or makers,
bringers, buyers, sellers, keepers or conveyers of any unlawful books, which
might stir and provoke sedition, or maintain superstious service within this
Realm, or any Aiders, Counselors, Procurers or maintainers thereunto.

Item, Patron. Tithes. Vacation.
Whether the Church of your Parish be now vacant or no, who is the Patron
thereof, how long it has been vacant, who does receive the tithes, oblations
and other commodities, during the time of the vacation, and by what authority,
and in what estate the said Church is at this time, and how long the Parson or
Vicar has had that Benefice.

Item, Whether any Minstrels, Minstrels.
or any other persons do use to sing or say any songs, or Ditties that be vile
or unclean, and especially in derision of any godly order now set forth and
established.

Item, Letany in English.
Whether the Letany in English with the Epistle and Gospel which was by the
Queens highness Proclamation willed to be read to the people, were put in use
in your Churches, and if not, who were the letters thereof.

Distinct.
Item, Whether the Curates and Ministers do leisurely plainly, and distinctly
read the public prayers, Chapters, and Homilies, as they ought to do.

God save the Queen.

Imprinted at London Anno 1559.

ARTICULI PER Archiepiscopum, Episcopos and reliquum Clerum Cantuariensis
Provinciae in Synodo inchoata Londini vicesimo quarto die Mensis Novembris,
Anno Domini 1584. Regnique Serenissimae in Christo Principis Dominae
Elizabethae, Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae and Hyberniae Reginae, fidei
Defensoris, etc. vicesimo septimo stabiliti, and Regia auctoritate approbati
and confirmati.

LONDINI, in aedibus C. B.

Articuli pro Clero.
Vt homines idonei ad sacros ordines, and Beneficia (uti vocant) Ecclesiastica
admittantur.
PRimo cantum est, ne quis posthac ad sacros ordines suscipiatur, qui non eodem
quoque tempore Praesentationem sui ipsius ad Beneficium aliquod intra dioecesim
sive Jurisdictionem ejusdem Episcopi a quo sacros ordines perit, tunc vacans
exhibuerit: vel qui non eidem Episcopo certum, verum and indubitatum
Certificatorium attulerit de Ecclesia aliqua intra dioecesim sive
Jurisdictionem dicti Episcopi, in qua curae animarum inservire possit: Vel qui
in aliqua Cathedrali aut Collegiata Ecclesia, vel Collegio Cantabrigiensi aut
Oxoniensi non suerit constitutus: Vel saltem, qui ab eodem Episcopo in
Beneficium aliquod, sive ad Curam (uti vocant) inserviendam tunc etiam
vacantem, non sit mox admittendus.

Deinde, ne quis Episcopus post hac aliquem in sacros ordines cooptet, qui non
ex sua ipsius Dioecesi fuerit: nisi vel ex altera nostratium Academiarum
prodierit: vel, nisi literas (ut loquuntur) Dimissorias ab Episcopo, cujus
Dioecesanus existit, attulerit, and vicesimum quartum aetatis suae annum jam
compleverit, ac etiam in altera dictarum Academiarum gradum aliquem
scholasticum susceperit: Vel saltem, nisi rationem fidei suae juxta Articulos
illos Religionis in Synodo Episcoporum and Cleri approbatos Latino sermon
reddere possit, adeo ut sacrarum literarum testimonia, quibus eorundem
Articulorum veritas innititur, recitare etiam valeat: Ac ulterius, de vita sua
laudabili and morum integritate literas testimoniales sub Sigillo vel alicujus
Collegii Cantabrigiensis aut Oxoniensis, ubi antea moram fecerit, vel alicujus
Justiciarii ad pacem D. Reginae conservandam assignati, una cum subscriptione
and testimonio aliorum proborum and fide dignorum hominum ejusdem Paroeciae,
ubi per tres annos ante proxime elapsos commoratus est, exhibeat.

Quod si vero aliquis Episcopus aliquem ad sacros ordines admiserit, qui
praedictis qualitatibus non sit praeditus, is per Archiepiscopum, assidente
sibi hac in part uno alio Episcopo, ab ordinatione Ministrorum and Diaconorum
per integrum biennium suspendatur, ac eam praeterea poenam incurrat, quae de
jure in ejusmodi Episcopos, qui ad ordines Ecclesiasticos sine titulo aliquem
promovebunt, statuitur.

Ad haec, nequis Episcopus aliquem in Beneficium (uti vocant) instituat, nisi
qui praedictis conditionibus ornatus fuerit.

Quod fi Curia de Arcubus aut Audientiae per viam duplicis querelae, seu alio
quovis modo contra Episcopum hac in part agat, quia homines minime idoneos ac
habiles admittere renuit: tunc licebit Archiepiscopo, vel auctoritate propria,
vel gratia speciali ab Regia Majestate impetrata, ejusmodi processus amptutare,
quo o laudabilis Episcopi industria debitum ea ratione sortiatur effectum.

Denique, ut quolibet anno ad festum S. Michaelis Archangeli, vel intra sex
hebdomadas idem festum subsequentes, unusquisque Episcopus numerum, nomina,
gradus and qualitates eorum omnium quos in sacros ordines, vel in aliqua
Beneficia eodem anno praecedente promoverit, ad Archiepiscopum transmittat.

De moderanda solennis Poenitentiae commutatione.
NEqua fiat posthac solennis Poenitentiae commutatio, nisi rarioribus
gravioribusque de causis, atque adeo cum ipsi Episcopo constiterit, eam esse ad
Reum reconciliandum and reformandum saniorem and tutiorem rationem.

Deinde, quod mulcta illa pecuniaria vel in relevamen pauperum ejusdem
Paroeciae, vel in alios pios usus erogetur, idque Ecclesiae solenniter and
fideliter approbetur and innotescat.

Quod si vero crimen fuerit notorium ac publicum, Reus ipse vel in propria sua
persona public in Ecclesia poenitentiam suam minime fictam profitendo, laesae
Ecclesiae satisfaciet, vel Ecclesiae minister in praesentia ipsius Rei, palam e
suggestu, ejus submissionem, and poenitentiae suae coram Ordinario suo
peractionem, atque etiam in verae suae resipiscentiae testimonium quantam
pecuniarum summam in usus supradictos erogandam reddiderit, denunciabit.

De moderandis quibusdam indulgentiis, pro celebratione Matrimonii absque
trinundina denunciatione, quam Bannos vocant Matrimoniales.
QUandoquidem honestae, clarae ac illustris conditionis homines, sive urgente
aliqua necessitate, sive aliis non contemnendis rationibus, Matrimonium
aliquando celebrandi causas habere possunt, facultate sibi de Bannis matrimonia
libus aut non omnino, aut semel iterumve denunciandis indulta, sine aliquo
gravi scandalo seu detrimento: Idcirco ad evitanda generaliter quae hac in
part notantur incommoda, visum est caveri ne ullae facultates sive
indulgentiae de celebrando absque Bannis Matrimonio concedantur, nisi idonea
cautio prius sub hisce conditionibus ineatur; nimirum, Primo, quod nullum
postea constabit impedimentum Praecontractus, Consanguinitatis, Affinitatis,
vel ullius alterius legitimae causae cujuscunque ratione. Secundo, quod eo
tempore quo ejusmodi facultas sive indulgentia concedetur, nulla controversia,
lis seu querela mota est, vel dependet coram aliquo Judice Ecclesiastico aut
Civili, de ejuscemodi legitimo impedimento Matrimonii inter hujusmodi personas
contrahendi aut contracti. Ac tertio, quod ad Nuptiarum solennizationem non
accedent, nisi assensu and expresso consensu Parentum sive tutorum prius
impetrato. Et ulterius, quod Matrimonii celebratio public ac tempestive in
facie Ecclesiae fiet. Cujus quidem cautionis formula seu exemplar in scriptis
concipietur, ac unicuique Episcopo in sua cujusque Dioecesi imitanda proponetur.

Proviso semper, quod quicunque contra hanc ordinationem deliquerit, ab
executione officii per sex integros menses suspendetur.

De quibusdam circa Excommunicationem excessibus coercendis sive reformandis.
QUia Excommunicationis usus in Ecclesia perpetuae legis vigorem jam obtinuit,
atque in omni jurisdictione Ecclesiastica exercenda hucusque retinetur, ideo
absque grandi mutatione totius ejusce jurisdictionis and plurimarum hujus Regni
legum, innovari vel alterari nequit. Nihilominus, ut Excommunicatio (quae
auctoritatis ac disciplinae Ecclesiasticae quasi nervus quidam ac vinculum
habendum est) ad pristinum suum usum, decus and dignitatem reducatur: cautum
est, ut quotiescunque Censura ista in immediatam poenam cujusvis notoriae
Haereseos, Schismatis, Symoniae, Perjurii, Usurae, Incestus, Adulterii, seu
gravioris alicujus criminis venerit infligenda, sententia ipsa vel per
Archiepiscopum, Episcopum, Decanum, Archidiaconum, vel Praebendarium, (modo
sacris ordinibus and Ecclesiastica jurisdictione praeditus fuerit) in propria
persona pronunciabitur, una cum ejusmodi frequentia and assistentia, quae ad
majorem rei autoritatem conciliandam conducere videbitur.

Denique, quod unusquisque Vicarius Generalis, Officialis seu Commissarius, qui
ordines Ecclesiasticos non susceperit, eruditum aliquem Presbyterum sibi
accerset and associabit, qui sufficienti auctoritate vel ab ipso Episcopo in
jurisdictione sua, vel ab Archidiacono (Presbytero existente) in jurisdictione
sua munitus, idque ex praescripto ipsius Judicis tunc praesentis,
Excommunicationis sententiam pro contumacia denunciabit.

Volumus etiam, ut sicut constitutum est ejusmodi excommunicationem per
Ministrum Ecclesiae denunciari: ita ipse Judex de absolutione ipsius Rei post
satisfactionem suam peractam, eundem Ministrum certiorem faciet, qui eandem
absolutionem populo public denunciabit: Ac interim quod been licebit dicto
Ministro Reum a sacris arcere and repellere tanquam in Ecclesiam minime
recipiendum, donec ejusmodi Certificatorium ab ipso Judice exhibuerit.

De Beneficiorum pluralitate cohibenda.
QUod nemini in posterum facultas sive indulgentia concedetur de pluribus
Beneficiis simul retinendis, nisi hujusmodi tantum, qui pro eruditione sua and
maxim digni, and ad officium suum before praestandum maxim habiles and
idonei censebuntur: nimirum, ut is qui hujusmodi facultate fruiturus est, sit
ad minimum Artium Magister, and publicus ac idoneus verbi Divini Concionator:
Ita tamen, ut idonea etiam cautione obstrictus teneatur, de personali sua
residentia in singulis beneficiis per bonam anni cujusque partem facienda, and
quod ejusmodi Beneficia triginta milliarium spatio ad summum non distent ab
invicem. Denique, quod idoneum Curatum habeat, qui plebem ejus Paroeciae in qua
non residebit, institutat ac informet, modo facultates ejusdem Beneficii talem
commode sustinere posse Archiepiscopo vel ejus Dioeceseos Episcopo videbuntur.

De feodis quae Officiariis Ecclesiasticis and eorum ministris debentur.
CAutum insuper volumus, quod neque alia neque majora feoda ab Episcopo,
Ordinario, Archidiacono, vel eorum ministris deinceps ulla de causa
percipiantur, quam ea quae ineunte hoc regnum Regia nunc Majestate percipi
solebant. Quodque tabula quaedam singulorum hujusmodi feodorum summas
continens, in quolibet Consistorio ante festum S. Johannis Baptistae proxime
venturum figatur, cujus exemplar manu ipsius Ordinarii subsignatum intra tempus
praedictum ad Archiepiscopum transmittetur.

Proviso semper, quod neque Archiepiscopo, neque Episcopo, vel direct vel
indirecte, aliquam pecuniarum summam pro admittendis ad sacros ordines
hominibus accipere licebit, idque sub poena Juris.

De inquisitione per Episcopos ineunda.
QUam primum commode fieri poterit, vel ad summum intra unius anni spatium post
hujus Synodi finem, quisque Episcopus de singulorum Ministrorum qui in sua
dioecesi degunt condition, moribus ac eruditione diligenter inquirat: per quos
etiam and quo tempore ad sacros ordines admissi, quodque vitae genus sectati
sint priusquam in ministerium sunt cooptati, ac de hisce omnibus ipsum
Archiepiscopum intra dictum tempus debite certiorem faciet.

Episcopi in sua quisque Dioecesi de omnium Rectoriarum, Vicariarum, ac
caeterorum Ecclesiasticorum Beneficiorum suae Dioeceseos valor annuo, juxta
censum libri illius qui Primitiarum dicitur, si modo ibidem censeantur: aliter
vero, juxta communem eorum aestimationem: Quot item Appropriationes, cujus very
valoris annui, and qui sint earum Proprietarii: Necnon de Curatorum salariis
annuis diligentem facient inquisitionem. Ac de hisce similiter omnibus intra
tempus antea praescriptum, dictum Archiepiscopum certiorem reddent.

FINIS
CELEBRATIO COENAE DOMINI IN FUNEBRIBUS, Si Amici and Vicini defuncti
Communicare velint. etc.

Anno 2. Eliz. Regin. 1560.

LONDINI, Apud Reginaldum Wolfium. 1560.

ELIZABETH, Dei Gratia Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regina, Fidei Defensor,
etc.
Omnibus ad quos praesentes Literae pervenirint, Salutem.
Cum memores Officii nostri erga Deum Omnipotentem, (cujus providentia
principes regnant) legibus quibusdam celeberrimis, consensu trium Regni nostri
Statuum, sancitis, anno Regni nostri primo, Regium nostrum assensum libenter
praebuerimus: inter quas una lex lata est, ut Preces publicae, una, and eadem
certa, and praescripta precandi forma, lingua vulgari, and vernacula, passim in
Ecclesia Anglicana haberentur, quo Subditi nostri quid orarent, facilius
intelligerent: and absurdum illum, diuque in Ecclesia inveteratum errorem,
tandem devitarent. Fieri enim non potest, ut precationes, supplicationes, aut
gratiarum actiones non intellectae, mentis ardorem aliquando excitent and
accendant, cum spiritu and veritate. Deus qui Spiritus est, non oris tantum
strepitu adorari vult; Cui rei etiam addi potest, quod hac caeca ignoratione,
superstitiosae preces, aut res alienae, non satis idoneae quae Deo
profunderentur, cordium humanorum scrutatori, saepenumero ore prophano
offerebantur. Notum vobis esse volumus, quod, quoniam intelligimus Collegia
utriusque Academiae, Cantabrigiensis and Oxoniensis: Collegium item novum prope
Wintoniam and Etonense, bonis literis dicata, supplicibus votis petere, ut quo
sacrarum literarum monumenta Latina, ad uberiorem Theologiae fructum eis
reddantur magis familiaria, eis liceat eadem forma precum Latin uti. Omnibus
Reipublicae nostrae membris, quantum in nobis est, consulere, and cum eorum
necessitati, qui Latina non intelligunt, tum eorum voluntati qui utramque
linguam percipiunt, consulere cupientes, constituimus per praesentes, licitum
esse, and permissum nostra Authoritate and privilegio Regali, tam Decano and
sodalitio Ecclesioe Christi in Academia nostra Oxoniae, quam Praesidibus,
Custodibus, Rectoribus, Magirstis and Sodalitatibus omnium and singulorum
Collegiorum Cantabrigiae, Oxoniae, Wintoniae Etonae, hoc modo precandi Latin,
uti public in Ecclesiis, and Sacellis suis quem nos per nostrum Typographum
aedi curavimus in hoc praesenti volumine, convenientem cum Anglicano nostro
publicarum precum libro, jam per universum nostrum Regnum recepto and usitato
Cui item peculiaria quaedam in Christianorum funebribus and exequiis decantanda
adjungi praecipimus, Statuto illo praedicto de Ritu publicarum precum (cujus
supra mentionem fecimus) anno primo Regni nostri promulgato in contrarium non
obstante.

Proviso semper, quod in ejusmodi Collegiis, quibus Laicorum parochiae annexae
erunt, ac in reliquis etiam, ad quorum Templa Laici eorundem Collegiorum famuli
and Ministri, sive alii quicunque sive Latinae linguae imperiti, necessario
adire debent, his horoe aliquot opportunae and loca in dictis Ecclesiis aut
Sacellis, assignentur, in quibus, Festis saltem diebus, preces matutinae and
vespertinae legantur and recitentur: Et Sacramentorum administrationes suis
temporibus Anglice, ad Laicorum aedificationem celebrari possint. Eadem etiam
formula Latina precandi privatim uti, hortamur omnes reliquos Ecclesiae nostrae
Anglicanae Ministros, cujuscunque gradus fuerint, iis diebus, quibus aut non
solent, aut non tenentur Parochianis suis ad aedem sacram pro more
accedentibus, public preces vernacula lingua, secundum formam dicti Statuti
recitare. In praemissorum autem fidem and Testimonium, has literas nostras
fieri fecimus patentes.

Dat. apud Palatium nostrum de Westmonasterio Sexto die Aprilis. Anno regni
nostri secundo. 1560.
In Commendationibus Benefactorum.
AD cujusque termini finem Commendatio fiat Fundatoris, aliorumque Clarorum
virorum, quorum beneficentia Collegium locupletatur.

Ejus haec sit forma.

Primum recitetur clara voce Oration Dominica.

Pater noster qui es in Coelis, etc.

Deinde recitentur tres Psalmi Exaltabo te Deus meus rex. Psalm. 144. Lauda
anima mea Do. Psalm. 145. Laudate Dominum quoniam bonus, Ps. 146.
Post haec legatur Cap. 44. Ecclesiastici.

Hiis finitis, sequatur Concio: in qua Concionator Fundatoris amplissimam
munificentiam praedicet: quantus sit literarum usus ostendat: quantis laudibus
afficiendi sunt qui literarum studia beneficentia sua excitent: quantum sit
Ornamentum Regno doctos viros habere, qui de rebus controversis vere judicare
possunt, quanta sit Scripturarum laus, and quantum iilae omni humani
Authoritati antecedant, quanta sit ejus Doctrinae in vulgus utilitas, and quam
late pateat: quam egregium and regium sit (cui Deus universae plebis suae curam
commisit) de multitudine Ministrorum verbi laborare, atque hii ut honesti atque
eruditi sint, curare: atque alia ejus generis, quae pii and docti viri cum
laud illustrari possint.

Hac concione perorata decantetur.

Benedictus Dominus Israel.

Ad extremum haec adhibeantur.

Minister.

In memoriam aeternam erit justus.

Responsio.

Ab auditu malo non timebit.

Minister.

Justorum animae in manu Dei sunt.

Responsio.

Nec attingit illos cruciatus.

Oremus.

DOmine Deus, Resurrectio and Vita Credentium, qui semper es laudandus, tam in
viventibus quam in defunctis, agimus tibi gratias, pro Fundatore nostro N.
caeterisque Benefactoribus nostris, quorum beneficiis hic ad pietatem and
studia literarum alimur: rogantes ut nos, hiis donis ad tuam gloriam recte
utentes, una cum illis, ad resurrectionis gloriam immortalem perducamur: per
Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Celebratio Coenae Domini in Funebribus, si Amici and vicini defuncti
communicare velint.
Collecta.
MIsericors Deus, pater Domini nostri Jesu Christi, qui es Resurrectio and
vita, in quo qui credidit etiamsi mortuus fuerit, vivet; and, in quo qui
crediderit and vivit non morietur in aeternum: quique nos docuisti per sanctum
Apostolum tuum Paulum, non debere maerere pro dormientibus in Christo, sicut ii
qui spem non habent resurrectionis, humiliter petimus, ut nos a morte peccati
resuscites ad vitam justititae, ut cum ex hac vita emigramus, dormiamus cum
Christo, quemadmodum speramus hunc fratrem nostrum, and in generali
resurrectione, extremo die, nos una cum hoc fratre nostro resuscitati, and,
receptis corporibus, regnemus una tecum in vita aeterna: per Dominum nostrum
Jesum Christum. Amen.

Epistola. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
NOlo vos ignorare fratres de his qui obdormierunt, ne doleatis quemadmodum and
caeteri non habentes spem. Nam si credimus quod Jesus mortuus est and
resurrexit, sic and Deus eos qui obdormierunt, per Jesum, adducet cum illo. Hoc
enim vobis dicimus in verbo Domini, quod nos qui vivimus, and reliqui erimus in
adventum Domini, nequaquam praeveniemus eos qui dormiunt. Quoniam ipse Dominus
cum hortatu and voce Archangeli, ac tuba Dei descendet de Coelo: and mortui in
Christo resurgent primum: deinde nos qui vivemus, qui reliqui erimus, simul cum
illis rapientur in nubibus in occursum Domini in aere, and sic semper cum
Domino erimus. Proinde consolemini vos mutuo sermonibus his.

Evangelium. Joan. 6.
DIxit Jesus Discipulis suis, and Turbis Judaeorum. Omne quod dat mini pater ad
me veniet: and eum qui venit ad me, non ejicio for as. Quia descendi de Coelo,
ut faciam non quod ego volo, sed quod vult is qui misit me. Haec est autem
voluntas ejus qui misit me, Patris, ne quid perdam ex omnibus quae dedit mihi,
sed resuscitem illa in novissim ^ie. Haec est autem voluntas ejus qui misit me,
ut omnis qui videt filium and credit in eum, habeat vitam aeternam, and ego
suscitabo eum in novissimo die.

Vel hoc Evangelium. Joan. 5.
DIxit Jesus discipulis suis and Turbis Judaeorum: Amen, Amen dico vobis, qui
sermonem meum audit, and credit ei qui misit me, habet vitam aeternam, and in
condemnationem non veniet, sed transivita morte in vitam. Amen, Amen dico
vobis, quod veniet hora and nunc est, quando mortui audient votem filii Dei:
and qui audierint, vivent. Sicut enim pater habet cviam in semetipso, sic de
dit and filio habere vitam in semetipso: and potestatem dedit ei judicandi
quoque, quia Filius hominis. Nolite mirari hoc: quia veniet hora, in qua omnes
qui in monumentis sunt, audient vocem ejus, and prodibunt, qui bona secerunt in
resurrectionem vitae: qui vero mala egerunt, in resurrectionem condemnationis.

FINIS.
ARTICULI De quibus convenit inter Archiepiscopos, ET EPISCOPOS Utriusque
Provinciae, ET CLERUM UNIVERSUM In Synodo, Londini.

Anno 1562. secundum computationem Ecclesiae Anglicanae, ad tollendam opinionum
dissentionem, and consensum in vera Religione firmandum.

Aediti authoritate serenissimae Reginae.

LONDINI, Apud JOHANNEM DAY, 1571.

De fide in sacro-sanctam Trinitatem.
UNus est vivus, and verus Deus, aeternus, incorporeus,

De verbo, sive Filio Dei, qui verus homo factus est.
FIlius, qui est verbum patris, ab aeterno a patre genitus, verus

De descensu Christi ad Inferos.
QUemadmodum Christus pro nobis mortuus est, and sepultus,

De resurrectione Christi.
CHristus vere a mortuis resurrexit, suumque corpus cum

De spiritu Sancto.


De divinis Scripturis, quod sufficiant ad salutem.


Sacrae Scripturae nomine, eos Canonicos libros veteris, and novi Testamenti
intelligimus, de quorum authoritate, in Ecclesia nunquam dubitatum est.

De nominibus, and numero librorum sacrae Canonicae Scripturae veteris
Testamenti.
Genesis. Exodus. Leviticus. Numeri. Deuteron. Josuae. Judicum. Ruth. Prior
liber Samuelis. Secundus liber Samuelis. Prior liber Regum. Secundus liber
Regum. Prior liber Paralipom. Secundus liber Paralipomen. Primus liber Esdrae.
Secundus liber Esdrae. Liber Hester. Liber Job. Psalmi. Proverhia. Ecclesiastes
vel Concionator. Cantica Solomonis. 4. Prophetae Majores. 12. Prophetae
minores.
Alios autem libros (ut ait Hieronimus) legit quidam Ecclesia, ad exempla
vitae, and formandos mores: illos tamen ad dogmata confirmanda non adhibet, ut
sunt
Tertius liber Esdrae. Quartus liber Esdrae. Liber Tobiae. Liber Judith.
Reliquum libri Hester. Liber sapientiae. Liber Jesu filii Sirach. Baruch
propheta. Canticum trium puerorum. Historia Susannae. De Bell and Dracone.
Oration Manasses. Prior lib. Machabeorum. Secundus liber Machabeorum.
Novi Testamenti omnes libros (ut vulgo recepti sunt) recipinius, and habenius
pro Canonicis.

De veteri Testamento.
TEstamentum vetus, novo contrarium non est, quandoquidem

De tribus Symbolis.
SYmbola tria, Nycoenum, Athanasii, and quod vulgo Apostolorum

De peccato originali.


De libero arbitrio.


De hominis justificatione.


De bonis operibus.
BOna opera quae sunt fructus fidei, and justificatos sequuntur,

De operibus ante justificationem.
OPera quae fiunt, ante gratiam Christi, and spiritus ejus afflatum,

De operibus supererogationis.
OPera quae supererogationis appellant, non possunt sine arrogantia,

De Christo qui solus est sine peccato.
CHristus, in nostrae naturae veritate, per omnia similis factus omnes. Et si
dixerimus, quia peccatum non habemus, nos ipsos seducimus, and veritas in nobis
non est.

De peccato post Baptismum.


De praedestinatione, and electione.


Que madmodum praedestinationis and electionis nostrae in Christo pia
consideratio, dulcis, suavis and ineffabilis consolationis plena est, vere
piis, and hiis qui sentiunt in se vim spiritus Christi, facta carnis, and
membra, quae adhuc sunt super terram, mortificantem, animumque ad coelestia,
and superna rapientem. Tum quia fidem nostram de aeterna salute consequenda per
Christum plurimum stabilit, atque confirmat, tum quia amorem nostrum in Deum
vehementer accendit. Ita hominibus curiosis, carnalibus, and Spiritu Christi
destitutis, ob oculos perpetuo versari praedestinationis Dei sententiam,
pernitiosissimum est praecipitium, unde illos diabolus protrudit, vel in
desperationem vel in aeque pernitiosam impurssimae vitae securitatem, deinde
promissiones divinas sic amplecti oportet, ut nobis in sacris literis
generaliter propositae sunt, and Dei voluntas in nostris actionibus ea sequenda
est, quam in verbo Dei habemus, diserte revelatam.

De speranda aeterna salute tantum in nomine Christi.
SUnt and illi Anathematizandi, qui dicere audent unumquemque in lege, aut
secta quam profitetur esse servandum, modo juxta

De Ecclesia.
ECclesia Christi visibilis est coetus fidelium, in quo verbum Dei purum
praedicatur, and sacramenta, quoad ea quae necessario

De Ecclesiae Authoritate.
HAbet Ecclesia Ritus sive Caeremonias statuendi jus, and in fidei
controversiis authoritatem; quamvis Ecclesia non licet

De authoritate Conciliorum generalium.
GEneralia Concilia, sine jussu, and voluntate principum congregari

De purgatorio.


De Ministrando in Ecclesia.


De loquendo in Ecclesia lingua quam populus intelligit.


De Sacramentis.
SAcramenta a Christo instituta, non ta^tum sunt notae professionis
invisibiliter ipse in nos operatur, nostramque fidem in se non solum excitat,
verumetiam confirmat.

Duo a Christo Domino nostro in Evangelio instituta sunt Sacramenta, scilicet:
Baptismus, and Coena Domini.

Quinque illa vulgo nominata Sacramenta: scilicet, confirmatio, poenitentia,
ordo, matrimonium, and extrema unctio, pro Sacramentis Evangelicis habenda non
sunt, ut quae, partim a prava Apostolorum imitatione profluxerunt, partim vitae
status sunt in Scripturis quidem probati: sed Sacramentorum eandem cum
Baptismo, and Caena Domini rationem non habentes, ut quae signum aliquod
visibile, seu caeremoniam, a Deo institutum, non habeant.

Sacramenta non in hoc instituta sunt a Christo ut spectarentur, aut
circumferrentur, sed ut rite illis uterentur, and in hiis duntaxat qui digne
percipiunt salutarem habent effectum: Qui vero indigne percipiunt, damnationem
(ut inquit Paulus) sibi ipsis acquirunt.

De vi institutionum divinarum quod eam non tollat malitia Ministrorum.
QVamvis in Ecclesia visibili, bonis mali semper sunt admixti,

Ad Ecclesiae tamen disciplinam pertinet, ut in malos ministros inquiratur,
accusenturque ab his, qui eorum flagitia noverint, atque tandem justo convicti
judicio deponantur.

De Baptismo.


Baptismus parvulorum omnino in Ecclesia retinendus est, ut qui cum Christi
institutione optime congruat.

De Coena Domini.


Atque adeo, rite, digne, and cum fide sumentibus, panis quem frangimus est
communicatio corporis Christi: similiter poculum benedictionis, est
communicatio sanguinis Christi.

Panis and Vini Transubstantiatio in Eucharistia, ex sacris literis probari non
potest. Sed apertis Scripturae verbis adversatur, Sacramenti naturam evertit,
and multarum superstitionum dedit occasionem.

Corpus Christi datur, accipitur, and manducatur in Coena, tantum coelesti, and
spirituali ratione. Medium autem quo corpus Christi accipitur, and manducatur
in Caena, fides est.

Sacramentum Eucharistiae, ex institutione Christi non servabatur,
circumferebatur, elevebatur, nec adorabatur.

De manducatione corporis Christi, and impios illos non manducare.
efficiuntur. Sed potius tantae rei Sacramentum, seu Symbolum, ad judicium sibi
manducant, and bibunt.

De utraque specie.
CAlix Domini laicis non est denegandus, utraque enim pars Dominici Sacramenti,
ex Christi institutione, and praecepto,

De unica Christi oblatione in cruce perfecta.
OBlatio Christi semel facta, perfecta est redemptio, propitiatio, and
satisfactio pro omnibus peccatis totius mundi, tam

De conjugio Sacerdotum.
EPiscopis, presbyteris, and diaconis nullo mandato divino praeceptum est, ut
aut coelibatum voveant, aut a matrimonio abstineant. Licet igitur etiam illis,
ut caeteris omnibus Christianis,

De excommunicatis vitandis.
QVi per publicam Ecclesiae denuntiationem rite ab unitate ecclesiae praecisus
est, and excommunicatus, is ab universo

De traditionibus Ecclesiasticis.
TRaditiones atque caeremorias easdem, non omnino necessarium semper fuerunt,
and mutari possunt, pro Regionum, temporum, and morum diversitate, modo nihil
contra verbum Dei instituatur,

Traditiones, and caeremonias Ecclesiasticas quae cum verbo Dei non pugnant,
and sunt authoritate publica institutae, atque probatae, quisquis privato
consilio volens, and data opera, public violaverit, is ut qui peccat in
publicum ordinem Ecclesiae, quique laedit authoritatem Magistratus, and qui
infirmorum fratrum conscientias vulnerat, public ut coeteri timeant, arguendus
est.

Quaelibet Ecclesia particularis, sive Nationalis, authoritatem habet
instituendi, mutandi aut abrogandi Caeremonias, aut ritus Ecclestasticas,
humana tantum authoritate institutos, modo omnia ad aedificationem fiant.

De Homiliis.
TOmus secundus Homiliarum, quarum singulos titulos huic articulo subiunximus,
continet piam and salutarem doctrinam, and hiis temporibus necessariam, non
minus quam prior Tomus Homiliarum, quae editae sunt tempore Edwardi sexti:
Itaque eas in Ecclesiis per ministros diligenter, and clare, ut a populo
intelligi possint, recitandas esse judicavimus.

De nominibus Homiliarum.
Of the right use of the Church. Against peril of idolatry. Of repairing and
keeping clean of Churches. Of good works. First of fasting. Against gluttony
and drunkenness. Against excess of apparel. Of prayer. Of the place and time
of prayer. That common prayers and Sacraments ought to be ministered in a known
tongue. Of the reverent estimation of Gods word. Of alms doing. Of the Nativity
of Christ. Of the passion of Christ. Of the Resurrection of Christ. Of the
worthy receiving of the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. Of the gifts
of the holy Ghost. For the Rogation days. Of the State of Matrimony. Of
Repentance. Against idleness. Against rebellion.
De Episcoporum and Ministrorum consecratione.
LIbellus de consecratione Archiepiscoporum, and Episcoporum,

De civilibus Magistratibus.
REgia Majestas in hoc Angliae regno, ac caeteris ejus dominiis,

Cum Regiae Majestati summam gubernationem tribuimus, quibus titulis
intelligimus, animos quorundam calumniatorum offendi, non damus Regibus
nostris, aut verbi Dei, aut Sacramentorum administrationem, quod etiam
Injunctiones ab Elizabetha Regina nostra, nuper editae, a^ertissime testantur.
Sed eam tantum prerogativam, quam in sacris Scripturis a Deo ipso, omnibus piis
Principibus, videmus semper fuisse attributam, hoc est, ut omnes status, atque
ordines fidei suae a Deo commissos, sive illi Ecclesiastici sint, sive civiles,
in officio contineant, and contumaces, ac delinquentes gladio civili coerceant.

Romanus pontifex nullam habet jurisdictionem in hoc regno Angliae.

Leges Regni possunt Christianos propter capitalia, and gravia crimina, morte
punire.

Christianis licet, ex mandato Magistratus, arma portare and justa bella
administrare.

De illicita bonorum communicatione.


De jurejurando.


Confirmatio Articulorum.
HIc liber antedictorum Articulorum jam denuo approbatus est, 1571.

FINIS.
LIBER QUORUNDAM CANONUM DISCIPLINAE Ecclesiae Anglicanae. ANNO MDLXXI.

De Episcopis. De Decanis Ecclesiarum. De Archidiaconis. De Cancellariis, etc.
De Aedituis Aecclesiarum. De Concionatoribus. De Residentia. De Pluralitatibus.
De Ludimagistris. De Patronis, etc.
LONDINI, Apud Johannem Day. 1571.

DE EPISCOPIS.
Sequuntur in hoc libello certi quidam articuli de sacro ministerio, and
procuratione Ecclesiarum, in quos plene consensum est in Synodo a Domino
Mathaeo Archiepis. Cantuar. and totius Angliae Primate and Metopolitano, et
reliquis omnibus ejus Provinciae Episcopis, partim personaliter praesentibus,
partim procuratoria manu subscribentibus in synodo inchoata Londini in aede
Divi Pauli, tertio die Aprilis. 1571.

OMNES EPISCOPI diligenter docebunt Evangelium, non tantum in Ecclesiis
Cathedralibus quibus praesunt, sed etiam passim, per omnes Ecclesias suae
cujusque dioeceseos, ubi maxim putabunt expedire.

Imprimis autem cohortabuntur populum ad lectionem, and auditionem Sacrarum
Scripturarum: utque statis temporibus conveniant ad suas quique Ecclesias, and
diligenter auscultent Sacris Concionatoribus, utque submisse and audiant pias
preces, quae a Ministro dicentur, and una precentur ipsi and coelestium
Mysteriorum, ut nunc in Ecclesiis nostris authoritate, and jussu totius Regni
legitime, and pie procurantur, sint participes.

Episcopus quisque ante Calendas Septembris proximas, advocabit ad se omnes
publicos Concionatores, quicunque erunt in sua cujusque dioecesi, and ab illis
repetet facultates concionandi, quas habent authentico sigillo consignatas,
easque vel retinebit apud se vel extinguet. Deinde, delectu illorum prudenter
facto, quoscunque ad illam tantam functionem, aetate, doctrina, judicio,
innocentia, modestia, gravitate, pares invenerit, illis novas facultates ultro
dabit: ita tamen ut prius subscribant articulis christianae religionis public
in synodo approbatis) fidemque dent, se velle tueri, and defendere doctrinam
eam, quae in illis continetur, ut consentients;imam veritati divini verbi.

Episcopus etiam atque etiam confiiderabit, quod genus hominum admittat in
famulitium. Fit enim interdum, ubi haec cautio and diligentia non adhibetur, ut
homines impios and verae religionis inimicos, and criminosos, and tota vita
impuros, and sceleratos admittamus. Ex eo adversarius facile capiet maledicendi
occasionem.

Episcoporum famuli in omni vestis genere, ita se modeste and composite
ornabunt, ut fratres suos, quos Paulus appellat domesticos fidei, non offendant.

Episcopus nemini posthac manum imponet, nisi instituto in bonis literis, vel
in Academia, vel in inferiore aliqua schola: aut qui satis commode intelligat
latinam linguam, and probe versatus sit in sacris literis: nec nisi attigerit
aetatem illam legitimam, quae statutis and legibus est constituta; nec nisi
cujus vita et innocentia gravium, and piorum hominum, and Episcopo notorum
fuerit testimonio commendata: nec si in agricultura, vel in vili aliquo and
sedentario artificio suerit educatus: nec nisi qui titulum (quem appellant)
aliquem habeat, ut sit unde vitam tueatur, si Dei permissu, vel in caecitatem,
vel in gravem corporis infirmitatem, vel in morbum diuturnum incidat: nec nisi
qui intra ipsius dioecesim sacro ministerio functurus sit, nec unquam nisi ubi
sacrum aliquod ministerium in eadem dioecesi vacare contigerit. Neminem autem
peregrinum, and ignotum vel ad sacerdotiorum proventus, vel ad Ecclesiasticum
ministerium recipiet, nisi ab illo episcopo, e cujus dioecesi discessit,
literas commendatitias, quas appellant dimissorias, secum afferat.

Episcopus praebendarum, and beneficiorum suorum proximas secundas aut tertias
advocationes, quas vocant, nulli dabit. Sunt enim and a bonis moribus, and a
Christiana charitate alienae: nec dimissiones fructuum, aut redditum
cujuscunque rectoriae, aut Ecclesiastici beneficii quacunque ratione in
plurimos annos confirmabit.

Episcopus neminem, qui se otioso nomine Lectorem vocet, and manus impositionem
non acceperit in Ecclesiae ministerio, versari patietur.

Quivis Archiepiscopus, and Episcopus habebit domi suae sacra Biblia in
amplissimo volumine, uti nuperrime Londini excusa sunt, and plenam illam
historiam quae inscribitur Monumenta Martyrum, and alios quosdam similes libros
ad religionem appositos. Locentur autem isti libri, vel in aula, vel in grandi
coenaculo, ut and ipsorum famulis, and advenis usui esse possint.

Decani Ecclesiarum Cathedralium.
EOsdem illos libros quos proxime diximus, Decanus quisque curabit emi, and
locari in Ecclesia sua Cathedrali, ejusmodi in loco, ut a Vicariis and
minoribus canonicis, and Ministris Ecclesiae, and ab advenis, and peregrinis
commode audiri, and legi possint.

Eosdem libros illos, Decanus and Primarius quisque residentarius, quos
appellant Ecclesiae dignitates, ement suo quisque famulitio, eosque opportuno
aliquo in loco, vel in aula, vel in coenaculo locabunt.

Decanus and Praebendarii diligenter docebunt sacrum Dei verbum, non tantum in
Ecclesiis Cathedralibus ubi vivunt, sed etiam in aliis Ecclesiis in eadem
dioecesi, maxim vero in illis locis, unde ipsis redditus annui, and stipendia
suppeditantur. Quod nisi fecerint, pro Episcopi arbitrio puniantur.

Nullus nec Decanus, nec Archidiaconus, nec Residentarius, nec Praepositus, nec
Custos, nec Praefectus, alicujus Collegii, aut Ecclesiae Cathedralis, nec
Praeses, nec Rector, nec quisquam ex illo ordine, quocunque nomine censeatur,
utetur posthac amictu illo quem appellant Graium Amicium, aut alia ulla vest
simili superstitione contaminata. Sed in Ecclesiis quisque suis utentur tantum
linea illa vest, quae adhuc Regio mandato retinetur) and Scholastica Epomide,
quae suo cujusque Scholastico gradui and loco conveniat.

Quivis Decanus in singulos annos ad minimum quater residebit in Ecclesia sua
Cathedrali, ibique singulis hujusmodi vicibus mensem integrum (si fieri potest)
docendo verbum Dei and hospitalitatem servando moram faciet, nisi forte
gravibus, and urgentibus causis impedietur. Eas autem causas in singulas vices
indicabit Episcopo suo. Ubi autem venerit, una cum Praebendariis residentibus
curabit, ut statuta illius Ecclesiae, nisi contraria fint (ut multa sunt) verbo
Dei, and statuta hujus regni quaecunque sunt, quae Ecclesiasticum ordinem
attingunt, and sacrae Injunctiones, vel a Regia Majestate aeditae, vel ab
Episcopo in visitationibus illius Ecclesiae Cathedralis impositae, diligenter
observentur. Praeterea Decanus, and residentarii quantum maxim possint dabunt
operam, ut minores Canonici, aut Vicarii and Ministri Ecclesiae, ne ignavi, and
inutiles vitam ducant in ocio, and illicitis lusibus se exerceant, adigantur ad
studia Scripturarum, utque illorum quisque habeat novum Testamentum, non tantum
Latino sermon scriptum, sed etiam Anglico.

Decanus and Residentarii curabunt, ne qua alia forma observetur in canendis
aut dicendis sacris precibus, aut in administratione sacramentorum, praeterquam
quae proposita, and praescripta est in libro publicarum precum: nec ullum
admittent peregrinum ad habendam sacram concionem ad populum nisi ei, aut Regia
Majestas, aut Archiepiscopus illius Provinciae, aut illius dioeceseos Episcopus
facultatem indulserit. Et si ejusmodi aliquis Concionator, ita vel a Regia
Majestate, vel ab Archiepiscopo, vel ab Episcopo approbatus, publicabit ad
populum pro concione droctrinam aliquam peregrinam, and impiam, and pugnantem,
vel cum sacro Dei verbo, vel cum articulis religionis nostrae approbatis in
Synodo, haud dubie cum eodem verbo Dei consentientibus, vel cum libro
publicarum precum: Decanus aut Residentarii primo; quoque tempore indicabunt id
Episcopo literis suis, and eorum aliquot qui concionantem audiverunt manu
consignatis, ut ille statuat quod videbitur.

Archidiaconi.
QUivis Archidiaconus habebit domi suae, and alios libros, and nominatim eos,
qui inscribuntur Monumenta Martyrum.

Archidiaconus qui vel jure communi, vel praescriptione habet potestatem
visitandi, semel in singulos annos in persona sua, visitabit Provinciam suam,
neque quenquam sibi substituet officialem, nisi qui in Academia fuerit
educatus, and juri civili operam dederit, and annum aetatis vicesimum quartum
compleverit, and non solum doctrina, sed etiam gravitate, and modestia par sit,
obeundo illi muneri.

Archidiaconi, and illorum substituti, quos appellant officiales, in
visitationibus suis vocabunt clerum ad rationem, quantum quisque promoverit in
studio scripturarum, and quicunque ex illo ordine Magisterium Artium in
Academiis non attigerint, illis proponent partem aliquam novi Testamenti
memoriter ediscendam, eosque in proxima synodo ad repetitionem adigent, and
contumaces, and negligentes Episcopo indicabunt.

Peracta visitatione Archidiaconus significabit Episcopo, quos invenerit in
quoque decanatu, ea doctrina, and judicio praeditos ut digni sint qui pro
concione doceant populum, and praesint aliis. Ex illis Episcopus potest
delectum facere, quos velit esse Decanos rurales.

Archidiaconi in omnes delinquentes severe, and graviter animadvertent, neque
connivebunt ad vitia, aut quenquam quem constat offendisse, impune abire
patientur.

Archidiaconi curabunt, ut forensium suorum actorum memoriae fideliter and tuto
conserventer, and semel in singulos annos adferent ad Episcopum suum originalia
exemplaria omnia Testamentorum, quae coram ipsis anno superiori probata
fuerint, ut ea in Episcopi registro asseruenter, copias autem illorum
testamentorum ad usum suum ipsi sibi describent, si velint.

Cancellarii, Commissarii, Officiales.
QUivis Cancellarius, Commissarius, and Officialis erit institutus in legibus
Ecclesiasticis and civilibus, qui annum aetatis vicesimum sextum attigerit, and
in scholis doctrinae nomine gradum aliquem susceperit, and in forensibus causis
mediocriter versatus fuerit, de cujus vita and moribus nullus sinister sermo
audiatur. Adhaec quivis horum, aut erit in sacro ministerio, aut si non erit,
tamen animo toto and ferventi zelo erga religionem feretur, idque aperte and
ingenue praese feret: and antequam in functionem ingrediatur, sacramento se
obstringet, de authoritate and primatu Principis, atque etiam subscribet
articulis de religione in Synodo Episcoporum approbatis.

Nullus horum, nec Cancellarius, nec Commissarius, nec Officialis in cognitione
causarum procedet usque ad ferendam sententiam excummunicationis nifi tantum in
causis instantiarum. In correctionis negotiis, alia quidem facient omnia quae
de jure possint, and solent fieri.

Excommunicationis autem sententiam deferent tantum ad Episcopum: eamque aut
ipse per se pronunciabit, aut gravi alicui viro in sacro ministerio constituto,
pronunciandum committet. Postquam autem sententiam tulerit, addet insuper
commonendi populi, and terroris causa, formulam illam verborum, quae postea suo
loco subjicietur, atque etiam aliam formulam similem, quae servanda sit in
denuncianda ad populum excommunicatione, curabit describi, and mittiad singulos
Ecclesiarum praefectos, ut habeant quo utantur, si usus postulet. Commutationem
autem injunctae poenitentiae, nec Cancellarius faciet, nec Archidiaconus, nec
Officialis, nec Commissarius. Ea potestas multis gravibus de causis Episcopo
soli reservabitur, aut si quem alium, Episcopus ad eum usum speciali mandato
designabit.

Ecclesiasticus Judex cujuscunque loci aut ordinis, neminem excommunicatum
absolvet Domi suae, aut alioqui in privatis aedibus: sed tantum public, and
pro tribunali.

Cancellarii, Officiales, Commissarii, omnem adhibebunt diligentiam, ut caeteri
omnes qui ipsorum jurisdictioni subjiciuntur, officium faciant. Imprimis vero
ut Rectores, Vicarii, and Ministri Ecclesiarum, studiose versenter in sacris
literis, and sibi libros ordini and professioni suae congruentes, comparent, ut
quicunque ad Magisterium Artium non accesserit, emat sibi duos libros novi
Testamenti alterum Latin translatum, alterum Anglice, ut illorum quisque
memoriter ediscat eam pensam Scripturarum quae illi vel ab Ecclesiastico Judice
ordinario, vel ab alio cujus fidem and industriam, Episcopus eligere maluerit,
fuerit imposita: ut observent ordines and ritus descriptos in libro Publicarum
precum, tam in legendis sacris Scripturis, and precibus dicendis, quam etiam in
administratione Sacramentorum, ut neve detrahant aliquid, neve addant, neve de
materia, neve de forma: ut honest se gerant, and in gravi vestitu, in libello
admonitionum proposito, modeste and decenter ambulent: utque si familiam
habeant, and uxores non habeant, mulierem aliam domi suae ne alant nisi aut
matrem, aut sororem, aut neptem ex fratre aut sorore: quod si coelibes vivant
and uxores non habeant, in taberna aut caupona cibum ne capiant, sed honesta
aliqua in domo in eadem parochia, ubi fine suspitione possint vivere: ut ne
ludant aleam, neve chartis, aut aliis improbatis lusibus se exerceant: ut arcu
tantum utantur and sagittis, idque animi causa, ut modeste, and in tempore, ne
vel ab officio faciendo, vel a sacrarum Scripturarum studiis auferantur.

Videbunt etiam ne Rector, Vicarius, aut Parochus uspiam inserviat, vel in
capella, vel in oratorio, aut publicas preces dicat in cujusque privatis
aedibus, nisi Episcopus illi autographo suo, and manus suae subscriptione ejus
rei potestatem fecerit: Neve Rector aut Vicarius, aut Parochus inserviat
plusquam uni Ecclesiae, aut Capellae uno die.

Quivis Minister Ecclesiae, antequam in sacram functionem ingrediatur,
subscribet omnibus Articulis de Religione Christiana, in quos consensum est in
Synodo: and public ad populum, ubicunque Episcopus jusserit, patefaciet
conscientiam suam quid de illis Articulis, and universa doctrina sentiat. Semel
autem receptus in sacrum ministerium, ab eo imposterum non discedit, nec se aut
vestitu, aut habitu, aut in ulla vitae part geret pro Laico.

Quivis Rector Ecclesiae, Vicarius, aut Parochus, quotannis ante vicesimum diem
a Paschate, exhibebit Episcopo, ejusve Cancellario aut Commissario, nomina and
cognomina Parochianorum suorum tam marium quam foeminarum (eorum inquam) qui
cum exegerint annum aetatis suae decimum quartum, tamen ad sacrosanctam
Communionem (uti statutis and legibus Ecclesiasticis hujus regni tenenter) non
accesserint, quique subire examen Ecclesiastici ministri de ediscendo
Catechismo, and articulis Christianae religionis detractaverint: quique
Parents aut Domini, liberos aut famulos suos ad audiendum discendumque eundem
illum Catechismum constitutis temporibus ad Ecclesiam mittere contempserint.
Neminem autem patientur de sacro lavacro infantem suscipere, nisi qui ad mensam
dominicam accesserit, and sanctorum mysteriorum particeps fuerit: ad
mysteriorum autem Communionem neminem admittet, qui Catechismum, and articulos
fidei non dedicerit.

Omnibus dominicis, and festis diebus, Rectores, Vicarii, (...) Parochi ita
mature and convenienter captato tempore ve^ent ad Ecclesias, ut Parochiani
confectis rebus suis, cum liberis and famulis possint eodem occurrere. Ibi vero
reverenter (uti par est) and pie peragent sacrum mysterium, ita clare, aperte,
distinct, ut populus audire, and intelligere possit quid dicatur, and ex eo
consolationem, and fructum capere. Eandem pietatem and reverentiam in
sacrosanctis etiam mysteriis retinebunt, modo ne ad superstitionem, aut
adorationem, aut idolatricum cultum vergant. Quod si tempore sacrae Communionis
nulla erit concio de scripto and e pulpito pronunciabunt unam aliquam, aut
aliam ex illis homiliis, quas jam antea publicavimus in illum usum. Interim
cohortabuntur populum, ut diligenter veniant ad Ecclesias, ut quae legantur,
quaeque dicantur attente audiant, utque se toto illo tempore reverenter, and
modeste gerant. Et ne piorum animi, insolentia and irreligiosa levitate
offendantur, curabunt ne juvenes, praesertim rustici, quorum ingenia
procliviora fere sunt ad neglectum pietatis, and nequitiam: neve pulsent
campanas, neve per templum obambulent, neve inter se otiose colloquantur, neve
aut risu, aut strepitu, aut scurrilibus ineptiis, vel ministrum impediant, vel
offendant populum.

Admonebunt populum, ut frequentius accedant ad sacram communionem, utque jam
antea tota mente (uti par est) sese praeparent. Et ut omnes intelligant quid
debeant Deo optimo maximo, quid Principi, quem colere ac venerari debent ut
Vicarium Dei: quid legibus: quid magistratibus: quid fratribus suis: quid
populo Dei, omnibus dominicis and festis diebus statim a meridie praesto erunt
in templis, ibique minimum ad duas horas legent, and docebunt Catechismum, and
in eo instituent omnes suos omnium aetatum, atque ordinum, non tantum puellas
aut pueros, sed etiam si opus erit grandiores. Imprimis vero admonebunt
adolescentes and juvenes, non tantum mares, sed etiam foeminas, cautum esse
legibus, ne quis illorum vel accedat ad sacram Communionem, vel contrahat
nuptias, vel infantem e sacro font suscipiat, nisi antea didicerit rudimenta
religionis Christianae and possit ad omnes parts Catechismi convenienter, and
dextre respondere.

Quod si Rectores, Vicarii, Parochi, vel concionari non possint, vel facultatem
concionandi ab Episcopo non acceperint, tamen docebunt pueros prima elementa
legere, scribere, noscere officium suum, quid debeant Deo, quid parentibus,
quidque aliis: and si quos ex illis viderint ea esse indole, ut possint
institutione, atque cultu ad literarum cognitionem pervenire hortabuntur
parents, ut eos deducant ad Scholam, ut imbuti bonis disciplinis possint
aliquando idonei esse ad sacrum Dei optimi maximi Ministerium; quos autem
hebetiores, and ingenio a literis alieniore esse senserint, ut eos curent, vel
ad alias arts, vel etiam ad opus rusticum ablegari.

Admonebunt etiam Parochianos suos magnis and gravibus de causis, constitutum
esse in Synodo a Reverendissimo Patre, Domino Mathaeo Archiepiscopo Cantuar.
and aliis Episcopis, ne liberi contrahant Matrimonium sine consensu parentum,
neve juvenis contrahendi potestatem habeat, ante annum aetatis suae decimum
sextum, neve Puella ante decimum quartum.

Aeditui Ecclesiarum and alii selecti viri.
AEDitui pro consuetudine suae quique Parochiae, Parochianorum suorum, and
ecclesiastici sui ministri suffragiis, eligentur: alioqui aeditui non erunt:
nec amplius quam unum annum durabunt in illo munere, nisi forte iterum
eligantur. Omnes autem Aeditui semel in singlos annos reddent justam rationem
earum pecuniarum, quae in suas manus pervenerunt: atque etiam indicabunt
particulatim quos sumptus fecerint in sarta tecta and usum Ecclesiae. Postremo
vero discedentes ab officio, quicquid pecuniarum, aliarumque Ecclesiasticarum
rerum supererit, and in ipsorum erit potestate, id omne bona fide tradent
Parochianis, ut ab illis rursus tradi possit proximis aedituis.

Aeditu curabunt ut Ecclesiae, plumbo, tegula materia, vi^ro, diligenter and
probe reficiantur, ne vel minister, vel populus, aut in sacro ministerio and
cultu Dei, aut in coelestium mysteriorum tractatione, aut in habenda and
audienda communione, coeli injuriis quatiatur. Imprimis autem operam dabunt, ut
in omni Ecclesiastico conventu pax quam maxim conservetur and in omnibus
Episcoporum atque Archidiaconorum visitationibus, fideliter and nominatim
detegent, atque indicabunt eos omnes qui sese in Ecclesia immodeste gefferint,
quique vel intempestiva pulsatione campanarum, vel ambulationibus, vel
colloquio and strepitu, ministrum aut concionatorem impediverint.

Aeditui curabunt ut aedes sacrae, munde and sancte conserventer, ne cuiquam
vel pulvere, vel ramentis, vel sordibus, moveant nauseam. Curabunt etiam ut
sacra Biblia sint in singulis Ecclesis in amplissimo volumine (si commode fieri
possit) qualia nunc nuper Londini excusa sunt, ut liber publicarum precum, ut
sacrae homiliae, utque homiliae, que nuper scriptae sunt contra rebellionem,
sint in singulis Ecclesiis. Hos libros quam maxim integros and mundos esse
convenit: Lac^ros autem aut sordidos nullo modo, ne populo fastidium, and
contemptum pariant. Curabunt mensam ex asseribus composite junctam, quae
administrationi sacro sanctae communionis inserviat: and mundum tapetem, qui
illam contegat: and suggestum commodum, unde caelestis doctrina publicetur.
Curabunt insuper ut omnia illa solaria, in quibus cruces ligneae aliquando
prostabant, and aliae reliquiae superstitionis prorsus e medio auferantur,
utque templorum parietes nova fidelia inducantur, and lectissimis sanctarum
scripturarum sententiis illustrentur. Ut illarum lectione and admonitu, populus
possit ad pietatem commoveri. Postremo curabunt ut in singulis Ecclesiis sit
sacer fons, non pelvis, in quo baptismus ministretur, isque ut decenter and
munde conservetur.

Admonebunt etiam Caupones, and Tabernarios, qui ve^dunt edulia, ne quem in
cauponam, aut tabernam suam recipiant toto illo tempore, quo aut habebitur
concio, aut sacrum ministerium peragetur. Quod si quis per contemptum, and
contumaciam contra fecerit, and illum ipsum, and eos quos ad se receperit,
nominatim in proxima visitatione indicabunt. Si quis vel aperto adulterio; vel
stupro, vel incestu, vel ebrietate, vel jurandi consuetudine, vel lenocinio,
vel usura, vel alia demum quacunque impuritate vitae, and nequitia, fratres
offenderit, illos aeditui amice, and fraterne admonebunt, ut resipiscant. Quod
nisi fecerint, indicabunt eos nominatim vel Rectori, vel Vicario, vel Parocho,
ut ab illis asperius, and vehementius admoneantur, and si perrexerint,
tantisper dum redeant ad sanitatem, a sacra communione arceantur. Utque qui
incontinenter, and laxe vivunt, pro meritis suis legum severitate castigentur.
Iidem aeditui eosdem illos adulteros, fornicarios, incestos, ebriosos,
juratores, lenones, usurarios, in Episcoporum and Archidiaconorum
visitationibus patefacient.

Aeditui convivia, symposia, coenas, and invitationes publicas in templis
celebrari non patientur: nec campanas superstitiose pulsari, vel in vigilia
animarum, vel postridie omnium sanctorum, qui dies non ita pridem geniis
mortuorum sace^ erat, nec omnino unquam, ubi pulsandi consuetudo ad
superstitionem videbitur inclinare. Illis autem tantum temporibus pulsari
permittent, quae in libello admonitionum descripta sunt, and ad eundem tantum
usum, eodemque tantum modo.

Nundinas, and mercatus publicos celebrare, and sontes sententia judicis
condemnatos, neci dedere, and supplicio afficere diebus dominicis non licebit.

Non patientur ut quisquam ex circumforaneis istis tenuibus, and sordidis
mercatoribus, qui aciculas and ligulas, and crepundia, and res viles and
minutas circumferunt ac distrahunt, quos pe^arios, aut pedularios appellant,
proponant merces suas vel (...) coemiteriis, vel in porticibus ecclesiarum, aut
uspiam alibi ^bus festis, aut dominicis, interim dum peragitur pars aliqua
sacri ministerii, aut habetur sacra concio; nec ut mendici aut errones, quibus
nulla est certa seeds, toto illo sacrorum aut concionum tempore, haereant in
coemiterio, vel in porticu sed mandabunt, ut aut ingrediantur, aut discedant.

Observabunt etiam atque inquirent diligenter ecqui ex Parochianis, temporibus
lege constitutis, aut non veniant ad ecclesias, aut ^ardius and negligentius
veniant. Quosque invenerint deliquisse, in eos ex legum praescripto
animadvertent. Observabunt etiam, ^cquid omnes ac singuli Parochiani toties
accedant ad sacram communionem in singulos annos, quoties leges and statuta
jubent, ecqui etiam peregrini atque advenae ex aliis Parochiis, frequentius and
usitatius veniant ad ecclesiam suam, illosque Parocho suo indicabunt, ne illos
forte recipiat ad sacram communionem inter alios, sed ad suos potius Parachos
rejiciat.

Nullum nec Rectorem, nec Vicarium recipient ad ministerium ecclesiae suae,
nisi quem Episcopus institutione sua approbaverit, and in possessionem illius
ecclesiae mandato suo misserit. Nec Parochum recipient nisi literis and sigillo
episcopi, nominatim illi ecclesiae commendatum. Quod si Rector, Vicarius, aut
Parochus aliter se gerat in ministerio suo obeundo aut quod male and obscure,
and confuse legate, aut quod solutius and laxius vivat, quam hominem par sit
ejus ordinis, and ex ear gravis offensio suscipietur: Aeditui eum mature
deferent ad episcopum, ut quam primum animadversio aliqua, and vitii emendatio
consequatur.

Utque Episcopus intelligat, quae conciones habitae fuerint in singulis
Ecclesiis suae dioeceseos; Aeditui curabunt, ut nomina omnium Concionatorum qui
ad se alicunde venerint, annotenter in libello quem habebunt paratum in eum
usum, utque in eodem libello concionator quisque subscribat nomen suum, and
diem quo habuerit concionem, and ejus Episcopi nomen a quo acceperit
concionandi potestatem.

Postremo Aeditui diligenter observari curabunt ea omnia, quae ad ipsorum
officia pertinebunt, quaeque Regiis injunctionibus, and in libello admonitionum
continentur, quaeque vel ab Archiepiscopo, vel ab Episcopo in suis cujusque
visitationibus ad usum ecclesiarum proponenter. Quod si quis eos vel jurgiis
petulanter insectetur, vel etiam in jus trahat, quod officium fecerint, and
errantes detexerint, id quoque; indicabunt episcopo, ut ejus opera and studio
facilius a molestia liberentur.

Concionatores.
NEmo nisi ab episcopo permissus in parochia sua public praedicabit, nec
posthac audebit concionati extra ministerium, and ecclesiam suam, nisi
potestatem ita concionandi acceperit, vel a Regia Majestate per omnes regni
parts, vel ab Archiepiscopo per provinciam, vel ab episcopo per dioecesim.
Nulla autem potestas concionandi firma erit imposterum, aut authoriatem aliqam
obtinebit, nisi tantum quae impetrata fuerit post ultimum diem Aprilis, qui
fuit in An. 1571. Concionatores modeste and sobrii in omne vitae part sese
gerent.

Imprimis vero videbunt, ne quid unquam doceant pro concione, quod a populo
religiose teneri and credi velint, nisi quod consentancum sit doctrinae veteris
aut novi testamenti, quodque ex illa ipsa doctrina catholici patres, and
veteres episcopi collegerint. Et quoniam articuli illi religionis christianae
in quos consensum est ab episcopis in legitima and sancta synodo, jussu atque
authoritate serenissimae principis Elizabethae convocata, and celebrata, haud
dubie collecti sunt ex sacris libris veteris and novi testamenti, and cum
caelesti doctrina, quae in illis continetur, per omnia congruunt, quoniam etiam
liber publicarum precum, and liber de inauguratione Archiepiscoporum,
episcoporum, presbyterorum, and diaconorum, nihil continent ab illa ipsa
doctrina alienum, quicunque mittentur ad docendum populum, illorum articulorum
authoritatem and fidem, non tantum concionibus suis, sed etiam subscriptione
confirmabunt. Qui secus fecerit, and contraria doctrina populum turbaverit,
excommunicabitur.

Inter concionandum utentur vest quam maxim modesta, and gravi, quae deceat,
atque ornet ministrum Dei, qualisque in libello admonitionum descripta est. Nec
pecuniam pro concione, aut mercedem ullam exigent: sed victu tantum and
simplici apparatu, and unius noctis hospitio contenti erunt.

Vanas and aniles opiniones, and haereses, and errores Pontificios, a doctrina,
and fide Christi abhorrentes, non docebunt: nec omnino quicquam, quo imperita
multitudo, vel ad novitatis studium, vel ad contentionem imflammetur. Semper
autem proponent ea, quae ad aedificationem faciant, and auditores Christiana
concordia, and charitate concilient.

Residentia.
ABsentia Pastoris a dominico grege, et secura illa negligentia, quam videmus
in multis, et destitutio ministerii, est res et in se foeda, et odiosa in
vulgus, et pernitiosa Ecclesiae Dei. Itaque hortamur omnes Pastores ecclesiarum
in Domino Jesu, ut quam-primum redeant ad Parochias quique suas, et diligenter
doceant Evangelium, et pro fructuum suorum ratione alant familiam, and
hospitalitate juvent pauperes, ibique versentur in singulos annos, non minus
quam sexaginta dies.

Pluralitas.
NOn licebit cuiquam cujuscunque sit gradus, aut ordinis, plusquam duo
Ecclesiastica beneficia obtinere eodem tempore. Neque cuiquam omnino licebit
obtinere duo beneficia; si plusquam viginti sex milliariis distincta sint.

Ludimagistri.
NOn licebit cuiquam docere literas, et instituere pueros, nec public in
schola, nec privatim in cujusquam aedibus, nisi quem Episcopus ejus dioeceseos
approbaverit, cuique sub authentico sigillo suo docendi potestatem fecerit. Hoc
autem loco primariam nobilitatem honoris causa excipimus. Episcopus autem
nullum Ludimagistrum approbabit, nec illo munere dignum censebit, nisi quem suo
judicio doctum, and illo loco dignum invenerit, quemque de vita and moribus,
and imprimis de religione viderit piorum hominum testimonio commendari.

Ludimagistri nullam docebunt grammaticam, nisi eam quam solam Regia Majestas
per omne regnum in omnibus scholis legi mandavit; nec alium latinum Catechismum
quam qui aeditus est Anno. 1570. quem etiam Anglice redditum, pueros, qui
Latin nesciunt, docere volumus.

Alios autem libros docebunt, unde Latini Graecique sermonis copia and puritas
addisci possit, and eos inprimis qui ad notitiam Christi, and pietatem faciant.
Semel autem in singulos annos indicabunt Episcopo, quos habeant ex omni numero
lectissimos, qui ea sint indole, eoque profectu in literis ut spes sit, vel ad
functionem politicam, vel ad sacrum ministerium fore accommodos. Hac spe
parents inducti, eos libentius alent ad literas.

Imprimis vero ita instituent, and formabunt linguas puerorum, ut aperte,
clare, distincteque pronuncient. Et quoties habebitur sacra concio, eos vel
emittent, vel deducent ad templum, ut statim a teneris incipiant erudiri ad
pietatem, neve negligenter audierint, ubi redierint ad scholam, vocabunt
singulos ad examen quid ex illa concione didicerint: quoque magis pueriles
animi ad virtutem and industriam excitentur, otiosos and ignavos reprehendent,
attentos and diligentes collaudabunt.

Patroni and Proprietarii.
EPiscopus graviter and studiose cohortabitur Patronos beneficiorum, ut
cogitent necessitates Ecclesiae, and ante oculos habeant ultimum illum diem,
and judicium, and tribunal Dei. Itaque ut neminem promoveant ad munus
ecclesiasticum, nisi qui doctrina, judicio, pietate, probitate vitae, and
innocentia possit onus tam grave sustinere, ut nihil in ea re nisi integre
incorrupte and sincere faciant. Se enim usurum omnibus honestis and legitimis
rationibus; ut verum possit inveniri. Quod fi vel in ipsa praesentatione, vel
etiam postea senserit corruptelam ullam, aut Simoniacum commercium, quocunque
modo, quantumvis obscure, vel direct, vel indirecte, vel per ipsum, vel per
alios intercessisse, ut ad ipsum vel pecunia, vel pretium, vel commoditas
aliqua, vel pars aliqua fructuum perveniret, velle se facti nequitiam, and
Simoniam publicare and palam facere, non tantum in Cathedrali Ecclesia, sed
etiam alibi, ad illius probrum, and dedecus sempiternum: and presbyterum quem
ita nequiter praesentaverit, non tantum a sacerdotio, in quod mala fide
ingressus sit, sed etiam ab omni ministerio, and a tota dioecesi removere.

Domina Regina humiliter and submisse roganda est, ut ratio aliqua ipsius
permissu and jussu ineatur, ut in Ecclesiis, quae ad illam proprietario jure
pervenerunt, Cancelli quam primum reficiantur, ut annuum stipendium peragendo
sacro ministerio, constituatur. Nunc enim multis in locis, and Cancelli foedum
in modum corruerunt, and ministerium Ecclesiae propter stipendii vilitatem
destituitur.

Episcopus curabit ut justum Inventarium, quodque vocant terrarium, omnium
agrorum, pratorum, hortorum, pomariorum, quae ad Rectoriam aliquam, aut
Vicariam pertinent, ex proborum hominum inspectione sumatur, and in archia sua
referatur, ad rei memoriam sempiternam.

Episcopus non patietur Procuratorem alicujus beneficii ullam habere potestatem
in ministrum Dei, ut eum vel admittat, vel rejiciat. Neque minister minus a
quoquam accipiet nomine stipendii, quam december libras.

Omnia matrimonia, quae uspiam contracta sunt intra gradus cognationis, aut
affinitatis prohibitos in 18. Levitici, authoritate Episcopi dissolventur:
maxim vero, si quis, priore uxore demortua, ejus sororem uxorem duxerit: hic
enim gradus communi doctorum virorum consensu and judicio putatur in Levitico
prohiberi.

Non licebit cuiquam matrimonium contrahere inter illos gradus, qui in tabula a
reverendissimo patre Domino Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, in eum usum scripta and
publicata, prohibentur.

Forma sententiae excommunicationis.
FRatres, quoniam quicunque profitemur nomen Christi Jesu, sumus omnes membra
ejusdem corporis, and par est, ut unum membrum alterius membri sensu, and
dolor afficiatur: pro officii mei ratione, significo vobis, A. B. public
accusatum esse de adulterio, in quo, fama est, eum vixisse nequiter, and
turpiter, cum ipsius dedecore, and infamia, and gravi offensione Ecclesiae Dei:
and ea causa, ut insignis illa turpitudo supplicio aliquo afficeretur, ad
Episcopi tribunal, vocatum esse. Et quoniam praedictus A. B. conscientia
nequitiae suae, ad diem legitime dictum comparere contempfit, and se justitiae
contumaciter subduxit, and alios exemplo suo ad similem contumaciam animavit,
idcirco hoc etiam vos insuper admonitos volo, Episcopum nostrum, nomine, atque
authoritate Dei optimi maximi excommunicasse illum ab omni societate Ecclesiae
Dei, and tanquam membrum emortuum amputasse a Christi corpore. Hoc ille in
statu versatur hoc tempore, and in tanto discrimine animae suae. Diuus Paulus
admonitus instinctu divini spiritus, jubet ut talium hominum societatem, and
contubernia fugiamus, ne participes simus ejusdem sceleris. Tamen, ut,
Christiana charitas nos monet, quoniam ipse pro se orare non vult, nec
periculum suum intelligit, oremus Deum omnes ejus nomine, ut aliquando agnoscat
miseriam, and foeditatem vitae suae, and agat poenitentiam, and convertatur ad
Deum, Deus enim noster est misericors, and potest lapsos etiam a morte revocare.

FINIS.
CAPITULA

SIVE Constitutiones ECCLESIASTICAE, PER Archiepiscopum, Episcopos, and
reliquum Clerum Cantuariensis Provinciae, In Synodo inchoata Londini xxv die
mensis Oct. ANNO DOMINI MDXCVII. Regnique serenissimae in Christo Principis,
DOMINAE ELIZABETHAE,

Dei Gratia Angliae, Franciae and Hiberniae Reginae, Fidei Defensoris, etc.
XXXIX. congregatos tractatae, ac postea per ipsam Regiam Majestatem approbatae
and confirmatae, and utrique Provinciae, tam CANIUARIENSI quam EBORACENSI ut
diligentius observentur, eadem Regia Authoritatate sub magno Sigillo Angliae
promulgatae.

Londini, Anno Domini MDXCVII.

Vt homines idonei ad sacr^s ordines, and Beneficia (uti vocant) ecclesiastica
admittantur.
PRimo cautum est, ne quis posthac ad sacros ordines suscipiatur, qui non eodem
quoque tempore praesentationem suiipsius ad beneficium aliquod intra Diocoesim
sive Jurisdictionem ejusdem Episcopi a quo sacros ordines petit, tunc vacans
exhibuerit: Vel qui non eidem Episcopo certum, verum and indubitatum
Certificatorium attulerit de Ecclesia aliqua intra Diocoesim sive
Jurisdictionem dicti Episcopi, in qua curae animarum inservire possit: Vel qui
in aliqua Cathedrali aut Collegiata Ecclesia, vel Collegio Cantabrigiensi aut
Oxoniensi non fuerit constitutus: Vel saltem qui ab eodem Episcopo in
Beneficium aliquod, sive ad Curam (uti vocant) inserviendum tunc etiam
vacantem, non sit mox admittendus.

Deinde, ne quis Episcopus posthac aliquem in sacros ordines cooptet, qui non
ex sua ipsius diocoesi fuerit: nisi vel ex altera nostratium Academiarum
prodierit: vel nisi literas (ut loquuntur) dimissorias ab Episcopo cujus
Diocoesanus existit, attulerit, and vicesimum quartum aetatis suae annum jam
compleverit, ac etiam in altera dictarum Academiarum gradum aliquem
scholasticum susceperit: Vel saltem nisi rationem fidei suae juxta Articulos
illos Religionis in Synodo Episcoporum and Cleri approbatos Latino sermon
reddere possit, adeo ut sacrarum literarum testimonia, quibus eorundem
articulorum veritas innititur, recitare etiam valeat: Ac ulterius, de vita sua
laudabili, and morum integritate literas testimoniales sub Sigillo vel alicujus
Collegii Cantabrigiensis aut Oxoniensis, ubi antea moram fecerit, vel alicujus
Justiciarii ad pacem Dominae Reginae conservandam assignari, una cum
subscriptione and testimonio aliorum proborum and fide dignorum hominum ejusdem
paroeciae, ubi per tres annos ante proxime elapsos commoratus est, exhibeat.
Utque hi sacri ordines diebus tantummodo Dominicis, ac festivis, idque public
ac tempestive in ecclesia ubi Episcopus moram traxerit, conferantur: Proviso
semper, ut utriusque Academiae Collegiorum Socii, qui suorum Collegiorum
statutis ad sacros ordines intra certum tempus suscipiendos tenentur, hoc
decreto (quantum ad aetatem attinet) non obligentur. Quod si vero aliquis
Episcopus aliquem ad sacros ordines admiserit, qui praedictis qualitatibus non
fit praeditus, is per Archiepiscopum, assidente sibi hac in part uno alio
Episcopo, ab ordinatione Ministrorum and Diaconorum per integrum biennium
suspendatur, ac eam praeterea poenam incurrat, quae de Jure in ejusmodi
Episcopos qui ad ordines Ecclesiasticos sine titulo aliquem promovebunt,
statuitur.

Adhaec, ne quis Episcopus aliquem in beneficium (uti vocant) instituat, nisi
qui praedictis conditionibus ornatus fuerit.

Si vero Curia de Arcubus aut Audientiae per viam duplicis querelae, seu alio
quovis modo contra Episcopum hac in part agat, quia homines minime idoneos ac
habiles admittere renuit: tunc licebit Archiepiscopo, vel authoritate propria
vel gratia speciali a Regia Majestate Impetrata, ejusmodi processus amputare,
quo laudabilis Episcopi industria debitum ea ratione sortiatur effectum.

Denique, ut quolibet anno ad festum Sancti Michaelis Archangeli, vel intra sex
hebdomadas idem festum subsequentes, unusquisque Episcopus numerum, nomina,
gradus and qualitates eorum omnium, quos in sacros ordines, vel in aliqua
Beneficia eodem anno praecedente promoverit, ad Archiepiscopum transmittat.

De Beneficiorum pluralitate cohibenda,
QUod nemini in posterum facultas sive indulgentia concedetur de pluribus
beneficiis simul retinendis, nisi hujusmodi tantum, qui pro eruditione sua and
maxim digni, and ad officium suum before praestandum maxim habiles and
idonei censebuntur: Nimirum, ut is qui hujusmodi facultate fruiturus est, sit
ad minimum artium magister, and publicus ac idoneus verbi divini Concionator:
Ita tamen ut idonea etiam cautione obstrictus teneatur, de personali sua
residentia in singulis Beneficiis per bonam anni cujusque partem facienda, and
quod ejusmodi Beneficia triginta milliarium spatio ad summum non distent
abinvicem. Denique quod idoneum Curatum habeat, qui plebem ejus Paroeciae in
qua non residebit, instituat ac informet, modo facultates ejusdem Beneficii
talem commode sustinere posse Archiepiscopo, vel ejus Diocoeseos Episcopo
videbuntur.

Vt Beneficiati in suis Beneficiis Curatis hospitalitatem exerceant.
QUoniam ecclesiarum Cathedralium Canonici sive Praebendarii ecclesiastica
beneficia curata alibi saepius possident, and tamen praetendentes se ratione
Praebendarum suarum a residentia in Curatis Beneficiis liberos and immunes, ad
Cathedrales convolant, ibique moram faciunt longiorem: Unde nec curae
parochianorum illis commissae satis prospicitur, nec pauperes domi suae (sicuti
difficultas hujus temporis exigit) aluntur atque sustentantur: Id^irco nos huic
malo providere desiderantes, decernendum censemus, ut omnes and singuli
Canonici sive Praebendarii qui beneficia curata unum sive duo obtinet (nec
Residentiarii necessarii in suis ecclesiis Cathedralibus existunt) ultra tempus
quo in Cathedralibus residere tenentur, a Beneficiis suis Curatis pretextu
praebendarum se non absentent: Et si aliqui eorum, qui ad necessariam
residentiam in Ecclesiis Cathedralibus non tenentur, ultra tempus unius mensis
aliquo anno, in Ecclesia illa Cathedrali moram traxerint, eos arctari volumus
ad familiam in Beneficio suo Curato (non obstante mora in Cathedrali) alendam,
and Hospitalitatem exercendam, toto reliquo tempore quo a Curato absuerint.
Quod autem ad eos attinet, qui ad residentiam in ecclesiis Cathedralibus
faciendam, per ordinationes illius Ecclesiae obligantur, and communis
dividentiae participes sunt, eos ita inter se anni tempora partiri volumus
quoad residentiam in Cathedralibus habendam, ut eorum aliqui in Ecclesiis illis
semper adsint, and personaliter resideant. Ac quo haec omnia melius peragantur,
Episcopi, vel alii ad quos per Ecclesiae statuta vel ordinationes pertinet, in
suis respective Ecclesiis diligenter providebunt.

Vt Decani and Canonici in Ecclesiis Cathedrabus suis vicibus conciones habeant.
CUm Beneficium propter Officium conferri debeat, aequum existimamus, ut
Ecclesiarum Cathedralium Decani and Canonici omnes and singuli, qui in sacris
ordinibus sunt constituti, and ad Conciones habendas in Ecclesiis suis
Cathedralibus, de Jure, Statutis, Ordinationibus, aut laudabili consuetudine
illius Ecclesiae tenentur, in personis suis propriis eas praestent, nec vicaria
in ea re opera utantur, nisi ex causa aegritudinis, aut alia legitima impediti,
Concanonicum suum, vel alium in Theologia eruditum ac ad concionandum
authoritate sufficienti approbatum sua vice substituant. Quod si qui hujusmodi
Decani aut Canonici officium ea in re neglexerint, per Episcopum vel eos ad
quos jurisdictio pertinet, quoad se debite correxerint suspendantur.

De moderandis indulgentiis pro celebratione matrimonii absque trina bannorum
denunciatione.
QUandoquidem honestae, clarae, ac illustris conditionis homines, sive urgente
aliqua necessitate, sive aliis non contemnendis rationibus, matrimonium
aliquando celebrandi causas habere possunt, facultate sibi de Bannis
matrimonialibus aut non omnino, aut semel iterumve denunciandis indulta, sine
aliquo gravi scandalo seu detrimento: Idcirco ad evitanda generaliter quae hac
in part notantur incommoda, visum est caveri ne ullae facultates sive
Indulgentiae de celebrando absque bannis matrimonio concedantur, nisi idonea
cautio prius sub hisce conditionibus ineatur: nimirum, primo quod nullum postea
constabit impedimentum praecontractus, consanguinitatis, affinitatis, vel
ullius alterius legitimae causae cujuscunque ratione.

Secundo, quod eo tempore quo ejusmodi facultas sive indulgentia concedetur,
nulla controversia, lis seu querela mota est, vel dependet coram aliquo Judice
Ecclesiastico aut civili, de ejuscemodi legitimo impedimento matrimonii inter
hujusmodi personas contrahendi aut contracti: Ac tertio, quod ad nuptiarum
solemnizationem non accedent, nisi assensu and expresso consensu parentum sive
tutorum prius impetrato: Et ulterius quod matrimonii celebratio public ac
tempestive in facie Ecclesiae fiet. Cujus quidem cautionis formula seu exemplar
in scriptis concipietur, ac unicuique Episcopo in sua cujusque Diocoesi
imitanda proponetur.

Praeterea adjiciendum putamus, ne cuiquam liceat Episcopalem dignitatem non
obtinenti (Commissario ad facultates, ac Vicariis generalibus Archiepiscopi and
Episcoporum, sede plena: and sede vacant Custodibus Spiritualitatis ac
Ordinariis, Episcopalem jurisdictionem de Jure exercentibus, in suis
jurisdictionibus re^pective exceptis) licentiam celebrandi matrimonia sine
bannis concedere: Ea vero duntaxat per se, ac sub manuum suarum subscriptione,
non per Deputatos aut Surrogatos suos, nec aliis quam suae jurisdictioni
subditis concedatur. Nulli autem cujuscunque sexus, dignitatis aut ordinis (in
parentum seu gubernatorum cura and regimine existenti) concedatur, nisi prius
constiterit de expresso consensu parentum vel gubernatorum suorum (si forte
parents excesserint e vita) idque parentum significatione, aut gubernatorum
Judici personaliter facta: vel Chirographis ipsorum, qu^bus fidem habendam esse
non putamus, nisi per nuncios honestae conditionis and famae illaesae
mittantur, qui fidem faciant se de parentum aut gubernatorum manu Chirographa
hujusmodi recepisse veris nominibus ac cognominibus per hujusmodi nuncios
designandorum: Cujus Chirographi exhibitionis, ac Juramenti per nuncium
praestiti actum conscribi volumus. Nec vero aliis concedantur hujusmodi
indulgentiae, quam illustris and clarae conditionis hominibus, nisi urgens
necessitas intercesserit, eaque Judici cognita fuerit.

Praeterea in ipso dispensationis sive Licentiae tenore, Ecclesia habitationis
sive commorationis alterius contrahentium, vel parentum and gubernatorum suorum
exprimatur, and remous diei etiam congruum, nempe inter horas octavam and
duodecimam ante meridiem assignetur.

Nec sine indulgentia a competente Judice concessa, Minister aliquis
matrimonium celebret, nisi trina bannorum denunciatione (per legitima
intervalla) interveniente, sub poena constitutionibus Provincialibus
praescripta.

Proviso semper, quod quicunque contra hanc ordinationem deliquerit, ab
executione officii per superiorem per sex integros menses suspendetur: and
licentia hujusmodi viribus car^bit, and pro nulla quoad poenam personis
clandestinas nuptias celebrantibus imponendam habebitur.

De Sententiis divortii non temere ferendis.
ET quia matrimoniales causae inter majores hucusque semper habitae suerunt:
Idcirco cum de matrimoniis in Judiciis disceptatur, cautius agi oportet,
praesertim vero cum matrimonium in Ecclesia solemnizatum, pretextu aliquo
separari, vel nullum pronunciari postuletur, aequum igitur visum est.

Primum ut in hujusmodi divortiorum and nullitatis matrimonii processibus,
deliberate procedatur, ac quantum fieri poterit, rei veritas, testium
depositionibus, aliisque probationibus legitimis eruatur, nec partium
confessioni (quae in hiis causis saepe fallax est) temere confidatur.

Tum ut nullae posthac sententiae vel separationis a thoro and mensa, vel
nullitatis matrimonii ferantur, nisi public, ac pro tribunali, and de scientia
and consensu vel Archiepiscopi, infra Provinciam suam, vel Episcopi infra
propriam diocoesim, Decani de Arcubus, Judicis Audientiae Cantuariensis, aut
Vicariorum generalium, aliorumve Officialium principalium, vel sede vacant
Custodum spiritualitatis, aut aliorum Ordinariorum, quibus de Jure competit in
suis respective Jurisdictionibus ac Curiis, atque inter suae jurisdictionis
subditos tantum, Deinde ut in Sententiis quando ad separationem Thori and
mensae tantum interponuntur, monitio and prohibitio fiat, ut a partibus ab
invicem segregatis cast vivatur, nec ad alias nuptias alterutra vivente
convoletur: Denique quo postremum illud firmius observetur, sententia
separationis non antea pronunciabitur, quam qui eam postulaverint, cautionem
fide jussoriam sufficientem interposuerint, se contra monitionem and
prohibitionem nihil commissuros.

Judex autem qui sententiam separationis seu divortii tulerit, and praemissa
omnia non praestiterit, per tres integros menses ab executione Officii sui per
Diocoesanum suum suspendetur: Et sententia separationis contra formam
praedictam lata, pro nulla ad omnem Juris effectum habebitur, ac si omnino lata
non fuisset.

De excessibus circa excommunicationem reformandis.
QUia Excommunicationis usus in Ecclesia perpetuae legis vigorem jam obtinuit,
atque in omni jurisdictione Ecclesiastica exercenda hucusque retinetur, ideo
absque grandi mutatione totius ejusce jurisdictionis and plurimarum hujus regni
legum innovari vel alterari nequit: Nihilominus ut Excommunicatio (quae
authoritatis ac disciplinae Ecclesiasticae quasi nervus quidam, ac vinculum
habenda est) ad pristinum suum usum, decus and dignitatem reducatur: Cautum est
ut quotiescunque censura ista in immediatam poenam cujusvis notoriae haereseos,
schismatis, symoniae, perjurii, usurae, incestus, adulterii, seu gravioris
alicujus criminis venerit infligenda, sententia ipsa vel per Archiepiscopum,
Episcopum, Decanum, Archidiaconum vel Praebendarium (modo sacris ordinibus and
Ecclesiastica jurisdictione praeditus fuerit) in propria persona
pronunciabitur, una cum ejusmodi frequentia and assistentia quae ad majorem rei
authoritatem conciliandam conducere videbitur.

Denique quod unusquisque Vicarius generalis, Officialis, seu Commissarius, qui
ordines Ecclesiasticos non susceperit eruditum aliquem Presbyterum sibi
accerset and associabit, qui sufficienti authoritate vel ab ipso Episcopo in
jurisdictione sua, vel ab Archidiacono (Presbytero existente) in jurisdictione
sua munitus, idque ex praescripto ipsius Judicis tunc praesentis
excommunicationis sententiam pro contumacia denunciabit.

Volumus etiam, ut sicut constitutum est, ejusmodi excommunicationem per
Ministrum Ecclesiae denunciari, ita ipse Judex de absolutione ipsius rei post
satisfactionem suam peractam, eundem Ministrum certiorem faciet, qui eandem
absolutionem populo public denunciabit: ac interim quod been licebit, dicto
ministro reum a sacris arcere and repellere, tanquam in Ecclesiam minime
recipiendum, donec ejusmodi certificatorium ab ipso Judice exhibuerit.

De Recusantibus, and aliis excommunicatis public denunciandis.
CUrent Ordinarii locorum, ut tam excommunicati ex eo quod divinis precibus
infra hoc regnum Angliae publica authoritate stabilitis interesse pertinaciter
recusaverint, quam ij etiam qui propter aliam quamcunque causam legitimam
excommunicationis sententia innodati Fuerint, nisi infra tres continuos menses
post latam excommunicationis sententiam se emendaverint, and absolutionis
beneficium obtinuerint, singulis sex mensibus sequentibus, in Ecclesia cum
parochiali, tum etiam Cathedrali Diocoesis in qua habitant, pro excommunicatis
public denuncientur. Teneantur etiam Ordinarii praedicti de praemissis omnibus
and singulis quolibet anno infra Festa Sancti Michaelis and Natalis Domini,
Archiepiscopum hujus Provinciae in scriptis certiorem facere.

De moderanda solennis poenitentiae communitatione.
NE qua fiat posthac solennis poenitentiae commutatio, nisi rarioribus
gravioribusque de causis, atque adeo cum ipsi Episcopo constiterit, eam esse ad
reum reconciliandum and reformandum saniorem and tutiorem rationem.

Deinde quod mulcta illa pecuniaria vel in relevamen pauperum ejusdem
paroeciae, vel in alios pios usus erogetur, idque Ecclesiae solenniter and
fideliter approbetur and innotescat.

Quod si vero crimen fuerit notorium, ac publicum, Reus ipse vel in propria sua
persona public in Ecclesia poenitentiam suam minime fictam profitendo, laesae
Ecclesiae satisfaciet, vel Ecclesiae minister in praesentia ipsius rei, palam e
suggestu ejus submissionem, and peonitentiae suae coram Ordinario suo
peractionem, atque etiam in verae suae resipiscentiae Testimonium, quantam
pecuniarum summam in usus supradictos erogandam reddiderit, denunciabit.

Quicunque vero absque Episcopi Diocoesani notitia poenitentiam commutaverit,
aut pecuniam ratione commutationis hujusmodi solutam in alios usus quam supra
est expressum converterit, vel aliter praesentem hanc constitutionem
violaverit: Is ab executione Officii sui per eundem Diocoesanum per tres
integros menses suspendetur.

De Feodis quae Officiariis Ecclesiasticis and eorum ministris debentur.
CAutum insuper volumus, quod neque alia, neque majora Feoda ab Episcopo,
Ordinario, Archidiacono, vel eorum ministris deinceps ulla de causa
percipiantur, quam ea, quae incunte hoc regnum regia nunc Majestate percipi
solebant: Quodque tabula quaedam singulorum hujusmodi Feodorum summas
continens, in quolibet Consistorio ante Festum Sancti Johannis Baptistae
proxime venturum figatur, cujus exemplar manu ipsius Ordinarii subsignatum
intra tempus praedictum ad Archiepiscopum transmittetur.

Jam vero quia dubium esse potest, quaenam certa Feoda pro singulis negotiis
expediendis, in singulis respective foris Ecclesiasticis quadraginta abhinc
annis percipiebantur, nisi quae usus frequentior succedentibus ab eo tempore
annis monstraverit, atque approbaverit: Ideo decernendum putamus ut citra
ultimum diem mensis Maij proxime sequentem Episcopus quilibet, vel sede aliqua
Episcopali vacant, Custos spiritualitatis ibidem curet, tabulam manu Jus
dicentis ejusque registrarii subscriptam public figi, vel in loco quolibet ubi
Jus ab illo dicetur, vel alias public in ejusdem jurisdictionis Archivo, ita
ut quivis ejusdem tabulae inspiciendae facultatem habeat: Quae quidem tabula in
se continebit separatas summas singulorum Feodorum, quae tam a Judice, quam a
singulis aliis Officiariis ac ministris ejusdem Curiae frequentius ac usitatius
ab initio regni dictae Serenissimae Reginae usque ad decimum octavum Majestatis
suae annum percipi consueverunt: Curabit praeterea quilibet Episcopus, vel sede
vacant Custos spiritualitatis, ut quilibet Judex hujusmodi citra ultimum diem
praefati mensis Maij Episcopo suo, vel Custodi spiritualitatis fidele and
auctenticum exemplar tabulae Feodorum praemissorum in Archivis Episcopi
custodiendum tradat: Qui vero contra fecerit, is ab executione officii sui per
Ordinarium suum immediate superiorem eo usque suspendetur, donec praemissa modo
and forma superius specificatis perfecerit.

Quorum omnium exemplarium, singuli Episcopi Provinciae Cantuariensis vel
Custodes spiritualitatis, fidele and auctenticum Instrumentum in pergameno
conscriptum, ad Archiepiscopum citra ultimum diem mensis Octobris proxime
futurum transmittent.

Poena vero cujusque Officiarii, ac Ministri majora Feoda quam quae in
hujusmodi tabulis respective exprimentur percipientis, suspensio erit per sex
menses ab executione officii sui per Ordinarium suum infligenda, vel Ordinario
negligente aut id facere omittente, per Archiepiscopum, qui alium delinquentis
loco interim deputabit.

Proviso semper, quod si alicubi dubium fuerit quae Feoda usque ad praedictum
decimum octavum regiae Mejestatis annum usitatissime percepta fuerint: Tum ea
Feoda pro legitimis habebuntur quae per Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem sub manus
suae subscriptione approbabuntur: nisi statuta hujus regni Angliae jam antea
aedita, alia in quocunque casu Feoda express praestituerint.

Proviso insuper, quod neque Archiepiscopo neque Episcopo, vel direct, vel in
direct aliquam pecuniarum summam pro admittendis ad sacros ordines hominibus
accipere licebit, idque sub poena Juris.

De excessibus Apparitorum reformandis.
PRaeterea quoniam excessibus and gravaminibus quae per Apparitores inferri
dicuntur, remedium cupimus adhibere opportunum, videtur ut Apparitorum
multitudo, quantum fieri poterit, restringatur; Non igitur licebit Episcopis
vel Archidiaconis, eorumve Vicariis seu Officialibus, aliisque inferioribus
Ordinariis deputare and habere plures Apparitores, jurisdictionibus suis
respective inservientes, quam ante viginti annos praeteritos, vel ipsi vel
praedecessores sui habere consueverunt, qui omnes per se suum fideliter
exequantur officium, Nec per nuncios aut substitutos quocunque quaesito color,
sua vice mandatorum executiones demandent, aut permittant, nisi ex causa ab
ordinario illius loci prius cognita and approbata. Tum ut promotorum Officii,
vel denunciatorum personas omnino non sustineant, Feoda ampliora vel majora,
quam quae his constitutionibus superius statuuntur, non exigant.

Quod si plures quam superius est expressum deputati, vel illorum aliqui
premissa violaverint, deputantes si Episcopi existant, moniti per superiorem
supernumerarios dimittant. Inferiores vero Episcopis Ordinarii, ab executione
Officii suspendantur, donec hujusmodi deputatos amoverint, deputati autem ipsi
ab Apparitorum Officio moveantur perpetuo: Et si amoti non desistant, tanquam
contumaces Canonicis censuris coerceantur.

Praeterea in causis Officii and correctionis ne quae fiant Citationes
generales (quae vulgo Quorum nomina dicuntur) nisi parts citandae veris
nominibus expressis per registrarium in ipsa schedula citationi annexa, and
sigillo munita scribantur: eademque schedula jus dicentis manu subscribatur,
sub poena coertionis ecclesiasticae per Diocoesanum delinquenti infligenda.

De Registris in Ecclesiis salve Custodiae committendis.
ET quia Registra in ecclesiis (quorum permagnus usus est) fideliter volumus
custodiri: Primum statuendum putamus, ut in singulis visitationibus admoneantur
ministri, and oeconomi ecclesiarum de injunctionibus regiis ea in re
diligentius observandis.

Deinde ut libri ad hunc usum destinati, quo tutius reservari and ad
posteritatis memoriam propagari possint, ex pergameno sumptibus parochianorum
in posterum conficiantur: lisque non modo ex veteribus libris cartace is
transumpta nomina eorum, qui regnante serenissima Domina nostra Elizabetha, aut
baptismatis aqua abluti, aut matrimonio copulati, aut ecclesiasticae sepulturae
Beneficio affecti sint, suo ordine sumptibus parochianorum inscribantur: Sed
eorum etiam, qui in posterum baptizati, vel matrimonio conjuncti aut sepulti
fuerint.

Ac ne quid vel dolo commissum, vel omissum negligenter redarguatur, Quae per
singulas hebdomadas in hisce libris inscripta nomina fuerint, ea singulis
diebus Dominicis post preces matutinas aut vespertinas finitas, aperte ac
distinct per ministrum legantur, die ac mense quibus singula gesta sunt
sigillatim adjectis.

Postquam autem paginam aliquam integram multorum nominum inscriptio
compleverit, tum ministri, tum Gardianorum ipsius parochiae subscriptionibus
volumus eam communiri.

Idemque in transumptis ex veteribus libris cartaceis, paginis singulis fieri,
sed diligenti, ac fideli prius habita collatione: neque vero in unius cujusquam
custodia librum illum, sed in Cista publica, eaque trifariam obserata
reservandum putamus, ita ut neque sine ministro Gardiani, nec fine utrisque
Gardianis minister quicquam possit innovare.

Postremum est, ut exemplar quotannis cujusque anni auctae nominum
inscriptionis ad Episcopi Diocoesani registrum per Gardianos infra mensem post
Festum Paschatis transmittatur, and sine feodo ullo recipiatur, atque in
Archivis Episcopi fideliter custodiatur.

Quicunque vero in praemissis corumve aliquo deliquerit, is ut delicti qualitas
Jusque postulaverit puniatur.

QUae omnia Capitula sive Constitutiones, omniaque and singula in eisdem
contenta, Regia Majestas per suas Literas Patentes gerentes dat. apud
West-monasterium decimo octavo die Januarii, anno regni sui quadragesimo,
ratificavit, confirmavit ac stabilivit, ipsaque ab omnibus regni sui subditis
utriusque Provinciae, Cantuariensis and Eboracensis, quatenus eorum aliquem
concernunt, diligenter exequenda, ac observanda authoritate sua regia
proposuit, promulgavit, and per easdem Literas Patentes sic per eos observari
praecepit, injunxit and mandavit, prout in eisdem literis Patentibus Sigillo
magno Angliae sigillatis before liquet and apparet.

EXEMPLARIA Licentiae Seu FACULTATIS Matrimonii, absque trina Bannorum
promulgatione celebrandi in fingulis Episcopatibus observanda.
Licentia ubi uterque vel alter contrahentium sub parentum vel gubernatorum
potestate existit.
R Permissione divina L. Episcopus: Dilectis nobis in Christo D. C. Parochiae
de B, filio naturali and legitimo I. C. Parochiae de F. generoso, and N. O.
puellae, filiae naturali and legitimae B. O. Parochiae de M. nostrarum L.
Diocoeseos and Jurisdictionis, salutem: cum vos (uti asseritur) ad
solemnizationem matrimonii very and legitimi de expresso consensu and assensu
parentum and gubernatorum vestrorum, ac utriusque vestrum procedere
decreveritis: Illudque in facie Ecclesiae cum ea qua fieri poterit matura
celeritate solemnizari facere and obtinere magnopere desideretis: Nos volentes
ut honesta haec vestra desideria debitum celerius consequantur effectum: Vt
igitur matrimonium hujusmodi in Ecclesia de F. (exprimendo Ecclesiam alterius
contrahentium, vel parentum aut gubernatorum suorum) per Rectorem, Vicarium seu
Curatum ejusdem Ecclesiae Bannis matrimonialibus unica vice tempore
solemnizationis ejusdem matrimonii (uti moris est) public editis, libere and
licite solemnizari, facere, and obtinere, possitis and valeatis, post cautionem
fidejussoriam sufficientem ex part vestra interpositam, juxta Constitutiones
authoritate Regia nuper editas: Dummodo vobis ratione consanguinitatis,
affinitatis, praecontractus, vel alterius causae cujuscunque de Jure prohibitae
nullum legitimum in ea part obstiterit impedimentum, nec ulla lis,
controversia, seu querela mota fit vel pendeat coram aliquo Judice
Ecclesiastico vel civili de matrimonio aliquo contracto vel allegato cum
alterutro vestrum, and Ministro ecclesiae praedictae prius constiterit, vos ad
hujusmodi matrimonii celebrationem accedere de and cum expresso consensu
parentum vel gubernatorum vestrorum, ac modo matrimonii hujusmodi celebratio
public in ecclesia de F. praedict. fiat inter horas octavam and duodecimam
antemeridianas, absque tamen prejudicio Ministri ecclesiae de M. ubi dicta N.
O. Parochiana existit, Licentiam and Facultatem tam vobis contrahentibus, quam
Rectori, Vicario aut Curato Ecclesiae praedictae defignatae matrimonium
hujusmodi inter vos solemnizandi sub modo et forma superius specificatis, juxta
ritus Libri Publicarum Precum authoritate Parliamenti in ea part editi and
stabiliti, nec non omnibus aliis Christi fidelibus eidem solemnizationi
interessendi, ex certis causis legitimis and rationalibus per nos approbatis,
quatenus in nobis est, and Jura regni patiuntur in hac part, benign
concedimus and impertimur per praesentes.

Proviso semper, quod si alteruter vestrum clarioris aut illustrioris
conditionis sit quam nobis suggestum est, and quam ex cognomine et additamento
in hiis literis insertis colligi facile potest, aut si aliqua fraus in posterum
appareat vel falsitatis nobis suggestae, vel suppress veritatis tempore hujus
Licentiae obtentae: Tunc haec Licentia nostra irrita sit ad omnem Juris
effectum ac si omnino concessa non fuisset: Et eo casu inhibemus quibusvis
Ministris (modo paermissorum aliquod eis innotuerit) ne ad solemnizationem
dicti matrimonii procedant, nisi nobis, aut Vicario nostro in spiritualibus
Generali prius consultis: In cujus rei testimonium, etc.

The Minister shall not solemnize this marriage, without the consent of their
Parents or Governors, who are hereby licensed to marry.

SI utraque pars contrahens in viduitate existens ad secundas nuptias convolare
facultatem petat, tum omnes clausulae parentum consensum requirentes omitti
possunt, sed Parochiae utriusque contrahentis in Licentia exprimendae sunt, ac
Parochia ubi matrimonium celebrabitur, designanda.

LONDINI, Anno Domini. 1597.

CONSTITUTIONES SIVE CANONES ECCLESIASTICI, Per Episcopum LONDINENSEM,

Praesidem Synodi pro CANTUARIENSI Provincia, ac reliquos Episcopos, and Clerum
ejusdem Provinciae ex Regia authoritate tractati, and conclusi

In ipsorum Synodo inchoata Londini, Anno Salutis millesimo, sexcentesimo
tertio, regnique Serenissimi Principis, Clementissimi Domini nostri IACOBI Dei
gratia Angliae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regis primo, and Scotiae tricesimo
septimo:

Ab eadem Regia Majestate deinceps approbati, ratihabiti, ac confirmati,
ejusdemque authoritate sub magno Sigillo Angliae promul^ti, per utramque
Provinciam tam Cantuariensem quam Eboracensem diligenter observandi.

LONDINI, Excudebat JOHANNES NORTON, Serenissimae Regiae Majestatis in Latinis,
Graecis, and Hebraicis Typographus. Anno 1604.

CONSTITUTIONUM Capita and Contenta.
De Ecclesia Anglicana.
1 SVprema in Ecclesiam Anglicanam authoritas Regiae Majestati asserenda. 2
Regii in Ecclesiam Anglicanam primatus impugnatores coerciti. 3 Ecclesia
Anglicana, Orthodoxa. 4 Divini cultus ratio in Ecclesia Anglicana stabilita,
pia and Orthodoxa. 5 Doctrinae Articuli in Ecclesia Anglicana stabiliti, pii
and Orthodoxi. 6 Caeremoniarum in Ecclesia Anglicana obtinentium usus, pius and
licitus. 7 Ecclesiae Anglicanae administratio, verbo divino consona. 8 Cleri
ordinandi ratio in Ecclesia Anglicana, verbo divino consona. 9 Authors
schismatis ac dissidii ab Ecclesiae Anglicanae communione coerciti. 10
Schismaticorum in Ecclesia Anglicana fautores coerciti. 11 Conventiculorum in
Ecclesia Anglicana propugnatores coerciti. 12 Ordinationum in conventiculis
conditarum propugnatores coerciti.
De Liturgia publica, and Sacramentorum administratione.
13 LIturgia publica, and reliqua pietatis exercitia diebus sacris celebranda.
14 Liturgiae publicae praescriptus Canon diebus sacris observandus. 15 Litania
diebus Mercurii and Veneris recitanda. 16 Liturgiae publicae praescriptus Canon
in Academiis observandus. 17 Inter Liturgiae publicae celebrationem
Superpellicea, and Epomides in Academiis adhibendae. 18 Inter Liturgiae
publicae celebrationem reverentia solennis adhibenda. 19 Inter Liturgiae
publicae celebrationem otiosi ab ecclesiae ambitu repellendi. 20 Panis and
vinum in sacrae Coenae usum paranda. 21 Coenae trina perceptio quotannis
indicta. 22 Coenae administrationem solennis indictio praeire jussa. 23 Coenae
usus frequentior Academicis indictus, and Coenae utentibus genuum flexio
injuncta. 24 Coenae in festis solennibus administratio in Ecclesiis
Cathedralibus indicta, and Coenam administrantibus Caparum usus injunctus. 25
Vestis lineae and Epomidum usus, Coena non administrata, in Ecclesiis
Cathedralibus injunctus. 26 Notorii peccati consuetudine infames a sacra Coena
repellendi. 27 Schismatici a Coenae communione arcendi. 28 Extranei a Coenae
communione repellendi. 29 Parents in liberorum suorum Baptismate, and pueri
Coenae Dominicae incapaces, Susceptores esse prohibiti. 30 Crucis in Baptismo
caeremonia explicata.
De Ministris, eorumque ordinatione and functione.
31 JEjunia Quatuor Temporum Ministrorum ordinationi decreta. 32 Vtrumque
ordinem eodem die non conferendum. 33 Neminem sine certo titulo ordinandum. 34
Certae conditiones in ordinandis requisitae. 35 Neminem, nisi praevio solenni
examine, ordinandum. 36 Neminem, nisi praevia trium Articulorum subscriptione,
ordinandum. 37 Ordinatis, dioecesin mutantibus, subscriptio coram Episcopo
Dioecesano iteranda. 38 Ordinati post subscriptionem praevaricantes a
Ministerio removendi. 39 Ordinati, sine congruo testimonio ac examine, in
Beneficia non instituendi. 40 Instituendi in Beneficia Simoniae susspicionem
solenni jurejurando jussi aver^ere. 41 Beneficiorum pluralitas parcius
dispensanda, ac de dispensatorum residentia cavendum. 42 Cathedralium
Ecclesiarum Decani ad congruam residentiam tenentur. 43 Decani and Prebendarii
in Ecclesiis Cathedralibus residentes ad sedulam concionandi diligentiam
tenentur. 44 Praebendarii Beneficiati ad congruam in Beneficiis suis
residentiam tenentur. 45 Beneficiati concionatores, in Beneficiis suis
residentes, ad jugem concionandi industriam tenentur. 46 Beneficiati non
concionatores vicariam concionatoris operam jubentur singulis mensibus
adhibere. 47 Beneficiati, a Beneficiis fuis legitime absentes, Curatum
concionatorem jubentur adhibere. 48 Ministri, nisi ex Episcopi vel Ordinarii
approbatione, pro Curatis non admittendi. 49 Ministris ad concionandum non
admissis glossae and paraphrases in publica scripturarum lectione interdictae.
50 Concionatores adventitii absque legitima missione ad concionandum non
admittendi. 51 Advenae concionatores, nisi authentico testimonio commendati, ad
concionandum in Ecclesiis Cathedralibus non admittendi. 52 Concionatorum
advenarum nomina in librum referenda. 53 Concionatorum mutuis oppositionibus
pulpita non patebunt. 54 Concionatores schismatici licentiis suis mulctati. 55
Precationis formula, a concionatoribus in concionum suarum ingressu imitanda.
56 Ministris mere concionatoribus precum publicarum lectio, and Sacramentorum
administratio bina annuatim injuncta. 57 A Ministris non concionatoribus
Sacramenta efficaciter administrari. 58 Ministris sacra peragentibus lineae
vestis, and Epomidum usus injunctus. 59 Catechizandi diligentia Ministris
injuncta. 60 Confirmationis solennitas in triennali Episcoporum visitatione
celebranda. 61 Catechumeni Episcopo visitanti per Ministrum ad Confirmationem
sistendi. 62 Ministri sine bannis ri^e indictis, vel legitime dispensatis
matrimonium celebrare prohibiti. 63 Ministri in locis exemptis sine bannorum
justa indictione, vel dispensatione legitima matrimonium celebrare prohibiti.
64 Feriae a Ministris solenniter indicendae. 65 Recusantes and Excommunicati a
Ministris solenniter denunciandi. 66 Recusantium conversio a Ministris sedulo
elaboranda. 67 Aegrotantes a Ministris sedulo visitandi. 68 Ministri Baptismum,
aut Sepulturam denegare vetiti. 69 Ministri Baptismum in articulo necessitatis
differ vetiti. 70 Ministri Baptizatorum, Nubentium, and Sepultorum registrum
conservare jussi. 71 Ministri Concionum and Coenae Dominicae publicam
religionem in privatas aedes invehere, prohibiti. 72 Ministri publica jejunia,
prophetias appellatas, and exorcismos privato ausu celebrare prohibiti. 73
Ministri conventicula privata conciliare prohibiti. 74 Ministris in vestitu
gravitas praecepta. 75 Vitae sobrietas Ministris praecepta. 76 Ministris a
vocatione sua resilire interdictum.
De Ludimagistris.
77 PVblice vel privatim injussu Ordinarii docere prohibitum. 78 Curati ad
docendum habiles ab Ordinario aliis praeferendi. 79 Ludimagistrorum officia.
De Ecclesiis and rebus Ecclesiasticis.
80 LIbri sacri in Ecclesiis parandi. 81 Baptisteria in Ecclesiis paranda. 82
Mensae in sacrae Coenae usum in Ecclesiis parandae. 83 Pulpita idonea in
Ecclesiis paranda. 84 Cistae ad eleemosynarum custodiam in Ecclesiis
comparandae. 85 Ecclesiae sartae tectae conservandae. 86 Ecclesiae de tertio in
tertium annum perlustrandae, and earum defectus Regiis Commissariis intimandi.
87 Terrarum, and peculiorum ad Ecclesias spectantium inventaria conficienda,
and in Episcoporum Archivis asservanda. 88 Ecclesiarum religio prophanis usibus
non polluenda
De Ecclesiarum Oeconomis and Inquisitoribus.
89 OEconomorum electio, and rerum Ecclesiasticarum procuratio. 90 Inquisitorum
sive Assistentium electio, eorumque cum Oeconomis officii communitas.
De Clericis Parochialibus.
91 CLericos Parochiales eligendi jus Ministro cedit.
Curiae Ecclesiasticae ad Archiepiscopi jurisdictionem spectantes.
92 TEstamentorum probatio, justa Bonorum Notabilium summa constante,
praerogativarum Curiae duntaxat competit. 93 Testamentorum probatio, justa
Bonorum Notabilium summa non comparente, Ordinariis vindicatur. 94 In Curias de
Arcubus and Audientiae extra proprium territorium nemo citandus. 95 Duplices
Querelae, nisi justi gravaminis facta fide, in Curiis Archiepiscopi non
concedendae. 96 Inhibitiones in causis instantiae absque Advocati subscriptione
non concedendae. 97 Inhibitiones in causis correctionis, nisi gravamine Judici
prius cognito, non concedendae. 98 Inhibitiones schismaticis, nisi
subscribentibus, non concedendae. 99 Intra gradus prohibitos matrimonium
contractum, ipso jure nullum. 100 Minores altero and vicesimo anno absque
parentum consensu matrimonium contrahere prohibiti. 101 Facultates pro Bannis
omittendis per quos, and quibus sint indulgendae. 102 In facultatibus pro
Bannorum omissione concedendis cautio fidejussoria interponenda, and sub quibus
conditionibus. 103 Eaedem conditiones ob majorem cautelam jurejurando firmatae.
104 Parentum consensus viduis contrahentibus remissus. 105 Pro conjugio
dirimendo nuda partium confessio non audienda. 106 Sententiae divortii and
separationis non nisi pro tribunali ferendae. 107 Separatis, eorum altero
superstite, nova copula interdicta. 108 Sanctio in Judices contra praemissa
delinquentes.
Curiae Ecclesiasticae ad Episcoporum, and Archidiaconorum jurisdictionem
spectantes.
109 PEccata and scandala notoria in Curiis Ecclesiasticis denuntianda. 110
Schismatici in Curiis detegendi. 111 Precum Divinarum perturbatores in Curiis
detegendi. 112 Puberes in festo Paschatis non Communicantes in Curiis
detegendi. 113 Peccata notoria Ministris jus est denuntiare, privatim confessa
retegere, nefas. 114 Recusantes per Ministros in Curiis detegendi. 115 Ne
Ministris aut Oeconomis fraudi sit criminosorum detectio. 116 Oeconomi ad binas
tantum detegendi vices annuatim tenentur. 117 Oeconomi, binis detegendi vicibus
debite perfuncti, non sunt de reliquo in Curiam vocandi. 118 Anni superioris
Oeconomi detectiones suas tenentur exhibere, priusquam successuri munus suum
adeant. 119 Detectionum schedulae fide bona, non perfunctorie and pro forma
conficiendae. 120 Nequa citatio, nisi expressis citandorum nominibus, e Curiis
emittatur. 121 Nequis in pluribus Curiis super eodem crimine cogatur
respondere. 122 Sententiae pro Ministris a beneficio vel officio removendis non
nisi per Episcopum pronunciandae. 123 Actus judiciales non nisi publica, and
authentica manu expediendi. 124 Curiarum sigilla, unica. 125 Curiarum seeds,
opportuna. 126 Curiae inferiores testamenta originalia ad Episcoporum Archiva
jubentur transmittere.
De Judicibus Ecclesiasticis.
127 IVdicium Ecclesiasticorum qualitas. 128 Deputandorum qualitas.
De Procuratoribus.
129 PRocuratores, nisi de partis mandato authentico, causas attingere
prohibiti. 130 Procuratores sine consilio advocati causas retinere prohibiti.
131 Procuratores, inconsulto advocato, in causa concludere prohibiti. 132
Procuratorium in causis testamentariis juramentum prohibitum. 133 Procuratorum
vox importunior in Curiis, cohibita.
De Registrariis.
134 REgistrariorum excessus coerciti. 135 Eeodorum, quae juris Ecclesiastici
administris debentur, census debet esse statarius. 136 Statarius feodorum
census in tabulas relatus public in Consistoriis and Archivis proponendus. 137
Feoda, pro Ordinum literis, aliisque licentiis Episcopo exhibendis, tantum
dimidia (praeterquam in Prima Episcopi visitatione) persolvenda.
De Apparitoribus.
138 APparitorum excessus coerciti.
Synodorum authoritas.
139 SYnodus nationalis, Ecclesia representativa. 140 Synodi acta tam absentes,
quam praesentes obligant. 141 Synodi authoritati derogantes, coerciti.
Constitutiones sive Canones Ecclesiastici per Episcopum Londinensem, Praesidem
Synodi pro Cantuariensi Provincia, ac reliquos Episcopos and Clerum ejusdem
Provinciae ex regia authoritate tractati, and conclusi in ipsorum Synodo,
inchoata Londini Anno Salutis millesimo, sexcentesimo tertio, regnique
Serenissimi Principis, Clementissimi Domini nostri, JACOBI Dei gratia Angliae
Franciae and Hiberniae Regis primo, and Scotiae tricesimo septimo.
De Ecclesia Anglicana.
1. Suprema in Ecclesiam Anglicanam authoritas Regiae Majestati asserenda.
PRout officii nostri ratione erga Serenissimam Majestatem regiam obligamur, in
primis statuimus and ordinamus, ut Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis pro tempore
existens, omnes Episcopi hujus Provinciae, Decani item, Archidiaconi, Rectores,
Vicarii, caeterique ex Clero quicunque, tum ipsi fideliter custodiant ac
observent, tum (quantum in ipsis est) ab aliis curent observari, and custodiri
omnia and singula statuta, ac leges sancitas and constitutas pro antiqua
jurisdictione in statum Ecclesiasticum hujus regni Coronae restituenda, omnique
extranea potestate, quae eidem repugnet, exterminanda. Porro etiam ut omnes
Ecclesiasticae personae ad curam animarum constitutae, omnesque alii
concionatores and Theologici in quibuscunque ecclesiis praelectores (quantum
ingenio, cognitione, ac doctrina valebunt) pure and sincere absque omni fuco
aut dolo, singulis annis quater ad minimum public in concionibus, aliisque
homiliis, ac praelectionibus suis doceant, divulgent, enuncient, ac declarent,
usurpatam omnem and peregrinam, potestatem (utpote nullo jure divino nixam and
fundatam) justissimis de causis sublatam esse and abolitam; and propterea
nullam obedientiam aut subjectionem infra Majestatis suae regna and dominia
hujusmodi extraneae potestati cuicunque ullatenus deberi: sed authoritatem
Regiam infra regna sua Angliae, Scotiae, and Hiberniae, ac reliqua ipsius
dominia and territoria proxime and secundum Deum primam esse and supremam, cui
omnes earundem regionum tam incolae, quam indigenae fidem omnem, and
obedientiam supra aliam quamcunque in terris potestatem lege divina tenentur
exhibere.

2. Regii in Ecclesiam Anglicanam primatus impugnatores coerciti.
QUicunque in posterum affirmabit, Majestatem Regiam non habere eandem
authoritatem in causis Ecclesiasticis, quam pii Principes apud Judaeos, and
Christiani Imperatores in Primitiva Ecclesia obtinuerunt, vel Regalem ipsius in
eisdem causis primatum, hujus regni Coronae jam diu vindicatum, ac legibus
ejusdem regni in ea stabilitum, ullatenus laedere aut extenuare praesumpserit:
excommunicetur ipso facto, non nisi per Archiepiscopum restituendus, idque
postquam resipuerit, ac impios hosce errores public revocarit.

3. Ecclesia Anglicana, Orthodoxa.
QUicunque in posterum affirmabit, Ecclesiam Anglicanam, sub Regia Majestate
legibus stabilitam, non esse Orthodoxam, and Apostolicam Ecclesiam, Apostolorum
videlicet doctrinam tradentem, and astruentem: excommunicetur ipso facto, non
nisi per Archiepiscopum restituendus, idque postquam resipuerit, ac impium hunc
errorem public revocarit.

4. Divini cultus ratio in Ecclesia Anglicana stabilita, pia and orthodoxa.
QUicunque in posterum affirmabit, Liturgiae formam in Ecclesia Anglicana
legibus stabilitam, and in libro Precum publicarum, ac administrationis
Sacramentorum comprehensam, corruptum, superstitiosum, aut illicitum esse Dei
cultum, vel quicquam in se continere, quod Scripturarum canoni sit contrarium:
excommunicetur ipso facto, non nisi per Episcopum Dioecesanum, vel
Archiepiscopum restituendus, idque postquam resipuerit, ac impium hunc errorem
public revocarit.

5. Doctrinae Articuli in Ecclesia Anglicana stabiliti, pii and Orthodoxi.
QUicunque in posterum affirmabit, ullum ex triginta novem articulis, in quos
consensum est ab Archiepiscopis and Episcopis utriusque Provinciae, ac reliquo
omni Clero in Synodo Londini habita Anno Domini 1562 (ad tollendam utique
opinionum varietatem, and consensum in causa fidei firmandum, and stabiliendum)
ulla ex part superstitiosos aut erroneos existere, vel omnino ejusmodi, ut in
eorum veritatem salva conscientia subscribi nequeat: excommunicetur ipso facto,
non nisi per Archiepiscopum restituendus, idque postquam resipuerit, ac impios
hos errores public revocarit.

6. Caeremoniarum in Ecclesia Anglicana obtinentium usus, pius and licitus.
QUicunque in posterum affirmabit, Ecclesiae Anglicanae ritus ac caeremonias
legibus constitutas, impias, Antichristianas, aut superstitiosas esse, vel
denique ejus generis, ut homines pii ac religiosi, quantumvis legitima
authoritate jussi, non possint integra conscientia eas approbare, aut
observare, vel etiam (prout occasio tulerit) eisdem subscribere: excommunicetur
ipso facto, nullatenus absolvendus, priusquam resipuerit, ac impios hos errores
public revocarit.

7. Ecclesiae Anglicanae administratio, verbo divino consona.
QUicunque in posterum affirmabit, Ecclesiae Anglicanae sub Regia Majestate
regimen and disciplinam per Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Decanos, Archidiaconos,
and reliquos ad ejusdem gubernaculum constitutos, Antichristianum esse, ac
verbo divino contrarium; excommunicetur ipso facto, nullatenus absolvendus,
priusquam resipuerit, ac impium hunc errorem public revocarit.

8. Cleri ordinandi ratio in Ecclesia Anglicana, verbo divino consona.
QUicunque in posterum affirmabit, aut docebit, formam and ritum Episcopos,
Presbyteros, and Diaconos ordinandi, and inaugurandi quicquam in se continere,
quod pugnet cum Verbo divino, illosque omnes, quotquot ad eum modum Episcopi,
Presbyteri, and Diaconi ordinantur, non esse rite ordinatos, neque vel a
seipsis vel ab aliis pro Episcopis, Presbyteris, aut Diaconis habendos,
priusquam ad sacra illa officia aliam ordinationem fuerint adepti:
excommunicetur ipso facto, nullatenus absolvendus, priusquam resipuerit, ac
impios hos errores public revocarit.

9. Authors schismatis ac dissidii ab Ecclesiae Anglicanae communione coerciti.
QUicunque in posterum a Sanctorum Communione, qualiter in Ecclesia Anglicana
existit ex Apostolorum regulis approbata, seipsos segregabunt, and novo
fraternitatis cujusdam foedere consociati, Christianos omnes, quotquot
doctrinae, disciplinae, ritibus ac caeremoniis Ecclesiae Anglicanae se
conformes exhibent, prophanos ducent, and indignos quibuscum in Christiana
professione communicent: excommunicentur ipso facto, non nisi per
Archiepiscopum restituendi, idque postquam resipuerint, ac impios hos errores
public revocarint.

10. Schismaticorum in Ecclesia Anglicana fautores, coerciti.
QUicunque in posterum affirmabunt, tum Ministros illos, qui formae and modo
divini cultus in Ecclesia Anglicana constitutis, ac in Libro publicae Liturgiae
praescriptis recusant subscribere, tum eorum etiam sectatores alterius
Ecclesiae, quae non sit lege stabilita, nomen and titulum posse sibi merito
assumere; itemque audebunt vulgo asseverare, praetensam hanc ipsorum Ecclesiam
jamdiu ingemuisse sub onere certorum gravaminum, sibi and membris suis
supradictis impositorum per Ecclesiam Anglicanam, ac decreta and sanctiones in
eadem legibus stabilitas: excommunicentur ipso facto, nullatenus absolvendi,
priusquam resipuerint, ac impios hos errores public revocarint.

11. Conventiculorum in Ecclesia Anglicana propugnatores, coerciti.
QUcunque in posterum affirmabit, aut tuebitur, ullos conventus, coetus, aut
congregationes subditorum indigenarum infra hoc regnum existere (praeter eos,
qui ex hujus regni legibus renentur, and approbantur) qui verarum, and
legitimarum Ecclesiarum nomen possint sibi jure vendicare; excommunicetur, non
nisi per Archiepiscopum restituendus, idque postquam resipuerit, and impium
hunc errorem public revocarit.

12. Ordinationum in Conventiculis conditarum propugnatores coerciti.
QUicunque in posterum asseverabunt, licitum esse cuivis Ministrorum aut
Laicorum ordini, vel eorum alterutris simul congregatis, Canones, Decreta, aut
Constitutiones de rebus Ecclesiasticis citra Regis authoritatem condere; and
eisdem regendos and gubernandos se subjiciunt: excommunicentur ipso facto,
nullatenus absolvendi, priusquam resipuerint, and impios hos ac Anabaptisticos
errores public revocarint.

De Cultu Divino, and Sacramentorum administratione.
13. Liturgia publica, and reliqua pietatis exercitia diebus Sacris celebranda.
OMnes cujuscunque conditionis aut status personae infra Ecclesiam Anglicanam
deinceps celebrabunt diem Dominicum (vulgo diem Solis nuncupatum) caeterosque
dies Festivos, juxta regulam divinae voluntatis, and Ecclesiae Anglicanae
instituta hac in part praescripta; nimirum in audiendo Verbo Dei tam lecto,
quam praedicato, in privatis publicisque precibus faciendis, in peccatis Deo
confitendis, and eisdem emendandis, in charitate cum proximis (sicubi laesa
fuerit) reconcilianda, in sacra Communione corporis and sanguinis Dominici
frequentanda, in pauperibus juvandis, and aegrotis visitandis, piam omnem ac
sobriam coversationem interim adhibentes.

14. Liturgiae publicae praescriptus Canon diebus sacris observandus.
LIturgia publica distinct, and debita cum reverentia legetur, vel canetur in
illis diebus, and eorum vigil^s, qui in Libro precum publicarum Sacri ac
Festivi designantur, hori^que eorundem congrois, and usitatis, atque in eo
potissimum Ecclesiae cujusque loco, qui Episcopo Dioecesano, vel loci Ordinario
(ratione vel amplitudinis vel angustiae) commodissimus, ac ad populi
aedificationem maxim opportunus videbitur. Singuli etiam Ministri studiose
observabunt instituta, ritus, and caeremonias omnes, quae in dicto libro
praescribuntur, tam in sacris Scripturis legendis, ac precibus recitandis, quam
in administrandis Sacramentis, absque ulla sive materiae sive formae additione,
aut diminutione, respectu vel concionis, vel alterius causae cujuscunque.

15. Litania diebus Mercurii and Veneris recitanda.
LItania a Rectoribus, Vicariis, Ministris sive Curatis in Cathedralibus,
Collegiatis, and Parochialibus Ecclesiis ac Capellis omnibus, earumque loco
aliquo conveniente pro arbitratu Episcopi, Dioecesani, vel loci Ordinarii
recitabitur vel canetur illis temporibus, and sub ea forma, quae in libro
publicae Liturgiae praestituuntur; ac (ut restrictius loquamur) singulis diebus
Mercurii and Veneris (etiamsi non fuerint Festivi) Minister ad horas Divinis
precibus consuetas in Ecclesia aut Capella praesto erit, ac populo per sonitum
campanae convocato, Litaniam in dicto Libro praescriptam recitabit; cui singuli
patres-familias, qui praese^tim infra dimidium milliare ab Ecclesia habitant,
vel ipsi debebunt interesse, vel unum saltem de familia sua mittere idoneum qui
Ministro inter precandum assistat.

16. Liturgiae publicae praescriptus Canon in Academiis observandus.
IN omnibus utriusque Academiae Collegiis and Aulis per integram Liturgiam and
sacrae Coenae administrationem debite, and absque omni aut omissione, aut
innovatione observari volumus ordinem, formam, ac caeremonias omnes prout in
dicto publicae Liturgiae Libro praescriptae inveniuntur.

17. Inter Liturgiae publicae celebrationem Superpellicea, and Epomides in
Academiis adhibendae.
IN omnibus utriusque Academiae Collegiis and aulis Praefecti ac Socii,
caeterique Scholares and Studiosi in Ecclesiis and Capellis suis per singulos
dies Dominicos, and Festivos, eorumque vigilias tempore divinorum
superpelliceis (juxta Ecclesiae Anglicanae mores ac instituta) utentur:
quotquot vero gradum aliquem susceperint, caputia suo cujusque gradui
competentia superpelliceis suis superinduent.

18. Inter Liturgiae publicae celebrationem reverentia solennis adhibenda.
CUm divina peraguntur, vel eorum pars quaelibet, aequum est, ut condigna omnis
reverentia adhibeatur: sic enim monet Apostoli praeceptum illud, Omnia
decenter, and secundum ordinem fiant. Cui decentiae, atque ordini regulas hasce
nostras sequentes consentaneas esse judicamus. Nullus in Ecclesia vel Capella
inter rem divinam caput suum operiet, nisi ex causa infirmitatis, quo casu
pileolo, aut rica utendum censemus. Omnes cujuscunque status aut conditionis
personae humiliter in genua se inclinabunt, dum generalis Confessio, Litania
and reliquae precationes recitantur: cum autem fidei Symbolum recensetur,
stabunt erecto corpore, juxta regulas in libro publicae Liturgiae in eam partem
praefinitas. Similiter etiam nomen Domini Jesu, quoties inter divinum cultum
inciderit, congrua ac humili reverentia ab universis tum praesentibus
excipietur, prout, hactenus fieri consuevit: ut per externas hasce caeremonias
and gestus testatam faciant internam ipsorum humilitatem, Christianam
constantiam, and debitam agnitionem, quod Dominus Jesus Christus, verus and
aeternus Dei filius, unicus est mundi Salvator, in quo solo omnes
misericordiae, gratiae ac promissiones homini a Deo indultae, tam in praesentem
vitam, quam futuram, integre and in totum comprehenduntur. Nullus porro
cujuscunque tandem sexus, aetatis, aut conditionis fuerit, in Ecclesia tempore
Divini cultus in aliud quicquam intendet, quam ut quiet auscultans audiat,
observet ac intelligat, quod a Ministro legitur, praedicatur, aut
administratur, eique Confessionem, Orationem Dominicam, and Symbolum recitanti
clara voce subserviat, aliaque in publicis precibus responsa subjiciat, quae in
libro Communis Liturgiae praecipiuntur. Nullus denique preces vel concionem
ambulando, aut garriendo, seu alio quovis modo interpellabit, vel ex Ecclesia
ante easdem peractas, absque justa, aut probabili causa egredietur.

19. Inter Liturgiae publicae celebrationem otiosi ab ecclesiae ambitu
repellendi.
OEconomi Ecclesiarum, and Inquisitores sive Assistentes personas otiosas non
patientur in coemeterio, vel Ecclesiae porticu tempore Divini cultus aut
concionis desidere, sed eos vel Ecclesiam ingredi compellent, vel abscedere.

20. Panis and vinum in sacrae Coenae usum paranda.
PArochiarum omnium Oeconomi (consulto hac in part Ministro) curabunt idoneam,
pro numero communicantium, panis siliginei, vinique boni ac salubris
quantitatem, in tempus sacrae Coenae praestitutum, sumptibus parochianorum
comparari, vinumque illud ad mensam Domini afferri in oenophoro nitido, and
mundo, eoque ex stanno, si non ex metallo praestantiore.

21. Coenae trina perceptio quotannis indicta.
IN omnibus hujus regni Ecclesiis parochialibus, ac Capellis in quibus
Sacramenta sunt administranda, Coenam Dominicam a Rectore, Vicario, vel
Ministro toties, iisque temporibus celebrari volumus, ut parochiani singuli
quotannis ter ad minimum (nominatim vero in festo Paschatis) sicut in Libro
publicae Liturgiae jubentur, possint Sacramentum illud percipere. Proviso
semper, ut Minister quilibet sacram illam Coenam administraturus, ipse semper
primus communicet. Insuper siquid panis aut vini inter Coenae administrationem
afferri contigerit, illud ad Sacramenti usum vetamus adhiberi, priusquam, eodem
in menla Domini apposito, institutionis verba fuerint recitata. Porro etiam
ordinamus, ut administrans panem and vinum singulis communicantibus separatim
and per vices distribuat.

22. Coenae administrationem solennis indictio praeire jussa.
CUm Laicorum quisque ad sacrae Coenae communionem ter quotannis obligetur,
multique nihilo secius vix semel communicent: Ministris omnibus praeceptum
volumus, ut quotiescunque Sacramentum illud celebrare voluerint, parochianis
suis solenniter in Ecclesia inter preces matutinas, idque praecedente die
Dominico (quo melius veniant praeparati) id denunciare non omittant: quas
utique monitiones parochiani vicissim suscipere, ac eisdem parere sub periculo
and poena legis tenebuntur.

23. Coenae usus frequentior Academicis indictus, and Coena utentibus genuum
flexio injuncta.
IN omnibus utriusque Academiae Collegiis and Aulis Praefecti and Socii, qui
praesertim pupillos habent, sedulo prospicient, ut ipsorum pupilli omnes, and
reliqui, qui inter eos agunt, universi recte and pie educentur, ac in articulis
religionis penitus instituantur, publicamque Liturgiam and conciones diligenter
frequentent; quin etiam sacram Coenam jugiter percipiant; quam primo quoque vel
secundo cujuslibet mensis die Dominico in eisdem Collegiis and Aulis
administrandam decernimus: volumusque ut singuli eorundem Praefecti, Socii,
Scholares, reliquique studiosi, ac officiarii, and illorum quilibet famuli ac
ministri unoquoque anno quater ad minimum ejusdem siat participes, idque in
genua reverenter (ut par est) inclinati, juxta ritum in Libro publicae
Liturgiae ea in part praestitutum.

24. Coenae in festis solennibus administratio in Ecclesiis Cathedralibus
indicta, and Coenam administrantibus Caparum usus injunctus.
PEr Cathedrales omnes and Collegiatas Ecclesias sacram Coenam in festis
solennibus administrari volumus nonnunquam per Episcopum (siquidem praesens
extiterit) nonnunquam vero per Decanum, quandoque eriam per Canonicum vel
Praebendarium (Ministrum ibidem maxim eminentem) eundemque decente Capa
amictum, ac adjutum ab Evangelii and Epistolae Lectoribus (juxta Admonitiones
in septimo Elizabethae promulgatas) idque iis horis, and cum illa prorsus
limitatione, quae in Libro publicae Liturgiae praefiniuntur. Proviso semper, ut
nulla ejusmodi limitatio admittatur, cujuscunque tandem interpretationis
praetextu, quo minus singuli Decani, Guardiani, Magistri, sive Praefecti
Cathedralis cujusque and Collegiatae Ecclesiae, and cuncti etiam earundem
Praebendarii, Canonici, Vicarii, minores Canonici, Cantores, reliquique de
Ecclesiae gremio universi, si non frequentius, saltem quater omni anno
Sacramentum percipiant.

25. Superpelliceorum and Epomidum usus, Coena non administrata, in Ecclesiis
Cathedralibus indictus.
IN Cathedralibus and Collegiatis Ecclesiis, cessante Coena Dominica, satis
erit tempore Divinorum Superpelliceis duntaxat uti: nisi quod Ecclesiarum
Collegiatarum Decani, Magistri, and Praefecti, itemque Canonici, ac
Praebendarii (dummodo graduati) cum Superpelliceis Caputia gradibus suis
respective congrua inter rem Divinam gerere tenebuntur.

26. Notorii peccati consuetudine infames a sacra Coena repellendi.
NUllus Ministrorum ex grege aut Cura sua quenquam ad sacrae Coenae communionem
ullo pacto admittet, qui manifest notus erit in infami peccato impoenitenter
vivere; nec qui cum proximis suis malitiose and aperte contenderit, nisi
reconciliatio intercesserit; neque etiam Ecclesiarum Oeconomos aut Assistentes
ullos, qui cum juramentum susceperint pro omnibus iisce delictis notoriis, de
quibus particulatim jussi erunt infra suas respective parochias inquirere, bis
quolibet anno ad Ordinarium suum deferendis, non verentur tamen, spreta
juramenti sui religione (cujus alioqui fidelis executio potissima ratio
existit, per quam publica peccata, and scandala rescindi possint, and coerceri)
etiam volentes and scientes in perjurii crimen perdite, ac nefarie incurrere,
dum vel negligunt, vel recusant ex praedictis criminibus, and delictis notoriis
aliqua detegere, quae sciunt infra parochias suas esse perpetrata, vel
congregationem saltem insigniter gravare, ac offendere; licet iidem vel a
vicinis, vel a Ministro, vel etiam ab ipso Ordinario admoniti subinde fuerint,
ut conscientias suas, dicta crimina praesentando, exonerarent, neque se vellent
in horrendum illud penjurii scelus ausu tam nefario praecipitare.

27. Schismatici a Coenae communione arcendi.
MInistri, cum Coenam Domini administrant, neminem scienter ejusdem facient
participem, qui in genua non fuerit inclinatus, sub poena suspensionis. Simili
etiam poena prohibemus, ne alicui eandem distribuant, qui publicae Liturgiae
(juxta Ecclesiae Anglicanae instituta) recusat interesse; vel qui Librum
Publicarum precum ac Sacramenta administrandi, ritusve and ceremonias quaslibet
in eodem praescriptas, aut quicquam sive in Articulis, qui in Synodo anno 1562.
conclusi sunt, sive in libro de Ordinatione presbyterorum, and Episcoporum
comprehensum frequenter and notorie calumniatur; vel qui Majestatis suae
supremam in causis Ecclesiasticis authoritatem ullo dicto audet convellere, aut
laedere: nisi singuli taliter delinquentes coram Ministro, praesentibus una
Oeconomis, delicti sui poenitentiam professi, viva voce prius spoponderint (si
nesciant scribere) se deinceps in eo genere nequaqum peccaturos, vel si norint
scribere, sub chirographo suo idem promiserint; quod eorum chirographum
Minister accipiens ad Episcopum Dioecesanum, vel loci Ordinarium quamprimum
transmittet. Proviso semper, quod Ministrorum quilibet, qui a sacra Coena
aliquem arcebit (prout in praesente, vel in superiore Canone constitutum
habetur) ad partis querelam, vel Ordinarii requisitionem, talis facti sui
rationem, dicto Ordinario reddet, atque ejusdem in ea part beneplacito and
mandato acquiescet.

28. Extranei a Coenae communione repellendi.
OEconomi and Inquisitores, sive Assistentes (non minus quam Ministri) attente
observabunt, number omnes and singuli ex Parochia sua toties ad sacrae Coenae
communionem annuatim accedant, quoties hujus Regni legibus, ac nostris etiam
Constitutionibus jubentur: ac ulterius numqui extranei frequentius and
usitatius a Parochiis alienis ad Ecclesiam suam conveniant; eosque (siqui
erunt) Ministro suo indicabunt, ne forte ad Mensam Domini inter caeteros
recipiantur; quod ii omni modo prohibebunt, dictosque extraneos ad proprias
Parochiae suae Ecclesias ac Ministros dimittent, ut illic cum vicinis suis una
communicent.

29. Parents in liberorum suorum Baptismate, and pueri Coenae Dominicae
incapaces, Susceptores esse prohibiti.
Parents liberorum suorum Baptismati interesse non impellentur; neque eisdem
etiam permittetur, pro propriis infantibus ad sacrum fontem Susceptorum loco
respondere. Praeterea nulli Susceptori, aut Susceptrici licitum erit, aliis
verbis in respondendo uti, quam quae in Libro publicae Liturgiae hanc in partem
sunt praescripta; nec quisquam ad officium Susceptoris vel Susceptricis pro
parvulis Baptizandis, vel Confirmandis admittetur, qui Coenae Dominicae
particeps nondum extiterit.

30. Crucis in Baptismo caeremonia explicata.
DOlemus, praeclarissimum Majestatis suae studium and laborem, in Colloquio ad
Aulam Hamptoniensem circa signum Crucis in Baptismo (inter alia plurima)
susceptum, non meliores effectus apud multos consecutum, quin adhuc in eo
haereatur, ejusque in Baptismo usus tantopere impugnetur. Itaque quo melius
constare possit legitima hujus caeremoniae ratio, simulque ut omnis scrupulus
deinceps amoveatur, qui hominum vere religiosorum conscientias perturbare
quoquo modo possit, nos in hac causa inclytissimi Regis nostri vestigiis
insistentes, ut qui Scripturae authoritate, and Primitivae Ecclesiae exemplo in
eadem ducitur, regulas ac observationes hasce nostris synceris omnibus
Ecclesiae Anglicanae membris commendamus.

Primo, observandum est, quod etiamsi Judaei, ac Ethnici Apostolos reliquosque
Christianos irriderent, quod eum praedicarent, in eumque crederent, qui Crucis
morte esset affectus; tantum tamen aberat, ut vel Apostoli, vel reliqui
Christiani Crucis opprobrio seipsos passi sint a professione sua deterreri, ut
in eadem exultandi potius, and gloriandi animos inde sumerent.

Imo Spiritus sanctus per Apostolorum ora ipsum Crucis nomen (Judaeis utique
invisum) usque adeo honoravit, ut non modo Christum ipsum Crucifixum sub eodem
comprehenderet, sed and mortis ac Passionis Christi vires, effectus, ac merita,
una cum solatiis, fructibus, ac promissis universis, quae nos ex eisdem aut
percipimus, aut in futurum expectamus.

Secundo, honor ac dignitas Crucis nomini acquisita, etiam and signo Crucis vel
ipsa Apostolorum aetate (neque enim contrarium ostendi potest) existimationem
peperit honorificam, adeo ut Christiani hand multo post in cunctis actionibus
suis eodem uti coeperint, eo ipso palam, and aperte testatum facientes (etiam
ad stuporem Judaeorum) se minime sibi pudori ducere, quod illum agnoscerent pro
Domino and Salvatore suo, qui Crucis mortem pro ipsis pertulisset. Atque hoc
Crucis signum non modo ipsi, idque cum ostentatione quadam solebant adhibere,
quoties Judaeis passim occurrerent, sed and liberos suos, cum Baptismatis aqua
abluerentur, eodem signari faciebant, ut eos per Crucis Symbolum illius
servitio dedicarent, cujus in Baptismo collata in ipsos beneficia Crucis nomine
essent repraesentata. Atque adeo hujus signi in Baptismo usus in Primaeva
Ecclesia receptus est unamini consensu, maximoque omnium tam Graecorum, quam
Latinorum applausu. Quo quidem saeculo siquis huic signo se opposuisset,
declaratus procul dubio fuisset pro host ac inimico nominis Crucis, and
proinde meritorum Christi, quorum illi tessera and signum adeo displiceret.
Denique hujus signi usum continuum and generalem extitisse, ex multis Patrum
testimoniis perspicue declaratur.

Tertio fatendum est, Crucis signum decursu temporis in Ecclesia Romana graves
abusus pertulisse, praesertim postquam eam Papismi labes ac corruptela semel
pervaserat. Caeterum rei abusus legitimum ejusdem usum nequaquam tollit. Imo
tantum aberat, ut Ecclesia Anglicana ab Italiae, Galliae, Hispaniae, Germaniae,
aliisve similibus Ecclesiis voluerit per omnia recedere, quicquid eas sciret
tenere, aut observare, ut (quod Ecclesiae Anglicanae Apologia profitetur)
caeremonias illas cum reverentia susciperet, quas citra Ecclesiae incommodum,
ac hominum sobriorum offensionem retineri posse senserat, and in iis tantum
articulis a praedictis Ecclesiis dissentiret, in quibas eaedem ipsae tum a
pristina sua integritate prius desciverant, tum etiam ab Ecclesiis Apostolicis,
a quibus primum sunt proseminatae. Quo quidem respectu, inter alias magnae
vetustatis caeremonias, etiam and Crucis in Baptismo signum in Ecclesia
Anglicana est retentum, idque ex judicio and praxi venerabilium illorum Patrum,
magnorumque in primis Theologornm, qui regnante Edovardo sexto in eadem
claruerunt; quorum alii deinceps ob verae fidei professionem Martyrium
constanter pertulerunt, alii Reginae Mariae temporibus exulantes, ac sub
initium Regni Serenissimae Reginae nuper defunctae in Angliam reversi, pro hoc
signo semper steterunt, ejusque usum exemplo, ac praxi sua perpetuo
commendarunt. Atque hoc Ecclesiae nostrae judicium and praxis comprobata sunt
tum per censuram, que de Libro publicae Liturgiae tempore Edovardi sexti
ferebatur, tum etiam per Confesionum Harmoniam recentioribus annis publicatam:
quoniam nimirum hujus signi in Baptismo usus in Ecclesia Anglicana congruis
omnibus ac idoneis cautelis and exceptionibus contra Papisticam superstitionem
atque errorem munitus semper fuit, prout in ejusmodi casibus fieri convenit.

Primo enim Ecclesia Anglicana jam inde a Papismo abolito semper sensit ac
docuit, and hodie etiam sentit ac docet, signum Crucis in Baptismo adhibitum de
ipsius Sacramenti substantia haudquaqaum existere. Nam ut primum Minister
infantem immergens in aquam, vel ejusdem faciei aquam inspergens, haec verba
recitaverit, Baptizo te in nomine Patris and Filii and Spiritus Sancti: infans
continuo plenum and perfectum Baptismi Sacramentum consequitur, adeo ut signum
Crucis post adhibitum ad Baptismi virtutem aut perfectionem nihil adjiciat, nec
idem omissum de ejus efficacia, aut substantia quicquam detrabat,

Secundo palam est in Libro publicae Liturgiae, infantem, postquam Baptismu^
susceperit (Crucis utique signo nondum superveniente) in Christi gregem ac
Ecclesiam, tanquam perfectum ejus membrum, receptum esse, ipsius adeo Baptismi
virtute, non autem potestate aliqua, quae signo Crucis affingitur. Ita ut
propter ipsam Crucis memoriam, quae apud omnes vere in Christum credentes
plurimi semper fuit, and reliquas etiam ob causas supradictas, Ecclesia
Anglicana ejus signum in Baptizando usque retinendum censuerit, secuta nimirum
ea in re Primitivas and Apostolicas Ecclesias, atque hunc Characterem pro
licita externa caeremonia reputans and symbolo honorifico, per quod infans
illius obsequio, qui Crucis mortem subiit, in perpetuum votus esset and
mancipatus; id quod ex verbis in Libro publicae Liturgiae expressis facillime
potest perspici.

Postremo, quum usus signi hujus in Baptismo in Ecclesia Anglicana purgatus sit
ab omni Papistica superstitione ac errore, and in primariam institutionem
vindicatus; nos (freti Orthodoxis iis doctrinae regulis, de rebus mediis and
adiaphoris, quas Divino Canoni, ac Patrum antiquorum concordi sententiae
judicamus esse consentaneas) privati cujusque tum Ministri tum alterius
personae cujuscunque statuimus esse, verum ejusdem usum, publica Authoritate
praescriptum reverenter amplecti ac recipere, praesertim cum intelligant res
alioqui medias ac indifferentes naturam suam aliquo modo mutare, postquam sub
legitimi Magistratus edictum, vel interdictum venerint, neque pro cujusque
libitu praeter legem omittendas esse, cum praecipiuntur, nec cum prohibentur
observandas.

De Ministris, eorumque ordinatione ac functione.
31 Jejunia Quatuor Temporum Ministrorum ordinationi decreta.
CUm prisca Sanctorum patrum authoritas, Apostolorum exemplo freta in solenni
Ministrorum ordinatione preces ac jejunia celebranda praeceperit; iisdemque
adeo precum and jejuniorum officiis stata quaedam tempora ex professo
decreverit, in quibus duntaxat sacri Ordines essent conferendi: nos sanctum and
pium illorum institutum colentes volumus and statuimus, ut nulli in posterum
Presbyteri aut Diaconi ordinentur, nisi in diebus Dominicis immediate
sequentibus Jejunia Quatuor Temporum, vulgo Septimanas Cinerum, ad preces and
jejunia (idque hunc ipsum in usum) antiquitus institutas, atque in Ecclesia
Anglicana hodie continuatas. Quod utique fieri volumus in Ecclesia Cathedrali,
vel Parochiali, ubi Episcopus commoratur, ac tempore Divinorum, assistente non
solum Archidiacono, sed and Decano, and duobus ad minus Praebendariis, aut
(illis legitime detentis) quatuor illis gravioribus personis, quae Magistri
artium ad minimum extiterint, and pro publicis concionatoribus legitime
approbatae.

32. Vtrumque Ordinem eodem die non conferendum.
CUm (ex Patrum antiquorum sententia, and Primitivae Ecclesiae praxi) Diaconi
officium ad Ministerii dignitatem gradus quidam sit constitutus; statuimus and
ordinamus, ut nullus deinceps Episcopus aliquam cujusvis conditionis personam
(quibuscunque tandem animi dotibus commendatam) uno and eodem die Diaconum and
Presbyterum constituat; quin ut ritus ea in part praescriptus in Libro de
Episcopis, Presbyteris and Diaconis ordinandis, and inaugurandis, stricte
observetur; non quo Diaconos omnes Presbyterii aditu per annum integrum
prohibeamus (cum tamen Episcopos justam ejus admittendi causam alioqui
invenerit) verum, ut cum Quatuor tempora Diaconorum and Presbyterorum
ordinationi in singulos annos sint decreta, aliquid saltem spatii detur, ad
periculum de singulis faciendum, quales in of. ficio Diaconi se exhibuerint,
priusquam in Ordinem Presbyterorum suscipiantur.

33. Neminem sine certo titulo ordinandum.
MUltis jam olim Patrum decretis cautum est, nequem liceret Diaconum, vel
Presbyterum ordinari, nisi quem constaret, certum aliquem and designatum
muneris sui exercendi locum per id tempus obtinere; quorum nos authoritatem
secuti, statuimus and ordinamus, nequis deinceps in sacros Ordines admittatur,
nisi qui eodem tempore praesentationem sui ipsius ad promotionem aliquam
Ecclesiastcam infra Dioecesin illius Episcopi, a quo manuum impositionem petit,
tunc vacantem exhibuerit: vel verum and indubitatum certificatorium attulerit
sive de Ecclesia aliqua infra Dioecesin seu jurisdictionem dicti Episcopi,
cujus Cura fungi possit, sive de loco Diaconi vel Presbyteri in Cathedrali aut
Collegiata aliqua Ecclesia, infra eandem Dioecesin vacant, in quo functionem
suam exerceat, vel nisi fidem fecerit, se esse actu Socium, aut jura Socii
obtinere, vel designatum esse Conductitium sive Capellanum in aliquo Collegio
Cantabrigiensi aut Oxoniensi, vel etiam ad Magisterii gradum ante quinquennium
provectum, suis ibidem sumptibus degere: vel nisi ab Episcopo ipsum ordinante
in Beneficium sive ad exercendam aliquam Curam, tunc etiam vacantem, brevi post
sit admittendus. Siquis vero Episcopus in sacros Ordines quenquam asciverit,
qui praedictorum aliquo titulo non sit praeditus, tunc omnia illi necessaria
earenus subministrabit, donec eidem de aliqua Ecclesia prospexerit. Quod si
facere recusaverit, per Archiepiscopum (uno praeterea Episcopo assidente) ab
ordinatione Diaconorum and Presbyterorum per integrum annum suspendetur.

34. Certae conditiones in Ordinandis requisitae.
NUllus Episcopus in sacros Ordines quenquam de caetero cooptabit, qui non ex
sua ipsius Dioecesi fuerit, nisi vel ex altera nostratium Academiarum
prodierit; vel nisi literas (quas vocant) Dimissorias attulerit ab Episcopo, de
cujus jurisdictione existit; and, si Diaconus fieri expetit, vicesimum tertium,
sin Presbyter, vicesimum quartum aetatis suae annum jam compleverit, ac etiam
in altera dictarum Academiarum gradum aliquem Scholasticum susceperit; vel
saltem nisi rationem fidei suae, juxta Articulos religionis in Synodo
Episcoporum and Cleri Ann. 1562. approbatos, Latino sermon reddere possit, and
eandem Scripturae testimoniis corroborare; ac ulterius de vita sua laudabili,
and morum integritate literas Testimoniales exhibuerit, sub sigillo alicujus
Collegii Cantabrigiensis, aut Oxoniensis, ubi antea moram fecerit, vel certe
trium aut quatuor gravium Ministrorum, una cum subscriptione and testimonio
aliorum probabilium and fide dignorum hominum, quibus ejusdem vita and mores
per proximum triennium fuerint explorati.

35. Neminem, nisi praevio solenni examine, Ordinandum.
EPiscopus, priusquam cuilibet Ordinando manus imponat, diligenti eum examine
excutiet ac explorabit, praesentibus eisdem Ministris, quos velit in
impositione manuum sibi assistere. Quod si Episcopus legitime impeditus
praedicto examini vacare nequeat, illud tamen a praefatis Ministris solicit
fieri procurabit. Proviso semper, ut qui Episcopo in dicta examinatione, and
manuum impositione adesse debeant, de ipsius Cathedrali Ecclesia existant
(siquidem eorum facultas dabitur) alioqui tres ad minus idonei Concionatores ex
eadem dioecesi adsciscantur. Quod siquis Episcopus vel Suffraganeus in sacros
Ordines quempiam sine praedictis qualitatibus, aut justo (ut supra) examine
cooptarit; per Provinciae suae Archiepiscopum ea de re certiorem factum
(assidente uno alio Episcopo) ab omni Ordines conferendi potestate in integrum
biennium secludetur.

36. Neminem, nisi praevia trium Articulorum subscriptione, Ordinandum.
NEmo ad sacros Ordines, vel Ecclesiasticum aliquod Beneficium per
Institutionem aut Collationem, vel ad Concionatoris, Praelectoris, aut
Catechistae munus exercendum sive in alterutra Academia, sive in Cathedrali vel
Collegiata aliqua Ecclesia, sive in urbe, aut oppido mercatorio, sive in
parochiali Ecclesia, vel Capella, vel alio denique hujus regni loco deinceps
admittetur, nisi prius vel ab Archiepiscopo, vel Episcopo ejus Dioeceseos, in
qua est victurus, vel ab altera Academiarum licentiam and facultatem ea^undem
subscriptionibus, and sigillis munitam impetraverit, tribusque sequentibus
Articulis (modo and forma a nobis praefinitis) subscripserit.

1. Quod Majestas Regia secundum Deum unicus est and supremus gubernator hujus
Regni, omniumque aliorum ipsius dominiorum, ac territoriorum, tam in omnibus
Spiritualibus sive Ecclesiasticis rebus aut causis, quam in Saecularibus: and
quod nullus extraneus princeps, vel persona, nec ullus praelatus, status, aut
dominatus habet aut habere debet ullam jurisdictionem, potestatem,
superioritatem, praeeminentiam, vel authoritatem Ecclesiasticam sive
Spiritualem infra Majestatis suae dicta regna, dominia, and territoria.

2. Quod Liber publicae Liturgiae, and Episcopos, Presbyteros and Diaconos
ordinandi, and consecrandi nihil in se contineat, quod verbo Dei sit
contrarium, quodque eodem taliter uti liceat: and quod ipse in publicis
Precibus, and Sacramentis administrandis illam prorsus formam, quae in dicto
libro praescribitur, and non aliam sit observaturus.

3. Quod libro de religionis Articulis, in quos consensum est ab
Archiepiscopis, and Episcopis utriusque Provinciae, ac reliquo omni Glero in
Synodo Londinensi An. 1562. omnino comprobat: and quod omnes ac singulos
Articulos in eodem contentos (qui triginta novem, citra ratificationem,
numerantur) verbo Dei consentaneos esse agnoscit.

Hisce tribus Articulis qui volet subscribere, ad vitandam omnem ambiguitatem,
hac verborum formula (nomine and cognomine suo expressis) in subscribendo
utetur: Ego N. N. tribus his praefixis Articulis, omnibusque in eisdem
contentis lubens and ex animo subscribo. Quod siquis Episcopas aliquem
ordinaverit, admiserit, vel facultate, aut licentia (ut superius dictum est)
ulla donaverit, nisi prius sub modo and forma praestitutis subscripserit; is a
collatione Ordinum, and licentiarum ad concionandum per anni spatium
submovebitur. Academias vero, siquid hac in part deliquerint, juris ultioni,
and Regiae censurae relinquimus.

37. Ordinatis, Diocesin mutantibus, subscriptio coram Episcopo Diocesano
iteranda.
SIquis Concionandi, Legendi, Praelegendi, vel Gatechizandi legitima alioqui
potestate praeditus (ut supra) in ullam Dioecesin ibidem commoraturus
devenerit, is ad hujusmodi munera exercenda, vel ad Sacramenta celebranda, aut
quamlibet Ecclesiasticam functionem illic obeundam nullatenus admittetur, (a
quocunque tandem dictam potestatem acceperit) nisi prius coram Episcopo ejusdem
Dioeceseos, in qua munerum praefatorum aliquo fungi debeat, in supradictos
Articulos per manus suae subscriptionem consenserit.

38. Ordinati post subscriptionem praevaricantes a Ministerio removendi.
SIquis Minister, postquam p^aefatis Articulis subscripserit, Liturgiae formula
vel ritibus and ceremoniis quibuscunque in Libro precum publicarum indictis,
uti deinceps omiserit, suspensionis poena coerceatur, ac nisi post mensem se
emendarit ac submiserit, excommunicetur; quod si per alium adhuc mensem in
contumacia permanserit, a Ministerio sacro amoveatur.

39. Ordinati, sine congruo testimonio ac examine, in Beneficia non instituendi.
NUllus Episcopus Ministrum quemvis ab alio Episcopo Ordinatum in Beneficium
aliquod de caetero instituet, nisi qui Literas ordinationis suae eidem
ostenderit, and de morum honestate, vitaque probabili congruum testimonium
(Episcopo id postulante) exhibuerit: ac nisi debite examinatus, Ministerio suo
dignus inventus fuerit.

40. Instituendi in Beneficta Simoniae suspicionem solenni jureiurando jussi
avertere.
AD detestabile Simoniae peccatum coercendum (quoniam Spiritualium, and
Ecclesiasticarum Functionum, Officiorum, Promotionum, Dignitatum, and
Beneficiorum nundinatio in dei conspectu odiosa est, and execranda) statuimus,
and ordinamus, ut Archiepiscopus, omnesque and singuli Episcopi, atque alii,
quibuscunque jus competit admittendi, instituendi, conferendi, consecrandi, vel
electiorem confirmandi cujusvis Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, vel alterius personae
ad Ecclesiasticam aliquam Functionem, Dignitatem, Promotionem, Titulum,
Officium, Jurisdictionem, Locum, aut Beneficium cum Cura, vel sine Cura, vel ad
Ecclesiasticum ullum munus quodcunque, ante omnem ejusmodi institutionem,
collationem, consecrationem vel confirmationem electionis respective faciendam,
unumquemque deinceps admittendum, instituendum, conferendum, inaugurandum, aut
confirmandum in vel ad Archiepiscopatum, Episcopatum, vel aliam Spiritualem
sive Ecclesiasticam Functionem, Dignitatem, Promotionem, Titulum, Officium,
Jurisdictionem, Locum, aut Beneficium cum Cura vel sine Cura, vel ad
Ecclesiasticum ullum munus quodcunque praesenti juramento oneret (quod utique
per omnes, quorum intererit, in propriis personis, and non per procuratorem
erit praestandum) sub modo and forma sequentibus: Ego N. N. juro me nullam
Simoniacam solutionem, stipulationem, vel promissum direct aut indirecte per
me, vel per alium quemlibet (me conscio, aut consentiente) cuivis personae vel
personis quibuscunque fecisse, pro vel de procuratione, vel acquisitione
Ecclesiasticae hujus Dignitatis, Loci, Promotionis, Officii, vel Beneficii
(exprimendo respective and nominatim locum illum, in quem admittendus,
instituendus, conferendus, installandus, aut confirmandus erit) neque deinceps
ullam ejusmodi solutionem, stipulationem, vel promissum absque mea notitia aut
consensu factum quovis tempore praestiturum, ita me Deus adjuvet per Christum
Jesum.

41. Beneficiorum pluralitas parcius dispensanda, and de personali
dispensatorum residentia cautio ineunda.
NEmini in posterum facultas sive dispensatio concedetur, de pluribus
Beneficiis Curatis simul retinendis, nisi tali duntaxat, qui pro eruditione sua
dignior, and ad officium suum before praestandum habilis and idoneus
censebitur: nimirum qui ad gradum Magisterii ad minus in altera nostratium
Academiarum promotus fuerit, publicusque ac idoneus concionator, idemque
legitime approbatus extiterit. Proviso semper, ut sufficienti cautione
obstrictus teneatur, de personali sua residentia in singulis Beneficii^ per
bonam anni cujusquam partem facienda; ac ut ejusmodi Beneficia non amplius
triginta milliarium spatio ab invicem distent; and denique ut in eo Beneficio,
in quo non residebit, concionatorem rite approbatum retineat, qui populum
utiliter docere, ac informare possit.

42. Cathedralium Ecclesiarum Decani ad congruam residentiam tenentur.
QUilibet Decanus, Praefectus, Guardianus, vel Rector primarius cujusquam
Ecclesiae Cathedralis, vel Collegiatae nonaginta dies ad minus in singulis
annis conjunctim vel divisim in dicta Cathedrali, vel Collegiata Ecclesia
residebit, verbi Divini praedicationi incumbens, and hospitalitatem interim
exercens; nisi alias gravibus, and urgentibus causis, iisque per Episcopum
Dioecesanum approbandis detentus fuerit, vel legitima aliqua ratione aliter
dispensatus. Quamdiu autem illic moram fecerit, ipse cum reliquis pariter
Canonicis, vel Praebendariis residentibus invigilabunt, ut Ecclesiae suae
Statuta, and laudabiles Consuetudines (modo verbo Dei, aut Praerogativae Regiae
non repugnent) nec non universa hujus regni statuta ad Ecclesiasticum ordinem
spectantia, quae in suo robore adhuc perdurant, omnesque aliae Constitutiones
Regia authoritate hactenus editae and stabilitae, and siquae per Episcopum
Dioecesanum (juxta statuta and consuetudines ejusdem Ecclesiae, ac leges
Ecclesiasticas hujus regni) in visitatione sua legitime praescribentur,
inviolate custodiantur: ac ut minores Ganonici, Vicarii Chorales, aliique
Ecclesiae suae ministri ad facrarum Literarum studium compellantur, and eorum
unusquisque Novum Testamentum non solum sermon vernaculo, sed and Latino penes
se habeat.

43. Decani and Praebendarii, in Ecclesiis Cathedralibus residentes, ad sedulam
concionandi diligentiam tenentur.
CUjusque Ecclesiae Cathedralis Decanus, Praefectus, Guardianus, vel rector
principalis, ac Praebendarii item, and Canonici non modo in ejusmodi Ecclesiis
suis (idque in propriis personis) toties concionabuntur, quoties lege, statuto,
ordinatione, and consuetudine ad id tenentur; sed in aliis etiam Ecclesiis
ejusdem Dioeceseos, in qua resident, ac in iis praecipue locis, unde vel ipsi,
vel ipsorum Ecclesiae vectigal aliquod, sive fructus annuos percipiunt. Quod si
ipsi vel aegritudine, vel justa aliqua causa impediti abfuerint, tum
concionatores sufficienti authoritate approbatos sua vice substituent, quales
Episcopus Dioecesanus ad concionandum in Ecclesia Cathedrali idoneos judicabit.
Secus siquis vices suas, prout dictum est, supplere quoquo modo omiserit, per
Episcopum, vel eos, ad quos ejus Ecclesiae jurisdictio pertinebit, pro delicti
merito, punietur.

44. Praebendarii Beneficiati ad congruam in Beneficiis suis residentiam
tenentur.
NUllus Ecclesiae Cathedralis aut Collegiatae Praebendarius, vel Canonicus, qui
unum vel plura Beneficia Curata obtinet (nec in sua Ecclesia Cathedrali aut
Collegiata Residentarius existit) a Beneficiis suis Curatis (praetextu
Praebendae suae) ultra tempus unius mensis aliquo anno aberit, nisi ex urgente
causa, and pro certo tempore per Episcopum Dioecesanum approbandis. Qui autem
ex dictis Canonicis and Praebendariis, per Ecclesiae suae Cathedralis, aut
Collegiatae Ordinationes, ad necessariam in eisdem residentiam tenentur, ii
inter se anni tempora ita partientur, pro residentia in dictis Ecclesiis
facienda, ut semper eorum aliqui personaliter illic resideant; omnesque,
quotquot in praesenti sunt, aut de caetero futuri sunt Residentiarii in ulla
Cathedrali, aut Collegiata Ecclesia, post exactum residentiae suae terminum,
per Statuta localia, aut Consuetudinem Ecclesiae suae definitum, ad Beneficia
sua vel unum ex iis, aut saltem ad aliam aliquam Curam, in qua ipsorum
praesentia lege requiritur, quamprimum convolabunt, ut debitis illic officiis
perfungantur, juxta leges in ea part constitutas, quas Episcopus Dioecesanus
curabit executioni mandari.

45. Beneficiati concionatores, in Beneficiis suis residentes, jugiter tenentur
concionari.
SInguli Beneficiati in Beneficiis suis residentes, (dummodo sint legitima
authoritate ad concionandum admissi) per singulos dies Dominicos (justo
impedimento cessante) in Ecclesiis aut Capellis suis, vel vicinarum aliqua,
Ministro concionatore destituta (ubi maxim facultas datur) concionem ad
populum habebunt unam, in qua sobrie, and sincere verbum veritatis divident in
Dei gloriam, and salutarem populi aedificationem.

46. Beneficiati non concionatores vicariam concionatoris operam jubentur
singulis mensibus adhibere.
OMnis Beneficiatus ad concionandum non admissus, concionem singulis mensibus
unam ad minus in Ecclesia sibi credita, per concionatorem legitime approbatum,
haberi procurabit; si tamen Beneficii valor Ordinarii judicio id far posse
videbitur; omni autem die Dominico, cum in ipsius Ecclesia deficiet concio,
dictus Beneficiatus aliquam ex Homiliis, publica authoritate praescriptis aut
praescribendis, per se vel certe per Curatum suum recitabit.

47. Beneficiati, a Beneficiis suis legitime absentes, Curatum concionatorem
jubentur adhibere.
QUilibet Beneficiatus, cui (propter necessitatem officii alias incumbentis)
dispensatio de non residendo in Beneficio suo per hujus regni leges est
indulta, per Curatum, qui concionator sit idoneus, and sufficienti authoritate
approbatus, Curae suae prospiciet, modo beneficii valor non repugnet. Caeterum
qui duobus simul Beneficiis perfruitur, is in illo Beneficio, in quo ipse non
residet, concionatorem legitimum retinebit, nisi ipsum constiterit in utroque
jugiter concionari.

48. Ministri, nisi ex Episcopi vel Ordinarii approbatione, pro Curatis non
admittendi.
NUlli Curato aut Ministro permittetur, ullibi curae animarum inservire, nisi
prius per Episcopum Dioecesanum, vel loci Ordinarium Episcopali jurisdictione
praeditum examinatus, ac admissus fuerit, ejusque rei testimonium manu Episcopi
and sigillo consignatum obtinuerit (habito semper respectu tum ad Curae ipsius
magnitudinem, tum ad personae admittendae habilitatem.) Quinetiam dicti Curati
and Ministri, siquando ex una Dioecesi in alteram transierint, nequaquam ad
Curam ullam exercendam admittentur, nisi Episcopi ejus Dioeceseos unde
advenerint, vel loci Ordinarii (ut supra) literis testimonialibus, de ipsorum
honesta conversatione, sufficientia, and conformitate ad Ecclesiasticas regni
Anglicani leges, muniti accesserint. Nec vero eorum cuilibet licitum erit
pluribus, quam uni Ecclesiae aut Capellae uno eodemque die Ministrare, nisi
forsan Capella illa Ecclesiae Parochialis membrum existat, aut eidem unita, vel
nisi Ecclesia aut Capella cui taliter inserviet, judicio Episcopi vel Ordinarii
(ut supra) Curato alendo non suffecerit.

49. Ministris ad concionandum non admissis glossae and paraphrases in publica
Scripturarum lectione interdictae.
NUllus cujuscunque conditionis Minister, non prius per Episcopum Dioecesanum
examinatus and approbatus, aut pro sufficient and idon^o concionatore (ut
praedictum est licentiatus, in sua ipsius Cura vel alibi locum aliquem
Scripturae, aut doctrinae sacrae exponere praesumet: sed solum apt and
distinct sine glossis aut additamentis legere studebit Homilias, publica
authoritate hactenus editas, aut de caetero edendas, in verae fidei
confirmationem and populi instructionem, atque aedificationem.

50. Concionatores adventitii, absque legitima missione, ad concionandum non
admittendi.
MInister, Oeconomi, aliique Ecclesiae Officiarii neminem patientur in suis
Ecclesiis, aut Capellis concionari, nisi qui Licentiis suis ad praedicandum
exhibitis, justa authoritate (ut supra) in eam partem muniti comperientur.

51. Advenae concionatores, nisi authentico testimonio commendati, ad
concionandum in Ecclesiis Cathedralibus non admittendi.
DEcani, Praefecti and Residentarii Cathedralis, and Collegiatae Ecclesiae
cujuscunque nemini extraneo in suis Ecclesiis concionandi potestatem facient,
nisi qui ejusdem Provinciae Archiepiscopi, aut Episcopi Dioecesani, vel
alterutrius Academiae approbatione suffultus venerit. Quod siquem contigerit in
concione sua dogma aliquod in populum disseminare vel novum, vel minus consonum
verbo Divino, ul ive ex religionis Articulis in Synodo anno 1562. approbatis,
aut etiam Libro Precum publicarum; Decani, aut Residentiarii quam poterunt
mature per literas suas, eorum manu subscriptas, qui dictam concionem
audierint, Episcopo Dioecesano id intimabunt, quo is, quod ipsi videbitur, de
eo statuat.

52. Concionatorum advenarum nomina in librum referenda.
UT Episcopo (causa id postulante) constare possit, tum quae conciones ^n
singulis Ecclesiis suae Dioeceseos habeantur, tum qui sine legitima authoritate
concionari praesumant: Oeconomi Ecclesiarum, eorumque Assistentes Librum
quendam comparabunt, in quo unusquisque concionator, qui ad ipsorum Ecclesiam
aliunde accesserit, nomen suum inscribet, adjecto etiam die, in quo concionem
ibidem habuerit, ac Episcopi nomine, a quo concionandi potestatem acceperit.

53. Concionatorum mutuis oppositionibus pulpita non patebunt.
SIquis Concionator Doctrinam ullam, ab alio Concionatore in eadem vel vicina
aliqua Ecclesia traditam, particulariter aut nominatim ex professo impugnare,
and pro concione refellere attentabit, priusquam Episcopum Dioecesanum de ea
certiorem fecerit, and ejusdem mandatum acceperit, quam eo in casu rationem
sequi debeat (cum alioqui ex publicis ejusmodi oppositionibus multum scandali
and perturbationis populo oriri possit) Oeconomi vel pars laesa absque omni
mora dicto Episcopo illud significabunt, neque praefatum Concionatorem
patientur illum locum, quo semel abusus sit, deinceps occupare, nisi sancte
receperit se ab omni ejusmodi contentionis materia in Ecclesia temperaturum,
donec Episcopus de ea re ulterius statuerit; qui item quamprimum commmode
poterit in ea taliter procedet, ut parti laesae in eadem Ecclesia, in qua
oblatum est scandadalum, public satisfiat. Proviso semper, ut si altera pars
Appellationem interposuerit, eidem concionandi officium pendente lite sit
interdictum.

54. Concionatores schismatici licenciis suis mulctati.
SIquis per Archiepiscopum, aut Episcopum ullum, vel alterutram Academiam in
praeteritum ad concionandum admissus, quovis deinceps tempore recusaverit
legibus, institutis, and ritibus Ecclesiasticis infra Regnum Anglicanum
stabilitis seipsum conformem reddere, eundem per Episcopum Dioecesanum, vel
loci Ordinarium quam primum admoneri volumus, ut eorundem usui and debitae
observationi se submittat. Quod si, tali admonitione praemissa, infra mensem se
minime reformarit, ejusdem Facultatem sive licentiam ad concionandum eo ipso
irritam esse and pro nullo habendam decernimus.

55, Precationis formula, a Concionatoribus in concionum suarum ingressu
imitanda.
OMnes Concionatores and Ministri in aditu cujusque suae Concionis, Lecturae
and Homiliae populum hortabuntur, ut secum in precibus concurrat in hunc aut
similem modum, idque (quantum licet) summaria brevitate: Praecamini pro Christi
sancta Ecclesia Catholica, id est, pro univerfo coetu Christiani populi per
orbem terrarum diffusi ac disseminati, specialiter vero pro Ecclesiis Angliae,
Scotiae, and Hiberniae; and in his praecipue pro Excellentissima Regia
Majestate, Clementissimo Domino nostro Jacobo Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae,
Franciae, and Hiberniae Rege, Fidei Defensore, and super omnes personas in
omnibus causis tam Ecclesiasticis quam civilibus infra Regna and dominia sua
supremo Gubernatore. Precamini etiam pro Serenissima Regina Anna, Nobilissimo
Principe Henrico, reliquaque Regia sobole Illustrissima. Precamini etiam pro
Ministris Divini Verbi, and Sacramentorum, tam Archiepiscopis and Episcopis,
quam caeteris Pastoribus and Curatis. Precamini etiam pro Honoratissimis Regiae
Majestatis Confiliariis, ac Proceribus, and Magistratibus hujus regni
universis; ut hi omnes and singuli in sua quisque vocatione, ad Dei gloriam,
populique aedificationem and rectam administrationem officiis suis diligenter,
and fideliter perfungantur, memores reddendae olim rationis, cum ad Christi
tribunal sistentur judicandi. Precamini etiam pro populo and plebe hujus regni
universa, ut in vera fide, and sancto timore Dei, in humili erga Regem
obedientia and fraterna erga se invicem charitate vitam suam instituant.
Postremo gratias and lauds Deo reddamus pro illis omnibus, qui in fide Christi
ex hac vita excesserunt, humiliter Deo supplicantes, ut per illius gratiam
vitam nostram ad pium eorum exemplar dirigamus, ut ita tandem hac mortali vita
defuncti, resurgamus cum illis in die Jesus Christi ad caelestem gloriam, and
vitam aeternam: semper cum Oratione Dominica concludentes.

56. Ministris mere concionatoribus Precum publicarum lectio, and sacramentorum
administratio bina annuatim injuncta.
OMnis Minister in Beneficio Curato constitutus, licet praedicationi potissimum
vacet, and Curatum sub se retineat, qui reliqua Ecclesiae officia, ipsius vice
exequatur; similiter etiam quilibet Concionator stipendiarius qui Praelegendi,
Catechizandi, aut Concionandi munus in aliqua Ecclesia vel Capella exercet,
liturgiam public recitabit duobus ad minus cujusque anni diebus Dominicis, ad
horas tum matutini, tum vespertini temporis consuetas and usitatas, atque in ea
Ecclesia, in qua Beneficiatus est, vel Praelectoris, Catechistae, aut
concionatoris munere fungitur; toties item Sacramenta Baptismi (siqui erunt
Baptizandi) and Coenae Dominicae quotannis administrabit, modo and forma
omnibusque iis ritibus and caeremoniis observatis, quae in Libro publicae
Liturgiae in ea part praescribuntur. Qui secus fecerit, si beneficio Dotatus
est (ut supra) poenam suspensionis incurret; stipendiarius vero (sive is
Lectoris, sive Catechistae, sive demum Concionatoris nomine censetur) per
Episcopum Dioecesanum a munere submoveatur, donec se conformem praebuerit, ad
omnia praefata officia (sub modo and forma supradictis) rite perficienda.

57. A Ministris non concionatoribus Sacramenta efficaciter administrari.
CUm multi a falsis Doctoribus in errorem inducti, liberos suos nisi per
Ministrum Concionatorem nolint Baptizari, eodemque respectu ad sacram Coenam,
nisi per talem administratam, recusent accedere: ac si illorum Sacramentorum
virtus and efficacitas a Ministri in concionando facultate penderet; cum tamen
integra tum Baptismi, tum sacrae Coenae doctrina, quae ad Sacramentorum
eorundem administrationem desideratur, in Libro publicae Liturgiae tam plene,
and integre sit expressa, ut eidem nihil addi possit, quod solidum sit and
necessarium: omnibus tali errore deceptis mandamus and praecipimus, ut
protervam hanc ipsorum pertinaciam de caetero deponant, ac Ecclesiae institutis
hac in part obsequantur; cum quoad eorundem Sacramentorum efficaciam nihil
intersit, utrum a Ministro non concionatore, an secus administrentur. Quod
siqui deinceps hac in re deliquerint, Parochiaeque suae Ecclesias eo intuitu
declinantes, in alienis vel sacram Coenam susceperint, vel liberos suos
Baptizari fecerint neque mandato hoc nostro admoniti ab errore suo and illicita
hac ratione destiterint; ad loci Ordinarium per Ministrum, Oeconomos and
Inquisitores, vel Assistentes Parochiae suae deferantur, talibus censuris
Ecclesiasticis per eum castigandi, quales adeo obstinatae pervicaciae merito
debentur: id est, si contumaces permanserint, primo suspensionis, si ultra
mensem deinceps perseverarint, excommunicationis poena coerceantur. Pari
ratione siquis Rector, Vicarius, vel Curatus, post praesentium Canonum
promulgationem, quamlibet personam, quae non sit de sua Ecclesia vel Parochia,
ad Sacrae Caenae Communionem recipere, vel ex talium liberis aliquem Baptizare
praesumpserit (eosdem hac ratione in errore suo confirmans) is suspensionis
poena eo ipso obstrictum se intelligat, a qua nequaqum absolvetur, priusquam
sancte promiserit, se hac in part de caetero nullatenus offensurum.

58. Ministris sacra peragentibus Superpelliceorum and Epomidum usus injunctus.
MInistrorum quilibet, dum vel publicas Preces recitat, vel Sacramenta
administrat, aliosve Ecclesiae ritus peragit, decente and congruo Superpelliceo
eoque manicato induetur, quod communibus Parochianorum impensis comparabitur.
Siqua autem controversia super ejusdem materia, vel competente decentia
oriatur, Ordinarii discretio eandem terminabit. Quotquot vero ex Ministris
gradum aliquem in Academia susceperint, ii inter sacra peragenda Superpelliceis
suis adjicient and Caputia, singulorum gradibus convenientia, quorum tamen usu
Ministris minime graduatis sub poena suspensionis interdicimus. Nihilominus and
huic Ministrorum classi (loco Caputiorum) Liripipia permittimus ex nigro (modo
ne serico) suis Superpelliceis injicienda.

59. Catechizandi diligentia Ministris injuncta.
QUilibet Rector, Vicarius, and Curatus singulis diebus Dominicis and festivis
ante preces vespertinas, (ad semihorae spatium vel amplius) juventutem, and
plebem rudiorem suae Parochiae examinabit, and instituet in Decalogo, Symbolo
Apostolico, and Oratione Dominica, eosque diligenter audiet, instruet, and
erudiet in Catechismo, qui extat in Libro Precum publicarum: omnesque patres,
and matres-familias jubebunt liberos, ac famulos suos, qui dictum Catechismum,
nondum tenent, tempore constituto Ecclesiam adire, ut Ministro diligenter and
humiliter auscultent and obtemperent, donec eundem per didicerint. Quod siquis
Minister in hoc officio negligens fuerit and remissus, re ad Episcopum vel loci
Ordinarium delata, and debite intimata, primum acriter corripiatur; si hic se
submittens, deinceps tamen in eadem re volens deliquerit, suspensionis
sententiam incurrat: si tertio offenderit, (quandoquidem exigua spes restat
illius hac in part reformandi) excommunicationis censura, donec se correxerit,
obstrictus usque teneatur. Simili modo siqui parents, Patres aut
Matres-familiarum vel eorum liberi, apprenticii, famulive officio suo hac in re
defuerint, illi quidem non compellendo suos, ut veniant, hi vero, ne discant,
recusando, per Ordinarium suum (modo adulti sint) suspensione plectantur; and
si per mensem sic perstiterint, excommunicentur.

60. Confirmationis solennitas in triennali Episcoporum visitatione celebranda.
CUm solennis, antiqua and laudabilis in Ecclesia Dei consuetudo fuerit, ab
ipsis usque Apostolorum temporibus observata, ut Episcopi quiq parvulis
Baptizatis, and in Catechismo Christianae religionis instructis manus
imponentes, super illis orarent ac benedicerent (quod vulgo Confirmationem
nominamus) cumque in triennali Episcoporum visitatione mos sanctissmi istius
operis peragendi in Ecclesia per multas aetates obtinuerit; volumus and
ordinamus, ut quilibet Episcopus vel ejus Suffraganeus in consueta visitatione
sua morem and ritum illum in propria persona diligenter observet; quod si
tertio demum anno aliqua infirmitate impeditus visitationem suam personaliter
obire nequeat, at saltem illud Confirmationis munus proximo anno (pro ut
commode poterit) nequaquam omittet.

61. Catechummeni Episcopo visitanti per Ministrum ad Confirmationem sistendi.
VNusquisque Minister curam habens animarum (quo melius instituta and ritus ad
Confirmationem spectantes, qui in Libro publicae Liturgiae praescripti
habentur, debite possint conservari) diligenter provibebit, ne ulli ad manuum
impositionem Episcopo sistantur, nisi qui fidei suae rationem norint reddere,
juxta Catechismum in Libro praedicto contentum. Cumque Episcopus huic officio
celebrando tempus aliquod certum praefixerit, Minister sedulam dabit operam, ut
quam queat plurimos ad hoc instruat, ac inducat, coram Episcopo Confirmandos
comparere.

62. Ministri sine Bannis rite indictis, vel legitime dispensatis matrimonium
celebrare prohibiti.
NUllus Minister, sub poena suspensionis per triennium ipso facto incurrendae,
matrimonium inter ullas personas celebrabit, absque Facultate seu licentia ab
aliquo eorum, qui in hisce constitutionibus nostris inferius designantur,
indulta and concessa, nisi Banna matrimonialia per tres dies Dominicos
separatim fuerint denunciata, idque public in Ecclesiis Parochialibus aut
Capellis, ubi parts praedictae commorantur, ac tempore Divinorum, prout in
Libro publicae Liturgiae habetur. Neque ullus Minister sub poena simili inter
quaslibet personas (quantumvis ejusmodi Facultatem seu indulgentiam habentes)
quocunque praetexu matrimonium solennizabit vel tempore aliquo incongruo, sed
duntaxat intra horas octavam and duodecimam antemeridianas; vel in loco
privato, sed in Ecclesiis tantummodo vel Capellis, ubi partium altera
commoratur, idque similiter tempore precum publicarum; vel omnino (etiamsi
trina Bannorum indictio praecesserit, nec ulla proinde dispensatio requiratur)
priusquam parents aut gubernatores contrahentium (si vicesimum primum aetatis
suae annum non compleverint) consensum suum vel personaliter, vel per
testimonium luculentum dicto Ministro significa^int.

63. Ministri in locis exemptis sine bannorum justa indictione, vel
dispensatione legitima matrimonium celebrare prohibiti.
QUilibet Minister, qui contra atque in constitutionibus hisce nostris cautum
est, inter personas quascunque matrimonium celebrabit, sub praetextu cujuslibet
immunitatis, quae certis Ecclesiis ac capellis arrogatur; per loci Ordinarium,
in quo sic offensum erit, triennali suspensione punietur. Siquis autem Minister
ex loco, ubi sic deliquerit, ante latam contra ipsum suspensionis sententiam,
se transtulerit; tunc per Episcopum Dioecesanum, vel Ordinarium loci, in quo
residebit (ab altero Ordinario, cujus jurisdictioni se subduxit, ea de re sub
ipsius manu and sigillo certiorem factum) eadem omnino censura ferietur.

64. Feriae a Ministris solenniter indicendae.
REctores, Vicarii, and Curati omnes in sua cujusque Ecclesia singulis diebus
Dominicis (ad tempus in Libro publicae Liturgiae praestitutum) populo
denunciabunt, siqui dies Festivi, and Vigiliae in sequentem septimanam sint
institutae. Quod siquis deinceps hac in re volens offenderit, and per
Ordinarium suum semel admonitus, officium illud secundo omiserit, debita juris
animadversione puniatur, donec huic constitutioni adimplendae se submiserit.

65. Recusantes and Excommunicati a Ministris solenniter denunciandi.
ORdinarii locorum, infra suas respective jurisdictiones, solicit
providebunt, ut tam Excommunicati ex eo, quod divinis precibus, infra hoc
regnum Angliae publica authoritate stabilitis, interesse pertinaciter
recusaverint, quam ii etiam, praecipue qui melioris notae and conditionis
extiterint, legitimaeque excommunicationis sententia propter insignem
contumaciam, vel graviora aliqua crimina obstricti fuerint (nisi infra tres
continuos menses post latam Excommunicationis sententiam se emendaverint, and
absolutionis gratiam fuerint consequuti) singulis sex mensibus sequentibus
public in Ecclesia tum Parochiali tum etiam Cathedrali Dioeceseos, in qua
habitant, die aliquo Dominico, ac tempore Divinorum pro Excommunicatis per
Ministrum denuncientur; quo reliqui and ab eorum communione declinent, and
procliviores reddantur, ad Breve de Excommunicato Capiendo procurandum, quo
illos ad officium and debitam obedientiam reducant. Quinetiam Registrarii
cujuslibet Curiae Ecclesiasticae, de praemissis omnibus and singulis, quolibet
anno infra Festa S. Michaelis, and Natalis Domini Archiepiscopum hujus
Provinciae in scriptis facient certiorem.

66. Recusantium conversio a Ministris sedulo elaboranda.
QUilibet Minister, cui concionandi Facultas est, siquem Papisticum Recusantem,
vel Recusantes infra suam Parochiam habuerit (dummodo per Episcopum idoneus
judicetur) sedulam illis subinde operam dabit, ut (si fieri possit) errantes in
viam veritatis reducat. Quod si is vel non concionator, vel non talis existat,
tum concionatoris idonei operam subsidiariam (siquidem poterit) in eum finem
procurabit. Quod si non datur, Episcopo Dioecesano illud significabit, cujus
erit, non modo vicino alicui concionatori aut concionatoribus id laboris
imponere, sed and ipsum (quantum per arduas occupationes licuerit) summo studio
contendere, ut docendo, persuadendo, modisque blandis and benignis omnibus tum
dictos Recusantes, tum omnes infra suam Dioecesin sic affectos a suis erroribus
deducat.

67. Aegrotantes a Ministris sedulo visitandi.
IN omni Parochia cum aliquis ex morbo decumbens, in periculo mortis videtur
constitutus, Minister ea de re certior factus eundem visitabit, (nisi
exploratum sit, vel probabiliter suspectum, morbum esse contagiosum) ut animam
ejus in hoc adverso ipsius statu salutari doctrina, and consolatione erigat,
idque sub forma in Libro publicae Liturgiae concepta, si non sit concionator,
alias prout ipsi maxim videbitur expedire. Morte vero jam ingruente, aliqua
campana pulsabitur, neque Minister supremo officio suo hac in part deerit. Cum
autem expiraverit (si utique expirare eum contingat) campana per breve
tantummodo spatium utrinque pulsabitur, quod idem tam ante, quam post
sepulturam observandum decernimus.

68. Ministri Baptismum, aut Sepulturam denegare vetiti.
NUllus Minister aut renuet, aut detrectabit, infantem ullum, qui die quovis
Dominico aut Festivo ad ipsum in Ecclesiam Baptizandus adducetur, juxta ritum
in Libro Precum publicarum editum Baptizare, vel defunctum aliquem, qui in
Ecclesiam vel coemeterium inhumandi causa deferetur, (data prius ejus rei
notitia competente) sub modo and forma in dicto Libro praefinitis sepelire.
Quod si hunc vel illum Baptizare aut sepulturae tradere recusaverit (nisi forte
defunctus denunciatus fuerit, majoris Excommunicationis vinculo propter grave
aliquod and insigne crimen obstrictus, neque de ejus poenitentia testari
quisquam potuerit) a Ministerio suo per Episcopum Dioecesanum trimestri spatio
secludetur.

69. Ministri Baptismum in articulo necessitatis differ vetiti.
SIquis Minister de infirmitate, aut mortis periculo, infanti cuilibet infra
suam Parochiam nondum Baptizato imminente, debite and citra fraudem
commonefactus, and ad locum, ubi dictus infans existet, ejus Baptizandi causa
rogatus accedere, ves plane recusaverit, vel per contumaciam, aut latam
negligentiam tempus ita produxerit, ut cum tempestive posset dictum locum
adiisse, and infantem praefatum Baptizasse, is tamen ejusdem culpa expers
Baptismi moriatur, dictus Minister trimestri suspensioni subjacebit, neque
absolutionis gratiam consequetur, antequam coram loci Ordinario culpam
praeteritam agnoscens, pro caetero polliceatur, se in hoc genere scienter
nequaquam peccaturum. Proviso semper, ut in illis Parochiis, in quibus Curatus,
aut substitutus extiterit, praesens Constitutio non ad ipsum Rectorem aut
Vicarium, sed ad dictum Curatum vel substitutum illic praesentem extendatur.

70. Ministri Baptizatorum, Nubentium, and Sepultorum registrum conservare
jussi.
IN omni hujus regni Ecclesia Parochiali and Capella Liber ex pergameno
(Parochianorum sumptibus comparabitur, in quo conscribi volumus diem and annum
cujusque Baptismatis, Matrimonii, and Sepulturae, quae infra eandem Parochiam
contigerint, ex quo lex in eam partem primum lata est, (quatenus veterum
registrorum copia haberi potest) praecipue vero ab initio Regni Serenissimae
Reginae nuper defunctae. Ad quem Librum tutius asservandum Oeconomi (communibus
Parochianorum impensis) cistam crassam and firmam curabunt confici, cum tribus
seris and clavibus, quarum una penes Ministrum, reliquae duae penes Oeconomos
separatim custodientur; ita ut nec Ministro liceat sine Oeconomis, neque
Oeconomis, nisi Ministro adhibito, Librum praedictum de cista promere. Singulis
vero in posterum diebus Dominicis, statim post finitas matutinas vel
vespertinas preces, Minister and Oeconomi Librum illum membranaceum de cista
praedicta sument, ac Minister in praesentia Oeconomorum in eodem inscribet
omnium personarum nomina, quotquot praecedente hebdomade infra eandem Parochiam
Baptizatae (adjectis item parentum nominibus, and cognominibus) vel Matromonio
conjunctae, vel sepultae fuerint; singulorum etiam die and anno specificatis.
Quo facto dictum Librum in cistam, ut prius, recondent: ac Minister and
Oeconomi singulis ejusdem Libri paginis, (postquam inscriptionibus ejusmodi
impletae fuerint) nomina sua subscribent. Porro Oeconomi semel omni anno, idque
infra terminum unius mensis post Beatae Virginis Annunciationem, ad Episcopum
Dioecesanum vel ejus Cancellarium transmittent verum registrum sive scripturam
eorum omnium nomina continentem, qui infra suam Parochiam anno proxime elapso,
and ad dictum Annuntiationis diem terminante, vel Baptizati, vel Nupti, vel
Sepulturae traditi fuerint; die ac mense, quibus singula gesta sunt, sigillatim
adscriptis, cum ipsius etiam Ministri, ac Oeconomorum subscriptionibus, ut
illud in ejusdem Episcopi Archivis possit fideliter custodiri; quod registrum
sive certificatorium absque feodo recipietur. Quod si Minister aut Oeconomi in
praemissorum executione remissiores fuerint, tum Episcopo vel ejus Cancellario
licebit cebit eosdem convenire, and contra eos tanquam nostrarum Constitutionum
contemptores procedere.

71. Ministri Concionum and Coenae Dominicae publicam religionem in privatas
aedes invehere prohibiti.
NUllus Minister in cujusquam privatis aedibus vel concionabitur, vel
Sacramenta administrabit, nisi tempore necessitatis, cum quis vel per
imbecillitatem Ecclesiam adire non valens, vel morbo gravi and periculoso
conflictatus, sacrosancti fieri particeps Sacramenti expetiverit; sub poena
suspens^onis pro delicto primo, and excommunicationis pro secundo. Proviso,
illas aedes hic pro privatis censeri, in quibus nulla existit capella
consecrata, ac legibus hujus regni Ecclesiasticis approbata. Proviso etiam sub
poenis supradictis, nequis Capellanus vel concionem habeat, vel sacram
Communionem alibi administret, quam in Capellis aedium praedictarum, idque raro
admodum faciat in diebus Dominicis and Festivis, ut Domini and Magistri illarum
aedium (cum suis familiis) in Ecclesiis suis Parochialibus alias convenire
possint, ibidemque una vice ad minus singulis annis communicare.

72. Ministri publica jejunia, prophetias appellatas, and exorcismos privato
ausu celebrare prohibiti.
NUllus Minister aut Ministri nisi mandatum and licentiam Episcopi Dioecesani
prius impetraverint, ipsius manu and sigillo communitam, solennia ulla jejunia
sive public, sive in privatis aedibus indicent, aut celebrabunt, vel etiam
eisdem scienter intererunt (exceptis iis, quae aut jam legibus instituta sunt,
aut publica authoritate in posterum instituentur) sub poena suspensionis pro
delicto primo, excommunicationis pro secundo, and depositionis pro tertio. Nec
quisquam Minister praesumet, absque licentia (ut dictum est) impetrata,
condicere, aut celebrare ullos conventus pro concionibus, quae vulgo Exercitia,
aut Prophetiae a nonnullis nuncupantur, in oppidis mercatoriis, aut alio quovis
loco sub poenis supradictis; nec sine simili licentia tentabit sub quolibet
praetextu sieve possessionis, sive obsessionis, per jejunium and precationes,
daemonia seu spiritus malos ejicere, atque expellere, sub poena imposturae
imputandae, and depositionis a Ministerio sacro.

73. Ministri conventicula privata conciliare probibiti.
QUoniam conventicula and clandestina Presbyterorum and Ministrorum
conciliabula Ecclesiae, in qua vixerint, incolumitati perniciosa merito semper
sunt existimata: statuimus and ordinamus, ut nulli deinceps Presbyteri, sive
verbi Divini Ministri, vel alii quicunque in privatis ullis aedibus, vel alio
quovis loco seorsim conveniant, consilium capturi de quavis re, aut ratione per
ipsos vel ipsorum suasu ac consilio per alios ineunda, quae ad Doctrinae in
Ecclesia Anglicana stabilitae, vel Libri publicae Liturgiae praejudicium, aut
derogationem ullatenus spectare possit, sub poena excommunicationis ipso facto
subeundae.

74. Ministris in vestitu gravitas praecepta.
VErae, antiquae, ac florentes Christi Ecclesiae, cum semper inprimis
studerent, ut ipsorum Praelati and Clerici tam in externo honor, quam interna
reverentia propter Ministerii sui dignitatem haberentu, consultum putarunt, ut
iidem, congrui and decentis alicujus habitus certa and praescripta forma
utentes, in omnibus locis, and conventibus tam intra, quam extra Ecclesiam a
populo discerni possent, ac internosci, ut ea ratione honorem, and
existimationem specialibus omnipotentis Dei Nuntiis and Ministris debitam
consequerentur. Nos ergo venerandum illorum judicium, veteremque Ecclesiae
Anglicanae consuetudinem sequuti (omnino nobis pollicentes fore, ut a factiosis
quibusdam affectata in vestitu novitas progressu temporis evanescat) statuimus
and ordinamus, ut omnes Archiepiscopi and Episcopi consuetum ordinum suorum
habitum non intermittant. Similiterque ut omnes Decani, Collegiorum Praefecti,
Archidiaconi, and Praebendarii Cathedralis and Collegiatae cujusque Ecclesiae
(modo in sacris ordinibus constituti) Doctores in Theologia, Jure Civili, and
Medicina, Baccalaurei in Theologia, Magistri Artium, and Baccalaurei in Jure
Civili (siquidem Ecclesiasticum aliquod Beneficium obtinent) togis cum
collaribus erectis manicisque ad manum contractioribus, vel laxioribus (prout
in Academiis usitatum est) una cum Caputiis, vel Liripipiis ex serico, and
pileis quadratis de more utantur: and ut alii omnes Ministri ad idem munus
admissi, vel admittendi praedicto vestitus genere (exceptis tantum Liripipiis)
consuetim induantur. Pari ratione ulterius decernimus, ut Ecclesiastici omnes
superius nominati in itinere usitatius gerant pallia cum manicis indutis, (quae
vulgo Presbyterorum pallia appellantur) sine fimbriis, limbis, fibulis
oblongis, aut scissuris. Nullus item, in quocunque ordine Ecclesiastico
pofitus, pilcolo ullo lineo acu-picto utetur, sed simplice tantum ex nigro
serico, tramoserico, aut holoserico. In qua vestitus forma, particulatim a
nobis hic descripta, non id agimus, ut ullam vestibus ipsis sanctimoniam, aut
praecipuam dignitatem tribuamus, sed ut gravitas, decorum, atque ordo (uti
diximus) per omnia conserventur. Caeterum in privatis ipsorum domiciliis, ac
Musaeis decentis cujuslibet and scholastici vestitus usum, (modo ne scissuris
aut puncturis variegati) dictis personis Ecclesiasticis permittimus; proviso,
uti ne in publicum nisi Cassocks.
promissis vestibus induti prodeant, nec tibialia gerant colorata. Tenuioribus
vero sive Beneficiatis sive Curatis, qui talarium togarum sumptibus non
sufficient, liberum erit togis uti curtioribus, ad formam praedictam comparatis.

75. Vitae sobrietas Ministris praecepta.
MInistri oenopoiia, aut cauponas (nisi propter congruas ipsorum necessitates)
non frequentabunt, nec in iis cibum capient, aut ditent. Nec vero sordidae
alicui aut illiberali operae assuescent, nec potationibus, and crapulae se
dedent, tempusve interdiu, vel noctu otiose transigent in alea, chartis pictis,
tesseris, aliisve ludis illicitis exercitati, sed horis omnibus opportunis vel
Scripturis legendis, aut audiendis incumbent, vel alii cuipiam studio aut
exercitio laudabili vacabunt; ea semper facientes, quae ad probitatem and
virtutem spectent, seduloque operam dantes, ut Ecclesiam Dei promoveant,
memores nimirum, debere se reliquis omnibus vitae innocentia praelucere,
populoque universo ad vitam recte, and pie instituendam exemplo esse; sub poena
sanctionum Ecclesiasticarum, quae pro delicti qualitate severius illis
infligendas praecipimus.

76. Ministris a vocatione sua refilire interdictum.
NUllus in Diaconi aut Presbyteri ordinem semel admissus quovis deinceps
tempore ab eodem volens recedet, nec in vitae suae instituto pro Laico se
geret, sub poena excommunicationis: eorumque omnium nomina, siqui vocationem
suam taliter abjicient, per Oeconomos Parochiarum, in quibus habitant, ad
Episcopum Diocesanum, vel loci Ordinarium Episcopali jurisdictione praeditum
deferentur.

De Paedagogis sive Ludi-magistris.
77. Public vel privatim injussu Ordinarii docere prohibitum.
NEmo sive in Schola aliqua publica, sive in privatis aedibus pueros docebit
aut erudiet, nisi qui ab Episcopo Dioecesano vel loci Ordinario Licentiam
ejusdem manu and sigillo roboratam obtinuerit; quique tum propter eruditionem,
and dexteram in docendo facultatem, tum etiam propter morum gravitatem, and
integritatem, ac verum sincerae religionis intellectum aptus and idoneus
reperietur: and denique qui primo and tertio Articulis (supra memoratis)
integris, ac secundi duobus prioribus membris subscripserit.

78. Curati ad docendum habiles ab Ordinario aliis praeferendi.
IN omni Ecclesia Parochiali, vel Capella in qua Curatus extiterit, qui in
Magisterii aut Baccalaureatus gradu constitutus, vel alias habilis ad docendum
fit, and ad augenda victus sui subsidia, puerosque in principiis rectae fidei
instituendos, operam munusque illud docendi lubens velit suscipere; statuimus
and ordinamus, ut nulla Facultas sive licentia ad pueros illius Parochiae, in
qua talis Curatus existet, erudiendos cuivis nisi dicto Curato per loci
Ordinarium concedatur. Proviso semper, quod praesens Constitutio ad Parochiam
aliquam vel Capellam, in oppidis ruralibus sitam, in qua schola publica fundata
fuerit, minime pertinebit: quo casu consentaneum ducimus, Licentiam ad
Grammaticam ibidem docendam nemini concedi, praeterquam publicae illius scholae
Magistro.

79. Ludi magistrorum officia.
LUdimagistri omnes pueros suos Catechismum vel ampliorem, vel breviorem
publica authoritate hactenus editum Latin, aut Anglice pro captu puerorum
edocebunt: ac quoties infra parochiam in qua docent, concionem aliquam sacro
quolibet and Festivo die haberi contigerit, discipulos suos adducent ad
Ecclesiam, in qua dicta concio fiet, curabuntque ut ibidem quiet and modeste
se contineant, eosque inde reversos tempore aliquo congruo sigillatim ad examen
revocabunt, quid ex dicta concione didicerint. Aliis autem diebus, talibus
sententiis ex sacra Scriptura haustis eosdem instruent, ac instituent, quales
ad eorum mentes pi^tate imbuendas maxim utiles, and idoneae-videbuntur. Dicti
etiam Ludi-magistri Grammaticam authoritate Henrici Octavi editam, and deinceps
Edwardi sexti, and Reginae Elizabethae felicissimae memoriae temporibus
continuatam and non aliam praelegent aut docebunt. Quod si quis Paedagogus post
factam (ut supra) subscriptionem, and Licentiam sive facultatem obtentam, in
quolibet praemissorum deliquerit, and contra aliquid, cui pridem subscripserat,
dicere, scribere, aut docere compertus fuerit, si interposita Ordinarii
admonitione se non correxerit, a docendi munere de caetero submoveatur.

De Ecclesiis, and rebus Ecclesiasticis.
80. Libri sacri in Ecclesiis parandi.
ECclesiarum and Capellarum omnium Oeconomi and Inquisitores Librum publicarum
Precum, nuper in paucis explanatum ex authoritate Regia (juxta leges and
Majestatis suae hac in part Praerogativam) sumptibus Parochianorum
comparabunt, idque quantum commode poterunt) mature and celeriter, ita ut
terminum duorum mensium ad summum post Constitutiones hasce promulgatas
nequaquam excedant. Et siquae Ecclesiae vel Bibliis amplissimi voluminis, vel
Homiliarum libris publica authoritate approbatis adhuc carebunt, praefati
Oeconomi similiter efficient, ut dicti libri Parochianorum impensis infra
tempus idoneum coemantur.

81. Baptisteria in Ecclesiis paranda.
PRout cautum est prisca quadam Constitutione, hodie in quibusdam partibus
neglectius habita: statuimus and ordinamus, ut in omni Ecclesia and Capella,
ubi Baptismus administrari consuevit, Baptisterium ex lapide in loco antiquitus
usitato statuatur: in quo duntaxat Ministris licebit infantes public Baptizare.

82. Mensae in sacrae Coenae usum in Ecclesiis parandae.
CUm nobis minime dubium existat, quin omnibus hujus regni Ecclesiis prospectum
sit de mensis congruis and decentibus ad Coenae Dominicae celebrationem;
statuimus and ordinamus, ut eaedem Mensae convenienter and decore conserventur,
and subinde reficiantur, ac tempore divini cultus operiantur tapete ex serico,
sive ex alia materia, quae per loci Ordinarium (sicubi de ea quaestio oriatur)
congrua and decora judicabitur; ipso autem administrationis tempore panno lineo
mundo (prout tali mensae convenit) vestiantur: suoque certo loco consistant,
nisi cum Sacramentum erit administrandum, quo quidem tempore in Ecclesia, vel
ejusdem Cancello ita constituentur, ut tum Minister inter precandum and
administrandum commodius possit a Communicantibus exaudiri, tum Communicantes
etiam convenientius and majore numero a Ministro Sacramentum percipere. Insuper
statutum and decretum sit, ut Decalogus pingatur in Orientali cujusque
Ecclesiae and Capellae part, unde a populo commodissme cerni and legi possit,
ac aliae lectae scripturarum sententiae in earundem parietibus passim in locis
opportunis describantur. Similiter etiam ut seeds congrua Ministro construatur,
in qua Divinas preces recitet: atque haec omnia Parochianorum sumptibus
perficientur,

83. Pulpita idonea in Ecclesiis paranda.
ECclesiarum Oeconomi, and Inquisitores in suis respective Ecclesiis Pulpitum
conveniens and decorum communibus parochianorum impensis fieri providebunt,
quod in Ecclesiae loco idoneo pro arbitratu Ordinarii (siquid ambigi de eo
contigerit) constituetur, in Divini verbi praedicationem decenter ibidem
asservandum.

84. Cistae ad eleemosynarum custodiam in Ecclesiis comparandae.
ECclesiarum Oeconomi, ac Inquisitores infra tres menses post harum
Constitutionum promulgationem sumptibus Parochianorum comparabunt, nisi forsan
jam comparatam habeant (cistam validam and firmam cum fissura in suprema part
ejusdem and tribus clavibus, quarum una a Rectore, Vicario, vel Curato,
reliquae duae ab Oeconomis pro tempore existentibus separatim custodientur.
Quae cista disponetur in locum maxim opportunum, ad Parochianorum eleemosynas
pro pauperibus ejusdem Ecclesiae excipiendas. Quinetiam Rectores, Vicarii and
Curati non cessabunt Parochianos suos invitare, hortari, and jugiter incitare,
tum vero praecipue cum testamenta sua conficiunt, ut huic cistae pro ipsorum
facultatibus largiantur; eisdem insinuando, quod cum hactenus multas opes
(praeter Dei mandatum) in superstitiosos usus studiose impenderint, multo
propensiores esse debeant (hoc praesertim tempore) ad egenos, and pauperes
sublevandos; cum non ignorent, misericordiam in pauperes sacrificium Deo gratum
and acceptum esse, and quicquid in eorum subsidium and levamen datur, Christo
dari, Christumque ejusmodi dona in eam partem accipere, ut illa sit benign
remuneraturus. Quas eleemosynas and pias populi largitiones per singulos annos,
vel tres menses, aut saepius (pro causarum vel temporum condition) custodes
clavium, praesente maxima Parochianorum part, vel sex illorum praecipius, de
cista proferent, ut inter vicinos suos maxim indigentes vere and fideliter
possint distribui.

85. Ecclesiae sartae tectae conservandae.
ECclesiarum Oeconomi, and Inquisitores diligenter prospicient, ut Ecclesiae
suae probe and congrue reparentur, and sic perpetuo custodiantur; ut fenestrae
been vitratae ac pavimenta plana and aequabilia existant, adeoque omnia
honest, and decore in eisdem serventur, absque pulvere, aut ullo situs aut
sordium genere, quod ingratum, aut indecorum esse possit, prout domo Dei
imprimis convenit, and in Homilia quadam hujus argumenti praecipitur. Pari
diligentia providebunt, ut coemeteria debite reparata, munita, and septa
custodiantur sive muris, sive vacerris, sive palis (pro loci consuetudine)
eorum impensis, ad quos jure pertinebit. Imprimis vero curabunt, ut in omnibus
populi ad rem Divinam conventibus pax and quies religiose conserventur,
omnesque quotquot excommunicationis vinculo public and notorie sunt innodati,
ab Ecclesiae liminibus arceantur.

86. Ecclesiae de tertio in tertium annum perlustrandae, and earum defectus
Regiis Commissariis intimandi
OMnis Decanus, Decanus and Capitulu^, Archidiaconus, aut alius quilibet, cui
visitationes Ecclesiasticas obeundi jus and potestas ex compositione, lege aut
praescriptione competit, unoquoque triennio Ecclesias omnes suae jurisdictioni
subjectas semel perlustrabit, vel saltem perlustrari faciet; and singulis annis
infra eundem terminu^ Regiis Commissariis pro causis Ecclesiasticis subinde
denunciabit, quos defectus reparatione indigentes in dictis Ecclesiis, aut
earum aliqua compererint, appositis eorum nominibus and cognominibus, qui in
singulis sint culpabiles. Qua informatione accepta, praedictos Commissarios
rogamus, ut ejusmodi personas coram se citatas, talis cujusque Ordinarii, qui
informationes praefatas fecerit, justis and legitimis decretis parere
compellant.

87 Terrarum and peculiorum ad Ecclesias spectantium inventaria conficienda,
and in Episcoporum archivis asservanda.
ARchiepiscopus, and Episcopi omnes in sua quisque Dioecesi (quantum in ipsis
erit) efficient, ut justum Inventarium, sive Terrarium omnium Glebarum (quas
vocant) fundorum, pratorum, hortorum, pomariorum, aedium, peculiorum,
utensilium, tenementorum, and portionum, decimarum, extra suas Parochias
positarum, quae ad Rectoriam, Vicariam, vel Ruralem quamlibet Praebendam
noscuntur spectare, per singulas Parochias ex inspectione proborum hominum per
Episcopum designandorum (quorum Minister unus erit) in scriptis redigatur, ac
in suis Archivis ad perpetuam rei memoriam asservetur.

88. Ecclesiarum religio prophanis usibus non polluenda.
ECclesiarum Oeconomi, and Inquisitores, vel Assistentes nequaquam patientur
ludos scenicos, convivia, epulas, coenas solennes, invitationes publicas,
symposia, Curias saeculares, Visus Franci Plegii, Juratus Laicos, Lustrationes
militum, vel prophanum ullum usum sive ritum in Ecclesiis, capellis aut
coemeteriis suis fieri, aut celebrari; neque etiam campanas superstitiose
pulsari in illis Festivitatibus, aut earum Vigiliis, quae in libro publicae
Liturgiae sunt antiquatae vel alio quovis tempore, nisi ex causa idonea tam per
ipsos, quam per Ministrum approbata.

De Ecclesiarum Oeconomis, and Inquisitoribus, sive Assistentibus.
89. Oeconomorum electio, and rerum Ecclesiasticarum procuratio.
OMnes Ecclesiarum Oeconomi, sive Inquisitores Parochianorum and Ministri sui
unito consensu (siquidem id fieri possit) eligentur. Qui si in tali electione
dissenserint, tum Ministro licebit unum eligere, Parochianis alterum; nec
quisquam pro Oeconomo habendus erit, nisi quem ejusmodi consensus sive
conjunctus, sive divisus elegerit: neque iidem etiam in officio suo ultra
annum, nisi de integro ad modum praedictum electi permanebunt. Omnesque
Oeconomi ad dicti anni terminum vel saltem infra ejusdem termini mensem unum
pecumae tum acceptae tum expensae sive in reparationes sive in alios quoscunque
Ecclesiae usus veram and particularem rationem Ministro and Parochianis
reddent: quinetiam Officio suo abeuntes Parochianis cedent quicquid pecuniae,
aut alterius rei cujuscunque ad Ecclesiam sive Parochiam jure pertinentis in
ipsorum manibus residuum supererit, ut per eos in succedentium Oeconomorum
custodiam per billam indentatam transferatur.

90. Inquisitorum sive Assistentium electio, eorumque cum Oeconomis officii
communitas.
ECclesiarum omnium Oeconomi, sive Inquisitores, adhibitis in singulis
Parochiis duobus, tribus, aut etiam pluribus discretis hominibus, qui per
Ministrum, and Oeconomos (siquidem inter eos convenire poterit, alias per loci
Ordinarium) pro Assistentibus elegentur, sedulo invigilabunt, ut Parochiani
omnes Ecclesias suas diebus Dominicis and Festivis debite frequentent, atque in
iisdem per integrum tempus rei sacrae perdurent: quo item tempore neminem in
Ecclesia ejusdemve porticu aut coemeterio deambulare, vel otiari, aut garrire
patientur: Siquos autem compererint remissius aut negligentius Ecclesiam adire
(nulla magna aut ardua absentiae suae causa constante) eosdem serio admonebunt,
and (nisi debite admoniti se emendaverint) ad loci Ordinarium deferent. Horum
autem Oeconomorum, and Inquisitorum vel Assistentium annuam electionem in
Paschali hebdomade celebrandam decernimus.

De Ostiariis sive Clericis Parochialibus.
91. Clericos Parochiales eligendi jus Ministro cedit.
NUllus in Parochialis Clerici (quem vocant) locum vacantem infra civitatem
Londinensem vel alibi infra Provinciam Cantuariensem eligetur, nisi per
Rectorem aut Vicarium, vel defectu Rectoris aut Vicarii, per ejusdem Ecclesiae
Ministrum pro tempore existentem: quam electionem dictus Rector, Vicarius, aut
Minister subsequente die Dominico tempore Divinorum Parochianis suis
denunciabit. Omnis autem ejusmodi Clericus Parochialis annos ad minus viginti
natus erit, and de vita probabili, ac idonea legendi, scribendi, and cantandi
(quoad ejus fieri potest) scientia dicto eligenti cognitus. Iidemque Clerici
taliter electi stipendia sua antiquitus consueta, ab^que dolo aut diminutione,
vel ab Oeconomis (ad tempora hactenus usitata) vel ex propria collectione
percipient, juxta Parochiae cujusque ritum, ac consuetudinem maxim inveteratam.

De Curiis Ecclesiasticis, ad Archiepiscopi jurisdictionem spectantibus.
92. Testamentorum probatio, justa Bonorum Notabilium summa constante,
Praerogativarum Curiae duntaxat competit.
CUm multi hactenus per Apparitores Curiarum tum inferiorum, tum Praerogativae
Archiepiscopalis graviter distracti, and vary vocati and compulsi fuerint,
super probatione testamentorum, and Administrationis bonorum in causa intestati
petitione, variisque inde laboribus, molestiis, and expensis superflue gravati
fuerint, and fatigati: statuimus and ordinamus, ut omnis Cancellarius,
Commissarius, Officialis, aut alius quicunque jurisdictionem Ecclesiasticam
exercens, singulos ad Curiam suam super testamenti Probatione vel
Administrationis bonorum negotio citatos, aut etiam ultro advenientes primo and
ante omnia juramento oneret, number sciant, vel speciali aliqua causa permoti
firmiter credant, defunctum (de cujus testamento, vel bonis agitur) bona
aliqua, aut debita, idonea in alia quavis Dioecesi vel Dioecesibus, aut in
peculiari alia jurisdictione infra eandem Provinciam sita, quam in qua obiit,
usque ad valorem quinque librarum, tempore vitae and mortis suae habuisse. Et
si talis citatus, vel sponte accedens super juramento suo affirmaverit, se
scire, vel (ut praefertur) firmiter credere, quod ejusmodi defunctus bona, vel
idonea debita in alia aliqua Dioecesi, vel Dioecesibus, vel in peculiari alia
jurisdictione infra eandem Provinciam, ad valorem praedictum habuerit, eademque
particulariter expresserit, ac declaraverit, tum statim eum dimittet, nec vel
testamentum talis defuncti probare, vel Administrationem bonorum sic ab
intestato decedentis concedere, neque alias expensas, quam pro citatione
debitas, vel etiam pro aliis processibus contra eundem super ipsius ulteriore
forsitan contumacia adhibitis, ab eo exigere praesumet, sed hoc negotium ad
Praerogativam Archepiscopalem ejusdem Provinciae spectare, aperte, deserteque
profitebitur; quinetiam partem ipsam monebit, and hortabitur, ut apud Judicem
dictae Praerogativae testamentum illud probet, vel administrationem talium
bonorum petat, and coram ipso ejusmodi Probationem sive Administrationem,
sigillo Curiae Praerogativarum munitam, infra quadraginta dies continuos
exhibeat. Quod siquis Cancellarius, Commissarius, Officialis vel alius
Ecclesiasticam jurisdictionem exercens, vel eorum Registrarius aliquis contra
fecerit; ab executione Officii sui ipso facto suspensum se noverit, nullatenus
absolvendum, donec omnes pecuniarum summas, contra tenorem praemissorum per
dictam partem expensas, eidem restituerit; talisque sive testamenti Probatio
sive Administrationis concessio quaecunque ipso jure pro nulla habeatur
Registrarius etiam cujusque Judicis inferioris Apparitorem Curiae P^aerogativae
(semel duntaxat singulis mensibus ad se venientem) sine omni difficultate
certiorem reddet, quos Executores vel Administrationem petentes Judex suus
infra mensem proxime tum praecedentem (ob incompetentiam suae in hac part
jurisdictionis) ad Curiam Praerogativae dimiserit; idque sub poena menstruae
suspensionis ab exercitio Officii, pro singulis ejusmodi delictis. Proviso
semper, quod praesens Constitutio, vel aliquid in eadem contentum, compositioni
ulli, quae inter Archiepiscopum, and Episcopum quemvis, vel alium Ordinarium
intercesserit, neutiquam praejudicabit: nec etiam Judici cuivis inferiori, qui
ullam testamenti Probationem, vel bonorum Administrationem alicui tam ex dicta
inferiore Curia, quam ex Curia Praerogativae sponte and consulto eandem petenti
concesserit. Proviso itidem, quod siquem in itinere mori contingat, bona illa,
quae tunc temporis penes se habuerit, testamentum ipsius vel bonorum
Administrationem Curiae Praerogativarum nequaquam subjicient.

93. Testamentorum probatio, justa Bonorum Notabilium summa non comparente,
Ordinariis vindicatur.
STatuimus insuper and ordinamus, nequis Judex Praerogativae Archiepiscopalis
ad praemissorum aliquod quemlibet ex Officio citet, aut citari faciat, nisi
eidem prius constiterit, defunctum tempore vitae and mortis suae bona vel
catalla in aliqua alia Dioecesi vel Dioecesibus, vel etiam peculiari
jurisdictione, infra eandem provinciam sita, quam in qua fato cessit, ad summam
quinque librarum ad minus habuisse. Nam qui minorem aliquam summam hoc casu
habet, eundem Bona Notabilia non habere per praesentes decernimus, and
declaramus. Proviso, quod haec clausula, in hac, and in praecedente
Constitutione expressa, ad illas Dioeceses nullatenus extendatur, in quibus ex
compositione vel consuetudine Bona Notabilia majore summa definiuntur. Quod
siquis Judex Praerogativae, aut ejus Deputatus, vel eorundem Registrarius, aut
Apparitor aliquem secus, quam ut praemissum est, citaverit, aut citari vel
moneri ad Curiam suam fecerit, eundem expensas parti sic citatae vel monitae
refundere volumus, and acta ejusdem ipso jure vacua and pro nullis habenda
pronunciamus. Quas expensas si vel Judex, vel Registrarius vel Apparitor
taliter rependere detrectaverit, ab executione officii sui, donec illud
praestiterit, suspendetur.

94. In Curias de Arcubus, and Audientiae extra proprium territorium (nisi
consentiente Episcopo Dioecesano) nemo citandus.
NEque Dec^nus de Arcubus, neque Officialis Consistorii Archiepiscopalis, neque
Judex Audientiae posthac nomine vel suo, vel Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis sive
ex officio sive ad instantiam partis originaliter citabit, monebit, aut quoquo
modo compellet, vel citari, moneri, aut compelli faciet aliquem, qui
particularem dicti Archiepiscopi Dioecesin, vel peculiares ejusdem
jurisdictiones non inhabitat, ad comparendum coram ipsis vel ipsorum aliquo,
super causa vel re quacunque ad cognitionem Ecclesiasticam pertinente, absque
Dioecesani sui licentia prius impetrata (extra casus speciales in Statuto Anno
23. Henr. 8. cap. 9. diserte exemptos, and reservatos.) Quod siquis dictorum
Judicum contra fecerit, is pro singulis ejusmodi delictis ab Officii sui
exercitio per tres menses suspendetur.

95. Duplices Querelae, nisi justi gravaminis facta fide, in Curiis
Archiepiscopi non concedendae.
TAmetsi pristinae Constitutiones Ecclesiae Anglicanae duorum mensium tempus
Episcopis indulserint, infra quod de sufficientia and qualitate cujusque
Ministri, qui ipsi praesentatus esset, in Beneficium aliquod instituendus,
inquirere and before informari posset: nos tamen, quibusdam incommodis
occurrere volentes, spatium illud bimestre ad terminum viginti and octo dierum
per praesentes contrahimus, and abbreviamus. Cujus contractionis intuitu,
statuimus and ordinamus, ut nulla Duplex Querela ex Curia ulla Archiepiscopi ad
instantiam Ministri cujuscunque concedatur, nisi prius jurejurando fidem
fecerit, quod praefatus terminus viginti and octo dierum ad minus effluxerit,
ex quo dictam sui ipsius praesentationem Episcopo exhibuerit, and Episcopus se
taliter praesentatum instituere recusaverit, vel nisi cautionem fidei^ssoriam
sufficientem interposuerit, se assertionem illam veram esse legitime
probaturum: sub poena suspensionis semestris ab Officii sui exercitio singulis
talem actionem sive Duplicem Querelam concedentibus, per Archiepiscopum to^ies
quoties denuncianda; ac etiam nullitatis ad omnem juris effectum cujusque
Duplicis Querelae sic indebite procuratae. Proviso semper, quod infra
praedictum tempus viginti and octo dierum Episcopus alium nullatenus instituet,
in praejudicium partis ita praesentatae, idque sub poena nullitatis.

96. Inhibitiones in causis instantiae absque advocati subscriptione non
concedendae.
UT Episcoporum jurisdictiones illaesae (quantum fieri potest) conserventur, ac
ut hujus regni subditis melius consulatur, ne frivolis aut injustis litibus de
caetero fatigentur; ordinatum and provisum est, quod nulla deinceps Inhibitio,
ex quacunque Curia Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis ad instantiam partis emanabit,
sine subscriptione Advocati ibidem exercentis, id quod gratis and absque feodo
aut salario ab eodem fiet; nisi forte is qui caus^m prosequutus fuerit, pro
ipsius in eadem consilio, aliquid ei ultro erogaverit. Pari ratione decretum
sit, ne ad instantiam alicujus partis ulla emanet Inhibitio ab Episcopo, aut
ejus Cancellario contra Archidiaconum, vel quemvis alium Ecclesiastica
jurisdictione utentem, absque Advocati (ut praefertur) subscriptione. Quod si
forsitan in Curia alicujus Episcopi nullus extiterit Advocatus, tunc
subscriptio Procuratoris ibidem exercentis sufficient.

97. Inhibitiones in causis correctionis, nisi gravamine Judici prius cognito,
non concedendae.
STatutum insuper and decretum sit, ut nulla deinceps Inhibitio concedatur, per
occasionem alicujus decreti Interlocutorii, aut in quacunque causa
correctionis, nisi sub forma praecedente: and ulterius quod ante emanationem
istiusmodi Inhibitionis ipsa Appellatio, aut verum ejusdem exemplar (juramento
super eiusdem veritate praestito) Judici aut ejus legit mo Deputato exhibeatur,
unde and de qualitate delicti, and causa gravaminis Judici praedicto ante
Inhibitionem emissam summatim possit constare. Porro quilibet Appellans aut
ejus legitimus Procurator ante Inhibitionem in causa correctionis obtentam,
Judici aut fuo Deputato ostendet verum transcriptum sive copiam Actorum, unde
se gravatum queritur, and a quibus Appellat; aut juramentum suscipiet, se
diligentiam loco and tempore opportunis praestitisse pro eisdem comparandis,
nec potuisse tamen a Registrario in partibus aut ejus Deputatis, oblato
salario, eadem adipisci. Siquis vero Judex, aut Registrarius Inhibitionem
quamlibet (sic ut praefertur) contra formam praedictam sigillari procuraverit,
aut permiserit, ab executione Officii sui per tres menses suspendatur; sin vero
Procurator aliquis, aut quivis, alius de ipsius mandato contra tenorem
praemissorum in aliquo deliquerit (Inhibitionem sive conficiendo, sive
emittendo, praemissis non observatis) ab exercitio muneris sui praedicti per
annum integrum, sine spe veniae aut restitutionis, amoveatur.

98. Inhibitiones schismaticis, nisi subscribentibus, non concedendae.
QUoniam Legis auxilium frustra implorat, qui in legem committit; cautum sit,
and provisum, ut sicubi Judex Ecclesiasticus adversus refractarios, factiosos,
ac caeremoniarum contemptores, ob non servatos Ecclesiae Anglicanae ritus, vel
ob Precum publicarum contemptum, judicialiter processerit, nullus Judex ad quem
eorum Appellationes admittat, nisi pars Appellans (Appellationis protocollo
dicto Judici per ipsum exhibito) in propria persona receperit, se omnes
Ecclesiae Anglicanae ritus ac caeremonias, and formam publicae Liturgiae
praescriptam bona fide observaturum, ac etiam nisi tribus arciculis superius a
nobis specificatis subscripserit.

99. Intra gradus prohibitos matrimonium contractum, ipso jure nullum.
NEmo matrimonium contrahet intra gradus Divino jure prohibitos, ac expressos
in tabula quadam ex authoritate publica Anno Domini 1563 edita; omniaque
matrimonia taliter contracta, incesta and illegitima judicabuntur, and proinde
(ut ab initio vacua, sive nulla) dissolventur, partesque ita conjunctae per
juris processum separabuntur. Tabulam autem praedictam in singulis Ecclesiis
(Parochianorum sumptibus) public proponi, atque affigi volumus.

100 Minores 21. annis absque parentum consensu matrimonium contrahere
prohibiti.
NUllis liberis (qui vicesimum primum aetatis suae annum nondum compleverint)
absque consensu parentum, aut (defunctis parentibus) tutorum sive gubernatorum
suorum, conjugia sive sponsalia licebit contrahere.

101. Facultates pro Bannis matrimonialibus omittendis per quos, and quibus
sint concedendae.
NUlla in posterum Facultas sive indulgenia, pro matrimonio absque trina
Bannorum denunciatione (juxta Librum publicae Liturgiae) inter quoslibet
celebrando, per quamvis personam jurisdictionem Ecclesiasticam exercentem, vel
privilegia ulla Ecclesiae suae nomine sibi vendicantem, nisi tantum per eos,
qui Episcopalem authoritatem obtinent, vel per Commissarium ad Facultates, vel
sede plena per Archiepiscopi, and Episcoporum Vicarios Generales, aut sede
vacant per Custodes spiritualitatis, vel Ordinarios Episcopalem jurisdictionem
de jure exercentes, and non per alios concedetur; idque duntaxat illustris, ac
clarae conditionis hominibus, suae respective jurisdictioni subditis,
interposita etiam idonea and sufficienti cautione.

102. In facultatibus pro Bannorum omissione concedendis cautio interponenda,
and sub quibus conditionibus.
DIcta cautio conditiones hasce complectetur, Primo quod tempore ejusdem
dispensationis concedendae nullum existit impedimentum ratione praecontractus,
consanguinitatis, affinitatis, vel alterius causae cujuscunque de jure
prohibitae, quod dicto matrimonio occurrere, aut obstare possit. Secundo quod
nulla controversia, lis, seu querela mota sit vel pendeat in aliqua Curia coram
ullo Judice Ecclesiastico super aliquo contractu vel matrimonio alterutrius
dictarum partium cum alia quavis persona. Tertio quod parentum (modo sint in
vivis) vel alias tutorum sive gubernatorum suorum expressum consensum hac in
part obtinuerunt. Postremo quod dictum matrimonium in Ecclesia Parochiali, vel
Capella, ubi contrahentium alter commoratur, and non alias, idque public in
facie Ecclesiae inter horas octavam and duodecimam curabunt solennizari.

103. Eaedem conditiones ob majorem cautelam jurejurando suffultae.
UT omnis deinceps fraus and dolus in obtinendis ejusmodi facultatibus
evitetur; statuimus insuper and ordinamus, quod ante obtentam facultatem pro
matrimonio absque Bannis celebrando, Judici constabit de expresso consensu
parentum, vel parentis (eorum altero defuncto) aut tutorum vel tutoris, per
juramentum duorum fide dignorum testium, quorum unus vel Judici ipsi, vel alii
cuipiam bonae existimationis tum praesenti ac eidem etiam Judici cognito, pro
tali innotescet. Et ulterius ut alter contrahentium juramentum subeat, se
credere, nullum legitimum impedimentum ratione praecontractus,
consanguinitatis, affinitatis, vel alterius causae cujuscunque de jure
prohibitae obstare, nullamque litem aut controversiam in foro aliquo
Ecclesiastico motam esse, quo minus dictum matrimonium, juxtatenorem ejusdem
facultatis, ad effectum procedat.

104. Parentum consensus viduis contrahentibus remissus.
QUod si uterque contrahentium in viduitate constitutus pro Bannis omittendis
dispensationem petierit, tunc clausulam praedictam, per quam parentum consensus
requiritur, licebit praetermitti; ita tamen ut Parochiae, in quibus utraque
pars commoratur, in dispensatione exprimantur, atque illa Parochia nominatim
designetur, in qua ejusmodi matrimonium sit postea celebrandum. Siquis vero
Commissarius ad Facultates, Vic. Generalis, aut dictorum Ordinariorum aliquis
in praemissis, aut quolibet praemissorum deliquerit, is pro singulis ejusmodi
delictis ab executione Officii sui per spatium semestre submoveatur, and
licentia sive indulgentia hujusmodi viribus vacua, and pro nulla ad omnem juris
effectum habebitur, ac si omnino non fuisset concessa; partesque ejusdem
virtute in Matrimonio conjunctae poenis illis subjacebunt, quae in nuptias
clandestinas sunt constitutae.

105. Pro conjugio dirimendo nuda partium confessio non audienda.
QUoniam Matrimoniales causae inter graviores semper habitae fuerint, and
propterea majorem cautelam desiderent, siquando in judiciis veniant
disceptandae; praesertim cum Matrimonium in Ecclesia debite solennizatum,
quovis nomine separari, vel nullum pronunciari postulatur: stricte mandamus and
praecipimus, ut in omnibus divortiorum and nullitatis matrimonii processibus
circumspecte and deliberate procedatur, ac quantum fieri poterit, rei veritas
testium depositionibus aliisque probationibus legitimis eruatur, nec soli
extrajudiciali, aut judiciali and juratae partium confessioni fides habeatur.

106. Sententiae divortii and separationis non nisi pro tribunali ferendae.
NUllae in posterum Sententiae vel separationis a thoro and mensa, vel
nullitatis Matrimonii praetensi ferantur, nisi public, ac pro tribunali, and
de scientia ac consensu vel Archiepiscopi infra Provinciam suam, vel Episcopi
infra propriam Dioecesin, Decani de Arcubus,, Judicis Audientiae Cantuariensis,
aut Vicariorum Generalium, aliorumve Officialium Principalium, vel sede vacant
Custodum spiritualitatis, aut aliorum Ordinariorum, quibus de jure competit, in
suis respective jurisdictionibus, ac Curiis, atque inter suae jurisdictionis
subditos tantum.

107. Separatis, eorum altero superstite, nova copula interdicta.
IN Sententiis, quando ad separationem thori and mensae tantum interponuntur,
monitio, and prohibitio in ipso contextu Sententiae latae fiet, ut a partibus
ab invicem dissociatis cast vivatur, nec ad alias nuptias, alterutra vivente,
convoletur. Denique quo postremum illud firmius observetur, Sententia
separationis non ante pronunciabitur, quam qui eam postulabunt, idoneam
cautionem interposuerint, se contra dictam monitionem and prohibitionem nihil
commissuros.

108. Sanctio in Judices contra praemissa delinquentes.
QUod si quis Judex Sententiam separationis, seu Divortii tulerit, and
praemissa omnia non praestiterit, per annum integrum ab executione Officij sui
per Archiepiscopum, vel Episcopum Dioecesanum suspendetur. Et sententia
separationis, contra formam praedictam lata, pro nulla ad omnem juris effectum
habebitur, ac si omnino lata non fuisset.

De Curiis Ecclesiasticis ad Episcopos, and Archidiaconos spectantibus.
109. Peccata and scandala notoria in Curiis Ecclesiasticis denuncianda.
SIqui per manifestum adulterium, stuprum, incestum, ebrietatem, jurandi
consuetudinem, lenocinium, foenerationem, vel aliam quamcunque vitae
turpitudinem aut nequitiam fratres suos offenderit; Ecclesiarum Oeconomi, and
Inquisitores, sive Assistentes in proximis praesentationibus suis ad Ordinarios
omnium and singulorum ejusmodi delinquentium nomina fideliter deferent, ut
legum severitate pro meritis possint castigari. Tales autem notorii
delinquentes ad sacram Coenam, donec mores in melius commutarint, nequaquam
admittentur.

110. Schismatici in Curiis detegendi.
SI Oeconomi Ecclesiarum, and Inquisitores sive Assistentes de aliquo infra
suam Parochiam vel alibi resciverint, qui vel verbo Dei legendo, aut sincere
praedicando, vel Constitutionum praesentium executioni obstare conabitur, vel
etiam usurpatae ulli and extraneae potestati, hujus regni legibus jamdiu merito
repudiatae atque abolitae, favebit atque adhaerebit; vel dogma aliquod
Papisticum ac erroneum astruet, aut tuebitur; dicti Oeconomi, and Inquisitores
sive Assistentes Episcopo Dioecesano, vel loci Ordinario eundem detegent, and
indicabunt, ut poenis and censuris per Ecclesiasticas sanctiones irrogatis
coerceatur.

111. Precum Divinarum perturbatores in Curiis detegendi.
IN omnibus Eiscoporum and Archidiaconorum visitationibus, Oeconomi, and
Inquisitores sive Assistentes eorum omnium nomina vere and personaliter
praesentabunt, qui inciviliter aut immodeste in Ecclesia se gesserint, vel
intempestiva campanarum pulsatione, obambulatione, garritu, aut alio quovis
strepitu Concionatorem, vel Ministrum interpellaverint.

112. Puberes in festo Paschatis non Communicantes in Curiis detegendi.
ECclesiarum Parochialium, and Capellarum Ministri, Oeconomi, Inquisitores sive
Assistentes quolibet anno infra quadraginta dies post festum Paschatis
Episcopo, vel Cancellario suo exhibebunt nomina and cognomina omnium utriusque
sexus de sua Parochia, qui majores sedecim annis ad sacro-sanctam Communionem
Paschate tum praecedente non accesserint.

113. Peccata notoria Ministris jus est denunciare, privatim confessa retegere,
nefas.
QUoniam saepenumero contingit, Ecclesiae Oeconomos, and Inquisitores sive
Assistentes aliosque e Laicis, quibus id officii, munerisque incumbit, ut per
admonitiones, reprehensiones, and delationes ad Ordinarios peccatum and
impietatem coerceant, partim prae timore potentiorum, partim prae incuria, in
hoc officio praestando remissiores esse quam par est, si horum temporum
licentiam consideremus: statuimus and ordinamus, ut licitum deinceps sit
singulis Rectoribus ac Vicariis, aut (ipsis legitime absentibus) eorum Curatis,
and substitutis, cum Ecclesiae Oeconomis and Assistentibus, reliquisque supra
nominatis, in criminibus ad tempora inferius praestituta detegendis, operas
suas conjungere; si quidem dicti Oeconomi and Assistentes crimina and culpas
enormes in suis Parochiis notorias defer voluerint. Quod si ij facere
detrectaverint, tum licebit singulis Rectoribus and Vicariis, aut (illis ut
supra absentibus) eorum Curatis ac substitutis, omnia ejusmodi crimina, de
quibus dicti Officiarii habent inquirere, aut alia, quaecunque ipsis (utpote
quibus praecipua cura peccati infra suas Parochias coercendi incumbit)
corrigenda videbuntur, temporibus constitutis, vel alias, ubi commodum
judicaverint, ad Ordinarios suos defer and praesentare. Proviso semper, quod
siquis peccata sua occultiora alicui Ministro privatim confiteatur
(conscientiam suam exonerando, quo ab illo spiritualem consolationem, and
levamen percipiat) eum hac nostra Constitutione nullatenus teneri volumus; quin
potius stricte e illi praecipimus, ne ejusmodi aliquod crimen aut delictum
fidei ac tacitutnitati suae taliter commissum cuivis personae aliquando
retegat, nisi sit ex eo genere criminum, quorum occultatio ex legibus hujus
regni sit capitalis: qui contra fecerit, eo ipso irregularis esto.

114. Recusantes per Ministros in Curiis detegendi.
REctores, Vicarii, vel Curati omnes quolibet anno solicit inquirent, quot
Papistici Recusantes viri, mulieres, vel pueri ultra tredecim annos nati, quot
etiam Papisticae religioni rectius ad dicti (qui licet in Ecclesia se
praesentes sistant, Sacramenti tamen participes fieri recusant) infra suas
respective Parochias commorentur, sive ut hospites, sive ut inquilini; eorumque
omnium nomina vera (siquidem ea poterunt exquirere) vel alias, quae pro tempore
usurpant (debita semper inter absolute and ex part Recusantes distinctione
servata) in scriptum referent, eademque quatenus norunt, creduntque sic
distincta, and sua manu descripta ante festum Nativitatis Ordinariis suis
fideliter exhibebunt, idque sub poena suspensionis per eosdem Ordinarios
infligenda; atque sic demceps singulis annis sequentibus, sub simili poena ante
festum S. Ioannis Baptistae. Insuper tenebuntur omnes Ordinarii, Cancellarii,
Commissarii, Archidiaconi, Officiales, caeterique Ecclesiastica jurisdictione
fungentes, quibus supra-dictae detectiones exhibitae fuerint, easdem infra
mensem unum, postquam illas receperint, Episcopo suo respective tradere, sub
poena suspensionis semestris ab omni muneris sui executione, per Episcopum
(quoties hac in part defecerint) irroganda: qui and ipse easdem infra sex
leprimanas Archiepiscopo curabit offerri, per eundem infra alias sex
septimanas, postquam ipse receperit, Regiae Majestati praesentandas.

115. Ne Ministris aut Oeconomis fraudi sit criminosorum detectio.
QUum ad correctionem criminum and hominum criminosorum Ecclesiarum Oeconomi,
inquisitores, sive Assistentes, aliique id genus Officiarii Ecclesiastici
jurejurando obstringantur, (quemadmodum and Ministri nostra monitione tenentur)
tam ipsa crimina and culpas a dictis criminosis perpetratas, qua etiam publicam
famam de iisdem sparsam and disseminatam defer, and praesentare: unde saepe
odium illis, and invidia, quandoque etiam molestia per dictos sontes eorumve
amicos conflatur: monemus and hortamur omnes Judices tam Ecclesiasticos, quam
saeculares, quatenus tremendum summi Judicis tribunal recipient, and
reverentur, ne admittant in suis Guriis ullam querelam, actionem, litis
intentationem aut prosequutionem contra ullos Ecclesiarum Oeconomos, aut
Inquisitores, sive Assistentes, aliosve Officiarios Ecclesiasticos, qui
ejusmodi detectiones exhibuerint, nec contra Ministrum aliquem, quamcunque
demum personam vel culpam detulerit; quum omnes ejusmodi delationes ad
impietatis audaciam cohibendam spectent, quumq, tam ex regulis charitatis, quam
recti regiminis praesumendum sit, eos quicquid hac in re fecerint, non odii aut
malevolentiae causa, sed fidei suae liberandae conscientia fecisse.

116. Oeconomi ad binas tantum detegendi vices annuatim tenentur.
NUllius Parochiae Oeconomi, vel Inquisitores, sive Assistentes accusationes,
aut detectiones suas cogentur Judici cuipiam Ecclesiastico praesentare saepius,
quam singulis annis semel, in iis utique locis, ubi non consueverunt pluries
exhiberi, aut bis in Dioecesi vel loco quocunq (nisi in Episcopi visitatione.)
Pro quibus Parochiae cujusque praesentationibus Registrarius cujuslibet Curiae,
in qua exhibendae sunt, supra quatuor denarios in uno anno non recipiet, sub
poena menstruae suspensionis a muneris sui exercitio pro singulis ejusmodi
delictis. Proviso semper liberum fore cuique Ministro, Oeconomis, and
Assistentibus, quoties and quando videbitur (pro causarum condition)
delinquentes defer and accusare, similiterque cuivis pie affecto, vel etiam
Judici cuilibet Ecclesiastico, super notitia sibi facta de enormi aliquo
crimine infra suam jurisdictionem perpetrato, Ministrum, Oeconomos, aut
Assistentes licebit admonere, quatenus gloriam Dei recipient, and correctionem
peccati, ut tale crimen public detegant, (dum tamen justam ejus detegendi
causam invenerint) ut ista ratione mature puniri ac corrigi possit. Proviso
etiam, ut pro spontaneis hisce praesentationibus nullum feoum aut salarium sub
poena praedicta recipiatur.

117. Oeconomi, binis detegendi vicibus debite perfuncti, non sunt de reliquo
in Curiam vocandi.
NUllus Ecclesiae Oeconomus, aut Inquisitor, sive Assistens ad comparendum
coram Ecclesiastico Judice quocunque extra tempus vel tempora praestituta
citabitur, quod delictum aliquod in sua parochia commissum, and Ecclesiasticis
censuris obnoxium aliis temporibus defer recusaverit; neque eorum quilibet
post detectiones suas statis temporibus exhibitas, earum occasion deinceps in
jus trahetur, nisi ex certis and manifestis indiciis constiterit, eum volentem
and scientem omisisse detectionem notorii alicujus criminis aut criminum, quae
vel commissa fuisse noverit, vel ignorare saltem non potuerit, publica fama
eadem laborare: vel nisi forte justa causa emerserit, eosdem pro detectionum
priorum explanatione in Curiam compellendi: quo casu (voluntariae scilicet
omissionis) Ordinarii contra eosdem taliter procedent, quemadmodum in causis
spontanei perjurii in Curiis Ecclesiasticis commissi, hactenus lege cautum and
provisum est.

118. Anni superioris Oeconomi detectiones suas tenentur exhibere, priusquam
recens electi munus suum adeant.
OEconomi, and Inquisitores, vel Assistentes non prius Officio suo soluti
deinceps intelligentur, quam ipsorum successores juramentum suum susceperint,
id quod prima post festum Paschatis septimana, vel aliqua statim sequente (pro
arbitrio Ordinarii) fieri volumus. Quod tempus dicto juramento assignatum,
alterum semper erit ex duobus illis anni cujusque temporibus, in quibus omnium
Parochiarum Ministri, Oeconomi, and assistentes suis respective Ordinariis
exhibebunt illorum criminum detectiones, quae citra proximas praesentationes in
suis Parochiis admissa esse compererint. Quod officium praedicti Oeconomi
perficient, antequam recens electi Oeconomi and Assistentes juramentum suum
praestent, neque illis ullatenus permittetur, dictas praeteritorum criminum
detectiones in novitios hosce rejicere, qui munus suum vix dum ingressi,
eorundem ignati esse praesumuntur; sub poena sanctionum, in eos constitutarum,
qui conscientias and juramenta sua ad hunc modum audebunt eludere.

119. Detectionum schedulae fide bona, non perfunctorie and pro forma
conficiendae.
QVo melius illis incommodis occurratur, quae ex detectionum schedulis sive
billis (quas vocant) propere, and festinanter confectis (in ipsis videsicet
diebus Visitationum, and Synodorum) hactenus constat evenisse: statutum est and
decretum, ut quilibet Cancellarius, Archidiaconus, Commissarius, Officialis,
aliique jus dicentes Ecclesiasticum, ad tempus Oeconomorum juramento praestando
consuetum, itemque Archiepiscopus and Episcopi omnes, quoties visitationes suas
indicunt, Parochiarum omnium Oeconomis, and Inquisitoribus, sive Assistentibus,
aut eorum aliquibus tradant aut tradi curent Libros Articulorum, de quibus
eosdem velint detectiones suas anno insequente ad stata tempora exhibendas
instituere: in quo item Libro apponetur forma juramenti, quo statim ante
singulas ejusmodi praesentationes sint onerandi: ut spatio sufficienti dato ad
examinandam, and perpendendam tum juramenti sui qualitatem, tum etiam
Articulorum, quibus ipsorum detectiones niti debeant, diliberate and cum fide
easdem domi suae formare possint, ad conscientias suas, jurisjurandi religione
jam obstrictas, (uti probos and pios decet) liberandas.

120 Nequa Citatio, nisi expressis citandorum nominibus, e Curiis emittatur.
NUllus Episcopus, Cancellarius, Archidiaconus, Officialis aut alius quilibet
Judex Ecclesiasticus Citationes ullas generales (quae vulgo Quorum nomina
dicuntur) ex Curia sua emanare patietur: nisi partium citandarum nomina per
Registrarium, vel ejus deputatum diserte sub eisdem exprimantur; eaedemque
citationes (cum nominibus sic inscriptis) Judicis vel ejus Surrogati
subscriptione and sigillo munitae exeant.

121. Nequis in pluribus Curiis super eodem crimine cogatur respondere.
IN partibus iis, ubi Episcopus and Archidiaconus sive ex praescriptione sive
ex compositione ad diversa unius and ejusdem anni tempora visitationes suas
obire consueverunt; ne Majestatis suae subditi in pluribus Curiis
Ecclesiasticis super uno and eodem crimine (non sine gravi ipsorum molestia)
postulentur, statuimus and ordinamus ut quilibet Archidiaconus, vel ejus
Officialis infra unum mensem, post peractam eo anno visitationem, and
praesentationes acceptas, Episcopum vel ejus Cancellarium sub sua manu and
sigillo instruat ac informet, de nominibus and delictis eotum omnium, qui in
visitatione sua fuerint detecti and praesentati, quo is super ulla causa, aut
crimine ad Archidiaconum prius delato aliquem convenire deinceps abstineat.
Pari ratione decernimus, ut Cancellarius, infra idem tempus post finitam
Episcopi visitationem, and detectiones receptas, eorum sontium nomina and
delicta, quos in proxima ipsius visitatione praesentari contigerit, sua
subscriptione and sigillo verificata, ad Archidiaconum, vel ejus Officialem (in
praedictum finem) transmittat. Quod si dicti Officiarii vel se invicem (sicut
praefertur) instituere ac informare omiserint, vel post factam ejusmodi
informationem, personas aut culpas in aliena visitatione detectas and
praesentatas, attigerint, tunc eorum quilibet sic delinquens ab omni
jurisdictionis suae exercitio per Episcopum Dioecesanum eatenus suspendetur,
donec expensas omnes per hanc molestiam susceptas personae gravatae restituerit.

122. Sententiae pro Ministris a Beneficio vel Officio removendis, non nisi per
Episcopum pronunciandae.
QUotiescunque in Curia aliqua Ecclesiastica, ad quemlibet hujus Provinciae
Episcopum spectante, contra Ministrum accusatio instituetur, Cancellarius,
Commissarius, Officialis, vel quivis alius Ecclesiasticam jurisdictionem
obtinens, (cujus intererit) causam omnem per processus, aliasque vias and modos
adversus eum expediet, ejusque in non comparendo contumaciam primo
suspensionis, eandem vero continuatam excommunicationis poena ulciscetur. Sin
autem debite comparens legitimo juris processui se submiserit, tunc, ubi causae
maturitas Sententiam postularit, si forte delicti meritum vel deprivationem,
vel depositionem a sacris ordinibus ex decreto juris exigat; nullam ejusmodi
sententiam per quamlibet personam pronunciari volumus praeterquam per
Episcopum, adhibitis ipsius Cancellario, and Decano (si commode id fieri
potest) and aliquot Praebendariis, si prope Ecclesiam Cathedralem dicta Curia
teneatur, vel Archidiacono (modo ejus facultas detur) aliisque duobus ad minus
gravibus Ministris, ac eisdem Concionatoribus, per Episcopum advocandis, quando
Curiam aliis in locis haberi contigerit.

123. Actus judiciales non nisi publica, and authentica manu expediendi.
NUllus Cancellarius, Commissarius, Archidiaconus, Officialis, aut alius
quilibet Ecclesiasticam jurisdictionem exercens, actum aliquod judiciale
expediet, sive Cententiosae, sive Voluntariae Jurisdictionis, nisi adhibito
Ordinario ejusdem Curiae Registrario, vel ejus legitimo deputato; aut fi^is
velii nolint aut nequeant interesse, tum aliis personis authenticis, quae eadem
acta conscribant aut expediant, sub poena suspensionis ipso facto subeundae.

124. Curiarum sigilla, unica.
NUllus Cancellarius, Commissarius Archidiaconus, Officialis, aut alius
quilibet jurisdictione utens Ecclesiastica, plura quam unum duntaxat sigillum
citra Episcopi consensum habebit, pro omnibus, quaecunque in ipsius Officium
inciderint, sigillandis. Quod quidem sigillum custodietur semper aut penes
ipsum, aut penes illius substitutum legitimum, ejus vice jus dicentem, nec non
infra ipsius jurisdictionem, vel saltem in urbe aut oppido ejusdem Comitatus
principali commorantem. Hoc sigillum titulum ejus Jurisdictionis continebit,
quam quisque praedictorum Judicum, aut deputatorum exercet.

125. Curiarum seeds opportuna.
OMnes Cancellarii, Commissarii, Archidiaconi, Officiales, caeterique Judices
Ecclesiastici Curias suas (de mandato, vel consensu Episcopi Dioecesani) in
talibus locis instituent, qui ad eos, quos in eisdem comparere oportet,
excipiendos idonei, and ad laborem itineris minuendum maxim commodi
videbuntur. Similiter etiam Curias suas intra horas competentes inchoabunt, ac
dissolvent, ita ut quisque (quantum fieri potest) mature and tempestive domum
suam possit repetere.

126. Curiae inferiores testamenta originalia ad Episcoporum Archiva jubentur
transmittere.
CUm Decani, Archidiaconi, Praebendarii, Rectores, Vicarii, aliique
Ecclesiastica jurisdictione fungentes, omnium infra suas respective
jurisdictiones defunctorum testamenta probandi immunitatem sibi vendicent,
neque tamen cognitos ullos aut certos habeant Registrarios, vel locum publicum
Registrorum suorum tutae custodiae deputatum: unde saepius evenerit,
testamenta, jura, and legata quamplurima per dictorum Judicum mortem, aut
mutationem perire ac intercidere, in maximum subditorum praejudicium ac
dispendium: statuimus and ordinamus, ut singuli peculiarem ejusmodi
jurisdictionem possidentes ac exercentes semel quotannis referant in publicum
Archivum Episcopi Doecesani vel Decani and Capituli, infra cujus ditionem
peculiares illae jurisdictiones extiterint, omnia testamenta originalia per
ipsos infra peculiares suas jurisdictiones respective eo anno probata: vel
verum saltem eorundem exemplar per dictum Judicem peculiarem, ejusque Notarium
examinatum, subscriptum, and consignatum. Quod siquis Judicum praedictorum in
eo deliquerit, is per Episcopum Dioecesanum, vel Decanum and Capitulum, ad quos
illa Jurisdictio respective pertinebit, omni peculiaris jurisdictionis
exercitio eousque privabitur, quoad hanc nostram Constitutionem debite
adimpleverit.

De Judicibus Ecclesiasticis.
127. Judicum Ecclesiasticorum qualitas.
NUllus in posterum ad Officium Cancellarii, Commissarii, aut Officialis,
admittetur, ad jurisdictionem quamlibet Ecclesiasticam exercendam, nisi qui
vicesimum sextum ad minus aetatis suae annum compleverit, and qui in Jure
Civili and Canonico eruditus existat, sitque ad minimum Magister artium, aut in
Jure Baccalaureus, ac in praxi, and causis forensibus laudabiliter exercitatus,
nec non recte affectus, and religioni studiose deditus, de cujus vita and
moribus nullus sinister sermo audiatur: ac insuper nisi priusquam talis
cujusque Officii functionem, aut exercitium adeat, in Supremam Regis
authoritatem in causis Ecclesiasticis coram Episcopo, vel public in Curia
juraverit; ac religionis Articulos in Synodo anno 1562 communiter conclusos
subscriptione sua comprobaverit; and etiam juratus receperit, se integre and ex
aequo (pro captu suo) jus redditurum, absque omni intuitu vel gratiae, vel
mercedis; quorum utique juramentorum, ac subscriptionis per Registrarium tum
praesentem actum conscribetur. Haud secus omnes Cancellarii, Commissarii,
Officiales, Registrarii, aliique quotquot jurisdictionis, sive ministerii
Ecclesiastici locum aliquem in praesenti possident, aut exercent, citra festum
Nativitatis proxime venturum, coram Archiepiscopo, aut Episcopo, vel etiam in
aperta Curia sub quo, and in qua muneribus suis funguntur, eadem juramenta
subire, and (prout superius dictum est) subscribere tenebuntur. Quod si facere
recusaverint, a munerum suorum executione eousque suspendentur, quo ad
juramenta praemissa, and subscriptionem, ut supra, praestiterint.

128. Qualitas Deputandorum.
NUllus Cancellarius, Commissarius, Archidiaconus, Officialis, aut alius
quicunque Ecclesiastica jurisdictione praeditus aliquem ad Curiam sui absentis
loco tenendam quovis tempore deputabit, nisi qui gravis Minister fuerit,
idemque graduatus; vel pro Concionatore publico legitime receptus, ac prope
ejusmodi Consistoria Beneficiatus; vel qui in Legibus Baccalaureus, aut in
Artibus Magister ad minimum extiterit, ac in jure Civili and Canonico scientiam
habuerit competentem, and de verae religionis studio, sobrioque ac honesto
vitae cultu fuerit commendatus; sub poena suspensionis ab executione officiorum
pro singulis delictis spatio trium mensium toties quoties. Deputatus vero qui
praedictarum qualitatum expers, audebit tamen Judicis vices in Curiis tenendis
(ut supra) usurpare, simili prorsus censurae (modo and forma praemissis)
subjacebit.

De Procuratoribus.
129. Procuratores, nisi de partis mandato authentico, causas attingere
prohibiti.
NUllus deinceps in aliqua causa Procurabit, nisi ab ipso litigante apud acta
Curiae fuerit constitutus, vel in ipso litis ingressu illius vero and
sufficienti procuratorio fulciatur. Sufficiens vocamus, quod authentico aliquo
sigillo munitur, approbatione item, aut saltem ratihabitione constituentis
eodem accedente. Ejusmodi vero procuratoria omnia quamprimum confici volumus,
and a Procuratoribus exhiberi, ac in publicis ejusdem Curiae scriniis per
Registrarium salva custodiri. Qui ex Registrariis vel Procuratoribus secus in
istorum aliquo fecerit, bimestri suspensione ab exercitio Officii sui, absque
omni spe relaxationis, aut restitutionis, ferietur.

130. Procuratores sine Advocati alicujus consilio causas retinere prohibiti.
AD minuendas and consopiendas lites, ac litigantium querelas tollendas qui
Procuratorum incuria ac negligentia, vel etiam inscitia multoties causa cadunt;
necnon ad incrementum bonarum literarum, jurisque Civilis and Ganonici
propagationem: juxta laudabiles consuetudines in Curiis Archiepiscopi
Cantuariensis hactenus observatas, statuimus and ordinamus, ut nullus
Procurator ibidem exercens absque Advocati alicujus consilio quamlibet causam
suscipiat, ac per duos dies juridicos retineat, sub poena suspensionis annuae
ab Officii sui executione; nec Judici potestas erit, absque expresso
Archiepiscopi mandato and authoritate, hujus poenae gratiam ullatenus faciendi.

131. Procuratores, inconsulto Advocato, in causa concludere prohibiti.
NOn admittet aliquis Judex in Curiis Archiepiscopi praedictis libellum, aut
aliam quamlibet materiam, sine consilio and subscriptione alicujus Advocati ad
exercendum ibidem admissi: neque vero Procuratoribus licebit, in causa
concludere, nisi de notitia Advocati in eadem causa adhibiti, and salariati.
Siquis vero Procurator contra fecerit, aut fieri procuraverit, vel etiam
Advocatum quocunque praetextu suo fraudaverit stipendio aut salario, vel in
Advocato consulendo, quid in causa fieri expediat, negligentior fuerit; eidem
suspensionem semestrem a muneris sui executione, sine spe veniae interim
consequendae, decernimus.

132. Procuratorium in causis testamentariis juramentum prohibitum.
CUm in testamentorum probationibus, administrationumque bonorum ab intestato
decedentium petitionibus, juramentum per Procuratores Curiarum in animam
constituentis praestitum multis patere incommodis sit perspectum; cautum
deinceps esse volumus, ut quilibet Executor, vel bonorum defuncti
administrationem petens, Judicem in hac part ordinarium, vel ejus Surrogatum
personaliter adeat, and juramentum usitatum per se and non per Procuratorem
aliquem praestet. Si tamen vel valetudinis, vel aetatis incommodo, vel alia
causa legitima impeditus in propria persona Judicem adire nequeat: permittimus,
ut (fide super impedimenti veritate per excusatorem fide dignum prius facta)
Judex gravi alicui viro Ecclesiastico partis habitationi vicino Commissionem
concedat, per quam juramentum usitatum dicto Executori vel Administrationem
petenti vice sua ministrandi eidem viro Ecclesiastico potestatem tradat, eumque
roget, ut quid in praemissis fecerit, per nuncium fidelem se postea certiorem
reddat. Proviso semper, quod nullus Judex, vel Registrarius, pro hujusmodi
Commissione scribenda, concipienda, aut sigillanda, ultra summam sex solidorum
and octo denariorum quoquo modo accipiet, cujus dimidium Judici, and dimidium
ejusdem Curiae Registrario cedet.

133. Procuratorum vox importunior in Curiis, cohibita.
QUoniam experientia compertum est, Procuratorum vociferationes, and clamores
in Curiis Archiepiscopi non modo Judicibus and Advocatis molestiam and
offensionem parere, sed and astantibus causam contemptus and calumniae adversus
Curiam ipsam praebere; quo melius dignitati Judicis consulatur, causaeque
facilius and commodius tractentur, and expediantur: mandamus, and praecipimus,
ut Procuratores in Curiis praedictis praecipue in id intendant, ut juxta
consilium Advocatorum acta per Registrarium bona fide conscribantur, ut ab omni
strepitu, and verborum contentione abstineant, and modeste se gerant, ac
loquentibus Judicibus aut Advocatis, vel eorum aliquo, protinus conticescant,
sub poena silentii imponendi per duos terminos inde sequentes. Etsi eorum
aliquis pluries deliquerit, neque debita interposita admonitione se
emendaverit, a praedicti muneris exercitio in perpetuum arceatur.

De Registrariis.
134. Registrariorum excessus coerciti.
SIquis Registrarius vel ipsius Assignatus, aut deputatus qualiscunque
certificatoria receperit fine consensu Judicis, quem pro tribunali sedere
contigerit; vel sponte omiserit praeconizari facere quemlibet citatum aut
assignatum ad comparendum die aliquo juridico; aut testes in diem a Judice
praestitutum examinandos indebite distulerit; aut judiciali and legitimae
monitioni Judicis non paruerit; aut si neglexerit citationes and decreta ante
proximum diem juridicum exequenda, and per nuncios speciales emittenda
transcribere; aut non euraverit testamenta omnia infra tempus idoneum in
registrum conscribi; vel siquid falsum and ex se commentum, ac non per Judicem
pronunciatum, tanquam Judicis decretum in acta retulerit; aut in transmissione
processuum ad Judicem ad quem aliquid falsi inseruerit, aut quicquam sive dolo
malo, sive lata negligentia omiserit; aut munera in favorem alterutrius partis
in causis instantiae, vel promotis ex officio acceperit; aut alterutri partium
litigantium a consiliis direct, vel indirecte fuerit; aut in executione
Officii sui aliud malitiose aut subdole fecerit, unde Judex Ecclesiasticus, aut
ejus Jurisdictio possit infamari: volumus and ordinamus eundem Registrarium aut
ejus Assignatum and Deputatum in praemissis, aut eorum aliquo delinquentem a
suo munere ac Officio per unum, duo, tres, aut plures menses (pro delicti
ratione) per Episcopum Dioecesanum suspendi, publicumque aliquem Notarium per
Episcopum deputari, qui (durante ejusmodi poena) omnia dicti Registraii
Officium contingentia exequatur.

135. Feodorum, quae juris Ecclesiastici administris debentur, census debet
esse statarius.
NUllus Episcopus, Suffraganeus; Cancellarius, Commissarius, Archidiaconus,
Officialis, aut alius Ecclesiasticam jurisdictionem quamcunque exercens, nec
ullus cujuslibet Curiae Ecclesiasticae Registratius, vel administer quicunque
dictis Officiariis vel Curiis subserviens, pro qualibet causa in illorum Curiis
promota alia aut majora feoda sive salaria deinceps recipiet, quam ea quae anno
1597. Reverendissimo patri D. Ioanni nuper Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo
certificata, and ab eodem rata sunt, and approbata. Quod sinquis Judex aut
Registrarius, vel eorum Minister aliquis contra fecrit, pro singulis ejusmodi
delictis per sex menses Officii sui exercitio privabitur. Proviso semper, quod
si dubium aliquod de talium feodorum, aut eorum cujuslibet certa summa oriri
contigerit, tum ea feoda pro legitimis judicabuntur, quae per Archiepiscopum
Cantuariensem pro tempore existentem sub manus suae subscriptione erunt
approbata, nisi Statuta hujus regni hactenus edita in particulari aliquo casu
alia express praestituerint. Proviso etiam, quod nihil salarii aut pecuniae
recipietur, vel per Archiepiscopum, vel per Episcopum, aut Suffraganeum ullum
direct aut indirecte pro quolibet in sacros Ordines suscipiendo: nec quod
aliqua persona vel personae eisdem Archiepiscopo, Episcopo, vel Suffraganeo
subservientes, pro membrana, scriptione, cera, sigillatione, vel alia quavis
causa hoc negotium contingente, supra december solidos percipient, sub poenis hac
in part lege constitutis.

136. Statarius Feodorum census in tabulas relatus public in Consistoriis and
Archivis proponendus.
STatuimus porro and ordinamus, ut cujusqu Judicis Ecclesiastici Registrarius
tabulas binas, in quibus certae singulorum feodorum summae separatim
exprimentur, public figi curet and proponi; unam in Consistorio, vel loco
consueto, ubi dicta Guria teneri solet; alteram in suo Archivo; utramque in
loco ita congruo, ut quilibet (cujus intererit) ejusdem inspiciendae, and
legendae, vel etiam transcribendae liberam habeat facultatem; quod ante Festum
Nativitatis proxime futurum perfici volumus. Quod siquis Registrarius dictas
tabulas juxta tenorem praemissorum public figendas non curaverit, ab
executione Officii sui eousque suspendetur quoad praemissa (modo and forma
specificatis) perfecerit; easque tabulas semel fixas siquando vel auferet, vel
(in fraudem hujus Constitutionis) ex loco, in quo primum positae erant,
removeri, vel quovis pacto occultari patietur: tunc pro singulis ejusmodi
delictis ab exercitio muneris sui per semestre spatium suspendetur.

137. Feoda pro Ordinum literis, aliisque licentiis Episcopo exhibendis, tantum
dimidia (praeterquam in prima Episcopi visitatione) persolvenda.
CUm non minima sit Visitationis causa and effectus, ut Episcopus,
Archidiaconus, aut alius Visitans de statu, sufficientia, and facultatibus
Cleri, and aliorum visitandorum perfectiorem aliquam notitiam consequantur;
aequum duximus, ut quilibet Rector, Vicarius, Curatus, Ludi-magister, and alius
quicunque licentiatus literas Ordinum, Institutionis, and Inductionis, itemque
dispensationes, Licentias, and Facultates suas quascunque in Visitatione prima
illius Episcopi, vel in proxima post ejus admissi onem exhibeat, per dictum
Visitantem approbandas, aut (si justa fuerit causa) rejiciendas, and si
approbatae fuerint, per Registrarium (uti moris est) consignandas, quodque
feoda in Visitationibus (intuitu praemissorum) consueta solvi, semel duntaxat
tempore alicujus Episcopi integra persolvantur; in reliquis vero ejusdem
Visitationibus, quamdiu in ea sede permanserit, dictorum feodorum dimidium
tantum exigatur.

Apparitores.
138. Apparitorum excessus coerciti.
QUoniam excessibus and gravaminibus, quae per Apparitores inferri dicuntur,
remedium cupimus adhibere opportunum; censemus Apparitorum multitudinem
(quantum fieri poterit) restringendam. Statuimns ergo and ordinamus, nullatenus
licitum fore Episcopis vel Archidiaconis eorumve Vicariis seu Officialibus,
aliisque inferioribus Ordinariis, deputare and habere plures Apparitores,
jurisdictionibus suis respective inservientes, quam ante triginta annos
praeteritos vel ipsi, vel ipsorum praedecessores habere consueverunt; qui omnes
per se suum fideliter exequantur Officium, nec per Nuntios aut substitutos
(quocunque quaesito color) sua vice mandatorum executiones demandent, aut
permittant, nisi ex causa a loci Ordinario prius cognita and approbata: neque
vero promotorum Officii, vel denunciatorum personas omnino sustinebunt, feodave
ampliora vel majora, quam quae his Constitutionibus superius statuuntur,
ullatenus exigent. Quod si vel plures, quam superius est expressum, deputati
extiteriat, vel illorum aliqui praemissa violaverint; deputantes, si Episcopi
sint, per Superiorem moniti supernumerarios dimittant; si Ordinarii Episcopis
inferiores, ab executione Officii suspendantur, donec hujusmodi deputatos
amoverint; Deputati autem ipsi ab Apparitorum Officio amoveantur perpetuo: and
si amoti non desistant, (tanquam contumaces) Canonicis censuris coerceantur:
Proviso semper, quod si Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis experientia compertum
habuerit, Apparitorum numerum in aliqua Dioecesi redundare, tum omnem ejusmodi
redundantiam dicto Archiepiscopo relinquimus, pro ipsius beneplacito minuendam.

AUTHORITAS. Synodorum.
139. Synodus nationalis, Ecclesia repraesentativa.
QUisquis de caetero affirmabit, sacrosanctam hujus Nationis Synodum in Christi
nomine, ac de Regis mandato congregatam, non esse repraesentative veram
Ecclesiam Anglicanam: excommunicetur, nequaquam absolvendus, priusquam
resipuerit, and impium hunc errorem public revocarit.

140. Synodi acta tam absentes, quam praesentes obligant.
QUisquis de caetero affirmabit, nullos sive Clericos sive Laicos, qui in eadem
sacra Synodo personaliter non convenerint, ejusdem Decretis, Ecclesiasticas
causas concernentibus (quantumvis ex suprema Regiae Majestatis authoritate
conditis, and per eandem ratihabitis) ullatenus obligari, ut quibus ipsi votum
and consensum suum non praebuerint: excommunicetur, nequaquam absolvendus,
priusquam resipuerit, ac impium hunc errorem public revocarit.

141. Synodi authoritati derogantes, coerciti.
QUisquis de caetero affirmabit, dictam sacram Synodum, congregatam ut supra,
fuisse coetum ex talibus conflatum, qui in pios and religiosos Evangelii
professores conspirabant, ac proinde tum ipsos, tum ipsorum acta in Canonibus
sive Constitutionibus circa causas Ecclesiasticas ex Regis authoritate (ut
praedictum est) condendis, ac sanciendis rejici, ac contemni debere, quantumvis
eaedem per dictam potestatem Regiam, ac supremam ejusdem authoritatem
ratihabitae, confirmatae, ac injunctae sint; excommunicetur, haud quaquam
absolvendus, priusquam resipuerit, ac impium hunc errorem public revocarit.

FINIS.

