PRAYERS To be Used during the QUEENS SICKNESS, In the Cities of London and
Westminster.

By His Majesty's Special Command.

DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceased;
Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1694.

PRAYERS To be used During the Queens Sickness, in the Cities of London and
Westminster.
This Prayer shall be used, when the Litany is not said, after the Prayer for
the King and Queens Majesty's; when it is said, then after the Collect for the
Day. O Father of Mercies, and God of all Comfort, our only help in time of
need; We fly unto thee for succor in behalf of thy Servant our Sovereign Lady
the Queen, lying now under thy hand on the bed of Sickness. Comfort her with
thy Salvation, support her with thy holy Spirit, enable her to bear whatsoever
thou shall lay upon her, with Patience and Resignation to thy Will. Give a
Blessing to the Means used for her Recovery, Restore her to her former Health
in thy good time, and continue her long, together with his Sacred Majesty, to
be the blessed Instruments of advancing thy Glory, and establishing true
Religion, and Righteousness, and Peace in these Kingdoms. We confess that, by
our manifold sins, we have deserved the severest of thy Judgments; yet we
humbly beseech thee, upon our true Repentance, to pardon all our Offenses, to
turn away thy Anger from us, and to hear the Prayers that we now offer up to
thee: So we that are thy people and the sheep of thy pasture shall give thee
Thanks for ever, and will always be showing forth thy Praise from generation to
generation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. When the Litany is not said,
these following Collects, taken out of the Office of the Visitation of the
Sick, shall be used after the Prayer for All Conditions of Men. O Lord, look
down from heaven, behold, visit and relieve thy Servant, and our most gracious
Sovereign Lady the Queen; Look upon her with the eyes of thy Mercy, give her
Comfort, and sure Confidence in thee, defend her from the danger of the enemy,
and keep her in perpetual Peace and Safety, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen. HEar us, Almighty and most merciful God and Savior; Extend thy
accustomed goodness to this thy Servant who is grieved with Sickness.
Sanctify, we beseech thee, this thy fatherly Correction to her; that the sense
of her weakness may add strength to her Faith, and seriousness to her
Repentance. That if it shall be thy good pleasure to restore her to her former
Health, she may lead the residue of her Life at the fear, and to thy glory: or
else give her grace so to take the Visitation, that after this painful life
ended, she may dwell with thee in life everlasting, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen. When the Litany is said, then these two Collects shall be used
after the Prayer, We humbly beseech thee, O Father, etc.
FINIS.

