The Case betwee,n the Right Honorable CITY of LONDON, and Robert Campion.
Represented to Public View, after Sixteen Years private sad Sufferings, and
attendance, early and late, upon the several Lord Mayors, Aldermen, and
Common-Councels, without Relief.
ROBERT CAMPION, being by Trade a Tallow-Chandler, and aged above Sixty Years;
and having a Wife aged above Sixty Years, and two Children; had, by his pains
and care in his Calling, by Gods blessing, in his younger years, gained an
Estate of One Thousand Pounds, before the Troubles began, toward the
maintenance of himself, his Wife and Children, and for their provision in the
World: which he lent unto the City of London (in their necessity) to be repayed
with Interest at six Months end; and had a Bond Sealed with the City Seal, for
repayment thereof accordingly.

The Bond bears date the first of August, 1643. to be paid upon the third of
February, next ensuing the date. At which time the said Robert Campion repaired
to the Chamberlains Office, where the same was by the Bond to be paid, for the
Interest of his Money, toward the livelihood of himself and Family; the
Chamberlain refused to pay him, and advised him to go to the Court of Aldermen
for his Money, which he did, Sir John Woollaston being then Lord Mayor; who
taking notice of the said Robert Campion's good affection and forwardness to
lend his Money, desired a little patience for a Fortnight or three weeks, that
the Court might examine what was become of the money lent: and after that
desired as much time longer: and then Alderman Andrews directed him to bring a
Petition to the Court of Aldermen, and Common-Counsel for his said Money; And
he attended their Honors four years; during which time, Sir John Woollaston,
Alderman Atkins, Alderman Adams, and Alderman Gayr were Mayors.

The said Robert Campion attending still an answer of his Petition; when
Alderman Warner was Lord Mayor, he directed him to put the said Bond in Suit,
which he did in Michaelmas Term, 1648. But the City refused to appear; and
thereupon Issues were awarded against them; But the said Robert Campion being
aged and not able to undergo so tedious a Solicitation and proceeding at Law,
petitioned the Court of Aldermen and Common-Counsel again, hoping that they
would take his distressed condition into consideration, after so many years:
and so continued Petitioning every Lord Mayor, desiring that he might have his
Debt paid, according to Justice. Whereupon the Common-Counsel ordered a
Committee the 19 of October, 1652. to consider what might be the best and most
effectual way and means for the payment of his Money. And upon their Report the
19 of April 1653. it was ordered at a Common Counsel, that the Committee for
letting the City-Lands, should be authorized to demise unto Robert Campion any
of the City Lands demisable, as he should find out; reserving the old Rent.
Provided, the Fine do not exceed 600 l. Which Fine is ordered shall be forborne,
during the pleasure of this Court. The said Robert Campion having lent all his
Money unto the City already, and not knowing how to raise 600 l. if the
pleasure of that Court had been to require it, still Petitioned for his own
money, or desired that he might have the 600 l. paid in part of his Debt: which
not being granted him, and he still being pressed by his wants to solicit for
his Money, it was alleged by some of the Common Counsel, that the Money was
lent by him, was upon an order of Parliament; and thereupon they referred it to
a Committee to consider, and report upon what Order of Parliament it was lent:
And the Committee by their Report upon the 16 of March 1653. report, that upon
Examination they could not find any Order of Parliament for borrowing or
issuing out of the said Money, but that the said Money was lent upon the Act of
Common Counsel, made the 18 of July 1643, and upon the Security there mentioned
only. Above a year after, the said Robert Campion continuing to Petition, and
crave that Justice might be done for him, the Common-counsel ordered the 28th.
of October, 1654. That the Chamberlain of the City should pay unto the said
Robert Campion 600l. out of the first Moneys to be raised by Fines of Leases of
the City Lands. Provided, that he deliver a Bond, given under the City Seal,
for payment of one thousand Pounds, a Debt due to him by the State, upon
payment to him of the said 600 l. and the Mayor, Commonalty, and City of
London, becoming bound to him by Bond of convenient Penalty to pay the said
Robert so much Money of the said Debt, as the City shall receive of the
Parliament or State over and above the said 600 l. The said Robert having lent
the City his said Money, and being thus from time to time put off and deluded
by them in his old age and necessity, was enforced through their opression, to
accompany his Petitions with more earnest desires and Speeches; and conceiving
himself to be as bad as cheated of his Estate, seeing those to whom he lent it,
would not own it, but pretend it to be a Debt of the States, notwithstanding
their own reports to the contrary, and that they would not, nor could be
enforced to appear at Law: The said Robert Campion being in almost a distracted
condition, did speak words to that effect, that he was cheated by the City and
their Power; which being spoke to Alderman Fowk then Lord Mayor, he caused the
said Robert to be Arrested, and laid in Prison eleven weeks and two days in
Newgate. And when he had procured Bail, and came again to prosecute his
Petition, when Alderman Pack was Lord Mayor, the said Mayor and diverse of the
Aldermen committed him to Woodstreet Compter, where he was imprisoned again for
some time; as appears by their Warrant, dated the 12 of June 1655. the said
Robert Campion being only provoked, and almost mad, through the oppression
which he then groaned under, for want of his Estate which he had lent unto the
City, and came then to Petition for, after so many years fruitless attendance.
The said Robert Campion having undergone all this hardship, still continued
Petitioning, and desiring that his Money might be paid according to (...) did
nothing, so that another Order was directed to the said Committee the 27 of
March 1657, to (...) matter of Fact, and to consider of a way for his Relief,
and for the Relief of others in his condition, and to make Report thereof: For
the effect of which Report, the said Robert Campion was then attending.

WE whose Names are Subscribed, authorized among others by Order of
Common Counsel of the 18 of March 1652, to examine upon what Order of
Parliament the sum of one Thousand pounds, for which Mr. Campion has the
Cities Seal, was lent, and how much all the money lent upon the same Order is,
and how much of such money is Issued out, and upon what Warrants: do humbly
certify, that upon our Examination of the Matter, we cannot find any Order of
Parliament for the borrowing or issuing out thereof, but we conceive that the
said money was lent upon the occasion mentioned in the Act of Common Counsel
made the 18 day of July 1643, and upon the security therein mentioned only,
which we humbly submit to the further consideration of this Honorable Court,
this 26 day of March 1653.

Thomas Andrews. John Dethick. Richard Gibbs. Thomas Stanley.


London,
THese are to require you to receive into your Custody the Body of Robert
Campion forthwith sent you, for the speaking of scandalous words against
several Aldermen, in coming to the Court of Aldermen to do their duties, and in
their return from thence: and for abusing the Court of Aldermen with scurrilous
language, and for interrupting them in doing of their business of the Court and
this City; and for refusing to find Sureties for his Personal appearance at the
next Sessions of Peace to be held for the City, and in the mean time to be of
good behavior, or be otherwise discharged by due course of Law, and this shall
be your Warrant:

Given under our Hands and Seals this 12th day of July 1655. Christo. Pack
Major. Thomas Atkins. John Fowke. Thomas Viner. John Dethicke. Robert
Tichbourne. John Ireton.


To the Keeper of Woodstreet Compter London.
To the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons, in
Common Counsel Assembled. The Humble Petition of Robert Campion.
Humbly Shows,
THat your Petitioner has been these 16 years continually attending and
soliciting the Mayors, Aldermen, and Common-Councels of this City, and
endeavoring by all just Means to recover the 1000 l. heretofore lent by your
Petitioner, upon an Act of Common Council, and a Bond under the Seal of this
City, for repayment thereof. But has had no other Returns, than Sorrow,
Imprisonment, and a further great expense of the dear and precious fruits of
the Labors of his younger years, and provision for his Age, Wife and Children,
as may appear by his Case annexed.

That to increase the measure of his Sufferings, Alderman Fowk has and does
demand of him 100 l. and his Costs recovered against your Petitioner, for words
spoken to him by your Petitioner, in a Passion, and deep sense of his said
Sufferings. (to this effect) that he was cheated by the City and their Power;
whereto your Petitioner conceives the said Alderman was and is encouraged by
the Court of Aldermen, as does appear by their Warrant: in regard Alderman
Atkins was present at the Trial, and there spoke against your Petitioner, in
favor of the said Alderman and the Cause. And Mr. Allen this City Counsel
there also said, It was not Alderman Fowk that Sued your Petitioner, but the
whole Court of Aldermen: And has continued Petitioning every Lord Mayor this
16 years, and never had an Answer to any one Petition.

He humbly Prays he may not spend and end his days in Sorrow, in seeking and
asking in vain his Right from this City. That every Member of this Court, would
make the Case his own, and seriously consider the great Precept, of doing as he
would be done unto; and the Power put into his hands, and how it is to be used.
And take such Order, that your Petitioner may be speedily satisfied his just
Debt and Damages, and ere he Dies, he, his Wife and Children, Bless God for
your Just dealing.

And he shall Pray, etc.

Taking notice of a Letter directed to one of the Committee chosen by the
Common-Counsel of London, for Ensuring of Houses against Fire. That the City
Bonds which they refuse to pay, were only for Money advanced on the Public
Faith, and that the Money was not paid into the Chamber, but to Treasurers
appointed by the House of Commons in the late Rebellious times: Lest under that
pretense my just Debt should be lost, I having a Right to the Bond of 1000 l.
with Interest, (which was for Moneys really paid into the Chamber of London)
did think fit to Reprint the Case of Robert Campion, as it was Printed in his
life time, and delivered abroad. For that the Money lent on the Public Faith
was of a different Nature, and expressed to be so in the Writing given for that
purpose.

London, Printed in the Year 1681.


