The Case betvveen the Right Honorable City of LONDON, and Robert Campion.
Represented to public view, after Sixteen Years private sad Sufferings, and
attendance, early and late, upon the several Lord Mayors, Aldermen, and
Common-Councels, without relief.
ROBERT CAMPION, being by Trade a Tallow-Chandlor, and aged above Sixty Years;
and having a Wife aged above Sixty Year^ and two Children; had, by his pains
and care in his Calling, by God's blessing, in his younger years, gained an
Estate of One Thousand Pound^ before the Troubles began, toward the
maintenance of himself, his Wife, and Children, and for their provision in the
World: which he le^^ unto the City of London (in their necessity) to be
re-payed with Interest at Six Months end; and had a Bond sealed with the City
Sea for re-payment thereof accordingly.

The Bond bears date the first of August, 1643. to be paid upon the third of
February, next ensuing the date. At which time the said Robe^^ Campion
re-paired to the Chamberlain's Office, where the same was by the Bond to be
paid, for the interest of his money, toward the livelyho^^ of himself and
Family; the Chamberlain refused to pay him, and advised him to go to the Court
of Aldermen for his money, which he did, (...) John Woollaston being then Lord
Mayor; who taking notice of the said Robert Campion's good affection and
forwardness to lend his money, desired a little patience for a fortnight or
three weeks, that the Court might examine what was become of the money lent:
and after that, desired as much time longer: and then Alderman Andrews directed
him to bring a Petition to the Court of Aldermen, and Common Counsel, for his
said money; And (...) attended their Honors four years; during which time, Sir
John Woollaston, Alderman Atkins, Alderman Adams, and Alderman Gayr were Mayors.

The said Robert Campion attending still an Answer of his Petition; when
Alderman Warner was Lord Major, he directed him to put the said Bond in suit,
which he did in Michaelmas Term, 1648. But the City refused to appear; and
thereupon Issues were awarded against them; But the said Robert Campion being
ag^^ and not able to undergo so tedious a Solicitation and proceeding at Law,
petitioned the Court of Aldermen and Common Counsel again, hoping that th^^
would take his distressed condition into their consideration, after so many
years: And so continued petitioning every Lord Mayor, desiring that he might
have hi^ Debt paid, according to Justice. Whereupon the Common Counsel ordered
a Committee the 19 of October, 1652. to consider what might be the best and
mo^^ effectual way and means for the payment of his money. And upon their
Report the 19 of April, 1653. it was ordered at a Common Counsel, That the
Co^mittee for letting the City-Lands, should be authorized to demise unto
Robert Campion any of the City Lands demisable, as he should find out;
reserving the (...) Rent. Provided, the Fine do not exceed 600 li. Which Fine
is ordered shall be forborne, during the pleasure of this Court. The said Robert
Campion having le^^ all his money unto the City already, and not knowing how to
raise 600 li. if the pleasure of that Court had been to require it, still
petitioned for his own money or desired that he might have the 600 li. paid in
part of his Debt: which not being granted him, and he still being pressed by
his wants to solicit for his money, was alleged by some of the
Common Counsel, that the money lent by him, was upon an Order of Parliament;
and thereupon they referred it to a Commi^tee to consider, and report upon what
Order of Parliament it was lent; And the Committee by their Report upon the
16th. of March. 1653. report, that upon Examination they could not find any
Order of Parliament, for borrowing or issuing out of the said money: But that
the said money was lent upon the (...) of Common Counsel, made the 18th. of
July, 1643. and upon the Security there mentioned, only. Above a year after,
the said Robert Campion continuing (...) petition and crave that Justice might
be done for him, the Common Counsel ordered the 28th. of October, 1654. That
the Chamberlain of the City should pay unto the said Robert Campion 600 li. out
of the first moneys to be raised by Fines of Leases of the City Lands.
Provided, that he deliver up a bond, given under the City Seal, for payment of
one thousand Pounds, a Debt due to him by the State, upon payment to him of the
said 600 l. And the Mayor, Communalty and City of London becoming bound to him
by Bond of convenient penalty, to pay the said Robert so much money of the said
Debt, as the City shall receive of the Parliament or State over and above the
said 600 li. The said Robert having lent the City his said money, and being
thus from time to time put o^ and deluded by them in his old age and necessity,
was enforced, through their oppression, to accompany his Petitions with more
earnest desires and speeches; an^ conceiving himself to be as bad as cheated of
his Estate, seeing those to whom he lent it, would not own it, but pretend it
to be a Debt of the State's, notwithstanding their own Reports to the contrary,
And that they would not, nor could be enforced to appear at Law: The said
Robert Campion being in almost a distracted Condition, did speak words to that
effect, That he was cheated by the City and their Power; which being spoken to
Alderman Fowk, then Lord Mayor, (...) caused the said Robert to be arrested,
and laid in Prison eleven weeks and two days in Newgate. And when he had
procured Bail, and came again to prosecute hi^ Petition, when Alderman Pack was
Lord Mayor, the said Mayor and diverse of the Aldermen committed him to
Woodstreet Compter, where he was imprisone^ again for some time; as appears by
their Warrant, dated the 12 of June, 1655. The said Robert Campion being only
provoked, and almost mad, through the oppression which he then groaned under,
for want of his Estate which he had lent unto the City, and came then to
petition for, after so many years fruitless attendance. The said Robert Campion
having undergone all this hardship, still continued petitioning, and desiring
that his money might be paid according to Justice and not himself and Wife, in
their old age, with their Children, be ruined. Upon the third of October, 1657.
a Committee was again appointed to find a way for hi^ payment, which did
nothing, so that another Order was directed to the said Committee the 27 of
March, 1657. to consider of his Petition, and state matte^ of Fact, and to
consider of a way for his relief, and for the relief of others in his
condition, and to make Report thereof: For the effect of which Report, the said
Robert Campion is now attending.

WE whose names are subscribed, authorized among others by Order of
Common Counsel of the 18 of March, 1652. to examine upon what Order of
Parliament the sum of one Thousand pounds, for which M. Campion has the Cities
Seal, was lent; and how much all the money lent upon the same Order is, and how
much of such money is issued out, and upon what Warrants; do humbly certify,
that upon our examination of the matter, we cannot find any Order of Parliament
for the borrowing or issuing out thereof, but we conceive that the said money
was lent upon the occasion mentioned in the Act of Common Counsel made the
18th. day of July, 1643. and upon the security therein mentioned only; which we
humbly submit to the further consideration of this Honorable Court, this 26
day of March, 1653.

Thomas Andrews. John Dethick. Richard Gibbs. Thomas Stanley.


London,
THese are to require you to receive into your Custody the body of Rober^
Campion forthwith sent you, for the speaking of scandalous words against
several Aldermen, in coming to the Court of Aldermen to do their dutie^ and in
their return from thence: and for abusing the Court of Aldermen with scurrilous
language, and for interrupting them in doing of their business of the Court and
this City; and for refusing to find Sureties for his personal appearance at the
next Sessions of Peace to be held for the City, and in the mea^ time to be of
good behavior, or be otherwise discharged by due course (...) Law: and this
shall be your Warrant given under our Hands and Seals thi^ 12th. day of July,
1655.

To the keeper of Woodstreet Compter, London. Christo. Pack, Major. Thomas
Atkins. John Fowke. Thomas Viner. John Dethicke. Robert Tichbourne. John
Ireton.


To the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons, in
Common Counsel Assembled.
The humble petition of Robert Campion.
Humbly shows,
THat your Petitioner has been these 1^ years continually attending and
soliciting the Mayors, Aldermen and Common-Councels of this City: and
endeavoring by all just means to recover the 1000 l. heretofore lent by your
Petitioner, upon an Act of Common Counsel, and a Bond under the Seal of this
City, for re-payment thereof. But has had no other Returns, than sorrow,
imprisonment, and a further great expense of the dear and precious fruits of
the Labors of his younger years, and provision for his Age, Wife, and
Children, as may appear by his Case annexed.

That to increase the measure of his sufferings, Alderman Fowk has and does
demand of him 100 l. and his costs recovered against your Petitioner, for words
spoken to him by your Petitioner in a passion and deep sense of his said
sufferings (to this effect) that he was cheated by the City and their Power;
whereto your Petitioner conceives the said Alderman was and is encouraged by
the Court of Aldermen, as dothappear by their Warrant: in regard Alderman
Atkins was present at the Trial, and there spoke against your Petitioner, in
favor of the said Alderman and the cause. And Mr. Allen this City Council
there also said, It was not Alderman Fowk that sued your Petitioner, but the
whole Court of Aldermen: and has continued Petitioning every Lord Mayor this
16. years, and never had an answer to any one Petition.

He humbly prays he may not spend and end his days in sorrow in seeking and
asking in vain his Right from this City. That every member of this Court, would
make the case his own, and seriously consider the great Precept, of doing as he
would be done unto, and the Power put into his hands, and how it is to be used.
And take such ^rder that your Petitioner may be speedily satisfied his just
Debt and Damages, and, ere he dies, he, his Wife and Children, bless God for
your just dealing.

And he shall pray, etc.


