ARTICLES OF INQUIRY Concerning certain Matters ECCLESIASTICAL: Exhibited to
the Churchwardens and Sidemen of every Parish WITHIN THE ARCH-DEACONRY OF
LEICESTER: FOR THEIR Better Direction in their Presentiments IN THE VISITATION
OF WILLIAM OWTRAM, D.D. Archdeacon of LEICESTER.

London, Printed in the Year, 1676.

The Tenor of the Oath of the Churchwardens and Sidemen of every Parish.
YOU shall well and faithfully execute the Office of Churchwardens (or
Sidemen) in the Parish of N. and true Presentment make of such Defaults and
Offenses, as you know or believe to be enquirable by the Laws Ecclesiastical of
this Land.

So God you help.

Articles of Enquiry within the Arch-Deaconry of LEICESTER.
TIT. I. Concerning Churches, and their Possessions, with the Furniture and
Ornaments, thereunto belonging.
IS your Church or Chapel with the Chancel and Steeple thereof in good and
sufficient repair both within and without?

2. Are all things therein cleanly kept, free from anything that may be noisome
or unseemly?

3. Has any part thereof been demolished or pulled down? Have any of the
Bells, Lead, Timber, or utensils, heretofore belonging to the same, been
imbezelled, or converted to private uses during, or since the late War?

4. Have you in your Church or Chapel, a large Bible of the last Translation,
the Book of Common Prayer lately established, the Book of Homilies allowed by
Authority, the Table of Degrees wherein Marriages are prohibited, as also a
Register Book in Parchment, for Christenings, Marriages, and Burials; and is
the same kept in all points as is required? Have you a Paper-Book to record the
Names, Sirnames and Licenses of such strangers as are admitted to Preach in
your Church or Chapel, and do such strangers subscribe their Names thereunto?

5. Have you a Font of stone standing in the usual place for Public Baptism,
and does your Minister therein only Baptize Publicly?

6. Have you a decent Communion Table with a Carpet, and another covering of
white linen to be spread thereon, at the time of Administration of the Lords
Supper? What Cup, Chalice, Patten or Flagons have you belonging to that Service?

7. Have you a convenient Seat or Pew for your Minister to read Service in, a
comely Pulpit set in a convenient place to Preach the Word in, with a decent
Cloth or Cushion for the same? Have you also a large Surplice for the use of
your Minister in his public Administrations.

8. Have you a Book for the Churchwardens accounts, a Box for the alms for the
Poor, a strong Chest with Locks and Keys wherein may be safely kept the Plate,
Vessels, Carpets, Vestments, and Books belonging to the Church, and have you a
Bier with a Hersecloth for decent Burial of the dead?

9. Is there any strife or contention among any of your Parish about the Pews
or Seats in your Church or Chapel? Have any new Pews or Monuments been erected
there without License, or any old Monuments or Ornaments of your Church or
Chapel been defaced contrary to Law, and by whom?

10. Is your Churchyard well and sufficiently fenced, and decently kept
without abuse or nusances? Have any encroached upon the ground thereof; or cut
down any trees growing therein, unless for necessary reparation of the Church
or Chapel?

11. Have you in your Parish a House for your Minister to dwell in? Is the
same, with the outhouses thereunto belonging, in good and sufficient repair?
Have any of them been defaced or pulled down without license?

12. Have you a true perfect Terriar of all the Glebe-lands and Tenements
belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage, taken by the view of your Minister,
and other honest men of your Parish? As also a note of such Pensions,
rate-tithes, and portions of tithes both within and without your Parish, as
belong thereunto? And is a Copy thereof delivered in the Bishops Registry?

13. Is there any Almshouse, Hospital, or Free School (being not of the Kings
foundation) in your Parish, and are they and their endowments preserved and
employed to the right use?

14. Have any dying in your Parish given any legacy to the Church, or Poor,
which has been misemployed and disposed of to other uses?

15. Are there any Wills or Testaments of persons dead in your Parish that are
yet unproved, or any goods Administered without a due grant from the Ordinary?

TIT. II. Concerning Ministers.
1. HAve you a settled Minister in your Parish? If not, how long have you been
destitute? What is the living yearly worth, and who is the Patron thereof? By
whom are the fruits received and how are they disposed of? If you have a
Minister lately settled, out of what Diocese, and from what place came he?

2. Is your Minister (so far as you know or believe) in holy Orders according
to the Laws of the Church of England?

3. Does he diligently attend upon his Ministry, in reading the Lessons and
Prayers, Preaching the Word, Administering the Sacraments, Catechissing the
Youth, visiting the sick, and in all other the offices of his Ministerial
Function, in such manner and form as is directed by the Book of Common Prayer
lately established, and the Act of Uniformity therewith published? And does he
in the reading or celebrating every office in your Church or Chapel wear the
Surplice?

4. Does he give notice of the Holidayes, and of the Ember weeks, that the
people may be minded to pray for such as are to be solemnly called to the work
of the Ministry? As also of the yearly Perambulation in Rogation week for
preserving the bounds of the Parish, and for desiring Gods blessing upon the
fruits of the Earth? Does he also observe the fifth of November, the thirtieth
of January, and the twenty ninth of May, according to the Statutes and Orders
set forth in that behalf?

5. Is his Doctrine (so far as you can judge) agreeable to the Word of God, and
the 39. Articles agreed upon, and published Anno Dom. 1562.

6. Has he at any time, that you know of, publicly or otherwise spoken
against the Order and Government of the Church of England as is now by Law
established?

7. Does he administer the Sacraments in private houses otherwise than is by
Law allowed?

8. Does he every year publish in your Church or Chapel, the Statute against
profane swearing, and cursing, according as it is thereby enacted? 21 Jac. cap.
20.

9. Does he permit any strange Minister to preach in your Church or Chapel,
who is not sufficiently authorized thereunto?

10. Does he serve more than one Church or Chapel in distinct Parishes upon
one day? If so, how far distant are those Churches or Chapels which he so
serves, and what wages and salary has he for his pains?

11. Is your Minister a man of godly, sober, and peaceable conversation? Or on
the contrary, is he a frequenter of Taverns or Alehouses, or does he board
therein? Is he a common Gamester? A profane Swearer, an obscene Iester, or an
intemperate Drinker? Is he vehemently suspected of incontinency? Is he a
fomenter of suits and contention among neighbors? Does he give himself to any
base or servile labor, or secular Trade, unbefitting the duty and dignity of
his office? Is his apparel grave and decent both for fashion and color, as the
Canons of the Church require? Or is his carriage and conversation in any kind
disorderly, scandalous or unbeseeming a Minister of Jesus Christ?

TIT. III. Concerning Parishioners.
1. DO any of your Parish make profession of any other Religion, than what is
professed and established in the Church of England? Do any reproach the same
Religion, or seduce others from it, or endeavor to alienate the hearts of the
People from their Loyalty and obedience to the King? Or are there any
Conventicles or Religious Meetings for people of several Families held in your
Parish contrary to the Laws in that case provided? And who are the persons that
go to those Meetings?

2. Do any absent themselves from the public assemblies and Services of the
Church? or not come in due time as well to Service as Sermons; or not behave
themselves when they are there with such Reverence, order decency and
attention, as is required; or depart thence, before the Service and Sermon be
ended and the blessing pronounced?

3. Do any refuse to send their Infant-children to be baptized in your Church
or Chapel, unless in case of extreme danger? or are any Children kept
unbaptized longer than is allowed? or are there any more aged persons yet
unbaptized? or are any Children not Communicants admitted to be Godfathers or
Godmothers in Baptism?

4. Do the House-holders of your Parish take care to send their Children and
Servants to your Church or Chapel there to be instructed in the Church
Catechism, that so they may be brought to understand and take upon them their
Baptismal covenant, and be confirmed and admitted Communicants?

5. Do all Communicants of your Parish, upon timely notice given by the
Minister thrice at the least every Year (once whereof at Easter) kneeling in
that meek and reverend manner which is required, partake of the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper? and do such signify their names and purpose to communicate,
unto the Minister, at least the day before the Celebration thereof?

6. Are there any living in your Parish, who have been Married contrary to the
Laws of God? Or any who being lawfully divorced have Married again? Or any who
being lawfully Married and not separated or divorced by due course of Law, do
not cohabit together?

7. Have any been clancularly Married in private houses, or in the Church
without license, the Banes not being thrice published, or by License, or
without, neither of the Persons so Married dwelling at that time in your Town?

8. Do any Married Women in your Parish, after their delivery from the danger
of Childbirth, refuse in due time to make their public thanksgiving in your
Church for so great a mercy? or to pay their accustomed duties as is required?

9. Are such as die in the Parish (who are not denied Christian Burial)
decently buried according to the order of the Church?

10. Do any profane the Lords Day by working in their ordinary callings, by
tippling, gaming, or any other unlawful exercises or pastimes?

11. Do any walk, talk, or stand idle in the Churchyard or Church Porch during
the time of Divine Service, or Sermons?

12. Is there any of your Parish who has lately or heretofore paid any sum of
money to any Ecclesiastical Officer for Commutation of Penance? What was that
sum? To whom was it paid? And to what use has it been employed?

13. Have any irreverently used your Minister, or spoken flanderous or
reproachful words against him to the scandal of his Vocation? Or interrupted
him in his Administration?

14. Do any refuse to pay the Rates assessed upon them, for the repair of the
Church or Chapel and the providing of Books, Vtensils, and other necessary
Ornaments for the same?

15. Are there any in your Parish Blasphemers of Gods Holy Name? Any common
Drunkards or Swearers? Any commonly known, or suspected to be guilty of
Fornication, Adultery, Incest, or any other notorious Crime of Ecclesiastical
Cognizance; Declare who they are, that they may be punished according to their
deserts.

TIT. IV. Concerning Churchwardens.
ARe the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen? Have the former,
and last Churchwardens given up their accounts to the Minister and
Parishioners, and also delivered up to their Successors the moneys remaining
in their hands, together with all things else, belonging to your Church or
Chapel?

TIT. V. Concerning Schoolmasters.
Does any man keep a public or private School in your Parish, who is not
licensed by his Ordinary? Does your Schoolmaster teach his Scholars the
Catechism of Religion set forth by Authority? Does he cause them upon the Lords
day, and Holy Days to repair to your Church or Chapel, and see that they
behave themselves there quietly and reverently during the time of Divine
Service, and Sermon? And does every woman that keeps a School in your Parish
do the like?

TIT. VI. Concerning Parish-Clerks.
HAve you a Parish-Clerk, chosen by your Minister of twenty years of age at
least? Is he of ability to perform his duty, and does he perform the same in
all respects as is required of him? Are his accustomed wages duly paid unto
him, or do any withhold the same from him?

IF you know any other default or crime of Ecclesiastical Cognizance not
expressed in these Articles, you are likewise to present the same, and therein to
take the assistance of your Minister; and you are to know assuredly, that as
the true discharging of your Office is the chief means whereby public
Disorders, Sins, and Offenses in your Parish may be reformed and Punished, so
if you wilfully refuse to present such Crimes and Faults, as either you know to
have been committed or otherwise have heard of by public fame, that in such
cases you are to be proceeded against in this Court as in cases of wilful
Omission and Perjury.

The Minister of every Parish may join in Presentment with the Churchwardens
and Sidemen: and if they will not present such enormities as require
Reformation, the Minister himself (being the Person that should have the chief
care for the suppressing of Sin and Impiety in the Parish) may present the same.

FINIS.

