FORMA This Formulary of holding a Convocation as by ancient Custom it used to
be Held, is unhappily Called by Dr. Atterbury in the First Edition of his
Rights, Powers, etc. p. 376. A Directory of Archbishop CRANMER's: When it was
certainly drawn up by Archbishop Parker (as soon after confessed by Dr. A.) from
all the Precedents before and at the Reformation: for a Rule to Himself in
Opening his first Convocation, Jan. 12. 1562. and for a standing Pattern to his
Successors.
SIVE DESCRIPTIO Convocationis Celebrandae, Prout ab Antiquo Dr. Atterbury has
advanced a Pernicious as well as a Mistaken Scheme, that the Act of Submission
entirely altered the Method and the very Nature of our English Convocations;
before Summoned by the Archbishop, Governed, Prorogued and Dissolved by Him:
but since entirely Subject to the King; and the Archbishop now made a
Ministerial Officer, and a pure Instrument of the Crown. If our Reformation had
been built on this fatal Erastian Principle; The Form of holding Convocations
must have needs altered with the Constitution of 'em. But as really there was no
other change in the Nature of our Synods, but only as the Archbishops were
restrained from Calling 'em without the King's License and Letters: So this
little Change did not at all affect the manner of their Sitting and Acting
under the Government and Presidency of the Metropolitan. And therefore this
Solemn Form does no where drop and old Custom, or advance a new Practice, or
adapt any thing to the Act of Submission; but refers All to antecedent Usage
and long Prescription -- Prout ab Antiquo -- consuevit. -- Ex More -- Ex
laudabili and antiqua Ordinatione. -- Solet observari, etc.
observari consuevit.
SCiendum est quod Omnes qui Autoritate It was a late Artifice of Dr. A. to
exempt the lower Clergy from the Jurisdiction of Archbishop and Bishops in
Convocation, by pretending, first, they were cited by the King in his
Parliamentary Writs; and at last, by asserting, That the Provincial Writ was a
like immediate Summons by the King, which the Archbishop barely executes as a
proper Officer; his share in convening his Clergy, being no longer
Authoritative, but purely Ministerial. Which yet does not only strike at the
very Being of a Church, but directly contradicts this Form; where All the
Clergy are expressly said to be Cited by the Authority of the Most Reverend the
Archbishop, to Appear before Him.
Reverendissimi Domini Archiepiscopi Cantuar' citantur ad comparendum coram Eo
in Domo Capitulari Ecclesiae Cathedralis Divi Pauli London' duodecimo die
Januar' prox' tenentur praefixo tempore interesse, atque in eadem Ecclesia
Cath' praestolari Adventum dicti Reverendissimi. Qui ex More paulo post octavam
ante Meridiem illius diei solet cum celebri Comitatu apu^ Portum Thamisis
vocatum Paul's Wharf in terram descendere, atque exinde Praeeuntibus Advocatis
and Procuratoribus Curiae Cantuar' certisque Reverendissimi Generosis ac
Virgifero Convocationis, ad Ecclesiam Cath' Divi Pauli London recta tendere,
atque in chorum ibidem ingredi. Vbi postquam in stallo Decani collocatus
fuerit, ac preces dixerit, tam Ipse quam Reliqui Episcopi Praesentes habitu
Convocationis togati ex atroque Chori latere in suis Stallis sese constituunt
and mox incipiunt Preces The Service and Sacrifice of the Mass, was reformed
into purer Latin Prayers, and a right Communion of the Blessed Sacrament. For
the use of the Synod, there was drawn up by the Archbishop only, and by him
alone prescribed, Forma Precum in utraque Domo Convocationis, etc. And
according to this Prerogative of the Archbishop at the Head of his Province,
this Ancient Form has received some Alterations and Additions, with new
occasional Hymns and Collects, at the discretion of our successive Archbishops,
without any express Consent, or active concern of the Lower Clergy, who herein
submitted to the Judgment and Authority of the Archbishop; who is presumed
indeed not to act in these Matters, without Counsel and Consent of his
Suffragans.
, quibus Spiritus Sancti gratia invocatur, ac Communio subsequitur. Ac tempore
Offertorii tam dictus Reverendissimus quam coeteri Suffraganei Episcopi rem
divinam celebranti ordine progredientes Oblationem offerre ex more debent.
Peracta in hunc morem Re Divina, solet doctus Aliquis ex Caetu Convocationis
sive Superioris sive Inferioris Domus ad hoc selectus e Suggestu in medio Chori
Concionem As the Archbishop in the Rubric of the Form of Prayers for
Convocation, has directed, That they shall be Read in the Upper House, by the
Junior Bishop; and in the Lower House, by the Prolocutor: So the ordering of
the Sermon, and appointing a Preacher, has been always lest to the Archbishop's
Sole Power; who assigns the Office to any One of his Suffragans, or any Other
of his Inferior Clergy, as he thinks most Fit and Proper.
ad Clerum ibidem congregatum Latin proferre: Qua absoluta, Reverendissimus
statim se confert in Domum Capitularem dictae Ecclesiae; sequentibus Episcopis
and toto Clero. Quibus ingressis ac seclusis Extraneis, Reverendissimo ac
caeteris suis Co-Episcopis in suis sedibus ordine considentibus, ac reliquo
Clero It much explains the true nature of our Provincial Synods to observe,
That the Archbishop is always represented, Pro tribunali sedens; and sometimes
in throno suo collocatus. The Bishops are described to be Ordine confidentes,
and Secum (i. e. cum Archiepiscopo) Assidentes. But the Prolocutor and Lower
Clergy are evermore found in the Upper House, or Presence of the Archbishop and
Bishops, to be Stantes and Circumstantes. Dr. A. indeed would make this Decency
to be an Innovation: For he describes the old Provincial Synods, to have
Presbyters always Sitting with the Bishops, and the Deacons and People only
standing. Rights, Powers, etc. p. 5.
Yet as this was not the Figure of Provincial, but of Diocesan Synods only,
where the Priests were, and still are Co-Assessors with their Bishop: So he
does not in any part of his Writings offer one Instance, where the Sitting of
Presbyters in presence of the Bishops, was ever Allowed in any one English
Provincial Synod.
circumstante, Reverendus Dominus Episcopus London Mandatum It is a shameful
Assertion of the Author of the Power of the Lower House, etc. p. 3. c. 1. that
these Certificates or Returns to the Archbishop are All made in Virtue of the
King's Writ of Summons, which they do or should Recite; not at all in Virtue of
the Archbishop's Mandate any further than it Executes this Writ. When in truth
all the Returns from the Dean of the Province and from the other Suffragans
regularly made, either do not recite the King's Writ, because they execute only
the Archbishop's Mandate: Or when they do recite the King's Writ, it is only as
they find it included in the Mandate, and so recite it as a Part of that
Mandate. But it is not at all in Virtue of the King's Writ, that the Dean Cites
the Suffragans, or those Suffragans cite their Clergy, no such Civil Call; but
a pure Ecclesiastical Summons, and a Canonical Execution of the Archbishop's
Mandatory Letters. Therefore at the Opening of a Convocation, the Archbishop
does of late Order the King's Writ to be solemnly read, to justify his Calling
and Holding of it by Virtue of the King's License and Command directed to him.
Yet the Bishop of London does not here at all refer himself to the Royal Writ,
but Purely to the Archiepiscopal Mandate, which alone he here introduces, and
of which alone he certifies the Execution; with no manner of Return to the
King, nor of immediate Respect to any Royal Writ. Mandatum sibi a dicto
Reverendissimo -- introducere tenetur -- cum debito Certificatorio super
Executione ejusdem, i. e. Mandati.
sibi a dicto Reverendissimo ad Convocationem hujusmodi subeundam [submonendam]
alias directum una cum debito Certificatorio super executione ejusdem
introducere, ac debita cum Reverentia eidem Reverendissimo Patri presentare and
tradere tenetur. Quo quidem Certificatorio perlecto, statim porrigitur eidem
Reverendissimo Schedula descripta, per quam pronuntiat omnes ad eosdem horam
and locum non comparentes To disturb our Convocations, and destroy the very
Being of 'em, Dr. A. has advanced a Notion, that the Members are accountable
for their Absence to the House, and not to the President. When yet by the
King's Writ, the Bishops and Clergy must meet before the Archbishop, and must
therefore answer for their Non Appearance to him before whom they ought to
Appear. Such Non Appearance at first, or afterward withdrawing without His
Graces leave, was reputed a Contumacy or obstinate Contempt of his Graces
Authority; for which a Canonical Punishment or Censure was due; of which kind
of Censure, and the time of inflicting it the Archbishop was the proper Judge,
and therefore reserved it to himself, and all the Circumstances of it to his
own Pleasure.
contumaces, reservando poenam eorum contumaciae in aliquem diem competentem
pro Beneplacito ipsius Reverendissimi. Praemissis sic expeditis dictus
Reverendissimus ad Episcopos and Clerum tunc Praesentes Anglice sive Latin
causam sui Adventus ac dictae Convocationis Inchoatae Another fancy of
Independence has been raised, that at the Opening of every Parliament, the
Lower Clergy ought to be put into a capacity of doing Business, and may then
choose their own Business, and agree upon Debates, and even come to Resolutions,
without any preceding Advice or Directions from the President and Bishops. But
this Liberty was never till now Assumed. The Lower Clergy never thought
themselves such absolute Judges in Synodical Affairs, as to make the first
Steps in them. They waited the Motion of the Archbishop and Bishops, and and
were content to follow the Hints and Instructions given by their Superiors:
This did establish a Custom for the Archbishop to open the Synod in a Speech,
that should set forth the Causes of his Coming there to meet his Brethren and
the Rest of the Clergy; and the Reason of thus forming themselves into a
Synodical Assembly: Causam sui Adventus ac dictoe Convocationis inchoatoe
exponit.
exponit: Quodque ex laudabili and antiqua Ordinatione eadem Convocatio in duo
Another daring Notion has been raised, that the Lower House is a distinct Body
from the Upper, Separate upon Essential Rights of it is own Body, with all the
Powers and Privileges of a House, in the Parliamentary sense of the word House.
But yet here the same Body the Convocation is divided into two Members, the
Upper and Lower House, which Members have the same common Head of the whole
Body the Archbishop. Though the Author of the Power of the Lower House has most
injuriously degraded the Archbishop into a Chairman or Moderator of the Whole
Assembly, when the two Houses are together; or when the Upper House is by it
self, then the Archbishop must not be President (tho it be his title in the
very Act of Uniformity) but a chief Member at most, or the proper Person to
Intimate or Notify the Act of the Bishops, p. 15. c. 2. p. 18. c. 1. while the
Prolocutor is made by much the greater Man, Nothing singular in the Notion of
representing the Prolocutor as Head ^resident or Governor of the Lower House.
p. 9. c. 2.
Membra dividitur, nempe in Superiorem atque Inferiorem domum. Vnde
Reverendissimus and caeteri Co-Episcopi Superiorem Domum efficient; Inferior
vero Domus ex Decanis Ecclesiarum Cath' Archidiaconis Collegiorum Magistris and
Capitulorum Cath' Ecclesiarum necnon Cleri cujuscunque Dioceseos Procuratoribus
constat.

Et quoniam si in rerum tractandarum serie Vnusquisque ex inferiore Domo suam
ipse sententiam quoties visum esset diceret, aut si omnes aut plures simul
loquerentur, pareret confusionem. Igitur semper hactenus observatum fuit, ut
Vnus aliquis doctus and disertus ex gremio dictae inferioris Domus in eorum
omnium locum ad hoc munus assumatur Agreeable to this wild Notion of Houses
Coordinate, and a Prolocutor Supreme: It has been suggested, that the Lower
Clergy by inherent right have always had a Prolocutor as an Original President
over them. But certainly there was a time when A. B. Bishops and Clergy made
but one House; when the Lower Clergy had no right to withdraw from the Bishops,
but by Order or Leave of the President. So withdrawing and debating of a matter
referred to them; they were but a Select Company or Commit of the Archbishops
Appointment, and some One was taken as a Chairman to manage their separate
Debates, and report their Sense to the Archbishop and his Brethren. When the
Lower Clergy were by Degrees formed into a more settled State of separation
from their Lordships, the Archbishop allowed them a distinct Apartment, which
soon came to be their Locus solitus, and a fixed Prolocutor to be chose at the
Beginning, and continue to the End of every Convocation or Synod. But this
Ministerial Officer in the Lower House did by no means exempt the Clergy from
their Canonical Subjection to the Archbishop, who had hereby a larger exercise
of Jurisdiction. For he now prevented Confusion in the Lower House by his
prescribing this Method of Peace and Order: He asserted his own Authority, by
not suffering them to choose without his Leave and Admonition: He took care that
the Elect should be presented to him for his Consent and Approbation: And when
Actually in the Office he must be subservient to ^he Archbishop and the whole
Synod, by ^elating the consent of his Fellow Members ^o the most Reverend,
whenever he should ^e required if both Houses were together, ^r whenever he
should be sent for if the Lower House were in a separate Place.
; ut Is intellectis and scrutatis caeterorum Omnium votis, tanquam unum Eorum
omnium Os and Organum loquatur, and consonam eorum sententiam eidem
Reverendissimo, cum ad hoc rogatus seu missus fuerit, caeteris silentibus
fideliter The Office of Prolocutor and very Name of Referendary is from his
being the common Mouth and Organ of the Lower Clergy, to ^onvey and relate
their joint Requests and Resolutions to the most Reverend; and car^y back his
Graces Answers and further Orders, ^s the only Messenger of Correspondence
be^ween the two Houses. This part of the Constitution they would have lately
broke through, and would have sent chosen Mem^ers without the Prolocutor to
relate the ^^nse of the Clergy to the Archbishop and ^he Bishops. A Violence
that for ought ap^ears, was never Attempted but in one ^odern Convocation, and
even then it was ^ublickly declared to be against the judg^ent of the President
and Bishops, and against the Authority of their Records.
referat': Qui ex hoc munere Referendarius sive Prolocutor communiter
denominatur. Cujus eligendi libera facultas semper penes dictam Inferiorem
Domum remanet.

Vnde ipse Reverendissimus solet eosdem ex inferiori Domo monere and ^^hortari,
ut statim se conferant in dictam Inferiorem Domum It Is observable, that though
the Body of ^^e Synod soon divides into two Members, an ^pper and Lower House:
Yet the Place ^here the Archbishop and Bishops assemble, (...) always the Place
of the Synod; which whole ^^^od of the Prelates and Clergy of the Pro^^nce is
Prorogued in hunc locum, i. e. to the ^^om where the Archbishop is then sitting
^^o Tribunali, and his Suffragans as Co-As^^ssors with him. And as at the
opening of the Synod, the Lower Clergy attended the President in the very same
Place with the Bishops; So at the beginning of every Session, they are presumed
to pay the same Attendance coram Archiepiscopo, in the same Place to which they
as well as the Bishops were Continued and Prorogued, though to save unnecessary
trouble the President does commonly accept the Attendance of the Prolocutor and
two or three Principal Members as equivalent to the whole House; and may often
excuse even their Absence, if it be not in Contempt or affected Separation.
It Is further observable, that while the Lower Clergy are so attending the
Archbishop and Bishops, they are never found to be at their own will, but at
the Presidents Monition: He dismisses them from the Common Place of Assembling,
with Leave to retire to their own Apartment.
, ibique de viro docto pio and fideli in Prolocutorem suum assumendo
consultantes, unanimiter consentiant and eligant, sicque electum ipsi
Reverendissimo in eadem Domo Capitulari prox' insequente Sessione debita
solennitate praesentent The Registers of the Upper House do prove, that when
the Lower Clergy had in their Place of withdrawing elected a Prolocutor, they
then came back to the Archbishop and Bishops, and related the Names of the
Persons they had chose for the Prolocutor and the Presenter of him, and had his
Grace's Approbation before his Proroguing in their Presence to a day, in which
the said Prolocutor should be formally presented. But of late, the Parliament
Opening the same day with the Convocation has called away their Lordships to
Westminster, before a Report could be made of such Election,
. His dictis descendunt Omnes in Inferiorem Domum ad effectum praedictum.

FORMA Eligendi and Praesentandi PROLOCUTOREM.
SOlet observari, ut postquam ingressi fuerint Inferiorem Domum, in sedibus se
decenter collocent Taking Seats, and Sitting is the first Privilege of the
Lower Clergy in their separate Room from the Bishops. For the Presbyters of
England as not at first admitted into the Provincial Council of the
Metropolitan and his Suffragans; so when upon Secular Accounts They were by
degrees admitted to be a Part of that Council, they still rather waited as
Assistants, and never joined as Co-Assessors. So as when their Advice or
Consent was asked in a Matter, that required longer consideration than could be
taken on the Spot, then it was an Ease and Relief to them to withdraw to some
distinct Adjacent Place, where they might with greater Rest and Freedom debate
and determine of the Subject referred to them.
, and si Aliqui ex Iis sint Consiliarii sive Sacellani Regiae Majestatis, ut hi
superiores seeds occupent; atque ut Vnus ex Iis propter Dignitatem and
Reverentiam, seu in eorum absentia, Decanus The Dean of St. Paul's, if the
King's Chaplain, has a Right to Preside within his own Church over his Brethren
the Clergy Assembled by the Archbishop's Leave, in order to choose a Prolocutor.
Ecclesiae Cath' D. Pauli London' sive Archidiaconus London' Praesidentis The
name of President was at large applied to any Person who Presided or Moderated
or took the Chair in any Ecclesiastic or Scholastic Meeting. And therefore it
is an Affected Error in the Author of the Power of the L. H. to Adjourn, etc.
to say, that whenever the Word is employed in Convocations, it constantly
signifies One that Presides in the stead of, and by an authority derived from
some other. p. 18. c. 1. It is hard to make this definition of a President
agree with this title here given to the Dean of St. Paul's. And it is more
Absurd in that Author to affirm, That the title of President as applied to the
Archbishop, is wholly New -- and implies a diminution of his Authority. For the
Archbishop at the Head of his Province could have no greater title than that of
his ordinary style Reverendissimus, appropriated to the Archbishop, and not
capable o^ being assumed by any other Person. Yet He was well known to Preside
over the whole Synod, and is frequently said Praeesse and Praesidere, from
whence He might well have the Name as He had the Office of Praeses and
Praesidens. But because the Archbishop had power to assign this Office to a
Deputy or Representative commissioned by Him, therefore any One of his
Suffragans so delegated, had the Name along with the Dignity of Presiding, and
is often said loco Reverendissimi praesidere. And again, because in the vacancy
of the Sea of Canterbury, the Dean and Chapter commit the Care of Presiding to
the Dean of the Province, the Bishop of London; therefore his Lordship is then
properly the President of Convocation. Not that He presides in stead of the
Dean and Chapter, for they have no such Power of Presiding. But observe, when
the title of President is so ascribed to his Grace's Delegate, or Sede vacant
to the Bishop of London, it is still a borrowed title, and derived from the
Archbishop's original Power of Presiding, and imputed to Them only, as they pro
hac vice fill the Place of the standing President of the Convocation of a
Province, the Metropolitan.
officio in hujusmodi Electione fungatur. Atque ut ad hoc rite procedatur,
primum jubebit nomina omnium citatorum and qui tunc interesse tenentur a
Clerico dictae Inferioris Domus recitari and praeconizari This Preconization or
calling over the Names of the Clergy now by order of the inferior President,
before they are a House; or afterward by order of the Prolocutor, when they do
become a proper House; is not by any inherent Power in either Person or
Assembly: but it is done by the Authority and for the Service of the Archbishop;
to Whom the Names of the Absents should be given; He Alone having the power to
judge of the reasonable Cause of their Absenting, and Canonically to punish
Such as He finds to be contumacious Absenters.
. Notatisque Absentibus, alloquatur praesentes atque eorum sententiam de idoneo
Procuratore eligendo sciscitetur. Et postquam de eo convenerint (quod semper
quasi statim The choice of a Prolocutor used to be thus dispatched with Ease
and Expedition, because the Clergy had this only to consider, what Person among
'em would answer the Character recommended by the Archbishop, De viro Docto Pio
and Fideli: Agreeing always on such a One as stood right in the Opinion of their
Superiors; and so was the more Able to keep up the fair Correspondence and
happy Union between the Archbishop and Bishops and Clergy. Upon the first
Establishment of a Prolocutor, they continually chose the Archbishop's Official
or other Minister, in Respect to their Metropolitan, and in hopes of having
their Affairs negotiated with more Success. In later times when his Grace's
Official was not a standing Member, they generally chose the D. of S. Paul's,
or whoever else was President at the Time of Electing. The first Divisions that
are known to have happened about the choice of a Prolocutor, were in 1689. when
the Majority were for a Person to serve a particular Design of Not Acting, and
indeed of Not Sitting, which they confess to have been rather their Desire.
and absque ullo negotio perfici solebat) mox convenient inter se de Duobus
eminentioris Ordinis, qui dictum Electum Reverendissimo Domino Cantuar' in Die
statuto debita cum Reverentia and Solennitate praesentent.

Quorum Alter sicut, cum dies advenerit, ipsum Prolocutorem cum Latina and
docta Oratione praesentare tenetur, sic etiam idem Praesentatus habitu
Doctoratus indutus consimilem Orationem ad dictum Reverendissimum Patrem ac
Praelatos and caeteros Praesentes habere debet. Quibus finitis, praefatus
Reverendissimus Oratione Latina tam Electores quam Praesentatorem and
Presentatum pro sua gratia collaudare, ac demum ipsam Electionem sua
Archiepiscopali Authoritate The Archbishop had reserved to himself, the express
Authority of Approving and Confirming the Choice of a Prolocutor. And if he
never once rejected the Person presented to him, it proves, that the Clergy of
this Province were always so Wise and Happy, as to Agree in One very Acceptable
to the Archbishop and Bishops.
express confirmare and approbare non dedignabitur. Et statim idem
Reverendissimus Anglice (si placeat) exponere solet ulterius been placitum suum
These Gravamina and Reformanda to be consulted of by the Lower Clergy, and
reported to the Archbishop, were such chiefly as concerned their Civil Rights.
Such Grievances relating to their Properties and Persons, which they had been
used to complain of, to the King, and to Petition him for Redress when he
required their Subsidies and Taxes. And like the Temporal Commons, they often
insisted upon such Redress of Grievances, as a Condition of granting their Aid
and Benevolence. This by degrees taught the Clergy in Convocation a like Method
of representing to the Archbishop and Bishops, any sort of Ecclesiastical
Oppressions they lay under from Inferior Courts and Officers. But then,
whatever these Grievances were, they were never once cast into Resolutions, or
Positions of Censure and Remonstrance; but were always delivered in Articles of
Request and Petition or Address, in a decent humble manner. The drawing up of
Grievances in a Declaratory Style, with a sort of Judicial Condemnation of
^^em, was a new and peculiar Liberty of the last Convocation, when they also
limited their Complaints, and made 'em against the Bishops only, and their
Ecclesiastical Government: Never once thinking how to represent the Hardship of
Poor Vicars in bearing an unequal Burden of Taxes; nor the want of a
proportioned Number of Clergy-Commissioners to preserve their Brethren from
being overcharged in Assessments. Nor to recommend any other Relief or Favor,
which upon suitable Application to his Grace and their Lordships, might
possibly have been obtained from the Legislative Power.
; Hortando Clerum, ut de rebus communibus quae Reformatione indigent,
consultent and referant die This Passage was applied by Dr. K. to prove the
Continuance and Intermission of Sittings in the Lower House, as depending
intermediately on the Metropolitan, and finally on the Prince. Occas. Letter p.
54. but the Author of P. L. H. applies it to a Meaning directly opposite, and
makes it an express Argument, that the Consultations of the Lower House were to
be held on Intermediate days as they saw best; But the Report of 'em was to be
made above, on the day appointed for the common Sitting of Both Houses. p. 12.
c. 2. So the Narrative in the Appendix p. xiii. would have these Words capable
of being fairly Understood of the free Liberty of so Using the Intervals of
Sessions, i. e. of holding intermediate Sessions, so as die Statuto (the next
Session) must be joined with Referant, and the Consultent be left at large. But
there is Force as well as Art in detorting these Words to apply 'em to the New
Pretenses of Intermediate Sessions. The Author of P. L. H. is first driven upon
dividing consultent and referant that he may make the die Statuto refer to the
latter only; and therefore he puts a stop after Consultent, which is not in the
Manuscript, nor in the two Copies Printed (before the thoughts of such a turn)
by Dr. Atterbury himself in the two several Editions of his Rights, Powers,
etc. Nay, it is not in the Citation at large that is made for the like purpose
in the Appendix to the Narrative. But in all the Books and Papers I have yet
seen (excepting that P. L. H.) the words are joined as the Conjunction
requires, Consultent and referant die statuto. So as their Consulting and
Relating may well belong to the same Appointed Day, which in the sense of those
Writers, is the next Session to which the Archbishop Continues and Prorogues
'em. Without breaking the words by that feigned stop, it is so hard to divide
the application of 'em; that the Writer of the Appendix to the Narrative is
free to own, we may so fairly presume, if not by common sense, yet by what we
have seen; i. e. by far fetched Allusions to the Parliament. Certainly if this
Form had meant to provide for any such separate Practice, it would have said,
De rebus communibus quae Reformatione indigent suo tempore consultent; ac denuo
Referant die statuto. And yet after all, granting the Consultation must have
intervening Days, before the final Day of Report: Might not the Archbishop
direct 'em, or allow 'em to let a Part or Committee of 'em meet, and advise in
the mean while, that they might be ready for a Report against the regular Day
of Session. This is a Method frequent in the Registers, where the Archbishop
commits Business to a Select Company, in order to adjust and offer it in some
appointed Session. But in all our Records we meet not with one single Instance,
before 1701, where the Lower House after the Prorogation by the Archbishop,
formally Adjourn themselves to an Intermediate day; and call that Meeting a
Session, and there consult Business of their own choosing, independently from
the Bishops. In truth, there never was any proper Synodical Business of common
concern to the Church or Religion, that was ever treated of in a Committee of
the Lower House Alone. But all such Business was constantly referred to a joint
Committee of Bishops and Clergy, and by them together formed into a Report to
be made to the Archbishop and his Suffragans.
statuto. Ac ad hunc modum de Sessione in Sessionem continuabitur Ad hunc modum
must relate to the words immediately foregoing Die statuto, which the Author of
P. L. H. allows to be the Day appointed for the common Sitting of Both Houses.
And the Appendix to the Narrative, justly calls it, The next Session. Thus, or
after this manner, by the Archbishop's Appointment from one Session of both
Houses to another, the whole Convocation shall be continued, as shall seem
expedient to the Archbishop upon Counsel of his Brethren, and till the King
himself shall interpose by Writ for the Prorogation or the Dissolution of it.
Convocatio quamdiu expedire videbitur, ac donec de eadem dissolvenda Not a
Writ that actually dissolves, but a Writ for dissolving presented to the
Archbishop, who in obedience makes the Dissolution. The Author of the P. L. H.
having ascribed the Power of Assembling only and purely to the King's Writ,
does then artfully infer, That the powers of Proroguing and Dissolving are in
Law and Reason the natural and necessary Result of the former, p. 3. c. 1. But
the Supposition indeed is absolutely false. For our Reformed Princes did no
more assemble the Clergy only and purely by their own Writ, than their Popish.
Predecessors did, when they also sent the same Writ of Precept to the
Archbishop, who thereupon did Convene the Clergy then, by the same Mandate as
now. In truth as before the Reformation, the Archbishops Prorogued and
Dissolved by their own power (as Dr. A. confesses) even when they assembled a
Convocation at the King's Command: So the Act of Submission did not at all
alter the Constitution of our Provincial Assemblies; only as it restrained the
Archbishop from convening, without having License and Authority for so doing by
the King's Writ; which Writ was to be now Always, as it had Frequently before
been, Preceding to his own Mandate. But neither Prorogation nor Dissolution
were directly or immediately affected by the Statute. Archbishop Cranmer did
all along actually Prorogue, and if he had seen a Necessity, he might yet have
legally dismissed his Provincial Assembly. But indeed King Hen. 8. to keep a
Convocation of Popishly affected Clergy more in Awe of a Reforming Parliament,
began (even before the Act of Submission, and therefore not by Virtue of it) to
send his Precepts to the Archbishop, to Prorogue and Dissolve the Convocation
at the same Times with the Parliament; because he could best trust them under
such an Awe and Restraint. King Edw. VI. and Queen Elizabeth were put upon the
same prudential Methods: While the Majority of Convocation were suspected as
Averse to the Measures taken in Parliament. This Reason Alone began and
confirmed the Custom of Royal Writs to command the Proroguing and Dissolving a
Convocation concurrent with every Parliament. Yet the Custom did not bar the
legal Prerogative in 1640. Nor is there Any Law but a like Custom, that can now
restrain the Crown from Issuing or not Issuing the like Writs at Pleasure. But
observe, whenever these Writs are Issued, the Writ it self does not of it self
Prorogue or Dissolve (as the first Writ did not of it self Convene) but only
declares an Expedience and a Resolution upon it; and then commands the
Archbishop to exert his Authority, who in pursuance of such Precept, does by
Himself or his Commissary Prorogue or Dissolve the Convocation by a Schedule of
their own distinct from the Writ; as it was before assembled by a distinct
Mandate in obedience to the King's Writ.
Breve Regium eidem Reverendissimo praesentetur.

Et sciendum est quod quotiescunque Prolocutor ad praesentiam Reverendissimi
causa Convocationis ac tempore Sessionis By this it appears, that the
Prolocutor is never supposed to be at the Head of the Lower Clergy in any
intermediate Session, but only tempore Sessionis, i. e. when both Houses hold a
concurrent Session, and are ready for a mutual Intercourse.
accesserit, utatur habitu praedicto, ac Janitor sive virgifer dictae
inferioris Domus ipsum reverenter antecedat.

Ejusdem Prolocutoris est etiam monere omnes ne discedant a Civitate London'
absque licentia It is here declared to be an express Duty of the Prolocutor to
Admonish All the Members not to go out of Town without Leave of the Archbishop.
And in the Minutes of former Convocations, there is frequent Entry of such
Solemn Admonition. So as when Occasions required any Member to retire into the
Country, a proper Application for Leave was made to the President, and to Him
only. Till in this last Convocation, among other ways of attempting to come up
to the Appearance of a House of Commons; They fell upon this of asking Leave of
the House for this or that Member to go into the Country; and this too
sometimes in an Intermediate Session. As in their Minutes of May 14. Memorand.
Mr. Archdeacon Hutton desired Leave to go into the Country to hold his
Visitation. And several Others of the Majority Side went so away without Leave
or Knowledge of his Grace, in contempt and open breach of our Synodical
Constitution. But upon second thoughts, their own Narrative condemns the
Practice, and the Men that were guilty of it; by denying not that his Grace has
a Power of demanding the Attendance of our Members: and if the Lower House do
give a Leave of Absence, yet the Member is not perfectly at Liberty without
Leave from the Archbishop. Narrat. p. 49.
Reverendissimi. Quodque statutis diebus Statutis diebus does always signify the
common Days appointed by the President for holding a concurrent Session of Both
Houses. And no notice being ever given of any other Days, it is a sure Sign the
Lower Clergy never pretended to make intermediate Sessions of their own
Appointment. The Prolocutor admonishing 'em to come early on these proper
Convocation Days, was to have 'em in Readiness to attend at the opening of the
Session, when the President often took occasion to instruct 'em and advise 'em
in the Business of the Day.
tempestive veniant ad Convocationem. Quodque salaria Clericorum The obligation
of the Lower Clergy to pay the Salary of the Clerk of the Upper as well as of
the Lower House, is a clear Argument that they are not exempted from that
Upper-House: But that indeed the whole Body of the Convocation under the Head
of the Province requires every Member to contribute to the common Occasions of
being mutually served and assisted. And therefore by the Constitution of our
Provincial Synods there is but one Register of Convocation, and one Registry of
Acts and Minutes: i. e. the Register of the Archbishop, and the Registry of his
Metropolitan See. His Grace's Principal Register has commonly his Delegate or
Deputed Officer, and he or his Deputy by virtue of such Office is the standing
Register of the whole Convocation. He being able to attend in Person only on
the Upper House, deputes his Proxy or Assistant to attend upon the Lower House;
as an Actuary or Scribe to form their Minutes, and prepare their written
Correspondence with the Archbishop and Bishops: Which Actuary or Under-Clerk
was never chose or rejected by the House or the Prolocutor, but was assigned
and dismissed by the Superior Clerk or Register of Convocation. But in the
late Assembly they were breaking these fixed Rules of Property and
Constitution, and pretended that the Clerk of the Upper House is but a Fellow
Actuary with the Clerk of the Lower, who is chose and employed by the
Prolocutor, concontrary to all Right and Fact. Narrat. p. 33. 36. All true Sons
of the Church of England will be content with a Convocation to be Held, Prout
ab Antiquo observari consuevit. And it is for that Reason, I have here published
the Entire Form of Holding a Reformed Convocation or Protestant Provincial
Synod, drawn up by an excellent Antiquary Archbishop Parker, under the
Government of Queen Elizabeth, which a strict Regard to the Constitution of the
Church and State, for a standing Rule to Posterity, as long as God should bless
this Nation with the Purity of Religion then Established.

And the Reading over this Form Alone, will abundantly discover and refute
those late Writers who have labored for Change and Innovation in these
Matters. There is scarce any one of their Pretenses, but what is really
opposite to the Orders and Opinions here delivered. As you find particularly,
1. Dr. Atterbury would have the Constitution of English Synods entirely altered
by the Act of Submission (...); when this Form refers All to Ancient
Observation, and to antecedent Custom; without hinting at any one material
Change occasioned by the Reformation. 2. It is a Pretense of Dr. A. that the
Parliament Writ is entered in the Front of the Acts of every Synod; and that
even by the Provincial Writ the Bishops and Clergy are summoned directly by the
King, not at all by the authority of the Archbishop: Whereas here is nothing at
all of a Parliament Writ; nor indeed of the King's Provincial Writ as a Royal
Summons; but the Archiepiscopal Mandate only is mentioned, and All Members are
expressly said to be cited by Authority of the Archbishop. 3. It is a Notion of
the like Author of P. L. H. that the Certificates or Returns which the Dean and
Suffragans make to the Metropolitan are in Virtue of the King's Writ, and not
at all in Virtue of the Archbishop's Mandate; whereas here the Bishop of London
brings in the Mandate only, and Certifies nothing but the Execution of that
single Mandate. 4. He has advanced a new Claim to the Lower House to give leave
of Absence to their Members, without Application to the Archbishop; when here
the Members appear before the Archbishop only, and the Penalty of their Absence
is reserved to Him alone; and the Prolocutor is to admonish all the Lower
Clergy of this Duty, that they do not presume to go out of Town without the
Archbishop's Leave. 5. Another Practice was begun of the Lower Clergy choosing
their own Business, and coming to Resolutions, in very important Matters,
without any consult with, or knowledge of the Archbishop and Bishops; Whereas
here the Archbishop is first to declare the Cause of his coming, and the
Reasons of opening the Convocation; and then the Inferior Clergy proceed upon
Instructions, and in mutual Concert with the Upper-House in joint Committees.
6. The Prolocutor has been made Head Governor and President of the
Lower House; but the Archbishop not a President of Convocation: When here a
Prolocutor is elected and confirmed by Authority of the Archbishop, and is to
attend his Grace when and where he shall be Bidden or Commanded: And when by
the very Act of Uniformity 14. Car. 2. the two Archbishops are more than once
called the Presidents of Convocations within their respective Provinces. 6.
They took up a singularity of intermediate Sessions: When here is no intimation
of any Meeting but in Die Statuto, which they themselves acknowledge to be the
next Session appointed by the Archbishop for the joint Assembly of both Houses.
And so in many other Particulars, they have advanced Notions and Claims either
directly Opposite, or at least not at all agreeing, to this GOOD OLD FORM.



tam Superioris quam Inferioris Domus, and Janitoris inferioris Domus juxta
antiquam taxationem, quatenus eorum quemlibet concernit, fideliter persolvant.

State super vias Antiquas.
FINIS.

