A TRUE COPY OF THE Humble Desires OF THE COMMISSIONERS OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
March 22. Presented by them to the Parliament of Scotland With their ANSWER
March 27. 1648.

Together with a humble Representation of the sense of the Commissioners of the
General Assembly to the honorable Estates of Parliament upon their Lorships
Answer, March 29.

As also the last Answer of the Assembly to the Parliaments Paper, March 31.
1648.

London, Printed for Robert Bostock, and are to sold at his shop at the Kings
head in Paul's Churchyard. 1648.

Edinb. 22o Martii 1648. TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Estates of Parliament. THE
HUMBLE DESIRES OF THE COMMISSIONERS OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.
WHereas we were desired to appoint a Conference with some of your Lordships
which did go on toward an agreement til it was obstructed by a Vote of
Parliament of the 16. of this Instant; And having already shown by your Papers
of the 17. and 20. the reasons of our not proceeding in that Conference, and
that the cause was not in us, We do now as the servants of Jesus Christ, for
our own exoneration, for preventing of mistakes, and for a clear understanding
between your Lordships and us, represent these our humble desires which we
recommend to your Lordships serious thoughts.

First, That the grounds and causes of undertaking a War may be cleared to be
so just, as that all, who are well-affected, may be satisfied in the lawfulness
and necessity of the engagement, and that nothing be acted in reference to a
War, before the lawfulness of the War and state of the question be agreed upon.

2. That as the breaches of the Covenant, by the prevalent party of Sectaries
in England, are evident, so we desire and hope that according to the Treaties,
it may be condescended upon and declared by the Parliament, what are those
breaches of Peace which they take to be a ground of War, and that reparation
thereof may be sought.

3. That there may be no such quarrel or ground of the War, as may break the
Union between the Kingdoms, or may discourage or disoblige the Presbyterian
party in England who continue firm in adhering to the League and Covenant.

4. That if the Popish, Prelatical or Malignant party shall again rise in Arms,
this Nation and their Armies may be so far from joining or associating with
them, that on the contrary, they may oppose them and endeavor to suppress them
as enemies to the Cause and Covenant on the one hand, as well as Sectaries on
the other.

5. Seeing your Lordships undertakings should be in the first place for
Religion, we desire that his Majesty's late concessions and offers concerning
Religion, as they have been by the Church, so may be by the Parliament declared
unsatisfactory, whereby your Lordships may give further evidence of the
reallity of your intentions for the good and safety of Religion.

6. That your Lordships may be pleased not to fix or settle upon any such state
of a question as does not contain security and assurance to be had from his
Majesty by his solemn oath un^^ his hand and seal; That he shall for himself
and his successors consent and agree to Acts of Parliament enjoining the League
and Covenant, and fully establishing Presbyterian Government, Directory of
Worship, and Confession of Faith in all his Majesty's Dominions; And that his
Majesty shall never make any opposition to any of these or endeavor any change
thereof; and that this security be had from his Majesty before his restitution
to the exercise of his royal power, which desire we propone for no other end,
but because we cannot see how Religion, which has been, and we trust shall be
the principal end of all the undertakings of this Nation, can be otherwise
secured, but that without this security it shall be left in very great hazard.

7. That for the same end of securing Religion, (which is professed to be the
principal cause of engagement) and for securing all the other ends of the
Covenant, such persons only may be entrusted by your Lordships to be of your
Committees, or Armies, as have given constant proof of their integrity and
faithfulness in this cause, and against whom there is no just cause of
exception or jealousy; that so we may the more confidently encourage our
flocks and Congregations to follow the cause of God in their hands, and not to
doubt of the fidelity of these who shall be entrusted by your Lordships.

8. That there be no Engagement without a solemn Oath, wherein the Kirk may
have the same interest which they had in the solemn League and Covenant, the
cause being the same.

All which desires, being duly pondered by your Lordships in an equal balance,
will, we trust, be found just and necessary; And we do not doubt but
satisfaction from your Lordships therein may be a happy and effectual means for
facilitating the state of the question, and for uniting the Nation in an
unanimous undertaking of such duties as are requisite for the reformation and
defense of Religion, the honor and happiness of the King, the good, peace and
safety of the Kingdoms.

Edinb. 27o March 1648. An Answer of Parliament to the desires of the
Commissioners of the General Assembly represented by them to the Parliament.
I.
THe Estates of Parliament, now convened in this first Session of the second
Triennial Parliament, having considered the desires of the Commissioners of the
General Assembly represented to them, They, after full debate and consideration
concerning the same, for Answer to the first desire, etc. Declares, That the
grounds and causes of undertaking of war shall be cleared to be so just, as
that all, who are well-effected, may be satisfied in the lawfulness and
necessity of the Engagement: And declares, that they will be very careful, that
nothing be acted in reference to a war, during the conference, and until the
same be reported to the Parliament.

II.
Item, For Answer to the second desire; The Estates of Parliament think it fit,
That the breaches of the Covenant and Treaties be represented, and the seeking
of reparation, and the best time and manner thereof considered; and appoint the
Committee of 24, or such of their number as they shall appoint, to do the same.

III.
Item, For Answer to the third desire, declares, that this Kingdom will be so
far from making war against the Kingdom of England, That any engagement they
shall enter into, shall be for strengthening the union between the Kingdoms,
and for encouraging the Presbyterians, and well-affected in England.

IV.
Item, To the fourth desire; The Estates of Parliament agree to the substance
and matter of the fourth desire, and remit to these, who are to be upon the
Conference for stating the Question, to explain the same.

V.
Item, To the fifth desire, declares, That upon the agreement on the whole
matter and state of the question, they will declare his Majesty's Concessions
concerning Religion not to be satisfactory.

VI.
Item, To the sixth desire, declares, That since Religion has been, and they
trust ever shall be, the principal end of all the undertakings of this Kingdom;
so they will be careful, that the present Question to be stated shall contain
security and assurance to be had from His Majesty, by his solemn oath under his
hand and seal, that he shall for himself, and for his Successors, give his
Royal Consent to pass Acts of Parliament, injoyning the League and Covenant,
establishing Presbyterial Government, the Directory of Worship, and Confession
of Faith in all His Majesty's Dominions; and that His Majesty shall never make
opposition to any of these, nor endeavor any change thereof. And as to that
Clause, viz. That this security be had from His Majesty before his Restitution
to the exercise of his Royal Power: The Estates of Parliament remits this to
these on the Conference, and who shall be appointed for drawing up the state of
the Question, to find out some more smooth expressions in place thereof with
the like security to Religion.

VII.
Item, To the seventh desire; That they will be careful that none shall be
employed in the command of their Armies, nor in their Committees, but such as
are of known integrity and affection to the cause, and against whom there is no
just cause of exception.

VIII.
Item, To the eighth Article or desire; The Estates of Parliament declare, That
to the grounds of their Engagement and undertaking, an oath shall be subjoyned,
wherein both in the framing of it, and other wise, the Church shall have their
due interest. And the Estates of Parliament desire the Commissioners of the
Church to appoint some of their number to meet with such of that Committee of
Parliament of 24. as shall be appointed by the same Committee for the
conference and stating of the Question, for agreeing upon the grounds of an
Engagement, and drawing up such a state of a Question, as may unite this Nation
in an unanimous undertaking of such duties as are requsite for the Reformation
and defense of Religion; the safety, honor and happiness of the King, and his
Posterity; and the good of this Kingdom. Extract. Sic Subscribitur, Alexander
Gibson Cl. Reg.

Edinb. 29 Martii, 1648. An humble Representation of the sense of the
Commissioners of the General Assembly, To the honorable Estates of Parliament,
upon their Lordships Answer to the Eight Desires lately presented to their
Lordships.
HAving received yesterday the Answer of the honorable Estates of Parliament
to our late Desires presented to their Lordships upon the 22 of this instant;
we did immediately take to our consideration the particular Answers given
thereunto. And now, without any longer delay, do humbly represent to their
Honors our sense of the particulars.

1. As to the Answer of the first Desire, we conceive that notwithstanding any
thing expressed in your Lordships Answer, there may be an acting in reference
to a War, before the lawfulness of the War and the state of the Question be
agreed upon; which is the very thing we did desire to be avoided.

2. In the Answer to our second Desire, we neither find any breaches of Peace
between the Kingdoms which may be a ground of War condescended upon, nor any
positive resolution of the Parliament to seek reparation thereof according to
the Treaties; yet both these were desired by us.

3. In the Answer to the third Desire, in stead of that clause of the Desire,
The Presbyterian party in England, who continue firm in adhering to the League
and Covenant, we find this change of expression in the Answer, The
Presbyterians and well-affected in England; which, as the words stand, may
intimate and suppose that there are some well-affected in England which are not
of the Presbyterian party, nor do adhere to the League and Covenant.

4. Our fourth Desire, for not joining or associating with the Popish,
Prelatical, or Malignant party if they shall again rise in Arms, and that it
may be endeavored to suppress them as enemies to the Cause and Covenant on
the one hand, as well as Sectaries on the other, being so just in it self, so
consonant to the former principles and professions of this Kirk and Kingdom
since their first engagement in this Cause, and being also as clear both in the
matter and expression as the Covenant, Treaties and Declarations of both
Kingdoms; we cannot conceive wherein it needs explanation, or what doubt or
scruple can be made concerning it as it stands, unless there be now some more
favorable and friendly intentions toward the Malignant party then formerly,
which we pray the Lord to avert. And although it is too manifest that some
plead for Malignants, as if they were to be joined with as friends, rather then
avoided as enemies to the Cause (whereof we have spoken more fully in our late
Declaration) yet we trust that any such design is and shall be far from the
thoughts and intentions of the honorable Court of Parliament.

5. Touching the fifth, as your Lordships Answer seems to suppose his Majesty's
late concessions concerning Religion not to be satisfactory; so these
concessions being so prejudicial to the Cause and Covenant, we wish your
Lordships had been pleased to declare against them, both positively, without
any condition; and presently, without any delay.

6. In the Answer to the sixth Desire, as there is much said in the first part
for security of Religion to be had from his Majesty; so that clause, viz. That
this security be had from his Majesty before his restitution to the exercise
of his Royal power, not being agreed to by your Lordships, but rather laid
aside until some smoother expressions be found out, we are left unsatisfied in
that which is the main of that Desire, and cannot be assured of any security
expressed in the first part of your Lordships Answer. If your Lordships had
been pleased to condescend upon another expression containing as good and as
real security for Religion, we should have acquiesced therein, without sticking
upon words: but there being no other expression yet condescended upon, and that
clause of ours (without which the whole Desire is left uncertain) laid aside
for the present, we cannot find our selves therein satisfied as yet.

7. The Answer to the seventh Desire concerning such as are to be trusted in
Armies and Committees, does omit some of the qualifications expressed in our
Desire; viz. Such as have given constant proof of their integrity and
faithfulness in this Cause, and against whom there is no just cause of
jealousy; that so we may the more confidently encourage our flocks to follow
the Cause of God in their hands, and not to doubt of their fidelity: which
qualifications being contained in our Desires, and omitted in your Lordships
Answer, we are not without fears that this omission may be made use of by some,
as if your Lordships had not meant to agree fully to that Desire, and so take
occasion to deal for employing and intrusting such in the Committees and Armies
as may be justly excluded by the qualifications contained in our said Desire.

8. In the Answer to the last Desire, in stead of that clear expression used by
us, namely, That the Kirk may have the same interest in any Oath for a new
engagement, which they had in the Solemn League and Covenant, we find this
doubtful and uncertain expression, That both in the framing of the Oath, and
otherwise, the Kirk shall have their due interest. Which difference of your
Lordships expression from ours, may also be interpreted by some, as if the Kirk
had assumed more interest in the League and Covenant then was due unto them.

Upon these and the like considerations, we humbly conceive that our Desires,
unto which we still adhere as just and necessary, are not satisfied by your
Lordships Answer. And without clear satisfaction in these Desires, we find it
not safe to appoint a Conference for agreeing upon the state of a Question for
War. Yet if your Lordships had desired or do desire further conference with
some of our number for satisfaction of our abovementioned Desires, we should
have yielded, and yet shall willingly yield thereunto. And as the present want
of satisfaction in these Desires does retard and hinder our proceedings toward
an agreement upon the state of a Question: so we are still confident that a
real and clear satisfaction to the said Desires, may be a happy and effectual
means for facilitating the state of the Question, and for uniting this Nation
in an unanimous undertaking of such duties as are requisite for the reformation
and defense of Religion, the safety, honor and happiness of the King and his
Posterity, and the good, peace and safety of the Kingdoms.

Subscr. A. Ker.

Edinb. penult. Martii, 1648. The Answer to the Parliaments Paper.
THe Commissioners of the Assembly having this day received a Paper from the
honorable Estates of Parliament desiring a Conference upon our late Desires,
and the Parliaments Answer given thereunto, and also upon the state of the
Question and whole matter, Do humbly return this Answer:

That as we have been, so we are still willing to appoint a Conference upon the
Eight Desires lately presented to your Lordships, and upon the
unsatisfactorinesse of your Lordships Answer thereunto: and if your Lordships
shall yet be pleased to give real and clear satisfaction to our said Desires,
we shall immediately thereupon appoint some of our number to confer with a
Committee of Parliament upon the state of the Question. This insisting upon
satisfaction to our Desires, before we appoint a Conference upon the state of
the Question, does not proceed from any peremptorinesse about words or things
of small moment, nor from any partiality or self-interest, nor from any
inclination to stretch our selves beyond our line, nor from intention to
obstruct any lawful endeavors, either for preserving Monarchical Government in
the Kings Majesty and his Posterity, or for opposing and suppressing of
Sectaries; our record is in heaven, we abhor and detest all such ways: But our
real purpose is to keep our selves so free, that in an implicit way we consent
not to, nor concur in stating of a Question of War, before we see the safety
and security of Religion sufficiently provided for; being tender of the great
trust committed to us, as the servants of Jesus Christ, and officers of his
Kingdom, for preserving the precious jewel of Religion, which ought to be as
well to your Lordships as to us, above all worldly interests.

Subscr. A. Ker.

FINIS.

