A REMONSTRANCE AND DECLARATION OF THE General Assembly OF THE Church of
Scotland, CONCERNING Present and Imminent Dangers, and concerning Duties
relating thereto.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most excellent Majesty,
1649.

And Reprinted at London for Robert Bostock, dwelling at the sign of the
King's Head in Paul's Churchyard. 1649.

Edinburgh, 27. July, 1649. Sess. 27.
A seasonable and necessary Warning and Declaration, concerning Present and
Imminent Dangers, and concerning Duties relating thereto, from the General
Assembly of this Kirk, unto all the Members thereof.
THe Lord, who chooses Jerusalem in a furnace of Affliction, has been pleased,
since the beginning of the work of Reformation in this Land, to exercise his
People with many trials: All that desired to keep a good conscience, were not
long ago under many heavy and sad pressures from the insolency and oppression
of a prevailing party of disaffected and Malignant men, who under a pretext of
bringing the King to a condition of Honor, Freedom, and Safety, did carry on an
unlawful Engagement against the Kingdom of England: and if the Lord had not
been merciful unto his People, they were like either to have been banished out
of the Land, or to have bin kept in a perpetual bondage in their consciences,
persons, and estates: But he, whose Messengers those men had mocked, and whose
Word they had despised, did bring them down suddenly in a day, and restored
liberty and peace unto his people, a mercy and deliverance, which as it ought
to be remembered with thankfulness and praise, so may it engage our hearts not
to faint in troubles and straits that do yet abide us, but to trust in the name
of the Lord, who both can and will deliver us still out of all our afflictions.

Albeit, we do now enjoy many rich and precious blessings wherein we have
reason to be comforted and to rejoice; yet it were to shut our eyes if we
should not see our selves involved in, and threatened with many and great dangers
at home and from abroad. It is matter of exceeding great sorrow to think upon
the ignorance and profanity, the impenitency and security that abounds still in
the Land, notwithstanding all the gracious dispensation of the Gospel and means
of grace in such purity and plenty, that none of the Nations round about us can
boast of the like, and of all the long-suffering patience of the Lord, and of
all his sharp rods wherewith he has afflicted us from year to year, and of all
the mercies and deliverances wherewith he has visited us, and of our late
solemn confession of sins, andengagement unto duties, sealed with the renewing
of the Covenant and the Oath of God; Which some men have so far already
forgotten, as to return with the dog to the vomit, and with the sow to the
puddle; and many signs of inconstancy and levity do appear among all sorts and
ranks of persons, who seem to want nothing but a suitable tentation to draw
them away from their stedfastness: Our Army is not yet sufficiently purged, but
there be still in it Malignant and scandalous men, whose fidelity and
constancy, as it is much to be doubted, so is the wrath of the Lord to be
feared, upon their proceedings and undertakings, without a speedy and effectual
remedy.

That prevailing party of Sectaries in England, who have broken the Covenant,
and despised the Oath of God, corrupted the Truth, subverted the sundamental
Government by King and Parliament, and taken away the Kings life, look upon us
with an evil eye, as upon those who stand in the way of their monstrous and
newfangled devices in Religion and Government; and though there were no cause
to fear any thing from that party but the Gangrene and infection of those many
damnable and abominable errors, which have taken hold on them, yet our vicinity
unto, and daily commerce with that Nation, may justly make us afraid that the
Lord may give up many in this Land unto a spirit of delusion, to believe lies,
because they have not received the love of the Truth.

Neither is the Malignant party so far broken and brought low, as that they
have abandoned all hopes of carrying on their former designs against the
Covenant and work of Reformation, beside many of them in this Kingdom who are
as Foxes tied in chains, keeping their evil nature, and waiting an opportunity
to break their cords, and again to prey upon the Lords people. There be
standing Armies in Ireland, under the command of the Marquess of Ormond, the
Lord Inchiqueen* the Lord of Airds, and George Munroe, who forgetting all the
horrible cruelty that was exercised by the Irish Rebels upon many thousands of
the English and Scottish Nations in that Land, have entered into a Peace and
Association with them, that they may the more easily carry on the old designs
of the Popish, Prelatical and Malignant party, and the Lord of Airds, and
George Monroe, have by treachery and oppression brought the Province of Vlster,
and Garrisons therein, under their power and command, and have redacted our
Countrymen, and such as adhere unto the Covenant and cause of God in that
Province, unto many miseries and straits, and are like to banish the Ministers
of the Gospel, and to overturn these fair beginnings of the work of God, which
were unto many a branch of hope, that the Lord meant to make Ireland a pleasant
Land.

But which is more grievous unto us then all these, our King, Notwithstanding
of the Lords hand, against his Fathers opposition to the work of God, and of
the many sad and doleful consequences that followed thereupon, in reference to
Religion and his Subjects and Person, and Government, does hearken unto the
counsels of these, who were Authors of these miseries unto his Royal Father,
and to his Kingdoms, by which it has come to pass, that his Majesty has
hitherto refused to grant the just and necessary desires of this Kirk and
Kingdom, which were tendered unto him from the Commissioners of both for
securing of Religion, the Liberties of the Subject, his Majesty's Government,
and the Peace of the Kingdom; And it is much to be feared that those wicked
Counselors may so far prevail upon him in his tender years, as to engage him
in a war, for overturning (if it be possible) of the work of God, and bearing
down all those in the three Kingdoms that adhere thereto, which if he shall do,
cannot but bring great wrath from the Lord upon himself and his throne, and
must be the cause of many new, and great miseries, and calamities to these
lands.

It concerns a Nation thus sinful and laden with iniquity, and involved in so
many difficulties and dangers, by timous repentance and unfeigned humiliation to
draw near to God, and to wrestle with him in Prayer and supplication, that our
sin may be pardoned, and our iniquity done away, and that he would establish
the Land in the love of the Truth, and enable every one in their station to do
their duty boldly and without fear, and in a humble dependence upon the Lord,
in whom alone is the salvation of his people; every man ought with all
faithfulness and diligence, to make use of all these means that are approved
and allowed of God, for preserving and carrying on of his work, and for
securing and guarding the Land against all enemies whatsoever, both upon the
right hand and upon the left.

The Spirit of error and delusion in our Neighbour-Land, in the policy of
Satan has veiled it self in many, under the mask of holiness, and is in the
righteous and wise dispensation of God, armed with power and attended with
success. Therefore all the Inhabitants of this Land would labor for more
knowledge, and more love of the truth, without which they may easily be
deceived, and led into tentation, and would learn to distinguish betwixt the
show and power of godliness; We know that there be many in England who be truly
godly, and mourn with us for all the errors and abominations that are in that
land, but it is without controversy, that that Spirit which has acted in the
Courses and Counsels of these who has retarded and obstructed the work of God,
despised the Covenant, forced the Parliament, murdered the King, changed the
civil Government, and established so vast a tolleration in Religion, cannot be
the Spirit of Righteousness and Holiness, because it teaches not men to live
godly and righteously, but draws them a^ide into error, and makes them to bring
forth the bitter fruits of inipiety and imquity, and therefore ought to be
avoided; and not only are such of our Nation as travel in our Neighbour-land,
to take heed unto themselves, that they receive not infection from such as are
leavened with Error, but these also who live at home, especially in those
places where Sectaries, upon pretext of merchandise, and other civil
employments, ordinarily traffic and converse: Neither needs any man to be
afraid of the power and success of that party, they who have gadded about so
much to change their way, shall ere long be ashamed; the Lord has rejected
their confidences, and they shall not prosper in them. How far they may proceed
in their Resolutions and Actings against this Kingdom, is in the hand of the
most high, if the Lord shall suffer that party to invade this Land, it may be
the comfort and encouragement of all the Inhabitants thereof, that not only
has that unlawful engagement against the Kingdom of England been declared
against, and condemned both by Kirk and State, but also that these men can
pretend no quarrel against us, unless it be that we have adhered unto the
Solemn Leagne and Covenant, from which they have so foully revolted and
backslidden, and that we have born testimony against Tolleration, and their
proceedings in reference to Religion and Government, and the taking away of the
Kings life; and therefore we trust that in such a case none will be so far
deficient in their duty as not to defend themselves against such injust
violence, and in the strength of the Lord to adhere unto their former
principles, with much boldness of spirit, and willingness of heart, in this
certainly we shall have a good conscience, and the Lord shall be with us.

We are not so, to have the one of our eyes upon the Sectaries, as not to hold
the other upon the Malignants, they being an enemy more numerous, and no less
subtle and powerful nor the other, and at this time more dangerous unto us,
not only because experience has proven that there is a greater aptitude and
inclination in these of our Land, to comply with Malignants then Sectaries,
that they carry on their wicked designs under a pretext of being for the King,
but also because there be many of them in our own bowels, and for that they do
pretend to be for maintenance of the Kings Person and Authority, (and which is
the matter of our grief) because the King owns their principles and ways, which
if it be not taken heed unto, may prove a great snare and dangerous tentation
to many to side with them against the Lords people, and his cause. The constant
tenor of the carriage of these in this Land, who stand for the cause of God,
are undeniable arguments of their affection to Monarchy, and to that Royal
Family and Line which has sweyed the Scepter of this Kingdom for many hundreds
of years past, albeit his Majesty, who lately reigned, refused to harken to
their just desires, yet did they with much patience and moderation of mind,
supplicate and solicit his Majesty for satisfaction in these things that
conceres Religion and the Covenant, and were still willing, that upon
satisfaction given, he should be admitted to the exercise of his Royal Power*
and whatsoever envy and malice objects to the contrary* were careful to get
assurance concerning the safety of his Majesty's Person, when they brought
their Army out of England, and when notwithstanding of that assurance, the
prevailing party of Sectaries were acting his life, did to the utmost of their
power, endevor by their Commissioners that there might have been no such
proceeding, and when their desires and endevors were not successful, did
protest and bear testimony against the same* And as both Kirk and State had
testified their tender respect to his Majesty who now reigns, by their Letters
written to him whilst his Father was yet living, so no sooner did the
Parliament hear of his Fathers death, but they did with all solemnity proclaim
him King of these Kingdoms, and after they had acquainted his Majesty by
Messages with their proceedings herein, Commissioners were sent both from State
and Kirk, instructed with power and commission, to express the Affection of
this Kingdom to Monarchy, and his Majesty's Person and Government, together
with their desires concerning the security of Religion, and the Pence of those
Kingdoms. And albeit the desires of both which are now published to the world,
with his Majesty's Answers thereto, are such as are most just and necessary;
yet the Counsels of the Malignant party had so great influence upon his
Majesty, that his Answers are not only not satisfactory, but short of that
which was many times granted by his Royal Father, and cannot be acquiesced unto
unless we would abandon the League and Covenant, and betray Religion, and the
cause of God.

We hold it the duty of all who live in this Land, to wrestle with God in the
behalf of the King, that he may be recovered out of the snare of evil Counsel,
and brought to give satisfaction to the public desires of Kirk and State; and
in their places and stations, to use all endevors with himself and others for
that effect, and to be willing, upon satisfaction given, to admit him to the
exercise of his power and cheerfully to obey him in all things according to the
Will of God, and the Laws of the Kingdom, and to do every thing that tends to
the preservation of his Majesty's Person, and just greatness and Authority, in
the defense and preservation of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms.

But if his Majesty, or any having or pretending power and commission from him,
shall invade this Kingdom, upon pretext of establishing him in the exercise of
his Royal Power, as it will be an high provocat^on against God to be accessory
or assisting thereto, so w^ll it be a necessary duty to resist and oppose the
same. We know that many are so forgetful of the Oa^h of God, and ignorant and
careless of the Interest of Jesus Christ, and the Gospel, and does so little
tender that which concerns his Kingdom, and the Privileges thereof, and does
so much dote upon absolute and Arbitrary Government for gaining their own ends,
and so much malign the Instruments of the work of Reformation, that they would
admit his Majesty to the exercise of his Royal Power upon any terms whatsoever,
though with never so much prejudice to Religion, and the Liberties of these
Kingdoms, would think it quarrel enough to make War upon all those who for
conscience sake cannot condescend thereto; but we desire all these who fear the
Lord, and mind to keep their Covenant impartially to consider these things
which follows.

First, That as Magistrates and their power is ordained of GOD, so are they in
the exercise thereof, not to walk according to their own will, but according to
the Law of Equity and Righteousness, as being the Ministers of of God for the
safety of his People; Therefore a boundless and illimited power is to be
acknowledged in no King nor Magistrate; neither is our King to be admitted to
the exercise of his power as long as he refuses to walk in the Administration
of the same according to this rule, and the established Laws of the kingdom,
that his Subjects may live under him a quiet and peaceable life, in all
godliness and honesty.

2. There is a mutual obligation and stipulation betwixt the King and his
People; as both of them are tied to God, so each of them are tied one to
another for the performance of mutual and reciprocal duties: according to
this, it is statute and ordained in the eighth Act of the first Parliament of
King James the sixth, That all Kings, Princes or Magistrates whatsomever,
holding their place, which hereafter shall happen in any time to Reign and bear
rule over this Realm, at the time of their Coronation and receipt of their
Princely Authority, make their faithful promise by Oath in the presence of the
eternal God, that during the whole course of their lives, they shall serve the
eternal God to the utmost of their power* according as he has required in his
most holy Word, contained in the old and new Testament; and according to the
same Word, shall maintain the true Religion of Christ Jesus, the preaching of
his most holy Word, and due and right Administration of his Sacraments now
received and preached within this Realm, and shall abolish and gainstand all
false Religion contrary to the same, and shall rule the people committed to
their charge according to the will and command of God revealed in his Word, and
according to the lovable Laws and constitutions received within this Realm, and
shall procure to the utmost of their power, to the Kirk of God, and whole
Christian People, true and perfect peace in all time coming, and that Justice
and Equity be kept to all creatures without exception: which Oath was sworn
first by King James the 6, and afterward by King Charles at his coronation,
and is inserted in our National Covenant, which was approven by the King who
lately reigned: As long therefore as his Majesty who now reigns, refuses to
hearken to the just and necessary desires of State and Kirk, propounded to his
Majesty for the security of Religion, and safety of his People, and to engage
and oblige himself for the performance of his duty to his people: It is
consonant to Scripture, and Reason, and the Laws of the kingdom, that they
should refuse to admit him to the exercise of his Government, until he give
satisfaction in these things.

3. In the League and Covenant, which has been so solemnly sworn and renewed
by this kingdom, the duty of defending and preserving the Kings Majesty's
Person and Authority is joined with, and subordinate unto the duty of
preserving and defending the true Religion and Liberties of the kingdoms: And
therefore his Majesty standing in opposition to the just and necessary public
desires concerning Religion and Liberties, it were a manifest breach of
covenant, and a preferring of the Kings interest to the interest of Jesus
Christ, to bring him to the exercise of his Royal power; which he, walking in
a contrary way, and being compassed about with Malignant counsels, cannot but
employ unto the prejudice and ruin of both.

4. Was not an arbitrary Government and unlimited power the fountain of most of
all the corruptions both in Kirk and State? And was it not for restraint of
this, and for their own just defense against Tyranny and unjust Violence, which
ordinarily is the fruit and effect of such a power, that the Lords people did
join in covenant, and have been at the expense of so much blood, pains, and
treasure these years past? And if his Majesty should be admitted to the
exercise of his Government before satisfaction given, were it not to put in his
hand that arbitrary power which we have upon just and necessary grounds been so
long withstanding; and so to abandon our former principles, and betray out
Cause?

5. The King being averse from the work of Reformation and the Instruments
thereof, and compassed about with Malignant and disaffected men, whom he
hearkens unto as his most faithful Counselors, and looks upon as his best and
most Loyal Subjects: We leave to all indifferent men to judge, whether his
Majesty, being admitted to the exercise of his power before satisfaction given,
would not by such counsels endeavor an overturning of the things which God
has wrought amongst us, and labor to draw public administrations concerning
Religion, and the Liberties of the Subject, unto that course and channel in
which they did run under Prelacy, and before the work of Reformation? Which we
have the more cause to fear, because his Royal Father did so often declare,
that he conceived himself bound to employ all the power that God should put in
his hands to the utmost for these ends; and that he adheres as yet to his
Fathers principles, and walks in his way, and has made a peace with the Irish
Rebels, by which is granted unto them the full liberty of Popery.

6. It is no strange nor new thing for Kingdoms to preserve Religion and
themselves from ruin, by putting restraint upon the exercise of the power and
Government of those who have refused to grant those things that were necessary
for the good of Religion and the Peoples safety; there have been many
Precedents of it in this and other Nations of old, and of late upon these and
other important considerations: It shall be the wisdom of every one who
dwells in the Land, to take heed of such a temptation and snare, that they be
not accessory to any such designs or endeavors; as they would not bring upon
themselves, and upon their families the guilt of all the detriment that will
undoubtedly follow thereupon to Religion and the Covenant, and of all the
miseries and calamities that it will bring upon his Majesty's Person and
throne, and upon these Kingdoms; such a thing would in all appearance be the
undermining and shaking, if not the overthrowing and destroying of the work of
Reformation; and therefore whosoever attempt the same, oppose themselves to the
cause of God, and will at last dash against the Rock of the Lords power, which
has broken in pieces many high and lofty ones since the beginning of this Work
in these Kingdoms, and it is unto us a sure Word of promise, That whosoever
shall associate themselves, or took counsel together, or gird themselves
against God and his Work, shall be broken in pieces.

It is not only joining in Arms with the Malignant party, that all these who
would keep their integrity has need to beware of, but also subtle devices and
designs that are promoted by fair pretexts and persuasions to draw men to
dispense at least with some part of these necessary desires that are propounded
to his Majesty for securing of Religion after many turnings and devises the
foundation of the Unlawful Engagement was at last laid by his Majesty's
Concessions of the date the year 1648. wherein though many things seemed to be
granted, yet that was denied, without which Religion and the Union betwixt the
Kingdoms could not have been secured, and it is probable that such a way may be
assayed again, and prosecuted with very much cunning and skill to deceive and
ensnare the simple: It does therefore concern all ranks and conditions of
persons to be the more wary and circumspect, especially in that which concerns
the National Covenant, and the solemn League and Covenant, that before his
Majesty be admitted to the exercise of his Royal Power, that by and after the
Oath of Coronation, he shall assure and declare by his Solemn Oath under his
hand and seal, his allowance of the National Covenant, and of the Solemn
League and Covenant, and obligation to prosecute the ends thereof in his
Station and Calling, and that he shall for himself and successors, consent and
agree to Acts of Parliament, injoyning the solemn League and Covenant, and
fully establishing Presbyteriall Government, the Dire^tory of Worship, the
Confession of Faith and Catechism, as they are approvea by the General
Assembly of this Kirk and Parliament of this Kingdom, in all his Majesty's
Dominions, and that he shall observe these in his own practice and family, and
that he shall never made opposition to any of these, nor endeavor any change
thereof; Albeit the League and Covenant be despised by that prevailing party in
England, and the work of Uniformity, through the retardments and obstructions
that have come in the way, be almost forgotten by these Kingdom, yet the
obligation of that Covenant is perpetual, and all the duties contained therein
are constantly to be minded, and prosecuted by every one of us, and our
posterity, according to their place and stations; and therefore we are no less
zealously to endeavor, that his Majesty may Establish, and swear and
subscribe the same, then if it were unanimously regarded and stuck unto by all
the Kingdom of England, his Majeste swearing and subscribing the league and
Covenant, will much contribute for the Security of Religion, his Majesty's
happiness, and the Peace of his Kingdoms

As it is incumbent to all, who live in this Kirk and Kingdom to be watchful
and circumspect, so it concerns these of the High and Honorable Court of
Parliament and their Committees, in a special way to see to their duty, and to
be straight and resolute in the performance of the same: Their former
proceedings is unto us a sufficient evidence and ground of hope, that they will
not be wanting in any necessary testimony of duty and Loyalty that they owe
to the King, by using all just and seasonable established upon his Thrones; And
we trust, that upon the other hand, the sense of their Obligation to God; and
his Oath that is upon them, will make them constantly to adhere to their former
principles, and resolutions and desires concerning Religion and the Covenant,
that real satisfaction may be had there anent, before the King be put in
exercise of his power, and that they will carefully provide for the safety of
the Kingdom, both in regard of intestine dangers, and in regard of invasion
from without: It is not long since they, together with the rest of the Land,
made solemn public Confession of Compliance with Malignants, carnal
confidence, following of it self interests, and harkening to the Counsels of
flesh and blood, and did in a special way engage themselves to comply, and seek
themselves and their own things, no more to abandon the counsels of their own
hearts, and not to rely upon the Arm of flesh and to purge Judicatories, and
Armies from profane, and scandalous Persons; And God forbid that they should
so soon forget, or neglect so necessary duties, and fall again unto so great
and grievous transgressions. We trust that they will seek the things of Christ,
and not their own things, that they will hearken to his Word, and not walk in
the imaginations of their own hearts, that they will rely upon the Arm of the
Lord, and not upon the arm of flesh, that they will be wary and circumspect in
discerning the dispositions and affections of those whom they put in trust; and
that seeing this Kindom has so much smarted, and been so often deceived by
compliance with Malignants, that they will carefully avoid this snare of those
who were upon the former Unlawful Engagement, and be tender in bringing in of
such; And we cannot but exhort them in the Name of the Lord, to take notice of
the Oppression of the People and Commons in the Land, by the lawless exactions
of Landlords, Collectors and Soldiers. We do not justify the murmurings and
grudgings of those, who preferring the things of the world to the Gospel and
things of Jesus Christ, repine at necessary burdens, without which it is not
possible that the Land can be secured from invasion without, and insurrection
within, or the Cause and People of God defended from enemies: It is the duty of
every one who has taken the Covenant, willingly and with a cheerful mind to
bestow their means and their pains as they shall be called thereunto in an
orderly way; yet should these to whom God has committed the Government, take
care that they be not nedlesly burdened, and that none grind their faces by
oppression; not only by making of Laws against the same, but by searching out
of the cause of the poor, and by executing those Laws timously upon these that
oppress them, that they may find real redress of their just grievances and
complaints, and be encouraged to bear those burdens which cannot be avoided.

As the Parliament have begun, so we hope they will continue, to purge out all
these from trust, that are not of known integrity and affection to the cause of
God, and of a blameless and Christian conversation, and that they, and the
Officers of the Army in their respective places, will seriously mind and
speedily and resolutely go about the removing from the Army all malignant and
scandalous persons, and also the removing of Sectaries, when any shall be found
therein; that they may give real evidence that they did not deal deceitfully
with God, in the day that they engaged themselves thereto.

Albeit we hope and pray that those who bear charge in our Army, will from the
remembrance of the Lords goodness to them, and the honor that he has put upon
them, endeavor to carry themselves faithfully and straightly, yet it cannot be
unseasonable to warm them to ^^ke heed of tentations, and to beware of snares,
that they be not drawn to indifferency or neutrality in the cause of God, much
less into connivance at, or compliance with the courses and designs of
malignants or Sectaries, but to stick closely by the same, and to be zealous
against all the enemies and adversaries thereof, and it concerns Soldiers to
be content with their wages, and to do violence to no man, but as they are
called unto the defense of the cause and people of God, so to behave themselves
in such a blameless and Christian a way, that their carriage may be a testimony
to his cause, and a comfort to his people, so shall our Armies prosper and the
Lord shall go out with them.

But most of all it concerns the Ministers of the Gospel, whom God has called
to give warning to his people to look to their duty, It is undeniably true,
that may of the evils wherewith this Kirk and Kingdom has been afflicted in
our age, have come to pass, because of the negligence of some, and corruptions
of others of the Ministry, whilst some fell asleep, and were careless, and
others were covetous and ambitious, the evil man brought in Prelacy and the
Ceremonies, and hah facre promoted the Service Book, and the Book of Cannon,
and the course of backsliding and revolting was carried on, until it pleased
God to stir up the spirits of these few who had stood in the gap to oppose
and resist the same, and to begin the work of Reformation in the Land; since
which time the silence of some Ministers, and compliance of others, has had
great influence up. on the backsliding of many amongst the people, who upon the
discovery of the evil of their way, complain that they got not warning, or
that if they were warned by some, others held their peace, or did justify them
in the course of their backsliding; We can look upon such Ministers no
otherwise, then upon those that are guilty of the blood of the Lords people,
and with whom the Lord will reckon for all the breach of Covenant, and
defection that has been in the Land. The Priests lips should preserve
knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth, for he is the messenger
of the Lord of Hosts; but such have departed out of the way, and have caused
many to stumble at the Law, therefore has the Lord made them contemptible and
base before all the people, according as they have not kept his ways, but have
been partial in his Law; because they have lost their savor, he has cast out
many of them as unsavory salt; but such as have been faithful, as he has
preserved them from the violence and fury of men, so has he verified his word
in their mouths, both against his enemies, and concerning his people, and his
work, and makes them see (though not all their desires concerning the Gospel,
and the work of God in the Land, yet) very much of the fruit of their labor,
by preserving the doctrine, and all the Ordinances of Jesus Christ in their
parity, and adding in some measure thereto the power and life thereof: We do
therefore charge all the Ministers of the Land before God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing in his kingdom,
as in every thing to be ensamples of a good conversation, and to walk without
offense, that the Ministry be not blamed; so to take heed unto the Flock over
which the holy Ghost has (...) them ever-seers, to declare unto them all the
counsel of God, and to give them timous warning concerning every danger and
duty, and to hold forth unto them the solid grounds of real comforlation, by
which they may be encouraged and comforted in all their trials and afflictions,
that they may be free of the blood of all men, and have this as a ground of
rejoicing, even the testimony of their consciences, that in simplicity and
godly pureness, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God they have had
their conversation in the world, and have exhorted and comforted, and charged
every one committed unto them, as a Father does his children; especially,
Ministers ought to be careful to be much in discovering the temptations, and
pressing the duties of the times, that those who are under their charge may
know what to avoid, and what to embrace and pursue. If all the Watchmen in the
Land shall give warning, and blow the Trumpet at once, it shall not be easy
for enemies to prey upon the people of God: We know no cause why any whom God
has called to preach the Gospel, should be afraid to speak boldly in the Name
of the Lord, since God has given so manifest a testimony of hi^ care and
protection in preserving them these years past, who have striven to be
faithful to him who has called them from all the fury and malice of the
haters of the work of God, and of the Kingdom of his Son Jesus Christ, who has
promised to be with his servants unto the end of the world.

Albeit the Land be involved in many difficulties, and compassed about with
great and imminent dangers; yet there is hope and ground of consolation
concerning this thing; the Lord is in the midst of us, and we are called by his
name, our ears hear the joyful sound of the Gospel, and our eyes see our
Teachers. We behold the arm of the Lord stretched out daily in working
salvation for his people, and answering their desires upon their enemies, by
terrible things in righteousness; although we be but few in number, yet the
Lord of Hosts is with us, and (...) the power of his strength we shall be able
to prevail; although our Land be filled with sin, yet we have not been forsaken
of the Lord our God, but he has always had compassion upon us, and delivered
us in all our distress; although some of understanding fall, it is but to try,
and to purge, and to make white even to the end, because it is yet for a time
appointed; although many cleave to us by flatteries, yet there be a remnant who
keep their integrity, and the Lord shall do good to these that be good; but
such as turn aside to crooked ways, shall be led forth with the workers of
iniquity.

The Lords people in England and Ireland, who adhere to the Cause and Covenant,
may be perplexed, but shall not despair; they may be persecuted, but shall not
be forsaken; they may be cast down, but shall not be destroyed; and although
uniformity, and the work of Reformation in these lands seem not only to be
retarded, but almost plucked up by the roots, and the foundations thereof razed;
yet the seed which the Lord has sown there, shall again take root downward,
and bear fruit upward; The zeal of the Lord of Hosts shall perform this.

A. Ker.

FINIS.

