MEMORIAL FOR The Members to be Chosen TO Represent this CHURCH, at the ensuing
General Assembly, HUMBLY OFFERED, BY An Elder of the Church of SCOTLAND.
Reverend and Honorable Fathers, and Brethren,
I Crave Leave to be your Remembrancer with all dutiful Respect, as to some
Things of great Weight in the present Juncture. 1st. It was the Glory of this
Church, that for about Fifty Years together, after our Reformation from Popery,
we continued free, both of Error and Schism. And afterward, when Antichristian
Prelacy, with other Romish Trumpery, was thrust in upon us, and supported by
the most cruel Persecutions, and horrible Barbarities; yet some honest
Testimony was born to our received Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government. No Party amongst us maintained Doctrinal Errors. Once indeed we had
the sharp Trial, that a Deluge of Errors and Heresies broke in amongst us, at
the Advantage of a conquering Enemy, when the English Sectaries got Footing
here, and kept us under their Feet, for a considerable Number of Years;
nevertheless all that Time they could Proselyte no Party amongst us, to espouse
their Errors. A few, I confess, were charmed to some Liking of the
Congregational Way. But as these were very inconsiderable, so neither did they
continue. In the mean Time, the Church and Nation adhered to our Covenanted
Doctrine and Discipline; and did also signalize themselves for inviolable
Loyalty amidst many strong Temptations from a victorious Usurper, at the Head
of a powerful Army, flushed with unexpected Successes. But now while we enjoy
Quietness and Liberty, it is Matter of heavy Regrate, that the poisonous Leaven
of Error should ferment and spread so strongly. 2dly. It Is humbly tendered to
your serious Consideration, That judicious and godly Persons in foreign
Places, think strange, and lament, That this Church has not taken the Affair
of Professor Simson into their own Hands, and have declined to appoint an
Enquiry to be made in Name of the Church of Scotland, into the Errors, he is
alleged to have owned, and taught; Instead of which, they have obliged the
Reverend Mr. Webster to a laborious and difficult Pursuit, as if it had been a
personal Affair of his, and did not equally, yea, and much more concern the
whole Church. To set this Matter in some Evidence of Light, I tender the
following Particulars to your serious Consideration. 1st. This Method of
proceeding was proposed in full Assembly, when the Business of the Professor
was tabled before them. The Reverend Mr. Webster laid it at their Feet, as an
important Concern of the whole Church, and declared his utter Aversion to
intermedle in a personal Way; yet withal did signify his hearty Willingness to
give all the Assistance, that might be within his Reach, providing the Assembly
would proceed in the Way desired. 2dly. Neither was this the Sentiment of Mr.
Webster alone: Several Honorable and Grave Members of that Venerable Assembly
were of the same Judgment. 3dly. With all due Respect to our very Reverend
Assemblies, I represent, That personal Prosecutions in the Affair of Error, are
manifestly, and in the Nature of the Thing, obnoxious to such Inconveniences
as are most hurtful to the Cause, and favorable on the Side of Error. I shall
give but a few Hints, which I presume ye will find very plain. This Method
tends clearly toward the Prevention of any Pursuits in such a Cause,
considering how Matters are stated with poor sinful Men. For in Regard of the
Softness and Selfishness, with the Timidity of Nature in many; it is
presumable, That not one of an Hundred will adventure upon a Pursuit in this
Case, when he knows before Hand, that the Church will not assist him as they
refused to the Reverend Mr. Webster. The Patrons of Error have ordinarily a
strong Party, who more openly, or secretly favor them, and they are assured of
their utmost Assistance, ere they broach their own dangerous Opinions. The
poisonous Leaven has usually spread its Contagion very far, and gone deep ere
it appear more openly; and they who may have Thoughts of a Pursuit, in such
Events, are not readily ignorant of this, nor will fail to sit down and count
the Cost, ere they adventure on such a difficult Project. Please take a little
Glance. 1st. They must lay their Account to travel the Length of the Radical
Judicatory, of which the Person accused is a Member; there they must attend,
and in Case the Presbytery favor the Party lybelled, the Pursuit is at the
greatest Disadvantage, and the Pursuer may readily be discouraged, and succumb,
having no Assistance from the Church. But, to take the Matter by the very best
Handle; what though he should persist, and finding himself leas'd, should appeal
to a higher Court; beside that he thereby stateth the Court appealed from, a
Party against him, and is liable to all the Exceptions they can make against
his Management, which may perhaps defeat the Pursuit, because of some
Informalities, and bring himself into the Lurch. I say, besides what is plainly
supposable on this Head, though the Affair should be fairly brought to a higher
Judicatory, and failing of Redress there, should be carried to the highest in
due Form; the Pursuer must still follow it out, and attend all this while. And
when the Process is brought the Length of an Assembly, that great Court cannot
find Leisure to examine and cognosce upon it: it must by them be referred to
some Committee; and much depends upon the Choice of such a Committee, which, if
swaying, in a great Part toward the Side of the pursued, will embarass and
entangle the Pursuer so much the more. Thus the Matter is tossed from Committee
to Committee: He is wise indeed, who can tell how long. These are no foolish
and remote Suppositions; whoever acts wisely, must lay his Account with them.
2dly. In regard such Pursuits are reckoned very provocking, the Pursuer cannot
readily escape all possible Recriminations by the pursued, and these who take
his Part. He must lay his Account, to have his Conduct canvassed and sifted to
the Outmost, and every Shadow grasped at, with the greatest Eagerness, for
bringing him under Discredit. And if any thing can be found in his Management,
that is justly exeptionable (which may readily befall) he must make his
Reckoning, that such Things will be aggravated to the highest Pinnacle. And who
knows what Lies and Calumnies may be invented, and tossed upon that Occasion,
and all to blacken the Pursuit, while in the mean Time, the Favorers of the
pursued are busied in venting their Legends, concerning his Piety, Learning and
eminent Virtues. These, with other such Difficuties, will readily fall under
the View of any, who deliberatly considers such a Pursuit; which being maturely
pondered, together with the great Fatigue and Expenses he must needs undergo
(and deserve Consideration in their own Place) will go far to deter one, or
other, from intenting such Processes, in Matters which are no personal
Concerns, but do equally, and yet more affect the whole Church, than any
particular Member. Thus the poisonous Leaven spreads, while no Man is like to
make it his Business to stop the Diffusion. And if the Church will not interest
her self, without some Pursuer, or refuses to take the Load off from his
Shoulders, who may adventure to state a Process. Behold, here a more effectual
Toleration is granted to Error, than any that a State can inact, especially if
these deluding Interprizes be managed with Art, as they fail not to be. Error
is a chief Project of lying, and murdering Spirits, for destroying the
Churches of CHRIST; and they will take Care to choose the fittest Tools. I
confess, That the Researches of Error ly open to Difficulties, in whatsoever
Method they be Managed; especially after these Tares are multiplied, and have
taken strong and deep Roots, through Neglect of the Watchmen: And the Cure of
Eating Cankers is still uneasy. But so much the less Cause is there for
rolling over such a Business upon the Shoulders of any one Person. The harder
the Work be, the more skilful Hands, and the greater Number are necessarly
required; And the forementioned, or the like Difficulties are more easily
prevented or redressed, under the Churches Management, than when such Pursuits
ly open to the Mistakes of weaker Hands: So much for the Third Particular, viz.
The Inconveniences of Personal Prosecutions in this Affair. I shall Fourthly,
Adventure a little higher, and make some Enquiry into the Divine Institution
about these Matters. I acknowledge, an Undertaking of so much Weight may
readily suffer in so weak an Hand: Yet my poor Essay may give Occasion to
others for setting that Business in some full Evidence of Light. Were there any
Divine Appointment or Personal Prosecutions in the present Matter. I should
soon yield the Cause, and plead no longer on the Score of Inconveniences: But
to me the Scriptures of Truth seem to look a quite contrary Way. 1st. The Body
of Sound Interpreters do (so far as I have hitherto understood) carry the
Lord's Commands, both with respect to Error, and other Disorders. First, to the
Church. A Man that is an Tit. 3.10.
Heretic after the first or second Admonition reject, or cast out. These
assuredly are Church Acts, and so understood by the Cloud of Faithful
Interpeters. They ought to take Care of the LORD's Vineyard, and to take the
little Song 2.15.
Foxes, which spoil the tender Vines, Whatever Deficiencies may be in the Point
of Delating, And touching Scandals in the Conversation of Professing People,
the Charge is given primarly to the Church, as our Eminent Divines have still
understood it. If any Man (says th Apostle) obey not our Word by this Epistle
2. These. 3.14.
Note that Man, etc. Let the Church especially put a Mark upon him. And what if
none should Complain? (such may be the Degeneracy in particular Churches) must
Scandals be Tolerated on that Pretext? Our Assemblies have interested
themselves in Points of Disorder as to Church Communion, and have made these
the Church's Business, and Prosecuted them in their own Name with Vigor
enough. And must the Poisonous Gangrene of Error be no Concern of the Church,
and be suffered to spread, unless some Person (and under the heaviest
Discouragements) undertake the Prosecution. We our selves acknowledge, that a
Fama Clamosa my sufficiently found the Churches Pursuit in the Matter of
Scandal: And is Error of no less moment? Sure it is more infectious. And (allow
me to say it) there was more than a Fama Clamosa in Mr. Simson's Case; for two
Presbyteries Delated him to the Assembly, and instructed their Commissioners to
move that the Church should enquire into the Matter, and yet this may not be
made the Churches Business! What can Impartial Beholders think! 2dly, The
Designation of Watchmen Ezekiel. 3.17. and 33.7. Heb. 13, 17.
which the Spirit of GOD gives to the Overseers of the Church, bears clearly
the Obligation that lies upon them to make the Affair of Error their Business.
It were a sorry Inspection of Watchmen, should they suffer a whole City to be
Murdered, unless a Potent Poysoner were Prosecuted before them by some
particular Citizen? I need not enlarge a Remark so very obvious. 3dly, I Appeal
to the first Christian and New Testament Assembly at Jerusalem, Acts 15.1.
Here we have a leading Instance, and a clear Rule laid before us by an
Assembly under the Conduct of Men Divinely Inspired, and who might truly say,
It seemed good unto the Verse. 5.28.
Holy Ghost, and to us. An Error had sprung up in the Primitive Virgin Church;
Namely Certain Men which came from Judea had taught the Brethren: Except ye be
Gal. 5.1.2.
Circumcised after the Manner of Moses ye cannot be saved. What was the
Management of the Apostles and Elders in this Case? Did they Sist, until some
one or other had the Courage to commence a Process? Nay, the Church made the
Affair it is own Business, and met about the Matter in a Judicative Capacity, as
may be seen at more length in the History. Suffer me a little to run the
Parallel; Certain Men have arisen amongst us, who teach strange, but no less,
yea, and more Dangerous Doctrines: For Instance, they call in question Adam's
Federal Headship, and Assert a sure Connection between Moral Seriousness and
Saving Grace. They Aver, That the Number of the Saved is equal to, Yea, and
greater than that of the Damned; And that all Infants Christian and Heathen,
dying in their Nonage are Saved, heing Born in an Estate of Favor, from which
nothing can cast them out; But a Rejection of the offered Salvation; And that
this Salvation is explicitly or implicitly offered unto all, both within, and
without the Church, with a great deal more Rotten and Poisonous Pelagian Stuff,
all tending to exalt corrupt Nature. This is observed, Judicatories find Fault
with it, some of them Attempt to lay it before the whole Representative Church,
yet they are born down and Discouraged. A great Party Conspires to crush the
very first Motions, though but humbly craving an Inquiry. Nevertheless it comes
before our Assemblies at length; And their Conduct is such, as I love not to
Repeat. They will not make it their Business, nor do they attempt to Meet ex
professo upon that Head. Nay the Reverend Mr. Webster who had but an equal
Interest with others, though Honored to stir more in that Matter: Mr. Webster, I
say, must be obliged to an uneasy Pursuit, and the Assembly refuses to grant
his humble-Petition, earnestly craving the Appointment of some little
Assistance, though upon Solemn Promise to interest none in the Cause but himself.
Now after all, dare we hold up our Faces, and think, or say, that, we have
sincerely followed the Scriptural Pattern in Professor Simson's Affair. So much
for this Head. I Represent 5ly. That the Churches of CHRIT from their first and
Purest Times have endeavored to follow the Apostolical Pattern, and are not
accustomed to make the Business of Error a Personal Business. Here I might give
large and Circumstanced Accounts from the first Records of Church History to
following Ages, and to Times, within the Compass of our own Memory. But, such a
Labor would carry me too far, and is not necessary, while I Write to Persons
much better Versed in these Matters. Only allow me to give a slender Touch.
This was not the Method of the first four General Councils, so far as I could
find, in the Matter of Error. Neither did the Renowned Synod which met at
Dordreght, near the beginning of the last Age, oblige any to a Personal
Prosecution of the Arminians, nor any Leader of them. That Church made it their
own Business. And in our Times Roel's and Leenhof's Errors were Condemned in
the Netherlands, and Intrants into the Ministry obliged by the Classes there to
Renounce them. There was no Personal Prosecution in that Matter. And I remember
that several Years ago, when I was occasionally at Rotterdam, the Classis (or
Presbytery) there, took Notice of some Erroneous Positions peeping out among
the French Refugees, and obliged the Suspected Persons to Renounce them; As of
Old, the Classis at Amsterdam, had obliged Jacobus Arminius while he was one of
the Ministers of that City, to Renounce the Errors he had begun to vent. In all
these Transactions no Load was laid upon any Person to state and follow out a
Process, Yea, even our Congregational Brethren in New England (who are not the
greatest Friends to the Just Power of Church Judicatories) Yet in the Affair of
Error, did meet in a General Synod, Condemned some dangerous Errors sprung up
amongst them, and ordered a vigorous Prosecution by the several Churches of
every one who presumed to vent the Condemned Errors. I know it will be
Objected, That our Assemblies have proceeded in this Matter, according to their
own Acts, which were made upon mature Deliberation; and as it is presumable,
they knew best the Circumstanced state of this Church, to which they adjusted
them, so it may be justly accounted intolerable Presumption in any Member of
this Church at one dash, to condemn the whole Church. I Answer, that I owe, and
do sincerely pay dutiful Respect to this Church and her Assemblies, though I
Lament much want of the Zeal and Integrity which signalized us in former and
purer Times. I am also well satisfied with the Act, which obliges to Commence
Processes against Ministers at the Radical Judicatories of which they are
Members, and that the steps should be taken, and Methods used, to which our
Form of Process directs. All this I Acknowledge, is wisely Ordered and well
Inacted by the very Reverend and Honorable Compilers, and ought to hold in
ordinary Cases, but as the choicest Rules of humane Framing, admit of some
Exception; so there are Specialities in the Affair of Error, which render other
Methods necessary. Scandals of Practice, are held in general Detestation, no
Person pleads for them, and they are not so Infectious, but that the usual
Steps may be taken in the Process, and competent time for that Effect may be
bestowed without Hurt. Pursuers may be also necessary in these Events, and yet
the Church may proceed without them upon a fama clamosa. Nevertheless, there
are specialities in the Matter of Error, which require that the Church should
make it her own Business. Errors are not ordinarily broached, until the
Favorers of them be so Strengthened, that scarce any Accuser shall dare to
appear against them, especially when at the forementioned or the like
Disadvantages; and thus the Poison destroys without Control, unless the Church
Interpose. Besides, that a personal Prosecution in such Cases is so difficult,
invidious, and liable to such manifold Checks, that few will be found, both
able and willing for such an Enterprise: And Persons of Eminency, may readily
be doubtful, whether the LORD call them to set their Faces against Streams so
very strong, or may be tempted to desist from such Pursuits in Case they enter
upon them, because of the Difficulties and Discouragements that attend these
Processes. Moreover, Errors in a Church are like a spreading Gangrene or a
House set on Fire. No delay may take place in such Events, but all Hands ought
to be at Work immediately, in the first place, to put a stop to the Progress,
and afterward to use the speediest, and most effectul Methods for removing the
Causes. This hard and important Work, the Churches of CHRIST have from the
Beginning usually accounted their own Business. 6ly. It may be considered, that
some Errors vented by a late Probationer, and Published in a Print by him, and
which were much of a bind with these alleged against Mr. Simson: These Errors,
I say, were brought to a quicker Issue. The Reverend Presbytery of Edinburgh
Cognosced upon them, and took that Probationer's License from him; That
Business was managed without any Personal Pursuit. 7ly. It is earnestly desired
by many Judicious and Godly in the Land, that besides others, two Resolutions
and Deeds of the Reverend Committee in Mr. Simson's Affair, may be specially
considered, which seem to put a sad and effectual Check upon any Process in the
Point of Error. 1st. The Erroneous Positions charged on Mr. Simson, were so
Sensed by that Committee, and allowed to be Relevant only in these Senses, That
neither could the Probation by Witnesses be Possible in these Events, for
Witnesses cannot prove a Sense: And Moreover, several of these Senses are so
Constrained, That almost any Hetrodox Position, may be dragged into Orthodoxy
by such Strainings. 2dly. They resolved, That no Probation by Witnesses should
be admitted, unless the Witnesses could Depone upon the Ipsissima vert^,
without Addition, Dimin^tion or the least Alteration. Now by such dealing, though
the grossest Heresies were Preached in the Hearing of Thousands, it were a vain
Attempt to intent a Process against the Preacher; Seeing it is fairly Presumable,
That Two concurring Witnesses would not be easily found amongst them all that
could Depone upon the very Words, without the Alteration of any one Particle.
It Is earnestly desired, that the Venerable Assembly would Remove these
Obstructions.

After all, for as much as the Tares of Error are Sown, and Springing up in
this Church, where the Increase must needs be Great, while the necessary
Pursuits are at the Disadvantages which render them almost utterly
Impracticable. It is the humble and earnest Desire of many Judicious and Godly
Persons, both in this and other Churches, that not only the Affair of Professor
Simson may be brought to a just Issue, but that also, the venerable ensuing
Assembly would consider and make such Acts, as they in their Wisdom, and under
the Divine Conduct, may find Necessary and Proper, for Purging out that
Poisonous Leaven which has Fermented many amongst us, and is still spreading.
I shall be very far from Prescribing to that Great and Venerable Court. I only
Represent this plain Overture, with all dutiful Submission, Namely, That they
would Condemn by a Solemn Act, the spreading Errors, which are like to prevail
amongst us, and may be easily specified upon no great Inquiry, and that they
would appoint the Judicatories of this National Church, to take a closs and
narrow Inspection of the Ministers and Members thereof, who may be Tainted with
the same, after they have strictly Prohibited the venting of such Errors; And
that they would nor suffer these Matters any longer, to depend upon Personal
Prosecutions, which it is not to be thought, that any will Adventure upon,
after the Discouragements which the present depending Pursuit has Labored
under, and that they would oblige all Intrants into the Ministry to renounce
these Errors.

I shall Conclude with this one Remark; That the Assembly in the 15 of the
Acts, the sole Pattern in the Word of GOD we have for our General Assemblies,
did not busy themselves with any thing but the suppressing of Error, for they
Reckoned that an Affair of the highest Importance. And seeing cuilibet licet
supplicare, I do most humbly beg the Venerable Assembly, as they Tender the
Purity of our Doctrine, and the Peace of this Church, to consider the Affair
Judicially, and by themselves, without referring it to a Committee, and giving
Implicit Faith to their Report; And though the bulk of the Committee's Procedure
may frighten some Members, from granting this my humble desire, yet the
Reviewing the Dissents made by several Reverend and Worthy Members of the
Committee formerly appointed, will not be a Work of so long a Time, as the
Assembly in some Diets cannot consider.

FINIS.

