Causes of a public Fast, and solemn Humiliation to be kept throughout the
Church of Scotland upon the last Sabbath of this instant month of July, being
the 25. day thereof 1647.
THat notwithstanding of our solemn engagement, in the Covenant, our
Obligations from great and singular mercies, and our many warnings from
judgments of all sorts; Yet not only do we come far short of that sobriety,
righteousness and holiness that becomes the Gospel of Jesus Christ, but
ungodliness and worldly lusts abound every where throughout the Land, unto the
grieving of the Lords Spirit, and provoking the eyes of his glory to make him
increase his plagues upon us, and to punish us seven times more, because we
continue to walk contrary unto him.

Secondly, That the Lords hand is still stretched out against us, in the
judgment of the Pestilence, which spreads not only in several places of the
Country, but continues and increases in many of the most eminent Cities in
the Kingdom.

Thirdly, The great dangers that threaten Religion, and the work of
Reformation, In these Kingdoms from the number, Policy and power of the
Sectaries in England, which are like not only to interrupt the progress of
uniformity, and the establishing of the Ordinances of God in their bewty and
perfection, but to overturne the foundation already laid, and all that has
been built thereupon, with the expenses of much blood and pains.

First, And therefore we are earnestly to pray the Lord that the solemn League
and Covenant may be kept fast and inviolable, notwithstanding of all the
purpofes and endeavors of open enemies and secret underminers to the contrary.

Secondly, We are to entreat the Lord on the behalf of the Kings Majesty,
that he may be reconciled to God, and that he may be now furnished with Wisdom
and Council from above, that he be not involved in new snares, to the
endangering of himself and these Kingdoms, but that his heart may incline to
such resolution, as will contribute for settling of Religion and Righteousness.

Thirdly, We are also to entreat the Lord on the behalf of the Parliament of
England of the Synod of Divines, and of all such in that Land as do unfainedly
mind the work of God, that they may not be discouraged or swarve in the day of
temptation, but that each of them in their stations, and according to their
places and callings may be furnished with light and strength from heaven for
doing of their duty with faithfulness and zeal.

Fourthly, We are to supplicate for direction to our Committee of Estates, that
they may discern the times, and know what is fitting to be done, for securing
our selves and encouraging our Brethren.

Fifthly, We are to pray for a spirit of light and of law unto our Assembly,
that they may be isntrumental in preserving the truth, and advancing holiness
amongst our selves, and for carrying on the work of God amongst our Neighbors.

Finally, That the Lord would power out upon all sorts of persons in these
Kingdoms a spirit of grace and supplication, that it may repent us of all our
iniquities, and that we may be reconciled to the Lord; that so all the
threatens of his wrath may be removed from amongst us, and he may bless us
with the sweet fruits of truth and peace.

A. KER.

Printed at Edinburgh by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
MAJESTY 1647.


