To the King's most Excellent Majesty, The humble ADDRESS of the General
Assembly of the Church of Scotland,
May it please Your Majesty,
THE grateful Sense of the Goodness of GOD, in blessing us with such a gracious
Sovereign, and the Duty and Loyalty toward Your Majesty, which so justly fill
our Hearts, oblige us to show the deepest Concern for every Thing that affects
the Safety of Your Majesty's Person and Government: And therefore, though with
the greatest Satisfaction, we do understand, that the Commission of the late
General Assembly did, according to their Duty, present a humble Address to Your
Majesty, upon Occasion of the happy Discovery of the late horrid Conspiracy,
which Address we heartily approve, as expressing the most sincere Thoughts of
our Minds; yet we cannot omit laying hold of this first Opportunity of our
Meeting in a General Assembly, to declare, in the most public and solemn
Manner, our utmost Detestation of that most wicked and execrable Design, and to
express our great Joy, that it has pleased God to assist Your Majesty, in
making a seasonable Discovery thereof.

A Design so bloody and detestable in it self, and so pernicious and fatal in
its Consequences, raises in our Hearts the greatest Horror and Indignation. We
have for a long Time observed, with Astonishment, the restless and impudent
Malice of Your Enemies, endeavoring to misrepresent Your Majesty's just and
gracious Administration, in order to diffuse their own Disaffection to Your
Person and Government, into the Minds of others of Your Majesty's unwary,
though well-meaning Subjects. With this View have they charged upon Your Reign*
those Evils, to which none but themselves gave Rise. They have set forth the
most innocent, necessary and prudent Steps of your Administration, in the
falsest and blackest Colors, and have even denied and ridiculed Your Royal
Goodness and Mercy; to which Multitudes of themselves, and of their nearest
Relations, owe their very Lives and Fortunes. So monstrous is their
Disingenuity and Ingratitude, and such is their ^naccountable Fondness to have
your Kingdoms again enthralled under all the Miseries of Popery and Arbitrary
Power.

Your Enemies are abundently sensible, that there is no accomplishing this
their most wicked Desire, so long as the Throne is filled by a PRINCE so Wise
and Steady in all His Measures, and so powerful a Protector and Guardian of the
Protestant Religion, and the Liberties of His People, as Your most sacred
Majesty. But, how shall we express our Amazement and just Indignation, that any
of Your Majesty's Subjects, especially such as call themselves Protestants,
should have contrived to destroy Your Majesty's sacred Person and Your Royal
Family, and to cut off many of Your best Servants and Subjects, by the
complicated Wickednesses of Perjury, Murder and Parricide, in order to set a
Popish Pretender upon your Throne? This we look on, as striking at the Root of
the Religion and Liberties of a Protestant and Free People, and of all that is
valuable and dear to us, both as Men and Christians, and as a horrible Evidence
to what barbarous Wickedness, an incurable Malice can drive Men of abandoned
Spirits.

Had God, for the Sins of Your Kingdoms, permitted this hateful Conspiracy to
take Effect, it must have been attended with such a dismal Train of fatal
Consequences, as makes our Hearts to tremble: And therefore, while, with Hearts
full of Joy and Thankfulness, we adore the Wisdom and Goodness of our gracious
God, in discovering and disappointing such an execrable Design, permit us,
Great Sir, with the greatest Loyalty and most dutiful Affection, to
congratulate Your Majesty upon the Success of Your prudent and watchful
Administration in this Matter.

The Opening up so much of this deep-laid Plot, and tracing it through so many
of its various Mazes and Windings, the stripping it of these Vails of Darkness,
which were so industriously spread over it, by Men of the most artful Cunning,
and the Deliverance thereby wrought for Your Majesty's sacred Person, and Your
Royal Family, and also for the dearest Privileges of all Your faithful
Subjects, and of this Church in particular, will, we hope, be remembered by
latest Posterity, to the Honor of God, and as One of the Glories of Your
Majesty's most auspicious Reign.

We humbly presume, upon this Occasion, to assure Your Majesty of the
Continuance of our Loyalty and Affection, and of all that Duty and Fidelity,
which is owing from the most faithful Subjects, to the best of Kings; and, that
we will use our utmost Endeavors, to instill into the People, among whom we
have Charge, the same Sentiments of Duty and Loyalty to Your Majesty's Person
and Government, and the same Zeal for the Protestant Succession in Your Royal
Family, which we our selves esteem it our great Happiness to entertain.

May the same wise and merciful God, who brought You so seasonably to the
Throne, and who has hitherto so graciously preserved Your sacred Majesty,
continue His watchful Care over You: May He lay open to the very Bottom, and
effectually disappoint all the dark and malicious Designs of Your Enemies, and
turn their Counsels into Foolishness: May the Crown, wherewith He has adorned
Your Royal Head, sit long and easy and flourishing upon it: And may all Your
Subjects be made sensible of the valuable Blessings which they enjoy under Your
happy Government. May He eminently bless their Royal Highnesses the Prince and
Princess of Wales, and their Offspring, and make them the happy Instruments of
much Good to the World, and to the Church in their Day: May Protestant
Sovereigns, of Your Royal Line, always inherit Your Crown, and these
illustrious Qualities with which Your Majesty does now adorn it: May You be
long honored to do eminent Service to God on Earth, and at length enjoy a
great Reward in Heaven. So pray,

May it please Your Majesty, Your Majesty's most faithful, most obedient, and
most loyal Subjects, The Ministers and Elders met in this National Assembly,
Signed in our Presence, in our Name, and at our Appointment, by JA. SMITH,
Moderator.
Which Address His Majesty received graciously; and was very much pleased with
the Assembly's seasonable Expressions of Zeal for His Government, as well as
Concern for the Preservation of His Person, and Prosperity of His Family.




