A Grave and Serious Advice of the MINISTERS of the KIRK of SCOTLAND, to
Masters of Families that they may govern according to the Word of God.
BEsides the Public Worship in Congregations, mercifully established in this
Land in great Purity; it is expedient and necessary, that Secret Worship of
each person alone, and private Worship of Families, be pressed and set up; that
with national Reformation the profession and power of godliness both personal
and domestic be advanced.

I. And first for secret worship: It is most necessary, that every one a part
and by themselves be given to Prayer and Meditation, the unspeakable benefit
whereof is best known to them who are exercised therein, This being the mean
whereby in a special way communion with God is entertained, and right
preparation for all other duties obtained: And therefore it becomes not only
Pastors within their several Charges to press persons of all sorts to perform
this duty Morning and Evening, and at other occasions, but also it is incumbent
to the head of every Family, to have a care that both themselves and all within
their charge he daily diligent herein.

II. The ordinary duties comprehended under the exercise of Piety, which should
be in Families when they are convened to that effect, are these: First, prayer
and praises performed, with a special reference as well to the public
condition of the Kirk of God and this Kingdom, as to the present case of the
Family, and every member thereof. Next, Reading of Scriptures with Chatechizing
in a plain way, that the understandings of the simpler may be the better
enabled to profit under the public Ordinances, and they made more capable to
understand the Scriptures when they are read; together with godly conferences,
tending to the edification of all the members in the most holy says; as also,
admonition and rebuke upon just reasons from these who have authority in the
family.

III, As the Charge and office of interpreting the holy Scriptures is a part of
the Ministerial calling, which none (howsoever otherwise qualified) should take
upon him in any place, but he that is daily called thereunto by God and his
Kirk. So in every Family where there is any that can read, the holy Scriptures
should be read ordinarily to the family; and it is commendable that thereafter
they confer, and by way of conference make some good use of what has been read
and heard, As for example, if any sin be reproved in the word read, use may be
made thereof, to make all the family circumspect and watchful against the
same; or if any judgment be threatened or mentioned to have been inflicted in
that portion of Scripture which is read, use may be made to make all the family
fear, lest the same or a worse judgment befall them, unless they beware of the
sin that procured it. And finally if any duty be required, or comfort held
forth in a promise, use may be made to stir up themselves to employ Christ for
strength to enable them for doing the commanded duty, and to apply the offered
comfort; In all which the Master of the family is to have the chief hand, and
any member of the family may propone a question or dombt for resolution.

IV, The head of the family is to take care that none of the family withdraw
himself from any part of family worship. And seeing the ordinary performance of
all the parts of Family Worship belongs properly to the head of the family,
the Minister is to stir up such as are lazy, and train up such as are weak to a
fitness for these exercises; It being always free to persons of quality to
entertain one approved by the Presbytery for performing family Exercise: And in
other families where the head of the family is unfit, that another constantly
residing in the family, approved by the Minister and Session, may be employed
in that service; wherein the minister and Session are to be countable to the
presbytery. And if a Minister by divine providence be brought to any family, it
is requisite that at no time he convene a part of the family for worship,
secluding the rest; except in singular cases specially concerning these parties
which (in Christian prudence) need not or ought not to be imparted to others.

V. Let no idler who has no Particular calling, or vagrant person under
pretense of a calling, be suffered to perform Worship in families to or for the
same; seeing persons tainted with errors, or aiming at division, may be ready
(after the manner) to creep into houses, and lead captive silly and unstable
souls.

VI. At Family Worship a special care is to be had, that each family keep by
themselves; neither requiring, inviting, nor admitting persons from diverse
families, unless it be those who are lodged with them, or at meal, or otherwise
with them upon some lawful occasion.

VII. Whatsoever has been the effects and fruits of meetings of persons of
diverse families in the times of corruption or trouble (in which cases many
things are commendable, which otherwise are not tolerable,) yet when God has
blessed us with Peace and the purity of the Gospel, such meetings of persons of
diverse families (except in the cases mentioned in these directions) are to be
disapproved, as tending to the hinderance of the religious exercise of each
family by it self, to the prejudice of the Public Ministry, to the renting of
the families of particular Congregations, and (in progress of time) of the
whole Kirk: besides many offenses which may come thereby to the hardening of the
hearts of carnal men, and grief of the godly.

VIII. On the Lords day, after every one of the family apart, and the whole
family together have sought the Lord (in whose hands the preparation of men's
hearts are) to fit them for the public Worship, and to bless to them the
public Ordinances, the Master of the family ought to take care that all within
his charge repair to the public Worship, that he and they may join with the
rest of the Congregation; And, the public worshp being finished, after prayer
he should take an account what they have heard; and thereafter to spend the
rest of the time which they may spare in Catechizing, and in spiritual
conferences upon the Word of God: Or else (going apart) they ought to apply
themselves to reading, meditation, and secret prayer, that they may confirm and
increase their communion with God; that so the profit which they found in the
Public Ordinances may be cherished and promoved, and they more edified unto
eternal iife.

IX. So many as can conceive Prayer, ought to make use of that gift of God:
albeit those who are rude and weaker may begin at a set form of prayer; but so,
as they be not sluggish in stirring up in themselves (according to their daily
necessities) the Spirit of Prayer, which is given to all the children of God in
some measure, To which effect they ought to be the more fervent, frequent in
secret Prayer to God for enabling of their hearts to conceive, and their
tongues to express convenient desires to God for their family, and in the mean
time, for their greater encouragement, let these materials of Prayer be
meditated upon, and made use of, as follows: Let them confess to God how
unworthy they are to come in his presence, and how unfit to worship his
Majesty; and therefore earnestly ask of God the Spirit of Prayer.

They are to confess their sins and the sins of the family, accusing, judging,
and condemning themselves for them, till they bring their souls to some measure
of true humiliation.

They are to pour out their souls to God, in the name of Christ, by the Spirit,
for forgiveness of sins, for grace to repent, to believe, and to live soberly,
righteously, and godly, and that they may serve God with joy and delight
walking before him.

They are to give thanks to God for his many mercies to his People, and to
themselves, and especially for his love in Christ, and for the light of the
Gospel.

They are to pray for such particular benefits, Spiritual and Temporal, as they
stand in need of for the time (whether it be Morning or Evening) as health or
sickness, prosperity or adversity.

They ought to pray for the Kirk of Christ in general, for all the Reformed
Kirks, and for this Kirk in particular, and for all that suffer for the Name of
Christ, for all our Superiors, and their Children, for the Majestrates,
Ministers, and whole body of the Congregation whereof they are Members, as well
for their Neighbors absent in their lawful affairs, as for those that are at
home.

The Prayer may be closed with an earnest desire, that God may be glorified in
the coming of the Kingdom of his Son, and in the doing of his Will; and with
assurance that themselves are accepted, and what they have asked according to
his Will shall be done.

X. These exercises ought to be performed in great sincerity, without delay,
laying aside all exercises of worldly business or hindrances, notwithstanding
the mockings of Atheists, and profane men; in respect of the great mercies of
God to this Land, and of his severe Correction, wherewith lately he has
exercised us: And to this effect, persons of eminency (and all Elders of the
Kirk) not only ought to stir up themselves and their Families to diligence
herein, but also to concur effectually, that in all other families, where they
have power and charge, the said exercises be conscionably performed.

XI. Besides the ordinary duties in Families, which are above mentioned,
extraordinary duties both of Humiliation and Thanksgiving are to be carefully
performed in Families, when the Lord by extraordinary occasions (private or
public) calls for them.

XII. Seeing the Word of God requires, That we should consider one another to
provoke unto love and good works; Therefore at all times, and specially in this
time, wherein profaneness abounds, and Mockers, walking after their own lusts,
think it strange that others run not with them to the same excess of riot,
Every Member of this Kirk ought to stir up themselves and one another to the
duties of mutual Edification, by Instruction, Admonition, Rebuke, exhorting one
another to manifest the grace of God, in denying ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and in living godlily, soberly, and righteously in this present world,
by comforting the feebleminded, and praying with or for one another; Which
duties respectively are to be performed upon special occasions offered by
Divine Providence; as namely, when under any calamity, gross or great
difficulty, counsel or comfort is sought, or when an Offender is to be
reclaimed by private Admonition, and if that be not effectual, by joining one
or two more in the Admonition, according to the rule of Christ, that in the
mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established.

XIII. And because it is not given to every one to speak a word in season to a
wearied or distressed conscience, it is expedient, that a person (in that case)
finding no ease after the use of ordinary means private and public, have their
address to their own Pastor, or some experienced Christian: But if the person
troubled in Conscience be of that condition, or of that sex, that Discretion,
Modesty, or fear of scandal, requires a godly, grave, and secret Friend to be
present with them in their said address, it is expedient that such a Friend be
present.

XIV. When Persons of diverse Families are brought together by Divine
Providence, being abroad upon their particular Vocations, or any necessary
occasions, as they would have the Lord their God with them whithersoever they
go, they ought to walk with God, and not neglect the duties of Prayer and
Thanksgiving, but take care that the same be performed by such as the Company
shall judge fittest; and that they likewise take heed that no corrupt
communication proceed out of their mouth, but that which is good to the use of
edifying, that it may minister grace to the Hearers.

The drift and scope of all rhese directions is no other but that upon the one
part the power and practice of godliness among all the Ministers and Members
of this Kirk, according to their several places and vocations, may be cherished
and advanced, and all impiety and mocking of religious Exercises suppressed;
And upon the other part, that under the name and pretext of Religious Exercises
no such Meetings or Practices be allowed, as are apt to breed Error, Scandal,
Schism, contempt or misregard of the public ordinances and Ministers, or
neglect of the duties of particular callings, or such other evils as are the
works not of the Spirit, but of the Flesh, and are contrary to truth and peace.

A. KER.

FINIS.

