THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE COMMISSIONERS OF THE Church and Kingdom OF SCOTLAND,
WITH HIS MAJESTY at the HAGVE. AND The Papers interchanged betwixt his
Majesty and them, as they were Reported in Parliament and the General
Assembly.

Appointed by Authority to be Published

Edinburgh, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1649. And Reprinted in London for Robert Bostock, at the sign of the
Kings head in Paul's Churchyard.

The Report made to the Estates of PARLIAMENT of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND, By
their Commissioners, after their return from the Kings Majesty out of Holland.
WE have from time to time as occasion offered, given Your Lordships and the
Committee of Estat^s, a particular account of our diligence, and of the
progress of these affairs, which it pleased Your Lordships to entrust us with,
which had been done more frequently, if the passage had not been so difficult,
and uncertain, that we could not get our Papers conveyed to Your Lordships with
that speed which we desired. And although our former Papers do bear much of the
Report, yet that the Parliament may have at once a recent and entire review of
the whole business together, we shall shortly resume the substance of what has
been at several times communicated, and the Papers which have not as yet been
transmitted to Your Lordships hands will make known the rest.

According to our Additional Instructions of the fifteenth of March, finding
that James Grahame was about the King, We did by a Paper of the twenty seventh
of March, desire that he might be removed from his Majesty's person and Court,
as one who had been deservedly forefaulted by the Parliament, and Excommunicate
by the Kirk of this Kingdom; which when we had pressed once and again, his
Majesty returned this Answer, That he was Resolved to consider the whole that
we had to propose, before he Declared his Resolution upon any part.

Although we were sorry to receive this Answer, yet being loath upon this
ground to break off, (laying that desire aside for the time we did proceed, and
in three Propositions offered to his Majesty the substance of these things
which we were warranted by Your Lordships to Demand; the first whereof was,
That his Majesty would by his Oath under his hand and Seal, allow the
Covenant, and the Solemn League and Covenant, and obl^ige himself to prosecute
the enemies thereof in his Royal Station. Secondly that he would ratify al
Acts, of Parliament enjoining the Solemn League and Covenant, and for settling
Presbyterial Government, (...) of Worship, Confession of Faith, and Catechism,
as they are already approven by the General Assembly and Parliament of
Scotland, and would assent to Acts of Parliament, enjoining the same in
England, and observe the same in his own practice and family, and never m^e
opposition thereto. Thirdly, That his Majesty would agree that matters Civil
should be determined by this present and subsequent Parliaments of this
Kingdom and matters Ecclesiastical by the General Assemblies of this Church,
as his Royal Father did formerly grant. These Propositions were pressed with the
best reasons we could, both from the justice and necessity of the matter, and
fr^ the advantage that would arise to his Majesty's affairs upon satisfaction
given there unto, which for brevity we forbear to repeat.

In stead of an Answer, his Majesty returned a Paper, containing these three
Queries, first whether the Papers already presented, did contain all that we
had to propose. Secondly, whether we had any power to recede from any thing
therein, or were bound to insist thereupon in terms as they stood. Thirdly,
whether we had any Propositions to make toward the advancement of his Service,
for his restitution to his other Kingdoms, and bringing the murderers of his
Father to Justice.

And considering that these Queries were moved of purpose to obstruct all
Agreement, and to cause and increase jealousies and differences betwixt his
Majesty and us, we offered by conference to show that these Queries were
materially answered in our Paper of April 20. and therefore entreated his
Majesty not to insist in these or the like, for the moving of them tended
greatly to the prejudice of his own affaiars at this time. But his Majesty
finding that conference could not be so well transmitted to his counsel, he
ansisted in the same, so that we were necessitated to make it appear by Writ,
that they had been answered in that our former Paper, as to the first we
answered, That we were not to propose any further unless we were commanded by
the Parliament or their Committee; To the second, our desires proposed were so
just and necessary, for securing of religion and the peace of this Kingdom,
that we could not in reason recede from the matter contained in them (which
being retained) we were not to stand with his Majesty upon words or terms. And
to the third we replied, that the granting of these desires, would make his
Majesty's good people, do all for him as could be expected of faithful and
loyal Subjects to their gracious King; and particularly, would make them
contribute their utmost endeavors, that his Majesty might be restored to the
possession of his just right of government of his other Dominions.

And when as yet his Majesty seemed not satisfied, and did especially recent,
that in these Answers nothing was expressed of our sense of the murder of his
father, nor was any thing offered to bring the actors thereof to Justice: We
did by another Paper clear our former Answers, and did much regrat, that our
sense of that horrid fact against the life of our late Sovereign, should be
called in question; since the Parliament by their Commissioners at London, had
(...) to the world, how much they did abhominate and detest the very design
thereof: all which, with unanimous consent was allowed, and approven in
Parliament.

And finding that his Majesty did all this while desire to give a direct or
positive Answer to the Propositions, we did by another Paper of May 11. with
all the freedom and faithfulness we could, press his Answer, and did represent
to him the great danger and disadvantage, which would inevitably ensue upon his
delaying, or refusing, to give the satisfaction desired by by this Kingdom.

Whereupon his Majesty gave us this Paper of May 29. after consideration
whereof, we did represent to his Majesty how grievous that Answer was to us,
and how unsatisfactory it would be to Your Lordships, and therefore forbearing
to insist upon particulars, we entreated his Majesty to take the same again
into consideration, to which his Majesty was pleased only to return this
general Answer, by the which Your Lordships, may perceive, his Majesty's
purpose of sending an express hither for your further satisfaction

In pursuance of our trust, there did many things occur in conference, which
cannot fitly be now repeated, in which, according to our duty, we left no means
or arguments unassayed, that his Majesty might apply himself to the Counsels of
his Parliament, in which we did express how much Affection and Loyalty your
Lordships did bear to his Royal Person, and Government, whereof we shall be
ready to make a more full relation, when it shall please your Lordships to
require it. Although we have not had as yet such satisfaction, as both your
Lordships and we did wish, yet do we not despair, since affairs are left in
that condition, that further progress may be made thereupon, by the express
which his Majesty is to send hither, or by new applications to his Majesty, as
your Lordships shall think fitting.

We have had so many experiences and proofs of the good hand of our God with us
unto this day, that (although our difficulties be many) we were of all people
most unthankeful, if we should now faint or cast away our confidence, in doing
of our duty, we may hope, that he will yet assist, and go before us; and as all
possible and lawful means would be still used, for gaining from our Sovereign
the King, a gracious Answer to our Desires, so should we not in the mean time
become secure, but employ all warrantable means for preserving Religion, and
the Kingdom in safety.

June 14. 1649. CASSILS. BRODIE. GEO. WYNRAME.


The Commissioners first paper to the Kings Majesty, desiring the removal of
James Graham from his presence and Court.
May it please your Majesty,
THe Estates of Parliament, of your Majesty's ancient Kingdom of Scotland,
considering what sad effects the pernicious Counsels of wicked Instruments have
produced, by raising and fomenting division between your Majesty's Royal
Father, and his faithful Subjects; Have commanded us at our first Address to
your Majesty, humbly to crave, that your Majesty would be pleased to remove
from having access to your Royal Person and Court, all these who have been and
continue Excommunicate by the Church of that Kingdom, and namely James Graham,
sometime Earl of Montrose: and now we, according to the Trust committed to us,
do humbly and earnestly crave the same at your Majesty's hands, being very
hopeful that a more plentiful blessing from God shall accompany your Majesty's
Counsels and affairs, and that the desires and endeavors of the Parliament
shall prove the more effectual to work a good understanding and mutual
confidence betwixt your Majesty and your people, when so eminent an Author and
Actor of mischief shall have no countenance from your Majesty, nor influence
upon your Royal Counsels, who abandoning the Covenant, and despising the Oath
of God, did invade his native Country, and with most inhumane and barbarous
cruelty did burn and waste diverse parts thereof, and who spilt so much blood of
your Majesty's good Subjects, taking advantage of that time when the prime
Commanders and Forces thereof were employed elsewhere, for which crimes he was
excommunicated by the Church and fore-faulted by the Parliament of that
Kingdom, and still to this day continues in the highest contempt against God,
under that fearful sentence of Excommunication, without the smallest sign of
Repentance.

March 27. 1649. Signed by Warrant and at Command of the Commissioners of the
Parliament of the Kingdom of Scotland.


His Majesty's Answer.
I Desire and expect that you deliver all the Propositions or Desires you are
instructed to present to me, before I make an Answer to any particular one,
being resolved to consider of the whole, before I declare my Resolution upon
any part.

April 8. 1649. N. Stilo. Signed, C R.


The Commissioners second Paper for removal of James Graham.
May it please your Majesty,
WE the Commissioners of the Parliament of your Majesty's Kingdom of Scotland,
having considered your Majesty's Answer of the date the 8 of April, Stilo no.
to our desire for removing James Graham from your Majesty's Person and Court,
must in conscience of our duty with all humility represent unto your Majesty,
how sorry we are, that your Majesty should delay to give satisfaction to that
our first, so just and necessary Desire; It being previous, and most conducing
to an happy procedure in the other particulars, which we are warranted to under
to your Majesty: We do humbly beseech your Majesty seriously to consider, what
fears and discontents it would beget in the hearts of your Majesty's most
affectionate Subjects, and how it would blast their hopes of comfort by your
Majesty's Reign, now in the bud, if delay or difficulty were made to remove
from your Majesty one who justly and deservedly is most hateful unto them, and
how great disadvantage it would bring to your Majesty's affairs, that he should
have any countenance from, or neerness to your Royal Person, especially at this
time; therefore we do most humbly and earnestly renew, and insist upon that our
first desire, assuring your Majesty, that we shall in the rest endeavor
(according to that trust reposed on us) to give your Majesty all satisfaction.

March 30. 1649. Signed by Warrant and at Command of the Commissioners of the
Kingdom of Scotland.


His Majesty's Answer.
I Do insist upon my former Answer, and do desire and expect, that you do
deliver all the Propositions or Desires you or any of you are enstructed to
present to me, before I make an Answer to any particular one, being resolved to
consider of the whole, before I declare my Resolution upon any part.

April 10. n. still. 1649. Signed, C R.


The Commissioners third Paper, containing the Propositions offered to his
Majesty in name of the Parliament of the Kingdom of Scotland.
May it please your Majesty,
WE are commanded by the Estates of Parliament of your Majesty's Kingdom of
Scotland, humbly to represent to your Majesty, that as they were not wanting in
giving faithful and timous counsel to your Majesty's Royal Father, for
preventing the dangers which were then feared, and have since to their deep
sorrow and unexpressible grief fallen out: and as they have with all care and
faithfulness contributed their utmost endeavors for preserving their late
Sovereign, as their Letters, Instructions, Declarations, and their
Commissioners Papers can evidence: So they do resolve to continue the same
loyal affection and faithfulness to your Majesty, and accordingly have
acknowledged and proclaimed your Majesty King of Great Britain, France and
Ireland, with all readiness, unanimity, alacrity and solemnity; and have
protested in favors of your Majesty's just Right of Succession in the Royal
Government of your Kingdoms of England and Ireland, against all Acts done, or
to be done to the contrary: As also have commanded us in their name, humbly to
offer to your Majesty, that they conceive it necessary for establishing the
happy Government of that your Majesty's ancient Kingdom, and for restoring your
Majesty to the settled and peaceable possession of your ^ust Right of Government
of your other Dominions.

1. That your Majesty would be pleased to assure and declare, that you will by
your solemn Oath under your Hand and Seal allow the National Covenant of
Scotland, and the Solemn League and Covenant of Scotland, England and Ireland,
and that your Majesty will prosecute the ends thereof in your Royal (...).

2. That your Majesty will ^fie and approve all Acts of Parliaments, enjoining
the Solemn League and Covenant, and establishing Presbyterial Government the
Directory of Worship, the Confession of Faith, and Catechism, in your Majesty's
Kingdom of Scotland, as they are already approven by the General Assembly of
the Kirk, and by the Parliament of that Kingdom: And that your Majesty will
give your Royal Assent to Acts of Parliament, enjoining the same in the rest of
your Majesty's Dominions. And that your Majesty will observe the same in your
own practice and family, and never make opposition thereto, or endeavor any
change thereof.

3. That your Majesty will consent and agree, that all matters Civil be
determined by the present and subsequent Parliaments of your Kingdom of
Scotland, and all matters Ecclesiastical by the ensuing General Assemblies of
that Church, as was formerly condiscended, and agreed to by your Majesty's
Royal Father.

These desires are so just and necessary for the securing of Religion, and the
Peace of that Kingdom, and for gaining not only the out ward obedience, but
also the inward affection of all your Majesty's good people, to your royal
Person, Authority, and Government, after so great distractions and troubles,
that the granting thereof will so far endear your Majesty to that Nation, that
they will not only receive your Majesty with all cheerfulness, and most
willingly render to you that subjection and dutiful obedience which can be
expected from loyal Subjects to their gracious King; But likewise will
contribute their utmost endeavors by all necessary and lawful means, according
to the Covenant, and the duty of faithful and loyal Subjects, that your Majesty
may be restored to the peaceable possession of the Government of your other
Kingdoms, according to your Majesty's and doubted right of succession. And if
your Majesty shall speedly begin to move that way which will be acceptable to
God, and good men, and really offer to settle Religion and Peace, as is
represented in our desires; and upon these grounds shall claim the right of
your Royal Government, before Democracy or any new model of Government under
the name of an Agreement of the people, or any other name or device be settled
or take root in England; it will be more easy to maintain Monarchical
Government, as (...) in the hearts of your Majesty's loyal Subjects there, then
(...) it after a new form of Government has gotten leave to take root, and the
people have been habituated thereunto. We are very confident (...) your
Majesty's speedy and cordial joining in the Government with God, and your good
people, will open a door of hope that God will arise and shine upon your
Majesty's just undertakings, and will plead your righteous cause against the
enemies thereof.


His Majesty's Answer.
J Desire to know whether the papers you have already delivered, contain all
particulars, which you or either of you have to propone or desire, and whether
you have any power to recede from any particular proposed, or to be proposed;
and whether you have any Propositions to make, for the advancement of my
Service, and toward the recovery of my right in England, and bringing of the
murderers of my Father to Justice, and what assistance you will give to that
purpose.

April 12./^^. Signed, C: R.


The Commissioners fourth Paper.
May it please your Majesty,
WE have considered your Majesty's paper of the 22. of this instant, and do
humbly conceive that it is sufficiently answered by ours of the twentieth of
the same, containing the just and necessary desires of the Parliament of your
Majesty's Kingdom of Scotland, as we are ready instantly to make appear.

April 14. 24. Signed by the Commissioners of Parliament.


His Majesty's Answer.
I Have again considered your Papers of the 20. of this instant month, to
which you refer in your Papers of the 24. and do not understand that the
Questions asked by me in my Paper of the 22. were sufficiently answered by you
in the other, there being no mention in that Paper of the 20. whether the
Papers you have already delivered contain all particulars which you, or either
of you, have to propone or desire, nor whether you have any power to recede
from any particular proposed, or to be proposed by you, or whether you are
bound to insist on them in the terms they are proposed, nor are the offers in
that Paper particular enough for the advancement of my Service, and toward the
recovery of my Right in England, nor is there mention of bringing the
Murderers of my Father to Justice, or what assistance you will give to that
purpose. To all which I expect particular Answers, or that you will make it
appear in writing, that the former Paper, or any other delivered by you to me,
contains sufficient Answers thereunto: And upon your full Answers to these
particulars, you shall receive such an one from me, upon the whole, as shall be
agreeable to Conscience, Honor and Justice.

April 30. May 10. 1649. Signed, C R.


May it please your Majesty,
BEing unwillling to trouble your Majesty with long and tedious Papers, We
choosed rather by conference to make it appear that your Majesty's Queries
contained in the paper of April 22. were sufficiently Answered by ours of the
20. containing the desires of the Parliament of your Majesty's Kingdom of
Scotland: But now seeing your Majesty is pleased to insist in the same, by
another of the 30, desiring that we would make appear in writing that our
former paper contains sufficient Answers thereunto. In obedience to your
Majesty's Desire, we do by these humbly crave, It may be considered, that
whereas your Majesty desires to know whether our papers already delivered
contain all particulars which we have to propose. It is Declared therein, that
your Majesty's granting of the desires contained therein, will obtain all that
in reason can be required of your people of Scotland, or can be expected of
Loyal Subjects to their gracious King; neither are we to propose any other,
unless we be commanded by the Parliament or Committee of Estates; That whereas
your Majesty desires to know, whether we have power to recede from any
particular proposed, or if we are bound to insist upon them in the terms they
are propsed, It is declared therein, that these Desires contained in it, are
just and necessary for the securing of Religion, and the peace of that Kingdom,
so that we shall have no reason to recede from the matter of them, though we
are not to stand upon terms or words with your Majesty; That whereas your
Majesty Desires to know what that Kingdom will do for the advancement of your
Majesty's Service and affairs: It is Declared therein, that the granting these
just and necessary desires, will make your good people in Scotland, do all that
can be desired or expected from Loyal Subjects to their gracious King, and
contribute their utmost endeavors by all lawful and necessary means,
according to the Covenant, and the duty of loyal and faithful Subjects, that
your Majesty may be restored to the peaceable possession of the Government of
your other Kingdoms. Wherefore we do in all humility, renew these our former
Desires, earnestly beseeching that without losing of precious time, your
Majesty would be pleased to give a direct and satisfactory Answer thereunto.

April 23. May 3. 1649. Signed by the Commissioners of Parliament.


His Majesty's Answer.
I Cannot think your Paper of the 3. of this month to contain a partain Answer
to the Questions of Mine of the thirtieth of the last; all your Answer to My
Question, whether you have any other thing to propone then that you have
already proposed, being that you are not to propose any other unless you be
commanded: Whereas I expected you would have answered, whether you are
commanded to make any other proposition or no, and that you would have told Me
whether you have power to recede from any particular which you have proposed,
which you answer no other ways, then by saying what you demand is just and
reasonable, but I cannot but observe, that to My Question of the bringing the
murderers of My Father to justice, and what assistance you would give to that
purpose, you make not the least answer, nor not so much as mention your sense
of that horrid and Unparalleled Murder, and therefore I would be glad to receive
your full answer thereunto,

May 7. N. S. Signed, C.R.


May it please your Majesty.
OUr deep sense of the great dangers which will unavoidably ensue to your
Majesty's affairs, upon delaying to give satisfaction to these desires, which
we have proposed in name of the Parliament of your Majesty's Kingdom of
Scotland, as the best and most effectual means for establishing your Majesty's
happy government of that your ancient Kingdom, and for restoring your
Majesty to the possession of your just right of government of your other
dominions; makes us heavily regrate: that so much time has been spent without
any direct Answer from your Majesty, but instead thereof of some questions
have been proposed to us; and that notwithstanding we have once again, as we
humbly conceive, sufficiently answered and cleared the fame, both by Word and
Writ, yet they are renewed and insisted upon by your Majesty's paper of the
seventh of this instant, to which little more can be said (to our judgment)
then what has been expressed before. For to your Majesty's first question,
whither our papers already delivered contain all particulars which we have to
purpose; we could not answer more directly and clearly, then that we are not to
propose any other, unless we be further commanded by the Parliament. And to
that, whither we had power to recede from any particulars proposed, we answered
that the desires we proposed, are not only just and reasonable, but necessary,
and consequently, such as from which we may not recede. And to your Majesty's
last question, we gave an Answer very full and comprehensive, that your
Majesty's granting these just and necessary desires, would move your good
Subjects of Scotland to do for the advancement of your Majesty's service and
affairs, whatsoever could be expected from loyal Subjects to their gracious
King, and to endeavor to the utmost of their power by all lawful and
necessary means, that your Majesty may be restored to the possession of your
just right of government of your other Kingdoms. Neither did we conceive it
necessary to multiply words in repeating our deep sense of that horrid Fact
against the life of your Royal Father, seeing the whole Parl. of Scotland,
whereof we had the honor to be Members, had so solemnly declared to the world
how much they did detest and abominate the very design thereof, as the
Protestations and Papers of their Commissioners at London can bear witness,
and we were so conscious to our selves of our sincere tender respects, and
affection toward our late Sovereign, that we looked not to have our sense of
that fact in the least wise questioned. Wherefore we do again with all humility
and earnestness, renew our former supplication that without further loss of
precious time, whereof too much is lost already (we wish it be not to the
prejudice both of your Majesty's affairs, and of your lamentably distracted,
and bleeding Kingdoms) your Majesty will be pleased to give a direct and
satisfactory Answer to these our most just an necessary desires; in doing
whereof, your Majesty will be to these afflicted Kingdoms, like the rain coming
down upon the mowen grass, and as showers that water the earth.

April 29. May 9. 1649. Signed by the Commissioners of Parliament.


May it please your Majesty,
HAving for a long time waited your Majesty's leisure, for an Answer to the
humble desires of the Parliament of your kingdom of Scotland, which we have in
their name tendered to your Majesty, and having received no Answer, or the least
satisfaction to any of them, in discharge of our duty to your Majesty. We
cannot but show that both your affairs and your distracted Kingdoms are exposed
to exceeding great prejudice by the loss of so much precious time, which (in
our humble opinion) might have been much better improved for the advantage of
both. And by your Majesty's intended removal hence, and our necessity to
return, we are so straightened with time that we cannot forbear any longer, to
renew our humble and earnest request for a speedy and favorable Answer,
whereby your Majesty has a fair occasion (if embraced) at once to make both
your self and people happy. And on the contrary, the great danger and
irreparable loss, will inevitably ensue upon further delaying, or refusing to
give satisfaction to so just and reasonable desires, so obvious to any
impartial eye, so that if now when by the power and prevalencie of Sectaries,
and their Army in England, that Kingdom brought underfoot, and almost lost; and
when Ireland is in very great distractions your Maj. shall not speedily and
heartily satisfy the desires of your Maj. Kingdom of Scotland, especially for
Religion and the Covenant which is the strongest band to tie Subjects to their
King. It will weaken the hands of all those that love Religion, and
Monarchical Government in England, and wholly discourage, and disenable
Scotland to do for your Majesty; by that means also your enemies will be
encouraged, and strengthened to prosecute their wicked designs, and your good
people in England will be forced to couch under the burden, and submit to the
yoke, dispairing of any means of relief or deliverance; We entreat your
Majesty to remember, that opportunity once losed, cannot be regained, the
neglect, and not taking hold whereof, when so frequently offered, has been the
chief cause of the troubles of your Royal Family, and has to our unspeakable
grief proved sad and fatal at last; We are confident that your Majesty rightly
pondering and laying these things to heart, will in the entry of your Reign so
much cherish the hopeful expectation of your Loyal people, as that they may
at length look for the wished ends of the long-continued troubles, and may live
a comfortable and quiet life under the shadow of your Majesty's prosperous and
happy Government.

May 17/27. 1649. Signed by the Commissioners of Parliament.


His Majesty's Answer, more expressly relating to the Propositions.
I Have considered the several Papers and Propositions delivered to me by you,
and do assure you, That I desire nothing more, then that I may entirely unite
the hearts and affections of all my good subjects of Scotland to me, and
amongst themselves, as well for the Honor, peace, and prosperity of that
Kingdom, as that they may jointly and unanimously assist me, in the revenge of
that horrid and impious murder of my Father, and the recovery of my just Right
in my other Dominions, (to which they are equally engaged by the laws of God,
and of that Kingdom) and to the obtaining of such an Union, I will consent to
all that in Conscience and Honor I may, without imposing on my other Kingdoms.
As, first, I will maintain, confirm, and defend the Government Ecclesiastical
and Civil of Scotland, as is settled by Law, and the Ancient known Laws of that
Kingdom, as likewise all such Acts of Parliament, as have been actually
consented unto by the King my Father, being personally present in Parliament,
or by his Commissioners lawfully authorized by him; and particularly, the Laws
concerning the National Covenant, the Confession of Faith, and Presbyterial
government of that Church: Touching that part of the League and Covenant which
concerns My other Kingdoms of England and Ireland, it is not in my power
justly to take any resolution therein, without the advice of my respective
Parliaments of these Kingdoms, by whose advice and consent only, Laws are there
to be made and altered; Neither can I consent to any thing which shall oppose
or disturb the peace lately concluded in Ireland, but I am very willing to
refer the full consideration of the said League and Covenant, and of all the
other particulars you mention (as to England) to a free Parliament to be
convened there by My Writ, as soon as the condition of that Kingdom will permit
me so to do; By whose advice I am resolved to govern my self therein; in the
mean time, as I am very ready to do all that is in my power to the safe and
quiet protection of my people in Scotland, under the benefit of the Laws of
that Kingdom, as likewise further to gratify them in all that may really tend
to their welfare; So I shall expect that obedience and duty from them in the
exercise of my Royal power, as is due to me by their Allegiance; To which they
submitting, and for the burying all bitterness and animosities which the former
distractions and divisions may have produced, and the better effecting the
happy union beforementioned, I am very willing and desirous to consent to any
Act of Oblivion and Indemnity to all persons of what condition soever of that
Kingdom of Scotland, excepting only such persons (if any such there be in, or
of that kingdom) that shall hereafter upon sufficient and due evidence in a
lawful trial, be found actually and expressly guilty of that late unparalleld
horrid Act, of the murder of their late Sovereign. And if it shall appear unto
me, that the League and Covenant contains any thing in it not comprised in
these Acts concerning the National Covenant, and Presbyterial government of the
Church of Scotland, and necessarily to the welfare of the said Church and
kingdom, without reference to England or Ireland; I shall upon the first settling
of such an Union, and the passing of such an Act of Oblivion as is
beforementioned, apply my self to give full satisfaction therein. Passionatly
desiring to remove all occasions of misunderstanding between my self and all my
good Subjects of that my Kingdom of Scotland; and what is not particularly
answered at this time shall be supplied by an express, whom I will dispatch
into Scotland as soon as conveniently I can.

May 1^/29. 1643. Signed CHARLES REX.


May it please your Majesty,
ALthough We were much troubled that your Maj. Answer should have been so long
delayed, at such a time when Resolution and Action were so necessitated; yet
have we now received it with much greater grief, finding that your Majesty's
Counsels lead you to resolutions so contrary to the satisfaction desired by us,
in the name of the Parl. of your Kingdom of Scotl. and so far from engaging
them to hazard their lives and fortunes in your service (which with so much
affection they desired) as that by this strange Answer, the distance is made
greater then before, nay by it far less is offered for Religion, the Covenant,
and the Laws and Liberties of that Kingdom, then was by your Royal Father;
even at that time when the difference amongst them was greatest: yea, many of
the most material Acts agreed upon by the large Treaty ratified by him, are by
this Answer called in Question: His Majesty's Concessions in the Isle of Wight
did bear, that he would confirm the Solemn League and COVENANT in both
Kingdoms for all that had taken it, or should take it, and that he would
settle Presbyterial Government; and the Directorie of Worship in England
(although these Concessions were found unsatisfactory) yet your Majesty is not
pleased to go so much as that same length, or to offer any present and express
satisfaction as to the Solemn League and Covenant, Confession of Faith,
Directory for Worship, and Catechism in either of the Kingdoms. And although
your Majesty professes that you will confirm and defend the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Government of Scotland, as they are settled by Law; yet by
restricting your Concessions to such Acts of Parliament, as have been actually
consented to by the King your Father, Being personally present, or by his
Commissioner authorized for that effect, at once all our Laws and Parliaments
these eight years by past, so often acknowledged by our late Sovereign, are now
by this your Majesty's Answer laid afide, and utterly rejected, seeing it has
pleased your Majesty so directly to question the clear and undoubted Laws and
constitutions of the Parliament of your Majesty's Kingdom of Scotland, upon
that ground; We most humbly crave leave to remember your Majesty, that as the
Parliament held in the year, 1561 without the presence of the Queen, or her
Commissioner was ever acknowledged by her Majesty, and your Royal
Predecessors since as a lawful Parliament; so your Royal Father our late
Sovereign was pleased, in his Wisdom and Justice to acknowledge all Acts of the
Parliament 1640. as Laws to be observed, by all his Subjects of that Kingdom:
Notwithstanding, that neither he, nor any Commissioner from him, was therein
present; amongst which is that Act for the constitution of Parliament in all
time coming, whereby it is declared and ordained, that that Parliament holden
by the Nobility, Barons, and Burgesses, or their Commissioners as the true
estates of the Kingdom; is, and should be accounted a complete and perfect
Parliament, and to have the same power, authority, and Jurisdiction as
absolutely and fully as any Parliament formerly has had within the Kingdom in
time by gone* As likewise the 17. Act of the same Parliament, entitled, Act
Statutarie, appointing Parliaments to be holden once every three years, wherein
the appointing of the time and places is to be the last Act thereof, by the
authority of the which Act the Parl. 1641, wherein his Maj. was present; did
meet, and by the Act thereof appointed the first Tuesday of January in Anno
1644. to be the day of meeting and conveening of the next Trienuial Parliament:
His Majesty and the Estate: Declaring that the publication of that Act should
be a sufficient for conveening of the whole Members of Parliament, as if all
sooner Solemnities were used; By Authority (...) which Parliament the several
subsequent Sessions of Parliament have conveened, and have often by Treaties,
Letters, and Messages, solemnly been acknowledged by your Father: and yet these
are the Parliaments questioned by your Majesty, wherein if you should insist,
it would be no less then to strike at the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, nor
could the subjects there be in security of any thing while they possess. Were
it not to make the gap wider, we should particularly show, that your Majesty's
answer is so far from containing satisfaction to our Desires, that it drives at
the subversion of them all, and the dissolving of that Solemn Covenant, which
for the good of Religion, the honor and happiness of the King, and the peace
and safety of his Kingdoms, was sworn and subscribed before the most high God,
by your Majesty's good Subjects of both Kingdoms, from which they will not
depart, nor suffer themselves to be withdrawn, by any trouble or difficulty
that they can meet with. But we do purposely forbear ^ther to insist upon
particulars, desiring rather your Majesty to take the business again unto your
most serious consideration, and that (laying aside the occasion of such
dangerous debates) it may please your Majesty to give the satisfaction desired,
to the just and necessary Propositions of your Kingdom of Scotland, concerning
Religion, and the Solemn League and Covenant, and the determination of matters
Civil by the Parliament, and matters Ecclesiastical by the Assemblies of the
Church of that Kingdom: That thereby your Majesty may gain not only the outward
obedience, but also the inward affection of your good people to your Royal
Person, Authority, and Government, which is the only way to unite and
strengthen their hearts and hands, and so to engage that Nation entirely to
perform to your Majesty all the duties of faithfulness and loyalty. But if (by
the instigation and persuasion of pernicious Council) your Majesty thus (as we
wish it may never enter into your Royal hear) shall refuse and reject these
reasonable desires wherein there is nothing asked, but your Majesty's assent to
these things; the particulars whereof, have been by Parliament enacted before
your Majesty's coming to the Crown, and by the people universally received and
obeyed as Law, as it will be very grievous to them, so it will constrain them in
such an extremity, to do what is incombent to them for preserving Religion and
the Kingdom from ruin; and we are confident that it shall appear to the world
with how much humility, affection, and Loyalty, they have carried themselves
toward your Majesty since the beginning.

May 22. and June ^ 1649. Signed by the Commissioners of Parliament.


May it please Your Majesty,
AT your Majesty's desire we did forbear to insist, upon that first Paper which
we offered to your Majesty, and the removing of James Grantham as a person
excommunicate by the Church and forefaulted by the Parliament of Scotland; and
now having received no answer nor satisfaction from Your Majesty ther^nt, but
that be still presumes to intrude himself into your Majesty's presence and
pretending Commission from your Majesty, has given warrant to some Officers
to Levy Forces, which must be understood to be against the Kingdom of
Scotland, he having sent some of his compliers thither; Therefore it is our
humble desire, that he may be discharged your Royal presence and Court, and
that your Majesty would be pleased to let us know whether any such Commis be
granted to him or not, at this time whilst we are expecting your Maj. answer to
the desires of that Kingdom.

(...) Signed by the Commissioners of Parliament.


His Majesty's Answer.
I Am much unsatisfied with your Papers of the first and second of this month,
in Answer to mine of the 29 of May, finding by them the My real endeavors to
give all just satisfaction to my good Subjects of Scotland are undervalued and
misinterpreted; and observing in them several inferences, opposing the
natural sense and true intent of what I have proposed, with most entire
intentions for the good of that Church and Kingdom, and unseasonably stirring
useless questions, neither properly arising out of any thing contained in any
of the former papers, nor conducing to the Common Peace: But neither these nor
any discouragements shall prevstil with me, to omit any thing that my tend to
the Peace and Happiness of all My good Subjects of Scotland; To which I shall
most affectionately to My utmost power) upon all occasions) apply My Self,
according to the duty which I owe to the Almighty God, in the exercise of My
Royal power, for the good of My People, in order whereunto, I shall with
covenient speed, send you by the Express mentioned in My last Paper, the more
particular Answer I then promised: I shall likewise more fully express My Self
concerning the new matter contained in these Papers, and shall particularize,
what I now complain of in them. In the mean time, I expect and require from all
My Subjects of Scotland, such obedience as is due to Me their King, by the Laws
of God, of nature, and of that Kingdom.

Signed, C.R.


Act of Approbation of the Commissioners, their faithfulness and diligence in
their Commission.
AT Edinburgh the fouretenth day of June, 1649.
The Estates of Parliament now presently convened in the third Session of this
second Trienniall Parliament, Having received from John Earl of Cassils,
Alexander Brodie of that ilk, Master George Winrame of Libberton, and Alexander
Jaffray Burges of Aberdeen, Their Commissioners sent to the Kings Majesty, The
Report of all their proceedings with the King, And read the papers delivered
therewith to this Parliament; And being fully satisfied with their Integrity,
Faithfulness, and Diligence, in contributing their utmost endeavors for
prosecuting their instructions, And for obtaining satisfaction to the desires
of this Kingdom; Do therefore unanimously and heartily acknowledge their
Faithfulness and Diligence, and approve their proceedings, And render to them
the hearty thanks of this Kingdom for the sa^e.

Sic Subscribiter, ARCH. IOHNSTOUN. Cler. Regist.

The Report of the Commissioners of the Church, of their Proceedings with his
Majesty at the Hague: Made in the General Assembly, July 10. 1649.
AS We were commanded by the Commission of the Church, we made ready with all
the speed we could for our voyage to Holland. According to your prayers, the
good hand of our God brought us safe through the Sea. On Tuesday March 27. we
made our first Addresses to his Majesty, we delivered our Letters and
Commission, expressing in our Speech (according to our Instructions) the deep
sense and greef of this Church for his Majesty's afflictions, their detestation
of the principles and proceedings of the Sectaries in England, their constant
affection to Monarchy, and most hearty desires for the blessing of God upon His
Majesty's person and Government. All this was well taken from us, and we were
courteously dimissed, to return when we thought fit, with our Proposions.

The Commissioners Letter was as follows, May it please your Majesty,
While the Parliament of this Kingdom are making their Addresses to your
Majesty by their Commissioners, We thought it our duty to send some of our
number also instructed with Commission from us, by whom your Majesty may
understand the integrity of our intentions toward Monarchical Government, and
the continuance thereof in your Majesty's Person and Posterity, and our utter
detestation of these abominable and unparaleld practices of some against the
Person of your Majesty's Father, and their subverting the ancient and
Fundamental Laws and Government of these Kingdoms. Our humble and earnest
Petition to your Majesty is, That you would be pleased to grant the Desires of
your loyal Subjects, who sincerely seek the Establishment of your Throne in
righteousness; and as you love the glory of God, the good of Religion, your
own Honor and Happiness, and the Peace and Welfare of these Kingdoms, your
would not hearken to the Counsels, nor countenance or own the courses of them
who have been, and are usurpers upon the Privileges and disturbers of the
Peace of this Kirk and Kingdom. Our Commissioners will acquaint your Majesty
more fully with our mind, unto whom we humbly desire your Majesty may give
credit, and interpret our freedom and plain dealing by (...), as a real
Testimony of our unfeigned affection to your Majesty's Person and Government. We
have hitherto labored to approve our selves in all fidelity to our Lord and
Master Jesus Christ, and in all loyalty to Kingly Authority; And we are
resolved to walk still after the same Rule, in our several stations and
vocations, amidst all the difficulties and oppositions wherewith we are
assaulted on either hand; Praying for your Majesty, that the Lord of the whole
earth would multiply all sorts of mercies upon your Royal Person; and
graciously incline your young and tender heart unto the speedy embracing and
following of the Counsels of Truth and Righteousness, and grant unto your
Majesty a long and happy Reign, that we may live under you, a peaceable and
quiet life in all godliness and honesty, who are

Edingburgh March the first, 1649. Your Majesty's Loyal and Loving Subjects
and humble servants in the Lord, The Commissioners of the General Assembly.




Before we offered any of our desires, we thought it convenient to assay the
putting away of that which we feared might prove obstructive to all our
intentions; Before our coming, that unhappy and cursed man, James Graham had
been sent for, and too well entertained by those of the English Council, who
least affected our Covenant, and all the late proceedings of our Nation: our
first paper therefore on Friday March 30 was for the removal of this evil man
from his Majesty's presence and Court. The Commissioners of Parliament had
desired the same before, the first answer they got was bu^ dilatory; we
conceived it the more necessary for us to join with the same desire again, our
petition was in these terms May it please your Majesty,
ACcording to our Commission, we do represent in the name of the Ki^k of
Scotland their earnest desire, that such as lie under the censure of
Excommunication may be discountenanced by your Majesty, and removed from your
Court; especially James Graham late Earl of Montrosse, being a man most justly,
if ever any, cast out of the Church of God. It has been ^he c^st^m of
Christian Princes in all places and times to maintain so far the discipline of
all Churches which themselves did protect by their Laws, as (according to the
order of Christ) to decline the familiar conversing with every one whom the
highest censure of Excommunication made to Ethnicks and Publicans; your
Majesty's walking in any other way would be contrary to the rules of Scripture,
to the practice of these Princes whose gracious examples will be your Majesty's
most whollsome Patterns, and would certainly give a great stroke to all the
Discipline of the Kirk of Scotland, which your Majesty's Royal Grandfather by
many of his Laws, and your Royal Father in his Parliament of Scotland 1640.
has expressly ratified, and we trust your Majesty will never intend to alter;
least of all at this time, in the hopeful beginning of your Reign; for
gratifying of a Person upon whose head lies more innocent blood, then for many
years has done on the head of any one, the most bloody murderer in our Nation.

We hope for so much mercy from our God, that his gracious Spirit shall incline
your Majesty's heart to give us just satisfaction in all our necessary Desires,
that the cordial union of your Majesty with your people so much longed for on
all hands, may with all speed be fully accomplished: And that this cursed man,
whose scandalous carriage, pernicious counsel, and contagious company cannot
fail (so long as he remains in his obstinate impenitency) to dishonor and
pollute all companies, and provoke the anger of the most high God against all
places of his familiar access; shall not pe permitted by your Majesty to stand
any longer in the entry of our hopes, to our great discouragement and fear,
lest by his guilt, example, and acting, all the humble Desires, and wholesome
Counsels which we are entrusted with, should be obstructed and frustrate,

Friday March 30. 1649. Subscribitur, Cassils Robert Bailie. George Wynram
James Wood



His Majesty's Return to us both was in this Paper.
I Do insist upon my former Answer, and do desire and expect that you do
deliver all the Propositions or Desires you or any of you are entrusted to
present to me, before I make an Answer to any particular one, being resolved to
consider of the whole, before I declare my resolution upon any part.

April 10. n. still. 1649. C R.




We took it for no good presage, that notwithstanding all we could do by our
selves or by others, this man remained still in our way, as an open enemy to
all our designs; also that his Majesty's answer to us was put in o^e paper,
and was altogether the same with his Answer to the Commissioners of Parliament,
without any direction either to them or us, expressing his acknowledgement of
our capacity as Commissioners; yet having obtained the Kings promise of a
Satisfactory Answer in reason, to that our our first Petition, so soon as the
rest of our Propositions were given in: and judging his Majesty's receiving of
our Message, and answering of all our papers without any quarrelling of our
Commission, whereof in every paper we made express mention, to be a real
acknowledgement of us as Commissioners from the Church: and not being
instructed to break off all Treaty at the beginning upon dissatisfaction in
such things, as the Comissioners of Parliament, so we also thought fit to
proceed.

The man things we were instructed to propone to his Majesty, were the
National Covenant of Scotland, the Solemn League and Covenant of the three
Kingdoms, the Directory of Worship, the Confession of Faith, the Propositons
for Presbyteriall government, the two Catechismes, as they were agreed unto by
the General Assembly and Parliament of Scotland These six pieces we did bind
together in a Book, and delivered them to His Majesty, speaking somewhat to the
matter of every one of them, and entreating that this Majesty would be pleased
to read and peruse them all, what ever scruple might arise in his mind from any
of them we offered our best endeavor, to satisfy him therein: But our
Positive desires concerning th^se Particulars, we gave in on Thursday, April 5.
15. in this Paper. May it please your Majesty,
WE the Commissioners of the Church of Scotland, hoping for an Answer
satisfactory in reason to our first paper, according to your Maje^ies gracious
promise, do go on according to our Commission, to signify in the name of that
Church, that after their hearty prayer to God for his bles^ing on your Royal
person and government; It is their most earnest desire that it may be your
Majesty's pleasure to give them assu^ance under your hand and seal of your
^pprobation of the National Cavenant of Scotland, subscribed by your Royal
Grandfather, approven and enjoined by your Royal Father in the Parliament of
Scotland, 1640. And of the Solemn League and Covenant, which now for diverse
years the Parliaments, and General Assemblies of Scotland, the two Houses of
the Parl. of England, and the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, after long
and serious deliberation, have unanimously found to be the best and necessary
means of settling Religion, of establishing the Throne, and bringing back
prosperity to your Majesty and all your three now lamentably distressed
kingdoms; also of the Directory of Worship, Confession of Faith, Catechism,
and Presbyteriall Government of the Church, agreed upon according to the word
of God, by the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, and the General Assemblies
of the Church of Scotland: the Copies of all which we did the other day deliver
to your Majesty. Likewise that your Majesty would be pleased to subscribe the
National Covenant, with the Solemn League and Covenant, and give your Royal
Assent to such Acts of the Parliament of Scotland as shall be offered to your
Majesty, for the establishing and enjoining of the Premises in Scotland, and to
such Acts of Parliament as shall be offered by the two Houses of the Parliament
of England, for the establishing and enjoining the same in England and Ireland;
and in the mean time, that your Majesty would be pleased to lay aside the use
of the Service Book, and conform the worship of God in your Royal Family to
the Directory. We are fully persuaded that your Majesty's cordial joining with
your loving Subjects in these means of advancing the Honor of God and true
Religion, shall procure from heaven the Lords powerful assistance, to b^ing
your Majesty and your people, out of the great tribulation and danger, wherein
both for the present are plunged. We are also confident that your Majesty's
granting these most humble and earnest desires, shall be a chief and effectual
mean to knit to your Majesty in all duty, the hearts of all your good Subjects,
not in Scotland alone, but every where else, and shall loose to your Majesty
none at all, who either loves the truth of God, or minds your Majesty's
happiness above their own particular unjust interests,

April 5. 15. Subscribitur, Cassils. Robert Bailie. Libberton. James Wood,





Upon Friday the day following we received from his Majesty this short return.
C. R.
April 16.
I Desire for the reasons mentioned in my former papers, to know whether the
last papers I received from you, contain the full demands and Propositions, you
or any of you have to make in reference to Church or State, and if not, that
then you deliver what remains, that I may consider of the whole, and proceed
accordingly.

April 16. 1649.



To this on the Satturday we made this reply. UNto the paper deliverd to us by
your Majesty this day, we do make this humble return, that the last your
Majesty received from us the Commissioners of the Kirk of Scotland, does
contain the substance of all we have to demand of your Majesty, the Grant
whereof will make any other humble advice we are to propone most easy. What
the Commissioners of Parliament have to deliver in reference to the State, we
leave it wholly to themselves, they being in a Commission and capacity
altogether distinct from that which we have from the Church alone.

April 17. 1649. Cassils. Robert Bailie. Libberton. James Wood.





The days thereafter, His Majesty and the Commissioners of Parliament
interchang^d diverse papers about points of State, wherein we had no place to
meddle; in the mean while we were not idle, but went about our instructions
both by conferences with his Majesty, and by frequent dealing with diverse
persons of quality whom we conceived to have ability or any opportunity to
promove with His Majesty the Grant of our desires; Also by answering sometimes
even in Print, a multitude of calumnies wherewith our malignant enemies with
much artifice and malice, did labor to poison the ears of His Majesty and all
about him against our Church and Kingdom.

But finding time to drive over, and no answer according to our mind appearing,
we gave in on May 18./28. the following Writ. UPon the 5. 15. of Apr. We the
Commissioners of the Kirk of Scotland, did in their name present their humble
and earnest desire of these things which they conceived necessary for the
security of Religion, for the establishment of your Majesty's Throne, and for
putting of them in a confident expectation of the Lords blessing upon your
Majesty's Government; since that time we have been always waiting, and often
humbly moving for an answer; but as yet none at all is given we cannot conceal,
but so long a delay has affected us with grief, so much the more as your
Majesty has declared your resolution to be gone from the on Thursday next,
which makes the time we have to consider what your Majesty shall be pleased to
offer very short; Wherefore with all humility and earnestness we do supplicate
that without the loss of more time, now at last we may have so gracious and
satisfactory a return to our former papers, as may make us leave your Majesty
with joy, and carry home to them who have sent us, matter of praise to God for
inclining your heart toward these their counsels: which are most likely to
procure to your Majesty and all your Dominions, an happy deliverance from all
their present distresses.

May 18. 28. 1649. Cassils. To. Bailie. Liberton Ia. Wood.





Hereby we obtained from his Majesty May 19. 29. this answer. I Have considred
the several Papers and Propositions, delivered to me by you, etc. vide supra.




Our grief for this Paper was great, it was much worse then any thing we
expected; not only the hand of the worst of the English Counsel, but of James
Graham also, and others of our evil country men was visible therein; we
resolved to give unto it this plain Reply. May it please your Majesty,
We the Commissioners of the Kirk of Scotland, having considered your
Majesty's Paper of May 19. 29. given to us in answer of all our formet, must in
conscience of our duty with all humility make known to your Majesty, that to
our great grief, we find it in many the chiefest points of our desires very
unsatisfactory. Unto our first Paper for discountenancing of excommunicate
persons, to which a satisfactory answer in reason was promised, nothing at all
is said. To our other desires no proper return is made unto us, but we are sent
to gather it here and there out of your Majesty's Answer to the Commissioners
of Parliament; wherein though we find some things returned to their desires
which they had common with (...), yet the most part thereof runs upon
matters of State, wherewith our condition permits us not to meddle: but rather
then to go away without all further conference, we are willing in obedience to
your Majesty's desires, to consider what in that writing we conceive may have
any reference to our Propositions.

We bless God that your Majesty assures us you will maintain confirm, and
defend the Ecclesiastic Government of Scotland, as it is settled by Law; and
particularly these Laws which concern the National Covenant, Confession of
Faith, and Presbyteriall government of our Church, their blame must be the
greater, who have been Authors to your Majesty, to give so frequent, open, and
familiar access to James Graham, most solemnly and justly excommunicate by
that Church: which things cannot but be thought as it is indeed a great
violation of the Ecclesiastic government* To ou^ desire in the matter of our
National Covenant; that as your Grand Father by his own hand, and your Father
by the hand of His Commissioner had subscribed it* so your Majesty would be
pleased to subscribe the same; no answer at all is given. But our prime
dissatisfaction is, that what we petitioned concerning the Directory,
Confession of Faith agreed upon by the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, and
approven by the general Assembly and Parliament of Scotland, Catechismes, and
Propositions for government, is clearly denied; and our greatest desire about
the solemn League and Covenants fully frustrate. The Covenant it self is broken
in pieces, some parts are avowedly laid aside, the other parts are refused to
be taken into consideration till they be proven, first not to be comprised in
the acts concerning the National Covenant, and Presbyteriall government of the
Church of Scotland, next that they are necessary to the welfare both of the
Church and Kingdom, and thirdly that they have no reference either to England
or Ireland. When all this is made to appear, an Act of oblivion of all that
James Graham and his accomplices or any other have done during all the time of
these sad distractions must be past, and a union with all these then must be
fully settled, before your Majesty do so much as apply your self to give
satisfaction in these things.

Such an answer we know cannot fail to grieve the whole Church of Scotland, and
all their Covenanted Brethren in England and Ireland; who under the pain of
most solemn Perjury stand bound to God, and one to another to live and die in
that solemn League and Covenant, as the chief and necessary security of their
Religion and Liberties which the Popish Prelaticall and malignant Faction by
their pernicious Counsels and actions now of a long time have been
overturning, and to this day continue diligent in promoving to their power that
their destructive design. We marvel how any can object conscience or Honor
against your Majesty's granting to us what we desire in the Covenant for
securing the Protestant Religion, who have themselves been Counselors and
perswaders that your Majesty without all scruple either of conscience or
honor, should conclude, subscribe and seal antecedently to, and without any
Parliament, yea contrary to all the Parliaments of Eng^and the^e hundred years,
a liberty of the Popish Religion to the bloody Rebels of Ireland.

Your Majesty would be pleased to consider, that any relation these things we
desire may have to England, hinders them not to be lawful Acts of the
General Assembly of Scotland, legally ratified by the Parliaments of that
Kingdom; which when your Majesty does approve, nothing is imposed upon England
since their own Houses of Parliament and Assembly of Divines did not only Act
the same things; but in all their Treaties with the King and with Scotland for
diverse years together did earnestly press them. Your Majesty's Father in his
last Message to the Commission of our Church did offer to ratify the Solemn
League and Covenant for all that had taken it, or should take it in any of the
3 Kingdoms, and in his last Treaty with the English Commissioners in the Isle
of Wighe did, as we are informed, offer to confirm the Directory, Presbyteriall
Government, and what else was required for Religion in England and Ireland,
ever till he and his Parliament should agree upon a settled Order for the
Church. We do not conceive what in this Covenant can stumble your Majesty. The
abolition of Episcopacy, and of the Service Book your Majesty maintains,
confirms and defends in Scotland: the duty done with a good conscience and
allowance of God in Scotland cannot be against conscience, nor offend God in
England: no Reformed Church, no Protestant Divine out of England, did ever
esteem Episcopacy or Liturgy necessary: All Scotland, the most of England, the
best part of Ireland, do judge the abolition of Popery, of Prelacy, of the
Liturgy; And joining in a Covenant for that end, a necessary duty. Your Majesty
and all the World may see, to the very great grief of our soul, the wrath of
the Lord burning like a flame, no better mean know we to quench it, then for
your Majesty to be humbled under his mighty hand, to seek and rely on his
favor, to be zealous for advancing his affairs, to establish the Solemn League
and Covenant, to provoke him no more by holding up in his House, against the
Hearts of all the Orthodox abroad, and of the godly at home, humane inventions
borrowed from Rome, most unhappy to Britain. No mean in our judgment is
comparable to this, for opening the arms and hearts of your best people to
embrace your Majesty's person, to second with their lives and Estates all your
just desires, to employ with cheerfulness their who I strength to settle you
upon all your thrones. The refusing thereof we are persuaded will be
displeasing to God, will discourage and discontent extremely all your
Covenanted Subjects, who otherwise are most cordially affecteed to your
Majesty's Service, may tempt you to allyances with Idolaters, to a dependence
upon Strangers, to a course of cruel persecution against your best Subjects,
will be pleasant to none but to such as are your Majesty's Mortal enemies, who
cannot but account it the joyfullest news that can come to them; or to such as,
whatsoever be their pretenses or true intentions, yet by their counsels and
actions, more then any other men living, do serve the designs and advance the
work of the Sectaries at Westminster and Derby-House for ruining your Majesty
and Us all.

Our desire to be faithful to our Master in heaven, and to be answerable to
the trust we have from the Church that has sent us, the tenderness of our
hearts toward the more and more distressed condition of your Majesty and your
Kingdoms, have made us bold to lay out these our free, loving, and loyal
thoughts at your Majesty's feet, expecting your Majesty will be pleased to
review our former Papers, and yet grant us such a satisfactory Return, as may
send us home rejoicing, and make us be received for our glad tidings with
praise to God, with blessings upon your Majesty, and confident expectation of a
speedy change in the face of affairs in all your Dominions.

May ^3. June 3. 1649. Cassills, R. Baillie. Libberton Ia: Wood.





Hereunto we received from his Majesty this last Answer. I Am much unsatisfied
with your Papers of the first and second of this month, in answer to mine of
the 29 of May, etc. vide supra.




To this we thought fit to make no Return in Writ.

We did indeed expect by the assistance of the Prince of Orange, whose constant
friendship we felt all the time of our abode there, and by the industry of some
Noblemen of our Nation, to whom for their affectionate service to us in our
negotiation, We counted our selves not a little obliged: by the Lords blessing
we say on their labors, we expected toward the time of our return a betrer
and more satisfactory Answer; but his Majesty, as we heard, being resolved
before he made any conclusion to speak with the Queen his Mother, and to send
an Express hither with more of his m^de; we kissed his hands and took our
leave in discomfort and grief, yet not without some hope, certainly with most
earnest desires, that the promised Express may bring to as much more mat^er of
satisfaction and joy, then for the time we have any warrant to speak of.

We have but one thing further to give an account of: the Commission did write
wit^ to the Reverend Divines, Doctor Rivet and D. Spanheim: D. Spanheim
received his Letter, but before he did answer, the Lord to our g^ and the very
great regra^ of the Churches abroad, did end the Pilgrimage of that truly
eminent, and now much desiderate (...) Doctor Rivets abode was not at the Hague
as we expected, but in Breda: we thought it a pity in his extreme old age, to
put him to the pains of so long a journey as from Breda to the Hague; but we
had his best affections and prayer going along with us in all our desires, as
he signified to us in private Letters, and as we suppose; (...) to the
Assembly, which h^e we present.

^ssills, Robert Baylie, Geo. Wynrame, James Wood.


Edinburgh 10. July 1649. Antemeriden Sess. VI.
THe general Assembly, Having taken in serious consideration the Report of the
Travel and Proceedings of the Commissioners sent to his Majesty, presented by
them this day: Together with the Commission and Instructions which were given
unto them; Do find by the Report, that they have been very Diligent and
Faithful in the discharge of the Trust committed to them: And therefore, Do
unanimously Approve of their carriage, and return them hearty thanks, for their
great pains and travells in that Employment.

A Ker.

FINIS.

