FIAT LUX OR, A general Conduct to a right understanding in the great
Combustions and Broils about RELIGION here in ENGLAND.

Betwixt Papist and Protestant, Presbyterian and Independent

To the end That Moderation and Quietness may at length hapily ensue after so
various Tumults in the Kingdom.

By Mr. J V C. a friend to men of all Religions.

-- Jam proximus ardet
Vcalegon. Tantaene animis coelestibus irae?
1661.

To the most Illustrious, and most excellent Lady, the Countess of Arundel and
Surrey, etc.
Madam,
IT often happens in Books what sometime in Children, that although obscurely
born, they are by the benign aspect of some great Person happily cast upon
them, entertained and bred up in princely palaces, and flourish as much by
happy chance, as they could have don by a greater birth. I wish with all my
heart that this little Offspring of mine, which coms running with a modest
confidence to the feet of your glorious Virtues, which have only moved it to
such a boldness, may find favor in your eyes: so that encouraged by the
greatness of your Name, it may cheerfully go in and out conspicuous in the
world, and do the good my heart desires. To the end it may bear with it some
possibility of acceptance both, Madam, with your Honor and with the world too,
I have to my power imprinted upon its forehead the general lineaments of
noblenes, Reason and Civillity. But other Ornaments are so far wanting, that it
may not expect entertainment, but where some great part of that Goodness which
has rendered the Countess of Arundel so renowned and gracious may inhabit.

The Book carries no other intent but what a Person of Honor may own: and its
purpos written upon its face answers directly to its heart and spirit. It would
for sooth pacify our rural distempers about affairs of Religion, and shows a
Light that Madness may see what it does, where it mistakes, and how irrationally
it rages. This is the very end and purpos of my Book, laudable enough I may
presume, and not unworthy the Countenance of Honor, were it accomplished with
that art so good a purpos requires. Let your own excelling goodness, Madam,
cover the other defects; and graciously accept what I humbly offer, a sincere
though not very profound, not a high and eloquent, but which is harder in the
rude distempers I am to deal withal, a peaceable, harmles, well-meaning Book.
In my dark obscurity I dye daily; but my ashes will joy, If it should happily
fall out, that good be wrought in England unto the promoting of sobernes in any
one, by the Countess of Arundels FIAT LVX: and so will those with me, who may
chance to receiv any satisfaction from this little Light, be bound to your
Ladyship, whose countenance and favorable assistance has been the instrument
of setting it forth, wherein you shall ever oblige me to be,

Madam, Your Honors most humble and most devoted Servant, J V C.

The Chapters.
First Page 19. THere is no color of reason or just title may move us to
quarrel and judge one another with so much heart about Religion. Second. Page
66. All things are so obscure that no man in prudence can so far presume of his
own knowledge as to set up himself a guide in Religion to his neighbor. Third.
Page 140. No religion, or sect or way has any advantage over another, nor all
of them over Popery. Fourth. Page 213. All religions who have opposition to the
Catholic are equally innocent to one another, as likewise is the Roman
religion truly innocent and unblameable to them all. Fifth. Page 365. Moral
topics for charity and peace.
The Paragraffs.
1. DIversity of feuds. page 19 2. Ground of quarrels p. 27 3. Nullity of
title. p. 34 4. Heats and resolution. p. 48 5. Motives to moderation p. 54 6.
Obscurity of God. p. 66 7. Obscurity of nature. p. 82 8. Item. p. 90 9.
Obscurity of Providence. p. 106 10. Help. p. 118 11. Reason. p. 126 12. Light
and Spirit. p. 140 13. Puritan plea. p. 155 14. Protestant pro and con. p. 170
15. Scripture p. 182 16. Appeal. p. 198 17. History of religion. p. 213 18.
Item. p. 223 19. Item. p. 229 20. Item. p. 235 21. Discovery. p. 244 22.
Messach. p. 254 23. B. Virgin Mary. p. 267 24. Images. p. 272 25. Latin
Service. p. 280 26. Communion. p. 292 27. Saints. p. 303 28. Dirge. p. 323 29.
Pope. p. 336 30. Popery. p. 357 31. Conclusion. p. 365
FIAT LUX. Preface. The motive, matter, and method of the Book.
THese twenty years of intestin wars and broils principally if not solely upon
the account of Religion being now past, and the tempest ceased upon the return
of our great Pilot to whom such winds and seas ought to obey, unto the
government of his ship out of which our unruly passion cast him to our own
great shame and ruin, it is now high time for us to lay our hand upon our heart
and be sober.

An irregular fire of zeal, a meteor-lanthorn has led us into lakes and
precipices and there left us. But God forbid that for the time to com we should
any of us by such deceitful lights be any more misled. And this that we may
all heed, as it is the earnest desire of all good Christian spirits; so is it
the only scope and endeavor of this little book, which I humbly offer and
present unto the hands of my Countrymen, especially the gentler and more
refined natures of whose favorable acceptance I do conceiv greater hopes than
from any vulgar eye, which expecting to read the old common places they are
fore-acquainted with, and in the usual tract and method, will I fear when they
miss here of both, like of nothing. But gentlemen by the highness of birth and
greatness of their education have put on other affections, and do sometimes more
heed a plain rational discourse unto a commendable end, though destitute of all
guard but its own single reason, than the ordinary large retinue of autorities
and texts which may indeed much strengthen and adorn a book, but hinder a
reader in his progres; and generally they dislike any new book that differs no
otherwise from former ones, than a new moon from an old one.

These past times between 1640. and 1660. and the horror of them, wherein we
were afraid even to think, and that in our private closets, I intend not here
to speak of; for posterity, should I write true and fully, would never beleev
it; and if falls or imperfectly, the present age eywitnes of the truth would
slight it. Besides I would not willingly now offend any whom I have been
aforetime so hugely afraid of. Charity also toward my neighbor persuades me,
that the long Parliament and all their adherents had an appearance of some great
good before their eyes, which they were not able to wield: for when they had
all under their feet that might any ways oppose or binder their design, yet
could they never bring to pass any of the spetious things they made pretens of,
the great welfar of our Kingdom, settlement of a pure religion, liberty of
conscience, and freedom of the subject; unto all which their actions were so
contrary all these twenty years together, that man could not discern by their
doings that they did so much as mean any such thing; whether it were that they
did indeed never sincerely intend, or were not able to compass, or by several
concurrencies of affairs were diverted and jusled from that end unto ways
utterly opposite both to our good and their own too.

I was ever of opinion all the while, that the account of Religion as the case
stands needed not of all other things so highly to incens us one against
another unto such injurious outrages as past amongst us; and found in my heart
several times to put pen to paper and utter my mind; but I was retarded by the
two reasons of my own small ability, and my Countries indisposition at that
time to such discourse. But now people seem more calmly disposed, and my self
somewhat bettered by reading more books of Quakers, Anabaptists, Presbyterians,
and by the society of these and several others, Wel-willers, Seekers,
Atheists, Philosophers. The books of Roman Catholics I had perused and
digested a forehand: our Protestant Religion I understood long ago being born
and bred in that way. So that an exact knowledge of all I am to speak, together
with my long observing experience will I hope somewhat supply my other wants,

One thing incourages me not a little to this enterprise; which is that I have
frequently observed that it is not always a muchnes either of eloquence
learning or wisdom, that strikes a stroke in asswaging differences, or makes a
right understanding between parties, but such a hidden cause somtims in the
words and gestures of persons, as we may rather call it chance than any thing
else. I have my self pacified neighbors, even in their hottest dissentions,
when others of greater wisdom and acquaintance have prevailed less. So that I
have thereupon concluded that these kind of feudes against charity may have in
them somewhat of the property of the tarantulaes stingings, which be cured not
by the best music but the fittest.

Another thing I must add, that I never yet heard of any that so much as
endeavored to allay our religious distempers by the general lights I go upon:
without which notwithstanding every one will remain so fixed in his own way,
that little good can be wrought; as by daily experience we find it true. The
Prince of all to picks in the alaying of these kind of combustions is that of
Virgil -- Sed motos praestat componere fluctus. Controversies be written on
this side and that, invective defiances made on all sides without end,
confutations of Sects bitter enough every where, objections and replies endless,
some for Papists some against them, some against our Protestants some for them;
some by Presbyterians some by Anabaptists; some by Quakers against all, some by
all sorts against the Quakers. But all these kind of disputes be so far from
quenching, that they add still more fuel to the fire, and make it both to
flame more vehement and last longer and spread farther; whiles every one
remains so inveigled and addicted to his own way, that he execrates all the
rest, and cannot let fall a good word for any, or acknowledge a truth in them:
but Popery, the devil of Popery we are so transported with the hatred of it,
that we could tear it in pieces with our teeth. My dislike therefore of such
mistakes and ungrounded rancour, and the love I bear to a right understanding
urge me to attempt, what I see in this way no others go about, a mitigation of
groundles but dangerous animosities. I had the very same good purpos when I
wrote the Reclaimed Papist, but Satan hindered me in that: and I am resolved
now once again for the good of my Country which I dearly love, to try if I can
compass it another way.

But I am finally inflamed to this work by a sight of his Majesty's most
gracious Speech, together with the Lord Chancellors, unto the two houses of
Parliament upon their adjournment in September 1660. where one may evidently
see our Sovereigns most earnest and even groaning desire of a moderate and
prudent comportment in this Land one of us toward another according to the
dictamen of our Christianity and right reason in these matters of Religion,
together with a promis of his utmost endeavors to our general satisfaction,
if we in the interim could but have charity one toward another till he may
understand how to please us all. Could wisdom and goodness it self desire ought
of us, that might either be more facil or rational or more pleasing than that
we should be good to our selves. And who would not endeavor to his power what
he sees so great a Prince desires, as a thing necessary to the welfar of our
Land, which for want of this moderation has been lately so miserably harassed
and undone.

My Lord Chancellors words upon his Majesty's suggestion are these. There are
two other particulars which I am commanded to mention, which were both
mentioned and commended unto you by his Majesty in his declaration from Breda;
the one for confirmation of sales or other recompens for purchases, the other
for the composing of those differences and distempers in Religion, which have
too much disturbed the peace of the Kingdom. Two very weighty particulars, etc.
For the first his Majesty has not been without much thought, etc. the other of
Religion is a sad argument indeed. It is a consideration that must make every
religious heart to bleed, to see religion which should be the strongest
obligation and ciment to affection and brotherly kindness and compassion, made
now by the pervers wranglings: of passionate and froward men the ground of all
animosity hatred malice and revenge. And this unruly and unmanly passion which
no question but the divine nature exceedingly abhorres sometimes and I fear too
frequently transports those who are in the right as those who are in the wrong,
etc.

These be the learned Chancellors words (set down more at large in the last of
my book) so grave discreet and patheticall, that if they were seriously
pondered as they deserv, might suffice to put us to a stand even in the highest
carreer of our most uncharitable animosities upon Religions account. How many
ways does the honorable Orator turn himself to move us to our own welfar;
how wisely does he select his to picks, how sweetly unites, how vigorously
presses, ab essentialibus, ab effectibus, a contrariis, ab inconvenientibus, a
dissimilibus, etc. to this effect;

Religion is the ciment of affection; must or can that be the ground of malice?
Surely that is an evil passion, by what ever name it be entitled, that
transports as well those that are in the right as those that are in the wrong
unto effects in every right judgment injurious and hateful to the divine
nature. Not strangers, but allies and friends, and men otherwis of most
agreeable natures, under this color of religion and by it, become first
unsociable then uncharitable; first half friends then full foes, not for any
harm either of word or deed, but only a disparity of thoughts, such thoughts
too as concern not one another, but only pass betwixt man and his maker; nor
is it because one man will not, but because he cannot think as another does. And
God himself must patronise these our uncharitable divisions, whiles purely for
his sake we hate one another heartily: we hate even to death such as otherwis
be our dearest friends, for his sake and upon his account who commands us to
love our enemies; and enmity is our utmost profession in the mannaging of his
Religion, who told us himself that the fulfilling of his whole law is Love. The
primitive Christians were in all judgments good ones; and yet their badge and
practis quite contrary to ours: theirs was love and peace even to the
admiration of their enemies, ours hatred and war even to the confusion of our
friends; they died for, we by one another; they by the virtue of their Religion
cimented together who before by affection and blood stood far divided, we by
ours do separate in all we were before conjoined; theirs made new friendship,
ours dissolves the old. But when the honorable Lord Chancellor adds in the
close. This disquisition has cost the King many a sigh many a sad-hour: What
honest heart would not at that word be ready to burst asunder? Is that great
princely innocence contristated by my self ruinous disorder? Far be it from me
to sadden that royal breast, in which the Almighty sits and swaies over me for
my good.

My Reader be pleased to understand that I intend not directly in this my
dicours, to justify or judge any opinion, but only to show that wars and
enmities upon such an account between neighbors is neither pious nor
rational. But the acroamatick part which would prove our contentions about
Religion to be irrational fills up the book; the moral which shows them to be
unconformable to true piety and virtue is compendiously finished in the
concluding paragraff. And if I do let fall words that may favor any one
opinion or way more than another; it is only for this end, that I may thereby
allay the heats of the other side which is intemperatly set against it more
then any else; if to depress any, it is to abate the excessive both conceit we
have of it and faction for it without any just cause: that so the oppressed may
be a little eased and raised up, and the oppressor checked by his own
conscience; which is the only way of introducing equallity of thoughts and
unanimity amongst us. And when we are once persuaded to think more moderately
of that side we have hitherto hated, and to discern some uncertainty in the
other we so much doted of; so that our affection may rise where before it was
too low, and where it was too high there begin to fall, and that a smoothnes
and equability may appear once in us, then we shall be pretty well disposed to
a right understanding and peace. St. John Baptist the great precursor of the
worlds Messiah, whose office was to prepare mankind to receiv him, had nothing
else to do for that purpos but only this very thing; as if this kind of
smoothnes and equability in men's affections were the best and only preparation
unto the grace and peace of Jesus Christ within us. The voice of a Crier in the
desert says the Prophet Isaias, prepare the way of our Lord, make the ways
level, every valley shall be raised up, and every mountain and hill shall be
brought down, and crooked things shall become straight, and rough make smooth,
and then all flesh shall see the salvation of God.

My matter is perceived by the prefixed general contents of my five chapters.
1. There is not any color of reason or just title, to move us to quarrel and
judge one another with so much heat about Religion. 2. All things are so
obscure, that no man in prudence can so far presume of his own knowledge, as to
set up himself a guide and leader to his neighbor in Religion. 3. No Sect has
any advantage at all over another, nor all of them together over Popery. 4. All
the serverall kinds of Religion here in England are equally innocent to one
another; and Popery as it stands in opposition to them is absolutely innocent
and unblamable to them all. 5. As there neither is nor can be any rational
motive for disputes and animosities about matters of Religion; so is there an
indispensable moral cause obliging us unto moderation, if we either consider
the various incommodities of hatred and rancour, or the large sweetness and
convenience of charity and peace.


My method I do purposely conceal, to keep therein a more handsome decorum; for
he that goes about to part a fighting fray cannot observe a method, but must
turn himself this way and that, as occasion offers, be it a corporal or mental
duel. So did good St. Paul in his epistle to the Romans, which of all his other
letters as it has in it most of solidity, so has it least of method in the
context. The reason is, because it was intended to allay some heats and feudes
that were risen in Rome amongst the converted Jews and Gentiles there, who
began after their conversion to upbraid and disable one another (as such
childish heats will rise) with their former unworthines. The converted Jew
esteemed himself the better man, because his Nation was Gods chosen from the
beginning, out of which the Messiah came, and the Jews were in a continual
succession both before their conversion to Christianity and after it, still
Gods servants. The converted Gentile on the other side maintained, that he had
notwithstanding the darkness of his condition so worthily behaved himself even
by the mere light of reason that God was pleased of his love he therefore bore
him to call him to the light of Gospel, to serve that Lord of glory whom the
Jews had crucified. S. Paul to end this quarrel turns himself to and fro,
first on this side, then on the other, as occasion presented it self; and
finding the parties resolute in a question hard to decide as it was stated, and
both so deeply engaged that they could not easily be reconciled, that he might
the better part them he knocks them both down; and he dissipates all pretenses
of their own worthiness, to the end they might both of them have recours to Gods
mercy which was equally showed to both, and so have peace among them selves.

This is the occasion and end and sum of that Epistle; which it seems our
Ministers some of them do not understand, otherwis they would not cull out of it
so many various texts against the Christian doctrine of good works and their
merit, so absolutely impertinent to that purpose, that I cannot but be ashamed
to see grave men to defend the cause so frivolously. the works, whose merit S.
Paul disables there, were apparently such as were don before conversion, of
which the abettours would have those works to be the cause, works acted in
Judaisme and Paganism, without Christ, without the assistance of his grace,
without his command, without his promis of reward for them, end consequently
without any acceptablenes they might have upon those grounds. But what is all
this to the disabling of Christian good works, don in Christ, by his special
grace, out of obedience to his command, with a promis of everlasting reward,
and intrinsic acceptability thence accrewing. Look if Gospel do not make out
Christian merit in this point; see if do no clearly speak forth both Christ's
word commanding, his grace assisting, his love accepting, and the riches of his
goodness crowning all such good works don in him for his love with eternal
reward. Come ye blessed for I was hungry, etc. But this only by the way.

The occasion then of that sacred epistle being manifestly to make peace
between two stickling barrettours, as it required a great judgment and spirit
in the author to write it well, so could it admit but little of method in its
progres. And a man may easily discern that the Apostle turns himself now
against the Jew, then suddenly against the Gentile, then to the Jew again;
still disabling all the utmost they could either of them do, or pretend to do
before their conversion, as any way of ability and power to merit either it, or
the grace and life they had by it. And it is to be noted too, that whereas the
Jew had three times more of plausibility on his side than the Gentile had, St.
Paul speaks least against him that was the weakest side and most oppressed; but
where he checks the Gentile once, he rebukes the Jew three times: and never
lins till he had laid his insulting in the dust. So proper it is to an
ingenuous nature to withold the strong domineering party, that the weaker and
oppressed may gather a little heart, and discern himself at least in as good a
postur as his antagonist. Now my purpos since it is very like that of the good
Apostles, I shall not I hope be blamed for imitating so great a Doctor in his
method.

And although to every one of my five chapters I do adjoin some general
contents, as I have said; yet are they not to be looked upon as confined to
that place, but that other matters will in each chapter and its several
paragraffs occurr; and also those very contents be elsewhere hinted at: for I
do intermingle my topics, according as they seemed at any time conducing to
the right understanding I aim at; which I have don on purpos to keep up the
appetite, and refresh it with variety: So in tastes an olla has that good
relish, which all the things contained in it without that general mixture and
seasoning would never have apart. My Reader will see also, that somthings are
but slightly touched, which he would think ought to have been more seriously
prosecuted; some again he will imagine too prolix, others too often to appear and
too suddenly to vanish, like Virgills ghost. Omnibus vmbra locis adero: and all
so interwoven, that in one paragraff it can hardly be guessed what is to be
handled in the next. These and other such things which many may dislike I have
a reason for; and I hope my reader whose profit and pleasur I only wait upon
will give me leav to use it: A seasonable gentle air invites men abroad whom a
strong wind would have kept within doors; and I hope this my familiar discourse
may move many of my countrymen who would not have looked upon solid and studied
controversies, to read and perhaps recover that good disposition of mind I wish
them, even with their own pleasur and good liking. Our land this last twenty
years has been in a chaos of confusion, a Tohu and Bohu, without either form
or order, and we all find our selves in a mist, in a wood, in a darkness almost
invincible by our several divisions and subdivisions of parties in the way of
Faith. But I hope, that by the help of this Discourse which is intended as a
general light unto all Books, Sermons, or Controversies whereby people are
drawn into so many several distracting opinions, we shall find the way out at
least know where we are: My order and phrase be suited to the present times,
but the matter and purpos concealed in it of a lasting concernment: Qui legit
intelligat. This is all I have to prefate, and I wish no more but truth and
peace to all and to the whole Israel of God.

FIAT LVX.
First Chapter. There is no color of reason or just title may move us to
quarrel and judge one another with so much heat about Religion.
. 1. Diversity of feuds.
THe applaus and honor of this world is a thing desired and pleasing to all
persons, from the Prince in the court to the Peasant in the cottage; even as
wealth and place by which it is achieved. Nor is there one of a thousand that
follows not the inclination, to the end be may attain it in that degree his
condition is capable: and they get it some by chance of birth and education, some
by industry and worth, some by subtilty and wit. Hence proceed those many high
attempts we so much wonder at in this world, (for arts and trades began at
first through a necessity of food, and the convenience we found in mutual
society) such attempts I mean as were apt to lead the vulgar into a fit of
admiration; as be the two great excellencies of power and knowledge, and their
great achievements, that for defense of laws and kingdoms, this for the
adornment of nations and purer pleasurs of more refined intellects. And both of
these have many branches and kinds, and each has a diversity of graduall
perfections. He that cannot sway a Province, will tirannise in his Parish, and
if he cannot appear abroad, will domineere in his own house: so likewise on the
other side, what glory the emulous Plebeian sees given to higher spirits for
sciences they cannot reach, or for a supervisorship of Religion they may not
hope for, this by the contempt of the one and reformation of the other do they
go about to compass in the world, first by words and pen (if they can write)
then, if they multiply and grow strong enough, by rude force and violence: and
still the pretens for all is cleanly and fair washed over; that applaus and
glory may both accompany strengthen and crown the design.

What strange things have been attempted by emperors and great captains and
commanders upon earth all histories make mention, and it is a pleasant
speculation to consider it. But the method and several wais of enhancing fame
by inventions and discoveries of truths prosecuted by contemplativ heads, what
and how various they have been in the Pagan world, we may in part gather out of
Aristotle, Plato, Lucretius, M. Tullius Cicero, and some other few monuments yet
kept amongst us. What they have been in the Christian world lives more fresh in
our memories: but these are of two sorts; one in explication and defens of
faith against all opposition possible to be made by any kind of adversaries,
Jew, Heretic, or Pagan; and this has been the emploiment of the most sublime
eagles that ever the Christian Church had, S. Austin, Magister sententiarum,
Alensis, S. Thomas Aquinas, Bonaventure, Gandavensis, Scotus, and the like: The
other in opposition to faith, which rose up in several ages for the exercise
of this mystic Body who was in his own person not only opposed by outward
adversaries but deserted by his own.

I love those eminent Pagan wits: and this commendation they have that they are
our first masters in all our Sciences; that they performed what they undertook
to write most solidly acutely and exactly both for judgment clearnes and
method; and thirdly that they confuted one another (for they were divided in
opinions as well as we, and it was expedient they should be so) not in reviling
words, as we Christians do, but in sober and purest reason; although the
arguments of their discourse inferred sometimes very little to the confutation of
an adversary, because they often proceeded upon several principles not ever
rightly understood, or at least for more particular advantage wilfully mistaken.

And in this method of sobriety do our two great Scholars the Lawyer and
Physician write, when they put forth treatises either one body of art against
another, or one member and person in particular against another in the same
body: So likewise did our subtle Schoolmen proceed five hundred years ago,
with no less sweetness of spirit than profundnes of reason; whose intention was
to explicate and defend Christianity even in the way of Aristotle's Philosophy,
by which the Pagans had for a thousand yea^ opposed it to the much prejudice of
Christian Religion, which the Priests and Doctors of ancient times would not
undertake to defend by a Philosophy they found so much tending to atheism, and
in so many things falls, that is to say contrary to the principles and faith
they had received from Jesus, whose word they preferred before all the
Philosophers reasons in the world.

These Schoolmen divided into diverse branches by occasion of a several
interpretation of Aristotle, either in the way of S. Thomas of Aquin the
Dominican, whose doctrine for the most part was followed in Cambridge, or of
subtle Scotus the Franciscan whose chair was at Oxford. And in other parts of
the Christian world they had their chairs erected according either as chance or
favor pleased. But all was then don with no less exact charity than sublime
reason: for they had nothing else to do in their Schools, but only by argument
and disputation to try the grounds and solutions, whether if a Pagan himself or
others antagonist whose person every opponent represents, should dispute
against them, they could then be able to come off in their defensions with
applaus and honor and without prejudice of their Faith.

But when we come to view the opposite judgments in matters of religion
commonly called heresies, especially in this last age, (for the rest before
these days have perished by the prevalency of one party against which all the
rest bandied together) as these be very gross and homly disputes so are they
managed on the opponents side with so much unseemly behavior, such unmanly
expressions, that discreet sobriety cannot but loath and abhor to read them.
Not reason but defiances, not charity but execrations, not subtilties but
downright defamations, not civil respect but vilest disesteem, not cool
persuasion but precipitous condemnation fills each page we look on, and fire
and stones fly about where meeknes peace and charity should most appear.

And all these religion-disputes whether we consider the subject they are
about, or the manner they are handled, or the distracting variety into which
they run concerning faith revealed (which can be but one) I do not see what
other effect they can have upon mankind but to subvert all civil respect and
charity, and good manners, and laws and kingdoms where they come. For no man is
content if he pretend to have discovered a new way of religion, unless all
other men embrace it, and press and pulpit must ring with loud cries against
all that do not be they neighbors or superiors, until the sword it self be
sharpened in our hands for battle. Thus beginning with the spirit we end with
the flesh.

It is not my meaning to interpose in any particular controversy whose
multitude has already made the world to nauseate, but to hold up my discourse
in such general terms, as I shall think may serve, if we lay our hands upon
our heart, and ponder them with a Christian seriousnes, so many of us as be now
uncharitably bent against our neighbor, somewhat to allay and mitigate the
many flaming heats of discord raging here in England, as much or rather more
than any other country for opinions concerning faith; which as they are taken
up at first upon self-conceit interest as experience has sufficiently shown,
so are they upon all rules of Christian virtue and prudence if we ever mean to
be happy, to be deposed. Be not many masters, for where all would sway there
none obey, and so ruin and mischief must needs follow.

The difficulty is, I know not how to express the parties in this
religion-feud, that I may not offend: for so bitterly is each side bent against
the other, that they will not endure to have them called by their own names.
But I notwithstanding should deem it not only a civility but a due debt so to
do; for that is every ones name by which himself will be called, and not what
an enemy gives him. The Protestant is such a one, and so to be named, though
his foe on one side surname him Papist, and his adversary on the other call him
heretic; so the Catholic likewis by his junior foe is called Papist, by his
elder enemy, a Galilean; and although he may if he will, yet do not think him
bound to answer either to that appellation or this, and therefore if I behave my
self civilly toward him, I can use neither.

And as it is for nomination of persons; so likewis for the verities of their
opinions, no party will endure that any one truth of the other side should be
acknowledged, and he that shall do it will be looked upon as a common enemy by
the rest: Insomuch danger is even ordinary neighborhood and civility amongst
us, when these feuds are once raised. I have known good Protestants endangered
these times of our civil wars for calling their neighbor (of whom they had
occasion to speak) by the name of Catholic, whereas according to the usual
language of the feud he should have said Papist. So strangly are we incensed in
these matters. Even our good nature is changed: for Englishmen have been
thought in the opinion even of foreign nations the fairest conditioned and
best natured people in Europe, whereas now these religious feuds have made us
the very worst. The Hollander, what a kind of man he is by nature it is well
enough known; and yet in this piece of prudence and civellity he excels us
beyond compare: their towns do often exhibit in one and the same street; here
a Jew, there a Christian, Lutheran, Calvinist, or Catholic; and yet all these
convers together without any rancour or misprision at all, heeding without any
thought or consideration of their opinions only the moderation and common
honesty they use in their contracts, which if it be good, all is well that
concerns neighbors; for the rest let God judge. And in every house they serve God
each one in his own way undesturbedly, without fear of penal law, danger of
pillaging, vexation of pursuivant, harrassing of soldier, any ill looks or
maledictions or heart burnings at all upon that account. This comportment is
more manlike, it is more Christian, it is far more gentile and honorable than
the contrary in the judgment of any discrete sober man in the world: and yet in
all other respects that be commendable how far does the Englishman exceed the
Hollander?

Witty observing travelers have noted that all other Nations besides ours, can
admit of several opinions or reformations without hazarding their wits; but we
and only we loos ours; and the testimony is too true. Indeed to undermine the
place and dignity of such as maintain an old religion or science is a piece of
some kind of ingeniousness or industry; but to do it with rancour disturbance
and ruin, this carries with it neither ingenuity nor any reason at all: if the
thing be good, by a supervening hatred and uncharitablenes the good work is
infected; if it be ill, the malignity is doubled. But charity covers a multiude
of sins.

. 2. Ground of quarrels.
THe nois and tumults that be in the world are partly about things known,
partly about things unknown, accordingly as men apply their spirits to the one
or the other; the intent and aim of all men in these their heats, being in
truth, whatever they pretend, (and the pretens is ever colored over) no other
thing but an affectation of power and tyranny over other men.

The known things about which we do so much contend, are reduced by a wise man
unto these three heads; concupiscence of flesh, concupiscence of eyes, and
pride of life; expressing by an usual metonimy the object by the act: and he
adds, that, this is all the world contains, namely in order to the worldly or
sensual man's desire: for a worldly temptation must needs be one of these; and
about some of these is all our worldly emulations conversant, the concernment
either of our pleasurs or wealth or honor. Unto concupiscence of flesh belongs
all that is apt to pleas the lower senses of Touch Taste and Smell; which be
versed in the more tangible employments of nutrition, vegetation, and
generation. To concupiscence of the eyes all that may delight the upper senses
of sight and hearing; as gold, silver, chains, jewels, costly attires, dresses,
furnitures of rooms, delicious walks and gardenings, music, applaus of men,
and the like. To pride of life, the things that tickle the inward senses and
imagination, as great titles, large retinue, offices and command of state, with
all worldly superiority. These are the things that inflame mankind to so many
combustions in this world; each man thrusting forward and crowding to be first,
in that he proposes to himself as the object of his chief content. The feud
began with the world, and will not wholly ceas so long as it lasts in its
present state of corruption: tho it has been in some times and places much
mitigated by virtue of a religion which Jesus our Lord planted upon earth on
very purpos to slake this hellish fire.

And it is to be observed that the Tempter (as it is recorded by one of the
Evangelists) assaulted even the very sacred Person of our Lord himself with one
of all these three temptations; according as he thought meet to make chois of
some one of each, that might best correspond unto such a conceived person in
those circumstances of time and place he either found or put him in. He found
him in the desert hungry; and there, Command that these stones be made bread,
as it was a temptation of carnal concupiscence most befitting the time and
place, so is it of that kind such a one as might seem least unbefitting such a
person, being of all the most innocent, especially to a hungry man. Upon the
battlements of a high church, in the face of a populous city, who might behold
and admire at his miraculous preservation and sanctity, Jacta te deorsum, leap
down, was a temptation belonging to concupiscence of eyes, in order to vulgar
applaus; nor would it appear so manifestly evil to do such a thing in the face
of the multitude, who seeing his safety might look upon him him ever after with
greater honor and respect, as lord of the very Angels who stood about to guard
him in so dangerous a precipice. In the prospect of the world, All these things
will I give thee, was a congruous temptation, and clearly pertinent to pride of
life; but joined with a condition manifestly sinful, (whereas the two former
were but such in lesser circumstances, and of them the first in the least) If
thou will fall down and worship me, which Satan annexed here, not so much out
of any hopes he could have to bring that person to such a sin, whole constancy
he had already tried; as to speak forth and express the ordinary way by which
men do generally arrive unto their height of dignities, wealth and honor in
this world: they dissemble, they sacrifice their conscience, they bow their
heads, they fall down and worship Satan, and so take from him their livery and
seisin, their haec omnia tibi dabo.

What heats are raised about these things in the world betwixt man and man, in
city and country, so thick, so general in all places, to set down with pen and
ink it is impossible they be so many, and also superfluous they be so obvious.
And from whence are all these wars intestin and foreign, domestic and civil,
personal and national, be they not from our concupisence? it is not to be
denied. And so long as there is concupisence in the world, these things will
be, or at least a motion toward them. Nor is it my present purpos to dissuade
any thing in this kind, after the endeavors of so many thousand sacred
persons, apostles, prophets and doctors, who have both by their example and
doctrine endeavored incessantly the eradication of the sinful weed. But happy
is that man in whom the three fold members of concupiscence are become through
his care and industry over himself either quite dead, or at least expiring; for
he only lives, and lives like a man, and is free.

The other noises (which is the subject and matter of this my present
consideration) are the many clashing opinions about God and religion: an empty
aerie business as I think ere long will appear, a ghostly fight, a skirmish of
shadows, or horsemen in the clouds: and yet it is prodigious to speak what real
heart-burnings, what deadly rancour it breeds in men's minds, and what a deluge
of mischief it causes in the world. It is a thing I have often and deeply
considered, not without horror and commiseration.

The result of my thoughts herein is thus much: surely, there is something
invisible over man, and stronger and more politic than he, that does this
contumely to mankind, that casts in these apples of contention amongst us,
that hisses us to war and battle, as waggish boys do dogs in the street, which
being once set on tear and devour one another, upon no other cause or motive
than that impulsion. For how else could it possibly come to pass, that a company
of men altogether unknown to one another, in several places, grabs,
constitutions; employments, ages, and educations, should all of a sudden, no
man knows how rise up conspire and jump together in a conceit before unthought
of, and to all other men besides themselves improbable, so unanimous and
vigorously, as to put all to a hazard for its defense and propagation, will or
nill the whole world that may dislike it, with such heat of earnestnes as is
never seen to appear in any known good thing. Can this be any thing else, than
an impression made upon us by some invisible substance or doemon; that by this
aerie phantosme inflames us one against another unto our utter worrying and
devouring, unto whom our deadly feuds arising thereon, may happily give no less
content and sport then dogs fighting in the streets to wanton boys that set
them on. This we may suspect at least; and if we do, methinks it should make
our pens and weapons drawn for the maintenance of our fansy fall out of our
unwary hands. And is it otherwise possible, that any faction in the world
should not have the capacity to think, that as they judge and condemn all the
world besides themselves, so also by all the rest of the world are they
themselves judged: and can they not see it as ridiculous in themselves to judge,
as in another whose judgment they contemn, and as easily suspect themselves, as
they do censoriously disesteem their neighbor, whom they cannot but acknowledge
to be in other things their equals, there elders oftentimes in age, superior
happily in natural parts, more eminent in birth and breeding, equally subjects
of our common creator, and happily in all civil respects their betters. Is not
this prodigious? and what can it rationally be attributed unto, but some
malign substance invisible, that makes a fool of mankind? Are not men blasted?
Are they not enchanted. I should think nothing else can be said for it: and
therefore they run and fling, and turn up tail, and snuff the wind, and
hoof-beat the earth, and bellow to battle, as if they were stung with gad
flies. But let us use moderation, God dwells not in a whirlwind. If every one
would but once begin to suspect himself as in all prudence he may, the business
were half ended, and a right under standing very forwardly on.

. 3. Nullity of title.
FOr the things of this world why men should contend so much, the reason is
enough apparent: we live, and our being is supported by them. Nor is it an
easy thing, especially if men do not apply themselves unto very serious
consideration, to distinguish between things necessary and superfluous, or to
know when we have enough.

But that we should struggle so much about opinions, even unto blood and utter
ruin sometimes of whole Kingdoms, except it be don in order to the things of
this world, wherein we labor by such means for a greater share than otherwis
would happen to us, or that the wicked fiend is in it, no satisfactory reason
in the world can be given.

For tell me, I pray you Sir that struggle so much and so earnestly for the
propagation of your opinion; What good is it that I should think as you do? Is
it for your own interest, or for mine? If your own, I am not bound to serve your
fansy, or inslave my understanding to your pleasur; if for mine, I thank you
for your good will, but refuse your service. Although you may have a thought
concerning God or nature, perhaps better than mine, (if I have any) or worth my
hearing, if I have none; yet can you not rationally think either that you are
bound in justice to communicate it unto me, or I to embrace it? There is
nothing but charity to urge you, which is neither obstinate nor seditious; nor
does any law of justice oblige me to accept of your favor if you offer it;
since every one stands as free in himself either to refuse or accept a good turn
proffered by another, as that other to present it. Will you urg and force me to
be of your opinion, which perhaps I look upon either as of no concernment at
all to me or false? And who made me your vassail? So great a vassail as to
command my thoughts; and those too, which are versed not about your self or me,
but our common creator, and his works and providence; which if they be
rectified in you by any light to me unknown, enjoy your own happiness, I envy it
not; leav me to my self as I do you, and do not importunely against the very
laws of right reason obtrude a courtesy upon him that likes it not, nor thinks
it so. Had you any true charity for me, you would not disturb my peace, which
even in your own judgment is one of our greatest goods, for an opinion of yours
which you cannot but see to be in my judgment of so little valiew. Let it be
what it will, a forced favor is an affront: force but a dog to eat or drink
when he has not a list to it, and see but how that very poor beast will take
it. Are not you and I worms of the earth both of us, and equally subject unto
that sours of light which is above? Why then should you go about to persuade me
to take my influence from your body, which is of no less opacity than mine own?
You are enlightened, you say, and have received a truth which I want. First you
are assured no more than my self that it is a truth; and although you may think
you be, one man's word is in this thing I am sure as good as another; and if
you have received it, and it be such, can you not be happy alone as well in
this as other things, or permit your neighbor to walk as well naked of truth
as clothes or other necessaries, which you will never thrust upon any, although
your self never so much abound and he want: if I do want your truth, my want if
it be any harm, it is mine own not yours. But let it be a truth received, is
therefore the whole course and order of the Univers changed? Why may not I have
that light if any such thing it be, from that general superior cause whence
you received it? it cannot be wrought in me without him, why may it not by him
without you as well in me as your self? How are you become of a sudden unto me
a star of influence, who was the other day a portion of the same earth and
darkness with me?

But now you begin to be angry, that I will not admit of the happiness you bring
me: and are you so indeed? then by your favor your proposition was made to me
not from charity but pride not unto my good but slavery: because I am really
perhaps above you, there must be a trick invented to bring me under in conceit;
and to captivate his understanding who is in power and ability your betters:
thus shall you get a dignity by the shadow of your fansy, where you could not
appear by any demonstration of real and apparent worth. But now grown more
wroth, you call me bruit beast, and dog and imp of darkness: and so you break
forth out of the cloud you walked in, and the sheepskin broken, the true face
of a wolf is seen; it was pride not charity that spoke in you; you offered to
give to me, in hopes I should thereupon fall down and worship; upon my refusal
you claw me with your curses; a sign that your proposal was not for my good
but your own, to work a glory not in me but over me, and to boast your self in
my conquest. If you had been born my Prince you could not have commanded my
thoughts, do you think by commanding them to make your self one? Content your
self. Puffing gusts of new fancies under what pretens soever they com (new
reason, new light or new revelation in any particular person) are for their
very violence to be suspected. When I hear any to censur all mankind, and to
disparage all judgments but his own, I begin then to think worse of his than
all others; for true knowledge walks not with universal contempt. If the way be
indeed of God, peace and meeknes will accompany it at least in the first
teacher. God resides not in tempests, nor does even he himself force man's will.
The very Gospel and volum of our Christianity was not thrust upon us, but
gently put into our hands upon our own good liking, by persuasion of miracles
and words of peace.

I suppose we are severed you and I as well in soul as body; nor is my soul any
more than body any part of you; how comes it then, that being so carles of my
body which you do see you are so zealous of my soul you see not? You are no
more to answer for me herafter in another life, than you eat and drink for me
in this; nor partake there more than here either of my weal or woe. But your
charity urges you forsooth for my future good, and how coms it then so dead and
senceles of my present. There be many ways of help you might afford me in this
life, in order to my welfar in it; if you heed me not in all these distresses
which you see and I feel, what esteem can I have of your pretended wellwishes
in a state imaginary abroad, for charity if it be true begins at home.

I have reason to think that God is as good to me as he is to you, and will
afford me as many helps of light and reason as another: if not, he has left me
at least in my own power to choos my guide, which shall be such a one as I
shall judge aforehand to be wiser than my self. All vassailage is against nature,
and when any man enters upon it on his own accord, it is upon some hopes of a
foredeemed greater good than without it he could have had; but it cannot be so
thought without an imagined precedence in the guide we fix upon. Now there is
no captivity more eminent than that of the understanding, which therefore is of
all others to be most spontaneous and rational, and without either temerity or
force; but it is rashness in me and not reason, to trust my self to the conduct
of a man I know to be as ignorant as my self, and destitute of all authority
over me in those affairs, without either conviction of reason or motive of
miracle; and for him to raise any mutiny against me, thereby to compel to the
obeisance of his thoughts whom he has no reasons to persuade, is a force too
too brutish and contrary to all laws both of God and reason. I may indeed if
I pleas submit to your direction: but can I do this in reallity and earnest,
unles beforehand I conceiv more of wisdom to be resident in you, than I find to
be in my self? Can any Pilgrim yield up himself to the guidance of a person he
has no reason to think more skillful in the ways than himself is, and if upon
his refusal to follow, that person should offer violence and either drag him
by force into the way himself shows, or offer to cut his throat for refusal,
would you esteem such a directour to be the Pilgrims friend or a thief and
robber. Because you cannot master my thoughts and make me a vassail to your
conceits, which I am so far from judging rational, that I cannot but think
them both impious and senceles, you will therefore take upon you to master my
estate and life: and perhaps only to effect this you pretend the other: what is
this but robbery and murder commenced upon a pretens of charity? There be some
thieves in the world that will not assault a traveller, till they have offered
him as a preparative to their convenience, the sight of some curiosity to stand
and demurr upon: I heard once of an honest traveller who in this manner gave
thirty pieces of gold for a hare offered him in his journey by a seeming
country man to buy for his supper, choosing rather against his judgment to
make such a market than to dye for his obstinacy; but is this a good and
commendable violence? Shall we prais these actions or do like to them? God
forbid.

You look upon me as an accursed thing without the belief and light you walk
by: And why so? What if I think the like of you, for that very falls light and
belief you boast of? If I do it not, learn virtue of me, that so you may the
sooner persuade me to com to you for knowledge. And how coms it to pass you do
so look upon me? Are you a Christian? So am I. Have you meditated seriously
upon the promises of Gospel, and hopes of a future resurrection? I have don so
too: have you lived justly soberly and piously in this world, expecting our
blessed hopes in the coming of our Lord Jesus in glory? I do the same; and if
I may speak on word secundum insipientiam perhaps more, in mortification more
frequent, more abounding in charity, more constant in the integrity of all my
dealings, more chaste and sober, less entangled in this present world, or any
affections thereof, more affected to my maker and redeemer, and I am persuaded,
that God does inhabit and dwell within me. Why then do you trouble me? he was
of another spirit who said, Siquis aliter sentit, Deus ipsi and hoc revelabit:
He that never judged amiss in points of Religion had so much meeknes in him, as
to conceit if any one in this or that particular thought otherwis than himself,
that God either had or would reveal it him, and so abstained from censuring;
whereas you condemn all men that think not as you do, who for aught I know think
aright of nothing.

The very true belief and right judgment of things, whence is it, or how come
we by it? If it be man's own operation, you cannot tell but that I have it. If
it be Gods work, you cannot blame me if I have it not; his gifts are free and
dispensed as himself pleases: Am I in fault or do I deserv to be vexed and
harassed by my neighbor, because the Kings majesty has not given me a chain of
gold? Whether he has promised it or no, I am sure the performance is only in
his hand, and my duty being don I cannot in justice be either checked or beaten
for default of the donary, which is to com only from above; and if my King or
God detain it, it is a virtue in me to be resigned and think he has a reason
for it although I know it not; and that I have it not, may be indeed my misery,
but not my fault.

St. Paul having severely chid the people of Corinth in his first Letter he
wrote to them for their many disorders, and some such like dissentions (though
in a far inferior degree) as ours in England be, and their great obstinacy and
feuds thereupon, with variety of pious rhetoric upon every subject they so
contentiously disagreed in, insinuated at last; that whatsoever they might
pretend for those their various Schisms, from the power and Spirit of God,
(even as we here do) yet God was not indeed and really amongst them at all; for
God, says he, is not the God of dissension but of peace: and then he adds a
great Oracle, which he left behind him for after ages, to stop all dissentious
feuds that might ever arise in any people about the pre-eminence of doctrine in
Christianity, wherein each one may pretend to be chiefest guide. An a vobis,
says he, verbum Dei processit, an in vos solos pervenit? Did the word of God
proceed from you, or unto you only did it com? as if he should have said, you
have not reason, you people of Corinth, to stand so much upon your opinions in
matters of religion, or to contest so hotly about them to your mutual
disparagements and breach of peace, since the Gospel and word of God neither
came forth from any of you, nor yet did it com only to you, that any of you
should thereby (and otherwis it could not be) presume to be teacher of the rest
in opinions and ways they cannot in their reason approve of, unles they should
prefer your authority before it. Here then is prescribed a most oraculous rule,
both to know whence the right Christian truth is to be deduced in any matter of
doubt, and whose conduct is to be rejected, whatever light or knowledge any one
may pretend by way of privilege, for the obtaining over other men the
preheminencie of a guide or leader. That man or those people who can rightly
challenge a power of leading other men in a way of religion must be such and
only such, as either the word of God came from, or unto whom alone the word of
God came. And it must needs in reason be so; for who should teach us in any
science, or resolv any doubts arising in it, but the master who first showed
it (if any such can be found) or which at first professed it: I ask then all
these our religious duellists, both Anabaptist and Quaker, Presbyterian and
Protestant: Did the word of God com from you, or came it unto you alone? and
unto which of you did it first come, that we may adhere unto that party without
dispute. He from whom it came, must have the primary guidance over all; and he
unto whom it first came, must carry a secondary presidentship over all such as
be derived from him; but which of you is it that can pretend to either. That it
came not alone to either our Puritan or Protestant is evidently apparent, since
by the testimony of the apostle it went forth unto all the ends of the earth:
and indeed our own experience and knowledge of several Kingdoms that be
Christian would sufficiently witness that without any testimony at all: and that
it came not forth from either of them is as manifest as the other, since the
word and Gospel of Christ was in the world many ages before any of those ways
were extant: and the Puritan with all their factions found that word here in
England in the hands of the Protestant, and the Potestant it is well enough
known wrested it from the Roman Catholic, who had lived in it a thousand years
before any Protestant was known or heard of in the Land^ and the catholic
received it from his Papal Pastor or Bishop, the Britain from Pope
Eleutherius, the Saxon from Pope Gregory the Great as all histories witness.
Let us take heed then, we incurr not the censur of mad men, for pretending with
so many furious quarrels both by tongue and pen and sword a precedence in
religion one over another, where according to this great oracle of S. Paul it
is manifest that none of us can have any; nay by this rule we cannot have so
much as truth amongst us, any further then we are conformable unto him from
whom the word of God came, or to them unto whom it first came: and if we make a
strict examine, we shall find that they unto whom the Gospel in this nation
first came, were not either Protestants, Presbyterians, or Independents; and he
from whom it came was one whom all these do hate. Where then is truth, and
which of these duellists has the precedence in it? I mention not the the
Papist or Roman Catholic amongst the rest; both because he raises not troubles
but is on the suffering side, oppugned by all opiniasters of what ever kind
they be, and defamed and vexed by them all, who notwithstanding upon the same
account of religion defame and vex one another, unto the daily disquiet and
overthrow of our Kingdom: as also because I believe he would soon answer the
doubt, and by the test of this great oracle carry away the precedence from us
all, and we all found to have no more truth in us than we have conformity unto
Roman Catholics. Wherefore gentlemen I shall never engage my self in any of
your feudes, (and I would to God none else would do it) till you answer me to
this my question, which I make to you all in general, and to each party in
particular. An a vobis verbum Dei processit, an ad vos solos pervenit, did the
Gospel first com from you, or only to you: If either, tell me which and on
what side it is, and I shall be on that; if neither, I can be of no side, to
follow it as my guide: for though each party may happily have in it some relics
of truth amongst other falls inventions (and all truths are not utterly
abolished on the sudden) yet can no such party hold forth any doctrine I may
safely build upon. That person, or that See, or that congregation from whom the
gospel came, or those people at least unto whom it first came legally delivered
and not extorted and totally accepted without diminishment, commensuratively
unto his mind who sent it, these are the only persons unto whom of divine
right precedence so much belongs, as all that will be of Christ's mystical body
not only may safely, but must universally follow them. But where this body of
men may be, the Pope and Papists from whom and unto whom alone the gospel first
came, being by us concluded under error, is so obscure that I for my part
having lost them cannot find out whom I may safely adhere unto in the opinions
and practices of religion: since none of us in England besides them can
according to this great oracle of St. Paul, pretend any right to guide his
neighbor in those ways. Wherefore it were good wisdom in my judgment to sheath
both our swords and pens, and be at peace, till we can find out a party among
us that can make good this canonical title of pre-eminence; for she that can do
it is the only pure and mother Church, whom all must hear and obey unto: and
all other factions that be unconformable unto that holy Church from whom or
unto whom first the gospel came, are little better perhaps then stark naught.

I cannot see then as yet why we should all of us* Presbyterian, Protestant,
and Independent, inveigh so furiously either one against another within our
selves, or all of us against the Papist: or why upon this account any one
should be puffed up against his neighbor, or hate and prosecute him as an
execrable thing; but that we should rather study mutual comiseration, charity
and peace.

. 4. Heats and resolution.
THere have ever been variety of opinions in the world, and considering the
diversity of our constitution and complexion will ever still be unto the end,
so long as we be left to our selves.

In the small knowledge we have of times past there is enough to certify the
division of minds and opinions in all ages and places. But it is to be noted
that none of these ever submitted to another, nor fell into unity by conviction
of any one reason above the rest? and yet doubtless there was ever some such
reason extant. But they rested notwithstanding at length, like boisterous
whirlwinds after some ages puffing one against another, well broken, tired and
decaying for want of further matter: but that which never fails is truth.

Nor do I find that they used in former times of old among the Pagans, other
weapons offensiv or defensiv in the heats of their opinion-wars, but only pen
and speech. Our Christians, those huge eminent professors of humility peace
and moderation, are the only hotspur opiniasters, and surely the sharpest
darers and eagerest fighters for their self-wills and conceits that were ever
yet brought upon this worlds amphitheater. And as they show the greatest fury;
so do they exhibit the least reason of all controvertists upon earth. For, the
spirit, the light, the Lord, the word, and such like motives of a new fansy,
what can these things signify between men of the same profession, that pretend
all to the same things, but only this, that the Papal chair being once removed
every one may advance his own seat in the place: for all are equally
infallible, equally resolute and unmovable in their decrees. Nor does any ever
heed the invalidity of his motives, not for the most part understand when he is
confuted even by his own weapons; so eager we are and withal impertinent and
resolute.

In truth opinions and controversies once raised were never yet allaied by
reason, nor ever can be: for the first founder and forger of the novelty being
moved thereunto by passion and interest (as in time it proves evident to the
world) put on a resolv never to yield, whether he held forth a natural or
supernatural light as a weapon of his warfar; and therefore he will only be
tried by his own weapon, and that too shall signify nothing but in his own
hand: which is a certain way of victory at least in the eyes of the vulgar whom
he seeks to inveigle, and consequently both of interest and glory to himself.
And let there be never so many opinions, they all overcome.

How shall he be confuted that brings with himself (I mean in appearance and
his own pretens) the Lord or light, or word or spirit, or tradition or reason,
with open defiance to the whole world as utterly devoid of all such helps which
himself and he alone enjoyes in all abundance? confute him that can. Let truth
and wisdom flow like streams from the lips of his opponent, let all sort of
rhetoric conspire to his satisfaction; if he do not laugh at it as empty
sounds and not the true word, as flesh and not spirit, as man and not the Lord,
as darkness and not light, as folly and not reason, as humane inventions and no
divine tradition, let me lose belief for ever. And what end can there be made
of such new started doubts? or where lies the defect or reason of their
indeterminables, but only in the pride and obstinacy of the first prophet and
his disciples, who indeed are not such if they be not self-willed and
self-conceited like himself.

And this may be the reason of that sage advice the Apostle gives to Titus;
Haereticum hominem post unam and alteram correptionem devita, etc. An heretical
man check him once or twice and then avoid him: for he is utterly subverted and
condemned in his own judgment. As if he had said; dispute not with him but
check him, if that will do no good avoid him for he is past hopes. But how is
such a one condemned in his own judgment! and why should we therefore treat no
further with him. Namely, because he knows aforehand in his own heart what ever
he pretend, that out of malice, pride or other passion he holds forth his
novelties, and yet means not to yield or be convicted of it, whatsoever shall
be said against him, because it would put a lettance to his interest and the
unlawful end he aims at either to be subdued or seem to be overcom.

If there were any true respect in the world or esteem of one another; if every
man had but that value of his neigbour which he has of himself, whereas he
has oftentimes reason to have more) then would all these opinion-feuds either
not kindle at all, or be soon extinguished. For although it could hardly be
prevented considering humane constitution, but that odd thoughts and various
whimsies would rise in the minds of men that are left to themselves; yet so long
as they remained inward without issuing forth to life, or as a still-born child
never to walk abroad, all would be well enough betwixt neighbors, and charity
inviolate amongst them. It were a most happy thing, if the fanatic wombs, and
brains of mortals would thus miscarry in the childbirth, and their conceit com
forth still-born: and so indeed it would, did not self-opinion midwife it into
the world and preserv its life.

But as soon as the mind has once conceived of her incubus, she swells
presently with pride, that every vein stretches, and labors hugely to bring
forth; the featous babe when it is once out, does so mightily pleas the dam,
that it is carried from city to city to be shown; and see the wonder within a
small space we have thousands of that opinion all ready pressed to undergo a
martyrdom for the imp; so prone is mankind to delusion. But in the true house
and mansion of Jesus, who is the right and only splendor of divine glory all
this bastardly brood is suffocated, for the most part in the conception by the
spirit of him who resides there, but generally in the birth by the care of
government instituted and observed in that place: and if the harlot do by her
subtilty bring forth and expose her brat to view she flies for it, and the
chattering moon-calf as soon as they can catch it is stifled.

Ith interim there is nothing brought forth so deformed, but it is hugged and
caressed as the fairest of creatures; such self conceit accompanies all these
natural conceptions: go about to convince it to be the seed of satan, and dirt
will be thrown in your face; this is the success and event of all disputes in
religion: no man will ever be confuted, or if really he be, he will not
acknowledge it, not desert his cause; for to seem to be convinced, is to
suffocate his interest and glory with his own hands.

When opinions therefore once rise, there is some reason indeed in Power, but no
power at all in Reason, either to assuage or stifle them: and if they do
multiply, as they are very nimble and volatile, apt to fly and encreas like
fire in dry stubble before a strong wind, then power it self is humbled before
them as unreasonable and senceles, even as before all reason was esteemed
impotent and weak. If princes would seriously lay these things to heart, much
of evil might be prevented in a kingdom.

Let any man think within himself what he pleases; thoughts are free and do
harm to none, but happily to the spirit of himself: but if once having invented a
conceit he go about to compel his neighbors to think as he does, otherwise to
bring upon them vexation and ruin; if he be restles till one of these be don,
and begin to make signs thereof, as symptoms of an approaching earthquake, then
let all men take heed and he especially that sits above the rest, whose care it
is to look to the safety of us all, and all our welfare too is involved in the
peace and safety of himself.

I have often wondered in my self, that since all men's opinions are their own
selfcreated paradises wherein they solace and pleas themselves, why they should
not be content to enjoy their pleasures alone, but are restles till they have
brought all others in to their garden of delight and made them taste of their
fruit. It is not usually so in other delightful pleasures of this world,
whereof all men endeavor to make a monopoly to themselves, if they be more
special delights. And yet after some serious thoughts we may discern a reason
for it upon sight of the great pride which their own words and gestures bewray
in them. They would be as gods unto men, for whom they create out of nothing so
pretty a fansy of pleasure: Another would say, they rather appear like the
serpent in the garden, discovering more as they pretend of Gods secrets than
plain old Adam and Eve ever dreamed of.

Let it be what it will, believe me in this the hieroglyphick is clear; After
God has once settled a Church wherein is the tree of life, if any one
neglecting the things which are ordained for his use and benefit begin to
discover new disturbing secrets not before heard of in the place, let every one
then beware; latet anguis in herba.

5. Motives to moderation.
THree things, if they were seriously considered, would methinks much weaken
selfconceit of our own judgments which obstructs all right understanding in
matters of religion.

First is, the great ignorance our state and condition is involved, concerning
either God in himself, or his works or providence. This is the first. And if
any anticipate and say, that the scripture reveals enough unto us; I answer it
is true, if men would content themselves to use it to that purpose it was
written, for to guide our feet in the practice of solid goodness sobriety and
justice upon a hopes of future bliss promised to all such as shall be sound so
doing in him that revealed it: for this is both the compendium and end of that
holy writ, and it is enough. But if not thinking of this, we use it, as now
generally we do, to raise and strengthen us in new opinions, for which it was
never intended (tho for aught I can see it is the greatest if not the sole use
we make of it) then it rather makes our maze greater then lessens it, and
through our abuse of it puts us besides those truths and ways, which otherwise
we should very patiently and constantly pursue. Whence are all these varieties
of opinions now in England, and the obstinacy each one has in his own, but by
the confident abuse of that sacred book, out of which we throw texts as one
another, as the old -- Tectour Oliver used in his sports to cast carpets and
cushions about the heads of his play mates, and in his feasts apple tarts and
custards, which were never made for that purpose tho he was pleased so to abuse
them for his pastim. Experience has now taught us clear enough, that the
scriptur is a dangerous edged tool to put into the hands of the rude and
boisterous vulgar. A compendious narration of the story and morallity of it, so
ordered unto solid practis, that it were suffered to be used for nothing else
(either for disputes or jesting conceits) kept our English Christian nation for
a thousand years together, so long as it was catholic, in all unity and peace,
and rendered them fruitful in all good works; whereas the whole and very text
now in this last age put into vulgar hands, together with a fore apprehension
and belief of the unmeritoriousnes and unprofitablenes of good works in order
to eternal life, unto which forsooth faith only suffices (which is contrary to
the very genius and end and purpose of Gods word and them that wrote it) has
filled the land with so much wretchlesnes and divisions. And who shall
interpret the scripture to us, to the end it may guide our thoughts without
error? It self? so some say; but then, if we may guess at the nature of it by
the fruits of the interpretation we have from it, what a Chaos of confusion
would it be thought to be; for such be the contradictory interpretations that
are all said to come from it: Shall the Church interpret it? no this is Popish:
and what Church? those in whose hands we found it, or from whose hands we first
had it; if the former, they may be as destitute of power to interpret as our
selves; if the other, then must we return unto the obedience of the Roman
church; for all the world knows we received the gospel first from Rome. Must
neither interpret, but only the spirit and divine light within our selves;
this may be it must teach us to know all things; but what is the thing shall
teach us to know it? how shall we be assured that it is a spirit or light
divine; if we mistake here our pretended light my prove an ignis fatuus and no
less foolish the illumination by it. If we do not know even our own soul and
spirit within us, what it is, how it informs our body, how it works in it all
those several operations of thoughts and corporeal alterations, or whence it
comes, or how it is annexed to us while it stays, why it departs, or whither
it goes (as it is certain we do not) how can we judge assuredly whence such or
such a thought arises in it, from God above or sensual causes, tho it never so
much pretend a divine mission and be transfigured into a shape angelical, or
that any spirit or light within us is truly divine and not fantastical. Do not
the corporeal spirits inflamed by often beating upon an object naturally hammer
forth such odd phantosms in great abundance without either order or measure,
invested all of them in such shapes as the artificer forged himself, without
any other exterior aid but objective representations, which ofentimes so
vigorously represent themselves that from the objects of thought they stand at
length in place of the subject thinking. If any one will not beleev me, let him
but take the pains to make a journey into Bedlam here in London, Paris, and
other Cities, and convers but a while with the mad men there, and then he will
soon find it true? There he shall meet with countesses, captains, bishops,
kings, nor real as themselves imagine, but fantastic and whimsical ones; nay
some one there will pretend to be Christ himself, another the Holy Ghost, a
third God the Father of all things; and what not? and the fansy too is so
strong and prevalent, that the whip may chance at length to beat it out, but
all the reasoning in the world shall not do it.

The second consideration to promote moderation, and consequently to make way
for a right understanding is the sad precipices men have run themselves and
others by their headines and temerarious obstinacy in their opinions and
conceits, even to the utter ruin and depopulation of flourishing kingdoms, as
ancient histories will copiously witness. And if any say, Alas what do you tell
us of those men, they were a self-deluded people; Does not the world say so of
you? Oh but we know the contrary. Just so said they. O but we cannot be
deceived, the truth, the word, the Lord himself cannot lie, heaven and earth
may fail these cannot. This was even their very song. O then if it be so, they
were in the right too! Then you are not, for they were in many things of a
contrary opinion to you all of them, and some in all things. Well well God knows
his elect. It Is true, but you know them not. No not I, why should I not except
I be reprobate? You may be so, walk then in fear. He that has the light must
he not needs see it. If he have it near him he may, so that he be not
hood-winked or blinded with a prejudice: and he may think too he sees it, when
he has it not; I have often waked at midnight, and thought my whole chamber
enlightened, but by and by perceived it was only the glimpses of some natural
luminous spirits not in the chamber, but under my own eyelids which was a
vanishing and false light; and not at all in the place I took it to be. You may
as well say as much of the apostles and prophets themselves. I may so, and
would do it without any fear at all, if I had no other motives of respect to
their words than I have to yours. Com, com if the truth be hid, it is hid to
them that be lost. Be it so, yet still the question will be, whether I be lost
or you, whether you or all mankind beside.

The third consideration is, the genuin and connaturall excellency of a good
Christian man (whether we follow reason or authority in deciphering it) which
consists not in finding new ways to the reformation of other men's thoughts,
but putting in practice the old received well known dictates of sobriety
justice and piety in our selves, with submission unto the direction of such as
delivered them unto us from that one Lord we all worship. Oh but men have
swarved from those ways. Let them; they shall bear their own burden, do not
you swarv and it shall be well with you: themselves and such as were set over
them (as I know you are not) shall render an account for those lost sheep,
whiles you are safe and being innocent have no account to give either for your
selves or others. O but the zeal of the Lords house does eat us up. Good, let not
that zeal of yours eat the Lords house up, and all is well. Away away we cannot
abide bishops and priests and copes and surplices, they are very beams in our
ways. It is is a sign of a weak and ill-affected eye, not to be able to look
upon any thing. You shall not be burdened with the wearing either of the
vestments or titles; and the mere seeing should not be methinks so troublesome.
And yet late experience has made it evident (whatsoever tenderness you may
pretend) that you are able to bear upon your selves even that you pretend you
cannot look upon at a distance: which is an odd kind of riddle. The office of
a priest and bishop (which you say is only to preach) together with his state
and means; this you have not only born very tamely these years of our
confusion but earnestly thrust your selves into it. And is it not a strange
tenderness to sweat under a burden which another man bears, and not to be
troubled at all when we bear it our selves, nay to thrust our selves into it?
their copes dislike you in the Church, but in your own houses they make a
goodly fine show, and their very surplices pleas you well when they are next to
your own skin. What it was that the fox fell out with the lovely grapes, it
appeared afterward when they were seen griped so greedily within his teeth; the
only cause of his dislike and vehement invectivs against them was (and a shrewd
one it was) that himself could not come at them. Nay, nay it is the Popery, it is
that we dislike. If the fox could have spoke, he would have called those grapes
popish too; for now adays all that stands in our way, and all that we would
undermine, and cannot immediately reach, we cry out upon as popery; which is a
sound so inflames the vulgar ears, that they all flock together at that alarm
against father and mother, Prince and neighbor, Church and state without any
further consideration, to the assistance of that cunning wag who by that so
taking a stratagem raised a public help for the working of his own design. The
Popery you say you dislike: This you may do, without disturbing either your own
or other men's peace: there be a thousand thinks I dislike every day, as I walk
along through London streets, which no prudence dictates me to check or seek to
rectify. It is not the custom of a traveller (and we are all pilgrims upon
earth) to cut up bushes or lop hedges that hang in their eyes as they pass; but
peaceably to go beside them, without further nois, or disquiet; and if any
should do otherwise, he would be looked upon as a mad man, and happily run
himself into jeopardy: but what if popery prove at length not to be any evil
thing at all, but good and pious, how ever represented to us all this while as
odious under the bug bear of that name. I know you will startle at this word;
but you would not do so, had you my experience. Christ and his Christianity was
long ago by such invectivs and ignominious appellations, made as odious in the
world as now it can possibly be under the name of popery: insomuch that of the
three, Epicureans, Christians and Atheists (which were generally put together,
as a triplicity of abomination) the professors of Christianity was ever put in
the middle as the most impious of all the three, not only in their lives but in
their opinions and belief; and as such they were dealt with throughout all the
Roman empire for three hundred years together whiles that empire was pagan,
contemned, pillaged, tortured as people of the most wicked profession the earth
ever bore: and all Europ wherein there were even then as many great wise heads,
and as morally honest persons as ever there were in the pagan world believed
it; such power has a popular vogue once raised to the prejudice of any,
especially if authority do constantly conspire to their ruin. It is not my
purpose at this time either to oppugn popery or defend it; for in oppugning it
I may chance indeed to pleas some, in defending it I am sure to pleas no body;
for the Catholics although they know in general that by the name of papist and
popery their persons and professions are aimed at, yet what their adversary
would express by popery when he objects it to them, there is not one catholic
in England understands. If it be an expression of their religigion, they have
no rule for that but the gospel; if of the superstitions, idolatries, murders,
treasons, adulteries, lies, pride, gluttonies, generally put upon them under
that name, they know no such religion. And if popery should be proved in any
part not good, this of episcopacy and their decent ornaments may be no part of
it that is naught: nay whether it be any part of popery at all, not we (who do
not know what popery is) but they who profess it, or at least profess a
religion that is loaded with this name must judge: and these do not acknowledge
our Protestant Bishops or any of their rites (if we mean by popery the religion
they profess) to be any popery at all. Oh but if it be not popery, it is at
least foppery, and we will have it taken away. Be it what it will, have you
peace within your self; if it be any invention of man, it will moulder away as
man's inventions do; if it be either instituted or approved of God, who can
resist him? Be first assured what it is before you attempt to remove it; and
when you are resolved, choose to do it, no by tumult but by ways of peace.
This prudent and honest method of proceeding in such cases as these is well set
down by a Scribe or Justice of Peace amongst the Ephesians upon occasion of the
like uproar. There was made a loud cry of all the people says the sacred text
in the Acts of the Apostles, as it were for two hours together crying out,
great is Diana of the Ephesians (and every man's opinion is his Diana) and when
the clerk of the court, had appeased the uproar, he said, Men of Ephesus, what
man is there amongst us, that is ignorant that the City of the Ephesians is a
worshipper of great Diana and the offspring of Jove; whereas therefore these
things cannot be gainsaid, it behooves you to be quiet and to do nothing
rashly. Ye have brought hither men neither sacriligious nor blasphemers of your
gods. But if Demetrius and the artificers with him have aught against any one,
the courts are open and proconsuls ready, let them accuse one another there: if
ye would any thing further, in a lawful assembly it may be decided; for we are
in danger to be called in question for this days sedition, whereas there is no
one man in so great a tumult, of whom we can give an account as author of this
concours. Thus spoke that wise pagan, and the counsel is very good in all such
cases, whereof this of ours is one. Oh but these bishops do captivate men's
consciences, and take away our Christian liberty, they would force us to a
belief and liking of their ways. Say you so? then you may shake hands, for you
would force them and others to a liking of yours. But we neither can nor will
approve of them. They neither can nor will assent to you. They have no reason
but their own pride. The alledg pride to be all your reason. The spirit and God
that is in us urges us to hate all the works of the devil. So say they, There
is no communion with light and darkness, God and Belial: They say so too; you
will be friends anon. Blessed is he that hates iniquity from his heart. This is
the very subject of their sermons; you are now become one of their disciples We
their disciples? no, we bow not our head to any horned beast. Very good, they
like your resolution, and will not therefore bow their heads to you.

Second Chapter. All things are so obscure that no man in prudence can so far
presume of his own knowledge as to set up himself a guide in religion to his
neighbor.
6. Obscurity of God.
OF the three abovenamed considerations, which being well imprinted in our
hearts I should deem sufficient to put all our animosities to silence, the two
last be rather moral then acroamatick topics, and therefore to be cast with
their fellows into the last paragraff of the book. The first which speaks the
great ignorance our present condition is involved, both concerning God and his
works and providence, requires a little more explicit discourse; and because it
is a speculation very beneficial not only to the purpos I now aim at, but
absolutely in it self, and for several uses of man's life, it shall take up the
three or four following paragraffs. And if all these things (and religion can
be about nothing else but them) both God nature and providence do prove so
obscure, as I find them to be, and I think will to all that ponder the matter
well, evidently appear; what is then the knowledge we boast of, and of which we
are so confident as to prescribe laws every one of us to the whole land, and to
bring all into confusion about it.

He that shall think upon God alone, apart from heaven and earth and every
whatever created substance visible or invisible, as in the center of his own
all-sufficient eternity, before either earth or heaven was made, must needs be
swallowed up, and darkened round about, as if he stood in the center of a world
of waters, and for want of a proper idea to fix on melt away in reverence of
that all venerable and and sacred being, which is an unmeasurable and boundless
ocean of wisdom power and goodness in himself: And although he may have much
improved himself by the frequent study and meditation of the subtle books
Christendom has brought forth; yet shall he find himself so infinite short of
any satisfying knowledge concerning God, that he must conclude himself to remain
still in the wondering side, and to know nothing. Whenever I think of that
first Esse we call God, both S Thomas and subtle Scotus and all writings or
conceits of men fail and fall short, and help me little or nothing, no nor any
scripture whatsoever: they seem all to speak something about God, nothing of
him, indeed they cannot. In this our earth and exile we have no words to
express him, no notion to conceiv him as he is in himself, no idea to represent
him; which perhaps is the reason moved subtle Scotus to teach, that our
divinity is not speculative but practical, lest it should be a science that
signifies nothing; for love of that divine object makes up all.

Our Lord is verily a hidden God, says one no less piously than truly; hidden
in himself and essence, hidden in his works, hidden in his providence, hidden
in his own life and being, and hidden too in all his emanations and the
egressions of eternity. Nor can any created being in the highest pitch of all
possible excellency naturally approach that unaccessible presence in his state
of pilgrimage and mutability. The discovery of himself unto them is their
bliss; it is their condition supernatural and felicity of glory.

What then can poor man a worm and dust, in this his state of sin corruption
and darkness presume to know of Him, whom no invisible creatur or the highest
angel can pry into even in the highest excellency of his spiritual condition,
out of his state of immutability and beatitude. No man can see God and live,
and no angel can see God and dye: for the vision is inconsistent either with
our mortality or their state of probation; we must be elevated above our mortal
life, they exalted from their condition of mutability by that vision once
imparted. God is an abyss of beatitude reserved only for the infinity of
bliss in the state of eternity, where new ravishing wonders and ecstasies and
joys shall spring up from him without end, to the daily fresh beatifying of
all those spirits that shall be thought worthy of that glorious never failing
day.

Nor is there any way left for man to reach this infinite abyss but by
affection. The will of man is far longer winged than his understanding, and
love will find access where knowledge cannot approach. For tho it be true that
an unknown thing cannot be loved, yet may a man love more of a thing than he
knows, and fasten his affection upon that thing in particular; whereof he has
but a general and confused apprehension: Thus I may love a man's person whom I
never saw and consequently know not, by a report of his goodness or sight of
his hand writing, which love will embrace the person himself tho it be guided
by no more knowledge then that of his words or gesture or written conceptions:
so God represented unto us under the general and metaphysical notions of an
infinite substantial ocean of goodness wisdom and power, from whom do all
things flow, by whom they subsist, and in whom finally they end, the first cause
eternal immense omnipotent, the best and greatest, creator and conserver of
all that is or can be, substantial wisdom and sanctity, immutable, hater of
iniquity and lover of good, the beginning and end of things, essential truth
and light and life, the very being of all beings, the solace of all spirits,
and sole beatifying bliss and the like; tho this and much more said of him as
notions adjacent and metaphysical properties of that eternal and ineffable
essence suffice us for our knowledge of him in this world, yet is all the while
that great essence from whence those properties flow unexprest and utterly hid,
and God still in his particular and specific entity and unknown God to us: and
yet notwithstanding God or that unknown essence is supereminently estimated
adored and loved even in his very individual being by that spirit who will
think of him and love him as he ought, even in this very state of our exile,
corruption and darkness. So far extended so ingenious and quick is love, that a
very small sparkling of knowledge if it do but show her afar off only the
outward frontispiece and battlements where the beloved dwells, will enough
suffice her for a guide to throw her self into him bosom.

This great God and immens spring of life and being, if he be compared to the
univers and whole creation consisting both of the millions of invisible spirits
and the great machin of this visible world, he will be found as the only
substance, and all things besides him a thin shadow; he solid entity, and the
great univers in comparison of him but a mere show, far more differing than the
body of a house or tree, and the shadow thereof in the Sun: and therefore high
contemplativs have called the world a vanity, a lie, a shadow, a non entity;
and so indeed it is, compared with God wherein all being is subsistent in its
substantial primogenial perfection: It must needs be so; whereby we may see,
how deeply the sensual and carnal men of this world are deceived in their
judgments; whilst they look upon this world and the things of this world,
especially that part of it they use for their pleasur and delight, as things of
true real and solid substance, but God the author of all as an aerie flying
fansy, taking the substance for the shadow and the shadow for the substance: so
grossly do we delude our selves in our conceits of God, and for his good deeds
toward us dishonor him in requital. But the inveiglement of pleasures brings
us below our manhood and makes us think like beasts.

The obscurity of this most high God and his unaccessible light (not to use any
further argument than what is vulgar and before our eyes) will be made more
than manifest, if we do but cast our eyes upon the sons of men round about this
globe of earth our selves inhabit, and their various both inquests after him
and conceptions of him. If men could do this one thing exactly, all further
pains of implanting in us true humility instead of pride, amazement in place of
arrogance, fear in the room of presumption, self denial in exchange of that
prodigious self-confidence that abounds and rules in us might soon ceas. Who is
he that dare presume in any way of his own invention when he considers (as very
true it is) all mankind so many several ways in all ages groping after a deity
like so many blind men in a vast plane, by the help not of eyes (for who can
discover or see him) but of that pitiful reed of weak imagination. And are not
all these equally his creatures? do they not equally show their love in seeking
after him? have they not at their birth equal right to his favor, which before
they were born they could no ways demerit. And how then can infinite goodness
so neglect, infinite wisdom so far unheed, infinite power so desert this poor
wretched worm, that very fain would love him, would be very glad to find him,
would think it a happiness to serve him, and for this end seeks after him so
incessantly, so variously, and by reason that he is a hidden God so fruitlesly
as he does. In this perplexity remains mankind, till there appear a prophet or
teacher to each nation who may direct and lead them. But when this happens, how
much is poor man the nearer? There be happily as many several prophets as there
be nations upon earth (for though two or three nations may follow one, yet some
one nation has two or three) and all these equally pretend to be divine, tho
their laws and rules and religious rites be not only diverse but oftimes
opposite. What can we think when we contemplate this? where is truth, and how
shall we have it (since we cannot find it out our selves) if not from the hands
of such as pretend to come from God? And yet they cannot all be true: which
then is false, and who is true? is there any way in nature to know it? for all
establish their own way and honor by all inventions possible within their
reach, sometimes by miracles (which their own disciples believ tho others deride
them) oftentimes by visions and prophecies, generally by a show of sanctity,
with a concours of threats and promises both present and future to the
violatours and observers of their law. And therefore if any be true, as it is
but a surmise to think it, so is it a mere chance to hit it; which is generally
done by birth, or casual circumstance of persuasion. Besides a religion once
established be it true or falls (when it is once received it is then taken for
true) in the space of some succeeding ages is reformed anew by other teachers
or interpreters, who in time lead men out of the former way into their own;
sometimes slowly, gradually and insensibly, that they are brought into another
religion before they be aware; sometimes by open hostility to the former, which
whether by covin or violence yields at last to the ingres of a new one.

This is the right case and business concerning religion in the world: people
still being vehemently bent upon that they fasten upon, tho happily it be quite
opposite to the former, wherein both themselves and forefathers lived. Such is
the miserable instability of mankind; which is a sign, that God and his truth,
(how confident soever men may be) is ever hidden and in-evident; for men do not
use to depart from evidence: let Philosophers dispute never so subtly to
prove snow is black, they will get no followers; a contrary evidence detains
even them that cannot tell how to answer their arguments from a submission
unreasonable. Nor is there all this while any one sect upon earth but condemns
all other ways besides his own which he no less admires than he disesteems
them; yea separating from a former religion to another either in all things
opposite or a part only, men are apt to inveigh as bitterly against that now,
as then they did against this, and with equal confidence of truth in both
places. Where then is truth, and who sees it? Is not God indeed hidden? does he
appear at all to any; for although all say they see him and his truth with
their eyes, it is evident enough by the mutations both personal and national
that be made in the world, there is no such matter (from God and from truth no
man does willingly depart) as also by the opposite professions of it with such
equal confidence, that it is not in the power of any man to say of himself
assuredly where it is. Archimed had an opinion that he could move the whole
earth, had he but a place out of the earth to set his foot on; and so must he
who shall judge of this controversy stand in some place a part, where he may
oversee all, not interested in any, in a word he must be out of the earth? nor
is the atheist a fit judge, although he may bear himself for one; for as none
can judge of men but he that owns such a thing as humanity, so neither can he
give any plausible judgment of religions who acknowledges none: nor yet is it
an easy thing to pluck up the general connatural seeds of religion implanted in
man's spirit, and sprouting forth rather into the profession of a falls religion
than none.

Who dare then presume of his knowledge, and what motives has he in himself to
do so which another wants: Be it scriptures, prophesies, visions, light, or
inward assurance; boast of what you pleas, all the earth will do the like, and
with the self-same confidence. For let Philosphers speak what they pleas of the
certainty of object which some men have over and above the certainty of subject,
I am not able to conceiv how an objectiv certainty can stand without evidence,
or how it may consist with that mutability I see to be in the world; for men do
depart as well from a good religion (wherein they would have to be certainty of
object) as from a bad one wherein they allow only a certainty of subject, which
is nothing but a personal self-willed resolution in their ways.

Since men therefore do thus abound all of them in their own sens, happily without
sense (if a thousand voices may be of force against one single one) how does it
behoove us if we would be truly wise to walk all our days not in disputes and
disquietness without end, but in humility and fear. But some will say, all this
is nothing to us, since Christ our Lord has revealed to us both God himself
and all necessary truths concerning him, of all which we may be confident. But
stay a while and ponder what I have already spoken; do not all nations say as
much for themselves. What then! should we doubt of our faith in Christ? no in no
wise. But I must speak a bold word: these very dissentions of ours about that
faith in its branches so hot, so various, so extravagant, are apt to infer a
suspicion of it in its very root: are not hundreds in our own country become
atheists already upon that very motiv? and these men supposing substantial
change once made in religion and deliberately admitted are rather to be
commended for their wit than blamed: for they do but that suddenly which all
the land will will come to by degrees. If the Papist or Roman catholic who
first brought the news of Christ and his Christianity into the land, as all men
must needs know that have either heard or read of Christianities ingress into
England or other countries and kingdoms (for we do no sooner hear news of
Christianity than Popery, and his crucifixes, monasteries, relics, sacrifice,
and the like) I say if the Papist be now become so odious as we see he is, and
if the faith he brought and maintained a thousand years together, be now rent
all asunder by sects and factions which bandy all to the ruin of that mother
religion; if all her practical truths wherein chiefest piety consists be
already abolished as erroneous; does not this justify the pagan whom this
catholic Christian displaced to make way for his own law: And must not this be
a certain way and means to introduce atheism, which naturally follows that
faith once removed even as a carkas succeeds a living body once deceased? for
one truth denied is a fair way to question another, which came by the same
hand, and this a third, till the very authority of the first revealer be at
stake, which can no more defend himself than he can his law; for the same axe
and instrument that cut down the branches can cut up the root too; and if his
reverence for which all the rest was believed defend not their truth, it must
needs at length utterly fail in his own. For all the authority they had was
purely from him, and he falls in them before he falls in himself? no man can
deny this that shall seriously lay his hand upon his heart, and ponder things
as he ought. And he that once ceases to beleev in Christ whom before he
worshipped, I am sure he will turn atheist if his wit and reason proceed
consequently and beleev nothing. A little more to specify my meaning: If the
institutions of monasteries to the praise and service of God day and night, be
thought as it has been now these many years a superstitious folly; if
Christian Priests and sacrifices be things of high idolatry, if the seven
sacraments be deemed vain most of them; if it suffice to salvation to beleev,
what ever life we lead; if there be no value or merit in good works; if Gods
laws be impossible to be kept; if Christ be not our law maker and directour of
doing well, as well as redeemer from ill; if there be no sacramental tribunal
for our reconciliation ordained for us by Christ upon earth; if the real body
of our Lord be not bequeathed unto his Spous in his last will and testament; if
there be not under Christ a general head of the Church who is chief Priest and
Pastor of all Christians upon earth under God, whose Vicegerent he is in
spiritual affairs; all which things are now held forth by us manifestly against
the doctrine of the first preachers of Christianity in this land, then say I
paganism was unjustly displaced by these doctrins, and atheism must needs
succeed; for if Christ deceived us upon whom shall we rely; and if they that
brought us the first news of Christ, brought along with it so many grand lies,
why may not the very story of Christ himself be thought a Romance? And erunt
novissima pejora prioribus, the latter condition of this land under atheism
(catholic faith once utterly extirpated) must needs be far wors than it was in
paganism before it was planted. Far sweeter is that body, put case a statue of
stone that was never animated, than is any carkas of man after the soul is
departed. And are not we in a wood now? who shall lead us out? The maze is made
greater by the consideration of the multitude of sects now reigning amongst us;
all which as they do unanimously conspire against that catholic Church they
have deserted, so do they wrangle now about every thing wherein they first
agreed and conspired against her, hating and execrating one another even unto
war and bloodshed, and the utter desolation of our distressed nation. Quid est
veritas, and on whose side is God all this while? does he not lie hid, and say
nothing, and leav us wholly to our selves by a judgment unsearchable in these
our affairs, even as in other courses of this world: Ith interim all opinions
utter fine words, all presume of themselves, all are peremptory, and censur not
only their neighbors but even the whole earth round about. Where is truth?
here says one; nay not there, but here quoth another; neither there nor there,
but here says a third: but so many here is and there is sounds nothing to a
rational man but either every where or no where* and which to conclude, is
impossible for man of himself steadfastly to resolv. Here is Christ and there is
Christ in the judgment of Christ himself signifies neither here nor there. If
they say says our Lord, here is Christ or there is Christ, do not ye go forth
or follow them: and the reason is very good, for the true Church wherein Christ
really resides, is ever in a posture of quietness and defens. But they that go
out of her and set up new ways of their own are ever in clamor and
dissension, which of them should do it best; and the cry is heard aloud and
without ceas, Here, Here. Christ is here says the Protestant, and not amongst
the Papists; nay quoth the Presbyterian by your favor, he is Here; nay then
says the Anabaptist, Here he is; if you be at that, quoth the Quaker. you are
all blinded men, if any would find the true light com to us; for here it is and
no where but here. But when all is done truth is not in division but unity, not
in sedition and clamor but meekness and peace. If ten men stand gazing in a
street, and all agree that they see a thing there, but disagree all in the
description of it, a stranger coming by will rather guess they are all mad,
than that they see any thing at all. One thing I am sure of; if all men would
be humble minded and sober, and cast out of their hearts the great prejudice
they have taken up against one another, they would see the better for it.

To conclude this subject (for I would say no more than what may help to lop
the vain and superfluous excrescencies of faction and dissentions about
religion which perhaps none of us do rightly understand, and would be loath to
cut the tree it self to the quick) it may appear sufficiently by what I have
said, and yet far more if we join our own experimental knowledge and
ratiocination of further things which I do purposely omit, that God is in
himself an unsearchable abyss, and his essence and counsels past finding out;
nay he is the great primo genial and father-abyss of all others not to be
approached by angels or men, but according to such few exterior conceptions
himself has either revealed or imprinted in them, which be far from reaching
home either to his counsels or proper essence. And who has been his mate or
counselor that he should tell us news of him never heard before. If any news
there be of him, it is surely to be had from Christ, whom we beleev to be his
very substantial word and the splendor of his glory; and if Christ has left
any secrets of him to be revealed unto mankind, we must have them from his
Church, which is the pillar and foundation and treasury of all his truth; and
if any Church is to be consulted, I should think it should be that, and only
that which by an uninterrupted succession has descended from himself, which is
that very same that first brought Christian religion into this land, which
without all controversy is the Catholic, now by contempt surnamed Papist; and
if any one be otherwise minded, etiam and hoc Deus ipsi revelabit. In the mean
time let us be peaceable and sober.

. 7. Obscurity of nature.
THe second abyss is that of Gods works, and the whole creation, which all men
that have considered it aright find unfoardable: and if any have not, let me
crave his company a while but in a slight survay of this wondrous fabric, and
then tell me what he thinks.

When we confider those myriads of intelligencies, angels and spirits, and the
whole intellectual world, the first exterior issue of divine brightness; we
are not then much nearer apprehension of any thing in particular than in the
first abyss; what they are, either for substance, or place, or operation, or
extent of presence, or knowledge, or power, or motion or order, or any thing else
in particular.

In the visible world we begin a little to find our feeling, and know at least
where we are; but not much more. Here we see a wonderful face of things, but
what else? what is the basis on which all the frame stands, and how is it settled
upon it in its various and stupendous motions? the order of things little or
nothing appears; their essences altogether unknown; their properties,
dependances, and mutual connection obscure; their limits and vigor and duration
and influences doubtful; their motions uncertain; the mode, method and chain of
operation utterly hidden. And what is it then we know? wherein consists the
excellency of our science that we should boast our selves, and contemn the
world? and what are we able to determine in the truth of these things without
uncertainty and error.

This our ignorance of nature is sufficiently insinuated and evinced in that
solid piece of moral-divinity in sacred writ commonly called Job from chapter 38 to
42. It were worth my pains to insert here all that eloquent discourse. But
because the Bible is in every man's hand, he that pleases may read it there at
leisure? And although Doctor Brown say in his Vulgar errors (as I remember)
that the difficulties of nature there propounded will now adays be easily
answered by every puny scholar; yet those words of his be unwary; both because
those intricacies of the creation are there propounded by no less a person than
almighty God as insoluble and not to be dived into by man: as also because the
Doctor if he consider right cannot but know, that he that were able to give a
full satsifactory reason even of the smaller things in nature as the wind or
rain, would be able to tell what weather it would be or what wind would blow
every day in the year in any part of the earth until the worlds end; so sure
and fixed is the whole frame of nature: But such kind of puny scholars the
world never yet saw. And although man sees and knows enough in nature to make
him admire and adore the Author, yet not to contend with him in questions and
replies about it. The whole world is an immens entangled gordian knot which the
wisest of men could never yet untye, or discern the intermingled series of the
many voluminous causes concatenated therein.

Even the progress of a poor plant from its seed to its decay, who can declare
or conceiv it? so many several seeds both of plants and animals, how do they
shoot forth so orderly into their parts and organs, peculiar each one to
themselves? where lies that celestial particle in the little seminal origin,
which is the spring of life and motion in every thing? In the first primogenial
sours how is distinguished either kind from kind, or part from part in the
same kind; and which is that part that is to run forth into the head, and which
into the arms, and how is it done? I see wheat and barley, elm and oak, horse
and man to shoot up constantly each one from their own seed, in their own
proper and peculiar mode and method; and perhaps an angel or intelligence may
distinctly see the reason of all in the very seeds, (for some reason is
certainly there to be seen) but what man can do it? how comes such variety of
bulk, parts, odor and color unto flowers; there is a reason it must needs be
so and no otherwis than so; what is it? Be there, put case, a thousand plants
upon earth, much mineral and metal within it, huge variety of birds and fish,
and beasts about it, what is it we know of all this, from the egg to the
apple. If the earths semidiameter be three or four thousand miles, what lies
hid in all that vast bosom? Do the seas meet in a center, as well as close in a
surface? what preservs this vast globe of earth in its huge entrails that it
rot not, and tumble all into putrefied heaps, and we with it? what rivers run
hurrying under ground, to and fro crossing one another in several depths of
earth, like veins in the great massy body, whence com they and whither do they
go? Pursue the river of Thames to his first original, and tell me how far it
creeps under ground before its appearance; and whether it proceed at length
from some greater subterraneous channel like a small artery from a vein, and
whence that underground channel it self proceeds; and if from the ocean, from
what part of it, and how and where, and whether all rivers that appear in our
hemisphere fall to us by some secret passage under earth from the seas of our
antipodes.

How comes the crumbling earth to be made to flow in tenacious liquid streams,
so rare and yet so strangely compact, that water even in a bottle can hardly be
crowded nearer. What is the true nature of air, and the etherial limits: The
earth and sun which of them moves about the other? and why within the limits of
the zodiaque. What is the order in that camp of glory over our heads? are the
stars like the stones in the street, without any rank as they seem to our eye?
and what are they? holes in a solid firmament where the glimpses of glory above
dart forth unto the eyes of mortals, or solid bodies themselves, and all
suspended in liquid air as our earth is: and what sustains either our earth or
them? what shoves them on so equally in their course? do they move daily through
all that vast expans, so that they must necessarily fly so many thousands of
our miles in one hours space as we conceiv; or is that error engendered in us
by our own motion either upon our own or the worlds axletree? what creatures
live there: or be there in the univers no other corporal intellectual creature
but man in this our earthly system, to serve contemplate and bless that infinite
holy one who is the conserver and cause of all things. A man of himself might
easily doubt it: for it makes more to the glory of that great blessed Being,
that he should be enjoyed praised and served in worlds innumerable, under
innumerable degrees of perfection, by creatures, intellectual of several modes
constitutions and excellencies, rather than only in this one world of ours; a
world of known ignorance and darkness, a world of sin and malice, that probably
may lie under some unknown malediction (it knows not his own weal, and as little
heeds it when it is known) a world of much naughtines, and so far alienated
from God and true piety and peace, that Origin seems not irrationally to
conceit it to be a house of correction for offenders, delivered up for some
space unto the prince of darkness (not much beside the fansy of good S. Paul who
was as good a philosopher as divine) to inveigle harrass and plague us for a
season.

This book of the creation or volum of Gods works is a noble and most excellent
bible, opened to us here on earth although in part only for our exercise, being
intellectual indeed but the most infantile intellect that can be imagined,
opened I say to us to look on, as little children upon a primer, whose letters
they see but know none of them, nor yet their connection or end; to other more
excellent corporeal creatures in the stars above (if any there be) for further
understanding and knowledge, and to incorporeal intelligences for a more
absolute apprehension. But our looking upon the world is not to be merely
sensual and exterior, as a horse or a cow looks up to the sun, but a savory and
affectionate speculation (if we will have it a humane action) our want of
knowledge being supplied by love, in admiring that power whose works we see
indeed but cannot comprehend.

Hence it might not irrationally be believed, although religion were silent,
that the soul of man is surely immortal; and that an intellect such as man's is,
being admitted by his creator to a rational sight of his works (as all know
ours is, and the bruits is not) shall at length he translated unto some better
state of more perfect and comprehensiv knowledge both of his works and
providence and essence too which here we cannot attain. For so we use to put
little books into the hands of our infant children, when they can make little
more use of them than a bruit, to accustom them to the outward sight of that
they shall afterward in their riper growth more fully understand: but we do not
the like to young whelps or fawns, although at their birth they seem far more
mature than one of our slavering babes, because the nature of such creaturs will
in no state be able to reach the knowledge. Hence I say may proceed a suspicion
of our souls immortality, which is afterward strengthened by religion and
philosophy. The beasts of the field see nothing but their food; but man sees,
that is, considers and admires all things visible and invisible; I mean in his
human life and operation: for man is so set in the horizon of eternity and
corruption, that he may betake himself unto which life he pleases either human
or bestial; and it is in his power either to make himself a beast or angel;
this, by superior and intellectual; that, by inferior and sensual propensions
thoughts and operations: but with this difference, that a created angel or
intelligence shall still have a greater amplitude of intellect by precedence of
nature, and exacter clearnes of thought by segregation from all matter, but a
made angel or the spirit of man angelized, may have notwithstanding through the
difficulty of his combat a greater crown of glory and comfort at the feet of
his maker.

. 8. Item.
NOt to wander from my purpos. The gulf of the creation is indeed but a
secondary abyss and nearer to our feeling but far from our comprehension: since
we neither know the nature of those visible bodies we behold both above and
below us, nor the manner of their first rise when they started out of their
ancient nothing, nor their dependances one upon another, nor their motions, nor
the limit and extent either of the elements and stars, or of all the univers
together.

For is the world finite! where ends it? in the highest stars? who can tell if
we were there, but that our eye should still discover other new glittering
systems at as great a distance from us then, as these be now; and so forward
without end. If we imagine an edge or outward rim of the univers, let us conceiv
(as it is not impossible) that a man were set there and preserved in his being;
where should his head be? out of the world, and no where? could he there think
or speak or put forth his finger or cast a stone, and all this in nothing, and
beyond the whole univers; can an imaginary thing be as capable of real action
as natural place? Is God really there beyond all this univers, or no? if not,
then must he be limited to the extension of his works, and his immensity as
much confined as they: if he be really there as he is here, I cannot see but
that it is as real a place as this wherein the world stands, namely if we take
place not according to the definition of Aristotle, ultimum continentis, etc.
(which description provides well for the placeing of a house or tree, not at all
for the univers which according to that description is in no place at all) but
according to the true and genuin nature of place, as it is the immovable basis
of a body penetrating and penetrated by it; for this is the true reason of
primary absolute and essential place; whereas Aristotle describes only that
which is secondary, accidental and relative; essential place is naturally
before any body placed in it, accidental described by Aristotle must needs be
after some body, being a relation of the containing to the contained body. And
lastly if the world be finite, as man's understanding is more prone to think
(because of the incongruities in reason apprehended in a supposal of infinity
not indeed to be grasped by man's intellect) who can say where the incongruities
be greater? about an infinite something, or an infinite nothing? if the world
be finite in its real being, the imaginary or no being must be infinite; where
also, it is as possible for Gods unlimited power to place worlds without end,
as he has done this here. Who dare say he cannot do it, who can say he has not
done it. This then is absolutely uncertain unto us as we are left to our selves
and not to be defined by man. Nor do the reasons produced by philosophers
against the worlds infinity infer any greater absurdity, then a finite world
inferrs, perhaps less: and if those reasons be well pried into, we shall find
that generally those philosophers endeavoring to show the absurdities of a
real categorematical infinity which we cannot grasp, do notwithstanding so
argue against it as if they had grasped it; which is a great and ordinary
fallacy in all their arguments against infinity either of time or magnitude. I
intend not here to maintain any thing but only this, that our reason left to
it self can certainly make out nothing.

Those innumerable shining lights we behold in the firmament there glittering
and twinkling without ceas, S. Austin doubted if they were not beatified bodies
wherein glorified creaturs might have their residence in bliss: and we may
doubt it still for aught I know. Were those huge bodies of glory in their
several stations and magnitudes made only for us to sleep by? we can mean no
other, when we say so confidently, that all the whole univers was made only
for our use? For our use, I doubt not, some part in one kind, some in another;
but to say or think only for our use, the use we now make of it is in my mind
but a weakish fansy. The sun moon and other planets we know some use of; but of
the stars in the firmament, little or none at all, but only for our
wonderment. What needed so many for our use? why of that diverse magnitude, since
candles all of a bigness would have been both more handsome and convenient: why
in that uncouth situation, that the greatest wit can make no more of it, than
childrens imagination of fantastic shapes in the clouds: why thousands so
obscure that hardly discernable, and likely thousand others seldom or never
seen by us at all. And what is the use we have of them? do they make our sleeps
sounder, or our dreams more or less? do not the beasts of the field, especially
those of prey, make more use of them than man, who is commonly going to bed
after the sun, when the wild beasts go forth to their prey by starlight: and
amongst men the better any one is, the less use has he of the stars; for the
drunkard thief and adulterer do their works generally by night. The greatest
use I know we have of those glorious bodies, is to raise us up to a devout
contemplation of that invisible and almighty Being, from whence did issue so
many visible glories of himself: for to say those firmament stars serve for the
effecting alteration of states and kingdoms, translation of empires, wars and
peace, civility and barbarism, religion, deluges and the like, is a mere
ungrounded conjectur; since all these things might be sufficiently promoted by
the inferior planets and concours of others causes for aught any one can tell,
without any star in the firmament at all: and yet even those uses are but very
small and inconsiderable for such vast bodies to be only ordained for, if truly
asserted. One use is certain, to raise us to the meditation of things invisible,
and to lead us up by degrees, (even as themselves are seated one above another)
like so many greeces in the ethereal expans, unto that hidden Being who is the
cause of all. And this is for us who have all our necessities otherwise
supplied use enough; but he that therefore thinks they have no other use in
themselves because they serve us in this, is but yet in his young thoughts and
sees not beyond his own untutoured imagination.

For considering that those glorious bodies are even in our demonstrated and
uncontrouled reason as exessively more specious and beautiful, so also far
greater than our whole globe of earth wherein we live, even twenty sold some of
them and upwards, why should all those vast capacities be in vain? Why may not
we rather think intellectual substances resident therein with bodies more and
less refined, in degrees and modes and fashions to us altogether unknown, who
might chant out the praises of the almighty One, in measures answerable to
their condition without end? can this seem to any man unreasonable? so the
ancient wise men among the Pagans, Democritus, Pythagoras, and several other
great Philosphers conceived, for the greater honor and glory of the first
cause: and shall they be more zealous of Gods glory than we; or shall we
Christians be the only hidebound Philosophers in the world not able to conceiv
any thing beyond the eye and imagination of a child.

The eminent french Philosopher De Carts conceited the twinkling stars we see
and innumerable others we discover not, to be in their ranks and places, as so
many suns in the firmament, about which move Planets or bodies unto us here*
altogether invisible, except we either rise higher or they descend toward us
in their motion, warmed and vegetated by their fires as we by our sun; If it be
thus, as well it may for aught I can know of my self, what a strange consort of
hymns and praises rise up in the univers, continually and without ceas as
incens, in several keys of music unto that great holy One who made us all, to
supply the defects of those small pitiful services we poor worms perform unto
him, in this our earthly system! This may seem far more rational thank to
think that we gross corporeal creatures and sensual sinners, are the only
people in the univers who serve the almighty, and that all those eminent bright
shining systems above us, whose order, method, properties, bulk and nature is
so obscure, are there set and appointed for nothing else but only for our use,
which we cannot yet say what it is; and when we have imagined our utmost, is
not of the value of any one star in the firmament; or that bodies of their vast
capacity should be utterly empty and have no creature at all within them.

I should of my self be so far from thinking that the stars of the firmament
are only for our use; that I should doubt whether the very elements amongst
which we live and breath, earth, aier, and water, and the beasts minerals and
plants contained in them, are only made to serve us, tho chiefly intended for
our benefit. The very gradual perfections of nature has in it self a worth and
decency beseeming the Creator, tho man had never been? And if all had been
only aimed for our use, would not a less sea have served our turn, and fewer
birds beasts fish and plants. What use have we of all the great depth of earth
under us to the center, or larg vast ether about us. And if we were such
absolute lords of the world as we conceiv our selves to be, how is it that
nothing at all in nature is at our command? not the sea, not the aier, not the
earth it self, nor any thing upon it or in it, will either come or go, or
alter, or stop his course at our pleasure: which King Canutus observed well,
when standing with his nobles by the Thames side, he perceived the tide to rush
upon him, although he had commanded it to com no nearer. What kind of vassails be
these inferior natures under man, that will obey us in just nothing? Besides,
when any one is absolute master of a house, wholly destined to his use, surely
such a one can go and com into any room thereof without control; but let man
walk down either into the bottom of his seas to see his fish there, or into the
cellars of his earth amongst the metals, and tell me if he be not stifled as
soon as other creatures: But if he once attempt to mount the upper rooms of his
habitation, tho it be but into the first or second region of the aier, he shall
fail at the very first step; for his ethereal greeces will not bear the gross
unweildly bulk of their Lord: so ill is the house fitted for the masters
constitution from the very top to the bottom. Can we not honor and bless God
for the use he has lent us of all these things which is great and various, but
we must by the vanity of our hearts appropriate and monopolise the univers to
our selves, as if it were for no other use at all but ours.

The manifold use and services we have of the stars and elements, beasts,
birds, fish and plants, which do all administer unto man in something or other,
according to the exigence either of his necessities thence to be supplied, or
his corporal delight, or mental speculation to be furnished from that great
body, which the divine goodness therefore made before man that in the first
instant of his being he should want nothing, ought to make us thankful but not
proud. And so the holy prophet, admiring the excellency and perfection of place
that mankind by his creators goodness has over other visible creatures amongst
whom he livs; and the various uses he has of them, does in one of his sweet
psalms invite man thereupon to magnify this his great benefactour, who set him
in so high a place when he needed not to have put him in any: and if man do so
he shall do well. But he must not appropriate more to himself than is given, or
instead of being thankful for the dominion he has received, vainly conceit a
dominion he has not.

Aristotle fansied our earth to be the center of the Univers, and the stars to
be a sift essence differing from all the four elements placed in the
circumference: but the great wits of the world that lived before him,
Pythagoras, Empedocles, Anaxagoras, Democritus, Epicure, were of another mind.
And although our Christian Schoolmen have now for five of six hundred years
explicated and defended the principles of their religion even in the way of
Aristotle by which for a thousand years it had been opposed by the pagan, yet
do they not intend to mix his philosophy with those principles of their faith:
nor does the great Christian Church therefore canonise his philosophy for
truth, because she suffers her own truths to be declared and explicated by it.
If Christianity be true, it fears no antagonists; but will bear the test of any
right philosophy: but yet philosophy that it may be right indeed, must be
corrected and ordered by this divine truth, as well as this explicated in some
things by it. And if another Christian philosopher should explicate his faith
now afresh, in the way of Democritus or Pythagoras, as in the first times of
the Church it was declared in the way of Plato, and in these latter ages by
Aristotle; so he do it piously and warily, and square not his rule of faith by
them, but them by it; I cannot see why it may not commendably be done. But then
as he does use those explications to satisfy a pythagorean or epicurean; so
must he confidently reject as dissonant to right reason, what he finds unapt to
square with the received truths of Jesus Christ, as we do now deal with
Aristotle. This if it were done; as Christian religion will be justified, when
it is perceived to stand with the right reason of any Philosophy: so likewise
when another Philosophy contrary to Aristotle's is once understood, all the
whole univers both for number, weight, and measure, its essences, relations,
concatenation, origin, life, and qualities would hang as loose, suspense, and
doubtful as if nothing had been ever said of it. Aristotle's reasons will make
Democritus and his disciples doubted: and again, the great learning and
subtility of Democritus, Anaxagoras, Epicurus, Empedocles will as much disable
Aristotle; and the doubt may be as pregnant among Christians as other men,
where the catholic Church interposes not the authority of some received
tradition to cast the scales. But whether she do this or no, is not to my
purpos now in hand, who intend only to insinuate unto such as multiply
opinions about religion both without and against that Church, that even nature
it self is vastly obscure and unknown to man who lives in it, and nothing in a
manner, but only what enters our senses, can be so certainly known and
concluded by any, that he may prudently either swagger or fight for his
opinion. And religion and the things of another world must needs be yet more
obscure than those of this.

It is observable, that Christ and Moses, and other holy Apostles and Prophets,
when in their discourse they touch incidentally upon things of nature, (their
chief purpos being ever to teach the way of virtue and true piety) they comply
oftentimes to the capacity and judgment of the hearer, what ever it be. So
Christ our Lord told us, that at the final day, the stars shall fall from
heaven, insinuating by that amongst his other expressions, the great
disturbance of nature then to happen; wherein comets, which the vulgar calls
stars, may shoot indeed, but the Philosophers stars cannot fall upon us out of
the firmament, except all return to the old Chaos, and one System mix with
another. Moses calls the sun and moon the two greater lights, and the stars of
the firmament the lesser, although contrary to philosophical truth, when he
intended to declare unto the people that have vulgarly such conceptions of
them, that sun and moon and all the other stars and planets were created by
that God he revealed. The Psalmist under the similitude of an Eagle which
renews his youth, expresses moral renovation; which he might well do, since men
had so fansied of the eagle, whether indeed he do so or not. The like
compliance was used by him, who told the people that the stars in their ranks
fought against their enemies, in which phrase he insinuated Gods providence in
battles, condescending to the peoples imagination, who looked upon the stars as
a pitched field of champions under the Lord of those hosts of heaven to defend
the innocent. Thus leaving us in the same imagination about things of nature
they found us in, they endeavored all of them only to chalk us out the right
way unto that felicity, whereof the knowledge of these and other wonderments of
Gods power shall be the least part; by serving him as we ought from whom have
issued prodigies we shall never know in this life, and who is himself the
wonder of all wonders only to be seen and known in the other.

Having seriously perused the Schools and learning of the ancient Pagan
Philosophers, this I find, that their disciples however conceited of their
demonstration and knowledge, did rather beleev than know any thing: and the
first master invented himself (properly speaking) not so much a philosophy as
faith. Take Aristotle and his School on one side; Democritus and Epicure on the
other: these two schools were mainly opposite both in their principles and
whole body of learning. And yet none that understand them well can tell by any
strength of nature or force of their arguments, which of them is with truth.
According to learned Democritus and Epicure, all things began in time by a
fortuite concours of atoms, which in all eternity filled the immensity of
space; and as these made the world, so do they by their incessant mobility work
continually insensible alterations, till after long time they fly all asunder
again, and make casually another world either here again, or in some other part
of the immens space, quite of another mode and fashion unto this; so that
matter upon this account is all and does all. According to Aristotle the world
had no beginning, but partial generations daily, wherein form gives the act and
essence, and matter is so far from being all, that it is but a pure
potentiallity and prope nihil, almost just nothing. These were the opposite
principles of two differing Philosophies. But were they known or evident to
either of the masters? If they had sought for an argument to prove them, they
had labored in vain: one therefore conceited that matter was all things, the
other that matter was nothing, etc. and upon this conceit which nothing but the
authority of the master to whom they would adhere, fastened upon the disciples,
they raised a Philosophy, which being thus founded upon a human faith or fansy,
all their following ratiocinations could never effect that it should be rather
called knowledge than belief or fantosme.

And this is the reason why the ancient Christian Priests grave and learned
men, who had entertained an esteem of their master above all mortal men,
would never give way that the articles of Christian faith should be tried by
the principles either of Aristotelian or Epicurean belief; and since the
disciples of those men would adhere so firmly to falls and indemonstrated
principles of human teachers, they thought it much more reasonable that they
should hold constantly what they had received from a divine master, and not
submit to the test of such ungrounded inevident and contradicting principles of
men as much opposite one to another, as all perhaps to Christian faith, even
Aristotle's philosophy as well as the rest. What more assured pillars be there
in Aristotle's school than these. Ex nihilo nihil fit, 2. quod incipit esse,
desinit esse. 3 quae convenient in aliquo tertio, convenient inter se. 4
accidentis esse est inesse. 5. ex duobus entibus in actu non fit unum. 6. a
privatione ad habitum non datur regressus, not to mention others.
And yet those catholic priests perceived well enough, that Christian
principles were contrary unto these, and these to them; the first to creation;
the second to the souls immortality; the third to the Trinity; fourth to the
Eucharist, fifth to the Incarnation, sixth to the resurrection.

Some ages after rose our Christian philosophers (whom we commonly call
Schoolmen) and raised a fine piece of art upon Christian principles defended
and made good even in Aristotle's way. And these, because the forenamed and such
other Aristotelian axioms carried a plausible appearance of truth in the ear,
they did accept them indeed, but in a sens of their own; so that they do not in
this Christian school make out that sens they did in the others, though they
bear the same sound. And it is pretty to see, how one and the same axiom is
made in several schools to butteres up ways that be destructive to one
another. God made the world in time says the Christian, and none but he could
do it; for it is not in the power of any creature no not of the highest
intelligence to make a thing of nothing, for ex nihilo nihil fit, of nothing is
nothing made, namely by the power and force of nature, though it may by God the
first cause; so speaks he. The world is eternal says Aristotle and could not be
made in time, either by the meeting of atoms, for their concours is disorderly
and casual, and opus naturae opus intelligentiae, nor yet by the first cause
himself out of pure nothing, for ex nihilo nihil fit, of nothing can nothing be
made, either by God or nature, The world is not eternal says Epicure, but made
in time without the assistance of any deity; which if any there be must be ever
at rest, out of the eternal matter of ever moving atoms; it must be made
either of them or of nothing, and ex nihilo nihil fit, of nothing can nothing
be made; and the same atoms by their own connaturall mobility do make and
mar, do and undo all things. In these and a thousand such like contests that
employ the world, does not a credulity once fixed fill up both the pages of the
book? and all consequent ratiocination, disputes and arguments, are they any
thing else but colorable explications of this fore-conceived inevident
credulity? Since then all sciences stand upon some one or other basis of belief,
(which is a postulatum not to be examined) this world may indeed be esteemed
credulous but not knowing: and all masters of any whatever schools have equal
need to set this motto over their school doors, Oportet discentem credere. He
that will learn must believe; and when he has learned all truths can be taught
him, he does but only beleev that he had learned any. And so I take my leav of
this second great abyss of nature.

. 9. Obscurity of providence.
THe third and last abyss, is the great gulf of Gods Providence in the
government of the world, equally as deep and unfoardable by man as the former,
(tho we may sometimes perceiv some little glimmerings of it as an owl of the
sun, but even these are uncertain and doubtful) and it is so much the more
perilous, than either of the rest; for that in the other, and in particular
that of his works we follow Gods power wisdom and goodness, so much the more
admiring all things by how much the less we understand; but in this we are apt
to call every thing in question, and our thoughts if they be not well bridled
ready at every turn to accuse God and plead against him and cite him to
judgment, to the peril of his heavy displeasure. And therefore he did very
cautiously and wisely, who finding a doubt to rise within himself concerning
providence, subscribed beforehand to Gods inerrable justice, before he would
enter into any parley about his proceedings, Justus es Domine says he, Just art
thou O Lord, but why does the way of the wicked prosper.

Is there any man lives upon earth from the lowest hind to the highest
philosopher, that has not perceived the depth of providence, and the absolute
inscrutability of Gods ways in the government of the whole creation, as a gulf
without bottom where resignation adores and presumption drowns. My thoughts
have frequently hovered upon the shore of this ocean, but I durst never pass
further on, than so far as I saw ground, there dipping my hands and feet (to
follow God and pray) but no further: nor did I ever receiv from any writings of
discourse of man any satisfaction therein: and none I expect.

For what are those immortal laws God has fixedly prescribed, either to the
earth elements or stars, which they never transgress, who is it can tell? They
are many no doubt, and various; in order to him the first cause, in order to the
several things contained within them, and in order to one another; for they
must all make up one great Pan or univers, be it never so big. And all things
doubtless within the whole body of this univers, are don regularly truly and
justly, according to the prescribed idea rule and measure, the will order and
law of the first cause disposer and governor, who is the way truth and life to
all the whole creation.

What the angels know hereof cannot be certainly conjectured, nor whether any
one be absolute and universal overseer under God of the whole visible creation
It may seem not improbable that if any intelligence stand limited to the
oversight and guidance of any one place, put case our earth or a star, that he
may not know the laws of another no further than they concern his own system;
nay perhaps not all the laws of his own, but such only as himself is to
manage; for even some of these which concern him not to use, may lie covert in
that great will on whose revelation every intellect depends: and thus a miracle
may be wrought by God almighty, even beside or contrary to the course of nature
which is administered by angels. But man, he knows none of these laws, no not
any; let him exalt himself never so much in his own vanity, he knows not, I
say, any of those rules by which either the whole univers or our own earth and
elements are governed.

Man is of a certain the highest creature visible upon earth, and the most
excellent species known to our eyes; but who can therefore say there be not
others above him, more knowing and more powerful than he, and more conversant
in the government even of this our visible world, tho they appear not to our
sight. We have indeed a pre-eminence of perfection but not of operation over
any thing in nature; which is a superiority natural not moral. And therefore in
all probability there must be some creatur over us with both the precedencies,
far more perfect then any under them, and guiding also the motions of all well
known to himself; if namely God have committed the administration of this
present world unto any other under his own influence and ordination. St. Paul
seems to conceit that these spirits are evil ones, whom he calls rectores
tenebrarum harum, but there must be good ones too, to moderate the ill
influence of those malign agents, or else man that lives upon earth is in a sad
condition.

But as for us, what do we know of all this for certain, or what can we do? we
can neither raise a wind nor any other meteor, nor assuage the sea, nor still an
earthquake, etc. not only destitute of power to do it, but also of knowledge how
it should be done. There be many creaturs under us, that is to say, inferior
in perfection of nature, as birds beasts and plants, but they are not under us
at all either in direction or subordination of motion. We neither teach the
birds to build their nest, or to engender or provide for their young, or put
forth the wing to flight, or to appear and hide themselves in their season; nor
the fish to swim, to get food and defense against annoiances, or to choose
their resort and stations in the liquid main, or those several ways they have
for multiplication and livelihood; nor do we put the fansy into the be or
little ant to work their tasks in season, with the art and industry they show
in it; nor do we move the plants to their growth and ripenes, nor do we know
our selves how these or any other things in nature are wrought: Thus destitute
are we of any rules of providence whereby this world is either set or kept in
order; that we neither prescribe them, nor see them observed, or do our selves
understand them: we are neither called to advise for the ordering of the being
of things under us, or is our help required for their conserving, or our
suffrage demanded for the putting a period to their existences.

And are not we in the mean time goodly rulers and disposers of the world, that
have neither hand in the making or guiding of it. I knew once an innocent that
took a fansy in his brain, that he was master and disposer of all the burdens
that came up in barges and lighters by a river that ran through the town, and
would constantly be upon the bridge at the hour they were to unload, where
standing very serious and attentive, as soon as he saw the porters to carry
forth out of any barge a burden of coal or corn or other provision, he still
bad them aloud and with authority to take it, and carry it that way which he saw
them inclined to go, and all the day long he was never disobeyed. Such masters
and governors are we of this world, with power to bid a bird to fly, or ant to
creep, or wolf to run, or heavens to move even as we see they do; and so we are
obeyed and no otherwise; nor no otherwise do we know either what they will or
ought to do. We do indeed feed upon some creatures, we either ensnare or which
stand tame to our hands, and tirannize over some others, subjugating them either
by subtilty or force will they nill they to our yoke: but this is no more than
the beast fish and birds do to one another.

And as for the ebbing and flowing of those several events and accidents that
be proper only unto man, as peace and war, wealth and poverty, arts, policy,
religion and the like; what a labyrinth is he in, that enters into
consideratition of their varieties and causes, the ends and motives of them. If
religion be a thing so necessary to our salvation, how is it that our good God
left the gentiles for so many hundred years all over the face of the earth, to
walk after the errors of their mind, in the blindness and darkness of their
understanding? what had they done before they were born to deserv it; and if
they be so dealt withal without desert, how does Gods justice appear. And
again, if a particular religion be not necessary, for example the Christian;
why did Christ our Lord put those poor harmles men his apostles to so many
labors, necessities, and dangers of death, to plant it in the world. And how
comes it, that even this religion now revealed and preached in the world makes
so small progres, and brings forth so little fruit among us. Why should the
Turk and his alcoran cast forth the only true religion out of all his
Territories, where it did once so gloriously triumph and fructify, Syria,
Egypt, Africa, Greece, and heresies and schisms out of other places.

The assurance of our own souls immortality would conduce not a little to the
exciting of our dull and drowsy spirits, unto a more quick and lively care of
our future bliss; and so dull we are and doubtful of all things, that it were
almost necessary we had it, and yet we are, God wot, so far from that, that we
even doubt our selves, whether we our selves have any thing immortal in us: nor
is there left an argument in reason to convince us of it? Is it not a strange
thing that man the most excellent of creatures upon earth should be so left to
his own disposition, to turn and swarve as he pleases, either to right hand or
left, and by that means to fill the earth with injurious disorders and
enormities of sin, which might as well have ever remained innocent and
peaceable, and all other creatures both above and below us, go on orderly in
their course prescribed by their maker without any irregularity or deviation.
Does not every good master of a house, keep his whole family in order if he can
and know how to do it? And God wants neither wisdom power or goodness, that he
should be either not desirous or ignorant or not able to make all actually
good: What chain of causes known to man may unriddle these things

Are not all things in daily change both to Kingdoms in general. and each man's
particular person, both in matter of fame, wealth, power, and other accidents?
But how do all these things happen as they do: what is the immediate cause
efficient, what the final, where does the justice appear? Histories tell us of
little else but wars, battles, desolations, deluges, translation of empires,
the rise and downfall of kingdoms in their power, renown, and civility;
alteration of states and laws, succession of deepest barbarism to most high
civility, and again of most exquisite civility unto horridest barbarism,
mutation of languages, pestilences, oppression and liberties of people, etc. By
what laws of the almighty are all these things ordered, and what justice
infers such heaps of misery upon feeble mankind; especially since we see even
with our eyes that all invasion which sets afoot the greatest and most
oecumenick changes is generally unjust?

If we do but only consider the horrid turmoils, that have been at times in our
own country by the Romans and Brittons, Brittons and Saxes, Saxes and Normans,
Scotch and English, the two houses of York and Lancaster; nay but the mere
troubles of these last twenty years from 1640. to 1660. whereof we have been
spectators and sufferers, (nor will there any pen be able to set down the
miseries we have undergone) wherein rebellion prevailed over loialty,
dissimulation over truth, tenant over Lord, subject over King, even to the
murdering of that sacred person by a pretended form of justice, in the face of
the world, without any cause exhibited against him, but only his own defense
against their rebellion, and the depriving his loiall subjects of their
estates, liberties and lives, soldiers all the land over hovering daily over
our heads, like ravens over sick and dying bodies, etc. What justice, what
providence appears to us in all these things: Are we not as blind as beetles to
discern it? The iniquity of man we understand well enough, but Gods justice in
so ordering or permitting it, who can discern? and yet there is doubtless a
reason in heaven for all.

What distinction appears in this world betwixt the just man and unjust? save
that uprightnes and honesty for the most part goes to the worst. Is it not a
mystery, that so many innocent souls, persons of most exact virtue and good
conscience, both toward God and man, should walk up and down many of them
hungry and half starved, traduced and comfortles, of whom the world is not
worthy; whereas the slightest of men, even vanity and sensuality it self vaunts
it in silks and fulness of all plenty.

I should be infinite, if I should specify the innumerable uncouth changes and
chances in this world; all which carry no reason or equity at all in their
forehead. The stories of empires and kingdoms from the beginning of time to
this day, the records of all provinces, the lives of all particular persons in
the world, are all but little draughts and epitomies of this great amazement;
all whose causes since they be so utterly unknown to us, that we can discern no
reason or right for them, it appears that we know of our selves as little of
this great abyss as of the former. And it concerns us, I should think, not to
be puffed up as generally we are in our opinions, but to humble our selves
(wherein consists our greatest wisdom) before the great creator and governor
of the world, as well in this as other secrets altogether unsearchable, and
say; Surely thou O Lord art just and wise and entirely upright in all thy
ways, although we worms understand it not; for shall not the judge of all the
world do right. Shall not he do right himself that judges and punishes every
creature for their iniquity and wrong. This is an abyss that has in it not
only amazement but danger; and therefore I leave it more willingly.

Thus God both in himself, and works and providence is a triple great abyss,
altogether unsearchable by man; as we may in a manner see by all has been
hitherto said, and much more to that purpose reserved to thoughts and
meditation. But the more to strengthen my assertion, I will conclude this
matter with the addition of authority, which coming now into my mind I cannot
totally omit. To the unsearchableness of the first abyss, which is God in
himself, that great prophet attests, who proclaims him to be a hidden God, a
God that hides and conceals himself, God savior of Israel; and no less that
grave Apostle; who professes of this great God, that he inhabites light
unaccessible: though it be light, yet whiles it is inaccessible light, we are
never the near to see it. To the unfoardablenes of the second he subscribes
that was esteemed the wisest of men; to the other one of the holiest: The wise
man speaks thus. Vide afflictionem quam dedit Deus filiis hominum, etc. I saw
an affliction which God has laid upon the sons of men, that they should be
rackt in it; he made all things good in their time, and gave up the world to
the disputation of men, that man might not find out the work which God has
wrought from the beginning even to the end. Men talk and dispute of Gods works:
but what is the event? to find out something surely, tho it be but little; nay,
nay, if we may beleev wise Solomon to find out nothing even just nothing from
the beginning to the end: and who would not wrangle and disturb the whole
univers, about such disputes as these, where opponent and respondent conclude
nothing: And that the world might not think this speech of his to be hasty or
less considered, he repeats it again afterward: Intellexi says he quod omnium
operum Dei nullam possit homo invenire rationem eorum quae fiunt sub sole, and
quanto plus laboraverit ad quaerendum, tanto minus inveniat* etiamsi dixerit
sapiens se nosse, non poterit. reperire. The holy man of the third abyss, which
is of God providence and ordination of things, speaks thus: O altitudo
divitiarum, etc. O the height and depth of the riches of the sapience and
science of God, how incomprehensible are his judgments and his ways
unsearchable! Who has known the sens of our Lord, or who has been his
counselor, or who first gave unto him, and retribution shall be made: for out
of him, and by him, and in him be all things, to him be glory unto endless ages.
Amen.

And all that I have hitherto said about our ignorance both of nature and
providence is but in explication of our B. Saviors antecedent in his argument
to Nicodemus: and to close up my whole discourse I finish all with his
syllogism: If you conceiv not says he terrestrial things when they are
spoken, or propounded to you, how can you think of your selves to comprehend
celestial: and so say I.

. 10. Help.
NOr are we much helped either by Plato, or Aristotle himself and many hundreds
of his disciples and our masters, who have filled the world with their
philosophical discourses, in this our speculation. After a thousand questions
and disputes wittily raised, nimbly handled, prolixly discussed, resolutely
determined, and strongly guarded against all opposition of argument; after our
whole courses of logic, physic, and metaphysick well penetrated and
understood, our heads indeed we find a little stuffed with strange and uncouth
words, which is the outward rind and bark of knowledge, but real science where
is it? what do we yet truly and certainly know of the many things God has made
or done amongst us? Even so little, and in so small a manner that without
offense we may call it nothing: And so must every one acknowledge, except he
will pretend himself to be wiser than Solomon. And the business of religion
must needs concern either God in his own nature and properties, or his works,
or providence; in all which things we are of our selves equally ignorant, as
well he that advances his way with passion, as he that defends himself; as well
the opponent as respondent; and the advantage, if any there be, is precisely on
his side that exceeds in humility and resigns himself to some greater authority
than any private man's can be.

Let us therefore be sure we are in the right, before we whet our indignation
about it against our innocent neighbor: and since we can never find that out
of our selves, let us never strive against him with passion, but either
discourse with a sweet charity and moderation, or else leav him altogether as he
is in his own thoughts, which for aught I can know of my self may be true and
good; his reasons tho not to me yet to an indifferent arbiter may be equally
persuasive with mine own, and perhaps more efficacious, and on both sides but
topical places at the best, if both opinions be personal and stand alone
separated from all authority extrinsecal, whence they should receive a further
and more prevailing power: for no demonstration or uncontrollable science is to
be expected in this world by such poor worms as we, about either God or his
works or constitutions: and whatsoever is said, be it asserted never so
peremptorily, may by the same or semblable grounds be as stoutly contradicted.
What then can we do better or more consonant to the darkness of our present
condition, than to have peace with all men, to judge none, to suspect our selves
and commend the innocent intention both of our selves and others, unto that
almighty goodness, who having placed us in this world of darkness will expect no
more from us than lies within our reach and power; and if any thing be such
it is a rational resignation and quietness.

As several opinions have been advanced and maintained in the world, maugre all
opposition of word or pen, without any the least tottering or fear of yielding
on the defendents side, so am I assured that any whatever opinion either old or
new and hitherto unheard of, may be defended against the reason of all mankind
joined together against it, if but resolution and contempt of the opponent go
along as generally it does with him that is respondent and defender of it;
whether he guide himself by reason, authority or other light: if he go by the
first, no reason but his own shall be admitted for reason; if by the second,
his own authority shall be cast in to counterballance to any authority brought
against him, and his own be it what it will shall be of force, all others
against him either not genuine, or impertinent or corrupted; if by the third,
what should any one go about to talk with him that will be judged by nothing
but a light which is only within himself; who as soon as he is opposed pitties
the ignorance and darkness of his antagonist; for such he peremptorily concludes
all men to be, that gainsay his judgment which only he deems light. And well
then may any one defend any thing when nothing can convincingly be proved
against him; either through the inevidence of the matter, or self-conceit and
obstinacy of the author. In the interim every opinion contemns and is
contemned; and in that state will it remain, till long time and that mutability
which lays hold on all things make it to expire, if there be not some speaking
oracle unto which both parties will submit.

I need not for proof of this invincible pertinacy appeal unto the ancient
Philosophers, none of whom could ever be brought to yield unto the others,
though they were all great masters of reason. Our present controversies in
England, which proceed for the most part upon authority, and yet by no authority
will be laid down, may sufficiently justify my words. And all this happens by
the unnatural coupling together of darkness and passion, little knowing
ignorance and all presuming pride, self-conceit and folly, which though they be
as dissonantly put together as the ox and ass in a plow team, yet are they, so
unhappy is our condition, seldom or never asunder.

Indeed he that is truly learned in theological affairs, who has read all
histories greek and latin that may concern Christianity from its first
beginning to this day, perused the councels thoroughly, well understood the
ancient fathers, maistered the subtle schoolmen, and so penetrated all the
books of the Bible that he is able to resolve logically every treatis and
discourse thereof into its final scope: such a man may happily discern, where the
truth lies in a dispute between two sects or men grounded only upon tradition
or authority, if it be in one or perhaps in neither of them, although for
default of learning or excess of passion they may neither of them discern it.
But yet notwithstanding if he, even that knowing person shall let his mind walk
on yet further, and call that very authority to account, as in natural reason
well he may; how it came hither, where it resided in every age since its first
being, who first authorized it, and what sufficient ground he could have so to
do, what marks it may exhibit that it is indeed the offspring of such a
father under whose name it goes, or that he erred not whoever he was in that
particular who either first wrote or afterward transcribed it, (and the
transcribers may have been some thousands of indifferent affections and
capacities) whether nothing in reason or other authority may gainsay it; whether
the words in the original character by some art or other, (whereof there be
tricks good store) may not speak another meaning, or at least by some trope or
scheme of rhetoric be otherways interpreted, etc. then I say even that
knowing person shall find himself in a mist, and so thick a one too, as that
except he rely upon the authority of some living oracle, whom in these and
whatever such like things without further question or doubt he may beleev, he
shall never be able to get out of it. Especially if he dive yet further into
the secrets of providence concerning such things; and question first how divine
goodness should permit the world to wander in darkness and in the error of
their ways, so many hundred years without that truth so necessary as it is
reported unto man's salvation; how a company of ignorant men who are ordinarily
transported with their own fancies as oraculous visions should be chosen to be
our masters in it: how these should be so particularly inspired, and never any
since them though of the same profession; nor yet they till their master was
departed, if ever they did presume or give out any such thing, for in their
writings we do not find they did; one indeed says of the old Prophets that
they were inspired, but speaks not any such thing either of himself or
coevangelists; and although the master promised after his departure to send
them his Spirit to teach them in his place all things they were to know, yet
does it not thence follow that they wrote no more nor otherways than they
should; besides many appearing contradictions and other humane infirmities that
seem ever and anon to occurr unto a critic judgment, as well in their writings
as other men's, might easily move one to think that those illiterate men might
as well fail in something, as all holy fathers greek and latin, and Senators of
all sacred Counsels since Christ's time, professors of the same Christianity
and pretenders to the same Spirit have in some men's opinions erred and failed
in many, namely all things wherein we find them to gainsay us. And indeed we
do in effect deal little otherwise with the apostles writings, when we give a
peremptory interpretation to such places as gainsay our opinions, quite
contrary to the express words and the natural sens they be apt to make out unto
us, according to which all antiquity understood them, adjoining withal our own
natural reasons why the text cannot otherwise be true, but only in some trope
or figur though we cannot our selves tell what; for example the places in
gospel that plainly speak forth the the real presence of Christ's body in the
Eucharist; which is no other but to say plainly thus much: If that writer let
him be Evangelist or what he will really meant as he spoke in his story, he is
not to be believed against the plain experience both of our eyes touch and
taste, and so many improbabilities if not impossibilities of reason; and Christ
himself either spoke not in that manner the Evangelist uses, or if he did he
could not intend to affirm that which neither he nor God himself can make good.
Nor will we grant any thing to Christ but what we can do our selves or
understand at least how it may be don. If there were upon earth any speaking
oracle unto whom all parties would submit in these affairs, disputes would soon
end; if such a one be excluded or denied, the very rising of them is as ominous
as the blazing of a comet or coming of a whale into a river and portends great
disturbance and desolation. The world had that fearful apprehension, when they
first beard that Luther would shine with his own light and defy the stars of
heaven: But they were more than assured of much approaching mischief when they
once understood that Calvin had left the Roman Sea to show himself and domineer
and sport in the fresh waters of Geneva.

. II. Reason.
WHo shall then set up himself for a guide to his neighbor in affairs of
religion, which must needs carry an obscurity far above all that is in nature;
and how and which way will he do it, that a good disinterested judgment may
approve of his pretensions! There can no other way, whereby any should now
afresh, after Christian religion has been above sixteen hundred years professed
in the world, set up himself a new extraordinary directour, be thought of or
imagined; but either some high inconfutable reason, internal special light, or
purer interpretation of formerly received Scripture? And what man is there in
the world can now wisely begin to pretend any of these things to the
disparagement of the rest of the Christian world.

Reason carries the fairest show, and seems most civil and manly; and if it
lean upon principles of faith formerly received, it may do much good for the
strengthening or securing of religion in weak believers; but then it makes not
says but supposes it, and must know withal, and if it be right reason cannot
but know, that all argumentations are answerable, which if they rely upon
obscure suppositions, may according to the height of the masters conceit
pretend much, but can prove nothing irrefragably. Did religion com at first by
reason? or must it only begin now? A good believer cannot but think, that
Christ the great master had a reason for what he taught; but he must believe
first, before he can think so. and although he had a reason himself, yet since he
taught us none, we can have from him no other reason but his authority, and this
may be believed but not evidently proved: for his miracles recorded and not
seen, are as pure an object of faith as his authority and person: nay if I had
seen them I could not have told my self unto whom the intricacies of whole
nature are so much unknown, whether nature and art might compass them or no; and
so might I conclude him to be some ingenious person or great naturallist, but
not a god. Nor is it likely that Christ ever meant, that reason should frame
our religion, both because he constituted such men to plant faith, as were not
any masters of arts; and if reason had been the business it had been fitter to
send them about the world to learn than to teach; as also because himself,
though he did oftentimes with subtle and most rational argumentations confute
the Pharisees errors, yet did he never by any reason that I can remember
establish his own doctrine nor answer to any Quomodo though he was often put to
it; but still when the Jews demanded How can this or that be, How can man
forgiv sins, How can this man give us his flesh to eat, he repeated again his
own assertion and doctrine, and might perhaps confirm it by miracle but he
proved it not by reason. And it was very fitting, if so be he were such a
person as we beleev him to be, that he should be taken upon his word, and not
stand to give his vassails a reason of his will. If Christ our Lord had been no
more than an ordinary wise legislatour, yet could he not rationally intend at
once both the unity of his Church upon earth, and the guidance of all men in it
only by reason of their own; for my reason is not his, and may well prove
contrary as well to it as that of my neighbors; whence will result together
not only not one religion, but also no religion* whiles one neighbors reason
differs from another, and perhaps both from Gods. Wherefore wise and holy Church
has in all ages both forbid her children to dispute their principles of
religion in the sense they had received them, and also refused to be tried
before any Senate by the philosophy of any pure man, to stand or fall by his
axioms: This is apparent not only by ancient writings of Christian doctors,
but by a fact of Emperor Julian, who falling from Christian religion, amongst
other oppressions he deprived Christians of their schools of literature
throughout the Roman Empire, telling them by way of jeer, that Christians need
not any learning unto whom this one word Credo is sufficient. And indeed it is
sufficient for faith, and must needs be both the sufficient and only means of
conserving a Church in uniformity: for religion must be something which may be
common to all persons that profess it, and equally proportioned to all
capacities and conditions, and such a thing is to Believe, but not to
ratiocinate: all men both rich and poor, wise and unlearned, prince and
peasant, may equally beleev one and the same thing, and so hold it uniformly
from time to time: but if that very thing were to be set up unto each one by
his own proper reason, the several kinds of beings in sensitiv or vegetative
nature, even from the oak to the mustard seed would not more differ, than that
one judgment in several men: have there not been fifty or threescore several
interpretations of these few words, Hoc est corpus meum, etc. and almost a
hundred opinions amongst the masters of reason about their summum bonum.

And if any say, that it is enough for some great master in these times by the
strength of his reason to raise a religion that is only to be accepted; and
others of weaker abilities may either take all that from him, or only follow
and hold what themselves are able by their own reason to reach: This cannot
satisfy at all; for first if I must take a religion upon the credit of some
great masters reason, which my self cannot judge or comprehend, I had as good
take it from the first master and beleev as I do, and not suffer another in
these days to make himself lord over me, and lead me another way of his own:
and he indeed that does so, does not only by this slight put himself into the
place of Him who conveighes faith, but of Christ himself who made it; for the
sense is the life and spirit of all words, and Christ then should but only
administer matter for this great new rising Sun to quicken: On the other side
if I be not to follow another reason but my own, what variety would there be
in the world about the same thing, not only betwixt man and man, but betwixt
one man to day, and the self same man to morrow; for the opinions which be
totally from our selves we change continually upon the variety either of our
own intrinsic dispositions or casual alterations from without; and in each
seven years resolution we find a whole volum of new thoughts and judgments
within us, contrary to former ones we had of the same things, diet, clothing,
pastimes, company, nature, providence, books, and yet all must ever be true,
for generally in all the ages of our life, we are equally obstinate in that we
set upon: so that whiles reason is licensed to create a religion, not only all
the religions which any particular man shall run through in his life time, but
those also what ever they be which whole kingdoms and nations shall at any time
accept of, in a word, all the religions of the whole earth must needs be
justified: And he can mean no less who would have that to be religion and only
that which reason makes forth: Both heretic and catholic, both Jew and
Christian, pagan and Mohammedan do all and every one stiffly defend, that his
religion is rational, that his best reason is with it and for it, and that no
right reason can be against it?

If reason that should follow, once go before and lead religion it will
suddenly thrust Christ out of his chair, and separate at once all his Church
from him: For if I hold nothing but what reason dictates, then is not Christ my
master; nor will there be any Church that may any more belong to Christ than to
Democritus, Aristotle, or at least dame Nature. If any reply, that we must take
the words from Christ and his gospel, but the proper sense which words of
themselves cannot carry with them our own reason must make out. This indeed is
true thus far, that as we do understand languages and human words, so are we
accordingly to conceiv of their meaning, as we know those words were either at
first imposed, or by long use have got the power to make out: and if those
words speak faith, the same Church gives both words and sens together,
expounding them by her very practis which we daily convers withal: but if any
will further by his pretens of reason give power to any or all men, to make out
at his pleasur a particular sense of his own, differing from the ancient
meaning conveyed together with those words, this must needs justify Calvin's
private interpretation, from which this new doctrine differs but in words,
whiles that is here called reason which he calls spirit, and both do equally
exclude the guidance of any Church besides the temple of their own heads, in
both ways every one is in deed and reality chief bishop to himself; and
equally will religion be as various and mutable as our thoughts, and answerable
to the nature either of our reason or spirit, here wide, there narrow, there
none at all. Nay what is there in christianity that one reason or other as well
as peculiarity of spirit may not deprave and frustrate; the gospel may be made
to speak Mahometisme with one reason and the Alcoran to Evangelise by another.

S. Paul had no doubt a very sublime intellect, and yet he declares that his
own and every understanding in the world is to be captivated unto the obedience
of Christ and his faith, and that all Christians walk by faith and not by
species or evidence; which is a quite contrary way to this, that would have no
religion but what coms from reason: According to this, all are to walk by sight
and not by faith; but in St. Paul's judgment all Christians are to walk by faith
and not by sight: this would have faith captivated to the obedience of the
understanding, St. Paul would have the understanding captivated to the
obedience of faith: And good reason it should be so; for are not most part of
the things our Lord revealed contingent and hid from our eyes? And if there can
be made no demonstration in nature of the things we do see and touch and
convers withal, as is sufficiently insinuated, how can things invisible be
reached and confined and concluded by reason; and this indeed is the very
ratiocination of Jesus Christ to Nicodemus, whose word I should beleev,
although I did not my self know either the antecedent to be true, or the
inference certain and necessary. In my mind it is a poor imagination to think,
that doctrinal words delivered believed and practiced in the world for almost
two thousand years, should now at length be to receiv their true sens from a
new doctor in our times which hitherto the whole Christian world wanted, and
through the universal ignorance of mankind could not till now find it out:
and to add for further countenance of the way, that the Church has three
times, ('it is pity she is not allowed her quatuor tempora) in the first she
walked by credulity, in the second by probability, and in the third which
begins in these days of ours by scientifical demonstration, is as weak a fansy
as the other: for one and the same Church must have the same motives and
grounds and practice and articles of religion, which must needs be all of them
excessively diverse, if that were true? The same conclusions and articles can
never issue from a dark credulity, a purblind probability, and a staring
demonstration.

I know that in the second and all ages of the Church preachers and doctors
explicated and declared their faith by congruous similitudes and reasons, but
neither then nor in any time of Christianity, did they frame their faith either
by reason or probability, nor yet allowed it either to stand or fall by those
means. St. Austin, Eusebius and St. Bernard lived in that which is by our new
Rationalists called the age of probability; and yet the first in his book de
utilitate credendi confutes the Manichees for saying that faith is not to be
admitted till a clear reason of every thing be given, Eusebius in the fifth
book of his history condemns the Arthemonites for straitning faith within the
limits of human wit, St. Bernard in his epistles confutes Abailard for the same
fault: And they were all three backed with that great apostle who speaks
confidently that fides est rerum non apparentium, Heb. 11. And again by
another, if not the same as great as he, who said, we preach Christ crucified
to the Jews a scandal, to the Gentiles folly, for the Jews ask a sign, and the
Gentiles require wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. So that in St. Paul's divinity as it is
Judaisme not to beleev without a sign, so likewise to suspend our faith upon
philosophical reason is pure paganism. I will not burden my paper with the
testimonies of those ancient heroes who professedly affirm that they all rely
wholly upon obscure faith, and not upon any reason either topicall or
demonstrative for their religion. St. Gregory and Theodoret shall serve for all;
Fides non habet meritum, says the first in his homilies upon the Gospel, ubi
humana ratio praebet experimentum, speaking of human reason that should precede
faith: Theodoret in his graecanicis affectibus speaks thus, Cur nostrum
credulitatis and fidei titulum accusatis? quodque nostris sententiis tradendis
nullam demonstrationem praetendamus, solam vero illis fidem atque credulitatem
insinuare conemur quos rebus divinis imbuendos suscepimus? Annon ratione plenum
est quod Deo absque demonstratione credamus. Which made St. Gregory Nazianzen
tell Emperor Julian when he objected to the Christians their rusticity and
ignorance, that the one word Credere was the same to Christians that Ipse dixit
to the Pythagorians.

But this way of setting up and holding that only to be religion, which right
reason will make forth and justify, is a rare and untrodden path, and which
ordinary spirits dare not venture upon; and it is held forth only by some wits
here in London, I suppose to dash out of countenance that grosser way of
maintaining all by Scriptures texts; and it will serve well enough for exercise
and discourse, when good wits meet together, as Cicero showed his eloquence in
defending Paradoxes: but it must needs be dangerous, if it be once believed and
reduced to practis: nor is it easy to say whether solitary reason, or a text
privately interpreted would cause more and greater inconveniences: this makes
the skirts of the Church too narrow, that inlarges them too wide; even so wide,
that all Jews Turks and Pagans would by this reckoning be in the truth; which
in effect is only to say, there is no religion at all; quod ubique est nusquam
est: and so much is easily collected by the general axiom joined with our own
particular experience to the contrary; for if nothing is to be believed but
what can be demonstrativly proved, and we find by experience that nothing can
be demonstrativly proved either about Gods will, his providence or nature, it
will thence necessarily follow that nothing at all is to be believed: and he
that holding the axiom endeavors withal himself to demonstrate the whole body
of religion, creates the like conclusion in men's minds without further words,
when they find he has demonstrated nothing.

The power of reason then will not suffice to set up a new guide: and he that
pretends this for his own pre-eminence before others, must either actually in
words or at least vertually in effect disable the whole reason of mankind
besides his own; which to sober men will not exalt his cause, but rather render
him and all his reason contemptible.

Some will object; how can our faith then be rational, or how can we give a
reason for our faith if indeed we have none for it. I answer, that faith has
his reason, as science has his; and both be good reasons but very much
differing: the reason of science is drawn from the very intrinsic bowels of
the truths that be known, but faith draws his reason from the authority of him
who delivered it; this serves one and the same for the stability of all
articles be they never so many and diverse, as the Trinity for example, and
sacraments, creation and the life to come; whereas every several conclusion in
science must have his own proper reason. And one of these must not have, nor
can it admit of the reason that is peculiar to the other, for then it should
not be it self: if science should have an extrinsecal reason from authority, it
would then not be species but fides, not evidence but faith; and if faith
should have an intrinsical one, it would not be faith but evidence. He gives
the best reason in the world for his faith, that resolves it into an authority
which is the best can be had: and he that resolves it into his own reason, as
he cannot but run himself into danger, considering the wondrous frailty and
darkness of man's judgment in all things; so likewise considering that the very
essence and quiddity of faith requires to rely ultimately upon the credit of a
revealer, instead of defending faith he destroys it. To beleev no more then we
see is indeed to beleev nothing.

Let wise Solomon and Christ our Lord make up the concluding argument. Man
says Solomon can find out nothing of the works which God has wrought from the
beginning to the end, nor of all the works of God almighty can he find out any
reason, of the things that are done under the sun, and the more he labors to
seek the less he finds, although the wise man, or philosopher, should say he
knows them, he cannot do it. Thus speaks Solomon, arming us aforehand against
the temptations of any who might endeavor to mislead us by a pretens of
demonstration into erroneous ways to our own prejudice. Then comes Christ our
Lord in his discourse with Nicodemus, wherein he teaches him the regenerating
power of Baptism which Nicodemus could not understand and makes up the
argument, to this effect; If you cannot comprehend even the things you see and
feel and convers with here on earth, this is Salomons antecedent, as the wind
for example, which you do not know either whence it comes or whither it goes,
much less must you expect to comprehend the invisible and celestial secrets of
religion, this is Christ's consequence; as if he had said, these things are
sublime and foreign and brought to you, from another superior place you know
not, and therefore to be submitted unto by faith, and not to be measured with
your poor reason, which does not so much as know the things that be at home.
And it is an argument a minore ad majus.

And as for the two other pretenses of interior light and pure sens of Gods
word, which be held forth more generally for the victory and pre-eminence in
the contest, something I have said already, and something more shall speak in the
following paragraff.

Third Chapter. No religion or sect or way has any advantage over another, nor
all of them over Popery.
. 12. Light and spirit.
BY reason of this great obscurity of things (whereby we are led into so many
petty differences where otherwise there would be none) we are so withheld from
diving into weightier affairs, that not one of a thousand does so much as think
of them: so that greater things we take hand over head and boggle at lesser,
which in reason must needs follow upon the admittance of the former. The cause
of all this is, the narrow restraint of our judgments and considerations, which
seldom look forth out of our own doors. And hence it is, that if any one by
casualty of birth, society, books, or personal fansy, adjoin himself once to
any one opinion here in England, he suddenly entertains such a prejudice
against all the rest, that there is left in him no further place for counsel:
for all other ways besides his own are condemned, as soon as his own is
accepted; and he does no sooner think himself sure, but all others must in the
same time be lost. And yet he has but his own judgment for it neither,
supported only with the appearances of I know not what spirit or internal
light, which he and his enjoy and all others want. And if a man press him once
to further difficulties than himself has thought on, though without the
reflection upon them he could never be able to settle any firm judgment about
these things in particular, one shall soon find that he heeds not any of those
things, without which the other could not be judiciously concluded; nor is able
even by the help of that light or spirit of his, to satisfy therein either
himself or other man: which argues plainly that the spirit and light he
pretends is nothing but his own private resolution not sufficiently amplified,
and yet irrationally fixed against all authority and counsel.

The Christians in ancient times especially for the first four hundred years
after Christ, had many serious and grave disputes with the Jew and pagan; which
being rational and weighty, and about the foundations of Christianity whereon
the other articles were built, did pusle even the wisest of their clergy to
answer: but after all the ratiocination ended, whether it sufficed or no, they
still concluded with this one word Credo, which the love of Christ had fastened
upon them; as emperor Julian commonly surnamed the Apostate testifies of them.
And this, although in philosophy and logic it had been a weak answer, yet in
religion it was the best and only one to be made; so that all the burden fell
at length upon the authority of Jesus Christ, who being both a man, and one too
that was crucified as a malefactor undertook to send forth religion into the
world under the title of a divine Prophet, and the only Son of God almighty
maker of heaven and earth, which could not but at first make a disturbance both
among the Jews and Gentiles where it should be preached. And the great mystery
begins here, and here it must end; for this authority being once admitted from
the Church that brings it, all other catholic truths will follow by a kind of
consequence from the same hands: and therefore this authority of his which can
never be demonstratively proved unto us that live now but only by virtue of the
Church that derives it us, Christ must maintain himself by signs and wonders,
and such signal proofs of his divine providence over his Church from time to
time, that his deity may somewhat appear in his Churches progres and defense;
and all other doctrins must be made good by it, and the Church that first
preached it to us.

In any age of the Christian Church a Jew might say thus to the Christians then
living: Your Lord and master was born a Jew, and under the jurisdiction of the
high Priests; these he opposed, and taught a religion contrary to Moses,
(otherwise how coms there to be a faction) but how could he justly do it? no
human power is of force against Gods, who spoke (as you also grant) by Moses
and the Prophets; and divine power it could not be, for God is not contrary to
himself. And although your Lord might say, as indeed he did, that Moses spoke
of him as of a Prophet to com greater than himself, yet who shall judge that
such a thing was meant of his person? for since that Prophet is neither
specified by his name or characteristicall properties who could say it was he
more than any other to come. And if there were a greater to com than Moses
were; surely born a Jew he would being com into the world, rather exalt that
law to more ample glory, than diminish it. And if you will further contest that
such a Prophet was to abrogate the first law, and bring in a new one, who shall
judge in this case? the whole Church of the Hebrews, who never dreamed of any
such thing, or one member thereof who was born a subject to their judgments.

This is the great oecumenicall difficulty: and he that in any age of
Christianity could either answer it, or find any bullwark to set against it, so
that it should do no harm, would easily either solv or prevent all other
difficulties should arise by the same authority by which it was cleared. For if
Christ were not only a lawful Teacher, but even one that was greater than
Moses as Christians beleev him to be; and both the one and the other pretended
this great work of establishing a Church, surely Christ must do it in as great
an excellency as Moses and with some advantage; the doctrine and discipline must
be as sublime and stated as permanently as his: and Christ, who wrote no law,
must so provide notwithstanding, that his Church might otherwise have one from
him and keep it as uniformly as the Hebrew Church did theirs. Wherefore as
Moses after he had done all things which belonged to himself to do, constituted
Aaron and his Successors to be guides, rulers, overseers, and judges of all
Controversies that might arise in the tribes about any points of their religion
he had written them. So must St. Peter and his Successors be enabled by some
equal if not more special means, since they also were constituted by Christ to
govern his flock, to captivate all men to the obedience of Christ's will:
otherwise his Church could not go on so uniformly in all ages, which uniformity
is the glory and indeed the very life and conservation of a Church, as that of
the Hebrews did. Nor may any body prudently imagine that the Spirit of Jesus in
his Church, and all the members thereof cooperates in every one immediately
unto truth; as it does to grace; for then why should he constitute doctors and
pastors and bishops over us, as the good apostle learnedly asserts in his
epistle to the Ephesians: Ipse de dit quosdam quidem apostolos, quosdam autem
prophetas, alios vero Evangelistas, alios autem pastores and doctores, ad
consummationem sanctorum, in opus ministerij, in aedificationem corporis
Christi. donec occurramus omnes in unitatem fidei and agnitionem filii dei, in
virum perfectum, in mensuram aetatis plenitudinis Christi; ut jam non simus
parvuli fluctuantes; and circumferamur omni vento doctrinae, in nequit a
hominum, in astutia ad circumventionem erroris: Most excellent pathetical
words; where we have first the doctrine; that pastors are set over us in the
Church to guide us: then the end of that constitution; which he declares first
positively; then negatively: the positive end is a perfect unity of faith which
by that means must vegetate and fructify and grow up in one body, even as
Christ's natural body under one spirit and head, united and compacted together,
and that without ceas even so long as that mystic body lasts upon earth, in
mensuram aetatis plenitudinis Christi, till it receiv its final consummation:
negatively, to prevent schisms and herefies, which might otherwise render the
Church in her members both contemptuous and liable to continual ruin, whiles
every particular person left to himself would be carried up and down like
children with puffes of novelty blowing several ways, by the cunning subtilty
of men, pretending new light, spirits, reasons, and such like stratagems, in
astutia in their knavery and pride of heart to bring people into a
circumvention of error; all which inconveniences are avoided by following the
guidance of the Church and the Pastors therein appointed over us. A general
spirit of truth in those that are set over the flock keeps them together and
safe; whereas particular lights in the sheep that are to be ruled would divide
them from their pastor and from one another; and division infers destruction.

Nor could that great Jewish argument be any way warded or put by, but by
recours to the Churches infallibility, which can be no other but what Christ
gave her; and his own authority and truth revealed by this Church is the utmost
foundation that supports the whole fabric; nor can there be any thing further
assigned to support it but God with whom it is believed to be united: for as
all material buildings and their connection are beheld with the eye, but their
foundation is not seen but is believed by the influence it has in supporting
the fabric, which it self is ultimately sustained by the center: So may we
discern some consequences of the points of religion upon a supposal of a great
fundamental truth upon which they all depend as this is, that Christ is a true
and divine teacher: but this cannot be seen or maintained otherwise than by a
pure belief yielded unto that Church that first taught him; and His truth
sustains all his doctrine, and the formal fabric of the Church built upon him;
and it can be grounded upon nothing but God himself the center of all
subsistence and verity. This connection of us to the apostles, of the apostles
to Christ, and Christ to God St. Paul insinuates when he says to the
Christians of Corinth; Omnia vestra sunt, sive Paulus sive Apollo, sive Kephas,
vos autem Christi, Christus autem Dei.

The Christians might indeed reply to the Jew and say; that Christ our Lord was
a holy and sacred person, divine, innocent, miraculous, and unblamable in his
whole life and conversation; that he came from heaven by the mission of his
eternal father and his own great benignity, to plant upon earth an universal
catholic Church amongst all nations, which in the fulness of time God was
pleased to do, whereas Moses had confined his Church by Gods command, till that
hour of general salvation was come, unto the one family of Abraham; and that he
had received authority from God so to do, which not only his own evangelists but
even Moses and the prophets sufficiently attest, who all do so speak forth the
birth and life passion and resurrection of this our great Messiah, and the
glory of his Church amongst the gentiles accordingly as himself promised and it
has now appeared to be; and that nothing but rancour and prejudice and the
scandal of his humility and the Jews mistake of the Messiah his first and
second coming did incens them against their own lord when he appeared amongst
them; who also looked even then for a Messiah suddenly to come whom they were
to obey and follow; and cannot probably, being then the only select people of
God ascribe their immense desolations, exiles from their own homes, and
miseries these sixteen hundred years, than to the guilt they have contracted
upon themselves by shedding the blood of that sacred person. Nor are they to be
excused, since all the ancient Rabbis before Christ's coming did openly profess
throughout all the Hebrew Church that they understood not the end and meaning
of Moses law nor ever should, till the great Messiah came to teach them, which
was so beaten into their minds that all the Hebrews believed it, as appears by
the saying of the woman of Samaria, When the Messiah comes he will teach as all
things: although through the hatred they bore to Jesus Christ they began after
his coming to sing another song.

This I say and such like words they might reply and prove all by some authority
or other: but yet whatsoever they could allege, the Jewish Rabbis would give
another interpretation to it, or if it were their own gospel flatly deny it;
and so having no other further authority to rely upon but the truth of that
Church that stands upon this foundation of Christ's divinity, there they must
rest. For there can be no hope either of satisfying a querent or conconvincing
an opponent in any point of Christianity unles he will submit to the splendor
of Christ's authority in his own person and the Church descended from him; which
I take to be the reason, why some of the Jews in Rome, when S. Paul labored so
much to persuade Christ out of Moses and the prophets, believed in him and some
did not.

So then, the great resolv of all doubts must be immediately upon the authority
of the present Church, which derived from the Church foregoing must by several
concatenations bring us at length to the authority of Christ, which is the root
and firmitude and life of all: and if this be once acknowledged and firm, and
firm it cannot otherways be than by captivating our wills and understanding to
his love and obedience under that notion the Church has revealed him; it must
equally support all future generations of Christians be they never so many in
any temptation or difficulty that should afterward happen, and the whole
Church and all her doctrine built upon it. Nor can any at any time pretend
rightfully and justly other motive of his belief, than what the apostles had
for theirs; the first age from the apostles; the second age from the first,
etc. and still the foregoing Church does but derive the faith and practice
received unto its successor, and both must equally stand upon the same
foundation of one and the same authority, which all generations take by the like
resignation and faith-submission unto the worlds end. So that he that departs
in any age from the ways of the foregoing Church, upon what pretense soever it
be done, of knowledge, interior light, reason, spirit or other discovery, he
leaves the foundation on which his faith was built and vertually forsakes
Christ, and would have had the same argument against him, if he had lived in
his time: for if the Church, the visible Church prove not to be even in that
particular age a just keeper and deliverer of faith received, then was the
Church deceived not so much in that age as in the first, when she took her
faith from him that did manifestly so comport himself as if he would be taken
for a God, and promised his Church by the general spirit he would send her, to
teach her all truth and strengthen her therein against all opposition even to
the consummation of the world: which none but God or one exceeding near unto
him could make good: and if this were not performed, the imposture was in the
first beginning. That building must needs stand firm that rests upon a Deity,
which has influence upon the whole fabric to keep it up; and if it be not so
kept up and conserved, the Church does but vainly flatter her self when she
boasts of the divinity of her support; if she fail in her doctrine and faith,
Christ is not God.

Whenever therefore we read either in the Acts of the apostles, or other
ancient story of the conversion of a Kingdom or people unto the right religion
of Christianity, we still find it was done not by any private illumination of
any one, who living before in darkness with the rest was now secretly called to
teach others; but by a resignation unto a former doctrine brought from Christ by
his missioners and preachers; by submission to a truth delivered to them from
without, not rising up within them. Faith comes by hearing; and every man upon
earth, that has ever been approved Christian received it that way, and was
made thereby not a master but disciple to the Church. Whereas on the other side
this spirit and light and such like discoveries we so frequently talk of, makes
us not scholars but masters ipso facto; and urges not to submit to foregoers
but to condemn them; not to resign our own but to captivate others
understandings, not to go to the Church, but to go out of it; and that upon the
single motive of a new illumination which none had before us, and we from no
body.

I know well enough that a man cannot be converted and become a good Christian
without the assistance of Gods grace exciting and cooperating with us to our
good, when the truth is taught and revealed to us: But this I suppose is not
the Light men talk of; for this is rather in the affection and will than in the
understanding, and bids us hearken to another not to our selves; to join with a
Church already planted, not to begin a new one of our own heads: It says not
to us make a vineyard of your own, but go into mine. And the intellectual
Light men speak of, if we have any we receiv it afterward as a reward of our
humility in that Church, where we did not kindle it but found it already
burning, to guide our feet by it in the ways of peace; Creed and intelliges
said a great Prophet, Beleev and you shall understand: but we must beleev
first, and by that obscure step of belief, which is as a duksy twilight
between the darkness of infidelity we lived in before and the light of truth we
go to, arrive we to all future happiness.

But we in England that pretend this new Light and secret Spirit, are separated
by it from a former Church but brought to none; nor are we made disciples by it
but masters on the sudden, and enabled to teach all men that which we never
received from any: which is absolutely against the whole course of Christianity,
and will if it be admitted set open a gap unto all fanatic fancies.

St. Paul professes he was apostle not of men nor by men but by God; and the
reason is, because his first call was extraordinary from heaven, as was likewise
the suggestion he had to his mission; and yet that God that called him,
although he showed him so singular a favor, yet would he not dispense with his
own orders and constitutions even in him, but sent him to the good Priest
Ananias to be by him instructed and catechized and admitted into his Church;
and with those people St. Paul found in the profession of that faith did he
often confer, even he that was so strangly called from heaven conferred the
Gospel which afterward he preached, as himself speaks in his epistle to the
Galatians, with those people and with that Church he found in actual
possession and profession of that faith, least, says he, I should have run in
vain; that is least he should do or think or preach any thing amiss contrary to
the truth received unto which he was called; which he could no otherways by
the constitutions Jesus himself had made be assured of, but by comparing his
doctrine with that which was believed and practiced in the Church before him;
into which he was now incorporated as a member in that body by the assistance
of the grace he had received, to be first a disciple and then afterward a
master and teacher; and when he did become a doctor, he did not make himself
one, no nor his calling by Christ sufficed to do it, but he was made such a one
under the hands of the apostles, and by their approbation, authority and sacred
ordination, as may be seen in the book of the Acts chapter 13. Nor was he to teach
without that Churches leav or contrary to her faith, but by her direction and
in subjection to her.

This is a faithful speech and worthy of all consideration, which seriously
pondered would dissipate in a moment all whatsoever pretenses of light, spirit,
reason, or other thing that shall mov any to a new way by himself, contrary to
what he has received and seen practiced in the Church before him. And if any
would seriously peruse the Acts of the apostles, wherein the footsteps of
primitive Christianity fufficiently appear, he shall find that all that were
called unto Christ's religion, were brought to the feet of the apostles and
priests who received them at the door, and brought them into the house of God by
the laver of Baptism, and imposition of hands and confession of sins, and it
was not only the ordinary but sole ingress into that Church; and none were
ever esteemed to be of that body but only by those means, which also the
pastors of the Church were only to manage. He that comes not in at the door,
says Christ, is neither sheep nor shepherd but a thief and a robber. And true
Christian religion consists not in going out of a Church but coming in, there
to submit to the ancient dictates of piety which Christ revealed.

. 13. Independent and Presbyterians Plea.
TO a judicious man whom a word suffices it will already appear that no
opinion or way here in England can have any advantage over the other, by virtue
of discoveries made by any light, spirit or reason: since there can no such be
legally pretended to set up any new religion apart from the former, but to join
rather with the old, which if it be not absolutely true, Christ is not God, and
all Christianity but a human invention. But yet for the further satisfaction of
my reader I will look a little more particularly into the ways and pretensions
of all parties, and as brlefly too as may be.

The Quaker (for I have both read their books and conversed frequently with
their persons) is in appearance very just and honest, his open pretenses good
and plausible, and books spiritual enough to one of our vulgar readers, unto
whose judgment they be well proportioned; for good words are put together to
promote solid and sincere honesty, and to evacuate that empty show of piety
which has now generally taken place in the world in lieu of the real substance
that is in a manner quite vanished out of our hearts and hands: But these words
are so strangly jumbled together, that every line has good sens in it, but all
together none; for as they carry no reference to any one supreme scope, to
which as the utmost object of the whole discourse all those phrases may be
applied; so being well examined and compared together they will be found very
frequently to gainsay one another; and he that looks for connection and
correspondence either of sens or sentence, will lose his labor. I have never
seen any thing, that for the style and context of the speech does more nearly
resemble Mahomets Alcoran than a good Quakers book; for in both be handsome
words, some dreaming conceits interlarded with undeniable truths, much imperious
censur of all mankind that will not submit to that way, endless tautologies, and
no connection; and it would even amaze a man to see how pathetically the good
Quaker decries all mortal men and tramples them under his feet, with pious
words most uncouthly put together; in a manner, as far as I am able to imitate
it, to this purpos.

The Lord has begun a good work upon earth, and he will finish it, men shall
see it with their eyes, and all darkness shall be confounded before his feet, a
little thing within thee shall lay thy shame open, and strike thee hip and
thigh, his goings are mighty, and nothing can resist the breath of his
nostrils, when he shall make the mountains to smoke and the hills to tremble
before the arm of his power, when he begins to make his Saints glorious he will
do it, all that has exalted it self shall fall, root and branch, and the proud
cedar must down, thou shall see it in that day, for it will come upon thee,
even as pangs upon a woman in travel, Babylon shall fall, and all the glory of
men be laid in the dust, when Christ shall reign in his little ones, and they
in him, for there must be an end, an end to adulteries and darkness, an end to
pride, to tyranny, to all the sons of men, that the Lord may be all in all,
woe, woe, woe, is it not told thee, is not the truth preached, is not the light
already com, and yet men hate it, the sons of men hate it, they persecute that
light, but light cannot be hurt, it cannot be prevailed over, they may show
their spleen to the truth, but all their spite it must end, it must yield at
last, nothing is stronger than truth, not wit, not strength, not policy, not
wealth, not pride, not falsehood, the horns of the beast must fall off, as well
the little as the great one, when the beast is slain and cast out into the
wilderness, to the fouls of the air, to be devoured by the beasts of the field,
does not the Presbyterian preach for hire, does he not walk in black, the
color of the whore, does he not frequent steeplehouses or bellhouses built by
Papists, and profaned with adulteries and fornications with idols, does he not
set open his wares in his shop, commonly called a pulpet, a popish name, does
he not court and cap and cringe for lucre, filthy lucre, according to men, is
there any power of godliness in him, truth and the word of God does not consist
in words, it is not written in paper, it is here within thee, hearken to it,
yield obedience there, attend what it says there, Protestant what is
protestant, a mere carnal idol, a cheat, abomination, an imp of popery, the
eldest brat of the whore, thou can not, thou can not, thou can not stand,
thou art assuredly to fall before the arm of the lord which is bared against
thee, and all thy cheating lies shall be laid open in the dust, for men to
trample, and go over, and tread under their feet, O popery, idolatry, sin,
lies, thefts, tyrannies, wickedness, darkness, hearken unto me, come to the
light and heart it speak, it will guide thee, it will guide thee to the truth,
it is a sweet thing within thee, it speaks comfort, it makes thee see and hate
all kind of corruption, if thou will heed it, and hearken to it, and follow it,
it will make thee contemn thy self, contemn all mortal men, contemn pride and
the glory of this world, and all popish superstitions, and all that exalts it
self, popes, cardinals, principalities, steeplehouses, to lie in the dirt and
dust of the earth, which will be sweeter to thee with that light within thee,
than the silks and gold and earthly pelf of this world, ministry and
magistracy and wordly power, the two horns of the beast is invented only by
Antichrist to oppress Christ, the Pope is the old serpent, the grand seducer,
he it is that shows the apple that is fair to the eye and sweet to the taste,
but poison in the stomach, the Saints and little ones must rule, and all
iniquity shall be don away, the light will dissolv all the beasts ten horns,
etc.

Well good neighbor, it is enough: When Christ comes we will worship him, and
beg to be admitted into his kingdom; till then let us have peace, which is I am
sure some part of it. We cannot answer you, if that will satisfy you whom I
know no answer will. Every good man in the world wishes with you that all
iniquity were done away; and well may you I should think content your selves
with them to wish it so to all, and see it done in your own persons Why do you
trouble the world with your useles clamours, and put it so out of tune, that
Christ when he coms can find no quiet entertainment in the land, for the wars
and broils his great Saints have made in it? If you talk a little longer of
Christ's coming, and make way for him as the fanatics did last January with
bright steel armor and shining head pieces, sharp cimiters, pistols and
harquebusses, stoutly fighting and severely declaring against the whole earth
whom they condemned to ruin, we have reason to fear that the surname of this
your Christ will be Oliver, and your golden days but the slaughter and
bloodshed of your innocent neighbors. If your meaning be good, show it by your
peaceable conversation; and speak no more to us, for we need it not and heed it
as little, but say your prayers in your closets, and prepare your selves for
his coming, whom you judge so near: Nothing is so suspicious as tumultuous
piety. And I do earnestly request you would seriously peruse two short stories
related by wise Gamaliel in the fifth chapter of the Acts, and make them a part
of your primmer. Men Israelites, says he, look to these men what you are to
do. Before these days there was one Theodas professing himself to be some body
unto whom consented a number of men about four hundred, who was slain and all
that believed him was dissipated and brought to nothing. After him there was
Judas Galileus in the days of profession, and he drew people after him; and he
perished himself, and so many as consented to him were dispersed. And both these
rose up under a pretens of piety; and, if I be not mistaken, for Christ too;
whose reign they would have set up in Palestine before his first coming, or
thereabouts, even as you would now before his second, to the disturbance of the
kingdom you live in.

So then, good friends, setting aside your violent exclamations against all
that adhere not to you, which you cannot your selves justify, for humility and
peace is the great and inseparable property of piety if it be true and real,
our agreement with you is already made: for the true light you magnify we
praise it too and hope we enjoy it; the vice you deplore we do equally detest;
the coming and reign of Christ we hope and wish for with all Christian
resignation; and the two horns of ministry and magistracy, as soon as the
world is grown so good and peaceable as there shall be no further use of them,
will be taken away; but till all iniquity and the wild beasts you speak of be
rid out of the earth, I hope you will be so rational as not to think we will
throw away the only horns of our safety; and if you do well, you need not fear
the sword either of spiritual or temporal power. The apostles were never
rebellious to any authority they found established in the world. Nor is there
any power upon earth can justly disturb a Prince or Kingdom by pretens of any
light truth or religion, which be it never so true is to be humbly offered not
violently intruded upon any.

The Anabaptist walks with the Quaker and makes up with him a pair of
Independents; his books carry the like pious strain, but have somewhat a
clearer color of art and less of zeal. The particular controversy of
Infantbaptisme, which because he allows not of it, gives him his special name, I
will not meddle with. But his great argument why children should not be
baptized, namely because they cannot either know what is done to them or concur
themselves to the effect, if it were of force, might in my mind equally hinder
their corporal nurs to wash or make them clean, unto which they are so far from
concurring that as much as they are able they resist it and struggle and kick
and cry amain when it is done, not knowing what good is done to them; and as
there is as much need of the spiritual washing as of that, so can God as easily
with his laver make their souls clean without their help, as we their bodies.
However, gentlemen Anabaptists, if you will not wash your children, you will
give us leav I hope to baptize ours, which if it should not do them good, yet
will it for certain do you no harm: custom is a tirant, and we cannot but keep
it; it you like it not, unusquisque in suo sensu abundet.

Even as the Papist is defensiv against Protestant, Presbyterian and
Independent, who all hate and persecute him, so is the Independent offensiv
against them all: but the intermediat Presbyterian and Protestant are in an
offensiv postur against their foregoers, and defensiv against their revolting
successors.

But the Presbyterian very much renowned in these days for his zealous prayer
and preaching, does not so much heed the bitings of his junior Independent
weaker than himself both in learning and repute; as he does endeavor to
disable the Prelate-Protestant his foregoer, whose gravity and long continuance
in the land with much estimation and applaus cannot without great hostility and
force of wit be as he could wish utterly disparaged. And so the Presbyterians
cause in this great contest bears in a manner this scheme of plea against the
Protestant episcopacy.

Your Monarchick-superintendency wherein one should tirannise and lord it over
many in spiritual affairs, we can no ways appro^, against the lively current
of Gospel-dispensations in which if any will be greater than the rest, let him
that may he be so indeed by the form that is in Christ, who being in his
divinity-fulnes emptied himself into the figure of a servant, be made the
least. We have all one Lord and Master, and we equally his servants unto whom
alone we either stand or fall, from whose fulness we receiv all of us grace for
grace. Did not the master check his apostles for the like spirit-ambition,
when they labored against the vein of the ingoings of humble Christ within
their souls, to be one greater then another, whereas they were all
indifferently under him whom they called Lord and master, and by his own
testimony very truly. And if we be successors to the apostles in soul-ministery
and dispensations of Gospel-verities, we succeed them also in their absolute
independency upon any other Lord but himself who is all in all. The first
reforming Protestants in the sulnes of time and age of reconciliation-light,
whom both you and we acknowledge to be endued with most ample gifts and essences
of Christ within the closets of their souls, struggled and lift and bore up
more resolutely against this Papall-government the very Egiptian residence
whence succeeding darkness spread it self about the world, than any one or other
pernicious doctrine might have flowed from that sours, unto the obstructing of
the light-dispensations from above. And not without reason, for all
doctrin-vassailage was exercised and kept in hand by that Episcopacy-power over
men's immortal souls, whose command belongs only to him who sees and rules
hearts, to the utter ruin of all Christian liberty in the Gospel-messengers who
now were to administer to the hungry mouths of soul-starved persons not bread
of life from heavenly places, but husks and chaft from the earthly palaces of
dry and deceitful dictates of men. Nor was this Prelate-presidentship ever
permitted in any reformed Churches beyond the seas where reformation-light
first sprang forth, but pulled down and abhorred either as downright Popery or
at least the shadow and imitation of it: and we who be the lights of the world
and salt of the whole earth, as we are to refrain from all show of evil, so can
we not find upon earth any superior spirit-power by which we may be made good:
for if the primary lights of the world and stars of the firmament be once put
out, who shall lighten them again, whose abode is in earth and clay? And if the
salt have lost his savor wherewith shall it be seasoned? Nor can we be
ignorant that this Episcopacy-power was set up in England many years after
Reformation-ingress by the ambitious policy of some men who falling from their
former humility-spirit set up that chair of a State-spirituall for themselves,
which when another sat in it they used all kind of endeavor force and power
to throw it down.

Can prelate-affecters deny that Episcopacy-power was by the first and purest
reformation-light utterly subverted? If you know it not, the smallnes of your
judgment will comdemn you, if you know it and do the contrary you are condemned
in your own judgment: and if the Reformation was impure in this, then was
Protestant Reformation corrupt both in its first birth and the most glorious of
all its enterprises, wherein our consciences were withdrawn from the
tyrant-yoaks of inveigling men unto the sweet influences of Christ, who as he
is the great pastor of souls, so he is sure not to mislead his flock by any
such passions as do frequenty domineer in man, when he is once set over his
fellow servants, pride, ignorance, self-will and interest. And if we be once
brought again to the same ancient servil yoke of conscience-tyranny to receive
our light and influences from men as before we did under Popery, why may we not
by the same strong tide of an irresistible self-leading power be driven
uncontroulably to the same or greater errors? Except you will say, that the
Archbishop of Canterbury is a surer and more unerring guide than the Romish
bishop: both of them I am sure be men and equally fallible, who standing either
of them betwixt us and home may by their usurped power over consciences which
be only subject to the invisible Lord of truth lead us again either into our
ancient or some new invented error, and if they impose the yoke who can resist
them: But the Lord of truth cannot lie, and the beams of his light falling
immediately upon his peace-messengers as once upon the apostles in cloven
tongues of fire, untainted with the interposition of any intervening obstacle
must needs be both clear and true. I will teach you all things, says he, to
his apostles; he said not that one of them should teach another; nor did those
cloven tongues descend first from Christ upon Peter, from Peter to Andrew, from
Andrew to John and so forward in an hierarchical line which Papists imagine in
their Church, but from Christ alone immediately upon them all. Nor can you move
us at all by telling us as you do of ancient tradition for Episcopacy-power
even from Christ time unto this present age, since all those times and places
are concluded by the pious Reformation under popish darkness, which began even
in Paul's time when the mystery of iniquity, even this mystery of papal tyranny
began to work, and so overwhelmed the whole earth, till at length the Lord was
pleased by the foolishnes of preaching to enlighten those little ones who were
predestined to beleev a truth aforetime hidden to all the sons of men. Did we
not all appeal from such popish traditions to the oracle, to the gospel, to the
word of God, and to the truth that cannot lie: And what other instrument did we
make use of, to the abolishing of that human supremacy over men's souls, which
now again by erroneous tradition you would contrary to your own principles
obtrude upon us, than that very word and oracle. And the gospel which as it is
now by Reformation-purity put into every man's hand, so is every man, the
ministers successors to the apostles by the help of Christ's light which by
frequent prayer they unite to themselves, the people by light they receiv from
gospel ministers to interpret and understand it, is totally with us and for us.
Look into the gospel of Matthew, etc. Hic subauditur longus textuum catalogus
ab initio ad finem Biblii contra episcopatum. If you reply that we must for the
sense of all these places have recours unto the Church; what Church do you
mean, yours out of which you say we are fallen, or the popish Church which both
you and we deserted? Take which you will, for the same reasons and
gospel-verities equally reject them both: and if we must hearken to your
Church, out of which you say we are fallen, why then did not you obey that
Church out of which you sell your selves; if that were in error, and therefore
to be deserted, yours is in no better condition: but the invisible congregation
of the faithful, which in our first reformation we took to be the Church, can
never fail. And if you begin now to take the Church in a popish sense for any
hierarchicall prelacy, you do at once condemn your selves both of inconstancy
and dissimulation and also of violation of gospel, and rebellion against that
visible Church our forefathers found themselves in, unto which it seems now by
this tenor of your speech they were bound by their Christianity to obey.
Scripture authority you have none for you, nay it is all against you; human
words and practices being now rid by Christ of all those servil yoaks we valiew
not, and the true light of purest Reformation which you have deserted since it
is with us as at the beginning, we must not forfeit; nor do any thing may
obstruct the ingoings and outgoings of little Christ within us.

Whiles the Presbyterian is hotly busied in this his plea against the
Prelate-Protestant, the Independent touches his elbow and advises him to
bethink himself least with the same weapon he wound his adversary and kill
himself. For if such reasonings, says he, be of value, what will then become of
the clerical Presbyterian black coat, which being derived from popery, finds no
more grounds in scripture than episcopacy has. Are not all men equally subject
to Christ, and capable alike of his divine influences? and so indeed it is said
of the times of Christianity. And they shall be all taught of God. How then com
other teachers to intrude betwixt us and God, to obstruct and taint and
variously infect his light; those upon whom the Holy Ghost descended were all
lay men, as we be, and some of them women too. But as soon as the Presbyterian
turning upon him called him fanatic; the protestant cried, In neither barrel
better herring, ye are both so. It was presently replied by them both, when did
the spirit leav us to speak unto you? by what light or scripture can you make
that good, you that are blinded in your own errors. The Catholic coming by,
When thieves fall out, quoth he, honest men may hope to come to their own goods
again.

. 14. Protestant pro and con.
WHat advantage then can the pious Quaker have against the zealous
Presbyterian, or both of them against the honest Protestant, whiles all of them
find words enough out of scripture and reasons thence deduced, to throw at one
another, and each side is both disputant and moderatour, both opponent and
master of the chair, both interpreter and judge. The Roman catholic I do not
here mention; for the taking Him for his guide and judge from whom he first
received his scriptur and faith, and expecting all resolutions of doubts only
from his lips, can never stagger or fall into perplexity. But with Protestant
Presbyterian and Independent, whose utmost resolv is in their own hands, the
case is otherwise. And the combat that is amongst them is the most desperate
imaginable; whiles any visible speaking judge being excluded by them all, each
one fights against all the rest with the same topic ratiocinations, that none
but he that uses them must judge, Scripture is for us, scripture is easy and we
have it, the spirit that is in us teaches all truth, the light from above us is
only to direct us, and not men who are liars, etc. And these if they prevail,
overthrow him that uses them; so that to the same combatant must needs happen
by the same means both death and victory; and the same autorities and
argumentations if any of them obtain his desire, must bear both a probility for
him and a prejudice against him. Thus the Protestant, if he do or will pretend
to convince the Presbyterian, then must he at the same time and for the same
reasons yield to the Roman catholic with whose discourse and arguments he
flourishes and triumphs against him; and yet being uttered from the mouths and
pens of Catholics against himself, he contemned and jeered them. And if the
Presbyterian texts and reasons be of force against the Protestant, then must
the Protestant fall by that instrument by which himself stands and subsists
against the Papist; against whom he has ever used those very assertions and
arguments; and the Presbyterian too must stand and fall upon the same account,
the same weapon laying him dead before the Independent which against the
Protestant supports him. The Independent, if he be able by strength of his
light and spirit, to maintain himself against all his foregoers, Presbyterian,
Protestant and Papist; then by the same reasons must he needs fall when a new
fansy rises by any succeding generation.

A strange case and indeed a mere riddle, but a certain truth. And the Catholic
all this while to a disinterested understanding, whiles all his enemies condemn
one another, stands uncontroulably justified in his oppositions to them. The
Independent is in the wrong says the Presbyterian and Protestant; the
Presbyterian erres, says the Protestant and Independent; the Protestant is
deceived, says the Independent and Presbyterian; you are all mad men quoth the
Roman Catholic, you first abused and supplanted me, and now by the same ways
and means you do supplant and abuse one another. But if I may interpose my
judgment, the Protestant, although I honor his gravity above all the rest,
seems to be in a wors case than either Presbyterian or Independent: for these
in maintaining themselves and their ways, do but strike home the first
principles of protestant reformation; whereas the Prelate-protestant, to defend
himself against them, is forced to make use of those very principles which
himself aforetime when he first contested against popery destroyed; as be the
difference betwixt clargy and laiety, the efficacy of episcopal ordination, the
authority of a visible Church unto whom all are to obey, and the like: so that
upon him falls most heavily even like thunder and lightning from heaven,
utterly to kill and cut him asunder, that great oracle delivered by S. Paul in
his letter he wrote to the Christians of Galatia, Si^ quae destruxi iterum haec
aedifico, praevaricatorem me constituo. If I build up again the things I
formerly destroyed, I make my self a prevaricatour, an impostour, a reprobate.
A heavy sentence. But truth will out, and wisdom will be justified at long
running even by her greatest adversaries. It seems that those pieces of popery
we so desperately inveighed against for our own interest, were indeed not evil
but good.

The Protestant may indeed with some plausible show excuse himself; and say,
that the first Reformers though sent from God, yet might they notwithstanding
have some little mixture of humane passion and infirmity, and so out do their
work, and decry more then in truth they ought to have don; as he that would
straighten a crooked wand, bends it as much the other way, to the end that by
that over force it may at length recover its mediocrity and straightnes: and
what ever is done amiss by earnestnes of passion, may by a second thought be
mended. And this excuse would find place in any business of humane concernment,
but whether it may be of any weight in affairs of religion and divine faith I
leav others to judge; for what may be pretended by all unto endless changes, can
never be rightly said by any: and S. Paul having assigned that property as a
signal mark of a prevaricatour, I should think we may believe it without
further dispute.

However by the reassuming of this episcopacy, be it the substance or shadow of
Popery or what you pleas, our English Protestant Church became by that means
the very best and choicest flower of all the Reformation: no order, no decency,
no peace, no uniformity in all the world where Protestancy was received, like
unto that we here enjoyed under our bishops in England: nor could any man by
the force of nature suspect any the least rottennes in the foundation of such a
handsome fabric; I am sure I had not, but by a strange chance that happened to
me in my childhood.

And although our Prelate-Protestant is not able to answer the Presbyterian
objection, standing upon his own first principles of reformation, which do
indeed and ever will justify all revolts to the worlds end; yet by the
principles of his Recovery, those I mean by which he reassumed Episcopacy too
precipitously decried by the first reformers, which principles be firm and good
and right Christianity he will easily frustrate and dissolv all opposition; but
then he must creep into the bosom of Roman catholics and beg the assistance of
their arguments which before he foolishly contemned. For every Body be it what
it will, natural, politic or spiritual must so long as it remains entire and
sound, have the same principal parts and organs it was born withal, and cannot
endure long even in a contrary posture of them without dissolution and ruin.
Take any kingdom that is settled in monarchy, and if you endeavor once the
subversion of that Polity, you do at the same time take away the life of all
her laws and rights, and utterly disturb her happiness and peace, which are so
mixed and entangled in the very nerves and sinews of her laws, and these again
so settled upon the polity, as upon the prime innate influent Calid and
radical primogeneal Humid, that all goes together, and take part alike either
in weal or woe. This truth we have had a sad experience of in the time of our
late civil wars, wherein our Monarchy once subverted we all perished with it,
and our rights and welfare at such a loss, that no man could say that aught he
had remaining was his own. It must needs be so; for the government what ever it
be, is before the laws; and the laws receiv all their strength and vigor from
the acknowledged authority of that power from whence they are derived.

Now that the Christian Church was first monarchical under one Sovereign
Bishop, when Christ who founded it was upon earth, no man will deny; for
aristocracy or democracy it could not be, since all his twelve apostles were
under him as his disciples, and not fellow doctors or legislatours with him:
nor did he ever pretend to receiv his authority from men but immediately from
God above, unto whom he was personally united; and this authority of his must
first be accepted before his word can be believed or his law acknowledged: and
these must have all their force from that power which according to its
firmitude of truth gives them all their life and vigor, which remains and dies
with it and with the government under which the laws and doctrine began. It
appears then that all the laws and rules and promises and whole doctrine of
Christianity and founded upon the spiritual monarchy of Jesus who was Man-God;
that he might be both unto human kind a fit and proportioned head as man; and
uncontrollable, independent, and infallible as God. And hence it must needs
follow, that the subversion of episcopacy which is the spiritual monarchy in
which our Lord founded his Christianity must needs weaken and by degrees
utterly destroy all faith; for the ruin of the polity is the death of all its
laws founded in it.

Nor will it suffice, if an Independent or Presbyterian say, that they are
still under their head Christ, who being in heaven has his spiritual
influences over them. I say this suffices not: for the true Church of Christ
whersoever it is, must have the very same head she had at first, or else she
cannot be the same body, and that head was man-God personally present in both
his natures with the body of his Church here on earth; and although Christ may
and does supply the invisible part of his Godhead influence upon his mystic
body, yet a visible head or bishop if the Church has not now over her, as at
first she had, she is not the same she was, and consequently in the way to
ruin. What then, you will say, cannot God preserv his Church without the help
of man? I answer we must not here dispute what God can do, but what he will do.
God can warm the earth and make fruits to grow and us to see without the sun;
but if he have otherwise ordained we must expect those effects from the cause he
has set and no other ways. And that all truths are to be expected from his
Church, and from him he has substituted in his place to govern us as our only
visible Pastor, is manifestly apparent both by his own law and practice and
our experience: By his law, when he says, that he who will not hear his Church
must be as a publican and reprobate; by his practice, when he would not have
his own supernatural vocation and endowment and light from heaven to suffice
St. Paul either to make him a Christian, or a Teacher, till he had received
both from the hands of his Church and pastors; by our experience, while we see
from age to age, that all those that withdraw themselves from the Catholic
Church and from her chief Bishop and pastor, let the occasion be what it will
or never so little, do run themselves restlesly into endless schisms, denying
one thing after another, still from less to more, till at length all
Christianity be cancelled; and beginning with schism they end with atheism;
all truth unity and peace being to be had only from and in that one Church,
which as St. Paul does well and wisely call it Christ's Body, so is it only
animated with his spirit of truth, and from the government there appointed
which is episcopal, and in a special manner from the chief pastor there
presiding ruling and directing in place of Jesus Christ, unto whom all obey in
yielding obeisance unto him in spiritual affairs, according to his own order
and appointment. Nor is there any more certain rule of discerning the
approaching ruin of Christianity in any person or people, than when we see them
either secretly to undermine or openly to oppugn papal authority. No pope no
bishop, no bishop no Church, no Church no salvation.

This being once well pondered, as a thing of such weighty concernment deserves,
we shall begin both to suspect that the first reformers Luther and Calvin, who
being Priests under that Papal hierarchy flew out against the Church whereof
they had been members, and furiously cried down both Pope and all episcopacy,
were not sent from God; and likewise conclude, that the counsel of Queen
Elizabeth did wisely reassume that ancient form of Church government, though it
were opposite to the principles of reformation and judgment of all the first
reformers; because it was both most conformable to times of primitive
Christianity, and in all reason most likely to conserve the land in unity. And
if we were once by Gods grace freed from preconceived prejudice, we should all
of us as clearly see and love the beauty of papal doctrine, as now some of us
allow of papal government: nor is there any thing commendable in any
reformation, but that and only that, which it has in it of Popery: And lastly
we shall easily discern that the the Presbyterian plea and all its arguments,
or whatever else they can have to say against episcopacy, are of no value, and
indeed too slight for me to insist upon their solution.

I had a mind here to decipher the Protestants plea against the Papist; but I
find that there cannot be made any one scheme of it, as of the Independent and
Presbyterians; because these, the first of them speaks so generally of all
things, that he seldom touches upon any one particular; the other so insists
upon one particular, that he troubles himself with nothing else; and a man may
know what both of them would have. But all these, and several other
reformations when they set their face against the Roman Catholic, go all under
the general name of Protestants, and yet speak several and contradictory
things, one accusing them for that which the other approves. And generally they
do neglect their doctrine, and inveigh against the vices and follies which
either they put upon them, or are indeed found amongst some people or persons
that do profess that faith in France, Spain, Italy or other parts; as pride,
tyranny, drunkenness, leachery, foolish gambols, and usages of Countries; with
which Protestant books against popery are lustily stuffed up; or if they do
indeed speak to their doctrine, it is either done only with some witty jest and
jeer, and so having given it a flap with a fox tail they pass on soberly to
other matters in hand, as is commonly done in the pulpits of witty preachers;
or if they handle it more seriously, they do either for their own advantage
mistake the doctrine, or the proofs they bring against it, whether through fraud
or ignorance it is hard to say: and the foundations of catholic religion which
be tradition and scripture they do so variously expound in several times and
places, that one text shall have twenty several interpretations, which if they
be not catholic pass all for good; here and at one time an authority of a
father or council shall be accepted and diversely interpreted, in another time
and place quite rejected; now one piece of catholic doctrine shall be
vehemently cried down and at another time taken up again and maintained; and at
one and the same time in several parts of the world twenty points for example
of catholic faith shall all of them be somewhere received and somewhere
rejected amongst Protestants: for they being still their own masters, may
choos and throw away what they pleas, and as long as they list, without
control; whereas the Romans keeping still one and the same treasury of religion
and faith afford matter for them all either to take or leave, either to approve
or laugh at as they l^st; as a well furnished table affords wanton children
both what they may feed upon themselves, and what being full they may spoil and
play with, and cast to the dogs.

. 15. Scripture.
ANd whence com all these divisions? only from this, that every man has a
reason, an interpretation, a light, a spirit of his own by which the bible
which is now in all men's hands is made to speak what we pleas, and our thoughts
and tongues are our own, what lord shall us control. This is a sad case: while
all of us, upon those only motives which all men may take up at any time to
abuse his innocent neighbor, proceed to mutual hostility without end. The very
books that have been written against Roman catholic this last hundred years,
as they be furious and virulent, so be they also so many and various that they
would if they were all brought together fill up the Tower of London; and by
them have people been inflamed to such a height against the Romans that their
bodies, dignities, honors, fame, houses and goods have been ineffably
harrassed to this day. And yet no body can say what ill that religion ever did
in the world, until Henry the eights days when it was first rejected and
persecuted: and when we have laid them in the dust, we fly upon one another and
pull and tear upon the same motiv all that stands in our light. Reflect
countrymen upon your selves; shall we continue in a contest, that can never
possibly be ended; and being prosecuted to the utmost must needs infer a
general ruin upon all? for whatsoever we say against any one, may be said by
any other against our selves, and proved by the same argument; and the same
thing may be done to us upon the same account we do it to another.

All appellation to a visible judge is by anticatholicks jointly excluded; and
to the Roman catholic with whom unity has ever dwelt we will not return; nor
can it be yet expected, for the general disrepute unto that way has so filled
our ears and hearts, that hating the very name of Papist, we have not power to
consider soberly what their religion may be. Nay we are verily persuaded even
from our nurses milk, that Protestants are the only professors, and Papists
enemies to the gospel; although to all the world besides, the gospel is well
enough known to be the Roman catholics own and sole religion, by which they
walked and lived here in England many hundred years unto a fruitfulnes of all
good works, before Protestancy appeared: and we pretend to fight against them
only for the gospel, and with the gospel, whiles they forsooth are believed to
have nothing at all to defend themselves, but a little traditional trumpery of
man's inventions, with a greater heap of vices of their own. And upon this
account proceed all our books that are written against Papists and popery; in
effect like unto that picture that was carried not long ago up and down the
Protestant world, wherein was drawn a fair balance as a type of the two
religions, in whose left hand scale hanged beads, girdles, cardinals caps,
monks hoods, friars cowles, disciplines, crosses, to signify Popery; in the
other a fair great Bible to signify Protestancy; which hanging upon the ground
quite weighed up the other scale into the air as light as very vanity. And so
credulous is the generallity of mankind, that by such toies as these we are
carried away unto not only a dislike but even the highest detestation and
contempt of a sacred religion, without further examination. But what do I speak
of the generallity of the vulgar! Even our sober and most judicious men, who in
other things speak and think like oracles, in this business of popery are not
abashed to speak like children that talk of hobgoblings in the dark; so
prevalent is a prejudice brought upon us by the virulent impression of often
iterated calumnies. Nor are we able by the restraint of this great prejudice
either to read the books, or ponder seriously the reasons of our catholic
neighbors for their faith. Yea I have heard some Protestants in other things
most wise and judicious to say openly, that as for Papists he loved their
persons, but their religion he hated in his heart: the reason is clear, he knew
the one and not the other.

And as we do all of us by this old imbibed prejudice detest Popery though we
know not what it is; so by any new-received dislike, when we have once bodied
with any one faction we revile all the rest; and none will yield to another,
although in all reason that religion that has precedence of time with all the
other helps any juniour way can pretend unto, might one would think have so
much if not precedence yet equallity of respect, as not to be by a way that is
new in the world so bitterly reviled; especially when all that venomous
bitterness which by any junior sect is cast upon his foregoer, may and is as
heavily thrown upon himself by his successor. But thus rancour and malice
spreads abroad in our hearts and whole kingdom against his rule and doubtless to
his great displeasure who carefully obliged us to the contrary rules of love;
and, which is to be lamented, the first sours and origin of all these
defamations is the Pulpit, where both by word and example we are taught to
defame and hate even those we do not know. We may fear some great curs lies upon
our poor nation for these our unnatural disorders, even so far as to blind us,
that we cannot see the truth. Unto his dogs set upon their devouring sport even
Acteon the master may seem a stag and be torn a pieces by them. Wrath puts a
new shape upon an adversary, who through such a black medium, though he be
never so innocent in himself, will appear all odious; especially when the wrath
is unjust and the occasion of it taken but not given; for then it is cursed, and
works mavelous dark effects in the heart of him that bears it. And by this we
may suspect our selves to be blasted with such an unwarrantable passion, when
upon a conceived prejudice of our own we do more hate those have don us good,
than such as really hurt us. I cannot but take notice, that our learned
protestant, all these many years he has by the Puritan been outed of his
ecclesiastical possessions, he wrote little or nothing against him and with no
considerable violence; but most virulent books he put forth continually against
the Papist who did him no harm and meddled not at all with him, and then hanged
with him upon the same cross of persecution and might justly reply unto him as
the good thief to the evil one, Nunquid tu non Deum times qui in eadem
damnatione es. And what evil has the Protestant ever received from the Roman
catholic that he should treat him thus? even none at all, but all good
imaginable: The Protestant has been instructed in his Universities (for Oxford
and Cambridg were both of them built by Catholics as well as the cathedrals
and parish Churches) he has lived all his life upon their benefices, studies
their books, preaches in their pulpits even that gospel which he had from
catholic archives; this is the harm the catholic ever did, or the Protestant
received from him; and yet, Lord what volumes of invectives do we power forth
even to this day against him who has done us all good and never any harm at
all, neglecting in a manner the true adversary who has utterly undon us. Is
not this a piece of phrensy? what can one think it else, when any nips us
behind to fly into the face and scratch him that innocently stands before us,
our master and benefactour. But the Protestant seeing that outrage done unto
him, which he had done to Catholics before, upon the very same motives, and
with the like words and deeds, might fear perhaps that himself should now
appear justly punished, and the catholic at length be justified.

But let us see a little further, if our hot contesting combatants can find any
rational medium to conclude demonstrativly, or maintain infallibly, or know
certainly any thing at all concerning points of religion. If they cannot, they
have some reason to be silent, none to quarrel; either one with another, or all
of them against the Roman catholic.

The ways and practis of a visible foregoing Church is concluded by a general
consent of all, the Catholic only excepted, to be erroneous; antiquity of
former ages overwhelmed with Egyptian darkness; conciliary meetings of bishops
and pastors a conspiracy against purity of gospel; and the Pope who was
anciently believed sole judge and general pastor over all, a grand seducer: and
now scripture though it be wrested out of the hands of Papists, that something
might be held by us which is plausible, must be not the truth only, but the
sole judge of it too. This is it we all pretend to stand upon. Be it then
admitted for truth, who has the right meaning of it? the Roman catholic who
has lived by it now above sixteen hundred years in all unanimity, or the
Protestants who wresting it out of catholic hands about one hundred year ago
has ever since been contesting and quarrelling about it, not only with the
catholic but amongst themselves even to this present day. The gospel is no
doubt a good rule, but if we for our own ends to avoid the judgment of any
tribunal upon earth do constitute our selves, each one the sole speaking judge
by that rule, we do thereby make our selves both judge and rule too; for it is
all one, to arbitrate with a man's own words, or to do it with another bodies
words which he without control will interpret: and thus excluding one judge
whom we found in actual possession of the chair we set up a thousand, who will
determine more rashly and yet as resolutely as he, and we still further off from
any final conclusion than before. Do we not see this to be true by the daily
fresh uprise of so many several sects, which do all promote themselves by virtue
of the same pretens. These twenty years last past the zelots who preached so
vehemently against our innocent good King all the land over, did they not all
find a text in scripture for their purpos; and not only one text to preach
upon, but hundred others to elucidate and confirm their doctrine; which
notwithstanding all wise men knew were not taken in their own genuin sens and
meaning, and yet who could convince them of that, who had as much light within,
and without too, as all Protestancy ever taught sufficient for judgment even
against him who first sent us the scriptur and was then found in actual
possession of the chair: and a Protestant that should have gone about to
confute them, must have denied the principles by which he was himself first
constituted. Com, com, it is more than manifest by all our proceedings this
hundred year, that our bitter invectives against the Pope who swayed
Christianity had no other end but only this, that we might all sway and none of
us be controuled.

I would fain know if I should deny the great fundamental upon which all
religion is built; namely that the soul of man is an immortal substance and
distinct not only from the grosser tangible parts, but even from the very best
and purest both animal and vital spirits, which without doubt be mortal, and
that there is any other world for men to pass into after this life of
mutability; whether I could not sufficiently prove my negative out of
scripture, making use of all the advantages of semisentences, parables,
figures, stories, tropes, with as much reason, light and spirit, and as equal
plausibility, as any sect deduces their tenets: and so another likewise, who
should hold that heaven and the world to com, is nothing but a condition of
serenity in this life; a fourth that there is no hell angels or devils, etc.
since there is no tribunal to judge, who can outbrave any such defendant when he
faces his antagonist with the light of a text, which none but himself must
understand.

Scripture must do all, by that light all walk, how many soever several
gainsaying paths they tread. I will no further contest about the meaning of it:
What is this Scripture? It is Gods word. But you had it not immediately from
God, but found it in other men's hands, all whom from one series to another till
you come to the Pope who first sent it us, we have all aforetime concluded to
be liars; so that you must take it then upon the credit of those who by your
own principles may as well deceive you as you me. Can you tell who wrote that
book? O yes, you name me presently twenty several persons, which you can no
more prove to be authors of the books, than any thing contained in the
writings, although their names may be there prefixed Those persons at least as
they were men of several conditions, priests, kings, lawyers, poets,
historians, fishermen, doctors, so did they live in several times and places
of the world, and differ both in these things and also in their very style and
manner of writing as much as any can do. A brachman in India teacher of
morality two thousand years ago, William the conqueror King of England six
hundred years ago dictatour of our law; and our Sir Kenelm Digby Knight and
Philosopher, lately author of a Natural Philosophy. Do these three differ any
more then St. John, Moses and Solomon, either for time, place, condition, or
style of writing? I trow not: how then came all those with so much diversity of
their own to write the word of God more than these; and how they and no other?
Who first gave them their authority? or was it given or only declared, and by
what power and virtue could it be declared by any that knew them not, and lived
so long after them? How com laws, poems, sermons, histories, letters, visions,
so many several fancies in such diversity of composure to be dictated from one
divine hand? and how do they conspire together in such variety of times to make
at length one vlume of faith? And yet too, they must not all be either of
signification or validity, just as they lie and sound; but some in this manner
some in that. Moses law must not bind in its judicial or ceremonial part, which
makes up in a manner all the whole Pentateuch, but only in the truth of story
and morality: some books must be taken according to the literal sense, and not
in any mystical one, some in the mystery and not the letter, and some again
according to both. What shall guide us in these things? a parable must not be
looked on as a story, nor yet morallised in all its pars, but only in the
capital intention; no words must be culled forth to prove any thing out of the
road of his mind and purpose who spoke them; no axiom of holy writ is to be
taken by halves, nor yet in any sense was not thought of by the author; an
objection is not to be proposed for a conclusion, nor any trope or metaphor
perverted, all words must speak to the writers scope not against it, as he made
them to do who brought texts against veneration of Saints out of St. Jo.
Chrysostoms speeches made expressly in honor of them, and others against
monarchy drawn out of the book of Kings: and many such like cautions there be,
I cannot now think of. What authority or rule shall conduct us in all these
uncertainties? The Catholic indeed has one by which he passes on uniformly and
quietly in the course of his religion, as the sun in the firmament without
noise or trouble, but others jumble and justle one against another like coaches
in a street. O the Scripture, and truth therein contained will discover it
self. Does it not very fairly? whiles we are all of us together by the ears not
for the Bible but with it. You must believe. What should I beleev and why? I
expect a persuasion to beleev not a command, and to hear not that I must beleev
but what; and not only what to credit, but why and wherefore. O but you may
discern in these writings the very marks of Gods hand appearing. Though there
be such marks, yet it seems by our many divisions we cannot read of our selves
what those marks would have, or what Church and doctrine they would establish:
and to whom can those marks appear to be Gods, but to them only who have seen
Gods hand aforetime or stood by him when he wrote. Porphirius was as good a
marksman and understanding Philosopher as perhaps ever was, and yet he deserted
Christianity and all the whole Bible for want of the marks of divinity in it,
as others for the same reason have at times rejected many particular books; I
justify neither him nor them, but only speak thus much to show how instable a
thing man is, when he relyes upon his own judgment. Have not we known wicked
hypocrites to speak as fine words as any be in scriptur, and by those their
marks to deceiv many? and I doubt not but Antichrist when he appears will do so.

But how came this book into England? for it was not it seems any part of it
written here? It was brought hither, you will say, at the lands first
conversion all of it together in one volume. If this be true, as true indeed it
is, then we had it from the Pope of Rome, whether we speak of the conversion of
Englishmen or Brittons. And shall I build my belief upon the authority of a
book, if indeed it could make it out, sent us from him whom our own ministers
do publicly proclaim to be an impostour and antichrist? or can I in reason so
condemn him and not suspect it? If he did not only present it us, but made his
catholic believers with so much labor and industry to transcribe it all the
world over before printing was invented, as a sacred and venerable thing; a man
might think in reason there were something in it to favor him and his religion,
which being once accepted under the notion of divine writings men would not
easily dare to contradict, and nothing at all against him. O but the Pope did
not make the book, nor any of his predecessors. This is more than either you or
I can prove, since that book so much of it as belongs to Christianity, was never
found in our country but as taken and sent from him; and it is no hard matter
to make a book for my own ends, and for its ampler authority to father it upon
some renowned person, the better to promote my design. Truly such places as
speak so plainly the Churches authority, the real presence, absolution of sins
by man, episcopal government, and the like papal doctrine, are apt enough to
suggest such thoughts; and some of our first reformers upon that very account
did shrewdly suspect, and were not afraid to say it, that the Pope had at least
a finger in many such like places, which he might in their opinion easily do,
when he had once overwhelmed the earth with his mists of error, and made the
people so credulous, that he might do what he pleased. And if I do indeed think
the Pope to be Antichrist and a seducer, I cannot rationally beleev or trust
unto any book he sends me, more than I do to his doctrine which he says is
there grounded, since I have indeed but his word for the authority of both; and
let me once give a freedom to my thoughts, I shall as soon question one as the
other, and if I do reject one proceeding rationally I must cashier the other
also. Surely the Pope cannot but smile, to see his book which is the ground and
guide of the catholic faith he delivered with it, to be made by the Protestant
to speak protestantisme, presbyterisme by the Presbyterian, anabaptisme by the
Anabaptist, and quakerisme by the Quaker; even as doubtless it would be a sport
to Virgil, if he were alive, to see his Arma virumque cano turned epithalamist
by one, a prophetist by another, an evangelist by a third, whereas the poem it
self intends none of these things, but only the travels and wars of Eneas; and
doubtless our scripture it self might be made by these tricks of wit to speak
forth the passions of Queen Dido. Without all doubt and control, it is a most
high inconsequence, so passionately as we do to plaspheme a bishop, who is and
ever was acknowledged in the world for Pape or Father of Christianity as the
most wicked man alive and a grand seducer; and yet to hug a book in our
bosoms which we took at first upon his credit as an oracle of truth; and then
again first to fall out with him, and then with one another amongst our selves,
about the meaning of that book, wherein his own catholic believers all the
while unanimously agree, without any end pelting one another with texts and
verses unto the utter ruin of charity, not understanding for the most part
either the uncertainty of our own reasonings or the dangerous consequence of
our ways.

I will utter a bold word, but what I know to be true both by experience and
irrefragable reason. As the gospel cannot prove any thing being separated from
the Church and the living and speaking oracle of him that sent it, unto whose
judgment both defendant and disputant must submit; so neither without the help
of that authority can it prove it self, either by any argument, which it uses
none, or by virtue of miracle recorded in it: since those signs and wonders
there related are now as far from my knowledge, as be the truths of any doctrins
to be ratified by them: so that I shall have as much ado to beleev them as any
piece of doctrine they may confirm; being all of them equally either motives or
objects of belief as I pleas my self. And it is all one to me that am born in
these days, so long after those signs were wrought, to beleev the miracles by
Gods incarnation, or Gods incarnation by the miracles: since I may beleev both,
but can evidently know neither of them to be true; so far as that I may use one
of them as a medium to demonstrate the other. If the gospel laid before me
should work of it self any strange wonder in my sight, then I might happily have
some motive to beleev it; but we in England inveigh bitterly against the
present miracles, that are shown in the catholic Church, ascribing them all,
if they be true, unto the operations of Satan; so that according to this way I
should not know what to think neither, if the bible should do some strange thing
before me, and as little conclude of the past miracles there recorded.

. 16. Appeal.
AS it is impossible to be assured that the bible is the word of God, if we
condemn him from whom it first came of imposture; so is it certain, that upon
that book wrested out of the hands of catholics against him and his who first
presented it, we ground all the several ways of religion here in England
whereof each body and faction does so far presume as to condemn all to death
who will not approve them. And yet, if we did but proceed like rational men, we
could not but remain all of us in great humility and fear, upon these surmises.
Does not the Pope pretend the spirit of Christ as well as we? do not all
catholics so? had we not the bible from them? do they not ratiocinate out of
it and show their religion thence as well as we? only they do it uniformly, we
differently; and upon their principles they build up Church and State, we pull
down all. Put case we were all at this instant in our ancient state of
paganism, and a Priest or two should com to us from Rome to convert us now as
then they did to Christianity with the gospel in their hands, which they should
tell us to be pure truth and Gods word, which we never heard before: if we
should reject and disesteem them as cheating seducers, could we rationally
accept and beleev the book? or would we not therefore cast into the fire that
volum of theirs wherein were contained the sum of all their mission and news,
if we looked upon the men that brought it as impostours. Consider seriously,
and think not to pull the snail out of her shell, and then to keep one apart
and crush the other without which it cannot live. Church and Gospel were both
born together, but the Church first, at least in a priority of nature, and must
both live together. Christ the head must be authorized before he could teach,
and the Church established before any of her children could write a gospel: nor
can they with authentic authority write any thing, but what the mother Church
constituted by her espous the sours of all heavenly truths that earth can
expect, shall set her seal unto. So that in any age to deny the Church and to
accept of her writings, to profess Christ and condemn her that brought us the
first news of him, is at one and the same time to take her authority and reject
it; to say she is false and yet true in the same affairs. As she gave testimony
to Christ so did Christ unto her. The same gospel ratifies both Christ and his
Church, the same Church both Christ and the gospel, the same Christ both gospel
and the Church too which himself established. So then; reason, light,
scripture, power of interpretation being equally to be found at least pretended
in all anticatholick ways; and the Roman catholic although he have withal a
surplusage of true and right authority from the Church and her pastor whom he
ever follows, yet since he never denied, but strongly and effectuoussy
maintained, that he has with him as much of true interpretation, light and
reason, as any can pretend; and so far more peculiar and excelling, as the
judgment of the universal Church in all ages from whence he drew that reason
and light of his, is in matters of religion that are not invented but derived,
to be preferred before the conceit of any one person, who contrary to the very
essence and nature of ancient Christianity shall go out of the Church wherein
he found himself; it may most manifestly appear, that as the catholic has all
the right and pre-eminence that any other may pretend for himself, and yet a
far greater too, even that authority which can only constitute religion; so
likewise all anticatholicks both Independent Presbyterian and Protestant have
the same power and advantage each one against another which any other may
pretend against him; scripture, easy scripture, interior light and spirit;
whiles none of them will in the interim admit of any living judge, nor of the
authority of a foregoing Church wherein they found themselves when they first
went out and changed. And I have already said and truly said, that no man ever
yet was empowered even from heaven to go out of the general flock, but to have
recours unto it, nor considering the order God has set ever can be. Nor is
there any surer rule of discerning a falls pretension than that of the Apostle
Exierunt ex nobis, which if it held good in the Church when that apostle was
alive, it must needs do so unto all generations so long as the Church remains
by virtue of him who promised to confirm it, and therein his deity must chiefly
appear, even unto the consummation of the world. And if we consider the first
ingress of all these religions, we shall find that the catholic faith entered
our land first, and chased hence our ancient paganism; after it had been here
existent a thousand years the Protestant went forth out of it, the Puritan by
and by out of the Protestant, not to mention any further subdivision; and the
catholic religion entered by virtue of her own powerful integrity, all the
others by force either of Parliament or Sword: that Church as she entered
peaceably so she remained quietly all the time of her stay in the Kingdom, but
the others neither stay nor enter without disturbance; she has a rule to go by
and a judge to submit unto in all affairs; others as they will be their own
judge, so must the rule speak as they list and no otherwise; which manner of
proceeding if it have its free course must needs work much disorder in a kingdom.

I have often marvelled that these various ways of religion here in England
which multiply without end or any hope of reconciliation, have not all this
while appealed to the sacred majesty of the King who has been acknowledged by
all the parties, to be supreme in all his kingdoms as well in spirituals as
temporals, and head as well of the Church as State: Certainly had this been
don, and that all had rested upon his verdict as they ought by reason of their
own acknowledgment to do, much mischief had been prevented. But we were so far
all of us from doing so, that on the contrary first we secretly murmured
against both Queen Elizabeth and King James, and then broke forth into open
hostility against his son. Indeed that private swelling of the murmuring waters
were an ill boding omen of the vast tempest which followed afterward in the
reign of our good King Charles; with so dismal and violent a rage, that it both
split the ship and drowned our pilot. We did not appeal then with submission to
his judgment, as by our own law and agreement upon our revolt from Popery we
ought to have don, but forced him imperiously to our own; and when in right
reason he could not consent unto it, we made no conscience to destroy and cut
off not so much his head as our own: which being a singular unparalled piece
of insolent cruelty never yet acted before upon earth, it will remain an
eternal blemish both upon the men and religion too so long as the world
lasts. Did we sincerely think our King to be head as well of Church as of
State? how then durst we subjugate him to our selves in the affairs of both;
and under pretens of purity of religion oppress him, from whom under God all
our religion should be derived as the head and sours of it.

The body may prepare blood and vital spirits to be presented to the head; but
of these are not made animal spirits, till the head receivs and makes them such
for the good of the whole; and from the head com down all those influences that
be fitted and proportioned unto that life which the animal lives. So may and
ought every kingdom, either apart or in Parliament assemblies, to propose
affairs unto their head, but can take none as authentic till he have
determined and derived them to us whether civil or spiritual, if so be he be
head of both, resting quiet within our selves both before and after he has don
it: for what hand or foot ever questioned the spirits which the head derived it
or pretended either to mend or make them. But we have by these our proceedings
condemned our selves if we do not indeed think him our spiritual head as we
profess in words, of vise hypocrisy; if we do beleev him so, of inconsequent
madness. But to remove the Pope, the King is head with us, and to remove the
King the people is head, and to remove one another each particular person is
his own head. So arbitrary a thing it is with us, to set up and pull down power
at our pleasur.

It would seem very strange to a rational man, that the Pope who is in our
esteem the worst of men should keep together the people of many kingdoms, which
as they be not at all subject to him in civil affairs, so are they very diverse
among themselves, both in habits, manners, language, laws, and other weighty
respects and inclinations, in a constant unity of religion from age to age: and
yet a noble virtuous prudent King should not be able to do so much among his
own subjects all of one guarb, one law, one language, for one age together: the
Pope all the while we beleev to be a falls and only pretended Head, the King an
acknowledged and true one. This is a greater secret: and yet greater too upon
this account, that if any should fall away from the Popes religion, the
apostate runs himself into no more danger upon that account than what he
willingly brings upon himself, the loss of further communion with him and his
Church; for the Popes excommunication signifies no more, and all the Pope can
do is but to excommunicate him, who before by his own voluntary act put himself
out of his communion. But the King has a temporal sword in his hand to take
corporal reveng upon rebellion and apostasy, and the people subject to him in
faith are likewise subject in other temporal respects, and by their rebellion
against him hazard their estates and lives.

I know well enough that Popes are generally as civil and accomplished
gentlemen as be in Europe, and for the most part very learned; yet can I never
beleev but that there be others in the Christian world, both priests doctors,
and bishops as learned as the pope himself, and as wise too and accomplished
persons in any perfections either natural or moral; and yet can none but He,
hit upon this feat of guiding the Christian flock in unity and peace: Nay,
which yet augments the wonder, take any one kingdom under his spiritual
jurisdiction, and they shall remain a hundred yea thousand years in all peace
and unity upon religions account: But let that kingdom once divide and separate
from him; and presently all those very self same bishops who before in their
subordination to the Pope easily managed the peoples consciences and kept them
in a most orderly peaceablenes, not know in their separation from him, which
way to turn themselves, but that heresies and schisms will rise and augment
themselves without end in despite of all their power and endeavors, as if
unity and truth and peace were tied to the Popes chair. Those that understand
not catholic religion have stood many of them exceedingly amazed at this
consideration, and not without cause: for whence can this happen? It is not
because Popes are all saints and only they; for the venerable and renowned
priests under him, and great multitudes of people about him in all nations,
which shine like stars in the firmament, may be without control as good and
holy many of them as himself: and although Popes be for the most part very
good, civil and discreet men, yet if it should happen that some one be no better
than he should, yet even that man shall be as zealous of unity in religion and
preserv it as exactly as the best; which exalts our wonderment unto such a
height, that we are even forced to acknowledge that there is some great secret
in this business not easily to be resolved: for all other bishops and princes
the more worldly and sensual they be, the less care have they of their flock
and people. If we shall say that these be the great powers of God upon him, the
doubt is at an end, and a reason appears why people do fear so much to be
excluded his communion: if this be not admitted, I am at a loss, and can find
no reason, why a good king and true head of his Church, if himself or the
people can make him so, should not be able by his acknowledged authority and
sword to keep his own subjects in an unity of faith and peace, as well as a bad
Pope, for so we beleev them all to be, and pretended head keeps together other
men's subjects of different manners and languages without sword or axe or
corporal rods, only by the mere love of his communion and fear they have to
lose it.

Nor can we say that new opinions about religion are never broacht among
catholics: for this as it cannot be expected amongst so many millions of great
wits and spirits that be amongst them up and down the world; so is it so far
from being true, that all the heresies that have rose in Christianity were
invented ever by some catholic, I mean that had been formerly such, for his
opposition to and apostasy from his general Pastor makes him ceas to be
catholic any longer, and generally by priests, who preferring their own
judgments before their pastors and the tradition they had hitherto walked by,
in the pride of their hearts led people after them out of the fold of the
Church. And whoever does so, puts himself by his own authority in locum Petri,
and is to be looked upon by all good Catholics who have care of their own
salvation as a dangerous guide. Thus did first begin our own Protestancy by
Martin Luther, Calvin, and other fallen priests; and the fall of murmuring
Judas from the college of apostles, of contesting Adam and Eve from the bliss
of paradise, of dissenting Lucifer and his angels from heaven, who are said to
dispute with Michael and his angels, as Luther did with Eckius and his fellow
Catholics, signify nothing else.

But what does the Pape or Christian pastor do in this case. When the tumult
is once raised and a disorder begun in any part of his flock by some proud
turbulent spirit amongst them, the Pape first whistles him and his fellow
petulcous rams into order by charitable admonition, which still increases
louder by degrees: and if this will not serve, but that they will still be
refractory, he casts in his shepherds crook amongst them, and divides the
turbulent from the peaceful, and so the infection stays. The disquiet ones
being driven out, depart in a rout together; but within a while they separate,
and walk by sixes and seavens, and subdivide at length so often, that at last
they go single, whiles every sheep amongst them will be a ram, and every ram a
shepherd. But the other quiet ones that hear the voice of their sheapherd and
follow him in peace as becoms sheep to do, enjoy all happiness and spiritual
content amongst themselves to the unspeakable comfort of their souls, under him
whom Christ the great Messiah has set over them: and this is called the
Catholic flock, which for the love they bear to their honored pastor and
(...) we commonly call Papists; and sometimes, because they will not forsake
either their sheapheard or divine pastures of truth and sacraments wherein they
have been brought up, when we would speak more civilly, we call them Recusants.

If any one shall think I speak too much in favor of catholic religion, let
such know that I favor nothing but truth and peace: and it is the part of an
ingenuous and well bred nature to support what he can the weaker side;
especially if he know it to be innocent and injuriously oppressed, as it often
happens in this world that the stronger in right may be the weaker in repute.
Nor can any fewd amongst us ever be ended, which is the thing I aim at, so long
as error and injustice are maintained. And although we quarrel furiously one
with another, yet considering that our strifes amongst our selves proceed upon
the very same grounds and motives we pretend all of us to have against the
general adversary we all hate, till this capital dislike of Popery be
diminished our other fewds must needs be kept alive. No peace amongst our
selves; till we revoke our words and ill deeds against our innocent neighbors,
and at last comply charitably with them against whom our first dissension
sprang up in this land. Ephraim is against Manasses and Manasses against
Ephraim, but both against Juda; and because they are both against Juda their
lawful superior, therefore are they so furiously bent against one another,
whiles Ephraim to be in Juda's place, who is thrust out by both parties,
labors to depress Manasses, and Manasses for the same reason to trample upon
Ephraim. Thus is Presbyterian against Independent, and Independent against
Presbyterian, but both against the Papist: Protestant against Puritan, and
Puritan against Protestant but both against the Catholic. And as soon as the
Protestant had by violence supplanted and cast his Roman-neighbours out of all
their dignities honor and livelihood; the rancour had utterly ceased, had not
the Puritan rose up out of the Protestant bowels and subverted him by the same
means he had used to his catholic foregoers: and when this was don it had
ceased again, had not Presbyterian, Anabaptist and Independent sprung out of
the Puritan disturbed one another, and all the land by the same stratagems.

Thus Haslerig and Vane two grand Puritans, ancient and mortal enemies both of
them unto Roman catholics, when at length they fell out and jarred in this
last Rump. Parliament, they did both in public and private with the utmost
rage imaginable object Popery to one another, which they judged both of them to
be both the extremest vilification could be cast upon any one, and also most
advantageous to him that objects it: every mouth and book in the long
Parliaments time said no less of the Kings army wherewith he defended himself,
that they were all Papists and Popishly affected: all the adherents of --
Tectour Oliver after he had broken and shamefully dismissed the long Parliament,
said the like of it: the friends of the dissolved long Parliament, which were a
considerable part of the land asserted the like of Oliver and his soldiers;
and so did great store of good Protestants otherwise grave men say confidently
that the red coat soldiers were all Jesuits and Papists: and the same red
coat soldiers both swindged and pillaged all the land upon the same account,
laying popery to us all, and made us smart for it over and over; as if the very
notion and name of Popery had even turned our brains and made us all mad. If we
do but hear any one say of his neighbor that he is a Papist, our blood rises
presently against him whom we never saw; and if we know him one, we shall
beleev any evil that is spoken of him be it never so incredible or even
impossible; and are apt to imagine and speak it our selves in any place. A
rational man would hardly beleev that some English men should report confidently
even in Rome to the citisens there, that the Parliament men and judges who
murdered our good King here in England were most of them papists, who indeed
were all of them more professed enemies to the Papist or Catholic than to the
King himself. So that the malice of popery once taken away, and as it expresses
catholic religion it deserves none, we should not know in our religious feudes
what to object to one another for disparagement. It would seem a strange thing,
if after all our wars and the mischiefs we have either done or intended one
another upon the account of popery, it should prove at last so good and sincere
a religion, that we can never more truly commend our neighbor than when we lay
popery to his charg deservedly, nor ever act greater iniquity than when we
persecute him upon that account. But indeed if popery be taken as it is now
conceived for a fardel of iniquity fraud and treachery, then it will least
agree to them it is most put upon and is indeed proper only unto them who
impose it upon others.

Hitherto I have endeavored to take all men off from any basis of private
interpretation, reason, or light within themselves, whereupon they may raise a
new religion, and wars and broils to maintain it against the Church out of
which they sallied. And by this the Independent loses his conceived advantage
against the Presbyterian, this his against the Protestant, and the Protestant
his against the Roman Catholic. What we are to fix upon I have here and there
intermingled, although very sparingly; and he told us it long ago who said. If
any will be my disciple, let him deny himself.

Fourth Chapter. All Religions who have opposition to the Catholic are equally
innocent to one another, as likewise is the Roman religion truly innocent and
unblamable to them all.
. 17. History of religion.
I Have proceeded hitherto with a kind of negligent carefulnes, as I may so
call it, not lapping up my discourse with pithy argumentations and a formal
order, but letting it flow loose and intermingled, that it may delight all; and
withal profit any that will read seriously; but now that these contents of my
fourth chapter may connaturally appear unto the sight of every one, I will to
refresh my readers appetite, a little leave even that method too; and that he
may discern of himself without any further discourse of mine, both how all the
several ways of religion here in England are equally innocent, and withal
that the Roman catholic is absolutely unblamable, I will make a brief
narration of the ingress and progress of Christianity in this land unto these
present times and leav the concluding inference unto every man's own judgment.
Truth needs not the help of art, and its very natural appearance is the best
argument can be made for it. I know there be many eaglesighted men, that are
able to trace the proceedings of states and policy and religion from far, yet
because generally men live at home and see no further than the present, which
suffices nothing at all for judgment in these our turbulent affairs, I must
crave leav of those great heroes very briefly to run over that story, which
although they do well enough know already, yet to the generality of Englishmen
whom in this my discourse I serve and labor for, is so utterly unknown that they
do not so much as dream of any such thing.

In the thirty fifth year of our Lord when Sulpitius Galba and Cornelius Sylla
were consuls, all the Christians in Jerusalem except only the apostles being
dispersed abroad upon that great persecution which cut off St. Stephen, the
Church of God did spread and propagate upon that occasion into several
countries, not only of Judea and Samaria, but Phaenicia, Cyprus, Antioch,
Damascus, and round about beyond the borders of Palestin. At that time Lazarus,
Mary Magdalen, Martha with Marcella her handmaid, Maximin a disciple, and
Joseph of Arimathea that noble decurion, against whom the Jews were more
vehemently incensed, were after much pillaging and many injurious affronts put
together into a ship without sail; in which notwithstanding by the conduct of
that providence they worshipped, they arrived safe at last in Marselles in
France; where Joseph of Arimathea so far companion of the common danger with
them left them to divine protection, and is said, happily by means of some
British merchant in those coasts, to have sailed thence into this our isle of
Britanny, where by the power of his words and holy life having converted many
of our Brittons unto faith, he ended his days; the testimony of whose sanctity
that strange thorn of Glasenbury abbey which grew green and flourished every
Christmas day remained even to our times. This story of a fact so long ago
achieved, although it be obscured by that vicissitude of time which at length
buries all things; yet it servs so much as we have of it, to show that the
religion he brought was catholic, since the same antiquities that speak his
arrival here, and his conversion of people, mention their erection of crosses,
shrines, oratories, altars, monasteries and the like things of catholic
profession don by him and the people he converted.

But partly by the great succeeding persecutions raised by the Roman emperors
against Christianity, partly by the unwearied endeavors of the Pagan priests
here in the land against it, about the time of Marcus Aurelius the Roman
emperor, and year of our Lord 190. there were hardly any remnants of it left
in this island. Wherefore our noble British King Lucius moved by the fame of
that holy faith sent to Eleutherius then Pope in Rome, to entreat he would
destin into our country some of his special pastors to teach us his Christian
faith. The Pope sent him two good priests, Fugatius and Damian, who arriving
here with some few others who were pleased to accompany them, made both the
King himself and his Queen and very many of his subjects Christian.

And this Christianity of the Brittons no man I think will doubt it to be
catholic; since the whole profession of it both while the Brittons lived in
this land, and after that they were expelled by the Pagan Saxes into the
mountains of Wales, does clearly manifest it; if Priests living together in
monasteries, some hundreds of them many times together, and exercising in
Churches their priestly functions upon the real and mystical body of Christ,
if praying before crucifixes, erecting of crosses, solemnizing of feasts,
keeping of Lent, vigils and embers, honoring of Saints, making oblations and
orisons for the dead, may as it needs must signify so much: Nor can it be
imagined that Pope Eleutherius sent to us by his Priests any other religion
than his own. And this is called Englands second conversion, as that by Joseph
of Arimathea the first: and both of them equally to one and the same catholic
faith and no other; which however now by a strange judgment of heaven it be for
a time traduced, yet in primitive ages it was looked upon as a most sacred and
blessed religion, and then persecuted by none but such as were professed enemies
to Christ himself; as I could show at large; but I must make haste.

After two or three hundred years this Religion all that while professed in the
land was again banished by the utter overthrow and flight of the Brittons
professors of it into our english Alps in Wales, where Christian and
Christianity lay hid together: and the pagan Saxes who had driven them out
equally hated both their faith and them. Wherefor about the year of our Lord
596 the time of emperor Mauritius, Pope Gregory the great, of his own proper
motion and good will toward us destined unto the conversion of the Saxes or
Englishmen, who being then pagans had possessed themselves of all the English
territories, S. Austin bishop and abbot, who with forty other Priests his
companions all good children of blessed S. Bennet preached here so powerfully,
that upon one Christmas day he baptized more then ten thousand souls: for which
good work of our conversion the Kingdom of England ever owned that good Pope
for their spiritual patron and apostle. And the children of S. Bennet are
indeed our very fathers who first begat us in Christ, and regenerated our
English nation to the life of future bliss.

This Christian religion brought in by S. Austin, the Brittons could not deny
it to be conformable unto their own catholic faith received formerly from Pope
Eleutherius in all matter of doctrine; although they were so transported with
passion against the Saxons their ancient adversaries, that they would neither
let their own priests, whereof they had more store then they had use of, go
forth to their conversion; nor yet forbear to disturb good S. Austin in his so
pious a work. But such good Christians did our forefathers the Saxons after
their conversion prove, that they yielded nothing to the ancient Brittons
before them, yea rather they exceeded them; so that all the land was stored by
them with goodly monasteries of S. Bennets order, brave cathedral Churches,
fair colleges and libraries manuscript, crosses, shrines, oratories,
sufficient and wholesome laws for all occasions, hospitals, corporations, and all
that might be necessary either to our temporal or spiritual welfar. And all our
people were wholly attentive to their devout contemplations of a life to com in
Christ our great redeemer, Church and State being now most piously and
prudently provided for, when William the Conqueror in the year of our Lord
1066, Constantine Duca being Emperor of the East came in upon us from France
and conquered us.

This valiant captain finding our catholic religion conformable to his own
Christianity, although he abrogated much of our civil law, and used in temporal
affairs too too much of violence, thereby to subjugate the land more perfectly
to himself; yet he meddled not at all with any alteration in religion, nor once
excepted against it, but lived himself with the rest of his subjects both saxes
and normans and died contentedly therein, building of his own devotion some fair
monasteries to S. Bennet before his death, wherein God might night and day be
served and praised, for his souls greater expiation from that tinctur of
bloodshed it might have contracted in his wars and vehement proceedings with
the saxon nobility after his victory. And in this same catholic religion did
both Norman and Saxon live peaceably together and without any the least
disturbance upon that account, though for civil respects York and Lancaster
raised broils enough, until the end of King Henry the eighths reign, about six
hundred years together after the Conquerours ingress into the land, the people
offering daily their prayers and orisons before the altar and sacred crucifix,
together with their priests and prelates all Roman catholics, without any
schism or disturbance.

From whence we may note, first, that all the three conversions of our Kingdom
wherein we lived unanimously so long together, were all of them to one and the
same catholic Roman faith: secondly that this faith as it represents Christ
its divine sours in purity, which all men might see if they would have but
patience to examine it, so likewise both in unity and unchangeablenes: as there
is but one God and he immutable, so is there but one faith and it unchangeable.
Thirdly that catholic religion is so far from being an enemy to the
state-politick, as some reformers to its greater disparagement would pretend,
that it is the great founder and maintainer of it. Nor ever had this land for
so many hundred years it was catholic upon the account of religion any
disturbance at all, whereas after the exile of that catholic belief in our
land, from the period of K. Henry's reign to these days we have ever been
either in actual disquiet or at least in fears; vulgar heads uncontrollable in
their fancies, since they were by the reformation constituted in effect both
judges and contrivers of controversies; ever raising some new fangled way or
other to disturb or at least to threaten and endanger our peace. And it is a
thing of much wonder, that a nation such as England is, so wise and serious in
all other things, so judicious and grave, should be persuaded by any man's words
against the dictamen of their own reason if they would but consult it, to
beleev any such thing of this innocent faith, when they cannot but clearly see
in all histories both our own and others, that amongst all the pretended ways
of Christianity, only catholic religion both sets up and preservs the Crown,
which giddy headed sects endanger. Some of our english clergy tell us of a
thousand I know not what dangers of the Pope, thereby to get the assistance of
secular power to their own ends; but what is indeed the occasion? they know
assuredly that the Pope if he were once admitted would both separate them from
the secular life they lead, and bring into order their exorbitant opinions. And
what harm if both these things were done? If we do but search antiquities, we
shall find that none of our ecclesiastiastical benefices were given by princes
and people to maintain a wife and children, but only such single abstracted
contemplative men as had consecrated themselves and all their whole affections
to God, to serve him in all singlenes of heart, in prayer and fasting and
perfect charity and in the sacrifice of the altar all the days of their life,
without any solicitude after this world; as priests of ancient Christianity
did: and not for women and children, unto whose generation against
ecclesiastical custom and constitutions our ministers give as much attendance
as any secular man whatsoever, and generate children which after their death
unles they show in their life time more of wordly solicitude than their
spiritual state permits, must lie upon the parish: and as for ordering our
dissentions in points of faith I should think not only the Pope who would
assuredly do it, but any whatsoever thing in the world, though it were but an
owl in an ivy bush should deserv thanks if he effected it. But I return to my
story.

. 18. Item.
NOt only the kingdoms of the continent, Germany, Hungary, Italy, France,
Spain; but all the Northern coasts and islands, Denmark, Norway, England,
Ireland and the isles about them were now in a full and quiet possession and
profession of their catholic religion; when upon a little occasion, heaven so
willing it for some great sin or neglect of mankind, the whole scene was
changed on the sudden; and catholic faith in our northern coasts to the grief
and amazement of all that were then alive utterly abolished, even by the
discontent of one person, and he but a private one neither; upon this occasion.

The Pastor of Christianity upon some solicitation of Christian Princes for a
general compliance throughout all Christendom to their design, sent forth in
the year 1517. a plenary indulgence throughout the world in favor of the
Cruciata against the Turk. Albertus bishop of Mentz delegated by the Pope to
see it executed in Germany committed the preaching and promulgation of it unto
the Dominican friars; which the hermits of St. Austin within the same place
took ill; but especially Martin Luther a preacher and professor in that order,
esteeming himself the best deserving man in the town, grew exceeding wroth that
any should be chosen before himself, to execute that work which was likely to
have as great an auditory and confluence of people as might happen in a man's
life time, to the no small repute of him, who should be thought worthy before
another to divulge the bull and make the exhortation sermon, in the behalf as
it were of the whole Christian world. Vexed therefore that he was thus neglected
and as he thought undervaliewed, not only by words but books and papers
secretly thrown about he diminished first the dominicans, then the bishop, then
indulgences themselves. Catholic superiors and princes blamed this
misdemeanour of Luther as a practis of much danger and sedition; but he grew
not any thing better thereby, but rather more headstrong and furious, as
unlawful passion increases by the very means of mitigation, inveighing now with
more boldness as far as he durst, both against Prince and Prelate too. Insomuch
that the duke of Saxony after a year or two invited friar Luther to his court,
where by dispute and colloquy with the eminent doctor Eckius if he could not
make his cause good, he might grow better principled, at least for Gods sake and
his own good condescend to moderation and peace. But Luther after much tiresom
talk told at last very boldly both the duke and his doctor too, that the
quarrel was not begun for God, nor for God should it be ended. And so departing
thence he proceeded now with more virulent words to incens the people, unto
whom he promised liberty from their vows and fastings and other penitential
observances; whereby he perverted much of the laity, clergy and religious
people both men and women, who, it is strange to consider it, violating their
vows deserted that Catholic Church, besides which they had never known nor
heard of other, to follow the serpentine enticements of one private person; and
he if not the worst, yet at least none of the best that ever were.

Thus when one ram has leapt over a hedge, all the other poor sheep so many as
be within ken of the fact are apt to follow. So prone is man to go astray like
sheep, and do amiss to our own ruin without any other reason for it, than the
sight of a president acting before us what our own natural inclination is apt
of it self without the curb of religion or law of its own nature to embrace. And
so much was the world disposed at that ill hour to a dissolute loosnes, that
Luther was still gaining upon people even from his first apostasy: But when he
had once married himself unto Catherine Bore a Nun by him seduced out of the
monastery of Mymick contrary to both the^r vows, so that he was now become a
sure and fast enemy as well to continence as before he had shown himself to
abstinence; it is wonder how fast they flocked to him on all sides, not only
from the vulgar laiety, but even from all instutes and profession and
countries, even the priests and votaries of chastity, Oecolampadius a monk of
S. Briger, Jacobus Praepositi an Augustine, Andreas Carolstadius an archdeacon
in Wittenberg, Suinglius a cannon of Constance, Martin Bucer a dominican friar,
Lismanin a Franciscan, Richerius a Carmelite, John Calvin a curate priest:
Philip Melanchton out of Germany, Michael Servetus out of Spain, Bernardin
Ochyn and Peter Martyr out of Florence, John Alasco out of Poland, Sebastian
Castalio out of France, Beza out of Burgundy, Stancar and Valentine Gentile out
of Italy, Blandrate, Alciate and David Georg out of Transylvania, etc. who
being all hitherto catholics took occasion now by the example of Luther to
fall away; whereby as the body of holy Church was purged of some unquiet
spirits, so was Luthers retinue in a short space hugely augmented Insomuch that
this new clergy made up of fallen priests and votaries fell to writing stiffly
against their ecclesiastical pastor, and the laiety drew themselves into bodies
against their temporal superiors in every place, those in Germany against the
emperor, those in Holland against their King, they in France against theirs:
nay the contagion flew so swiftly about Europe like wild fire in dry stubble,
that ere King Philip could get into Spain, his subjects there were corrupted
many of them and hissing hot unto battle: but he was a wise prince and well
understood the unquiet genius of heresy, and therefore took a speedy course with
some for an ensample and terror to the rest, and so preserved his kingdom: but
the wars in France were long and dangerous, those of Germany and Holland hardly
yet ended.

It was almost twelv years before this strange confluence of people could agree
together by what name to be owned till a chance gave it them thus: There was
congregated, for the catholic Churches peace, a solemn diet at Spire in
Germany; against which and the articles there agreed upon, Luthers new troop
made a joint unanimous Protestation, appealing from the diet to the emperor,
although their after comportment showed that they did indeed no more respect
the emperor than his diet, upon which general and hearty Protestation of their
own, they were pleased ever after to call one another Pretestants. Yet sooner
than they had well agreed in the name they so much disagreed in doctrine;
ambitious heads, as all of them were, emulating each one as great a name and
fame as Luther had, whom they both equalled in renown and place whilst they all
remained priests in the catholic Church, and now separated enjoyed as great
fulness of the spirit as himself; that they did not only set up several ways
and sects amongst themselves; but inveighed and wrote bitterly one against
another, even with more virulency than they had aforetime used against the
Church in the beginning of their discession: And now there was up and down
amongst the Protestants, here Osianders church, there Stancars, there
Melanchthons; here a body of rigid Lutherans, there soft ones, here Calvinists
enemies to both: here Illyricans, there Valentine-gentilists: here
Plenilutherans, there Semilutherans, there Antilutherans: here the disciples of
Oecolampadius, there of Suinglius, etc. all which did so eagerly quarrel about
the matters of Reformation, that a sober man could not have the patience either
to hear their sermons or read their books.

Since that first division of Luther, which is now above a hundred years, there
have been several times both in Germany and other places many great meetings by
Protestant divines of all sorts and sides, to bring all parties to an union;
but it could never be effected to this day: which is a shrewd sign, as Luther
spoke ingenuously before the duke of Saxony, that the concertation was not
begun for God, nor yet for God shall ever be ended. An ambition they have by
their very discession and novelties to advance their name and worldly contents,
being so opposite as it is unto yielding or submission to another judgment,
will both make schisms and maintain them without control: nor can it be
expected he should yield to his fellow servant or condisciple, who contemns the
master and doctor and chief pastor of Christianity.

. 19. Item.
INto our Kingdom of England this new invented protestancy had found access
exceeding difficil if not altogether impossible; all our Kings even from the
Conqueror to that day being ever most vigilant that no innovation should arise
to the endangering, as those wise princes apprehended, not only the spiritual
but politic state, under what ever pretens it should begin; and the whole land
carrying throughout the world so eminent a renown both for their piety and
learning and zealous long continued affection to the catholic religion above
all other nations; when an odd accident set the doors wider open here than
either in Germany France or Netherlands, for its more free and copious ingress,
and it was this: King Henry the eight a valorous and noble prince, who had also
set forth a book against Luther and his new coined protestancy, for which
zealous and Christian act of his the Pope conferred upon him the title of
Defensor fidei, wherein our Kings glory to this day, even this so great a
prince stood at that time so vehemently affected unto one of his subjects Anne
Bullen, that for her he ran himself into a hundred troubles and his whole
kingdom into irreparable miseries. To the end he might marry with her, he
endeavored a divorce from his good wife Queen Catharine, with whom he had
lived honorably and peaceably twenty years together; which with most earnest
importunity for six whole years together when he could not obtain of the Pope,
he renounced him; and by the insinuation of some Lutherans who by this time had
crept into the land he made himself Pope and head of the Church within the
territories of England: and so he dispensed with himself, and made that divorce
by his own authority which the Pope could not do with his, and married Anne:
whom a while after by the same authority he divorced again, and cut off as King
and Pope, both Anne from his bed and Annes head from her shoulders.

Upon this strange act of the Kings declaring himself head of the Church never
before known or heard of since Christianity first entered England, for though
Kings were ever honored as nursing fathers of the Church yet head of influence
to this mystical body of Christ is only Jesus himself, and head of government
under him only that person who first begot us in Christ and in whom all the
sacred hierarchy ends, I say upon that strange act of his both King Henry and
his whole kingdom was overthrown at one blow and laid prostrate under the feet
of those men whom he had so gloriously triumphed of late, and obtained thereby
to the no small ornament of his crown the addition of a new title: for now came
flocking in out of Germany Geneva and the Netherlands whole swarms of
reformers, as thick as grasshoppers, by whom in a small time, the Kings
countenance being now set against catholics who could never be brought to like
of his divorce, the land was so universally corrupted, defaced and spoiled,
that within few years all the goodly monasteries, nunneries abbeyes and their
Churches were utterly dispeopled, pillaged and ruined: and millions of people
of both sexes, a sad sight to behold, who had served God night and day in those
their angelical retirements cast forth into the wide world to begin a secular
worldly life, many of them in their feeble old age, when all their whole
livelihood was taken from them.

The prey indeed was very great, but it proved aurum Tolosanum, neither King
nor people was ever the richer for it; general granaries, as the monasteries
then were, making provision for all children to be born in the land, which was
infinite eas both for rich and poor, even unto all eternity; but these once
pillaged and destroyed, vanishing in particular men's hands like water through
the fingers whereof nothing at all considerable is kept. Nay he that was before
the richest and noblest king in Enrop; after this vast spoil which a man would
think were enough to set up any Prince that was never so low, became so very
poor before his death, that he was forced to make adulterate and leather-coin
to supply his wants: and of all the great families that were enriched with that
spoil, there is not one in twenty that keeps up his head at this day.

Queen Mary stopped this torrent for a while, but it burst forth again in Queen
Elisabeths reign, who also found it so impetuous, that she with all her subtle
counsel could not tell how to wield or rule a people of so many heads and
factions, as had then flown together in the land out of several nations, and
endeavored to persuade the people every one to their own way of reformation as
the only pure one. Yet the Queen notwithstanding being declared illegitimate
in her fathers days, thought it safer all things considered, to leav off her
ancient religion in which she had by catholic bishops received the Crown, than
to disgust the resolute Protestants. All the difficulty was how to content even
them, being so severally, biassed that no one thing could do it. French
Protestants the Calvinists and Suinglians, were mo in number; but German
Protestants of greater repute; and both these and those so subdivided into
parties as there appeared no hopes to pleas any one without the offense of all
the rest. She concluded therefore by the advice of her counsel, which saw a
necessity of it, to recall episcopacy which had been now some years banished,
by whose awe and power the rabble might be brought to some order. And because the
catholic bishops who were now all of them so many as remained alive
imprisoned, would not be induced either by promis or threats to ordain her any,
and Protestant bishops there were none upon earth, she appointed her own
divines by her authority and power to create one another; which kind of
ordination though it were not only ridiculous to catholics, but hateful also
to the greater part of Protestants who in all their reformations that were ever
yet made, jointly execrated episcopacy as the main badg of popery; yet the
Queen provided by an Act that none upon pain of her displeasure and further
penalties should laugh at it.

Thus was settled and English Protestant Church neither according to Luther,
Melanchthon, Calvin, or any of those first Protestant teachers, much less the
Roman catholic; and yet too a part of every thing, as it were on purpos to
pleas all, at least to stop their mouths. The name of Protestants we assumed
from Luther as the most ancient and honorable of the reformation; the doctrine
for the most part from Calvin as most pure; and our episcopacy in imitation of
the Catholic, as most safe: and so we were neither one nor the other, and yet
in some sens all. We pulled down altars which Luther kept up, and set up
episcopacy which Luther pulled down. We joined with Calvin in his doctrine, but
not his government; we joined with Catholics in their form of government but
not in their doctrine. We cast off the Priests albe and vestment to pleas
Calvinists: we keep still the surplice to comply with Luther; and a sacrament
or two in condescension to the Catholic who delivered them with the addition
of more. Our ministers mourned in black to imitate the Papist priests that were
then only in repute; and yet they did it with a wife in their hand that Luther
might not take exception; whether the wife were virgin or widow, to satisfy
Calvin who without scruple of irregularity married a tailors widow. For Luthers
sake we defied the Pope; for Calvin's satisfaction we bore our selves toward the
King as if he were little concerned in spiritual affairs; and yet to affront
the Catholics we called him head of our Church. We preached the word because
Catholics amongst other things used to do it; we made no sacrifice because
Calvin abhorred it, and yet we kneeled in communion because Luther liked it. The
mass we cashiered to satisfy Calvin, for Luthers sake we drew a compendious
Common Prayer book out of it and the breviary, and to content the Catholics we
kept all the gospel entire. The real presence with Calvin we cried down, yet we
kept an altar-table covered with linen in some compliance to Luther, and we
bowed our knee as we past by, though it were a mere naked board, in imitation
of Catholics who used to do so to their inshrined Messiah. We kept up the
pulpit, that Catholics who built them for that use might not except against us
for pulling down all; we removed the altar-table to pleas Calvin and instead of
the crucifix upon the rood loft we placed a naked unicorn to content Luther and
Catharin Bore. To affront Catholics we preached down good works and charity,
we cried up faith for Luthers sake, and hope because we could not see how it
could stand with Calvin's certainty of salvation we left to his disposal, etc.

. 20. Item.
I Cannot see why a wise counsel and Parliament may not with as much authority
form a Church both for doctrine and government as either Luther or Calvin; their
judgments are more in number, more versed in weighty affairs, more clear and
free from that passion which transported those good birds to their reformation.
And this mixture of things by the discretion of so many grave men, if a Church
as well as other polities be of human institution, is so far from derogating
that it augments the splendor. I am sure this Church of ours marched forward
with a very handsome show and some tranquillity of progress even until the reign
of our good King Charles the first, when it was with a violent wild rage
miserably defaced. In all which time of its flourish the distressed Catholic
was with all exact care persecuted all the land over both in their livelihood
and dignities and liberty and sometimes life too; although their imprisonments
and loss of their estates did not so much afflict them as two other vexations,
the one to their fame the other to conscience, both of them unto good and
upright men almost insupportable. For the press and pulpit were ever sweating
out something against the honor of Roman catholics, which has rendered them
at length as black as ingenious calumny can make them. The conscience torture
was a double edged Oath drawn on purpos to entangle those catholics whom
threats punishment, or promises could not move to desert their former way of
faith: and it could not but take; for going under the specious name of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and withal implicitly involving, as the letter
sounded, an abnegation of ancient Christianity, it would if they refused them
render Catholics extremely odious to their neighbors, and perjured if they
took them. And here I cannot but commend the conscientiousnes of Pagan emperors
our ancient persecutors, who though they ceased not to deprive the poor
Christians of their dignities state and lives, yet did they never offer them an
oath concerning religion, which they knew beforehand to be against the articles
of their belief, those great heroes knowing full well, that as perjury is a
deviation from the right reason of humanity, so can it be no other to drive any
one upon it. Nay emperor Julian, surnamed Apostate, openly protested in one of
his epistles, that he would have no manner of violence offered to the
conscience of the Galileans: (...). I know that to pacify the Puritans who
excepted as highly as any catholic against them, although upon other grounds,
the Oaths were by roial interpretation both of Queen Elizabeth and King James
much mollified; but that their exposition was private, incomplete, and unknown
to Catholics, and which the words as they sounded would hardly and very hardly
bear.

However catholics as they did ever offer themselves to take any oath of
allegiance which were purely such, and involved not an abnegation of their
ancient Christianity, so likewise have they ever showed in deed and fact, that
they would keep the allegiance tho they took not the oath, whereas others took
the oath and broke the allegiance. And which of these two is most honest and
Christian like our B. Savior has in the like case long ago decided. A certain
man said he, had two sons, and coming to the former he said, son go to day and
work in my vineyard, and he answering said, I will not, but after repenting
himself he did it. Now coming to the other he said in the like manner, but he
answering said, I go my Lord: and went not. Which of the two did the will of
his father. They said unto him, the first: Jesus said unto them; Amen, I say
unto you that publicans and harlots shall go before you into the kingdom of
God: the reason of this application is, because the Jew had entered an oath or
covenant with God, but did contrary; the publicans took no such oath, but yet
when time served fulfilled it.

But whiles we thus armed our selves against the Roman catholics, the disgusted
part of Protestants who deeply disliked this new episcopacy, whereby they might
be as much curbed as by the catholic one before, did multiply amain; and were
oftentimes ready to make head both in the days of queen Elizabeth and king
James; insomuch that the bishops and state were often in great perplexity, and
utterly to seek what they were best to do; if they should favor the puritan,
so the antepiscopal protestant began then to be called, or let them alone, they
would increas unto public danger; if they should resist them, as it could not
be done without scandal and hazard, so neither could they tell how plausibly
to effect it, either by word or sword: for this, there was no sufficient
color; for that no reason: since they did but only press home the first
principles of reformation; which if they were falls, by what right was the Roman
catholic so persecuted and undon; if true, why should english
protestant-episcopacy against those principles be permitted to stand.

Yet at length our state concluded still publicly to persecute the Catholic,
thereby to give some little content to the Puritan, and privately with all
vigilant care to suppress the puritan, thereby to be more enabled to maintain
our selves against the Catholic whose state and dignities we had entered upon.
And our English bishops they chose rather to side with their younger foe the
Puritan, than with the Catholic their elder antagonist: because unto him in so
doing they might seem free benefactours, to the other but just restorers of
their due: besides, the novel levity of the Puritan could not, if it were a
little countenanced or connived at, in any probability do so much prejudice to
our prelate-protestant, as would the ancient renown of Catholics, if the
religion should com again into favor with that land that had not yet utterly
forgot its former glory. And although the danger to protestancy might be equal
on both sides if the power were alike, yet the Catholic would with a more
uncontrollable justice enter upon his own means and dignities of which he had
been deprived by violence, than could the puritan invade another which yet he
never had; although indeed he might pretend as much right to undermine the new
established protestant-episcopacy, as protestants the ancient catholic faith
and clergy; which although in truth it signified no right at all, yet ad
hominem it was good enough: and the puritan if he did it must be justified, or
the protestant if he judged him must condemn himself.

In the interim these waters of puritanisme increased and swelled so high, that
about threescore years after this our english reformation, they brake out into
effect in the reign of good K. Charles the first and overflowed all: and the of
these twenty years civil wars, wherein the rage of sword bore down all before
it, is not yet out of our minds. Whence we may see how vain the policies and
consultations of men, sometimes be; God sits in heaven and laughs at them. Our
favoring of the puritan, which we chose for our safety when we studied the
Catholics overthrow, has brought upon us a speedy ruin. And yet we are still
but where we were, and in the like fears of that generation which knows not the
things of peace; whereas the grave and sober Catholic if he had been
countenanced, had by this time morally speaking much innobled and strengthened
the land, and reduced it to the former splendor it had in ancient times.

As soon as the puritan had got the victory and overthrown both our
ecclesiastic and civil state, he fell himself into many subdivisions of
presbyterian, anabaptist and quaker, which struggled and contested one with
another not only in pulpits towns and cities of the land, but in our
parliaments too, those very parliaments that had overthrown popery, as they
called it, namely our protestant religion and monarchy; with the few Roman
catholics that were in the land, when they had once subdued all to their-will:
And how zealously every one of these canonises his own way to the disparagement
of all others: what biting books and sermons are darted forth by this latter
progeny against one another as well as against the papist and protestant is so
evident I need not speak it. The Puritan seems now to have yielded up his place
and title, this his great battle being ended, unto the new and later offspring
of Presbyterian and Independent; who are now grown old enough to begin a new
battle and sight, if they want a common adversary, with one another: for all
the brood is able and strong enough at ten years old to go forth to battle,
which will still be renewed so long as heresies are suffered to sport and
spawn: they only stay so long, that their number may sufficiently increas; for
as for every individual person he is furnished strong enough in his very first
being to skirmish, and comes forth even out of the womb with an alarm and open
defiance; as the progeny, that rose out of Cadmus his serpents teeth that were
sown in the earth, came up all of them with nodding crests and shaking spears,
and as soon as they got their foot above ground fell a fighting.

And this is the state of things in our kingdom when lo most happily returns
our glorious son to dissipate these mists King Charles the second to his own
home, after his too too long absence and retirement from the hands of our
violent rage; whom God inspire and strengthen that he may be able, if possibly
it may be, according to his own hearts desire to pacify, quiet, and content us
all. But this I am sure can never be done, had he ten times the wisdom of
Solomon and the excellency of all the worthies of the world couched up together
in his princely breast (and his own worth is reported without any help of other
title to deserv an empire) whiles we desire contradictory things, and will not
rest if we have them not, nor yet will submit unto his authority and reason who
studies only our good, and makes use of all the wisdom in the land to effect
it. Let there be but only two men whereof the one will have serene weather, the
other rain in one and the same time and place, and I do not see how God himself
except he chang their minds can pleas them both.

By this narration we may see when these divisions about religion came first
into England, what fruits they have had, how they have grown and increased, and
what to judge of books and sermons that cast so much odium upon another: It is
very brief indeed considering the amplitude of the matter, but I only intended
to set it before my countrymen as a small plate of anchovies or cavearr to
sharpen the appetite unto a further inquest after truth, which all these
several ways pretend to exhibit.

And if my reader be cautious he may easily discern a reason, why all these
sects are so boisterous one against another; and every one of them against the
Roman catholic. Ismael disturbed the whole house, and was ever quarrelling and
bustling against Isaac: The reason is the same both here and there. Ismael was
a natural son, and Isaac the legitimate heir: and natural sons be generally
seditious, violent and clamorous. As Ismael therefore was Isaac his natural
brother, so is a protestant minister but the bi-blow of a legitimate catholic
priest: the Presbyterian likewise to him: and so forward, till you come to the
Quaker, who was begot by a delusion and brought into the world by a fright; his
hand is against every man and every man's hand against him. The remedy and only
means of peace is Ejice ancillam cum puero suo.

. 21. Discovery.
IT may by what I have said without any further argumentation appear
sufficiently, that all anticatholick ways are equally innocent. But it will
not yet be so clearly acknowledged that the catholic also is absolutely
unblamable, except I wipe off some few spots and blemishes which we conceiv all
of us to be in that religion, especially the vulgar gross ones about mass,
images, service in the latin tongue, communion in one kind, saints, praying for
the dead, and the respect and dignity of him we all hate, the Pope. When I have
done this I shall then I hope have set the balance straight, and made popery
appear equally as plausible, innocent and unblamable as any protestancy. These
few prejudices once removed the light of a right understanding will easily
spring up, by virtue of what I have said already and what thence will offer it
self to every unprejudiced eye and judgment in the land. This that I may effect
with more delight to my reader; I will mix it with the occasion of the knowledge
I have got of popery, being my self neither born in a popish land nor popish
family.

About six or seven years old I began both by the speech and gestur of my
parents to understand the story of their misfortune, which had happened it
seems by the popery of my grandfather, so far impeacht about the rising of the
Earls in the north that he lost estate and life; at which my father then a
young stripling being affrighted betook himself to his feet, and fled away, not
staying till he came to the borders of Nottingham and Leicestershire where he
ended his days. I could not even then but weep of times to see my father sigh
so frequently and deeply, which yet he seemed to do in great fear and secresy,
as I even then discerned; nor did I ever speak word of it all my life, till now
after forty years that I find my self past either hopes or fear of many thing
in this world. But I could not tell all the while of my youth whether I should
be angry at Popery or those that persecuted it: although I remember I had a
tender respect for it, when I heard my father say, People were better in Popery
than we be now, yet still he added with a sigh in the close, I know not what to
think of it.

But by this means I contracted a kind of habitual resolv, to find out if I
lived what this Popery might be; which although troubles of school and childish
sports covered for some years, yet at length it came upon me again so fresh and
vigorous, that it ever and anon occurred unto me. About eighteen years of age I
lived in the University of Cambridg, where being one time desirous to ask my
good tutour who was my mothers kinsman, to show me the statutes of the house;
one of my fellow pupils wished me not to do it, for that he had already told
him, that none were to look upon them but only the seniours, and that it was
expulsion for any else to read them; because there was in them much of Popery
about confession, mass, praying at altars for the souls of deceased founders
and benefactors of the college: unto all which I replied not a word. The
greatest benefit I got in the University was by looking over the heads and
general contents of the many great volumes I there met with in several fair
libraries: for though I was not able then any further to manage or make use of
them, yet they stood me in stead afterward when reflecting upon what I had
there seen, I discerned that all those great volumes of learning were, so many
as were Christian either latin or greek, all catholic writers.

After two years, wherein I had learned some few terms of logic out of Smith
and John Seton, I left the University and came up to London where I met with
Churches and sermons good store. Therein I observed three things I could not
tell what to think of: First that both in the Churches of the city and
university and country, whatever the text might be, still pope and popery was
brought in. Secondly that never any good thing was said of it, but all evil.
Thirdly that contradictory opinions and practices were generally put upon that
way: and yet our ministers who could not but see it, did not so much as regard
it at all; but equally flourished all of them in whatever they said against it
without the dislike or check of any, or so much as the exception of him who had
spoke of it aforetime even contrary things in the same place.


If Popery thought I be so bad, let it pass: what a Gods name should we talk
so much of a thing that is past and gone, and buried with my grandfather, and
no man sees or is like to be troubled with it any more. How coms this nois so
frequent in all places about a poor business, as if it were don by design of
defamation? Are our ministers afraid we should turn Papists, who know not but
by their report what Papist means, nor can no more understand what they be,
than we can tell what complexion Julius Caesar was of. We know this way is
every where spoken against, and much evil is said of it, but that has been don
before now to the best things; and a general decrying defamation seems rather a
conspiracy of interest than any deserved reproach. And to what purpos, since it
is dead and gone, should we speak of it at all; much less evil, and so much evil
too. We ought to speak well of the dead, at least not ill; for dead men do not
bite and ghosts afright none but babes: and to speak ill of another, as it
argues a fear we have they may be able to hurt us, and a desire by our
defamation to disable them from so doing, so does it fill our hearts with
rancour, which if the party be dead is wholly useles.

But it is a strange thing that popery or any religion upon earth should be such
a fardell of trumpery sin and villainy, without any good at all in it. Such a
thing one would think were impossible to be found. And it is yet more strange
that noble persons should voluntarily lose their estates, honors, dignities in
court, and esteem among their neighbors, who were it not for that, obstacle
would dearly love them, and sometimes their lives too, for a thing has no
goodness at all in it. The old Pagan religion contained in it many good things,
but this Popery is a house of Judas all stench and rottennes: for our ministers
and the word of God must be believed.

And yet again, let Popery be what it will, if it signify any one religion. it
is the strangest thing in the world it should be evil in both extremes that be
contradictory and exclude one another. Ministers speak ill of it, that may
easily pass; and the highest ill, I cannot gainsay it: yea and nothing but ill,
they may have a reason for it. But contradictory ills and so many of them and
so tangible apparent ones it is a wonder of wonders that one and the same faith
and profession should be able to exhibit. And yet I have never heard, let a
minister say what he will against popery, that the bishop ever calls him to an
account for it: as it is don in other things even of less importance, insomuch
that Prynnes book against stage-plaies is now questioned. Against Popery, and
only Popery all goes current. No man if he speak but ill enough, can speak
amiss of it: and only here two evil extremes are not opposite.

One preacher says that the Papists worship stocks and stones to which they
are superstitiously addicted night and day; another, that all their religion is
to worship a piece of bread. One, that their consciences are so daily tortured
and afrighted with the fire of purgatory and doomsday and pennances for their
sins, that they never have quiet life; another, that they carry their top and
top gallant so high, that they will go to heaven without Christ, and get
eternal glory of themselves without any god-a mercy to him. One, that murders,
adulteries, lies, blasphemies and all sin make up the bulk of popery; another,
that papists are so wholly given to good works, that they place in them
excessive confidence. One, that the Pope himself and all his papists fall down
to pictures and commit idolatry with them; another that the Pope is so far from
falling down to any thing, that he exalts himself above all that is called God,
and is very Antichrist himself: He that hates and would destroy my person will
not surely worship my picture. One, that they wallow without any conscience or
fear of God in their excesses; another, that they nothing but torture their
carcasses with disciplines and fastings, as if men could not go to heaven in a
whole skin. One, that in respect of chastity they villifie matrimony which the
apostle calls honorable; another that by a superesteem of their own they make
matrimony a sacrament, thereby equalling it with baptism. One, that the
ignorance of papist priests is so gross and palpable that generally they can
hardly read latin: another that the little ones which profess the gospel had
by their simplicity prevailed over all the vast learning of the subtle popish
clergy. One, that popery began in the twelfth age of the Church; another in the
ninth; another in the sixth; another in the fourth; another in the very
primitive times of the aposstles: I cannot now call to mind the numberles
contradictories I observed put upon the papists. Nor could I ever determine of
my grand Sires religion by such reports.

Wherefor after a year or two I put my self to travel, all alone and solitary,
to make my long intended discovery. Humansy speaking, it was rashly done of me,
and I several times thought so when I met afterward with troubles I did not
then foresee, that were even ready to sink me. For in all my sufferings which
were many and frequent, I could not but think of my many dear friends whose
weeping tears in that my humor I had neglected. I beleev to this honor that
something went before me to provide my entertainment, and provoke people
againstime for coming to spy the land: for as loon as I set my foot on the
other shore and ever since, afflictions have still accompanied me. Nor yet was
I ever so much offended with any man's abuse, as therefore to think ill of the
religion which I knew him to transgress. It is not to be expected that all the
men of a kingdom should equally imbibe the religion of the place. It may well
be pardoned, if only one in four follow pure sensual nature as they received
it, from the womb, even amongst the best professions. Religion is superadded to
nature as salt, and is several ways imbibed by men. Some drink it in as water,
and with a little labor are quite concorporared with it, and make as it were
one body with the spirit thereof: such were the glorious saints of the Church.
Some take it in as powdered beef or other flesh, unto a perfect seasoning: yet
so as that still the flesh is more, and has the denomination: these are
upright good men preserved by the power of their religion from putrefaction and
unsavorines, although they be men still, upright men. Some take it in as clay in
a less degree and more imperfect mixture; but yet they show it in their lives
and conversation, for it keeps them together, and if in one action they miss of
grace in another they recover it. But some again in the fourth place are like a
marble stone or brick which rubbed over with salt imbibes nothing: and such as
these have the name of religion upon them, nothing in them; and they may be met
with every where, especially in outward society and commerce, for they are
still abroad, even when better people are retired: and sometimes they will for
their own interest get into enclosures too, where they procure much disturbance
and vexation to the saints. In a word catholic religion is wondrous good and
fruitful, as it was said of Canaan, and brings forth huge clusters of lovely
grapes all over the land, but there be also giants and the sons of Anak to be
met with there, and I escaped not their hands.

But God knew the innocence of my heart, and I beleev his good angel supported
me. For the main, I got the end I went for: and having passed through some part
of Holland and Germany France and Flanders returned to my country, to
participate of the miseries which our civil wars then commenced upon pretens of
a purer reformation and further elongation from popery, did bring upon us. And
out of the love I bear my protestant countrymen I set forth this little Light,
that they may no more be inveigled to infect their hearts and hands with the
hatred and ruin of the innocent. For catholic faith, which we call popery, is
in it self a most sacred and pure religion: it makes million of saints, though
it permit some bad ones; even as protestancy, which brings all things to a
naked belief that must suffice what ever life we lead, though it suffer some
honest men not apt by the light of reason to transgress so often as they may,
makes a million of loos and wicked ones: but this is the difference, that there
the few evil ones have some remors for doing ill, here the multitude of
desperadoes have none at all. Catholics cannot doubt of their faith, if Christ
who promised to be with his Church unto the worlds consummation, be a true
prophet: and again if he be a true prophet, then all reformers who jointly
affirm the Church to have failed for so many ages, must needs be in an error.
But I com to my travels and particular observations, so much as may serve to my
present purpos.

. 22. Messach.
I Was edified and amazed to see catholic people flocking to Church not upon
sundaies only but every day in the week to their sacred orisons, the bells
ringing to that purpos all the town over, not only every several hour in the
morning until midday, but at verspers compline, and even at midnight mattens
when all the religious of a kingdom are called up in the very depth of their
sleep to chant forth psalms hymns and canticles to the prais and glory of the
almighty. It deighted me to enter their Churches which be kept so sweet and
clean and in such a religious quiet retirednes, that it would make a man at his
entrance into them, as they say of the kingdom of Florida in a sweet spring
day, to forget wife and children and all worldly business. But when I beheld the
deep reverence and earnest devotion of the people, the majesty of their
service, the gravity of their altars, the decency of their priests; certainly,
said I within my self, this is he house of God and gate of heaven: Alas, our
Churches in England as they be now, be as short of those either for decency,
use, or piety, as stables to a princely palace: there they be upon their knees
all the week long at their prayers, many of then constantly an hour together in
the morning, and half an hour he that is least, and my house says God is the
house of prayer; but our Churches are either shut up all the week, or if they be
open, are wholly taken up with boys shouting running and gamboling all about.
On Sundaies indeed our people sit quiet and decently dressed; but to bow the knee
is quite out of fashion; and if any one chance to do it, as he is rare to
behold, so is he very nimble at it, and as soon up as down, as if he made a
courtship with his knees, or only tried if his nerves and sinews were as good
to bow as stand upright. And our whole religious work here, is to sit quietly
whiles a minister speaks upon a text, conferring notes, answering difficulties,
expounding words, drawing conclusions, and putting together for ampler
dilucidation one text to another; as if he were reading to students in the
school some piece of Aristotle's Perihermenias. And thus we spend all our days
ever learning and teaching, and our whole religion is to teach and learn, as if
religion were only to lend the ear to one who cries Hearkens; or an art of
knowing how to speak an hour upon two or three words of a verse; which for my
part as I am well enough assured that it is not the great work of Christian
religion, so neither is it the true work of Christian preaching; whether we
consult reason or presidents of antiquity to find it. For as all sermons left
us by greek and latin fathers are grave short and pithy, such namely as they
being all priests used to deliver at the altar between the Evangile and Creed;
so were they ever most free from any such verbal comparing of text with text,
verse with verse, and the like various vanities which so take up our English
preachings, that our sermons be little or nothing else, and only serve to spend
time and vent our own frivolous verbosity.

If it do happen that a more learned Protestant do make a sermon of solid
matter, as sometimes they will, he will be sure before he make an end by one
conceit or other to have a fling at the Papists, to the end that people may
think, as indeed they do, that Papists have no such doctrine, though the
preacher know himself that he got it all out of their books; which is a pretty
piece of legerdemain, but very frequent in this land. Another thing I have
observed, and it is worth observation, that of all the sermons I have ever
heard in England, I have never known any to deliver ex proposito the proper and
peculiar doctrine of protestancy, by which and for which we first revolted from
the catholic Church; as that our good works be all mortal sins and damnable
before God; that we have no will or power to do good or avoid evil; that the
commandments of God are impossible to be kept, etc. but rather all contrary;
as if we were ashmed of our own doctrine, and afraid to speak before the people
what we know in reason could not but offend Christian ears: But all generally
do preach, when they preach any good thing, the doctrine of catholics; though
ever abused with their own modes and mixtures. For every sect as it has a
peculiar spirit, so has it a mode and vein and method proper to it self. The
Independent speaks many good words, but inconsequent and unconnexed, so much
roving up and down as if he had a mind to be prophet errant, and before he
gives over, to say something of every thing. The Presbyterian ever pursues some
Platonic idea, for example, the ingoing and outgoings of Christ, which is so
thin and bodiles, that he is forced to assign six or seven ways to discern it;
then gives twelv consequent effects; nineteen ways to get, etc. in which ways
he does even tire himself, as you may perceive by his melting and breathing
when he comes to the high hills of eighteenthly and ninteenthly: and after some
months labor and travel in these his ways, at last with much ado he finishes
his text; which before he handled it was good and easy doctrine, but is now by
his tedious exercise rendered obscure intricate and full of doubts. The
Protestant cuts his text out logically into so many parts, and then walks
through them all with an even rhetoric, adorned with witty conceits and
flowers of common places, still bringing un that parcel of the text he is
handling with such proportion and measure in the close, that a man must needs
say when he has done, that he has showed a featous piece of art: and when his,
or Presbyterian or Independents sermon is ended, then is the great work of
their religion done; though all to little purpos, for a dead man's foot, say
what you will to him, will never warm is shoo.

But the Catholic, if he speak like himself, having gravely and pithily pressed
the intention of the gospel for such a day unto the peoples practis and
devotion, falls to the great works of sacrifice if it be in the morning, and of
evensong in the after noon, adoration, prayer and charity; which is the sum
wherein his religion consists; and all his preaching servs but as a pair of
bellows to make those coals burn. Nor does any good old catholic, that is well
grounded in the constant practis of his faith, care at all for any further
instruction; knowing aforehand that it can tend to nothing else than what before
he knew and yet endeavors to practis. For with him pure religion and undefiled
is not to hear words but do deeds, to reliev the orphan and widow, and to keep
our selves unspotted in this world; which unspottednes we attain by complying
heart and hand unto the rule and sacraments of Jesus Christ. Nor did the
primitive Christians for three hundred years, ever hear any sermon made to them
upon a text all their whole life time, but merely flocked together at their
priests appointment, to their messach, or dominicum, or Leiturgy, or by what
other name, for they used many at several times to avoid the pagans discovery,
their Christian sacrifice was called. And it is most strange that we should
pretend here in England to be Christians and the only good ones, and yet reject
those two great things which were by all Christendom esteemed in every age the
very essences of Christianity, the tribunal of absolution and the great Legacy
of Jesus his body to his spous the Church; insisting wholly upon preaching
which as it is an accidental and relative work of our Christianity, so is it
common with us an all religions both Mohammedan Jew and Pagan; whose sermons if
any should hear he could not tell, by the morality of the master, to what
religion they belonged.

It is hard to say, why against all the vogue of antiquity we should be so
violent as to abolish the Christian sacrifice, pull down the altars, banish the
priesthood, yea and persecute it unto death, except we mean to repaganise our
selves. Our protestant forefathers when they first rose, found manifestly all
the Christian world over, that this incruent sacrifice according to the order
of Melchisedeck was and had ever been the sum of all apostolical devotion; for
which our many goodly fair Churches, shrines and altars were built, which hang
now forlorn and desolate in our hands like great dead carcasses after the soul
is departed: for the inshrined body of Jesus was the life and soul of our
Churches, which then died all of them when he departed, mouldring away ever
since into dust and rottennes. And therefore Martin Luther with his Kate, the
Adam and Eve of protetestancy, did not for that reason presume to pull down the
altars, although they would not keep them up without the mixtur of some error
of their own. But we in England in our strange heat tore down all, without
either president of the catholic world or our own reforming forefathers.

We cannot but see if indeed we see any thing, that every law and religion has
been still annexed with a corresponding sacrfice. Yea so surely and
universally, that sacrifice seems both to be born with religion and with
religion to be extinguished. The first men who worshipped God in the world as
Cain and Abel, are said to have don it with a sacrifice: after the flood with
religion again renewed was also sacrifice renewed by Noah; and when afterward
through diverse persecutions religion was brought into hazard, nothing did the
prophets so much lament as the ceasing of their sacrifice as may be be seen in
the book of Kings and Daniel. And not without reason; for all other kinds of
good things offered or don to God are common also unto creatures; only
sacrifice is a worship so due to the Almighty, as none either in heaven or
earth may partake with him in it: an other sacrifice properly socalled besides
this according to the order of Melchisedeck there never was any amongst
Christians. For although faith, hope, and prais be by way of analogy called a
sacrifice, in an improper and translated locution, to set forth the worth and
acceptablenes of them; yet this is so far from derogating to the great and
solemn sacrifice properly so called, that it presupposes and establishes it:
for the other could not have that analogical name, except that thing were unto
which they may bear analogy: prais could not be commanded as sacrifice, if
there were no such thing as sacrifice, thence the commendation should be drawn,
and to whose worth it should allude: as it were impertinent and foolish, to
express the sweetness of any oratory by the name of honey and sugared rhetoric,
if we did beleev there were no such thing as honey and sugar in nature. It is
true also that the death of Christ upon the cross was both a true and solemn
sacrifice: but that is passed away and is the object of our faith, not an
external rite about which the Church may meet and com together at all times to
worship God, as is this representation of it which our Lord instituted for that
very end before his death. Nor is the passion of our Lord proper to us
Christians alone, as the real figuration of it which himself instituted; for
all the sacrifices of the old law were accepted in order to that passion to
com, even as ours in respect of it now past.

And since there were true sacrifices in the old law amongst the Jews, why
should there not be also in the new which is believed to be more perfect; about
which Christians should assemble to offer up with it and it order to it all
their requests and praises? For Christ our Lord took not away those things
which God his father in the old law instituted as being not contrary to him;
but only perfected and changed them into better things, both precepts,
sacraments and sacrifice too. and of this last it behooved him to be more
careful then all the rest; for otherwise, since sacrifice is the only worship
proper and peculiar unto God, by utterly taking it away, he had not augmented
but dimished his Fathers glory. All other kinds of worship we Christians have
for certain which the Jews ever had, invocation, adoration, vows, hymns,
feasts, fasts, faith, hope, charity and prais; must only that which only is
proper to the almighty be excluded? especially since we have all the reasons to
honor God by sacrifice the Jews ever had: we are an extern and visible
congregation as they were; we have the passion of the Messiah to be represetned
before our eyes now with us past, as with them it was to com; we have the same
God with the highest worship to be honored, for our sins to be appeased, for
favors to be invocated, for received benefits to be praised.

But if any will be contentious and not heed all this, which is nothing but
pious reason, let him look upon the primitive Church in the apostles time
whereof we have some clear footsteps delivered us in the Acts of the Apostles,
and he shall find that the apostles and apostolical Christians placed their
religion not in hearing or making sermons, for they had none; but in attending
to their Christian liturgy, and all antiquity will attest it. The sermons
mentioned in that book were only in defense of Christianity, made to the Jews
and Pagans for their conversion, not to any Christians at all: Such was St.
Peter's first speech to the Jews and Gentiles that brake in amongst the
Christians in Jerusalem after their Messach ended, and the holy Ghost fallen
upon them, c. 2. after this to other Jews, c. 3. c. 5. then to Cornelius a
pagan c. 10. So likewise spoke S. Stephen to the Hebrew Priests and Jews c. 7.
Saint Philip to the Ethiopian Eunuch c. 8. St. Paul to the synagogue in Pisidia
c. 13. to others in Iconium c. 14. to Gentiles in Macedonia c. 16. again to
other Jews in Thessalolonica and heathen Philosophers in Athens c. 17. both S.
Paul and Apollo to the Jews at Corinth and Ephesus c. 18. c. 19. at Troas also
he defended Christ and his religion against all that resisted it, speaking even
till midnight; c. 20. but this was dispute, (and so the text calls it) rather
than a preaching; and made una sabbati, says the same text, cum convenissemus
ad frangendum panem; so that it was not the work they came together for, but an
additament to it. So likewise he spoke to other Jews in Jerusalem, c. 22. to
Foelix and Agrippa painims c. 24. c. 26. to the Jews in Rome for their
conversion c. 28. And no where was ever sermon made to formal Christians either
by St. Peter or Paul or any other, as the work of their religion they came
together for: nor be there other sermons in that book but what I have
mentioned; nor did the Christians ever dream of serving God after their
conversion by any such means, but only by their Eucharistian leiturgy, and
sacrifice, bread-fraction, or Messach, as is apparent in that book: I will
mention but one place in the beginning of the 13. chapter which speaks thus,
Ministrantibus illis Domino and jejunantibus dixit spiritus sanctus, etc.
Whiles they were administering to our Lord and fasting, the holy Ghost said,
Separate me Paul and Barnabas; (...), which Erasmus renders well and truly,
sacrificantibus illis Domino; which one text gives double testimony both to
apostolical sacrifice and priestly ordination: For that ministerial function no
man can doubt but that it was a public work of religion; and it could be no
other than their great Christian Sacrifice, as the words do manifestly import;
since it was made (...) to our Lord; for other inferior ministeries of the
word and Sacraments are not made to God but to the people; but the apostles
were (...), administering, leiturgying, sacrificing to our Lord, whent his
segregation of Paul and Barnabas from the laiety to the clergy, which cannot
otherwise be imagined to be done but by sacredotal consecration, was to be
effected. And all that whole book testifies sufficiently that the apostles and
primitive Christians ever came together to their Dominicum or Educhdrist, to
their liturgy or messach, and not to any sermon; not ad audiendam concionem but
ad frangendum panem.

It would griev any Christian heart to see the poor Catholics of England so
miserably harassed, pillaged, imprisoned, hated, hanged by their own allies and
countrymen, as they have been now a hundred years, for the profession of that
great work of Christianity which Christ and his apostles taught them; and that
they should undergo the same disgrace and ruin by such as call themselves
Christians, yea the only pure ones, for that very self same act of Religion,
for which both the Apostles themselves and all primitive Christians were so
cruelly persecuted by Jew and Pagan. But the God of mercies look in his good
time both upon the persecutour and sufferer, with compassion and favor; them,
because they have done it ignorantly in incredulity, these because for his fear
and love they have persevered hitherto through many great afflictions in his
service, and patiently withstood all opposition even unto bloodshed and death
until this day: But Catholics had their lession read them long ago, and they
have it by heart by this time. They will, says their Lord and master, lay
their hands upon you and persecute you, delivering you into custody and
prisons, dragging you before Kings and presidents for my names sake; and ye
shall be betrayed by parents, children, kinsfolk and friends; and some of you
they will put to death, and ye shall be a hatred unto all men for my name: but
who shall persever unto the end he shall be saved. But I hope our countrymen
will at length discern their own dangerous mistake, and perceiv with me that
the Popish Mass which is the old opostolical devotion merits not the hatred and
mischief we have either wrought or intended the observers of it in our land.

Hitherto then I hope we have no reason to hate popery, upon the account of
their Messach; which is indeed the chiefest piece of our division, and occasion
of the many contumelies we put upon them; especially considering that in our
own Communion, so far as it goes, we do but imitate great part of it, and that
in their very words.

23. B. V. Mary.
AL Catholics I could ever see or hear or read of, bear a most devout respect
to the Virgin MARY, whom others care not how they villify and dishonor either
by their words or writings: and I cannot but dislike this our uncivil carriage,
to say no wors of it, as much as I do approve of their piety. Surely that
Virgin of whom God would be incarnate, and with whom he lived so many years
together, must needs be a person of strange perfection, and worthy of great
esteem amongst all such as worship her Son and look upon him indeed as their
Redeemer. He that loves him that begets, says the good apostle, loves him that
is begotten; and I should think he that worships him that is begotten, must
needs have some respect for her that bare him. The blessed Virgin was her self
so confident of this, that she was bold to say, Ecce enim ex hoo beat am me
dicent omnes generationes, all generations, all nations, says she, shall call
me Blessed. And surely if this be true, and in gospel it passes for divine
words, we that instead of calling her Blessed presume so highly to villify and
blaspheme her even in our public streets, for which in catholic countries we
should be in danger of being stoned to death by the people, show our selves to
be a nation that belongs not to the Magnificat. Indeed all here amongst us are
not so rude; but such as be, are neither punished nor questioned for it. And
what in the name of God has the Virgin Mary don to us, what ill or harm has
she ever wrought us, that any English Christian should cast so many gibes, and
show so much disesteem to that blessed creatur, whom the whole catholic world,
the angels of heaven, nay our Lord himself, and that great God that made heaven
and earth have set in so high a place of honor. Will our incivility, as it
has no ground or reason, admit likewise of no limits? It may be feared that
the spirit of Luther anisme is some very foul one; for it has moved the
professors of it in several places unto most unseemly language and highest
disesteem of very thing that is venerable. Not only princes and prelates,
priests and altars, shrines and sacrifice, bishops and their sacred
ordinations, the real presence, tribunal of our reconciliation and the like;
but the very saints and angels of heaven, nay the most innocent blessed Maid,
whom the very Turks do honor to this day, and, that she may not be thought the
wors of for that, an angel from heaven saluted by the mandate and in the name
of him who is primogeneal Life and substantial Truth with the title of (...)
Most beloved and Gracious, escape not the lash of our lips and pens. And yet
this is not all neither:

Do not I know that the primitive protestants in foreign parts have uttered,
some openly, some more obscurely, in their writings many odd words against the
very honor of Jesus Christ himself, although our more moderate Church of
England I am confident hates them for it. Did not Calvin taunt at his ignorance
and passion and too much haste for his breakfast: when he crust the figtree
that had not fruit upon it when he sought it? if he had studied catholic
divines they would have taught him a more modest and pious interpretation than
that idle wicked one of his own. Did not Michael Servetus that bold apostate
Spanish youth speak openly amongst his fellow protestants in Geneva, that he
wondered that they had raised all their controversies so many as they had
against the Church which is named the body of Christ, and yet never a one
against Christ the head of that body? did not Valentine Gentile that unhappy
Italian, after he had revolted to Calvin take it ill that all the reformed
Churches agreed yet with the papists in the belief of a Trinity? and with him
sided Matheus Gribaldus, Lismanin, Francis David; and Jacobus Paleologus,
though this last recanted afterward and returned happily to his catholic
faith. And who-knows not that Luther, Brentius, Calvin, Suinglius, yea and
Erasmus too, who though he yet remained catholic would be nibling now and then
at Arrian and Socinianisme, let fly many a secret dart at Christ and the sacred
Trinity? though they were not yet so bold as to profess openly with some others
of their brethren, whom they saw to suffer in their repute for it, any such
opinion; till they found the world in a more forward disposition to accept it:
and all these bent their bows and fitted their arrows to the string, that if
not openly yet at least in the dark and in Luna, as the prophet phrases it,
they might shoot and hit every thing that is sacred, even Christ himself. So
true it is, that he who loves him that begets, loves him that is begotten, and
he that hates the one does not truly love the other. But the penmen of our
creed and gospel who made honorable mention of the Virgin Mary were of another
spirit, than we be that so much dishonor her, although for fashion sake we
read over those holy penmens words. A certain protestant bishop did not many
years ago examine a catholic child that stood before him if he could say his
prayers; the boy replying yes, said first his Pater noster; after that began
his Ave Maria, which catholics use to repeat in memory of Christ's incarnation;
at which words, nay, quoth the bishop let her alone, let her alone, we have
nothing to do with her. The child went on to his Creed, and when he came to
conceptus est de spiritus sancto natus ex -- he suddenly stopped; and she is here
again, quoth the child, she is here again my Lord, what shall I do with her
now; you may let her pass quoth the bishop in your Creed but not in your
prayers. As though we might have faith but neither hope nor charity for her.
But if we seriously consider the spirit of those who wrote either our Gospel or
Creed, we shall find that of Roman catholics to have a most near consanguinity
with it, and loving them we cannot hate these for the respect they bear his
virgin Mother whom we all worship.

. 24. Images.
IN all places where I came I beheld great store of pictures and images in
Churches of Roman catholics; which being in the postures either of their
bloody martyrdoms which for their religion they underwent, or apostolical
sacrifice, or sacred retirements, meditations, or other exercise of their faith
hope or charity either toward God or their neighbors, apostles, martyrs,
confessors, hermites, monks, virgins, kings, queens, bishops, as they made a
goodly show, so did they mightily assist the fansy unto a more united thought
of the religion people came into the Church to fulfill and solemnise. But the
altar is seldom without the pourtraicts of Jesus and his Virgin Mother, but
never without the Crucifix: the sight of all which is apt to cast into the mind
of such as enter into the Church that meditation of the apostle in his epistle
to the Hebrews, Non accessistis ad tractabilem montem and accensibilem ignem,
etc. Ye are not com to the high towering mount, flaming fire and whirlwind; and
darkness and storm and sound of trumpet, and nois of words, which they that
heard excused themselves, and requested to hear it no more, and it seemed so
terrible that Moses himself stood trembling and affrighted; but ye are come to
Mount Sion, to the city of our living God, to celestial Jerusalem and society
of angels, the Church of primitive Christians conscript in heaven, to God the
Judge of all, to the spirits of just perfect men, to Jesus the mediator of a
new testament, and to the Aspersion of blood speaking better things than Able.

And all these representations, so much concurring to devotion and piety as
they do, the doctrine and men who tore them down and cast them out of our
English Churches, and broke and hewed them in pieces with so much rage, could
not be any friends whatever they might pretend, either to our mount Sion or the
city of our living God, the celestial Jerusalem, society of angels, the Church
of primitive Christians, or to the spirits of just men perfected, or to Jesus
mediator of the new testament, or lastly to the aspersion of blood speaking
better things than Abel, all which was there pour-traited and described.

It is the judgment of all men that the violation of an Image redounds to the
Prototype; and therefore Kings not only in Christendom, but beyond it use to
punish a grand traitor either deceased or fled even in his effigy. Every
particular person loves to behold the picture of him he esteems, and again if
he hate the person he detests the face: thus even our late rebels here in
England after they had murdered our good King, shot his pictures with bullets,
and broke them with their cimiters and spears all the land over. Thy
adversaries says the Prophet have roared and raged in the midst of thy
synagogues, and for thy ensigns have set up their own banners; as once of those
who with strong exes cut up the thickest of timber unto the temples structure
it was esteemed an honorable and noble work in them; so is it countd now if
any on the contrary break in pieces thy sculptures with axe and hammers: they
were Gods enemies then that did all this, and that brake down his sculptures;
and by those very works of theirs concluded to be his enemies by a great
Prophet, who well enough understood who was Gods friend and who his foe.

If any would consider the constitution and exigence of man's nature he would
soon find not only the convenience but necessity of such helps as ocular
representations afford us: for the fansy has nothing but what it receives from
the senses, and the intellect works upon nothing but what it has from fansy;
and therefore did God make man in the last place after heaven and earth was
framed, to the end that in so great a variety of sensible objects he might find
something to think of even in the first instant of his being; whereas if he had
been made before other things he had stood like a stock or stone without any
possibility of a thought. Now nothing administers to the fansy and consequently
to the mind with that variety and life and power as does the eye: the supplies
of the ear care but dead things to it, especially in the account of exciting
desire and love: let Cicero speak a whole day upon the beauties of a princely
seat, country, city, man or woman; yet when the eye comes once to see the
thing in its own properties, it discerns and represents more at one glance than
could his or all the oratory in the world ever by the help of the ear imprint
into the mind. Indeed who is so ignorant, that he has not observed ere this;
that the eye has a hundred fold the actuosity of the ear: nor is it unknown
what strange melting affections are caused in the heart by a continual sight
and meditation of some sacred pictur of the Crucifix; when sermons float by and
effect little or nothing in comparison; even as worldly objects so long as they
are coached in aerie words pass away like wind, but once seated in the throne
of the eye they move impetuously. Nor can all the ministers in the world give
me a reason why the eye in a sacred purpos may not have the helps of her
species, as well as the ear have hers; or why the mind that is to be moved and
can never be moved too much in such things may not as well have the quicker as
duller assistance. For when any one preaches upon the Passion of Christ, does
he do any thing else but labor to work out such representations in the ear and
mind as oratory may effect, for the moving of affections corresponding to such
an object: and if such good meditations put into a book of devotion be assisted
with an ocular representation which is more quick and full, and carries more of
life with it, what harm is it! surely he that deprives me of the more lively
helps, never means whatever he pretend, I should have any cordial feeling of
the things he talks of.

And verily the Protestant pretenses for their removal of images out of our
Churches are but simple ones, and the simpler they be the the better it seems
they serve the deluded vulgar. First say they God has in his commandments
forbidden the making of graven images: Good, and has he so? do you not find too
that he commanded it? see if he did not give order in the same scripture for
Cherubins and Seraphins to be made and set up in his sanctum sanctorum over the
ark? what then, did God or Moses forget himself, and contradict his own words?
or are you blind? or only catholics fools? or what is the matter. Look
seriously and you shall find that Moses forbad profane and foreign images,
but he commanded his own: though he disliked the ugly face of Molech Dagon and
Astaroth, yet did not he therefore will his people should tear down his own
Cherubins. And Christians likewise have not any images of Simon Magus although
they have St. Peter's: the Crucifix they will keep and use and honor, not the
portraict of Him with a cloven foot: if they esteem the memory and effigies of
great Constantine, yet not of wicked Dioclesian; if we find in their Churches
the image of blessed S. Bennet or good Saint Francis, yet shall we never meet
there with the face of Luther or Calvin: so that here in the catholic Church
as well as in Moses law is both, Thou shall make graven images, and again Thou
shall not.

Thus much Anticatholicks might themselves understand, if they would consider
any thing seriously, by the very words of the text. Thou shall not make to thy
self any graven image: not make to thy self. As if he had said, when you com
into the land amongst the gentiles, let none of you be inveigled either by
their example or words, to make to himself any of the images he shall see there
set up by the inhabitants, contrary to the ceremonies of Moses and practis of
the synagogue, which does so honor her own Cherubins, that she abominates all
idols and their sculptures. And thus if any catholic should make to himself
and upon his own head and fansy, contrary to what is allowed, any peculiar
image of the planets for example, or wicked men to worship it for sacred, I
believe he will be punished for his transgression. So that images are not
forbidden in the general notion of images, but only of such or such a kind; as
if I should forbid my servant who travels with me into France and keeps my
purs, to make unto himself any clothes; I intend not that he shall go naked,
but only that he make no clothes but what and when and in what fashion I
approve. Secondly they say, it is idolatry. But this is spoken without logic.
Except the thing represented be an idol, devil, or something opposite to God, or
below man, whom yet he will worship; the honor and use of the image cannot be
idolatry. If I may respect and love the person. I may love and respect the
image too; since this my esteem is terminated ultimatly only upon the prototype.
Moses never feared idolatry with his own Cherubins, and yet he had as much
reason to fear it as the Christian Church can have. The honor of an image is
but a natural resultancy from the exemplar represented in it, and this can be
no other affection but what is due to that: as any man may perceive by four
several images set before him, the first of his king, the other of his father,
a third of his sweetheart, a fourth of his mortal adversary: upon the sight of
all which he conceivs and can conceiv no other but that passion he bears the
prototype or thing resembled, honor to one, duty to the other, tender love to
the third, and hateful disaffection to the last. Now that the saints and angels
of God, spirits assisting to Gods glory and worship, and administering to our
necessities deserv a veneration at our hands I shall speak anon; and from the
image can result no other but what is their due. As they be no Gods, so neither
can their image make them so: the image of my enemy makes him not my sweet
heart, nor can the picture of my neighbor make him my king: And how can the
representation of Gods saints and servants make them otherwise than what they
are. But all these petty arguments are taken from the rancourous Jews, who
were never bent against images in general, till they saw the Christians to keep
and worship the figure of Jesus Christ whom they all hated.

And if Protestants can love Jesus Christ crucified and hate the representation
of his cross, which two things how they can consist together no reason of man
can comprehend; yet let us not malign the innocent Papists for doing that
which the reason of all mankind allows. What person soever I may love, I may
like his image also.

. 25. Latin Service.
THe catholic liturgy is and ever was all over the western empire in the latin
tongue. This general custom of keeping both mass and bible in an unknown tongue
from vulgar hands, as it may be made to carry with with it a plausible surmise
either of fraud or envy; so has it been the great engine used by Protestants
both to draw and keep a vast number of people from the bosom of the catholic
Church. The business of Scripture I have already hinted at: For catholics have
the sum of scripture both for history and dogme delivered them in their own
language so much as may make for their salvation, good orders being set and
instituted for their proficiency therein, and what needs any more? or why
should they be further permitted either to satisfy curiosity, or raise doubts,
or to wrest words and examples there recorded unto their own ruin, as we see
now by experience men are apt to do. Besides the book is sacred and therefore
not to be sullied with every hand. What God has sanctified let not man make
common. It is against the nature of a thing segregated to divine use, to be
vulgarly mixed with our profane utensils and touch and talkings; and indeed it
is a contradiction in rearms; for if it be segregated from them, how is it
mixed with them? if it be mysterious how can it be vulgar. And this is the
judgment of the whole world, both present and past: Not only mahometans and
pagans who evermore kept the book that spoke forth the secrets of their
religion still in that one language it was delivered in; but the Hebrews too,
as well as the Christian Church: Nor was the bible, the law of Moses, or the
prophets, or hagiography ever put out of their hebrew into syriack, either in
Moses time or after, either by his command or any permission of the high
priests that followed. Nay it was so far from that, that it was not touched or
looked upon by the people even in its own language, but kept privately in the
ark or tabernacle, and brought forth at times to the priest who might upon the
sabbath day, which is our saturday, read some part of it to the people, and put
them in mind of their laws religion and duty. Whereas the Christian bible is in
the hands of all who understand either greek or latin. So great is the
indulgence of the Catholic Church, and so good an opinion has she above all
others of her children; though every one is not permitted to prattle and
dispute about it, as I think no wise man will think it fit they should. And
this retirednes of sacred doctrine and rare approach unto the eye and ear with
high reverence and solemnity, works in the minds of people a wonderful great
awe and impression of respect; whereas familiar usage renders it contemptible.
Indeed after that sacred book becomes once to be slightly thrown about with
ordinary touch and tongue, what does it work but self will and conceit,
contentions, pride, schisms and wars? experience has proved it: for every one
has a text both to defend himself and oppose his neighbor, whether it be in
earnest, or as it often happens in sport and jest, whether wrong or rightly
applied.

Nor can the Bible be well translated; for the original carries oftentimes so
great a latitude and amplitude of senses that it cannot be brought into a
vulgar tongue without confineing the signification, to the great alteration and
perhaps subversion of the holy penmans intention. Besides, when men write or
speak with a special peculiarity of spirit, as all indeed do, but those holy
writers much more; this genius of theirs is so lapt up in their own words or
sounds, that by transmigration out of the coverture in which that Spirit was
born and bred, as a snail in her shell, it does in a manner quite expire and
vanish. We find daily, that books translated out of one tongue into another
lose much of their connatural grace and sweetness, if not all the whole genuine
power and life they carried in their own character. So ticklish and volatile a
thing is that hidden genius couched in the rind of men's words. Nor is a man
better known by his face than writings; I mean, if he draw his discourse and
sens out of his own bowels: for otherwise if he be only a book botcher or
collectour out of other authors, it will signify little; which I take to be
the reason why many spiritual books written in these times out of ancient
contemplatives, although the matter is the same and the language mended, yet be
they in these penmen but dry unsavory stuff, which in the first author was a
fragrant ravishing devotion; the good things therein contained have by their
transmigration lost their own spirit, and the latter author, if so I may call
him, had not another to give them answerable to their nature. By all this I
would say thus much, that the Bible translated out of its own sacred phrase
into a profane and common one, loses both its own property and amplitude of
meaning, and is likewise divested of its peculiar majesty, holiness, and spirit:
which is reason enough if there were no other, why it should be kept inviolate
in its own style and speech. Sacred doctrine like the persons is not to pass de
domo in domum, but remain under that roof which first covered them. And as for
peoples instructions, it is as I said before to be made by the priests and
pastors of the religion, on whose lips the sacred knowledge hangs and thence
drops down upon the assembly, out of that book according to occasion and times,
as holy Church whole book that is shall judge it fit. We commit not to children
the whole pot of honey, whereby they may surfeit and hurt themselves, but give
them only some few drops upon a stick of licoras so much as they can digest and
make use of for their health.

And if the book wherein religious rites be grounded lawfully may, and in reason
ought, and in practice ever has been kept segregated in a language not common
to vulgar ears; much more are the sacred solemn rites themselves to be performed
in a tongue that is segregated from common use, answerable to the Book
according to which they be executed: which custom as it renders that great Act
more majestic and venerable, so does it carry with it much of convenience and
no inconvenience at all. For thus the Church all over the world, as opposite to
Babel, wherein were so many divisions of tongues, shall as in heart and faith
so also in lip and language be unanimous and linked together; and the great
work of Religion, wherein all Christian people from one coast of heaven to
another do unanimously conspire, be so uniformly executed, that men may in all
places of the world meet with their own Christian Church in one mode and
fashion both to acknowledge and join with it in their orisons. Nor could
otherways any one priest serve in several countries, or administer presently
in a place which himself or others with him had converted: for which cause men
studying to get that one language, which is stretched as large and wide as is
the catholic Church throughout the world, have in all places one tongue, and
that no hard one to convers withal; which did not the Church use it in her
rites would in time be utterly neglected. The Hebrew Church being immured in
one Kingdom had not those many reasons which her younger sister, whose
territories are extended from East to West has, to keep her rites in a
language differing from the vulgar; and yet she did so.

Inconvenience in this practis there can be none assigned, but only this; that
if the latin tongue be used at the altar, then cannot the vulgar people
understand what is said. But this is not of any moment. For first the people
have all the whole scope and purpose and frame of sacred liturgy set down in
their own prayer-books, and if they will, in their hearts and mind; whereby
they may if they pleas as equally conspire and go along with the priest in
their devotions, as if he spoke in the mother tongue. Secondly catholic people
come together not for other business at the Mass, but only with fervor of
devotion to adore Christ crucified before them, and by the mediation of that
sacred blood to pour forth their supplications for themselves and others, which
being don, and their good purpos of serving and pleasing that holy Lord that
shed his blood for us renewed, they depart in peace: This is the general purpos
of the Mass; so that eyes and hands to lift up, knees to bow, and hearts to
melt, are there of more use, than ears. But thirdly there is no need at all for
the people either to hear or understand the Priest when he speaks and prays
and sacrifices to God in their behalf: Sermons to the people must be made in
the peoples language; but prayers presented to God for them if they be made in
a language that God understands, it is enough.

This was well enough conceived by the whole congregation of Israel who
commonly stood in vaste multitudes without in a large outward court when the
priest entered his sanctum sanctorum, to offer and pray for them, who all the
while were so far from hearing that they could not see him: this if any doubt,
he may both discern it in the old law, and in our gospel too; where Zacharias
is said to be praying at the altar when all the people stood without. Why then
may not the younger sister Church of Christians likewise pleas and pacify her
heavenly father with sacred words and rites addressed unto him in the behalf of
the people, although these do not understand, nay not so much as hear what is
said. And what matters it, if I pray for a friend whether he hear me or no, so
that God unto whom I pray do hear and accept of my humble addresses. St. Paul
wrote to Rome from Corinth most heartily in his letters requesting their
prayers; and he esteemed it as good, as if he had himself been by and heard it;
and yet the catholic altar is not so far from the people, as Corinth is from
Rome. Wherefore in St. Paul's judgment one may pray for another not only priest
for the people, but people also for the priest, without being understood, or so
much as either heard or seen. Nor could St. Paul in his own reason ever deny
the efficacy of those prayers which be made by one for another in any whatever
language, for it was all one to him what language the Romans spoke; and if he
did reflect upon it he could not be ignorant that they spoke not the language
of Corinth when he wrote to them from thence, that they should pray for him
there at so great a distance.

But if any will yet be obstinate and object unto me that S. Paul himself even
in his epistle he wrote to Corinth from Ephesus, which was his first letter he
sent to that people, speaks there about the end of the same letter very much
against their praying and prophesying in an unknown tongue; he may know first,
that even the tongue of the Romans whose prayers notwithstanding S. Paul so
earnestly requested at Corinth was an unknwn tongue to those that lived there,
and yet that wise apostle would not we may think contradict himself: Secondly
then, what was the matter? The business was this. There were in the primitive
Churches up and down many gifts and gratuities bestowed upon Christian people
by that holy Spirit who would thereby exalt the gospels glory, as extemporary
prophesies, working of miracles, gift of tongues, and the like; and S. Paul
hearing at Ephesus of some disorders in Corinth upon that account, as those
kind of gifts are possible to be abused, he wrote to them about it, to let them
know that the spirit of Jesus for such his voluntary donations unto men was
indeed to be praised; but yet that Christians should not therefore place in
those things their utmost glory: and then to diminish further the huge esteem
they had there of gifts and tongues before all other, he lets them know that of
all the other gifts, that in particular was liable to the greatest
inconveniences, even far more than either wonder-working or prophecy. This is
the apostles drift as any one may see that understands a grave and sober
letter. But what is all this to any service of the Church.

But thirdly that I may make the thing yet a little plainer; the Latin in which
the Catholic service is kept is no unknown tongue, and therefore that objection
of no valiew against it. There is no tongue in the world can be said absolutely
either a known tongue or unknown, but only with relation unto people; and so
every language in the world is in respect of some people a known tongue and in
respect of others an unknown. English is an unknown tongue to Vienna, but not
to London; high Dutch is an unknown tongue to London, but not to Vienna: And
therefore that we may conclude a tongue to be known or unknown, we must compare
it to the family or people in reference to whom it is used, and no otherwise:
and that family or people must be considered, not in any other respects if they
have many, but only in relation to that particular rank or order which refers
unto such a language. An English merchant living in Anwerp has two languages
which himself and family speaks, English and Dutch; and both of them in
reference both to England and Holland jointly may be called both known tongues,
and unknown: but in his business with the English, dutch is the unknown tongue,
in his Holland affairs, english. So the Pope as he is governor and lord of the
city of Rome speaks Italian as all the other people there do, and it is the
only known tongue in that degree and order; but as he is head of the whole
Church spread over the earth, which is a mystical body distinct from the body
politic, and has a language of its own quite differing from the Italian, that
passes through Germany France and Spain, both Indies and the Islands, the north
and south world, wheresoever Christians live, so he uses and speaks that
general language which is latin: and in that sens Italian is an unknown tongue,
and Latin only the known tongue of the Christian world. So that in order to
religion that one language that is spoken not in one corner, but runs quite
through the house, and is common to all as they be ranked in the series of
Christianity, wherein they are trained up by the father of the family, and
which in reference to religion he only speaks himself, is the only known tongue
in order to it and all other tongues unknown: And so not latin but english, not
latin but dutch, not latin but spanish is an unknown tongue to the Christian
world; for all these though they be the known languages of particular kingdoms
which be but a corner of Christianity, yet not they but latin is the known
language of the whole Christian body and family through the world. The house of
God is but one in it self, although it be dispersed over several nations, and
the language fitted for all the body must consequently be but one, wherein all
those nations are united and linked together exteriourly, even as they be
joined interiourly in faith, which in that one tongue is carried up and down
and conserved; and all other tongues, english, french, spanish, be accidental
to Christians as they be Christians, even as the times and places of their
abode be, nor be they fastened unto them by their Christianity but by corporal
birth and education, which be contingent and altogether accidental to religion.
So then latin in reference to religion, which for reasons above named must use
one language, is so far from being an unknown tongue that it is the only one
known language of the Christian world, united to Christian faith as the proper
garment to a body, by whose fashion it is discerned.

I know that a part of the Church uses greek in her Liturgy, and some few
people Hebrew, as well as the generality does Latin. But I mention only the
latin tongue because my countrymen take notice only of that. And all the three
languages agree in this, that they are segregated from vulgar use, consecrated
by the cross of the Meffi^s, approved by the general pastor, and equally
liable to the present objection, which is so trufatical that it casts not the
least blemish upon popery for that custom: and I hope all wife men will be of
my mind. Our land me thinks should thank the Pope for keeping his Mass and
Psalter in such an unknown tongue: For so our vulgar if they should be curious
to see it, yet can they neither be offended by what they hear, nor so much as
discern that our own English communion-book is drawn out of the popish Breviary
and Missal. To revile and hate a custom whence we do our selves receiv so much
benefit and no body and harm, is false latin in morality.

. 26. Communion.
EVen as to pleas the people and to draw and keep them from the catholic
Church we threw the Bible amongst them, telling them withal that as it is
easy to understand, so is every man enabled to interpret it, although our
Protestant Church does now too late repent it, and wish with all their hearts
it had never been done: so likewise another plausible advantage we took against
the Pope and Church wherein those people communicate commonly but under one
kind, by giving all communicants a spoonful of wine together with their
mouthful of bread: which stratagem has given as ample content as if people had
been treated at my Lord Majors Feast. For who would not drink with their meat?
and what reason can be given that they should not? or that a feast with wine
should not caeteris paribus be better than without it.

But a little to abate our insulting over a grave religious people, let me
argue a little for them after my plain manner. Protestant countrymen you
cannot but know, at least you ought to know, that the catholic Church uses the
cup in communion as much as we in England do, and in sacrifice more; for so I
distinguish at this time that the sacrifice is for the priest, communion for
the people; more I say than we ever mean to do: for the deacon or minister at
the altar after the priest had communicated the people with the host, carries
the cup after him to all the said communicants to drink: before which action of
communion the Priest to prefigure Christ's passion upon the altar and his blood
effused had both consecrated and consummated both the kinds himself. Is not
this enough to silence you? I should think it were; since you are taken so
clearly in a dissimulation, at least, that I may speak no more, when you say
that Catholics have not the cup in communion, concealing what you ought to
acknowledge both that the people have as much as ours, and that the priest
consecrates and consummates both, which others do not. Oh but you will say,
they give not the people the consecrated challice which is the very blood of
Christ! very good, no more do Protestants; do we give the people any more then
a cup of natural wine? they do so too: if you answer, it is blessed wine; know
and remember, that when you speak against the Priests consecration, Oh then
that blessing is nothing; but when you would argue against the communion in one
kind, then you make something of it: so likewise your own blessing of the cup
when you talk against puriritans, o it is a great and venerable secret; but when
you plead against Catholics, then it is but an empty ceremony. Where shall any
one hold such slippery cells. But to omit these cavills. May not Anti-Romans be
ashamed to say that Catholics use not the cup which they use as much as any,
and to as much effect as we will allow it to be used, and yet more too? The
catholic people in communion (I must say it again that I may be understood) do
drink of such a cup as Protestants do affirm to be the only cup and no other;
and over and above this communicate the very body of their redeemer animated
with his soul and sacred blood, and hypostatically united to his deity, which
thing Protestants neither do nor will allow it, although gospel do both direct
and command it. And yet we will be talking of I know not what defect of
catholic communion, not remembering too, as we forget other things, that all
the virtue of consecration is attributed by Protestants only to our feeding
upon Christ by faith; which no man can deny but that it may be totally done and
completed without touching either bread and drink: and therefore have they
mightily labored to make good, that when our Lord says in St. John, My flesh
is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed, that he speaks not one word of
sacramental eating or drinking but only of feeding upon him spiritually by the
mouth of faith. May not Catholics say the like to any text that shall be
brought for the people communion of the challice? He is surely a mad man that
so belabours his adversary in one argument, that by the same he knocks out his
own brains in another. So then Protestants take from the people both the real
body and blood of Christ united and effused, and then exclaim against
Catholics for not using the effused species as well in communion as sacrifice.
We who hold neither as we ought, condemn them for withholding one who hold
both, and call that in them a sacrilege with we our selves esteem but a
ceremony. The catholic Church feeds her people with real meat; we feed ours
with signs and husks: Though others might upbraid the witholding of one kind,
if it were so, yet surely we cannot ingenuously do it, who have taken away the
reallity of both. Whatsoever Protestants do truly hold and teach concerning
this sacrament, the same do catholics from whom they had it, maintain too: and
what more ought to be done, the Catholic Church does it and Protestants do it
not. Must we feed upon Christ crucified by faith? Catholics do it, and it is
the very end of their religion. Must the Eucharist be taken in remembrance of
him, and commemoration of his death* They do it. Must both kinds be blessed and
taken? they do that too. Must the people drink wine out of a cup in communion,
Catholic people do the like. On the other side, Catholics do really partake of
the animated and living body of their Redeemer: this ought to be done to the
end we may have life in us. And yet Protestants do it not. Catholics have it
continually sacrificed before their eyes, and the very death and effusion of
their Lords blood prefigured and set forth before them for faith to feed upon.
This Protestants have not, they do it not; and yet this ought to be done; for
so our Lord commanded when he said to his apostles, hoc facite; this do ye
which you have seen me to do, and in that manner you see me do it, exercising
before your eyes my priestly function according to the order of Melchizedech,
with which power I do also invest you, and appoint you to do the like even to
the consummation of the world in commemoration of my death and passion,
exhibiting and showing forth your Lords death till he com. This I say
Protestants do not, and we are mad angry that the Papist does what his redeemer
injoined him. Thus far ad hominem.

The consecrated challice is not indeed ordinarily given by the priest to
people in private communion. And it is neither expedient it should be so, nor
necessary to any effect of communion: nor yet is there in gospel any precept for
it. It is not necessary unto any effect either in the Protestants way which is false, or in the Catholic way which is true. In the Protestants doctrine all the
effect of communion is wholly attributed to the operation of faith, and Christ's
words say they are to be taken spiritually and not literally, for flesh and
blood profits nothing: And therefore according to them one kind is enough,
nay if we have neither kind there is no loss but only of a ceremony, which may
be supplied well enough at our ordinary tables. According to catholic doctrine
whole Christ is really under either kind, and so it is indifferent in which
kind we receiv. But it is not expedient ordinarily to communicate under the
liquid species for danger of effusion, as would sometimes happen in assemblies
severally disposed. And yet there may be reason by circumstance of the person
to communicate rather in the liquid kind than the other, as when the
communicant is young or sick, and not able to take down the other: and therefore
in ancient times such people were ordinarily communicated in the liquid species
only, by the help of a spathula linguae, or little pipe made on purpos for that
use: and for aught I know it may so be done still upon the like occasion. As
for any precept of communicating under both kinds I never heard or read of any;
none has the great mother Church delivered either in her gospel or out of it.
For all the whole passage of the last supper whence Anticatholicks do principal
ground their reasonings, concerns only the sacrifice; how the apostles and
their successors should consecrate and bless it; what they should take to
bless and consecrate; and how they should consummate after consecration: And
there is not there any word or fact concerning the communicating of people; nor
were there in that time and place any lay people at all to be communicated
either man woman or child, but they were all excluded: and if a man would draw
negativ arguments as some do out of scripture, he might conclude out of that
place that lay people are to receive in neither kind sooner then in both. And
although learned Saint Paul may insinuate in his epstles that even the laiety
did partake of Christ's body, yet it may readily be answered in the Protestants
own grounds, if he did plainly say so, that he spoke not of a corporal but
spiritual communion.

Indeed the whole manner of giving communion to the laiety is wholly left to
tradition and to the judgment and disposition of the Church; which appears more
probable, for that the catholic Church has according to her own prudence unto
some persons in some times and places used only the communion of the challice,
to others only the sacred bread, to others both; no man ever finding fault
therewith or startling at it as any new thing: and if we consider the
scrupulousnes of former ages we cannot but think they would have risen up and
excepted against this, if it had been deemed either new or ill; or if it had
not been in the breasts of all good Christians preconceived and fully known, to
be totally arbitrary and in the Churches power to communicate the laiety either
in both kinds or only one; and of the two in which she pleased or thought most
fitting for the condition of the communicant. This was certainly the opinion
which Christians ever had concerning communion. But as for consecration it
seems necessary to the integrity of the sacrifice and the fruit thereof to the
whole Church, and determined under a precept that it should be made in both
kinds: for so it was instituted to declare and set forth before our eyes the
Passion of Christ and his blood effused; of which it could not be a complete
figure or representation except both kinds were consecrated and so the effusion
expressed. It was to exhibit whole Christ crucified both quoad continentiam and
quoad significationem; which signification is not requisite in communion where
the thing contained is received and not the signification or mode expressed.

This indifferent use of communion amongst the ancient Christians in either
kind, sometime one, sometime the other, sometimes both, is enough to verify that
of Saint Paul, if it be taken, as it ought to be, in the literal sense; We are
all partakers of one bread and of one cup: For though either kind were lawful
for any one, yet that any one kind was sufficient, one may easily see was the
opinion of that good apostle by what he speaks in the foregoing comma;
Whosoever shall eat this bread or drink this cup of our Lord unworthily, etc.
and v. 24. and v. 25. repeating the institution as our Lord delivered it, makes
him after the consecration of the bread say absolutely, Do this in
commemoration of me; but after the consecration of the challice he speaks with
a limitation, Do this as often as ye shall drink it in commemoration of me. So
that the particle (And) in the other text, must needs be taken disjunctively,
when he says we are all partakers of one bread and of one cup; that is to say,
all of us either partake of both, or each one at least either of one or the
other: which manner of speech is very ordinary in all languages, Mulier est
domus salus and ruina, A woman, says the proverb, is the safety and ruin of a
house; yet not conjunctively or both together, but either the one or the other,
according as she is her self either wise or foolish: and nothing is more usual
in common speech than to use this particle And disjunctively, when we speak
unto many at once, or of many: thus ten men rising from a feast may say, we
have fed heartily to day of flesh fish and fowl; though one might happily eat
only of one kind, another of another as it chanced, and yet not any one of all

If a man do seriously peruse either the gospel, or Acts of the apostles
wherein is delineated the primitive religion of Christians, he may easily
gather that communion then was thought sufficient under one kind, and that the
species of Bread was most usual to such as were in health. For first, gospel
speaks of as much effect of this one kind, as of both. This is a bread com down
from heaven that if any eat thereof he dies not, Joh. 6.50. again, he that eats
of this bread shall live for ever, v. 25. If any one eateh me the same shall
live by me, v. 58. and he never there compares himself to wine as he does to
bread, nor mentions the drinking as he does the eating of him. We are one bread
and one body, says S. Paul, all that do partake of one bread, 1 Cor. 10.13.
And what is there more to be expected, but union with Christ and his mystical
body, immortality and life eternal with him, which all follow upon our worthy
communicating of the sacred bread. Secondly, when our Lord brake bread with his
disciples in Emaus and so disappeared, very great and ancient divines do teach
that he did before them the same sacramental act he had himself instituted and
done aforetime before his apostles, and by that he was discerned: which
interpretation is very probable, for there be set down the same words and
gestures, He took bread and blessed, and brake it and gave it to them, Luke
24.30. And if it were so, then it seems the cup was not thought necessary
either by Christ himself or his disciples; otherwise neither Christ would have
done his work imperfectly and vanished before he had given them the cup; nor
would the disciples have judged him by so doing to be their master, but some
evil spirit or impostour, as who had kept the cup from them against their
right: Nay by this example it seems that the very consecration it self may be
dispensed in case of necessity to be don only in one kind, though the complete
sacrifice and mode of signication would be unexprest. Thirdly in the first and
second chapters of the Acts of the apostles where mention is purposely made of
the religious assemblies of the Christians and their sacred Synaxis, there is
much speech there of their breaking of bread, but not any word of the use of a
cup amongst the people.
And it is enough insinuated as well directly in these forenamed places, that
that was the religious work of the primitive Christians, as it is indirectly
afterward c. 20. One day of the sabbath says the text, when we came together
to break bread. No mention being made any where in all that book of the
challice at all. So that I must conclude, as I said before; that the communion
of the challice is neither necessary to any effect of the sacrament, nor
expedient to be generally practiced; nor is there in gospel or sacred writ any
either precept or president for it. But the authority and practis of the
catholic Church descended from the apostles is in this as in all other points
the best and most irrefragable convincing argument, which S. Paul in another
case kept for his best and last refuge, 1. Cor. 11. If any one says he will be
contentious we have no such custom nor the Church of God. And if there be no
such custom in the Church of God, let not any of us be any further contentious.

. 27. Saints.
I Do not remember that ever I took into my hands any catholic Breviary or
Missal or other prayer book, but it had prefixed before it a calendar or
catalogue of great saints amongst them, apostles, martyrs, confessors,
virgins, of whom the Catholics keep a very respectful memory, as of the
temples wherein God did once dwell and work wonders in the Church. And although
this act and custom of theirs be made by our voluntary interpretation a thing
of much offense and scandal against them, yet looking upon it with an
unprejudiced eye I cannot discern it to be any other than the civility of a due
respect: For what ingenuous noble spirit would not do as much for the great
heroes of his own family that have upheld and innobled the house. And what says
Christ? would he not have it done so to his? surely if these things had not
been don in his Church, but all memorials of him and his blotted out, according
to the fansy of every reformer, we had had by this no more certainty of him
than of Jove or Mercury. But what says he therefore? He that loves me shall be
loved of my Father, and I will love him and make my mansion in him, etc. he
that leaves father or mother for my sake shall sit upon thrones, etc. he that
shall overcome and keep my words unto the end I will give him power over
nations, as I have received from my father, and I will give unto him a morning
star, etc. and the like promimises of glory I stand not now to mention. And I
should think whom God and Christ so highly honors that we may honor them too,
nay I beleev we should; for a good servant ought to respect him his master
loves. And what are we afraid of? least people by much reflecting upon such
eminent examples of virtue should be moved thereby to imitate them? what can it
be else? If saints were proposed and described unto us, like Mars Jove and
Venus, eminent both actours and patrons of vice, then we might justly blame it:
But who can dislike of an example of heroic virtue, though it were in a
Romance. And all those saints even from the first of January to the last of
December, are so commended for their sacred retirements, ravishing
contemplations of Gods love and the life to come, carnal mortifications and
castigations of body, fastings, abnegations of themselves, excessive charity,
daily renewed resolutions against the world flesh and devil, and valorous
attempts for the love of Jesus to justify his truth and gospel even to the
effusion of their bloods, that we read nothing else of them; all which is but
what Christ and his apostles both by example and word either prescribed or at
least counseled both them and us to do. And who can make bitter gibeing
invectives against them and their legends, but only he who is an enemy to the
virtues there commended? What my self and others in England have read and heard
against Popish Saints it would be tedious to speak; but I find it to be the
spirit and genius of them that depart from the Popes religion: Luther the
Hectour rampant was excellently dextrous at this feat of disabling persons of
renown, and before him his grandsire Wicleph, who publicly affirmed that St.
Austin, St. Bennet, St. Bernard and other such like men were damned in hell for
founding religious orders; yea and even John Calvin himself that holy faced man
was so intemtemperatly given to this theiomachy, that he opened his mouth not
only against all saints and their memorials in the register of the Church, but
even the renowned persons both of the old and new testament canonized in holy
writ; Noah, Abraham, Rebecca, Jacob, Rachel, Job, Moses, Josuah, David, Elias,
Jeremias, Daniel; The B. Virgin Mary, S. Joseph, S. Mary Magdalen, Martha, the
haemorroiss Woman who touched Christ's garments, S. Peter, S. Paul, S. Matthew,
S. Luke, S. Zacharias the husband of Elizabeth, and S. Denyse Areopagite, etc.
and his own words against all these I could easily set down, but that I would
not tire my reader nor foul my paper with his detracting unseemly speeches. But
I should being left to my own reason, shrewdly suspect him to be an enemy to
virtue, whom I find to calumniate and disable all those persons who by
authentic history are so much commended for it, and by the same proposed unto
us as an ensample of our lives. It is not only their due, but our benefit to
keep the memory of saints before us.

Besides that man cannot easily forget his own imortality after our deceas, who
often ruminates upon such virtuous presidents whom being dead he honors as yet
living. Honorable mention of Saints deceased proves an immortality of the
soul, and this immortality renders the saints even after their deceas still
more honorable; so that he that honors them must needs believ this, and he
that truly believes this will be apt to honor them. I am God of Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, God is not the God of the dead but of the living; so argues and
disputes our Lord Christ, proving the souls immortality by the honorable
mention of souls departed. And his argument is good and very subtle; for if
God be the God even of souls departed, then souls departed are not nothing but
some subsisting thing; for God cannot be said to be the God of that which is
not. And these two effects, a belief of our immortality, and a pronenes to
imitate their good works so highly crowned, has this memorial of saints
wrought all over the catholic world, where there is not a man but will urge
himself sometime or other for the respect he bears to such a glorious saint, who
by shedding his blood or mortifying his body magnified God and his religion
upon earth, to do something either of penance or charity superabundant, over
and above what he should have thought upon himself without that help in
imitation of the good pattern of him, who being once a man compassed with the
same infirmities that we now be, has showed us notwitstanding both by his life
and doctrine that such good works are both feasible by frail man, and very
commendable too, and beneficial even to the reward of never ending glory. And
to this end do Catholics read their saints lives, laboring each one to the
degree of his devotion to raise up in himself the lively sparkles of hope and
faith and charity, by those examples which he sees not confined only to the one
age of the apostles, but translucent in all times and places by his continued
goodness to his Church whose mercy endures for ever.

Nor are those saints lives so prodigious and incredible as we in England take
them to be, I speak of solid authenticated legends. For I have my self seen
with mine own eyes and known hundreds of living men that have equalled them in
those practices. And he that knows the vigorous nature and life of Gospel,
where it is really put to practice and not only verbally professed, will wonder
at nothing. If ye say to this mountain, remove hence says our Lord, to aright
believer all things are possible: and I am confident by what I have seen my
self, that there be now, as bad a world as it is, an immens number of people
among Catholics as eminent in all perfections as there have been in any age,
and some of them equal too even to the glorious saints of old whose legends we
read. For thousands of people do make it their very profession, even as people
here in London set up and profess a trade, to lead their lives exactly
according to the tenor of gospel, noting every evening before they sleep all
the deviations even of their very thoughts, and making resolutions in the
morning for the renewed practis of all such virtuous actions that may probably
lie in their way; and in particular, such a virtue to day, that to morrow, this
in the third: and so they end their lives. All the Catholic world knows I do
not lie. And all this is don not by any force of nature, but against it, by the
mere power and virtue of their religion, whereby I have known many men to
subdue corrupt nature even to amazement and miracle. And the various examples
both of good people yet alive and of eminent saints departed, whose cells and
vestments, and beads, and books are yet reserved amongst them, encourage
Catholics unto this virtuous adventure; while not only by sight of their lives
who live amongst them, and of the mortified figures of the holy persons
deceased, and bloody necks of their martirs, but also by sermons and the
continual rites of the Church prefiguring before them the conversation and
passion both of Jesus himself and his many glorious followers who have imitated
his steps, that none might think but that the same life might be led though not
in the same degree, and the same valor be shown in undergoing both carnal
castigations and death even by mere man, through the grace of him who
strengthens us to all things, they are made continually to remember and
seriously lay to heart both what they are to do and whom to imitate; by which
reflections they are more moved toward all the good works of piety, than
without them such a poor weak spirit as man's is, housed in mouldring clay,
could ever be.

And that this has been the practis of the Christian Church in all times to
set before the people the lively pourtraits of their holy and well deserving
foregoers, for their greater incitation unto semblable good works unto which
their religion calls them, I could easily show throughout all ages; but that I
intend here to speak no more than what may somewhat allay the preconceived
prejudice we have taken up against the Popes religion, especially in the few
particulars I touch upon; of which I speak no more than what I think may
suffice to unbeguile such as list seriously to ruminate upon the truth. And if
in these things which seem harder to us their cause be just, I should think the
lesser prejudices should fall away of themselves, and we at length love one
another as we ought; for no man I think does willingly hate the innocent. Only
two testimonies of the primitive respect unto saints and their images amongst
Christians taken not out of the bowels of the Church, but from her enemies, one
from the Jew, the other from the Pagan, sufficiently known in history, I cannot
but here mention. The Jews in the first three ages of the Church even from the
apostles to Constantine the great, accused the Christians not only in private
but even before the Roman emperors and Senate, of three great violations of
Moses law; first that they broke the sabbath and had turned it from the seventh
day of the week unto the first, making that holiday which Moses ordained for
work, and that a working day which Moses made holy: secondly that they
worshipped images of their saints and kept them not only in their houses but in
their oratories and chapels: thirdly that they brought in a strange God, Jesus
Christ they meant, which neither they nor their forefathers knew: all which
seemed expressly against the letter not only of the general law but of the two
tables of the ten commandments. The pagan all over the empire laughed at the
Christians for three ridiculous worships of theirs; namely of a breaden God, of
the priests genitals, and of an asses head: the first whereof proves the
primitive sacrifice, of which I have already spoken; the second their
confession; the third their use and respect they had of images: for the Jews
had defamed Jesus Christ our Lord, whose head and half pourtraict Christians
used upon their altars even as they do at this day, amongst other things of his
great simplicity and ignorance.

Some will happily say, if this were all that is done to saints to keep the
pictur and read the lives of such renowned personages who consecrated themselves
to Gods glory and service, for the incitement of our affections unto the like
virtuous achievements, I should not much blame it: But papists over and above
this do pray to saints too, and that is no ways excusable. Give me leav to
reply to this. That which you now say you cannot much blame, has been made so
odious that never a Catholic in England durst for this hundred years so much
as let a Crucifix hang in his chamber, lest both he and it should be torn
asunder by us. And what you judge in excusable, their praying to saints which I
have so often heard and read in our protestant Churches and books objected so
eagerly and constantly against them, when I found it other-wayes than we in
England conceiv it to be; I was glad both for their sakes and ours too.

I did therefore curiously examine and turn over the whole Roman Breviary and
Missal which is the devotion of the Catholic Church, and contains, almost a
fourth part of it, a commemoration of several Saints, according to the days of
the year wherein they flitted hence into a better life. And I did not meet with
so much as any one prayer addressed to any saint or angel of heaven, no not
upon those days wherein commemoration of them is made; but directed all of them
from the very first prayer to the last unto God the father by Jesus Christ in
the unity of the holy ghost either expressed or implied. And their practis herin
is conform to ancient tradition confirmed by their own law in a council at
Carthage under Pope Siricius an. 397. wherein it was declared and ordained that
all public prayers of the Church should be made directly unto God the Father.
And Catholics even upon a saints day, making their prayer to God, beg only of
him amongst other their requests, that the good works of such a saint in whom
he glorified himself, may speak better things for them than they can themselves
deserv. For example upon St. Bennets day, Intercessio nos quaesumus Domine
Benedicti Abbatis commendet, ut quod nostris meritis non valemus ejus
patrocinio assequamur. Upon the feast of St. Francis, O God who by the merits
of St. Francis do enlarge thy Church with a new offspring, grant unto us by
the imitation of him to despise earthly things and enjoy celestial. And so run
all the other prayers of the Church wherein any invocation of saints is made,
directed ever unto almighty God by his son Jesus Christ.

And this is no more than what was ever don in the Hebrew Church both before and
after Christianity was in the world, as the works of ancient Rabbis can
witness, and no less holy writ it self, when it makes almighty God sooner as it
were condescending to the peoples petition by the mediation of the merits of
glorious patriarchs whom he singularly favored, and his wrath and displeasur
against the Jews then at a height when he refuses to hear those saints in their
behalf. If Moses and Samuel, says the sacred text Jer. 15. should stand
before me, yet is not my soul unto this people: that is to say, he would not in
the behalf of such desperate wicked people, accept of the prayers even of those
saints that were most dear unto him: and this was spoken by the prophet long
after Moses and Samuel was dead. Long before this the Patriarch Jacob does most
plainly insinuate this custom of saints invocation as ordinary and familiar
among the Hebrews, when being to bless his two nephews Ephraim and Manasseh, he
speaks thus. The angel who brought me out of all my evils bless these children,
and upon them be invocated my name and the name of my fathers, Abraham and
Isaac, Genesis 48. And there is a formal prayer to that purpose Exodus 32. which
expresses as much invocation of saints as any, or all the prayers of the
Christian Church do ever use. Remember says Moses, remember O God, Abraham,
Isaac and Israel thy servants unto whom thou have sworn by thy self, saying I
will multiply your seed as the stars of heaven: Which prayer was after imitated
by Daniel c. 3. Withdraw not O Lord thy mercy from us for Abraham thy beloved,
Isaac thy servant, and Israel thy holy one. And if Daniel and Moses prayed to
saints well may we do it: and if that of theirs was not a praying to saints,
but only to almighty God by the concurrence of their merits, then is the
Catholic Church to be not excused only, but commended; for she does the like
in those prayers of hers she makes any mention either of saint or angel and no
otherwise.

In their letanies indeed and short ejaculations, Catholics seem to invocate
saints directly, when in one part of them they say: Holy Mary pray for us, St.
Peter pray for us, etc. But this though in words and sound it seems direct, yet
in sense and purpose it is indirect; so that sancta Maria ora pro nobis; omnes
sancti Dei intercedite pro nobis, is in sense but this, Sancta Maria and omnes
sancti intercedant pro nobis ad Dominum ut nos mereamur, etc. And if we ponder
it right, it must needs be so: for when I pray any one to pray for me,
considering the object and matter of my desire which both of us must join in, I
do not, properly speaking, pray to him but by him; and only desire in my good
affection, that the prayers he makes for all may be available unto me. And this
is the more apparent, because the letanies are directed unto God, beginning,
continuing, and ending with him. Lord have mercy, Christ have mercy, Lord have
mercy, Father of heaven God, Have mercy on us, O Son redeemer of the world God,
Have mercy on us, etc. Holy Mary pray for us, St. Michael pray for us, etc. Be
propitious, spare us O Lord. From all evil, Deliver us O Lord, etc. By the
mystery of thy incarnation, Deliver us O Lord. By thy nativity, Deliver us O
Lord, etc. We sinners, Beseech thee to hear us. That thou grant us peace, We
beseech thee to hear us, etc. Lamb of God that take away the sins of the
world, spare us O Lord, etc. Lord have mercy, Christ have mercy, Lord have
mercy. Our Father, etc. Thus the letanies run and he that directs, continues
and ends his letany or prayer to God, must needs pray to him, and objectively
to none but him. So that the interposition of any intercessour must needs be
indirect in sense, however it be expressed in words; and can signify no more but
this, that God would graciously accept of the prayers they make, in our behalf.
For that they do pray for their brethren and adoptives of the same bliss both
reason and holy writ sufficently assure us.

Nor is this way of expressing our desires unusual in holy Scripture. Bless ye
our Lord all the works of our Lord, bless ye our Lord O angels of God. O sun
and moon, bless ye our Lord, O stars of heaven bless ye our Lord, praise ye and
magnify him for ever, etc. Thus pray the three confessors in Daniel. And the
whole 148. Psalm runs in the same tenor. Prais our Lord all ye angels of his,
prais him all his powers, prais ye him O sun and moon, prais him all the stars
of light, etc. Here is an invocation direct in words not only of the saints and
angels, but stars and meteors, earth and seas, frost and snow, heat and cold,
light and darkness. And yet I am not bound who use that devotion to make it good
that the sun and moon, or other things there invocated hear me when I speak to
them in this manner: since I do but only express my affection and desire that
sun and moon, heaven and earth, frost and snow, heat and cold, mountains and
hills be in their manner isntrumental to the almighties prais and honor,
whether in words I speak directly to the sun and moon, as I do in that Psalm,
or express my self otherwise, saying; May the sun, moon, heaven and earth
concur with me to the honor and prais of God mighty: the affection and
meaning is still the same. Nay the kings and princes of the earth whom in that
same Psalm I invocate to my assistance do not more hear me when I say that
Psalm in my chamber, than do the mountains and hills. In like manner it is all
one for me to say either thus: Let the prayers of the saints and angels of God
assist my condition with the almighty holy one; or thus, Pray for me O saints
and angels of God to assist my poor condition with God almighty and holy. The
devotion is as good this way as the other, and all one and the same thing. And
the ancient Christians used indifferently either the one way or the other,
according as they deemed either this or that more agreeable and pathetical to
the exciting of their devotion and obtaining their desires with God. Nor did
those wise and devout people over enter into the curiosity; whether the spirits
of another world did either see or hear or know what we speak or think or do in
this: much less did it ever enter into their creed that they do so. After a
thousand years arose our Schoolmen who amongst other of their subtilities
raised the difficulty, Whether Saints in another life hear and see all our
motions in this: and generally they defended, and neatly declared both that
they did it, and also how it might be done; namely by the mirror of divine
essence seen and enjoyed by the blessed. But this is a mere nice theological
subtility and no business of faith at all, neither for the mode how it is done,
nor yet for the doctrine that it is done. And if those schoolmen thought this
their doctrine necessary for any practis of saints-invocation in the Church,
they showed themselves not so good rhetoricians as they were logicians. He that
will defend pure naked faith is not bound to enter upon any such dispute with
the adversary, or go any further than his faith reaches; for so he does but
entangle religion and expose it to needles doubts. But this is a great mistake
of many men otherwise of very great parts that they think what they have heard
in the schools of S. Thomas or Scotus is all of it de fide; not considering
that the schoolmen raised a thousand questions and invented several
declarations like ramparts about the citadel of Faith to enable men to speak
against all opposition several ways; either in the way of St. Thomas or
Scotus, Gandavensis, Durandus, Aureolus or other doctor, not to oblige them to
defend those ways as the citadel it self, when it shall com by any adversary
to be opposed. And although with some Antichristian great wits, as Plotin,
Porphyrius, Julian such subtilities may be spoke of, yet still with this
caution it must be done, that they first understand that Christians are not
bound when they defend the simplicity of their faith, to make good those
subtilities besides it. But with a grosser textual opponent as our Protestant
is, such curiosities are not at all to be touched. For he concludes presently
that invocation of saints is not to be used, if any one go about to tell him
that they hear our prayers, and make it not sink into his head how they can do
it. And thus catholic faith is prejudiced for want of wise comportment in the
defendant.

There is also another little defect in some late catholic writers, that in
their controversies with Protestants, wherein they hold that it is lawful to
pray unto saints, they consider not that they mean it one way and their
adversary another. This should first have been cleared, before they had
proceeded to persuade what could never enter into our Protestant heads in the
sens they understood it. For properly and strictly speaking, to pray saints or
by them is one thing, to pray to them is another: that intimates the means,
this the final end and object of our prayer; and the Catholic uses it in the
first sens, the Protestant understands it in the latter, as I know by my
experience and conversation with them in all places. St. Paul in his epistle to
the Romans as elsewhere very frequently calls the Christians Sanctos saints, and
in the end of that epistle earnestly importunes them to help him in their
prayers for him unto God. And yet will Protestants never be persuaded for all
that, that S. Paul prayed to saints: and indeed in their sens he did not; but
that he did pray to saints in the catholic sens, that is prayed saints or
prayed by saints no rational man can deny. And such and no other is the
devotion of catholics in this kind, save only that their practis is more
plausible than that of St. Paul now mentioned. If the prayers of such as be in
via and sinners in some part of their conversation, though saints in profession,
be so useful and may commendably be desired; much more those of consummate
saints in patria, absolute friends of God and partakers of his glory: these the
sacred text assures us that they pray for their brethren, but men in this life
although they be requested may neglect to do it, their prayer is surely
effectual one way or other to our good, when men of this life may obtain for us
happily nothing at all. Nor is it of any purpos whether they hear us or no, since
we do but pray them to do for us what we are assured they do for all; and so
apply the benefit of their prayers to our selves; or pray by them not to them,
or to them in the catholic but not in the protestant sens.

If any one like not this my way of explicating this holy custom of the Church,
he may use what other he pleases. But this I do use as most facile and
connatural to pious oratory, which easily diverts unbeleevers objections, and
best answers to the state not only of Christian saints but also those of the
old law, who could not see the necessities of men upon earth by any mirror of
divine essence which then they enjoyed not, and yet they were prayed unto then,
as well as the Christian Saints be now. And to me it seems irrational to defend
an easy custom of religion by a hard subtility of philosophy, which clears not
but renders that obscure and doubtful which was clear and utterly undoubted of
before All Christians ever believed saints invocation to be lawful and pious,
but it entered not into the Creed of any, that those of another world either
hear or see what we do in this: and this opinion brought to clear the other
practis is harder to beleev than it, and no point of faith neither, although by
the subtility of Christian Philosophers it be rendered probable enough to such
as allowed of the Christian custom aforehand.

This pious rite of saints-invocation common to the Hebrew and Christian Church
is necessarily justified upon the supposal of three principles which all I
think will grant. First that Gods grace whereby men are made partakers of the
divine nature is in a singular manner in some persons more than others:
secondly that the souls of those holy people and merits of their good works are
immortal with God even after their death: thirdly that God cannot dislike the
reflections of his divine nature diffused in them out of the fulness of his
beloved son, when any one makes use of them the easier to find mercy in his
sight.
And all protestant objections, as Come unto me says Christ, etc. are but
childish: for who does a man come unto or go unto but Christ and God alone,
when he sues to none but him for grace and mercy, whether he use or use not the
helps of other intercessour with himself to facilitate his request. As innocent
therefore is popery in this as in any other her religious practices, and we
destitute of argument to carp at them for it. Let us therefore love and not
hate, rather honor than diminish them without cause.

. 28. Dirge.
ALl over the catholic world prayers are constantly made for the dead both in
public and private: Insomuch that one day in a week the altar is set apart for
that purpos, and it is a rare thing when one half hour in every day is not
spent there by some priest or other, together with the people for that end, nor
is there a private person in the world that makes any orisons apart, but will
send forth some short ejaculations for the requiem of souls departed before he
give over. So that I may truly say, it is as ordinary for Catholics to pray
for the dead as for the living, and for one another as for themselves. And this
custom carries with it so great a show of piety, that for my part I could never
dislike it; and I have heard but few discreet persons speak otherwise against
it, than only as an ungrounded opinion. For of it self what can it be but
purest humanity to remember our friends when they are out of sight; and to pray
for them even after their deceas a most pious charitablenes. The question is,
whether the doctrine be well grounded, or whether it may make for good
accordingly to use it. If the deceased be utterly dissolved, and soul and body
equally extinguished, then it is likely my prayer cannot avail for any benefit;
nor will it become either my charity or discretion to pray for them that are
not: for God is not the God of the dead but of the living as our Lord speaks;
nor is he to be requested for benefits to any thing that is not existent, and
absolutely incapable to receiv them. But if their souls be still immortal with
God, where or in what condition soever they be, it cannot hurt I should think
either me or them to wish them well: for wheresoever they are, if so be they
are any thing, they are present to God, who fills all things, if not more yet
assuredly as much as we that live this mortal life, and as they themselves were,
when they lived amongst us; and God whom we pray unto is equally present both
to them and us, who assuredly hears and sees and knows us both. And since the
Almighty has set a limit to our knowledge, none to our, charity toward any man,
no reason can be given why I may not wish well unto them all my life time even
after their deceas, whom I might pray for while they lived, even by the command
of him who bad me do well unto all, and have love which is ever accompanied
with well wishes and prayers, even to my very enemies; never prescribing me
either limit of time or measure of charity. Those I pray for after their deceas
must needs be, if they be yet subsisting, either in hell or heaven or some third
place; I speak vulgarly that I may be understood, not heeding at all whether a
soul in Aristotle's philosophy may be said in rigor to be in any place or no;
in right reason whatsoever is, must needs be somwhere, and that is all my
meaning. If the soul I pray for should chance even then to be in heaven; then
my prayer for him is answerable to Gods will, and so not evil but good; whiles
I beg rest to him to whom God has given it: for prayer though it often
supposes, yet it does not necessarily require a want of the good thing prayed
for in him I wish it unto; otherwise I could not say as well and truly Our
father who art in heaven: sanctified be thy name, thy kingdom com, thy will be
don: as I say afterward, Give us this day our daily bread, etc. In the former
there is no want to be imagined; for they both are and shall be, whether I pray
so or no; and I do but only show my love and charity to God, in wishing him to
be as he is, most holy powerful and just, and desiring that to him which he
neither does nor ever can want, all sanctity, power and glory: but in the other
requests a want is presupposed before the petition. If he should be in hell,
fith it is not Gods will I should know so much, I can no more be interpreted to
gainsay his pleasur than when I prayed for the same person upon earth and
wished him what he should never have: for even then also I knew no more of Gods
disfavour toward him than now I do; and my good wishes in both places
presented ever under a tacit condition of Gods good pleasur, may be equally
acceptable in order to any effect either to him or my self for my charity
toward him, as they would have been whiles he lived; for I shall still have
the merit of my own charity in complying with Gods precept of an unlimited love
toward all all men, and he may receiv too as much good by my prayers now he is
com to such an end, as when he was going to it: especially if he were according
to the doctrine of some Protestants so destined to ruin by Gods unresistable
will, and by the torrent of that unavoidable decree so inevitably hurried to
damnation, that all things even the best and most sacred means make only for
his destruction. Indeed if any ones final ruin should be revealed unto me as
now is I think the condition of evil angels, then in praying for any such I
should formally resist Gods will; and therefore I must not do it: but so long as
it lies hid, let not me dive into his secrets but look unto my own duty, which
shall never turn to my blame, tho it may hap not to concur with the beneplacite
of his hidden purpos. And in both cases, either of the final bliss or ruin of
him I pray for, such kind of suffrages though they may prove not to be
adjumenta mortuorum, yet are they still consolationes viv^rum, as great S.
Austin speaks in the like case.

But lastly if he be in any third place in expectation of glory, then without
control I may wish him what he is ordered unto, and do any good thing I shall
know by such means as I know all other points and pactices of religion, may
further his expiation. And such an opinion have all Catholics or ancient
Christians ever had of their forefathers, who died in the bosom of the Church,
that they were as capable of prayers after their death as before it; and that
heaven was not so easily attained even by good and holy professors, without
some antecedent expiation of their venial transgressions, without which men do
rarely depart out of the concretion of these earthly tabernacles inclining
still to sensual propensions, let their souls endeavor never so much by the
help of Gods grace and sacraments to expiate and clear their thoughts, or to
raise themselves to the object of eternal purity, whiles they breathed here
below. Thus the case stands concerning this point.

And that every soul that passes out of the concretion of a mortal body with
any sensual contagion, after mortal sins remitted, passes through some
expiatory pains, commonly called Purgatory, declared by the ancients sometimes
by the notion of darkness, sometimes of scorching fires, before he can enter the
place of glory where no inquinated thing can come, as it is an opinion can
never be demonstrativly either proved or disproved, no more than other
contingencies of Gods will, so because it is a thing as constantly believed in
all ages of Christianity, and as unanimously practiced as any one thing I know,
I do not see any reason it should be so slightly thought of, or severely
condemned as I see it is by some, as an ungrounded popish superstition. For it
is not only the opinion of all orthodox Christians, but of all people in the
world, excepting only the disciples of Luther who jeer at all things, that there
be other places where souls departing this life may have their resort besides
hell and heaven; as if it were derived even with the souls immortality from the
first inhabitants of the earth unto all their posterity. The Pagans believed
it, as appears by Virgil, Cicero, Lucretius, and the few remnants of their
religion both under the Roman empire and elsewhere. The Mahometans that rose a
thousand years ago, and took to a miscellan religion made out of Pagan Jew and
Christian belief, hold it to this day; and the Hebrews taught and professed it as
appears by the ancient Rabbis: as if this opinion of a third place had come
down even from Adam to all his whole progeny; first to Cain and Seth, by Cain
to Enoch and his line; by Seth to Enos, and so down to Noah; from him to Sem
Ham and Japhet; by Sem to the Assirians, Aramites, Persians; by Ham to the
Ethiopians, Egiptians, Palestines, Cananites, Sidonians, Jebusites, etc. by
Japhet to the Hebrews, Medes, Bactrians, Indians, Babylonians, and isles of the
Gentiles; although it be severally mixed and modified according to the tenor
of the various religions that profess it.

This opinion then of the souls immortality and its detention after death in
some place citra coelum is not any new thing freshly taught either by our
blessed Savior or his Apostles, as any peculiar doctrine of his own, but taken
up as granted by tradition of the Church of the Hebrews, and supposed and
admitted by all sides for true, upon which our Lord built much of his own
instructions. And that may be the reason that in his parable of Dives and
Lazarus, which he recounted under the figur of a story then past, he says
expressly that Dives was in hell torments, but he does not likewise say of
Lazarus that he was in heaven, but in the bosom of Abraham, Luc. 16. For heaven
gates as they were indeed not opened unto any until the passion of the Messiah,
who first entered there as primogenitus ex mortuis; so neither did the Jews
beleev that any should have access thither before his coming, as I think it may
appear, to omit other places, in the Acts of the Apostles. For there St. Peter
preaching and proving before the Jews that Jesus was risen and ascended into
heaven, and was consequently the true Messiah, he takes his argument to prove
it out of a psalm of David which speaks thus, I foresaw the Lord always before
my face, etc. therefore did my heart rejoice, etc. because thou will not leave
my soul in hell, etc. thou have made known to me the ways of life, etc. This
is his first subsumption. Then he goes on in his argument. David was a Prophet,
and foreseeing the resurrection of Christ he spoke those things of him; therefore
Christ is risen and our Jesus is the Christ. This is St. Peter's argument. Then
he anticipates an objection: for some might say, David spoke not those words of
the Messiah, but of himself: unto this St. Peter replies with three reasons;
first David was a Prophet, and therefore he spoke them not of himself, but of
another whose resurrection he foresaw; secondly, he says, The Lord said unto
my Lord sit thou on my right hand, etc. it was then the resurrection and
ascension of one that was David's Lord, therefore not of himself; again it could
not be meant of David, for David ascended not into heaven, which is an argument
ad hominem, ex concessis: as if he had said, you all know and beleev that
neither David nor any of the Patriarks ascended after their death to their
final rest, but staid in some interjacent repose till the Messiah should com
and lead captivity captive; that is to say, take along with him in his train
and service all those holy prophets and patriarks of the old law, who had in
their place of detention waited for the consolation of Israel. I say St. Peter
must suppose that proposition on which the firmitude of his whole discourse was
chiefly grounded to be admitted by the Jews for true, otherwise his argument
had been inefficacious, and had neither proved Christ's ascension nor yet Jesus
to be Christ: and if the Jews had believed David's soul to be in heaven though
not his body, yet still the argument in my judgment had fallen short. All this
infers that the Hebrew Church did beleev a detention of spirits citra coelum,
and that the Rich man might go to hell before Christ, but Lazarus the happy
went but into Abraham's bosom, that is to say, unto that repose where Abraham
David and all the ancient patriarks expected the light and redemption of
Israel, and not into heaven it self.

And they might very well so beleev, for how can any one hope for that upon
another gift which he never promised, when he promised all other things but
it; heavenly bliss amongst all the fair promises made in the law of Moses was
never so much as mentioned, nor those people ever put in hope of it for any
good work they should do. But in the new testament of our Messiah heaven which
himself should open to his faithful, is frequently promised as an immens motive
and incitement to good words, they should for his love by the assistance of his
grace act and persever in unto the end. Yet so too, as that in the execution of
this promis it is sufficiently insinuated, that if any spirit issue out of his
body not absolutely purified, himself may indeed by the use of such means of
grace as our Lord instituted, be saved, yet so as by fire, 1 Cor. 3. And
therefore our blessed Savior speaking of the several trespasses we make in
this life gives us this counsel, to set all right and straight as far as we
can, while we are here in via, in the way of this life; for if once by death we
be delivered up to the place of hold, detention, or prison, there will be no
getting forth thence till the utmost farthing be paid. Math 5. that is, as holy
fathers do jointly interpret the place, till absolute satisfaction be made
either by sufferance or suffrages. And that redemption or remission of some
sins may be had after this life is enough insinuated unto us by himself when he
tells us, that there be some sins that shall never be forgiven neither in this
world nor in the world to come: For if any should tell me here in England that
some criminal offenses will neither be pardoned at the Sessions, nor at the
Kings bench at Westminster, he sufficiently insinuates, if he speak properly,
that releas may be had for some other offenses in both the places.

S. Paul in his epistles, although he do sometimes indirectly hint at this
doctrine of expiation after this life; yet does he not directly make use of it
as a topic place, either in his exhortation to virtue or disswasion from vice.
But the reason is manifest, for being a thing mixed of good and ill, it could
serve sufficiently to neither purpos; and heaven being now lately promised to
all those that walk piously in Christ Jesus was a more full and stronger motive
of persuasion, as also was hell a greater argument of affrightment, then the
interjacent place of expiation however penal could be, which by reason of the
temporality of the sufferance and hopes of approaching glory admits some
comfort to mitigate the terror; and again by reason of the penalty of that
condition and trouble of expectation, carries enough of terror to allay to
comfort of the place. And yet incidentally and without design there is there to
be found as much of purgatory as of the liturgy, the trinity, primitive
absolution, and other mysteries of faith. In a word, the thought of heaven
served well both to encourage people to the utmost perfection of charity and
good works, and to comfort them also in tribulations; which the memory of their
expiation before it could not do. And on the other side if any were wicked, for
such a one purgatory would neither be a seasonable nor sufficient menace. Yet
both all their life time and especially when they came to dye, all records of
primitive times will tell us how careful the ancient Christians were to provide
for their souls assistance after death. And accordingly S. Austin commends the
piety of his mother Monica, in that she begged so earnestly of him her son to
be mindful of her soul when he stood at the altar, to pray heartily for her
after her deceas: and he sets down at large in the ninth book of his
Confessions c. 12. and 13. the dirge and sacrifice and prayers he made both for
her and her husband Patricius. And the doctrine of expiatory punishments after
this life he teaches in several places of his many learned volumes: In his 20
book de civitate dei c. 9.13.16. and 24. In his comment upon the 37 psalm: In
his book of fifty homilies hom. 16. In his 41 sermon de sanctis. In the 110
chapter of his Enchiridion; In his book de cura pro mortuis c. 2. and 4. By
which and other places we may see, that S. Austin was not only of this
catholic opinion, but he was also a priest himself, who both taught and
practiced it, sacrificing at the altar for souls departed. And so was S. S.
Bid, German Constantinopolitanus, Jo. Damascen and Alcuin in the eight age of
the Church, not to mention later times: S. S. Isidore, Eligius and the fathers
of the eleventh council of Tolledo in the seventh age. S. S. John Climacus,
Gregory the great, and the Fathers of the council of Valentia in the sixth, S.
S. Jo. Chrysostom with the abovenamed S. Austin, Paulinus, Eucherius
Lugdunensis, Victor Vticensis, Socrates, and Theodores in the fist. S. S.
Eusebius Caesariensis, Athanasius, Basilius Magnus, Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus,
Gregorius Nazianzen and Nyssen, Epiphanius, Ambrosius, and Hieronimus in the
fourth. S. S. Eusebius Alexandrinus, Zeno Veronensis and Origin in the third.
S. S. Ireneus, Hermes, and Tertullian in the second; who were all of them
priests, catholic Roman priests, and publicly taught, as I am able to make it
apparent out of their works, this venerable religious doctrine of the souls
expiation after death, before it arrive to heavenly bliss, by the prayers and
pennances and alms deeds of the faithful left behind them in this world; and
did it, and practiced it themselves in their houses, altars and oratories:
according as they had received it from the first age, which they found in an
universal belief and practis of the same truth; as even yet appears by the
ancient liturgies and testimonies of S. Matthews; S. Mark, S. James the elder
and the younger, S. Clement and S. Denyse the Areopagite? Thus Popery did in
old times and so it does still. And I hope none of us hereafter will have the
heart to hate and persecute that religion, whose charity and goodness is so
great that it extends beyond the very horison and utmost limits of this world.

. 29. Pope.
THe catholics, as I perceived by their books and practices, do all the world
over pray for their Pape and pastor with a most tender affection; which I
esteemed a piece of most civil piety practiced in all ages for the comfort and
good of him they look upon as supreme head and governor of their religion
under God upon earth. We may perceiv in the epistles of good St. Paul, that to
pray for one another was a thing very familiar to the primitive Christians; but
when S. Peter their prince and head fell into danger, the whole Church then
united their supplications in his behalf, as one in whose welfar they were
universally and in a more peculiar manner all of them concerned: Peter was kept
in prison, says the sacred text in the Acts, and prayer was made without
intermission by the Church unto God for him. I doubt not but that they prayed
likewise for other apostles too, that God would keep and bring them out of
danger; but the writer of that Story gives us no notice of any universal prayer
made for any one, but only Him the head and prince of all the whole
congregation, thereby to intimate the singular respect and love they did
universally bear him.

But we in England do not more ordinarily call a Spade a Spade, than we do
traduce, defame, execrate the Pope, and proclaim him, whom also we do not know,
lewd, wicked, sensual, proud, seducer, serpent, Antichrist, and I know not
what; and that not only in our ordinary society but in books and sermons; not
only some of us but all hate him; not in England only but all protestant places;
not now only but in all times since Protestancy began: and our very children by
that time they com to be eight or nine year old are by our example and
imitation enabled to say after us like parrets, Pope is a rogue, pope is a
rogue. This behavior of ours if it be not impious, yet no man I should think
will after serious consideration deny it to be unmannerly. And what kind of
spirit must this be, that delights so much in defamations and curses! Surely
the spirit of God is a meek civil and quiet spirit. Either the Pope is good, or
evil; if he be good, why do we hate him? if bad, why do we not pray for him, as
gospel teaches us to do even for our enemies and sinners, but still defame and
curs him to make him wors. I know much good he has don our land, even so much
good as the Christianity we had from him has ever wrought amongst us; but
never any evil, no not in the least kind. Ministers above all others stand
excessively engaged to him even for the very bread they eat; for the formality
of their clothes and cassocks they wear; for the pulpits they preach in; for
the parishes and tithes they live upon; for the universities they were brought
up in; for the degrees they have taken there, and the canon of their
ordination; for the catholic learned books they study; and the very gospel
they either do or seem to preach: all which were originally from the Pope. And
as for others of the laety; if the Churches they meet in once a week, and the
hopes they have of a life to com; if the good wholesome laws of the land, if
corporations or other orderly dispositions in the kingdom; if the ancient
militia now almost abolished, wherein earls and marquesses command the
counties, dukes over them, and the King over the dukes; that in a moment all
the land might be up at his Majesty's beck; and the like militia by sea, where
admiral; vice admiral, and reere admiral were all subjected to the king,
besides the train bands for defense of cities) so orderly and wisely
instituted; if kingly authority and his crownland; if the orderly sittings and
proceedings in Parliament; if dignities and titles of honor; if the decency of
gowns and caps and modes and rules of government in colleges, halls and Innes
of law; if our very fashion of preaching and administering sacraments; if all
these and several such like things ordered and constituted amongst us be of any
worth, or commendable, or may deserv any thanks, we must then be civil toward
the Pope and his catholic believers who invented, disposed and ordered all
these things for our good. And yet we are so far from thinking of any of these
things which might civilize us toward him, that transported, we cannot our
selves tell how, with animosity and passion, we inveigh endlesly not only
against Papists, but even against the Pope himself, who as he never hurt us, so
likewise does he even to this day wish us all both temporal and spiritual good.

And I should think we might hereupon take occasion to admire at the Popes
great civility and temperance not again to be paralel'd in the world, who
though he has seen so many hundred virulent books writ against him, and heard
more words; yet has he never been known to let fall the least word of passion
against any, nor move any engine for revenge: And thus much several of our
countrymen have experienced of late years in Rome, where railing at the Pope
even under his nose, as a wicked proud Antichrist, they received being called
before him no other check but this: My friends be peaceable while you are in my
territories, least the people should fall upon you and hurt you; when you are
out of my territories say of me what you please. I have seldom known any noble
person, but if his honor were traduced, especially if falsely, undeservedly,
and by an inferior person, and frequently, and in a high degree, but he would
move more or less to a just reveng of his right. Only the Pape goes quietly on
in his course as the full moon in the firmament, which heeds not at all the
barkings of so many curres that vainly open their mouths against her. But in
the interim can there be any thing more unseemly than a young Minister in a
pulpit here in England, vapouring and talking before a congregation, that come
thither to hear Gods word, against a gentleman, a grave venerable person, a
bishop, a Prince, who also living a thousand miles off hears not a word he
says, and if he did would heed it as little. We read a story, in the book of
Kings, of a company of boys that mocked at Eliseus a grave and venerable
person, as he was going up to Bethel, crying; Up baldpate, up baldpate; and the
very bears issuing suddenly out of the woods tore them in sunder. May not we
justly fear some such like event for the like if not greater crime of ours shall
fall upon us, who do not only call that venerable person and his priests
Baldpate, but Antichrist, frog, caterpillar, serpent, etc. Besides the absence
of the person we calumniate, flout and expose to derision is a circumstance
that does not a little aggravate the fact, and renders it no less foolish and
irrational than it is unjust and rude. It is a wonder that our Protestant
bishops should countenance these disorders. A wise woman will not hear her
child call her neighbor Whore, without the application of a just rebuke,
knowing that such like impudence being countenanced, may imbolden him at last
to call Her so too. Indeed the judgment is already com home to our doors; for
now our bishops of England are as contumeliously treated in the pulpits by
their own ministers, as the bishop of Rome was by their connivance and applaus
abused aforetime in the same place by the self-same persons. Nor have there been
any in this land more furiously bent these last twenty years against our good
King, than they who to flatter our former princes most passionately reviled the
Pope; and the seed of those men who in the days of Edward the sixth, Queen
Elisabeth and King James plotted so vehemently against the Catholic Church and
nobility even to their utter disgrace and ruin, under a pretens of establishing
our State, were now the only great fighting sticklers against our State and
Monarchy. I give only this note by the way, to reach all men to do to another
as they would others do to them, and no othewaies: for God is just and punishes
all iniquity of men, (oftentimes with those very rods and scorpions, which
themselves used before to plague their innocent neghbours) who when they knew
the justice of God, yet would they not understand that they which do such
things are worthy of death; and not only they who do them, but they also who
consent and yield compliance to the doers.

But that I may a little lay open to my countrymen the unreasonablenes of our
proceedings, in hating and reviling a Person, whom Catholics on the contrary
do so much esteem and love; to what I have already said let thus much be added:
That the Pope is one, whose whole life and study is to defend innocence,
promote concord, and maintain unity of Faith in the world: nor is there any man
but he alone that looks to the general safety of all Christianity; and in all
times like a faithful pastor he has so don it, as if it were not so much his
office to do it as his nature. And this we might easily see if we would look
over ancient stories, and not suffer our selves to be misled by the reports of
those who think themselves undon if he that would curb their extravagancies
should com to be thought of according to his true deserts. I might make it good
in many particulars: but I will content my self only to run over briefly the
eighteen general councels that have been in several ages in the Christian
world, and their results and motives; whereby men may be persuaded to think that
the Pope is so far from what we in England are made to conceiv of him, that he
is the only man that has fought in all times for the unity of faith, for
concord and the good of all Christendom; when other bishops and believers under
him began many of them to revolt and disturb our welfar. Nor had we had any
thing left us at this day either of truth or unity, humanly speaking, had not
he been set over us and watched to make and keep us happy even against some of
our wills.

1. Arrius a priest in Alexandria had seduced many priests, deacons, nuns,
bishops, and princes to beleev amiss against the divinity of Jesus Christ our
Lord, when Pape Sylvester rose up against him and fought stoutly, for the
honor of our Messiah in his general council at Nice, in the year 325. and so
did other Popes his successors after him for some hundred years together.

2. Pape Damasus in the second general council at Constantinople with the like
spirit of fortitude maintained as valiantly the divinity of the Holy Ghost,
against Macedonius priest and bishop of Constantinople, and Eunomius that
insolent Cappadocian, and all their retinue, as he did likewise that of Christ
an. 381.

3. When Nestorius a bishop with his priest Anastasius gave great scandals in
Constantinople by denying the virgin Mary to be mother of God, for that in
Christ they said were two persons, and one of them was the son of the virgin,
the other son of God; Pape Celestin stood up and quelled them and all their
adherents in his council at Ephesus in the year 430.

4. Pape Leo in a fourth general council at Chalcedon an. 450. stopped the
mouths of Eutyches an Abbot in Constantinople, and Dioscorus deacon in
Alexandria; who by their great dislike of Nestorius opinion ran into the other
extreme, and affirmed Christ our Lord to have not only one person, but one
nature too; which was as scandalous and as much against the faith of believers
as was the former.

5. In the fifth general council at Constantinople an. 553. when all the
oriental part of the Church was in a combustion about the three heads or
contents of Theodore bishop of Mopsuesten, an epistle of Ibas, and Theodoret
bishop of Cyrus his writings against S. Cyril, who had been all three
honorably mentioned in the council of Chalcedon, and yet their writings were
then found very scandalous and faulty; Pape Vigilius though very sick and weak,
yet by his writings from his chamber he labored abundantly and to good effect
to assuage the feud.

6. Pape Agatho in the sixth general synod at Constantinople an. 680. when
Cyrus, Sergius, Macarius and many other learned unquiet priests and bishops
monothelites, had spread the Eutichian heresy under other notions, and taught
that Christ had but one will and operation, with much offense to the people; he
rose up and manfully resisted and subdued them.

7. Pape Adrian combated no less for the use of images and crucifix against
Gregorius Neocaesariensis, Paul patriarch of Constantinople, and several other
Iconoclasts, who tore and preached them down contrary to the judgment and
practis both of the Christians then living and all their predecessors, in the
seventh general council at Nice an. 787. And in one and the same place was
maintained by the whole catholic world both the images and divinity of the
crucified Messiah.

8. Not long after in the eight general council at Constantinople an. 869 Pape
Adrian the second defended the innocence of the great patriarch Ignatius whom
subtle Photius by the help of some potentates in Constantinople had expelled
his byshoprick, and put himself in his place, miserably harassing and vexing
both the good prelate Ignace and all his adherents, to the great disturbance of
the East who were all in a hot feud about it.

9. In the ninth general council at Lateran an. 1122 when after infinity of
troubles the Church had recovered her peace, pape Callixtus the second like a
good vigilant pastor labored to restore the ancient discipline much abated by
wars and factions; recovered the exclesiastick investitures out of the hands of
emperor Henricus who had invaded them, and moved Christian princes to a war in
the holy land, for the cause of Jesus Christ there blasphemed where he should
principally be honored; and the assistance of distressed Christianity against
the Turk: good works all, and which none but he would have heeded to effect.

10. Pape Innocent the second, when Peter de Lions his antipope had filled
Christendom with wars and factions, and Peter de Bruis had no less corrupted
their judgments with heresies, against baptism, temples, alms deeds, and
offerings; rose up and manfully fought them both, for the recovery of truth and
peace of Christianity, in his tenth ecumenical council at Lateran an. 1139.

11. Some while after in the time of pape Alexander the third, the Christian
world was no less rent asunder both by the faction of a competitour of his
called Victor the second, and the heresies of the Waldenses or Albigenses:
against both which the said Pape called his eleventh Council at Lateran an.
1179 and made provision there most carefully against any the like disturbance
upon such occasion.

13. Pape Innocent the third did the world no les good service in his twelfth
general council at Lateran an. 1215 where he judged and condemned the heresies
of those times which infected and troubled the world, censured abbot Joachim
his book against Magister sententiarum, and wicked Almaricus who denied the
real presence, and resurrection, etc. and exhorted all Christian princes to the
recovery of the holy land, which had been regained by the joint endeavors of
the Christian world in Pape Urban the seconds time, Godfrey of Bullen being
there made king of Jerusalem, but after 90 years was lost again in the days of
pape Urban the third, whose successor Gregory the eight and his followers till
this Innocent the third did much lament and labor to help the loss, but
Innocent had more hopes by reason that Baldwin earl of Flanders was then made
emperor of Constantinople.

13. Pape Innocent the fourth found a great deal of trouble in the world, and
to heal the malady he called a general synod at Lions an. 1245 which was the
thirteenth ecumenical council against the cruelties of emperor Frederick who
filled Christendom with wars and bloodshed, whence arose the faction of the
Gwelfs and Gibellines, against the tirrany of the saracens the perfidiousnes of
the greeks who plotted at Constantinople the destruction of all the Latins,
and against the irruption of the Tartarians who ruined Poland and Hungary.

14. A little afterward, when now Michael Paleologus had got the empire of
greece by the expulsion of Baldwin, and the greeks began to fall back to some of
their former errors, denying the Holy Ghosts procession, sacrifice in
unleavened bread, and some fasts: so that much combustion happened upon this
occasion in the oriental Church, Pape Gregory the tenth called the fourteenth
council at Lions an. 1274 for the healing these disorders, recovery of the holy
land, and union of the Greeks.

15. In the year 1311 when the knights Templers began to give some offense in
the Christian world, or at least the king of France and other princes pretended
so, and the Bogards and Beguines a kind of religious people in Germany sowed
some errors up and down, to the great scandal of people. Pape Clement the fifth
called a council at Vienna to rectify both, as also for recovery of the holy
land and reformation of discipline then much decayed in the Church.

16. But still there was much division in the oriental part of the Church among
the greeks, who denied many of them the procession of the Holy Ghost from the
second person of the Trinity, the felicity of the blessed, and purgatory in the
Churches ancient sens, and the primacy of the Roman See, which although they
held in the primitive times for many ages together, yet they sank into that
dangerous error by degrees; for after that they had got an emperor in
Constantinople absolute and independent, they motioned in councels kept in
those times for the most part in the oriental parts, first that the bishop of
that Sea for the honor of the empire might be made a Patriarch, then
afterward that he might have place before other ancient patriarchs who had the
right of precedence before him, and then at last they would have him
independent as the emperor himself was in temporals: thus by degrees running
themselves into schisms. To prevent these errors and factions Pape Eugenius the
fourth called the sixteenth general council at Florence an. 1439 where by means
of Josephus patriarch of Constantinople and other grave grecian prelates there
assembled, the union betwixt the greeks and latins was made up.

17. In the year 1512 was kept the seaventeenth council at Lateran under Pape
Julius the second and Leo the tenth to mitigate a great schism raised by means
of an episcopal conversion at Pisa called together by cardinal Caravaial and
Sanseverin without the Papes authority, both which came in here and submitted,
as also to bring Christian princes to mutual concord, to stop the frequent
argumentations that were too vehemently urged in schools out of Aristotle
against the souls immortality, and to hasten an expedition against the Turk.

18. And lastly three Popes one after another, Paulus, Julius, and Pius fought
successively with equal resolution against Luther and Calvin and several others
of their apostate priests, for internal justification, the possibility and
merit of doing well, the truth and efficacy of the seven sacraments, prayers
for the dead, intercession of saints, and indulgences, in the great ecumenical
council of Trent.

There have been in the Church besides these greater councels six hundred other
national, provincial, diocesan synods, over and above those which S. Peter kept
with the apostles in Jerusalem; which being called together upon several
occurrencies were all licensed guided and directed by the Papes of those times,
who kept continual correspondence with the prelates while they sat in council:
and if any synod either opposed him or swarved from his directions, it was
looked upon by the rest of Christendom as reprobate on that account.

I should be too tedious, if I should declare the indefatigable industry, high
wisdom and piety of Popes, in steering the Ship of the Church both in the calms
of peace that she might not then lie hulling and idle, but make good progress
toward bliss; and also in the strange storms and tempests that the malignity of
this world has raised against her, which have been so great and various, that
one would have thought by the many leaks that sprang in her at times, the
excessive beatings of decuman billows upon her sides, the dangerous hidden
rocks on which she has dashed unawares, and the greater apparent ones she has
been carried upon by the violence of wind and weather not humanly to be
avoided, that she could never have lasted to this day. But thanks be to Him
that provided a wise and vigilant Pilot, with whom he sits himself invisibly at
the stern to guide him and such as voyage in the same ship with him unto all
truth even to the consummation of the world.

Histories will tell us how careful and more then humanly happy Popes have been
in all ages, in reconciling Christian princes, and resolving difficulties
between them, in examining of doctrines, in counselling and persuading high
spirited children ready to fly out into heresies to humility and resignation,
in governing so many bodies of Religious which be all subjected under him as
other parts of the Church be, and are so numerous that one would hardly beleev
there should be so many religious houses in the Christian world, all serving God
night and day with that silence order and cleanlines every one in his way and
institute, that it is the goodliest thing in the world to behold. St. Bennet
rose in the sixth age of the Church about the year 529. and yet about the year
1480. it is written that there were then of his order fifteen thousand
monasteries in the world: and the other families of S. Francis, S. Augustine,
S. Dominick, the Society and others, are none of them much less numerous: and
all these families have still recours to the Pope both for their rule and
statutes, and for all difficulties that may occur in their spiritual
government. And who can be sufficient for all these things? None surely, but he
that is singularly assisted from heaven: and Christ our Lord in my judgment
has no less shown his divinity and power in the Pope, than in himself, as much
in his spiritual and mystic as he did in his natural body: and the life
indeed which by his Spirit he livs in his Church is in a manner the very same
with his natural one: now praying, now disputing amongst the doctors, now
fasting, then watching, then healing the sick, and working miracles; then
persecuted, maligned, envied; sometimes at a feast, sometimes hungrying, sometimes
making merry with a loaf of bread and few fishes, the disciples now defending
their master, now the master defending his disciples etc. for so the Pope
protects innocent believers, and these again defend him. But of all those
glorious things our Lord did in his life time, conversion of people,
confutation of pharisaical opposers, releeving of poor, healing of diseases and
the like, he has shown greater abundance in his Church than in himself,
according as himself promised; Ye shall do greater things than these. Which
confutes the ancient calumny of our old adversary the Jew, who ascribed all our
Lords miraculous operations either to some gypsy tricks he learnt when he was
in Egypt, or to some evil spirit he had got to attend his person: either of
which had it been true had failed with his peson, and his power had not
extended to his Church. And all things considered I think I may truly say that
Christ in the Pope and Church is more miraculous than he was in his own person:
and I doubt not but the nativity of his Church, and miraculous conversation,
passion, resurrection and ascension shall be the same with his. So that he who
contemns the Pope contemns Christ who presides in him, and he that contemns the
Church villifies his spirit which lives and movs and animates that body.

I could be very copious in this subject; but I must not be prolix in any
thing. I only desire my reader to consider this one thing, which after serious
thought he will find to be true, that if there had not been Popes in all ages
both to conserv and propagate faith, we had either never heard any news of
Christianity here in England, or not kept it undisturbedly so long. All the
whole gospel and body of Christianity is his, purely his, and from him we
received it. Nay the first great fundamental of Christian religion which is the
Truth and divinity of Christ, had it not been for him, had failed long ago in
the world: and what then had become of all the rest? For after Pope Sylvester
according to the faith of his ancestors had by means of his three Legates great
Osius bishop of Corduba, White and Vincent two priests, established in the
first council of Nice the said divinity of Christ our Lord, wherein he is
consubstantial to that almighty One who made the earth and stars, against
Arrius and his allies, who began to teach the contrary, it is incredible to say
what frequent murmurations resorts and conciliar meetings were made afterward
up and down the world by the priests and bishops who had drunk in the contrary
opinion, and in that point deserted him, against their Pope and Pastor for
three or four hundreed years together, till in a manner all the whole Church
not only clergy but laiety and the princes of Christendom opposed him in it,
while the Pope now left in a manner alone, or with a very thin retinue of
believers, and all his successors one after another fought even to sweat and
blood for the vindication of that great Christian article even against the
whole world. And he so far overcame at length, that there be scarcely in these
days any that doubt of that, which the Pope only by the authority of his place
and title wrought out of the very fire: Whence I may truly say that Christ is
the Popes God; for if the Pope had not been, or had not been so vigilant and
resolute a pastor as he is, humanly speaking, Christ had not been taken for
any such person as he is believed this day. And let men talk what they will by
their vain philosophy, this I will boldly say and am assured of, that if the
Pope be not an unerring guide in matters of religion and faith, all is lost A
man once rid of the control of his authority may as easily deride and as
solidly confute the incarnation, as the sprinkling of holy water: nor could the
reason of the whole earth be able to convince him.

And after all this shall children and boys jeer and revile in our streets and
pulpits this sacred majesty of the Pope, whom the virtue, wit, valor and
nobility of all Christendom has ever so highly honored; and we if we
consider things as we ought can never love too much? shall we cast unjust and
vile contumelies upon him who holding a solicitude for all the Churches of
Christ's, has so many millions of the greatest spirits in the world depending
upon his lips for direction and truth; with whom and under whom have concurred
in his general councels so many thousands of renowned prelates, venerable
bishops, princely cardinals, grave patriarchs, subtle divines and doctors,
Abbots and Generals of orders, orators, chancellors, knights and barons sent
to his assistance by the Kings and Potentates of Christendom, the very stars of
our earthly hemisphere, met together either to make up or grace and strengthen
his great counsel convened in subordination to his legates: nay emperors
themselves have thought it an addition of honor to sit in that solemn and
thrice venerable assembly, though in a separated place: Shall we I say, mock,
and revile this sacred person? Let not such a thing be said of us any more! let
it not be told in Gath, or the streets of Askalon, that we use any such rude
behavior; lest the very uncircumcised Philistines condemn our vast inexcusable
incivility. Nor yet let us either envy or malign the respect which Pappists
give to Him from whom they received their Christianity, and by whose vigilance
and care it has been kept inviolate amongst them from its first ingres into
the land even to this very day. Shall our eye be therefore evil because theirs is
good.

. 30. Popery.
IN the more flourishing doctrins of the Catholic Church I could be largely
copious: but I have said as much as may suffice my intended purpos, which was
so far to excuse even that religion also, that if all do not embrace yet none
may persecute and hate it. Wherefor I do purposly omit to speak of other more
plausible parts of Popery, viz. 1. The obligation which all who beleev in
Christ have to attend unto good works, and the merit and benefit of so doing.
2. The possibility of keeping Gods commandments with the assistance of divine
grace. 3. The liberty and freedom of human will either to comply with grace or
resist it. 4. The sacred council and excellency of divine vows. 5. The right
and obligation to restitution when any one shall have wronged his neighbor,
either in his soul or body, fame, goods or estate. 6. The power and authority of
of the Church in her tradition and decisions. 7. The fasts and abstinence at
certain times from some kind of meats, which is all the religion we read Adam
was injoined to observe in Paradise, that we may thereby be more apt to
acknowledge Gods gifts and goodness at those times we enjoy other good things of
his bounty and at other times them, and to sanctify our spirit for divine
retirements. 8. The divine ordination, and unspeakable comfort and benefit of
Confession. 9. The caelibate and single life of the clergy who thereby freed
from much solicitude of this world, though not without some troublesome
struggling against unseemly lusts of youth, may approach the altar like angels
of God who neither marry nor are given in marriage. 10. The doctrine of
indulgencies, which be nothing else but a releas from some temporal penalties due
to sin after repentance and remission; which the Church does generally bestow
by commutation; as when for example an indulgence of such penalties for so many
days or years is granted unto such as upon the time appointed shall repent and
confess, fast, pray, give alms, and communicate for the Churches preservation
and concord of Christian princes; which is a doctrine as rational and well
grounded as any in Christianity though we in England will not understand it.
11. Finally, the ecclesiastic hierarchy and supremacy, whereby catholic
religion like a flourishing fair tree, spreads his boughs in several kingdoms
of the earth even from sea to sea, so united all of it in all its parts and
connexed together, that there is no catholic upon earth but is under some
priest, all priests subordinated to their bishops, these to their metropolitan,
all metropolitans to the Patriarchs, and Patriarchs united in the Papal cone:
every leaf cleavs to some twig, every twig to some branch, every branch to some
bough, every bough to the bole, and the bole to the root.
And several other such like points of the Roman religion which coming all
together from once hand have stood unchangeable in all ages the same, and
depending all upon the verity of the first revealer have an equality of truth
though not of weight.

These and several others, with the other half dozen more offensive doctrins I
have cleared and explicated, our reformers cut off at one blow; when they
taught us that it would suffice to salvation only to beleev in Christ, without
any more ado: and that other things were popish superstitions: whereby we
became a strange kind of servants that beleev their master, but heed not either
to fulfill his orders or do his commands. For they told us and we have hitherto
believed it: That there be no such things as good works pleasing to God; but all
be as menstruous rags, filthy, odious and damnable in the sight of heaven: That
if it were otherwis, yet are they not in our power: That with the assistance of
any grace to be had Gods commandments are impossible to be kept, and it would
be therefore vain to attempt it; especially since we have in us no strength of
free will to act any thing but evil: That it must needs be foolishnes to vow
unto God, since we can do nothing we ought to do, and no less foolish if we have
vowed to pay it: That what wrong soever we do to another, God is merciful and
restitution fruitles, both because one sin cannot make satisfaction for another
nor any thing clear us but the blood of Christ alone, unto which if we should
concur our selves by doing good works or satisfying for ill, we should be half
our own redeemers: That the Church which presumes to teach other things than we
allow is a falls mistres, distracted, and knows not what she says: That to fast
from sin is fast enough, without depriving our stomachs of good flesh when we
have a mind to it; and yet because we sin in every thing we do, neither is that
fast possible to be kept: That confession is needless, How can man forgive
sins: That our clergy find themselves men and not angels and love women as well
as others, and first revolted from popery principally for their sakes,
preferring a good wife before the whore of Babylon, and the altars that kept
them asunder are thrown down, the honest pulpit standing now solitary speaks
for them and brings them happily together: That of indulgencies there is no
need, since obligation to penalties is shaken off long ago by our own authority
without any indulgence from another: That papal supremacy is the only obstacle
to our liberty, and therefore it must be abolished: And let popery hang together
as close as it can, it shall go hard but we will find a battery to shake it.

So much indeed has sophistry and continual clamor against popery, and state
punishments lying ever most heavily upon the professors of it, prevailed over
our judgments that now there is no goodness, no worth, no truth in it, no none at
all: it is all naught, all and every part of it naught, nothing but naughtines,
superstition and vanity. All that I will say for the present is this: If popery
be a bad religion more is the pity; for the professors of it suffer as much
for it as might well serve for a good one. Millions of people for the belief
they have in it and the love they bear its holy counsels and promises of future
reward, do voluntarily and of their own accord forsake the world and all
worldly pleasures to serve God night and day in poverty, humility, and chastity:
and multitudes of others of a secular condition in several parts of the earth
have rather chosen to live an afflicted life in this world, contemned, abused,
pillaged, beaten, put to death by their persecutours, than to forsake that
religion; and these too as noble and wise persons many of them as any the earth
has had.

But if any will yet be contentious, and maintain his hatred still against
Popery, I earnestly request he would seriously ponder these few following
Queries which I borrowed of a friend.

It will not be denied but that the Church of Rome was once a most pure,
excellent, flourishing, and Mother Church; for this is not only by good St.
Paul amply testified in his epistle to the said Romans, but acknowledged also
by Whitaker in his answer to Dr. Sanders, by White in his defense of his way,
by Fulk and Reinolds; and also by K. James in his speech to the Parliament.

This Church could not ceas to be such, but she must fall either by Apostasy,
Heresy, or Schism.

I. Apostasy is not only a renouncing of the Faith of Christ, but the very
name and title to Christianity: No man will say, that the Church of Rome had
ever such a fall, or fell thus.

II. Heresy is an adhesion to some private and singular opinion, or error in
Faith, contrary to the general approved Doctrine of the Church.

If the Church of Rome did ever adhere to any singular or new opinion
disagreeable to the common recived Doctrine of the Christian world, I pray
satisfy me as to these particulars, viz. 1. By what General Council was she
ever condemned? 2. Which of the Fathers ever writ against Her? Or, 3. By what
authority was She otherwise reproved? For,


If seems to me to be a thing very incongruous, that so great a Church should
be condemned by every one that has a mind to condemn her.

III. Shisme is a departure or division from the Unity of the Church, whereby
the Band and communion held with some former Church, is broken and dissolved.

If ever the Church of Rome divided her self by Schism from any other body of
faithful Christians, or brake communion, or went forth from the Society of any
Elder Church: I pray satisfy me as to these particulars.

1. Whose company did She leave? 2. From what body did She go forth? 3. Where
was the true Church which She forsook?
For, it appears somewhat strange to me, that a Church should be accounted
schismatical, when there cannot be assigned any other Church different from her,
which from age to age, since Christ his time has continued visible, from
whence She departed.

If these Queries were well pondered; or if men would once beleev, as most true
it is, that by irrefragable principles which all must needs acknowledge who will
own a Christianity in general, Popery may be proved to be as good a religion as
the best, then Facta est Lux. But this is a little beyond my intention, which
aims no further than only to put our passions to a demur; for which it may
suffice us to think that Popery is not ill. And if I should yet say more and
endeavor to prove it good, those that be of that Way will say I speak too
little; and they who be not, will think I say too much. I had a purpos in the
three last dialogues of my Reclaimed Papist, to make Popery appear not only a
good religion but the best, and not only the best but the only sole
Christianity which Christ planted upon earth, and which every right reason that
admits of Christ must needs approve. But I hope I was therefore discouraged and
hindered in that work, that it might be left for some better hand; and I should
my self very much rejoice to see it don. It is now besides my purpos, my paper
also is already too much swelled, my mind calls for freedom, and my pen is
dulled.

Acta est pars acroamatica, sequitur moralis.

Fifth Chapter. Moral topics for charity and peace.
. 31. Conclusion.
AS without the indifferency and moderation I have hitherto labored to
implant, there cannot be in us any capacity of a right understanding: so there be
yet some moral topics remaining which are apt to implant this moderation and
indifferency; as to consider first, the sad precipices men have run themselves
and others by their headiness and temerarious obstinacy in their opinions and
conceits about religion: secondly, that the connatural excellency of a good
Christian consists not in finding new ways to the reformation of other men's
thoughts, but putting in practis the old received well known dictates of
sobriety, justice and piety in our selves: thirdly, that charity, which the
apostle makes to be the end and highest perfection of religion and indeed all
virtue, suggests good and moderate thoughts of our neighbor, etc. But these
and such like topics be a subject fitter for a pious preacher than a civil
logician: and so leav them. What I should speak at this time unto any such
purpos, take it in the golden words and phrase of the honorable Lord
Chancellor, the Orator of the Land.

Gentlemen, the distempers of religion which have too too much disturbed the
peace of this Kingdom is a sad argument indeed; It is a consideration that must
make every religious heart to bleed, to see religion which should be the
strongest obligation and cement of affection and brotherly kindness and
compassion, made now by the pervers wranglings of passionate and froward men,
the ground of all animosity hatred malice and reveng. And this unruly and
unmanly passion (which no question the divine nature exceedingly abhors)
sometimes and I fear too frequently transports those who are in the right as
well as those who are in the wrong; and leaves the latter more excusable than
the former, when men who find their manners and dispositions very conformable
in all the necessary obligations of humane nature avoid one another
conversation, and grow first unsociable and then uncharitable to each other;
because one cannot think as the other does. And from this separation we entitle
God to the patronage of and concernment in our fancies and distinction, and
purely for his sake hate one another heartily.

It was not so of old when one of the most ancient Fathers of the Church tells
us; that love and charity was so signal and eminent in the primitive
Christians, that it even drew admiration and envy from their greatest
adversaries, Vide, inquiunt ut invicem se diligunt. Their adversaries in that
in which they most agreed, in their very prosecution of them had their passions
and animosities among themselves; they were only Christians that loved and
cherished and comforted and were ready to dye for one another. Quid nunc
dicerent illi Christiani si nostra viderent tempora, says the incomparable
Grotius. How would they look upon our sharp and virulent contentions in the
debates of Christian religion and the bloody wars that have proceeded from
those contentions, whilst every one pretended to all the marks which are to
attend upon the true Church, except only that which is inseparable from it,
Charity to one another.

My Lords and Gentlemen. This disquisition has cost the King many a sigh many
a sad howr, when he has considered the almost irreparable reproach the
Protestant religion has undergone from the divisions and distractions which
have been so notorious within this Kingdom. What pains he has taken to compose
them, after several discourses with learned and pious men of different
persuasions you may see by a declaration he has published upon that occasion
by which you see his great indulgence to those who can have any protection from
conscience to differ with their brethren. And I hope God will so bless the
candor of his Majesty in the condescentions he makes, that the Church as well
as the State will return to that unity and unanimity, which will make both king
and people as happy as they can hope to be in this world.

If aught yet remain to be said, in the heavenly words of blessed S. Paul I
shall conclude it all. Quosdam quidam posuit deus, etc. Some has God set over
us in his Church, first apostles, secondly prophets, thirdly doctors, then
virtues, then graces of healing, opitulations, gubernations, sorts of tongues.
Are all apostles? are all prophets? are all doctors? are all virtues? have all
men the grace of healings? do all speak with tongues? do all interpret? But do
you emulate the better graces. And I do yet show unto you a more excelling way.
If I speak with the tongues of men and angels, and have not charity I am but as
sounding brass, and tingling cimbal. And if I shall have prophesy, and know all
mysteries and all sciences and if I shall have all faith so that I can
translate mountains, and have not charity I am nothing, etc.

This is the great rule of our happiness and square of all perfection. Et
quicunque hanc regulam secuti fuerint, pax super illos and super Israel Dei.

FINIS.

