The City of LONDONS RESOLVTION, CONCERNING Their Loyalty to the King, and
their Love and Affection to the Parliament, in laying down their Lives,
Liberties, and goods for the maintenance of the true protestant Religion.

Also the several Propositions which the Common Council sent to His Majesty
by the Lord Newburgh, one of His Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel.

Likewise an Honorable and worthy Speech spoken by the Lord Newburgh to the
Common Council.

With a Letter sent from Secretary Nicholas to the Lord Major, and the Report
which Mr. Recorder made to the Common Counsel concerning the same, June 20.

Together with a Command from the House of Peers, concerning the stopping of
all kind of Ammunition in the Northern Road.

JOH. BROWN Cler. Parl.

June 22. Printed for I. Tompson and A. Coe. 1642.

The Citisens of Londons Resolution, concerning the taking up of Arms.
AT this Common Council, Mr. Recorder declared, That by the direction of the
Lord Major, he was to signify to them the cause of their Assembly, how that
his Lordship had yesterday received a Letter from Sir Edward Nicholas, one of
his Majesty's principal Secretaries, intimating that the Lord Major should
call a Common Council, and then he should hear further of his Majesty: there
was also present in the Counsel Chamber the Lord Newburgh, who came to deliver
his Majesty's Message or Request to to is Court: And thereupon the L. Newburgh
was desired to come into the Court who declared and said in this manner.

Gentlemen, His Majesty out of his good affection in acknowledging of your
great loves lately showed unto His Majesty, has sent me in a Message unto you
assuring it to be the same contained in a Paper, which he presented and desired
to be read to this Common Council, which was accordingly done.

The humble desire of the Court they thought necessary to present His Majesty
to be graciously pleased, that all the Delinquents and Causers of these
Tumults, whatsoever they be, being apprehended, may be brought into
Examination, and receive condign punishment according to the Law.

And these things thus agreed upon, were by Direction of this Common Council
here openly declared and delivered by the mouth of Mr. Recorder, unto that
Honorable person of the Lord Newburgh, with desire that the same should be by
his Lordship accordingly presented unto his Majesty, the which he promised to
perform with trust.

And likewise touching the great neglect in appearance of the Trained Bands of
this City to their Colors at the beat of the Drum, especially in these times
of danger, in contempt of Authority, being a matter of exceeding great
consequence, and not fit to be suffered. And thereupon this Common Council
taking much to heart, that such disobedience should grow and be found in the
Inhabitants of this City, to the great disrespect of Magistracy and contempt
of Government; And that such disorders and tumultary Assemblies should be
permitted in such a City as this, formerly famous for the good and quiet
government thereof, has thought it very expedient and behoveful, for redress
and remedy to be had in these abuses, being not fit to be any longer endured,
that every Member of this Common Counsel now assembled, shall in their several
precincts, spread it abroad, and make it known That if any person or persons,
shall from henceforth neglect his duty and service to be performed, as
aforesaid, he shall receive condign punishment, according to Law.

It is also further thought fit, and so agreed by the Common Counsel, that the
Lord Major may send out his Precepts in such manner, and to such purpose, as
his Lordship, and his Brethren the Aldermen, shall think fit for Watch and
Ward, raising of Arms, or otherwise, for the preservation of this City; to
which this Court, and all the Members thereof promise all due and cheerful
Obedience.

And although the troubles and distractions of this City has bin many, so that
they could not rest in peace, nor quiet; yet they are now resolved by the help
of Almighty God, to assist both King and Parliament, against any foreign
invasion abroad, or insurrection at home, and though many scandalous and
scurrolous speeches has bin spread abroad, and divulged throughout the whole
Kingdom, by factious people, to the great disgrace of the whole City, saving
that they are Traitors against the King, intending to assist the Parliament,
and to take Arms against him.

This is false and contrary, for neither the Honorable Court of Parliament nor
the City of London never were intended to take Arms against his Royal Majesty.

For they are resolved to assist him with all their might and power, against
all those that shall offer to oppose or resist him.

Likewise this Court entered into further consultation and debate, touching the
tumultuous Assemblies lately spread to the great trouble and affrightment of
His Majesty's Subjects, and also touching the great neglect of that due respect
which ought to be given by the Inhabitants of this City, to the several
precepts lately issued out by the Lord Major, fora continual Watch and Ward
day and night, for prevention and suppression of such tumults and distempers.

Die Sabbathi, 11. Junii, 1642.
IT is this day ordered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That a strict
search and Examination he made by the Justices of peace Mayor, Bailiffs,
Constables, and other his Majesty's Officers, inhabiting, or near adjoining to
all the Northern Roads, for the stopping and staying of all Arms, Ammunition,
Powder, Light-horses, or horses for service in the Wars, and great Saddles
that are, or shall be carried toward the North parts of England, but by the
privity and direction of one, or both Houses of Parliament; And that the said
Officers shall stay them accordingly, and speedily give information thereof
unto one of the Houses of Parliament.

Die Mercurii, 15. Iun. 1642.
Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That this Order shall be printed and
published.

Io. Brown, Cler. Parl.


