THE Cities Loyalty Displayed: OR THE Four Famous and Renowned FABRICS IN THE
CITY of LONDON Exactly described in their several Representations, what they
are, with their private meanings and perfect Actions at the day of public
View, which is not yet discovered.

Togther With a true Relation of that high and stately Cedar erected in the
Strand, bearing five Crowns, a Royal Streamer, three Lanthorns, and a rich
Garland.

Published for both Cities and Countries Satisfaction.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1661.

THE Cities Loyalty Displayed.
Right worthy and thrice renowned Citizens,
THat which is done at Noonday, and not in a corner, is impossible to be kept
private from the eyes of the world, no more can your Loyal Actions and
faithful true Allegiance, conceal it self under a bushel, but rather the more
appear in splendid luster and glory, like an occidental Star, still every day
more than another, which has evidently appeared since the blessed Restoration
of his sacred Majesty.

Therefore it is to you (most prudent Senators) the very glory of our English
Nation, which have caused me to set pen to paper, to declare these your late
admired actions against the blessed Coronation of our glorious second Solomon
King CHARLES the Second, which will ring like Music in the ears of all Loyal
Subjects thorowout every County of England, and other the Kings Dominions.

And thus to proceed, I shall insist upon the four rich and costly Fabrics
erected in Leaden-Hall-street, Cornhill, Cheapside and Fleet Street, with their
representations, rarities and glories, together with that high and stately
Cedar, the admired May Pole erected in the Strand, whose height exceeds or at
least equallizeth with the tops of any Spiers in the City of London, or I might
say as well in England, being the admiration of Standards, the glory of Summer,
the wonder of other Nations, and a Mirror of the World, especially for the
Dignities, Riches and costly Ornaments bestowed upon it. I shall not conclude
with few lines.

But to begin with Leaden-Hall-street, that Fabric is built near eighty
Foothigh, with four stately Pillars before, two above two, in Diameter, they
are in circumference about eleven Foot, the Statue of King James on the right
hand with Globe and Scepter, and on the left hand King Charles the First with
the Globe and Sword, himself drawn in armor; in the middle above them two, six
yards higher is placed King Charles the Second in a royal Robe, and the Crown
upon his Head, a Globe in the one hand, and a Sword in the other; behind his
back is artificially drawn with a pensil in rich and costly colors the Royal
Oak curiously shaded, that at small distance no mortal eye but would imagine it
to be a living man in the boughs of a natural Oaken Tree; above which is two
Angels holding a Crown over his head, and above that the Arms, Lion and Unicorn
as big as Horses, with famous Belconies at bottom to make learned Speeches to
him, and this does present the Royal Oak.

In Cornhill, adjacent to the Royal Exchange, is the next built, near upon the
same height, and highly archt under much like unto a Gate, and in the front
place eight high and stately Pillars, colored like unto Marble, and placed two
above two in latitude and longitude, like unto the former. About the height of
the first four Pillars, is a great and spacious roof, artificially wrought in
rich and carved work; it resembles the leads of a Castle, upon which is placed
four white Chairs, that is to say, two over one side of the Gate, two over the
other, in which sits four Kings in long robes, and Crowns upon their heads,
but Globes and Scepters excepted; these represent the four Kingdoms, and give
homage to his Majesty with low bows and congies, when he passes by. Above
this three degrees higher is erected a stately Turret, or such like, containing
beautiful rooms within; it opens with twelve casements, through which appear
twelve Angels, clapping their wings, and rejoicing. Upon that is placed a great
and mighty statue of a man, standing upright on the very top, holding the world
upon his shoulders. Under the Gate is four Statues more, that is, Charles the
first, Charles the second, Duke of York, and Duke of Gloucester, and over their
heads are two Belconies, out of whom are made two learned speeches, and this
will present the ruins of times.

In Cheapside is the third, though something lower than the former, it is built
four square half way to the top, and the residue as round as an Egg, and that
is laid all over with a covering, but to the eye of man it seems to be no other
than Lead, the residue is beautified with rich and costly colors, supported
with eight high and stately Pillars, two above two, like unto the former. There
is about the middle a most famous gilded room, out of which ascends a
splendid train of Goddesses, most lovely to behold, and on the top is the
Oracle of Apollo, two Statues are a little lower, holding in their hands
Lances, and what is on the one side the Fabric, the same is on the other. A
learned speech is made at the bottom, and this does represent the Temple of
Diana.

Cheapside-Conduits are all new furbished, and new Pipes prepared for the
running of Wine.

Ludgate is richly gilded, and the Effigies of the Kings and Queen Elizabe^^
most rarely beautified.

In Flee^street is the fourth, most high and stately, something in height
exceeding the other three, it is supported in the front place with eight large
Pillars, that is to say, of a marble color, and placed like unto the former,
two above two, which is four on the one side, and four on the other side of the
Gate. Toward the middle of these Pillars, this costly Fabric is built broad
and spacious, with rich and carved work, beautified and adorned with various
sorts of colors, with the Kings Arms richly gilded upon it. Above that is
built four Stories higher a renowned piece of workmanship, much like unto a
Tower, or the top of a Castle, upon which stands a very great Statue, that is
to say one main top of all, it being so high for to behold it at any great
distance. It seems like a blazing Comer glittering in the Air, it has several
rooms divided in it, out of every room proceeds a tragedy, or at least does
resemble it, great Orations is made then, and the garden of plenty is
represented. And as for the glories of these renowned Fabrics, prepared
against the blessed Coronation, the fame thereof is sounded throughout all
Europe; for I myself have seen a French Limner drawing the figures of them to
send to France, so that I perceive we English have not altogether patterns from
France, they take some from us, and they are even such, that I believe few in
this age did ever ^ee the like.

So loyal, loving, and liberal, are our English Nation to hasten the business,
for the honor of the Nation, and the triumph of our most glorious King, that
indeed all Europe do stand and even admire it.

Now you have the famous Fabrics within the City described to you with the
meanings thereof; let me declare to you the manner in general of that stately
Cedar erected in the Strand 1^4. foot high, commonly called the Maypole, upon
the cost of the Parishners there adjacent, and the gracious consent of his
Sacred Majesty with the Illustrious Prince the Duke of York.

This Tree was a most choice and remarkable Piece, 'twas made below Bridge, and
brought in two parts up to Scotland-yard, near the Kings Palace, and from
thence it was conveyed April the 14th to the Strand to be erected.

It was brought with a Streamer flourishing before it, Drums beating all the
way, and other sorts of Music, it was supposed to be so long, that Landmen (as
Carpenters) could not possibly raise it; Prince James the Duke of York, Lord
high Admiral of England, commanded twelve Seamen off a Board, to come and
officiate the business, whereupon they came and brought their Cables, Pullies,
and other tacklins, with six great Anchors; after this was brought three
Crowns, bore by three men bare-headed, and a Streamer displaying all the way
before them, Drums bea^ing, and other Music playing: numerous multitudes of
people thronging the streets, with great shouts and acclamations all day long.

The Maypole then being joynted together, and hoopt about with bands of Iron,
the Crown and Vane with the Kings Arms richly gilded, was placed on the head
of it, a large top like a Belcony was about the middle of it. This being done,
the Trumpets did found, and in four hours space it was advanced upright, after
which being established fast in the ground, six Drums did beat, and the
Trumpets did sound again, great shouts and acclamations the people gave, that
it did ring throughout all the whole Strand; after that came a Morice Dance
finely decked, with purple Scarfs, in their half-shirts, with a Taber and Pipe
the ancient Music, and Danced round about the Maypole, after that Danced the
rounds of their Liberty. Upon the top of this famous Standard, is likewise set
up a royal Purple Streamer, about the middle of it, is placed four Crowns more,
with the Kings Arms likewise; there is also a Garland set upon it of various
colors, of delicate rich favors, under which is to be placed three great
Lanthorns, to remain for three honors; that is, one for Prince James Duke of
York, Lord High Admiral of England; the other for the Vice Admiral; and the
third for the Rear Admiral: these are to give light in dark nights, and to
continue so as long as the Pole stands, which will be a perpetual honor for
Seamen; it is placed as near hand as they could guess, in the very same pit
where the former stood, but far more glorious, bigger and higher, than ever any
one that stood before it; and the Seamen themselves do confess, that it could
not be built higher, nor there is not such a one in Europe beside, which highly
does please his Majesty, and the Illustrious Prince Duke of York; little
children did much rejoice, and ancient people did clap their hands, saying,
golden days began to appear. I question not but 'twill ring like melodious
Music throughout every County in England, when they read this Story, being
exactly penned; let this satisfy for the glories of London, that other Loyal
Subjects may read what we here do see.

So God preserve the King.
FINIS.

