Master Clark Defended: Or, a Vindication of two particular Passages in the
Historical Relation of the late Presbyterian General Assembly.
Courteous Reader,
SOme few days ago I happened to see a Book, called, A second Vindication of
the Church of Scotland, where, among other Papers bound together, I found a
Vindication of the late Assembly, from the Lies and Calumnious Aspersions of a
pitiful Pamphlet, called, An Historical relation of the late Presbyterian
General Assembly; In the which Vindication, as I was glancing through several
Passages, there occurred something anent Mr. Clark, or rather nothing anent Mr.
Clark, with respect to his Vindication (saving that the Author says, Mr. Clark
is able to defend himself) though he comes under the lash of the railing
Relator, as much as many others, whose Patronage and Defense, the Reverend and
Learned Author undertakes, upon which when I made a pause, and considered that
my Friend Mr. Clark alone is refused the benefit of the foresaid Vindication, I
forced my Pen to drop these following Lines of Supplement thereto. There is
moreover another particular, that my mind prompts me to Vindicat, viz. The
silly feckless Fetch that the witty Relator makes to disparage Presbyterial
Government, because, as he gives out, the Trade of Book-selling is fallen since
it had force and footing, and the reason why I take upon me to touch this Point
is, in regard I have had perhaps more occasion to know the mystery of the Trade
of Books than the Relator, as will easily appear by what follows; and I choose
to say somewhat hereanent, ere I meddle further with Mr. Clark's Concern. That
I may then the more clearly acquit my self herein, I will set down the
Relator's own Words, and then offer a Reflection upon them; Page: 49. says he*
The Trade of Books is fallen so low, since the Presbyterian Reign was set up,
that our Stationers are thinking, either to quite their Employments, or to go
and live else where, for they have not made the Rent of their Shops these two
years; the Episcopal are not in Circumstances for buying, and the other crave
no other Books, than Durham on the Canticles and Revelation, Dickson and
Hutcheson, Dyer and Gray, these are their Classical Authors, and the standard
of their Learning; Now as to this Alledgance of the decay of the Trade of
Books, one Cause that our Relator mentions is, the Episcopal are not in
Circumstances for buying, and I will add another Cause, both as good and true,
viz. Though the Episcopal are not in Circumstances for buying, yet I know, they
are in Circumstances for selling; so that the Stationers may justly blame them
for the decay of their Trade, by taking their Trade over their head, for that
some of them are selling off their Books, I assuredly know, having in my own
Library not a few, which I bought from them; and here I cannot pass, that as of
late, I was bargaining with one of that Brotherhood, for a parcel of his Books,
but not agreeing, it seems he would needs have some of my Money, for when I
happened to offer him two pence for the Westminsters Assemblies Confession of
Faith in Quarto stitched, besides my expectation he took me at my word, for I
was really resolved to give more for it, if he had made more words; but what
could move the Man to sell his Confession of Faith so cheap, I cannot
conjecture, if he has not been very week in Purse, or strong in Resolution to
part with it at any rate, lest he should be suspected for too much
Presbyterian, in harboring such a Guest; Another Consideration here is, it may
be these Stationers of the Relator's acquaintance that he means of, are chiefly
furnished with such Books as peculiarly suit the Episcopal Gust and Genius,
such as High flowen-holy-days-Sermons, composed and fitted for Pasch, Yule, and
such high-times; and it is well known that the Presbyterians are not very fond
of observing Apocryphal Holy Days, and so have not much need to buy these
Writers; and I am also apt to believe, it must be only some Killicranky
Stationers (to use the new fashioned word) that the Relator means, with whom
happly Presbyterians has not much converse or commerce; he cannot surely mean
all Stationers, and the ground of my guess is, he himself tells us, Page 60,
That George Mosman the ( Presbyterian) Stationer has so good a Trade, that
hereby he is become fat every way; and I dare say, he means by one sort of
fatness, that he is grown rich, which is a very Native result and product of a
good Trade; I will not multiply here, but only close with this one Reason more,
why I think there may be some ground for Stationers to complain of the decay of
their Trade, and that is, because of the new way of vending Books by
Auctioning, so that certainly Book-shopes will get the less to do, when there
are so many Book-houses. The other Cause that the Relator gives of the decay of
the Stationers Trade, is, Presbyterians crave no other Books than Durham,
Dickson, Hutcheson, Dyer, Gray, which is so bairnly a conceit, that it deserves
not any serious consideration, but I wonder if this rattling Relator, has seen
all Presbyterians Libraries, or if ever he saw any one Ministers Library made
up of no other Books than these he speaks of, for my part I have had as much
occasion perhaps, to see both Episcopals and Presbyterians Libraries, as some
of my Neighbors, and I have seen as considerable on the one hand, as on the
other, either for quality or quantity; and I have also seen both of them having
Durham, Dickson, Hutcheson, Dyer and Gray; and both better and wiser men than
he or I either, will say, that as to the Subjects they respectively handle, no
man can be Master of better Books, whatever this Sciolist prat.

As for Mr. Clark's Sermon, that this Invidious Relator speaks so diminutively,
and contemptuously of, the story of it is to be seen, Page 50. where he tells
us, it was a Sermon ad Clerum, but on what ground this learned Clerk gives Mr.
Clark's Sermon this witty Motto, I cannot Divine, for it was not preached,
either before a Synod, or Presbytery, or any kind of Convocation of the Clergy,
except it may be some of the Episcopal Scouts in disguise, were present when it
was preached, who after the Popish Dialect, stick not to appropriat to
themselves the peculiar Title of the Clergy, but who knows but there is here an
error Typographi, by omitting ( versus) a part of a word, for what if the
Authentic Copy had, a Sermon adversus Clerum, the tenderhearted Relator
sympathizing so far with the Deposition of his dear Godly Brother as thereby to
be stricken into a pannick fear, least this kind of Treatment, was but a
frightful forerunner of more of the like Adversus Clerum. Ibid. He tells us,
That this Sermon was preached at the deposing of the Parson of Auldhamstocks,
where the Historian fails in the truth of his Relation, for the above designed
Parson that he means by, some days before the preaching of the said Sermon, had
the Sentence of Deposition, actually and judicially passed upon him by the
Presbytry, and the occasion of Mr. Clark's preaching, was only to make
intimation to the Paroch of Auldhamstocks, of the said Presbyterial Sentence,
he being ordered by the Presbytry so to do; next he comes to give his wonted
beggarly Epithets to the said Sermon, telling, There never appeared a more
silly and empty Discourse, but I hope these vain words will have small weight,
for disparaging Mr. Clark, or rendering his Sermon contemptible, or suspicious
of Guilt this way, for it is evident throughout his Narrative, that with the
same common style, he also lashes others, of known undoubted Reputation, for
Learning, Sense and Eloquence. Hence page: 19. He calls Doctor Rule's
Representation of the Principles and Practices of Presbyterians, a weak empty
Paper, full of contradictions, wherein Scripture is grossly wrested, etc. And
page: 18. He calls Mr. Simson's Sermon Presbyterian stuff course enough; But not
to instance more particulars, there is, page: 34. A general Passage of all the
Sermons preached before the Commissioner, They were, says he, very nauseating
to all rational persons, miserably flat and dull; Yea and further, page: 50.
Lest any should think there was some that did not Preach before the
Commissioner, as good at the Trade as they who did, he tells, Nothing can be
expected from any of them, whatever Church they preach in, but noise and
nonsense, much babble and, it seems the Printer has thought shame to make his
Types tell the rest, for there is some ill-favored word or another omitted;
but that it may appear how Nonsensical, Light and Loose this Relator is, in
what he vomits up so lavishly, I think it not unworthy of observance, that from
his own mouth it is clear, his foul-mouthed Epithets and Nicknames, are rather
maliciously invented, than judiciously applied, for though this rattling Relator
takes upon him with Thrasonick Confidence enough to speak so much ill of Mr.
Clark's Sermon, yet it seems he had not seen the said Sermon, which he studies
so much to defame, for he tells it was a Sermon ad Clerum, as was said; Said!
By whom? not by Mr. Clark, not by Mr. Clark's Sermon: So if he miscalls and
reproaches Sermons, only upon what others say, without his own reading or
hearing, I think no sober Judicious Man will readily regard what such a loose
raving Writer says; and hereby further, the same thing is evident, for he
tells, It was a Sermon preached, as was said, at the Deposition of the Parson
of Auldhamstocks; What needs him say, it was said so? When the very Title Page
of the said Sermon (if he had but seen it) reads expressly in these words,
Preached on the occasion of the Intimation of a Sentence of Deposition, etc.
And seeing he writes so loosely anent Mr. Clark's Sermon, it may be warrantably
supposed, that he is but a raving Romantic Scribler in other things too, which
he groundlesly and falsely Relates; Another thing he says to the disgracing of
Mr. Clark's Sermon (as he misconceives) is by telling, It was even far below
Mr. Andrew Gray's Sermons; whereby I think indeed Mr. Clark is more obliged to
the Relator than he is aware, for I dare say, there is no godly, exercised, or
discerning Christian, that ever perused Mr. Gray's Sermons, but will readily
give their Verdict of them, to be Excellent, Spiritual and Savory, so that
though Mr. Clark's Sermon may be below Mr. Gray's (which I believe he will
easily grant himself) yet if in any tolerable degree it comes near to be like
them, I think, pro tanto, it is to be prized and worthy of acceptance. In the
next place he tells us, the very Presbyterians were ashamed of it, I believe I
have had as much occasion to Converse among Presbyterians as the Relator, and
also have accidentally heard some vent their Sentiments anent the said Sermon,
yet I never heard or observed any of them express in the least, what imported a
shadow of semblance to what is said, (by this time I understand this man's
Tongue is no Slander) but whether or not there be any thing in Mr. Clark's
Sermon, that either he, or any concerned in him needs to be ashamed of, res
ipsa loquatur, his Sermon is extant in Print, let it speak for it self, and let
judicious sober men speak for or against the same as they find Cause; but I
dare say, if there had been any thing in the said Sermon that might be Carped
at or justly Censured, the Relator would not have neglected to set off the same
with a noise and thunder of insulting triumphal Reflections, but for all the
evil he speaks of Mr. Clark's Sermon, he Quotes not one evll thing out of it,
or the least Passage that can be quarrelled, by which unfair, disingenuous, and
injurious Dealing, he is certainly a matter of Reproach to his Party, whoever
he be, but it seems though he is so foolish as groundlesly and openly to
Reproach others yet herein he is so far Witty, as to conceal his Name, and so
prevent his own Shame; for who knows but he may be an infamous person, lying
under a public Stigma for notorious Villainies; but though he were guilty of no
more but the false Calumnies and Forgeries, where with his ridiculous Pamphlet
is stuffed full, it is enough to make him infamous and odious among judicious
and honest Men; and therefore he has industriously Printed and Dispersed his
Fables and Romances among Strangers, who^ly not in the way of being undeceived
of his clandestine Mis-representations; but we use to say, Veritas non petit
angulos, and I am sorry (for I own that I am very much obliged to the English)
that this Relator has given occasion to say, Falsitas petit Anglos, for our
Scots Lies-Mongers pack them to England to Vend their Sophisticat Wares, but to
this sort of Chapmen as our Pedling Relator is, I recommend to read what is
said, Isa. 5.20, 21, 22, 23. Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil,
etc. As to what this Historian says of my Lord Crafurd and the Printer, I
perfectly know Mr. Clark's knowledge herein, who has had the honor to be with
my Lord Crafurd, and also occasion to be with the Printer several times since
the said Sermon came to light, and yet he never heard a word from either of
them, of any such Bussel before the Council, as the Relator pretends there was.
He concludes at length, (for it seems he has designedly and industriously
enlarged against Mr. Clark) it is believed he showed all the Learning and
Eloquence he was master of in this Sermon; but I believe that godly Ministers
who project the Conversion of Souls to Christ, are not much studious or
perplexed, to make an Ostentation of Humane Learning, or Busk their Discourses
with the Gauderies of Rhetoric or Romantic Strains, but rather according to
the simplicity of the Gospel of Christ, humbly and plainly preach Christ to the
poor and ignorant, so as best to suit and accommodate their Capacities. But to
our Point again, it is no wonder he speaks diminutively of Mr. Clark's Learning
and Eloquence, when he dares perfricta front, to tell us of the learned Dr.
Rule, the things he has published discover no small Ignorance, and that it
appears his Learning is not great, Page 19. yea, and he tells us in general of
all Presbyterians, Page 49. that Learning is not the Talent of a Presbyterian.
As for what Learning this Anonymous Relator himself is Master of, I know not,
for he will not let himself be known, but this I may confidently aver of him,
that he declares himself sufficiently guilty of that piece of Diabolical
Learning that Jeremiah speaks of, Cap. 9. ver. 5. -- They will not speak the
truth, they have taught their tongue to speak lies --. I add no more, but a
Prayer for this Tongue-Persecutor and Accuser of the Brethren, The Lord rebuke
thee, Satan. Thus much an Assured Well-wisher of Mr. Clark.

At Innerweck, Dec. 11. 1691.
If any pleases to have Mr. Clark Sermon, or this Defense of it, they may Call
at James Wardlaw Stationer his Shop, on the North-side of the Street, opposite
to the middle of the Lucken-Booths.


