Henry Drummond, ^lbury Park. SURREY.



A twofold Shaking Of the EARTH: OR, An Exposition on Heb. 12.26, 27.

Wherein is showed, The FIRST SHAKING OF THE EARTH, seems to be meant the
putting down of the late King and Bishops: the later Shaking, a change of the
present Government. And Reasons given for both.

ALSO How, and in what manner this later Earth-Shaking may be according to
SCRIPTURE-PROPHESIE: Namely, by that Earthquake, Rev. 11.13 which is likewise
opened.

Lastly, Here are many Reasons given, why it may be HOPED that this PRESENT
PARLIAMENT will prove to be that EARTHQUAKE (or at least begin the work)
whereby the GOOD OLD CAUSE will be revived, the just Rights of the People
restored, and the Nation settled upon a lasting and durable Foundation of Truth
and Righteousness.

BY JOHN CAN.

Printed for L. Chapman at the Crown in Pope's Head Ally. 1659.

To the Reader.
Reader,
THou must be a stranger in our Israel, if thou have not heard of a people
called Commonwealths-men and Fifth-Monarchy-men, and what grievous things are
laid to their charge. Now I care not who thou art that shall read this brief
Apology for them, if thou be not like him, who said, He would not be convinced,
though he were convinced. The great accusation raised up, and spread all the
Nation over against these men, is, That they allow not Magi^^^ates, neither
would they have the people be un-under Laws and Government. I think I may
confidently say, The Devil (who is the father of liars) never brought forth a
greater untruth, nor had less whereby to palliate and hide his falsehood, then
in this particular. For not only do these men approve of Laws, Magistrates, and
Government, but there are none in the Nation, that do more desire, pray for,
and press after incorrupt Magistrates, good Laws, and a righteous Government,
then they. But this is true (and the Court-party knows it) they are not for
Tyrants, neither to have an Arbitrary power exercised over the lives,
Liberties, and Consciences of the people; but would have the undoubted Rights
and Privileges of the Nation settled upon a lasting and durable foundation of
truth and righteousness: they would have no violence or oppression done to any
man, but all men, as men, enjoy their Birthright; yea, and if it were possible,
to deliver the whole Creation from that bondage and groaning under which it
lies, into the glorious liberty of the children of God, Romans 8.20, 21, 22.

If a man dislike the standing of weeds in a garden, does it follow he is
against the sowing and planting it with herbs and flowers? Reader, open thine
eyes, and look up like a man; here thou have the Case truly stated: these
Commonwealths-men and Fifth-Monarchy-men are not well pleased that the English
Garden (or Commonwealth) should be overspread with the vines of Sodom, and the
sour grapes of Gomorrha, Isa. 1.10. That persons of corrupt interest should
impose (at their pleasure) heavy yokes upon the necks of the freemen of
England. That the proud are called happy, and they that work wickedness are set
up. That judgment is turned away backward, and justice stands afar off: That
truth is fallen in the streets, and he that departs from evil, makes himself
a prey. That such weeds and trash should be in the GARDEN they do dislike it,
this is true: they both speak against it, and mourn for it. But will any man of
reason or sense therefore conclude they are against all Magistracy and
Government, but rather thus, they would have these hurtful weeds plucked up by
the roots, that righteous things might be planted in the room of them?

The next thing that I shall speak a little to, is to give the Reader some
Reasons of publishing this Treatise.

1. After some seeking of God, and searching the Scriptures; this I humbly
conceive, that the Lord will begin to revive his Good Old Cause again by the
Representatives of the people. As he honored and blessed the long Parliament,
with a good progress in the work of Reformation: so I think he will make yet
further use of Parliaments for the public good of the Nation. I shall not be
absolute what will be done at this time; but I have great hope something will
be done for the restoration of the Civil Liberties of the people. A wise
General will hearken to the advice of a mean Soldier: I desire no more but
what is here set down for public good may be considered.

2. It is a special work of Parliaments to consider the grievances of the
people, and to be most severe (so Parliaments were wont to be) against such
men, who through the greatness of their power and place, take occasion to
oppress and wrong people the more. In this regard, I have thought it my duty,
publicly to declare what injustice and hard measure we have had; as to be
banished, imprisoned, cast out of our callings and livelihood; but never knew
any Reason or Cause why they dealt so cruelly with us. It is said of Herod, And
he sent and beheaded John in prison, Mat. 14. after such a manner have our New
masters used us; sent their Soldiers to our houses, plucked us out of doors,
thrown us into prison, but never told us for what, nor brought us to any Trial.
It is possible these things may meet with some Parliament Men; if it do, I
shall humbly propound this, Whether in point of Law and Conscience, those
public oppressions whereof we complain, should not be examined; and if found
true, Whether such men be fit to have the chief rule of the Nation any longer?
Major General Overtons Case will speak loud enough to this Parliament, what New
Masters are lately started up.

3. Howsoever hitherto the sons of Zeruiah have been too hard for us, and not
only so, but of such imperious and high spirits, as Pope-like, no man might say
to them, Sir, Why do you so? There is some hope now (a possibility at least)
that a Parliament may give them a check: true it is, there has not been for
some late years a door open for the oppressed to bring in their complaints
against such persons as did them the most wrong. So that the public sore has
run'd still, because there was not a coming upto the Cure. But it is hoped this
will be a free Parliament, out of which di^ributive Justice will flow, to the
great refreshing of the oppressed every where: it is to no purpose to cleanse
the pipes, and leave the fountain dirty; to sweep down the cobwebs, and leave
the spider to make more. Never had the long Parliament wrought that Reformation
in England, and restored the Peoples Liberties in that measure they did, had
they not fallen upon the SPRINGHEAD, and caught the SPIDERS.

4. To wipe off that common scandal which by Apostates is cast upon us; i. e.
that it is only our frowardness and discontents that make us complain,
otherwise we have nothing against them, nor any harm done us. Micah thought it
a very strange thing in the Danites, when they had taken from him his Priest
and Idols, then to ask him, What he ailed? We cannot take it little better then
a scoff, when they r^b'd the people of their goods and freedom, and oppressed
them several ways by an Arbitrary power, then to twit them in the teeth with
complaining. Just like a child, who having scratcht his mother, then cries, as
if the wrong had been done to him. Thus having scratcht and torn the Mother
Commonwealth; yea, upon the matter murdered her, They cry out against the
people, as being pettish and froward, know not what they would have, etc.
whereas it is only themselves that have done the evil. But if this Parliament
shall sit to judge between the Mother and the Child; we are sure the Mother
will be quitted, and the Child shall have his due payment, not only for
scratching, but for crying too.

But 5. And indeed this is a main Cause; that is, to show, that in taking off
heavy yokes, and executing justice upon oppressors, whereby righteousness may
be exalted in the Nation: here a Scripture-Prophesie will be fulfilled.

I have not mentioned the Laws and Statutes of the Land, because this by others
is already done. Mr. Pryn in a Book printed this year 1658. (and to which he
sets his name) affirms, (quoting many Acts of Parliament for it) That the
persons now in power are thieves and robbers; yea, usurpers, and have set up a
new usurped power, and have committed the highest Treason, and act against all
Law both of God and the land. And for that Parliament, which, they say, gave
them power and Authority: He says, It was but a pretended Parliament, and a
mock-Parliament; and by the Acts of lawful Parliaments they were all Traitors.
This is public, and known to the Judges and Lawyers of the Nation; and what
may we think, but by their silence they give consent? See his Book Demophilos,
Appendix.

Now howsoever the Parliament having Law and equity on their side, have ground
sufficient to be up and doing; yet it cannot be but some encouragement unto
them likewise, if they understand it is such a work as the word of God in a
special manner calls them to it. Doubtless it is an honor to be called unto
such a service; but if it be done faithfully, not like Jehn for self ends; but
as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God, not only shall their
memory be blessed, but the Lord will remember them for good, and reward their
work and labor of love.

I shall say little more: Righteousness (says Solomon) exalts a Nation,
Prove. 14.34. Again, The Throne is established by Righteousness, Prove. 16.12.
Note, it is not Ahitophels counsel, nor Machiavels Headpiece will do it. I say
further, It is not raising money, and increasing heavier burdens, or settling
things this way or that way, will do it without Righteousness. Of a truth, God
looks for righteousness and judgment from us, Isa. 5.7. To do justice and
judgment is more acceptable to the Lord then sacrifice, Prove. 21.3. This is
better then fasting or praying; better then a morning Sermon at the Abbey, or
praying before the House sits. It is so good, that if justice and judgment be
not ex^cuted, the Lord abhors all sacrifices, see Isa. 1.15, 16.

When Joshua and the rest of the Congregation knew who was the TROUBLER, had
they only acknowledged that great wickedness, and mourned for it, and done no
more, the Lord would have withdrawn himself still from them, Josh. 7.12. So
when it was told David, The three years famine was for Saul and his bloody
house, because he slew the Gibeonites, 2 Samuel 21.1, 2, etc. Had there been no
more then confessing the sin, and asking pardon, the Lord would not have been
entreated for the Land. So it may be said of our present condition; should
there be a public confession made of our late Apostacy, Covenant breaking,
Treason, Oppression. etc. before God, Angels, and men, and solemn days
appointed by the Parliament to mourn for it nevertheless except the accursed
thing be destroyed from amongst us, it may be questioned, whether God will be
with us any more. Faithful are the wounds of a friend: but the kisses of an
Enemy are deceitful, Prove. 27.6.

A Twofold Shaking OF THE EARTH: OR, An Exposition on Heb. 12.26, 27, etc.
IT is a common received opinion, that Alexander the Great was encouraged in
his Persian Wars, by the light and information which he had from Jaddus, the
High Priest of the Jews, who opened unto him the Vision of the Ram and He-Goat,
in which Daniel had foretold the overthrow of the Medes by the King of Grecia.
Dan. 8. I know it comes many times to pass, howsoever men in their actions
fulfill the purpose and design of God, yet think not so, neither do it to that
intent: Isa. 10.7. Notwithstanding the Lord (who is good to all) rewards them
sometimes largely for the worksake. And so much appears in the Prophet: Son of
man, Nebuchad-rezzar King of Babylon caused his Army to serve a great service
against Tyrus; every head was made bald, and every shoulder was peeled: yet had
he no wages, nor his Army for Tyrus, for the service he had served against it.
Therefore thus says the Lord God, Behold, I will give the land of Egypt unto
Nebuchad-rezzar King of Babylon, and he shall take her multitude, and take her
spoil, and take her prey, and it shall be the wages of his Army; I have given
him the land of Egypt for his labor wherewith he served against it, because
they wrought for me, says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 29.18, 19, 20. Now had he and
his Army done that service conscientiously, and in obedience unto Gods
appointment, and therein singly have sought the glory of God, and not their own
profit and interest; would they not much more have pleased him, and done a more
acceptable service, and received a better and far greater reward?

Hence this may be gathered: As there are great things to be done in the last
days, by the Representatives of the People, and by such as shall have the Power
of Nations in their hands (especially, when it is to execute the vengeance of
the Lord and the vengeance of his Temple upon any part of Babylon) that they
have some understanding in the Prophesies of the last days, whereby they may
know what their work is, and that they are called of God to it, and when and
how to move in it. For so not only shall they be encouraged to take it in hand,
but have assurance of good success, and a full reward for their service.

Object. But we have not now men of Prophetical spirits, to open unto us the
dark Prophesies of the Scriptures concerning the last Times.

Answ. 1. Let this be granted, yet I humbly conceive, a man may take liberty,
and that very warrantably, to declare his opinion of the darkest and
difficultest places of Scripture, in a sober and modest way; and for this he
has a Cloud of witnesses.

But, 2. It will be granted (I think) by all, when there is some part of a
Prophecy already fulfilled, there is much light given to the knowledge of the
rest: I say, by that PART which is fulfilled, he that is wise, and observes the
ways and works of God, may the better and easier understand what remains to be
accomplished. Though a brutish man knows not, neither does a fool understand
this, Psalm. 92.6. yet who is wise, and he shall understand these things;
prudent, and he shall know them, Hos. 14.9. So then, this I would say, Though a
man profess not infallibility, nevertheless, from a due and serious observation
of a Prophecy in part fulfilled; it is probable (being a person that fears
God, and in daily communion with him) what he apprehends by a diligent search
concerning the rest, will prove to be a Truth.

3. Do not Star-Gazers and Monthly Prognosticators take large liberty at this
time to publish to the world their predictions concerning the alteration and
change of States and Policies? as, what Kingdom and Commonwealth shall rise or
fall in such a Year, or such a Month; and what Desolations there will be, by
Pestilence and Famine, by the sword, and by fire and water; in such Countries,
Towns and Cities: Notwithstanding it is well known, (and confident I am it is a
Truth) the first invention of Astrology is by many learned men attributed to
the Devil. This is the judgment of Tertullian, lib. de habitu muliebri; and
again, de Idolatria: and of Origin, Hom. 13. in Number. and of Clemens
Alexandrinus, in Eclog. and Lactantius writes, as Coelius Rhodig. has
observed, Lib. 2. cap. 12. Astrologia, Auspicia, Auguria, and Oracula esse
Daemonorum inventum. And King James calls Astrology, the Devils School,
Daemonol. lib. 1. cap. 3, and 4. I might add, how their profession and practice
has been always condemned, for Imposture, Juggling, Superstition, and Vanity,
not only by the Fathers (as some call them) but by Councils, and diverse
learned later writers; yea, and more then all this, plainly forbidden in the
word of God, Lev. 19.31. Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. Isa. 47.11, 12, etc.

If this be so, that howsoever their profession be condemned by God and men,
yet there is freedom given them to publish their Astrological predictions, of
the alteration and change of States and Policies: It will then be thought far
more lawful, for any of the Lords servants to have the like freedom to declare
his judgment concerning the alteration and change of States and Policies,
taking his light and ground from the word of God.

For, 1. Howsoever there is nothing written upon the Stars or Planets of the
rise and fall of any Power or Government, Civil or Religious, yet in the holy
Scripture it is. Here we have the Fourth-Monarchy, and the ten Kings, the
little Horn, the Dragon, the Bottomless Beast, and the two other Beasts; the
former rising up out of the Sea, the later coming up out of the earth: not
only written at length and fairly to be read, but the time exactly set down of
their rise, and how long they shall continue, and the period and end of them:
Dan. 7.25. and 12.7, 11, 12. Rev. 11.2, 3, 9. and 12.6, 14. and 13.5. Hab. 2.3.
Psalm. 102.13. Dan. 8.14.

2. Though men are forbidden to search the Planets, and the Eclipses of the Sun
and Moon for those things, yet they are commanded and encouraged to search the
Holy Scriptures, even the Visions and Prophesies which concern the last days,
whereby to know the Time of the End, Rev. 1.3. and 22.10. and 13.10. Dan. 12.9,
10. Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he reveals his secrets unto his
servants the Prophets, Amos 3.7. Thus Noah knew the time when the Flood would
come, before it came, though the ungodly knew it not. So Daniel knew the
deliverance of Gods people, a little before they were delivered, not by gazing
upon the Stars, but by the light and direction which he had from the Word of
God, Jer. 9.1, 2. But this shall serve for the manuduction to our discourse.

The Scripture which I shall first mention, and speak a little to it (according
to that measure of Grace which I have received) is Heb. 12.26, 27. Whose voice
then shook the earth, but now he has promised, saying, Yet once more I shake
not the Earth only, but also Heaven. And this word, Yet once more, signifies
the removing of those things that are shaken, as of things that are made, that
those things which cannot be shaken, may remain.

But before I come to the opening and applying of this Scripture, I think it
necessary to set down a few things, both to prevent objections, and for the
Readers better understanding the matter treated of.

1. It must be minded, that Scripture-Prophesies have several accomplishments;
that is, they are sometimes fulfilled over and over, as to times, places,
persons: and therefore it cannot be fairly concluded, Because such a Prophecy
has been once fulfilled, therefore 'it cannot be fulfilled again. I could
instance several Prophesies, which already have been fulfilled more then once,
and yet are to be fulfilled again. To let pass many others, when Moses blessed
the twelve Tribes, for Judah he prayed thus: Hear Lord the voice of Judah, and
bring him unto his people; let his hands be sufficient for him, and be thou an
help to him from his enemies, Deuteronomy. 33.7.

This Prophetical prayer of Moses, sometimes in the whole, and sometimes in
part, has already at several times been fulfilled, and yet the Prophecy runs
on for a further fulfilling. Read and compare these Scriptures, 2 Chr. 13.14.
and 14.11, 12, 13, etc. Rev. 5.5. Psalm. 2.6, 7. and 72.15. 2 Samuel 19.26, -- 31.
Dan. 7.13, 14. 1 Timothy 6.15. Act. 3.20, 21. 1 Samuel 22.35, 40. Rev. 19.15, 16.
Psalm. 45.4, 5. and 110.5, 6. So in that blessing which Jacob gave to the same
Judah, Genesis 49.8, 9, 10, etc. what he there by the Spirit of God Prophesies
of, has been fullfilled; and yet we are sure there is much in the Prophecy to
be fulfilled. For the Readers satisfaction, I have thought good to mention
these places: 1 Chronicles. 5.2. Heb. 7.14. Hos. 11.12. Judge. 1.1, 2, 3. 2 Samuel
17.10. and 22.41. Phil. 2.10. Rev. 5.5. Mat. 28.18. Luke 1.32. Ephesians. 1.20, 21.
1 King. 4.25. 1 Cor. 15.25. Isa. 11.10. Romans 15.12. Hag. 2.7. Mat. 12.21. Zech.
9.9. Joh. 12.14, 15. Isa. 63.1, 2, 3. Rev. 19.13. and 14.20.

2. Whereas some think in applying Scripture-Prophesies to a particular State
or Nation, this is too straight, and misseth the mind of the Spirit; To this I
answer: If in applying a Prophecy to a particular Nation, it be there
confined, then I grant there is a mistake, if there be not a restriction in the
Prophecy. But though the Prophecy be general, and have a large extent, yet it
is no straitning of the Prophecy, to say, that in respect of the rise and
beginning of it, it will not be universal, but in such a Nation at first. As
light, though it spread it self over ^e face of the whole Earth, yet in the
^^wning it breaks forth and appears ^^t in one place. The Lord says, I ^^ll
pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, Joel ^.28. Again, I will shake all Nations,
^ag. 2.7. Now I do not think that ^^ese things shall be done at one time ^^d
all together; I mean, either of them; ^ut gradually; that is, he will begin
^^mwhere first, and so proceed from ^^esh to flesh, and from Nation to Nati^n,
till the whole be accomplished.

3. But the greatest difficulty is, to ^nderstand where the Lord will begin
(...) pour out his Spirit, and to shake all Na^ions: For my part, I think, as
the hi^tory of the old Testament respected ^he Jews, and we have little
recorded ^here of the affairs of the World, but ^s the Church and people of God
were more or less concerned therein: for howsoever there were great
transactions of things in the world (as we find in humane Histories) all the
while the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah stood; nevertheless, what respected not
the Church, the Holy-Gh^^^ takes (as it were) no notice of. (...) the Visions
and Prophesies of Scripture (...) specting the last days, do concern t^ Church
and people of God; They (...) written for their learning, Romans 15.4. A^^
therefore where the Churches a^^ there may we certainly expect the a^^pearance
of them, especially a begi^ning. And if this be so, I have the Reasons to
think, that the pouri^^ out of the Spirit, and the shaking of all N^tions will
begin here in England.

1. Where the Lord draws o^ the heart of his Children to seek h^^ face for any
particular blessing, the^ usually he grants it; Thou will prepar^ their heart,
thou will cause thine ear (...) hear, Psalm. 10.17. Now I think, the I may
boldly say, Never were the hearts of Saints in any age more strongly carried
forth by the Spirit o^ God in prayer, then some have bee^ these late years, for
the particulars before mentioned.

2. Where may we expect the work to rise and be revived, but where (...) was
stopped, and had a Death (as it ^ere) put upon it? What a Glorious ^^use the Lord
had in this Nation, and ^ow eminently he appeared with it, it (...) well known:
and also who they ^ere, who through their hypocrisy and Apostacy, most
unworthily be^ayed it, and put an unblessed stop to (...).

3. If Scripture-Prophesies respecting ^e last times, do most concern the
Churches, and such as make the grea^est profession of Religion; surely then ^or
the Lord to begin the Earthquake ^ere, I say, Judgment at his house and
^anctuary, it will make very much for ^he glory of his Wisdom, Justice,
Ho^^ness.

For, 1. This I will say, and stand ^y it against all gainsayers, That the
Apostasy of English Professors has brought more dishonor to God, and general
scandal ^o Religion, then ever was done by any people professing Godliness
these thousand years: ^dd to this, How they glory in their shame, and declare
their sin as Sodom, and ^ide it not, Isa. 39.

2. They have brought (as much (...) in them lies) all the Blood shed in t^^
three Nations, upon the good old Caus^ and seek to acquit the King and h^^
Party, by building again the Tyran^ and Idolatry which was destroye^ and
suppressing with both hands, the truth and Righteousness which they pr^tended
to.

3. The gross hypocrisy of Professors has made more Atheists within these
four or five years, then have bee^ heard of in many ages before. Some I could
name, who have confessed, tha^ observing the Horrible falsehood, treach^ry, lying,
self-seeking, etc. among Professors (especially in the Officers o^ the Army)
are become stark Atheists for they thought it was not possibl^ for men
professing so much Godliness and acting so much wickedness, to b^ suffered upon
the face of the earth, I there were a God of Judgment, Mal. 2.17. Reader,
wonder not at this, but wonder there are not more Atheists, I had almost said,
all Atheists. For is there any thing that can occasion men sooner and more
effectually to turn Atheists, then to see great Professors of Religion; yea,
Church Ministers, and Army Officers, even whilst they are talking of Godliness,
Justice, Honesty, and whilst they are fasting praying, and preaching, live in
the practice of such horrid sins as heathens would abhor, and be ashamed of? I
remember what a Turk spoke to an acquaintance of mine at Constantinople, when
he had bid him less for his commodity then he asked: I am no Christian, (quoth
he) to ask otherwise then I mean to have. What would a Turk have said, had he
seen the actions of some Professors of late years? I am no Christian, to break
all vows, oaths, promises, engagements: I am no Christian, to cheat and cozen
my Brethren, under pretense of long prayer: I am no Christian, whilst I talk of
Law and Justice, not to make conscience of any thing: I am no Christian, to
preach against pride, covetousness, self-seeking; and in practice, no man more
proud, more covetous, and more self-seeking then my self.

4. Howsoever the Good old Caus^ has met with great opposition; ye^ none have
done that wrong and prejudice to it, as Apostate Professors: though the Scribes
and Pharisees, with Pontius Pilate crucified Jesus Christ, yet it was Judas, one
of the twelve that betrayed him, and delivered him up into their hands. It is
true, Christ in his good old Cause has been crucified by all sorts of enemies;
the old Malignants and Cavaleers trample it under foot, and laugh it to scorn,
they shoot out the lip, and shake their heads at it: but who first betrayed it?
who were they that delivered up the interest of Christ and his people into the
hands of wicked men? It was not an enemy, then we could have born it; But they
were Disciples, and such as we least thought would have been so unfaithful unto
God and their Country. Let death seize upon them, and let them go down quick
into Hell: for wickedness is in their dwellings and among them, Psalm. 55.15.

5. What will more silence them that are without, and awaken the Nations
abroad, then to hear that judgment is begun at the house of God: surely if any
thing will waken them, this will.

Lastly, It is to be heeded, though there are no people, Nation, or Language
under Heaven, but more or less are concerned in the Prophesies of the last
times; yet every Prophecy is not to be carried to every Nation: neither do
some Prophesies (as I humbly conceive) belong at all unto some people. The five
first vials (as I understand) will extend no farther then the Dominion of the
Beast; neither shall any part of the world be the subject of these vials, but
the Antichristian State or Kingdom. Again, whereas Christ says, there shall be
Earthquakes in diverse places, Mat. 24. And certain it is, there is no Civil
power, Government, or State upon Earth, but shall be broken to pieces, and
utterly perish; yet touching that Earthquake mentioned Rev. 11.13. it will not
be universal, but rather a State Earthquake, in one Nation; although the
effect of it will be wonderful, even to the shaking and overturning of all the
powers of this world.

Moreover, as in Scripture we find many times part taken for the whole: so in
Prophesies, as appears, Act. 2.16, 17. with Joel 2.28, etc. Though there be but
a part of a Prophecy fulfilled, yet Peter expresses all. True it is, in all
Prophesies, that which is done last, will be more full and perfect then the
former; yet so, as we must remember they have their morning or dawning, as
their noon day. It is said of the Angel, the Earth was lightened with his glory,
Rev. 18.1. not at first, nor all at once, but by degrees: it will be so at
last. It is said, the ten Horns upon the Beast shall hate the whore, and shall
make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire,
Rev. 17.16. now this shall not be done by all of them; for some of these Horns
will never forsake the whore, but shall go into perdition with her, Rev. 18.9,
10. and 19.18. To be short, whosoever would inform himself in the prophesies of
the last times, let him observe these 5 things.

1. The Lord will begin his work, his strangework, amongst that people where
Religion is most eminently professed, Jer. 25.18, 28. Ezekiel. 9.6. 1 Pet. 4.18.

2. Though he shake Earth and Heaven together and at one time, yet the Earth
first. As a man lays first the foundation, and afterward builds upon it; so the
Lord will have righteousness and justice first established in the Earth, and
then men shall fear the Lord, (that is, worship him in spirit and truth, Isa.
28.13. with Mat. 15.9.) as long as the Sun and Moon endure, through all
generations, Psalm. 72.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

3. There must be a diligent and watchful eye to observe the first appearance
of Scripture-Prophesies; that is, how any Providential Dispensation gives forth
the matter of the Prophecy. For this is certain, if we see the Lord has begun
a work in order to the fulfilling of his Counsel and Decree, contained in any
vision or Prophecy, though there may seem to be some obstruction, or a death
upon it, notwithstanding he will carry it on in spite of all opposition men
and Devils: Exodus 5.1, 2, 20, 21. and 5.1. and 12.30, 31. When I begin, I will
also make an end, 1 Samuel 3.12.

And truly, I am of the opinion which the Army was of before their Apostacy,
That the late King was one of the ten Horns, Rev. 17. And whereas he and his
Monarchy were plucked up by the root, and a Commonwealth established; here I
take it, was a fulfilling of a Scripture-Prophesie, I mean a beginning of that
good promise, Rev. 17.14. where it is said, The Lamb shall overcome the ten
Kings. And whereas there has been a THING lately set up (I know not what to
call it; for it is neither formally a Monarchy, nor a Commonwealth; but tohu
and bohu, without form and void:) To me it signifies no more then the house of
the foolish builder, built upon the sand; the wind and floods nigh at hand,
will blow and beat upon it: and if so, it must fall, and great will be the fall
of it. But the Lord (as I said) will go forward to fulfill and perfect the rest
of that Prophecy: so that it is neither the house of the Stewarts, nor the
corrupt interest of any other man, that shall frustrate the Counsel of God
concerning the Government of this Nation; but the good old Cause shall rise
again, and be more glorious then ever it was before.

4. The Prophesies of the last times, as to their accomplishment at first, they
will be very dark and dubious. Truly, I think, without special enlightening by
the Spirit, few of the Lords people will have a clear sight and knowledge of
what God does, till a great deal be done.

And one great Reason is, because many think the slaying of the witnesses, and
their rising, the Reign of the Little Horn, the last Apostasy and Earthquake,
will make such a noise in the world, as the deafest and blindest amongst the
sons of men will be able to hear and see such things. But I cannot find in the
word of God any footing for such an opinion; but rather, that darkness shall
cover the Earth, and gross darkness the people, even then, when Zions light is
come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon her, Isa. 60.1, 2.

5. Beware lest thou stumble here with the multitude; that is, to think such
and such Prophesies are not fulfilled, because thou can not satisfy thy
self, when, where, and how they were fulfilled. That saying in the Prophet
holds true here, Thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the great waters, and
thy footsteps are not known, Psalm. 77.19. A man that shall see the Sun at
noonday, though he were asleep when it rose, will he conclude it is not the
Sun, because he saw it not at its rising? Reader, if thou shall see the
Earthquake whereby the Power of this Apostacy is broken, the good old Cause on
foot again, and righteousness exalted in the Nation; such as have basely
betrayed the Rights and Liberties of the people deservedly punished, and so a
way prepared for the 144000 to do the rest of the Lords work, of higher and
greater concernment: I think thou may very well conclude, that the reign of
the bottomless Beast, the Little Horn, the slaying of the witnesses and their
rising, all these things are past, though thou slepst when they were doing. Now
for the Text.

1. By Earth and Heaven, here, is meant States and Policies; the first, what is
Civil and Temporal; the other, Ecclesiastical and Religious. By Shaking, is
meant alteration and change; that is, removing and taking away all forms and
kinds of Government which now stand, Isa. 2.19. and 13.13. Joel 2.16. Hag. 2.6,
7. Rev. 21.1. Isa. 65.17. I know by others this is otherwise interpreted, i. e.
a Shaking of the material Earth and Heavens, with all the Inhabitants thereof,
Angels and men. But under favor, there is nothing in the Prophet nor in the
Hebrews, that has any reference to the judgment of the great day; and
therefore this Shaking cannot be applied to that time, but must be before.

2. By once more, I understand two things.

1. A State or Government changed; yet so, as there is something afterward set
up in the same Nation, so displeasing unto God, as THAT also shall be be
destroyed, That those things which cannot be shaken may remain. What the things
are which shall remain after a twofold shaking, is showed in Daniel: And in the
days of these Kings shall the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom, which shall never
be destroyed, and the Kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall
break in pieces and consume all these Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever,
Chap. 2.44.

By once more, is signified the great difference between the two-shakings: For
howsoever the Lord does both, and in the first shaking there was great
expectation and hope of much good by it; yet through the hypocrisy and
falsehood of some men, things proved altogether otherwise: He looked for
judgment, but behold oppression; for righteousness, but behold a cry, Isa. 5.7.

Now howsoever the Lord was pleased to suffer such corrupt men to carry on
their wicked design, and to set up themselves against his Son and Zion, that
the Scripture might be fulfilled; yet after the second shaking, it shall not be
so: but the work of Reformation (begun) shall go forward and prosper; yea, and
in spite of all Apostates and Hypocrites, under what profession and form
soever truth and righteousness shall rise and flourish for ever.

Now indeed here lay the occasion of a former mistake generally among the Lords
people: we thought when the King and Bishops were taken away, and the form of
Government changed from Monarchy to a Commonwealth, that we should presently
have seen good days, and that tyranny and persecution would have ceased; but we
did not consider the word here, YET ONCE MORE; i. e. there must be two
shakings. So that the good days (or, the days of the Son of man) spoken of in
Scripture, do not belong to the first shaking; neither may any that truly fear
the Lord, and keep the commandments of God, and have the Testimoof Jesus
Christ, expect any better time, till after the second shaking: when this yet
once more is over, then coms in the time, that the Lord will not be wroth with
his people any more: violence shall be no more heard in the Land, nor
destruction within thy borders. Thou shall no more be termed forsaken, neither
shall thy land any more be termed desolate. He will break all bonds, and
strangers shall no more serve themselves of thee. Then the house of Israel
shall go no more astray, neither be polluted any more with their
transgressions. The Lord will no more make his people a reproach among the
Heathen, neither shall the wicked any more pass over thee, but be utterly cut
off, Isa. 54.9. and 60.18. and 62.4. Jer. 30.8. Ezekiel. 14.11. Joel 2.19. Nah.
1.15. precious Promises! Oh, how should we desire this ONCE MORE! Come Lord
Jesus, come quickly.

3. By Voice, I understand the Instruments which the Lord has raised up and
brought together to shake the Earth, and his powerful presence with them,
enabling them effectually to perform the good work he calls them to.

Methinks there is something here (though it lie like gold close in the Earth)
very observable. There are two shakings, but the word VOICE is but once
mentioned, and joined with the first: the later brings a promise with it. As if
the Lord in this later shaking would be more engaged for the interest of Christ
and his people then he was before. Though a man do something freely and of his
own accord, yet where he stands bound by promise, there he takes the more care
to have the thing done. This may serve for our comfort and encouragement, the
Lord will not fail us in this second shaking. He seems to give us more then we
had before; I say, more ground and reason to hope that this present Apostacy
in Church and State shall be shaken, then we had formerly to believe the
shaking of the King and Bishops.

But seeing our business at present, lies not so much in explanation, as
application; I shall therefore come now to set down what I humbly conceive, may
be from the forenamed Scripture rightly gathered. Not restraining the Text to
our present time, or only to that which is here asserted (for as I have said,
so I say again, both this Prophecy and others may be fulfilled over and over.)
But that which I take the Holy Ghost has some respect to in this Prophecy,
and foretells should come to pass, is this.

The first shaking was, when the Long Parliament voted down Kingly Government,
and plucked up Monarchy root and branch, and constituted a Commonwealth, and
enacted, that the Supreme Authority of the Nation should be in a Parliament,
without a King and House of Lords. Add to this (as proper to the same shaking)
the extirpation of the Government of the Church by Archbishops, Bishops, etc.
The shaking which is yet ONCE MORE, is the utter abolishing of that THING,
which now stands. Reader, thou must bear with me: for truly I know not what to
call it, except the LATE STATE-APOSTACIE: neither that THING, which is managed
by the Tryers, unless I should say, it is one of the names of blasphemy, which
the great whore carries upon her forehead, Rev. 17. (as I am persuaded it is,)
yet it has no proper name. But to proceed, these two things (call them what
you will) being (as it were) the two present States and Policies of the Nation;
the one Civil, the other Religious, these both will the Lord shake; I say,
Overturn, overturn, overturn. Reader, let me request this of thee, forbear thy
censure till thou have perused my Reasons for what has been asserted: I hope
thou shall see I am not like the Apostates of this age, to give railing for
Reason.

1. It is without dispute that among all Nations professing Religion, there
has not been the liker State-shaking as was a while since in England. For not
only was he (who was acknowledged by many LAWFUL PARLIAMENTS, the Supreme
Magistrate) brought as a Delinquent before a High Court of Justice; but had
sentence of Death passed upon him, the which was soon after put in execution;
yea more, to the end that Monarchy might for ever cease in the Nation, and the
very name of it forgotten, there were four Acts of Parliament (all standing yet
in force, for ought I know) which make it high Treason, for any man to take
upon him the name of a King or Supreme Magistrate, without consent of
Parliament.

The first Act says thus: Be it enacted and ordained, that whosoever shall
declare, publish, or any way promote any person to be King or Chief Magistrate
of England or Ireland, etc. without consent of Parliament, shall be judged and
deemed a TRAITOR to the Commonwealth, and shall suffer pains of Death, and such
other punishments as belong to the Crimes of high Treason. Act of Parl. January
30. 1648.

The like Act was made March 17. 1648. and May 14. 1649.

Again, July 17. 1649. It was enacted, That if any person shall maliciously or
advisedly, publish by writing, printing, or open declaring, etc. That the
Commons in Parliament are not the Supreme Authority of this Nation; or shall
plot, contrive, or endeavor to stir up, or raise force, etc. that every such
offense shall be taken, deemed, and adjudged by the Authority of this
Parliament to be high Treason. But there is more yet; there was an Engagement,
which was drawn up and sent out by the Parliament for all the Nation to sign,
which went thus: I do hereby declare and promise to be true and faithful to the
Commonwealth, as now established without a King or House of Lords. And this
Engagement was generally taken by such as were then counted well-affected.

Object. Though it cannot be denied but this was a most eminent Shaking; yet
how is it proved, that in the Change of the English-Monarchy to a Commonwealth,
a Scripture-Prophesie was fulfilled, and particularly, Heb. 12.26, 27?

Answ. If it be granted it was a SHAKING (and an eminent one too) it will
easily be proved (being in England) a Scripture-Prophesie was fulfilled, and
particularly, Heb. 12.

For the Scripture-Prophesies of the last times, concern the Churches and
people of God; and where these are, there may we expect will come to pass what
things are foretold in the word of God: there are many changes and alterations
of States and Policies in the world at this time, of which nothing in Scripture
is foretold: nevertheless where Gods people are, and Jesus Christ is truly
worshipped, there cannot be any such shaking (I speak according to that light I
have in the things of God) but in order to the fulfilling of some Prophecy.
What thou see, write in a Book, and send unto the seven Churches in Asia,
Rev. 1.11.

2. If England be one of the ten Kingdoms, in Dan. 7.7, and Rev. 17.12. as it
is generally held; yea, the first that constituted it self a free and absolute
State when the Roman Empire was broken to pieces; then I think it may
certainly be concluded, that the Holy Ghost in Heb. 12. has reference to the
shaking of which we speak: my reason is this; What was revealed to Daniel,
John, and Paul, was by one Spirit, and concerned one thing, as to the shaking
of the ten Kingdoms.

3. That the first shaking was by a VOICE, I think there is very much in it (as
I have hinted before,) Truly more VOICE then PROMISE; My meaning is, that many
people in their rising against Monarchy and Episcopacy were carried forth
beyond their own principles: A VOICE there was; that is, God mightily appeared
in them and by them; but no Promise; that is, they had no Scripture Light for
what they did, but only followed Providence, opportunity, victory,
self-interest. Reader, mistake me not; I do not say there was not
Scripture-ground for putting down Monarchy and Episcopacie (I believe there
was:) but this I say, many who had a great hand therein, did it not upon that
account; for there are many at this day (and some I know) who were as active
and forward as any in the thing, and gave their Vote against the King, the
Bishops, and House of Lords; yet now, none more earnest for a King and House of
Lords then they; yea, and for Episcopacie too, if it fall in with their
Interest.

4. Whereas it was Gods voice that shook the first Earth; I hope none will be
offended (neither Independent, Presbyterian, or Baptized) if we say, such as
account themselves the Lords Ambassadors, Angels of Churches, the Ministers of
Jesus Christ, etc. are the persons by whom the Lord chiefly speaks; and his
VOICE, as John was in the Wilderness. This being so, by whose voice then was
the Earth shaken?

I answer, By no voice so effectually as that voice which came out of the
Temple. Oh! how did this VOICE ring through the Nation, calling upon the good
people every where, in their Sermons and Writings, to come forth and help the
Lord against the mighty: never did this VOICE cease, but was still crying in
the ears of the Parliament and Army, SHAKE, SHAKE, SHAKE, till they had shaken
King and Bishops out of the three Nations.

It is very requisite, as we have mentioned the Voice from the Temple, so to
give some instances how shaking it was, to have the late King cut off. I will
begin with Mr. Buroughs, because (I suppose) what he wrote, was the VOICE of
all his Independent Brethren in that particular. Thus he tells us:

You must observe, That every one is subject to the Higher Powers: Mark, it is
not to man first, but it is to the Power. Let every soul be subject to the
Higher Power, wherever this Power lies. It is not to the will of man, that
has Power, but it is to the Power of the man. Now the Power, the Authority, is
that, THAT A MAN HAS IN A LEGAL WAY.

Again, in another place, There is (says he) no Authority we are subject to
now, but according to the Laws and Constitutions of the Country where we live.
When things are brought into a Law, and be according to the Agreements and
Covenants of the place and Country wherein we live, etc. then the power of God
is in it. But we must enquire whether it be a Power. On Hos. Chap. 1. Lect. 6.
p. 157. and Lect. 4. page 111. and Lect. 3. page 65.

Mr. Bridge his Voice shall be next, in his answer to Doctor Fern, thus: Did
not Athaliah remain as a conqueress six years? and who knows not that she was
lawfully thrust from the Throne again by a stronger hand then her own? Mere
conquest being nothing else but an unjust usurpation. And if the Conqueror rule
the whole Kingdom, and keep them under by conquest only, WHY MAY NOT THE
SUBJECT RISE, AND TAKE UP ARMS TO DELIVER THEMSELVES FROM THAT SLAVERY? Mr.
Bridge against Dr. Fern, Sect. 4. page 42.

But one thing is remarkable, what searching Books there was, and citing the
opinion of men. Truly, I think there was scarce a learned man (whether Papist
or Protestant) if he had written against Usurpers, Tyrants violalating the
Laws, Rights and Liberties of the People; but he was brought forth by those who
defended the Parliaments cause against the King. To omit many, how often is
Alstedius quoted, for saying, A Tyr ant without Title, who is an Invader, every
private person may and ought to remove: for he is not a King, but a private
man, who does invade the Country as an Enemy. Alsted. Cas. Con. cap. 16. Reg.
8. p. 341.

So Chamier: All Citizens, or free Subjects, have a right or warrant to rise up
against Tyrants, who by open force possess the Kingdom. Tom. 2. Lib. 15. cap.
12. Sect. 19. Again, Dr. Willet: Where the Kingdom is usurped without any
right, as by Athaliah; or where the land is oppressed by Invaders, as in the
time of the Macchabees: in these Cases there is less question to be made of
resistance by the general consent of the States. On Romans 13. page 592. Neither
is King James left out: The public Laws (says he) make it lawful and free,
for any private person to enterprise against an usurper of the Kingdom. Every
man, says Tertullian, is a Soldier enrolled to bear arms against all Traitors
and public Enemies. In his Remonstr. page 216.

I shall not name any more cited by them. Touching this Temple-Voice, (wherein
Mr. John Goodwin was louder then most of his fellows) there are 5 things to be
seen in their writing, (when they stood with the Parliament against the King)
as their State Principles.

1. That an Usurper has no Authority, is a mere private person.

2. That no obedience is due to an untitled or illegal Power.

3. That the sword is peculiar to a Magistrate lawfully called, and not else.

4. That to the being of a Magistrate, is required a lawful calling.

5. To the making of a Supreme Magistrate, is to go the Vote and consent of the
people.

I do not mention this Voice to asperse it in the least; neither do I think,
they who stood with the Parliament against the King had a bad Cause; nor do I
condemn any man for the Public Testimony which he bore against the
exorbitancie and arbitrary actions of the late King: yet this I may say, and
none will be offended at it but the guilty:

1. It cannot be justified in any man, to call that railing, and speaking evil
of dignities in another, which being done by himself, was then according to
Scripture, Law and Conscience.

Neither 2. can I judge it otherwise then a fault, for any man to write against
Tyranny, and preach it down in reference to the King, and afterward in another
allow and justify the like Tyranny; yea, greater by many degrees.

But 3. And this indeed I most mislike, viz. that such men, whose Voice never
ceased against the King and Bishops, till their places were no more, should be
the forwardest to have that Tyranny up again, and exercised over the Bodies,
goods, and Consciences of the people, for which the King and Bishops were
removed.

Now for the next particular, i. e. our Grounds and Reasons why by yet once
more, the second shaking is meant; the shaking of this present State-Apostacie:
I shall only touch one thing which lies in our way, and so hasten to it.

As under the word Earth, in the first shaking, not only Kingly-Government is
signified, but the Hierarchy also, called Earth; not only because it was
interwoven with the other, but ascended out of the EARTH; was merely carnal and
earthly, and had nothing of Heaven in it. So I take the matter here: Though
this State-Apostacie have something in it that pretends to Religion, as the
business of the Tryers, yet this coms under the word Earth: so that Heaven
afterward said to be shaken, is another thing, in which the Tryers are not
concerned.

What was said before concerning the Bishops, that their Government was
earthly, carnal, etc. is as true in the other; It is a plant not of Gods
planting: yet in one thing the Prelates were to be commended, to the shame of
these men; for that party would many times publicly undertake the
justification of their calling, and would quote Fathers, Councils, Scripture,
for what they did; but this later earth (as it seems by their silence) dares
not put any thing forth for their justification. They know they have no
Fathers, Councils, Presidents, or Scripture to warrant their unsanctified place
and standing. And in John there is a good Reason why these Tryers come not
forth to the light: For every one that does evil, hates the light, neither
comes to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved or discovered, as has
the Margin, Joh. 3.20.

Concerning the second shaking of the Earth (for of Heaven I shall speak
nothing now) here I will follow the former order: 1. Prove, that the present
State-Apostacie shall be shaken. And 2. in this shaking, Scripture-Prophesle
fulfilled, and particularly, Heb. 12.

First, If the Rights, Liberties, and Privileges of the people shall again be
restored, and the work of Reformation go forward to a good settlement of the
Nation; then necessarily must this later Earth be shaken: for as darkness
vanishes when light breaks forth; so all falsehood and treacherous designs of
men must end and perish, when truth and righteousness take place: when the
Lords time came that Joash should be brought out of the Temple, and set upon
the Throne, it could not be otherwise but Athaliah and her confederates must
suffer deeply.

And this is the reason why some endeavor what they can to uphold
unrighteousness and all manner of oppression, and cannot endure to hear of good
Laws, and honest things, but hate such persons as would advance them. They
tremble (like Felix) to think of righteousness, and that there should be such a
thing as men call a FREE-PARLIAMENT, and not under the power of the sword. And
no marvel: for being conscious to what they have done, they cannot but expect
to be rewarded according to their works. But let these know, notwithstanding
all their crafty counsel, and joining hand in hand; the good old Cause which
was in the Nation, shall rise and prosper, but they shall fall and perish.
Associate your selves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces: Take
counsel together, and it shall come to naught: Speak the word, and it shall not
stand, for God is with us, Isa. 8.9, 10.

I was speaking just now of Joash: ^ethinks in him we have something ^at
resembles our good old Cause: A^aliah doubtless thought she had de^royed all
the seed Royal of the house of ^udah, and there was none left to have ^unished
her murder and Treason. But ^he was deceived, and found it other^ise. It is
sure enough, some thought ^ey had utterly destroyed the Common^ealth, when they
made one man Chief Magistrate; but these workers of ini^uity will know ere
long, it was a lie, and they wrought a deceitful work: ^or the Commonwealth
(though an In^ant) was hid, as Joash, in the Temple: What if you say, By the
Temple is ^eant the hearts of all the good people in the Nation? Again, though
A^haliah cried, Treason, Treason, when ^oash was brought forth, yet it was no
^reason in the people to set up their ^awful King, and put her to death for
(...) bloody Traitor. So, if the Representatives of the people shall punish
Tray^ors, and Crown the Commonwealth with her just liberties and freedom, there
will b^ no Treason in (...) though hypocrites an^ Apostates, cry, Treason,
Treason.

Object. There is no question, if (...) Commonwealth be established with the
Rights and Liberties of the people but the Thing now up, must and will be
sha^ken. But how does it appear, that the good old Cause ( like Joash) will b^
brought forth, and crowned with righ^teousness and truth? If you prove no^
this, you say nothing.

Answ. It is very true, and I grant it therefore to prove it, these Argument
and grounds I give.

1. This Bitter root shall certainly be plucked up, when those things are done,
for which the only wise God suffered it to rise. And no doubt, among many other
ends he had, it was,

1. To discover a multitude of rotten hearts, whose hypocrisy before lay hid,
either under a form of godliness, or a^ pretended zeal against the Tyranny and
Idolatry of the King and Bishops, and to have Church and State reformed; and
having made their folly manifest to all men, to lead them forth with the
^orkers of iniquity.

2. That a Scripture-Prophesie might ^e fulfilled; namely, the coming in of ^he
second Apostacy, foretold in 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, etc. the which Apostacy (to
me) is as clear to be now in this Nation, as the Sun that shines at noonday.
But of this more by and by.

3. To make proof of the faith, love, and obedience of his little flock; and in
very deed, as the Trials and Temptati^ns of the Lords witnesses, have been
these four or five years, many ways very great; So they have showed much
faithfulness to the Lord, and to his Son and Zion, that they have chosen bonds,
banishments, close imprisonment, and loss of trade and livelihood, rather then
with base time-servers, and merce-mary flatters, to betray the Liberties, Laws,
and Rights of the Nation, for filthy lucre sake. If a maid, that she might be
such a man's wife, should refuse a great estate, and live very poorly with him,
would not this argue she married him for LOVE and nothing else? How many are
there to my know ledge, would they have broken the^ Vows, Oaths, and
Engagements, an^ joined with others, to build again what before they had
destroyed, the^ might have had what honor, prefe^ment or place they would? But
the^ would rather be imprisoned and ba^nished, and suffer with joy the spoi^ing
of their goods, then turn Judasse^ for a few pence. But what love an^ affection
have these persons in thi^ showed to the good old Cause, and the just Rights of
their Country!

4. That Hypocrites having gotten by the present Apostacy fat pasture might
the sooner fill up the measur^ of their wickedness, and so be prepare for the
day of slaughter. As the Lord will have the harvest and vintage rip^ before he
cuts them down: so there i^ nothing will sooner ripen corrupt me^ then
greatness, honor, riches, etc. Swi^ will not fatten faster by acorns, then
will a^ hypocrite by Court-preferment. Now Reader, consider, as the Lord had
these and other such ends for which he suffered this root of bitterness to be
among us; so having had his END, what is now to be expected but a sudden
plucking of it up?

Then 2. What is it that has occasioned profane persons to blaspheme the holy
name of God, more then the late destroying of that good work of Reformation
begun in the Nation? What says the Scoffer at it! This man began to build, but
was not able to finish it, Luke 14.30. It is not man now, but God, the living
God, that is derided and laughed at: he began to build, etc. he made a fair
beginning (says the MOCKING-APOSTATE) to have had a Commonwealth; he seemed as
if he would have made a righteous Nation. and the people no more under the lust
and will of men. But some were too hard for him, and outwitted him, and undid
all that he had done before, with the infinite expense of Blood and Treasure.
But know (thou Atheist) Jehovah is more jealous of his glory and great Name,
then to give it to another. Though he have kept silence, and thou thoughtest
that he was altogether such an one as thy self; yet know, he will arise for his
Namesake. For so is his promise, I will sanctify my great Name, which was
profaned among the Gentiles, which ye have profaned in the midst of them,
Ezekiel. 36.23. But never will the name of God be recovered in this Nation, to the
stopping of the mouths of Apostateblasphemers, until that blessed work of
breaking Tyranny and Idolatry (begun in the Long Parliament) be on foot again.
I say once more (as a truth which I hope the Lord will enable me if called to
it, to seal with my blood) That the precious Name of God profaned in this
Nation by Apostate Professors, will not be sanctified, till the good old Cause
be revived, the Freedom and just Liberties of the people restored, a
Commonwealth settled upon right principles of truth and righteousness, and those
who have been the cause of the late horrible revolt brought forth to Justice.

3. Such are the wounds in the Body of this Nation, and the grievances and
Breaches so many and great, as I am persuaded, all the State-Physitians (I
speak not of Mountebanks and Quacksalvers) will perceive (when they shall come
to the Cause and Cure) there is no healing of the whole, without cutting a part
off; and what that part is, they will soon see. The Prophet Ezekiel speaking of
the false Prophets of his time, says, One built up a wall, and lo, others
daubed it with untempered mortar, Ezekiel. 13.10. He alludes unto a foolish
builder, who coming to a wall with his tools, sees it is so rent and torn, as
it cannot stand, but must be all plucked down, and a new wall rais'din the place
of it; nevertheless, he only plasters it over, and so seeks to cover the
fault, but not to mend it. Who should be builders, if not the Representatives
of the people? And therefore if the wall before them (which others built) be so
weak, sandy, and tottering, that it must be shaken; ought they not to beware of
dawbing it with untempered mortar? and the rather, because the Lord wants not
laborers, but if one company of men prove unfaithful; that is, will be dawbing
a rotten wall, when they should cast it down, he will DISSOLVE THEM with more
shame and dishonor, then any Protector could put upon them; and call such to
the State-work as shall be more faithful, and well rewarded for it. Say unto
them which dawb with untempered mortar, that it shall fall, there shall be an
overflowing shower, and ye, O great hailstones, shall fall, and a stormy wind
shall renit. Lo, when the wall is fallen, shall it not be said unto you, Where
is the dawbing wherewith ye have dawbed it? Thus will I accomplish my wrath
upon the wall, and upon them that have dawbed it with untempered mortar, and
will say unto you, The wall is no more, neither they that dawbed it, Ezekiel.
13.11, 12, 15.

4. It may rationally satisfy all unbyassed persons, that Gods actings and
appearances were formerly such for the interest of Christ and his people, as it
cannot possibly be, that he should leave it afterward. What! was the King taken
off? his Posterity laid aside? the Bishops and their Government put down, for
this end, that there should rise up in their places, a Generation of men more
corrupt then they were? Indeed, if we will give credit to the blasphemous
speeches published to the world by Apostates, it should be so; that is, all the
victories and deliverances which the Lord gave unto his people in the time of
the Long Parliament, was for them; that is, for their particular interest. They
blush not to tell us in print (as may be gathered from their words plain
enough) that Gods helping us in our several streights, was to keep up the
Lawyers in their corruption; Priests in their oppression; the Magistrates in
persecution; the Tryers in their beastly invention; and the old Malignant to
take his revenge on honest men, for their former good service to God and their
Country. But I shall leave these mockers to him that will not be mocked by them,
but one day stop their mouth with a witness.

For conclusion, If the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have showed
us all these things, Judge. 13.23. We may be confident, never would he have
drawn out so many heart-groans from his people, much less so much blood from
them, even heart-blood (willingly sacrificed in the high places of the field)
for the good old Cause, had he not intended to crown it with glory and honor
in the end.

5. And here is a fit place to remind the Reader; as the Lord eminently
appeared with us in the time of the long Parliament: so on the contrary, since
this OTHER THING came up, how visibly and sensibly has he showed his signal
displeasure against us, for our base backsliding; laying a curse (as it were)
upon all public affairs almost, (as he did on the fig tree) that nothing
should prosper which they took in hand? I shall not speak of that Golgotha in
Hispaniola, the field of English skulls and blood; nor the many millions of
Treasure, wasted merely to satisfy the lusts and will of some men; nor what
shame and dishonor the Nation lies under, being some years past a terror to
all Enemies about us. Let us come to consider the present condition of the
Nation: Ask the Soldiers what their Arrears are? Then enquire among the
Seamen, how many months pay is due to them? and while you are there, cast an
eye upon the Navy, and see in what a pickle that is, and whether there be any
provision to set out a Fleet either offensive or defenfive. Add unto all this,
the extreme poverty of the people, as having neither trade nor money.

It is probable, there will be in the next sitting, some that were Members of
the Long Parliament; these men do know in what a rising and flourishing
condition the Commonwealth was, when they were dissolved. But how are they like
to find it now? as a poor sheep full of worms; the worms are fat and lusty, but
the sheep lean, languishing and ready to perish. So they shall see now (and not
a few) persons that are grown fat and full, by devouring the flesh of the
Commonwealth; I mean her Laws, Liberties, Rights, and Privileges; but for the
Commonwealth, so maugre and lean, as it cannot be long lived, if the Lord raise
not up some good shepherds, to look after it.

A man that has spent much time and labor, and been at great cost in a work,
and no sooner has done it to his liking, but should see it presently broken
before his eyes, would not this extremely grieve him? such as sat in the Long
Parliament, and stood faithful to the good Cause, do well know, before Monarchy
was shaken, and a Commonwealth established, they had hard work, and it cost the
Nation not a little blood and treasure: for such men therefore to see all that
they did broken to pieces before their eyes, methinks it should much affect
them. What else they should do, I leave it to themselves, or rather to divine
Providence: For God stands in the congregation of the mighty, he judges
among the Gods, Psa. 82.1. Saul a little before his end fell into such
streights, as he knew not what to do. I know who have formerly pretended
necessity, when there was none: but now its fallen upon them to the full; for
had it not been NECESSITY, this Assembly had never been called: what the issue
will be, a little time will show. The Scripture says, The wicked is snared in
the work of his own hand, Psalm. 9.16.

It is very observable, that the Lord meets with oppressors and deceitful men,
one of these two ways; that is, either they shall take the better way for his
people, or the worse way for themselves: When Herod charged the Wise men to
bring him word where the young child was, Mat. 2. here he showed himself not a
subtle serpent, not wise in his generation: for to have had his bloody design
done indeed, he should have gone himself, or sent some of his guard to have
done it. But in this way God blinded him, and kept it from him, that he might
take a better way for Christ's preservation. So Jezebel, had she sent some of
her Priests with Soldiers to Elias (when she sent only a messenger to tell him
what she would do by to morrow) that had been a sure way to have dispatched him
presently: but God would not suffer her to take that way; she must choose
another way, and a better way for the Prophets life.

Again, Tyrants many times choose the worse way for themselves; thus it was with
Pharaoh at the Red Sea; he had two ways to choose, either to return the way he
came (which indeed was the better way) or to go forward and follow Israel into
the great waters; but he will into the Sea: now in this he appeared more blind
and hardened then before; for he might well think, the Lord had not made a way
through the Sea for him, but rather had laid a snare for him and his Host. I am
now waiting to see what will be the carriage of such men, who have betrayed
their country: they have methinks (like Pharaoh) two ways; the one is to
RETURN, or PUBLIC REPENTANCE, that is, make a free and ingenuous confession of
their former treason, oppression, Covenant Breaking, etc. and to give up all
their pretended Authority and Power into the hands of the Peoples
Representatives. Doubtless of the two ways, this is the better: the other is
Pharaoh-like to go forward, though they cannot but think that this Great
Assembly (like the Red Sea) will save the Rights, Liberties, and good Laws of
the Nation, and drown Arbitrary Power, oppression, treason, etc.

If the Power and Majesty of English Parliaments (which have been) be seriously
heeded; it would not seem altogether improper to liken them (at least some
which have been the best and most glorious) to the Red Sea. For many proud
Pharaohs with their Hosts have been swallowed up in Englands Parliaments! Had
not I seen so many unworthy Addresses, I should not have thought there had been
so much base English blood in the Nation, men of such mercenary, low, servile,
and slavish Spirits; so far from following the steps of their Ancestors, in
standing up for the Freedom and just Liberties of their Country, as they have
attempted to maintain a private interest against the power of the people and
Privileges of Parliament. But it is well that there is a Public Attestation
against them, of many thousands Religious and well disposed people, who say, We
testify and declare against the late flattering Addresses, which have been
contrived and carried on by interested persons, as tending to the preventing
the Assembling of a Parliament; as also anticipating (if not concluding) their
sense and judgment when assembled. And having in them a tendencie to the
dividing of the people, and consequently raising a new war, if God do not
wonderfully prevent. Attestat. November. 20. 1658.

Before I end, there is one thing I desirously desire the Reader to observe
(especially if he be a Member of this Parliament:) in all their late Addresses,
we do not find, that a Parliament is so much as named, or once desired: Hence
it may appear, who were the contrivers and promoters of them, and for what end
they came forth; not to have any oppression or heavy burdens taken off; not
that the Peoples Rights and Liberties might be restored, the several grievances
in the Nation might be looked into and remedied; not that corrupt men lately
crept into places might be removed, and better chosen: No such things were
aimed at; for had they not intended to keep up the grievous corruptions in the
Nation, they would not have discovered (as they did by their silence) such a
slighting and disregarding of Parliaments.

Having given many Reasons that this Earth-Power will be shaken; The next thing
is, to show how in this shaking, a Scripture-Prophesie is fulfilled, and
particularly Heb. 12.27.

Here I must re-mind the Reader of what was said before, That
Scripture-Prophesies do especially concern the Church and people of God: and it
is for them to heed and observe, how the Lord in his Providential Dispensations
brings them to pass, whether it be in beginning, proceeding, or ending.

Our first Argument is thus: Whatsoever Earth-shaking coms not within the verge
of the Text, Heb. 12. yet that Earth-government does; namely, which shall not
only be first shaken, but also whereby a way is made and prepared for the Lord
to proceed to the shaking of Earth-Powers in other Nations: But such is this
Earth-power or present Government, Ergo.

I shall only endeavor to prove that part of the Argument which is
questionable; that is, how this shaking asserted will be the first, and make
way for the rest, foretold Heb. 12.

1. If the Lord begin a work, and something stop it, his manner is to remove
that stop, and there to take up the work again and proceed: thus it was in the
building of the second Temple; after there was some good progress made in the
work, Ezr. 3. by Artaxerxes command the people ceased, Ez. 4.23, 24. But the
Lord (whose counsel shall stand) took off (by Darius) that stop, and so they
went forward with the building, Ezr. 6. I have showed before, that Gods work
began, concerning the overcoming of the ten Kings, and preparing the way for
the glorious and visible Kingdom of Jesus Christ, when the Old Parliament rased
down Kingly-Government, and constituted a Commonwealth: that there was a stop
made, it is true, and we know who were the occasion of it.

Truly, so wonderfully did the Lord of Hosts go forth then with our Parliament
and Army, as among the Heathen they began to say, The Lord has done great
things for them, Psa. 126.2. Not only were the Nations awakened about us, and
began to consider, whether the day of the Lamb and his great power were not
come: but likewise the Enemies amongst us, began to give Glory to God, and
would often confess, that God was with us and against them. What shall I say
(ah! these things cannot be remembered without great thoughts of heart by all
that are truly godly!) That blessed cause of truth and righteousness did so
prosper both at home and abroad, that had there not been an unhappy stop put to
it (through the hypocrisy and falsehood of some men) it would have been ere
this time in other Nations, conquering and to conquer; yea, probably before
now, more of the ten Horns had been cut off. For we were as a Beacon upon a
hill, all people looking on, to see what would be the event of this Act, this
strange Act in England.

This puts me in mind of the Philistims, when they were smitten with Emerods,
they take counsel, to know, whether the God of Israel had done it or no: having
therefore put the Ark of the Lord upon a new cart, and sent it away, thus they
speak one to another: If it go up by the way of his own coast to Bethshemesh,
then he has done us that great evil. But if not, then we shall know it was not
his hand that smote us, it was a thing that happened to us, 1 Samuel 6.9. Whilst
the nations abroad, and the Enemies at home were musing about the great cause
we had in hand, what it should mean; If it had gone directly forward, as the
kine took the strait way to the way of Bethshemesh, and turned not aside to the
right hand or to the left, v. 12. in all likelihood there would have remained
by this time no more doubtings concerning the work; but they would have been
fully satisfied (as the Philistims were) that it was the Lords doing; but when
they saw the work went not the strait way, but there was a grievous turning
aside, no less then building again the things which were destroyed, and
destroying what was built; this took them quite off, and so blinded them, as
now they can see nothing of God in the thing, but cry out, It was a Chance,
neither was the Lord more with the Parliament then with the King: but all is
now, It was the Fortune of War.

Thus have the Apostates by casting the Lords work behind their back, and
setting up their own interest, occasioned many thousands (far and near) not
only to speak evil of the Good Cause it self, but to deprive the Lord of his
due Glory and praise; for that honor which men would have given to the Lord
(and it was even upon their hearts and in their mouths to do it) is now by this
turning aside, denied him, and given to Idol-Fortune. Besides, what dread and
fear was there somwhile since upon the hearts of Cavaleers; no other then a
kind of convincement, that to vote or fight against our good Cause, was to
vote and fight against God: but since this late Revolt brake forth, that fear
(I believe) is over. So that now, if there be a door open for them in
Parliament or Army, they will as readily vote and fight against the interest of
Christ and his people, as ever they did before. O wretched Apostasy!

2. The Lord will begin to shake the Earth the second time, where he sees it
is first ripe. As a husbandman that has much corn to reap, cuts it not down
all at once; but where the ripest is, there he begins. Now among the Regions
of the Earth, that Field is nearest the sickle, where Religion, Conscience,
and the worship of God are made cloaks for fin and wickedness: SIN may be
confidered as single or double: if it have Religious hypocrisy mixed with it,
it is a double sin, and so ripens the sinner, and hastens his judgment the
sooner.

Had the Scribes and Pharisees which devoured widows houses under a show of
long prayer, Luke 20.47. picked these poor women's pockets, or cut their purses,
their sin and condemnation had not been so great, as to cheat them in the way
they did. It is said of Herod, He sent and Beheaded John in prison, Mat. 14.10.
though this were a most cruel act in the Tyrant, yet (I think) it was not half
so bad, as that in Jezebel, who took away Naboths life and goods under
pretense of Law, Conscience, Religion: It was no marvel, that Gods revenging
hand was presently upon her for it; for such a sin as that was, made her soon
ripe for cutting down. Among other Reasons persuading me to think some terrible
Earth-shaking is upon us, truly this is one; namely, that never so much
National wickedness was in any age, as has been of late committed in these
three Nations under Religious pretenses, viz. fasting, prayer, weeping,
talking high of God, and his Son and Zion; just as did the Pharisees: all
devouring of late times (not of houses alone, but) of the lives and liberties
of the people, is ex part altissimi, for the most high God. As Graserus
describing the Little Horn, says, he is one, Qui impietati suae Dei nomen
pretendit, which shall pretend the Name of God in all his impieties. Add to
this, 1. The number of Sycophants and flatterers every where (especially
Churchmen) who cry up the oppressors of the Nation as the only men for
justice, mercy, piety, etc. 2. By how much the crying sins of the Nation are
witnessed against, the more do men rise and grow worse and worse in the
practice of them. Now what do these things presage, but that God is ready to
lay the axe to the root of the tree? Shall I not visit for these things, says
the Lord? and shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? Jer. 5.9.

3. It is usually Gods dealing with his people (as I said before) when he
draws out their hearts to an earnest seeking of him, to grant them what they
ask. Paul says, He was the Spirits prisoner, Act. 20.22. The like is the case
now of many precious Saints: Such a powerful-commanding impulse they find upon
their Spirits, that they cannot rest day nor night, but must be sighing and
groaning, that the Lord would suddenly make this second shaking, and remove
unrighteous persons and things, and make the Nation happy and glorious, by
establishing truth and justice in the midst of it. I know these are reputed (by
the thriving party) madmen, giddy-heads, fantasticks, the greatest fools of the
time: But God ere long will put the Question out of question; that is, whether
those who prayed against oppressors, and to have Magistrates and Judges as at
the first, did well, and therein pleased God; or such as did flatter them, and
would have them still continue, to the end they might serve themselves upon
them.

And as the Spirit puts a holy force upon them to pray continually, so they
have many weighty encouragements not to faint.

For 1. It is generally believed by this Generation of Seekers, That England
will never be beautiful and lovely, but rather her present blackness and
deformity increase, until those be shaken, who have made her most unlovely;
yea, vile in the sight of the world.

Neither 2. will there be any Stateshaking in other Nations, as to the cutting
off of Tyrants, and planting righteousness among them, until some eminent work
be done here first, concerning a righteous settling of a good Commonwealth.

3. It is their belief, That the Lord ere long will so honor a Government and
Governors here established, as they shall be very useful and instrumental to
carry on his great work in the World; that is, destroy Babylon, bring down the
Enemies of Christ under his feet, promote righteousness every where; yea, and
help the Lords Ancient people when their day shall come.

Lastly, They are persuaded, The Lord will not be turned from the fierceness of
his anger, and entreated for the Land, until there be a public check given to
the late Apostacy by the Representatives of the people. They hanged Haman,
etc. Then was the Kings wrath pacified, Esth. 7.10. So they took up Jonah and
cast him forth into the sea, and the sea ceased from her raging, Jon. 1.15.

If we see a man whet and sharpen a tool, we conclude he intends to do
something with it: as the Holy Ghost speaks of shaking the Earth yet once
more, Heb. 12. so I think the Lord is now preparing Instruments for it. The
work is such, as it needs no fine tools; rough tools will serve well enough,
especially being to be used by so strong and powerful an hand: when God showed
Zecharie the Horns, he showed him the Carpenters too, Zech. 1.19, 20. Elias in
a little cloud saw abundance of rain. Methinks in this National cloud I see
both rain and hail; Rain for the refreshing of the Earth, after more then 3
years and an half drought. What think thou, Reader, would it not be a
pleasant sight, to see our Rights and Privileges again to spring: it is now
toward the Spring, and who knows, but we may have a GOOD SPRING of it; yea,
and a fruitful Summer too? I mean, such provision and care taken, as to have no
more such destroying winter (as we have had of late) by putting too much trust
in the hands of deceitful men.

Again, methinks I see in this cloud some hail; and why not that Prophecy here
to be fulfilled, Judgment also will I lay to the line, and righteousness to the
plummet; AND THE HAIL SHALL SWEEP AWAY THE REFUGE OF LIES, and the waters shall
overflow the hiding place, Isa. 28.17. But I shall refer the Reader to the
REASONS which he shall find in the close of this Treatise, wherefore I have
great hope that the Nation will reap much good by this present Parliament.

Our 2. Argument is, If this present Government be that State-Apostacie of
which Paul speaks, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, etc. Then is the shaking of it intended in
this Text. But the first is true: Therefore the second.

This I shall take for granted (for I am sure no understanding Christian will
deny me it) that the shaking of the two grand-Apostacies foretold in
Scripture, are certainly meant in Heb. 12.27. And therefore leaving that part
of the Argument which is without dispute; I shall endeavor to prove the other
Part.

1. That there should be in Gospeltimes, two notorious Apostacies, is evidently
showed in Scripture. The first in the later days; and this in Doctrine; that
is, a departure from the faith, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. 2 These. 2.3. 2 Pet. 2.1, 2. Act.
20.30. The second Apostacy, in the last days, and this to be in practice; that
is, a corrupt life or conversation: 2 Timothy 3.1, etc. 2 Pet. 3.3, 4.

2. As the first Apostacy was a State or Kingdom, and had a HEAD appointed to
it, and Laws made suitable to that Head and State, Rev. 16.10. and 13.2. So the
second Apostacy is to be a State, a Body, or Dominion, Dan. 7.11, 26. and to
have a Head or Protector set over it, and such Laws devised, as may best fit
the interest of the Head and Body: and so much lies plainly in the Text;
Perilous days shall come; intimating a power in the Apostacy, to act
wickedness by a Law, in spite of all opposition, so long as the Apostacy
should continue: for had it not been so, it could not have been perilous days,
as the Text holds forth.

3. The first Apostacy had its rise in the Church, occasioned through the
covetousness, pride, self-seeking, Covenant Breaking, etc. of professors, 2
Pet. 2.3. Act. 20.3. So the second present Apostacy, had its rise in the
Church, and among eminent Professors of Religion; and the Cause of it the very
same mentioned before, because they were lovers of themselves, covetous, proud,
etc. 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3. observe then, this Apostacy cannot be made by Jews,
Turks, Papists, etc. It must rise in the Church, and among Professors of
Religion, who have the right worship of God, in form at least.

4. As they gave to the Head of the first Apostacy all power, and to do what
he would, being above all, and to be obeyed of all, and not subject to any
Council, power, or Authority on Earth; so the Head of the second Apocie was
Dominus omnium temporalium, Lord of every man's goods, he might do what he
would, supra jus, contra jus, and extra jus, above Law, against Law, and
without Law; he was allowed to be above the people in their Representatives,
and to call Parliaments when he pleased, and to break them as often as he would.

5. Upon the Head of the first Apocie, is characterized the number of the
Beast, Rev. 13.18. VICARIUS DEI GENERALIS IN TERRIS; which according to the
numeral Letters is, 666. The very same number is on the head of the second
Apostacy, DUX GENERALIS ET PROTECTOR; that is, 666. Here is wisdom. Let him
that has understanding, count the number of the Beast, for it is the number of
a man, and his number is six hundred threescore and six, Rev. 13.18. The
English of the first is, Gods General on Earth; the other, Captain General and
Protector.

6. It is a wonderful thing to consider, when the Heathen Roman Emperors were
subdued, the Idols of the Gentiles thrown down, Persecution taken off from the
Church, and liberty granted unto tender Consciences in the exercise of
Religion; that just then, the Let should be taken out of the way, 2 These. 2.7.
and the first Apostacy rise in the Christian Church. Who would have thought
when the Kings head was taken off, and with it that form of Government; When
the Bishops were put down, with Altars, Crosses, Service Book, Ceremonies, and
other Popish-Idols; Persecution stopped, and liberty given to tender Consciences:
I say, who would have thought that Professors of Religion (yea, those who had
the greatest share and advantage in such mercies) would have brought forth
instead of grapes, the wild-grapes of the second Apostacy? as if there had
been no time for them, till just then, to have showed their hypocrisy,
falsehood, pride, covetousness, treason, etc. But besides the parallel between
the two State-Apostacies, that we have the second Apostacy at this time among
us appears thus.

First, We see plainly, though they left the power of godliness, and became
self-seekers, covetous, proud, traitors, covenant-breakers; yet they held fast
the form, or outside of Religion: as men that have sores and ulcers upon their
bodies, throw not away their clothes, but keep them on for covering. And here
the Reader is to observe, that this second Apostacy cannot rightly be applied
to any but to Professors of Religion; for such as have neither power nor form
of godliness, cannot be charged with it; they may be among the Apostates and
helpers of the Aposta^ie, but not proper members.

2. It must be understood that the men in the Text said to be lovers of
themselves, covetuos, proud, etc. did formerly seem otherwise, and condemned
these very vices and corruptions in others; for else it could not have been an
Apostacy or falling from righteous Principles, to a scandalous and corrupt
walking. Now who more complained against the King and Bishop for their
miscarriages whilst they stood, then those men, whose miscarriages since, have
been far worse in the very same particulars wherein the others were charged. I
need not give instances; it is possible this Parliament may have occasion to
remember the old Court and the new; and the old Bishops and the new Bishops. If
they do, there is hope then, that the greatest grievances of the Nation will be
removed, and the Liberties of the people restored.

3. In that way which Apostates seek to cover their Apostacy, does the Lord
discover both it and them. What is the way they take to have their Apostacy
hid, and not known? it is by taking up a form of Godliness. And how does the
Lord unmask them, and make their Apostacy known? by that form of Godliness
which they have taken up. And the truth is, were these men more self-seeking,
covetous, proud, etc. then they are, yet this alone would not prove them to be
the later Apostates, unless with those vices and sins they had also a form of
godliness; that is, did preach, pray, fast, and made a great noise and show of
the outside of Religion.

4. I know no better way for a man to have satisfaction in this thing, then
first to consider what the sins are set down in 2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5. foretold
should be in the later State-Apostacie, and then to look about him, and see
whether they are not all, and every one of them to be seen, as visibly and
plainly as was the leprosy in Gehazi's forehead. If the Reader do desire more
to inform himself in this matter, I shall refer him to a Treatise, entitled
The time of the End, at page 36, etc. where all the Characters of the last
Apostacy are fully opened.

Having spoken of the first and second shaking of the Earth, I come now to
deliver my thoughts concerning the manner of the second shaking (for of the
first I have spoken) and by whom the work will be done. And lastly, my Reasons,
wherefore I think the time of this later shaking is nigh. The Scripture which I
shall a little treat of, is in Rev. 11.13. And the same hour was there a great
Earthquake, and the tenth part of the City fell, and in the Earthquake were
slain of men seven thousand; and the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to
the God of Heaven.

I have thought sometimes, that this Earthquake, and the pouring out of the
first vial, had contemporized, and been all one thing; but seriously observing
again the places, it seems to me, that this Earthquake will be before any vial
is powered out, and shall be a forerunner (as John Baptist was to Christ) that
is, prepare or make way for the Vials. About the time of this Earthquake (in
the same hour, says the Text) the witnesses ascend up to Heaven in a Cloud. If
by the witnesses here, we understand fifth-Monarchy-men, and their work to be
about the more pure and spiritual part of the fifth Kingdom, I conceive then,
these do remain in Heaven, or the Temple, Rev. 15.6. (for I take it to be one
thing) until the Earthquake be made by the Commonwealths-men, as making way
for the seven last plagues.

I desire I may not be mistaken in mentioning fifth Monarchy-men and
Commonwealth-men distinct; I do it not as if they were not one people, and
their work all one in respect of pulling down and building up; but in reference
to the manner and way, how these things shall be done. The Earthquake will be
(as I said) before the vials, for these Reasons:

1. Howsoever there are many differences among the Lords people, as what is
Babylon, and so to be destroyed; yet in this they are all satisfied, and do
unanimously accord, That all heavy burdens should be broken, Tyrants (new as
well as old) removed, the just Liberties of the people restored, Righteousness
settled in the Nation, and the good old Cause up again, conquering and to
conquer. Now as the Lord in these things has made his people of one mind, so
he will have them join together in the prosecution of them: for things farther
off (as about the vials) they shall likewise have light in them, Rev. 18.1. and
accord in the work, when the time coms to put them in execution. Nevertheless
whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the
same thing, Phil. 3.16.

2. It seems to me, that this Earthquake will be before the Vials; because the
Earthquake is under the second woe, Rev. 11.13, 14. but all the vials (as I
conceive) fall under the third woe (which is the last) and therefore are said to
be the seven last plagues, Rev. 15.1.

3. If the Scriptures be heeded which treat of the fifth Kingdom, it will
appear, that the great work which the Lord will bring to pass for his Son and
Zion in the last days, will begin at righteousness among men; that is, to
destroy oppression and Tyranny in every kind; all corrupt Laws, and wicked
Orders and Customs, and to have things so settled, as every man may have his due
and just Rights: Righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and
faithfulness the girdle of his reins, Isa. 11.5. A scepter of righteousness is
the scepter of thy Kingdom, Heb. 1.6. There is a voice of many waters, before
the voice of a great thunder, Rev. 14.2. Waters are below, thunder above; the
work begins below at the waters: let us therefore take heed, that we miss not
the proper work of the day, in not beginning where we should.

4. As God is a God of order, not of confusion; so I think the great work of
the times will be carried on in a beautiful and comely order. It is said, The
stone was cut out of the mountain, Dan. 2.45. Observe, it is CUT; so that it is
not without form, it has some comeliness, fashion, and order in it. I see no
obstruction, why all that is written concerning the execution of vengeance upon
Babylon, or what is to be done by Saints as Saints (of public concernment)
till Christ personally appear, but may very well stand with good order. For
example: Is it not possible that a Government may be rightly established, and
such Governors chosen, as the tenderest conscience may safely act under it?

It is said, The ten horns shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate
and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire, Rev. 17.16. I do
understand this of a State or Government (let it be part of the fifth Kingdom)
and the meaning to be this: when the Lamb has overcome any Nation, there shall
be that Government erected, and such Governors set up, who will proclaim open
war against the great whore, and raise up forces to reward her double for the
blood she had shed, and other abominable wickedness. This being so, it must
needs follow, that the Earthquake will be before the vials; for it is not to
be imagined that the Representatives of a Nation, if they are wise and sober,
will meddle with Babylon abroad, until they have made a good Reformation, and
things well settled at home.

5. If God have a voice in humane affairs, and to be hearkened to and followed,
then I conceive this Earthquake will be next; that is, a purging out of the
dross and filthiness amongst us, that righteousness may dwell in the Land; this
indeed we may now expect: for the harvest of the later Apostacy is ripe, and
the Lord seems to have prepared some sharp sickles for the cutting down of it.
But for any other public work at present, I do not see the like fitness either
in things or persons.

I have spoken the more of this, to the end, that whilst we are looking at
things further off, we do not forget our duty and work in things nearer home. I
have read somewhere of an Admiral, when he should have gone presently in with
the rest of the fleet to fight the Enemy, he turned aside and wheeled about so
far, that he never came in, to give a stroke. If we take not heed, our darling
conceits will turn us aside, and cause us to wheel off from the fight, i. e.
our present Generation-work. If so, whosoever the Lord shall honor in
following him to the Battle and for his faithfulness in it, we for our parts
can expect nothing but shame and dishonor.

Quest. What is meant by the Earthquake in the Text?

Answ. The Representatives of the people assembled in Parliament, by whom the
later State-Apostacie shall be put down. So I take it. But,

1. I do not restrain this Earthquake to our Nation: I have showed before, that
one Prophecy may be often fulfilled. Thus, for ought I see to the contrary,
the slaying of the witnesses, and their rising, may be done over and over; one
while in one Country, and sometimes in another, in respect of time, persons,
and place. But what people soever are left out of these Prophesies, we are not.
For there is none of them (which concern the Gentile Saints in the last times)
but they will have some accomplishment here; yea, many of them more eminently
here then elsewhere, especially at first. But of this I have spoken before.

Neither 2. do I fix any time when this Earthquake shall be. For howsoever I
have strong persuasions that the work will begin at the sitting of this present
Parliament; yet I am not so certain that the Lord will honor them in so noble
and glorious a Cause for their poor country, as I am confident he will do it by
others, if they neglect their duty. For the needy shall not always be
forgotten; the expectation of the poor shall not perish for ever, Psalm. 9.18.

Quest. But why is the laying aside of the present State-Apostacie, and
bringing the Nation to a Commonwealth again, set forth by an Earthquake?

Answ. 1. Because in all likelihood before it be over, it will make a dreadful
and terrible shaking: Woe, woe, woe, to the inhabitants of the three Nations; who
knows but this Earthquake will raze the foundation of our new Nobility, reach
the Tryers, Lawyers, Sessers, Addressers, Excise-men, Custome-house-men,
Corporations, etc. in a word, all the devouring vermin in the Land, such as
have taken away men's goods contrary to Law, Isa. 33.1.

2. To show when the Lord will raise up instruments against this Apostacy,
they shall prevail, notwithstanding all Ahitophels and Machiavels, in spite of
Hell and all powers of darkness. It is an Earthquake: Stand now with thine
enchantments, and with the multitude of thy sorceries, wherein thou have
labored from thy youth; if so be thou shall be able to profit, if so be thou
may prevail. Let now the Astrologers, the Star-gazers, the
Monthly-Prognosticators stand up, aad save thee from these things that shall
come upon thee, Isa. 47.12, 13.

3. It may denote the cause of the shaking; that this State-Apostacie is
removed, it is, that oppression and tyranny may cease, and all people have
their rights. Now howsoever this be a good work, and ought to be done, yet it
rises no higher then Earth, and therefore fitly called an Earthquake.

4. That the infamous memory of this last Apostacy, and the happy downfall of
it may continue to all future Generations; Such desolations and ruins as
formerly were made by Earthquakes, we find them recorded in Histories both
Divine and Humane, Amos 1.1. Zech. 14.5. to the end that such things might not
be forgotten. It is true, many National Earthquakes has this Island suffered,
viz. by the Romans, Saxons, Danes, Normans, etc. Besides several Earthquakes
among our selves, by Parliaments and Civil Wars. Nevertheless, I am very
confident, that the memory of none of them will so long last, as the rembrance
of this present Apostacy, and that SEASONABLE GOOD-EARTH-QUAKE, which not only
shaked it, but swallowed it up. My Reason is, because the honor of Gods great
Name, the Cause of Religion, and the interest of Christ and his people, have
more suffered by this present Apostacy in four or five years, then ever they
suffered under the Romans, Saxons, Danes, Normans, put them all together, and
all their time too: Some report the prints of Pharaohs Charriot-wheels did
remain in the sand of the shore at the Red Sea, and was to be seen many hundred
years after. I shall not stand to the truth of that: but this is a truth, and I
shall abide by it, That the print of this Apostacy is so deep in Church and
Commonwealth, made by self-seeking, covetousness, hypocrisy,
Covenant Breaking, treachery, etc. that it will remain to be seen many ages
hereafter.

5. To show, that the Apostacy was such a BURDEN as the Earth could no longer
bear it, but must needs quake under it, and so shake it out. The land is
defiled, therefore do I visit the iniquity thereof upon it, and the land it
self vomiteth out her inhabitants, Lev. 18.25. The earth is utterly broken
down, the Earth is clean dissolved, the Earth is removed exceedingly. The Earth
shall reel to and fro like a drunkard, and shall be removed like a cottage. The
transgression of it shall be heavy upon it, and it shall fall and not rise
again, Isa. 24.19, 20.

6. To answer an ancient Type in the old Testament: For in the Rebellion of
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, was clearly shadowed out the last Apostacy. Amongst
many other parallels which might be noted, take these few:

1. That Rebellion was made a little after the Lord had given a wonderful
deliverance to his Church, and when they should have passed over Jordan to the
Promised Land.

2. The occasion of it was ambition and love of pre-eminence in some persons,
not contented with that form of Government which the Lord a little before had
appointed.

3. Howsoever the Action was wicked, (no less then high Treason) yet the chief
Authors of it are said to be famous in the Congregation, and men of renown.

4. That this Apostacy might the more effectually be carried on, the Liberty
and Freedom of the people was pretended: and that Moses and Aaron had taken too
much upon them.

5. Howsoever few at first had a hand in this Rebellion (by the Hebrew Text it
seems to be only Korah) yet through the hypocrisy and falsehood of these few,
many afterward were ensnared.

6. The Earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up. An Earthquake indeed;
yet a just reward for such Rebellion and Treason.

Reader, The Sentence is left to thee, only be honest; did not this Apostacy
rise as soon as the Lord had delivered us out of the hands of our Enemies? and
when in duty and Conscience we should have gone forward in his work? And was it
not through the base pride of some men (to have all power in their own hands)
that the Government of the Nation was changed from a Commonwealth (which the
Lord had owned and blessed) to a THING which we cannot tell what it is? Again,
though by three Acts of Parliament it was made Treason, to promote any person
to be King or Chief Magistrate of England or Ireland, without consent of
Parliament: Yet this was done; But by whom? Men famous in the Congregation, and
of great renown. And that they might the more prevail in their Rebellion, was
not Liberty promised, and taking off the grievances of the People? Is not this
very true likewise, that this State-Apostacie was first set on foot by a few
(some say seven or eight, but more probably it was but one) yet afterward
Multitudes, multitudes fell into the sin and snare? In conclusion then, wherein
agrees not the Antitype with the Type, but that the Earthquake is not
executed upon the later Rebellion? Consider of it, take advice, and speak your
minds, Judge. 19.30.

Quest. It is said in the Text, The tenth part of the City fell, and in the
Earthquake were slain of men seven thousand, etc. What is meant by it?

Answ. 1. As there are two Apostacies foretold in Scripture; so I find two
Cities mentioned in the Revelation: First, the GREAT CITY; signifying, the
whole Dominion and jurisdiction of the Papal Beast; that is, all States and
Policies, Civil and Religious, under the Sea of Rome, and acknowledging the
Pope Head of the Church. And note, when ever this Kingdom or State is meant by
the word City, it is always expressed (...), That great City, Rev. 11.8. and
18.8. and 16.19. and 17.18. and 18.10, 16, 18, 19. and 21.10. By which we are
to understand the first Apostacy: As for the second Apostacy, is called a
City likewise; but the word GREAT is left out, and there is great Reason for it.

For 1. This later Apostacy shall not be so large as the former, in spreading
it self over all peoples and Nations and Tongues; All the world wondered after
the first Beast.

Neither 2. shall the later Apostacy have that honor and homage done to it,
as had the former: For the Kings of the Earth shall give their Kingdoms unto
the first Beast, Rev. 17.17.

3. The first Apostacy is to continue 1260 years, but the later not above
three years and an half, till the Lord does begin to strike it with a
Consumption. So that the word GREAT, seems to be left out here, to distinguish
between the two Cities, or two Apostacies; and this in the Text is to be
understood of the later State-Apostacie. Moreover, we have some light here how
to understand that place, Rev. 11.8. where it is said of the witnesses, their
dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great City: it is well observed by
many, that the Greek (...), ( i. e. a broad or spacious place) does not
signify any place, Marketplace, or broad place within the walls of the great
City; but it is without the great City, as no part of the building. Hence we
may conclude two things.

1. The two Witnesses are not slain (in their Testimony) by any Civil Powers
that hold the Pope Head of the Church; neither lie their dead bodies in any
Country formally subject to the Sea of Rome. For their slaying and lying dead
must be without the walls of the great City. Indeed the blood of the Martyrs
will be charged upon the first Apostacy; but the slaying of the witnesses,
upon the second Apostacy. Therefore let Church Members and Church Officers,
and other Professors of Religion look to it. For to speak soberly and in the
fear of God, this is my opinion (and I think grounded upon Scripture and
practice) The blood of the witnesses will be required at their hands: for never
had the bottomless Beast murdered so blessed a Cause, and so glorious a
Testimony for Christ and his Kingdom (as was in this Nation) had they stood
faithful to the good old Cause.

2. Though the Power by which the witnesses are slain, is not from the great
City, yet it is for it; that is, it does more strengthen and support the great
whore then any State or Government properly the whores. Where lies now the
stop, that the Lords work goes not forward, to remove oppressions and heavy
burdens, and to establish righteousness among men? Not in Rome, Spain, Germany,
France; the stop is nearer home: remove this Apostacy, and you shall soon see
the good Cause revived again, and the hearts of all good people revived with it.

2. Whereas it is said, The tenth part of the City fell, and the remnant gave
glory to God; this cannot be meant of the great City, for that sinks (every
whit) like a great millstone to the bottom of the Sea: Besides, I do not read of
any giving glory to God in the great City when her plagues are upon her. But
contrary (it is expressly said) they repented not, to give glory to God, but
blasphemed the God of Heaven because of their pains and their sores, Rev. 16.9,
11. Now the Reason is, because the Lord will bring his people out of the great
City Babylon, (as he did Lot from Sodom) before he burns her to ashes. I will
not say, among that huge heap of chaff, there will be no corn; yet I think, if
any of Gods elect shall perish (as to the outward man) in that common
destruction; they will be very few, yea, in those few, no repenting and giving
glory to God, visibly will appear, Rev. 18.4. Jer. 51.6.

But the Case here is otherwise: for howsoever the whole Apostacy will fall,
yet in the Earthquake all will not be slain that are found in the Apostacy.
When Absalom made that unnatural Rebellion against his father, it is said, two
hundred followed him in the simplicity of their hearts, and knew not any
thing, 2 Samuel 15.11. that is, they were ignorant of the wicked plot he had in
hand; namely, under pretense of devotion and conscience to destroy his own
father, and make himself king or Chief Magistrate. No doubt many two hundreds,
thousands, I may say, through the dissimulation and lying of their Leaders and
Teachers, have fallen in with the Apostacy, simply and ignorantly, knew
nothing of their design, that is, how under a cloak of Religion, and the safety
of the godly party, the mother Commonwealth was to be murdered, and an
Absalom-like interest to be set up. Therefore by the Remnant here, I understand
these ignorant and simple ones; not the OLD SERPENT, the seducers and
ringleaders, who thought they had done their Country and themselves good
service, when they sought to destroy the lives and Liberties of the people.

3. Whereas it is said, In the Earthquake was slain of men 7000. the Greek has
names of men; meaning, men of note, renown, famous, Genesis 6.4. contrary hereto,
is men without Name, Job 30.8. alluding to the Rebellion of Korah, etc. Number.
16.2. and two things seem to be held forth.

1. This Earthquake (that is, the Representatives of the people) shall be men
of courage, and of public spirits, such as shall have Lion-like hearts, fear
no man's face, nor respect any man's person; but will cut down Cedars, as soon as
shrubs, if there be cause for it. Indeed no people in the world formerly have
been more honored then the English, for men of resolution, and of high and
noble spirits, in standing up for their freedom and Rights, against intrusion
and usurpation of all sorts and sizes. But, How is the faithful City become an
harlot? it was full of judgment, righteousness lodged in it, but now murderers.
Thy silver is become dross, thy wine mixed with water. Thy Princes are
rebellious, and companions of thieves; every one loves gifts, and follow after
reward; they judge not the fatherless, neither does the cause of the widow
come unto them, Isa. 1.21, 22, 23. Oh! that it should be said, ICHABOD, The
glory is departed from England. For have not men of late showed themselves to
be of low, base, and servile spirits, in preferring their own particular
interest, before the public good of the Nation? And in stead of contending for
our Birthright (which but a little before was recovered with the Blood and
Treasure of the Nation) to give it up (or rather sold it) Esau-like, for a mess
of Pottage? But God will raise up a better Generation of men (and why may not
we hope it is now?) who will recover the Glory of the English nation again, by
exalting truth and righteousness among us.

2. By names of men, is not meant the old names of note, renown, and famous in
the days of the King and Bishops; for they concern not the later Apostacy: but
the new names; that is, Lords, Knights, Esquires, etc. of the last edition.
Those who were poor the other day, and have made their families great by
hypocrisy and lies, and betraying their Country, must expect to fall by this
Earthquake. For the number seven thousand, it is probable before the
Earthquake be done, not fewer will be shaken; for it must go round the Nation,
and follow the Apostacy from end to end. And I hope the appearance of it will
be suddenly; we are waiting for it, and praying for it. So come Lord Jesus.
Amen, Amen.

Reasons, Why it may be hoped, that the present Parliament will begin the
Earthquake, or Second Shaking of the Earth.
FRom the late experience we have had of some men's unfaithfulness and falsehood,
and seriously weighing what a pitiful choice some have made: this could not but
altogether discourage me of Hope, were not my eyes upon the Mighty Creator, and
so better bottomed, then to put confidence in man. What my Reasons are, I shall
here set down, and so leave it to the Readers judgment, Whether from such
grounds, there may not be Hope of reviving the Good old Cause by this
Parliament.

Reas. 1. The Lord taking away that HEAD-STOP lately from us, seems to speak
much good in it to all Lovers of Righteousness in the Nation. Arise, and take
the young child and his mother, and go into the land of Israel; for they are
dead which sought the young child's life, Mat. 2.20. What otherwise was the Lord
voice in that Signal Providence, but a^ if he should say to the Representatives
of the People, Arise, take the Mother Commonwealth, and her young child, i. e.
her Rights, Privileges, etc. and go into London: i. e. let things be settled
and established as before: for they are dead which sought to devour Mother and
Child, so that there is no fear in returning to the good old work and Cause
again. Thou brakest the heads of Leviathan in pieces, and gave him to be meat
to the people inhabiting the wilderness, Psalm. 74.14. The meaning is, Gods
revenging hand upon Pharaoh, was to nourish and strengthen Israel afterward; as
to believe the Lord would not have done that great thing for them, had he not
meant to bring them to the Promised Land. Truly, that Stroke to me has been
meat in the wilderness; and I cannot but think, as it was the Lords doing, so
it was done, that the three Nations might the sooner enjoy their just Rights
again.

It is the opinion of many, that in Saul and David (as to their Kingdoms) is
shadowed out two States to be in the last days: when Saul was dead (the great
Block in David's way) it is said, Abner the son of Ner, Captain of Saul's host,
took Ishbosheth the son of Saul, and made him King, 2 Samuel 2.8, 9. Note three
things in this business.

1. What Abner did herein, was contrary to his light; for he knew well enough,
that God had appointed anoother man to reign; only his relation to the house of
Saul (for he was Saul's uncle) and his own base interest, made him do what he
did against knowledge and conscience, 2 Samuel 3.17, 18.

2. It appears by the Text, that this Ishbosheth (which is by interpretation A
MAN OF SHAME, and his end proved so) was a fellow of a low, fearful, and weak
spirit, not like his father Saul, neither for valor nor policy; merely set to
serve a Court-interest, and that a company of corrupt men might serve
themselves upon him, as not liking David and his way; for they knew David was a
man more honest and conscientious, then to suffer such locusts and caterpillars
to spoil and devour the Commonwealth, 2 Samuel 3.11.

3. Not only in the end is this mock-King left of his RAISERS, but has his
head taken off by two of his own Captains; a just reward for him, and for all
such who will take upon them the power and Government of Nations, against the
manifest appointment of God. What may be in the application, time will show. In
the mean time, take notice, if the time be come, That the Kingdoms of this
world are to be the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, Rev. 11.15. and
that righteousness is to be exalted in the Nations; then none of the House of
Saul shall long reign, but the House of David will grow stronger and stronger,
and carry it in spite of all opposition.

Reas. 2. Methinks it cannot be, but there is a wheel in the wheel, and the
Lords hand moving to the shaking the Earth the second time; in that I see of
late a spirit of prayer and supplication poured out upon many choice
Christians, whereby they are enabled to wrestle with the Lord in prayer day and
night for the public good of the Nation, more earnestly then they did before.
I have observed for these four or five years, that it has not been upon the
hearts of the faithful, to expect any good from Parliaments; and therefore most
of their praying has been (and no doubt by the Holy Spirit led thereto) that
the Lord would blast them, and break them to pieces, that the stout-hearted
might be spoiled, and none of the men of might find their hands. But I find it
otherwise now; for the Lord of late has put it upon their hearts with much
weight, to be daily groaning at the throne of Grace, that all those who like
good Nehemiah, Come to seek the welfare of the children of Israel, and to
repair the breaches of the Commonwealth, may through God do valiantly.

No doubt, honest Hushai prospered the better, when he sought to frustrate the
wicked counsel of Ahitophel, that he had David's prayers for him and with him.
And David said, O Lord, I pray thee turn the counsel of Ahitophel to
foolishness, 2 Samuel 15.31. Let such know, who are our Hushai's at this time,
and seek to break the designs of Ahitophels, and all such as would keep up a
corrupt interest against the public good of the Commonwealth, there are many
tears and prayers poured out for them. And I am confident, they will experience
the fruit and benefit of them all along upon their endeavors for the righteous
Cause.

Reas. 3. I have the more ground of hope, considering some persons now sitting,
were not only Members of the long Parliament, and sought to extirpate things
that stood in the way of a through Reformation; but have not since warped and
deflected from their former righteous principles. Now how can such good
Patriots of their Country but remember the days of old, and the wonderful
works of the Lord, how visibly and powerfully his presence was with them, when
they contested against the Court party, and how he delivered them from the Lion
and the Bear, King and Bishops, and so have it (with much assurance) upon their
hearts, that he will help them still, whilst they open their mouth for the
dumb, and plead the cause of the poor and needy. If a man see Beasts in his
field devouring the corn which himself had sown, he cannot suffer it, but will
drive them out. It may be said in a good sense, it was the old Parliament that
sowed this Commonwealth with much good seed, in order to the freedom, safety,
and welfare of the Nation. I hope therefore such men will stand up again in the
good old way, and seek to repair those grievous breaches which have been made
since, by a company of corrupt and deceitful men. Should such a man as I flee?
Neh. 6.11.

When Nehemiah upon his return to Jerusalem, saw what great evil had been done
in his absence, and how many things through the pride and covetousness of some
men were quite out of order, it not only grieved him, but stirred him up to
endeavor a present Reformation. And no doubt, that which occasioned him to
show himself so zealously earnest in the work, it was, in that they had broken
the good Government which he himself (as a principal man) had settled among them
but a little before: see Neh. 13. If there be a Nehemiah in this Parliament,
(as I hope there are many) men that will seek the welfare of England; it is not
an Apostate Eliashib, or a Malignant Tobiah, that they will fear; nor the
Rulers, but will contend with them, and never cease, till the Commonwealth be
freed from oppression and slavery, and settled upon a righteous foundation.

Reas. 4. I am the more encouraged to HOPE that this Parliament will be
successful in their undertakings, and highly blessed by Almighty God: Because
there are some Army- Officers among them, who have kept their integrity, and
have not betrayed the good old Cause, for which they engaged. I know it will be
matter of much grief unto such men, that they must now in a little room be
standing up for the public interest of the Nation, which could not be
obtained, till they had past through many places in blood. Ah honest hearts!
they little thought when they left their families, estates, Relations, and what
else was dear unto them, and carried their lives in their hands, that they
should afterward sit at Westminster, and hear the very same things pleaded
for, which they had before destroyed. For what were the things for which they
fought? Was it not against Tyrannical and Arbitrary power? against prosecution
of Court-Principles by corrupt men? Was it not to take off all oppressions from
the necks of the freemen of England? Was it not to remove the long usurped
Authority of Lords Civil and Ecclesiastical over the Commons? was it not that
the supreme Authority should reside originally in the people, according to the
Law of God, light of Nature and right Reason? That all persons should own, and
stand by that Commonwealth-constitution, as then established without King and
House of Lords? And that it should be Treason for any man to be Chief
Magistrate of England and Ireland, without consent of Parliament? was it not
against all Negative voices over the free-people of the Commonwealth? and
against the power of the Militia to be settled and kept in the hands of any
single Person? Let the enemies themselves be Judges, whether these were not the
main things contested for against the late King, and for the recovery whereof,
the Nations Trustees in Parliament engaged themselves and the good People
thereof, in a long, expensive, and bloody War, which (by the good hand of God
assisting them) ended in the total subduing of their adversaries, and
capacitating them to execute exemplary Justice upon the principal and his
abettors. Surely, these old Soldiers knowing this to be true, have not so far
left their former valor and resolution, as now to give all up unto men far
more inconsiderable then the Royal party was. If men should see a company of
Boys over their heads, throwing down stones upon them; I know what they would
do in such a case. I shall leave the application to the Reader.

But I hear the Noble Lord Fairfax is chosen for a Parliament Man. Surely, it
was not a personal grudge to the House of the Stuarts, nor any particular
discontent he had against the ancient Nobility and Gentry of the Nation, that
he cut them down in all places where he came; but rather his love to truth and
righteousness. Howbeit his silence of late is much wondered at, and his friends
do now expect that he will appear (like himself) against the new Court party,
and our yesterday Nobility, and Gentry, (so far as in point of honor and
conscience he is bound) and make it evident, it was no personal spite against
the King and his party that he fought them, but love to his Country.

Reas. 5. May not we HOPE now, that iniquity shall stop her mouth? The fear of
you, and the dread of you, shall be upon every beast of the Earth, Genesis 9.2.
Though there may be in some a will and de sire, that the several burdens and
grievances of the people should not be taken off, nor any thing done to settle
and provide for the safety, settlement, and welfare of the Nation by common
consent; Nevertheless, men of public Spirits, and righteous principles, now
speaking for the good old cause, and declaring against the exercise of
Arbitrary power over the lives, Liberties, and Estates of the people; Now
declaring against setting up a particular interest tending to the reviving of
the Baronswars, by a successive contention between two distinct persons and
families for the Sovereignty; Now declaring against persons of a degenerate,
slavish, and enslaving spirit, encouraging and joining with the old Malignant,
and acting and appearing again, directly opposite to those good principles and
things formerly established. When these, and such like things shall be spoken,
what may be expected then? A fear and dread, what will follow if there should
be any contradiction: and no marvel, the burnt child fears the fire. It is too
well known, how deeply some have suffered already for rash engaging themselves
for a Court-interest against the just rights of the people.

Job says, When he put on righteousness, and brake the jaws of the wicked, and
plucked the spoil out of their teeth; delivered the poor that cried, and caused
the widows heart to sing for joy: The young men hid themselves, and the aged
stood up. The Princes refrained talking, and laid their hand on their mouth.
The nobles held their peace, and their tongue cleaved to the roof of their
mouth, Job 29. There has not been of late time, such a time as this is, for
righteous Jobs (especially in Parliament) to plead for Justice. For rationally,
no man can think (as the case of the Nation stands) that any person will have
the forehead to speak (whatsoever he think) against the freedom, safety, and
welfare of the Commonwealth; which yet he must do, if he speak for the present
abuses and Court-corruptions, for which the Parliament and Army engaged against
the late King. Fear not, there shall not a man be able to stand before thee,
Josh. 5.1.

Reas. 6. It is the hope of many (and herein I am not without hope) under that
huge heap of chaff, (I mean the Army) there is some good corn; some fire among
the abundance of ashes: if so, it will now appear; that is, such among them as
still love the Good old cause, speak high for righteous things, and seem to
mourn for the great Apostacy of the Army, they will close with the present
Parliament, to have Arbitrary power put down, the peoples Birthrights
restored, and stand no longer with a corrupt interest against equity, Law, and
conscience.

Before the Lord destroyed Sodom, he brought Lot out of it: who knows but by
this Parliament the Lord will deliver his chosen ones in the Army from his
wrath he means to pour upon the rest? it is no matter though they are few.
There is no restraint to the Lord to save by many or by few, 1 Samuel 14.6. I
know some can hardly believe, that the Lord will so far honor them, as to
employ them in his good old Cause again. But let no man's eye be evil, because
God is good; he is wiser then man, and knows better then he what is to be done.
Considering therefore what an opportunity is now put into their hands by this
Parliament, there is hope, that our Heavenly Father (who is kind to the unkind)
is tendering mercy to them as he did to Lot. Besides, there are few in the Army
of honest Principles, but do very well know, if the Parliament do not stand to
effect good things for the Nation, there will be little safety for them in the
Army. For the contest begins now between the two old Interests, the Court or
Commons, Roundheads or Cavaleers; no halting shortly between two opinions, but
either back again where we were into the House of Bondage, or forward in a free
Commonwealth for more Reformation.

Again. It must needs be matter of grief to many Soldiers, to consider what
sad divisions and rents there are among the people of God about them; many
tender consciences not being satisfied to have spiritual communion with them,
because of their supporting an Arbitrary power. They may say, it is of their
weakness in judgment: let it be so, yet they cannot be without deep sense of
these divisions (as I hope they are,) and therefore they will look upon this
thing as a great Providence, that they shall now come under the Government of
the Parliament, to serve their Country honestly, and not the licentiousness of
lawless persons any more. And this will greatly tend to union and peace among
Christians. And whereas Parliaments of late have been overswayed by Swordmen;
yea, often broken to pieces at their pleasure: it is hoped now, that these
Army-men (of whom I speak) will prevent all such fear and danger, by giving up
themselves to the obedience of the Parliament, and openly declare, that they
will stand with them to have the Good old Cause up again, and the undoubted
Rights and Liberties of these Nations fixed upon the right foundation of truth
and righteousness.

Reas. 7. When this Parliament shall understand the straits of the Nation, and
how many ways the well-affected to our freedom and just rights have suffered;
yea, been undone in their persons and estates, contrary to Law and Conscience,
and who have been the cause of all this (as we hope they will hear the
grievances of the people) it is not to be doubted, but there will be an
Earthquake with a witness: Know thou not yet, that Egypt is destroyed?
Exodus 10.7. as if they should say, The land is wasted, the people impoverished,
and that little which is left us, will soon be taken from us, if thou send not
away this people. Thus will be the cry of the Nation to the Parliament (if they
sit a little while) and they will hear it with both ears: Sirs, Know ye not
that England is destroyed? our Merchants break daily, all trade fails us, many
families perish; and that little which is left in the land the Court will
devour, if it be not dismissed by your wisdom and care.

There is one thing (and very probably) this Parliament will remember and make
use of; it was the great pretense of some, in breaking one Parliament after
another, that they did it for TRIAL. And so this last Government was set up, as
judged the best and most expedient for public good. The Long Parliament was
too slow, and the little Parliament was too quick, and therefore a new
Instrument must be devised to save the Nation. Now I hope there is no wrong
done to the Tryers, if this Parliament having found by proof and sad
experience, that of the three changes the last was the worst, (I say) granting
this, if they should (following the others example) lay it aside, and take up
something else. Nay more, how can the Parliament (as the peoples Trustees) be
faithful, if they shall find that the better Government was laid aside, and the
worser set up, almost to the undoing of the Nation, and yet let it stand?

It is a Maxim in State, Religious and Civil, When corruptions and abuses do
arise, to reduce things to their first institution. Thus Christ in refuting the
Pharisees about plurality of wives, mentions the first institution of
marriage: From the beginning it was not so, Mat. 19.8. So Paul in seeking to
redress the disorders in the Church at Corinth about the Lords Supper, sets
down the Institution, 1 Cor. 11. and this I hope will be the practice of the
Parliament in seeking to reform the many grievances of the Nation, to bring
things to the Original; that is, when the Government was changed from Monarchy
to a Commonwealth.

Reas. 8. I never had of late years more hope then now, of a good accord among
all the Godly of the House, under what form or name soever, that they will as
one man stand up for righteous things. Indeed matters of Religion in former
Parliaments have greatly obstructed the settlement of the Nation. A rock under
water is perilous: meddling with Religion is the more dangerous, because it is
covered over with specious and fair pretenses, as if God would not bless
Parliaments, unless they begin at the House of God; and here presently they are
at a loss about this House of God, what it is, and where it is, there being so
many, Lo here, and lo there. But I shall wave this discourse. Whatsoever duty
lies upon Parliaments concerning Religion, I am sure as the affairs of the
Nation now stand, there is some other thing to be looked after: and if those who
are religious, mind it not, it is possible the Cavaleer (watching his
opportunity) will deprive both Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, etc.
of all their Birthright and freedom here in England; and where will they go
next for liberty of Conscience?

There are (as I said before) but two great Interests in the Nation, the
Commonwealth and Cavaleer; if the Cavaleer get it not, there is no fear, but
all truly fearing God, will enjoy much love and peace together.

Our Chronicles tell us, Never had the Saxons and Danes conquered us, had it
not been for our own divisions. If we lose our Commonwealth, and with it our
Liberties and Lives, and the Cavaleers have it, and from them Charles Stuart
(for they play the old game under a new dress) I say, should such a thing be
(which God forbid) it must be by the subtilty of the Enemy causing division
among good men, whereby their hands are made weak: but I hope better things,
and speak it for this end, As men are godly, so they should be wise.

Thus I have showed the grounds of my HOPE: what the actings and appearances of
God will be for this Parliament, a little time will show. I know few of them;
yet this I know, never did the condition of England require men of large parts,
of wisdom, integrity, of public and uninterested spirits more then now. I wish
therefore there be no Boys for Men; no time-servers, flatterers, light,
careless, and vain persons, instead of honest, faithful, vigilant, sober,
solid, and wise hearted. Their work is great, in a manner to save poor England,
and to bring her off those rocks whereon she is ready to split, into a safe
Harbor. With reverence therefore to the phrase, Who is sufficient for these
things!

FINIS.

