GOLDEN APPLES. OR Seasonable and Serious Counsel from the Sanctuary to the
Rulers of the earth, held forth in the Resolution of sundry Questions, and
Cases of Conscience about Divisions, Schisms, Heresies, and the Tolleration of
them.

Collected out of the Writings of the most Orthodox, and judicious Divines,
Both Presbyterians, and Independents.

By Sa. Clarke, Pastor in Bennet Fink.

Qui non prohibet malum cum potest, facit.

I have a few things against thee, because thou suffer that woman Jesabel
which calls her self a Prophetess to teach, and to seduce my servants, etc.
Rev. 2.20. LONDON, Printed by Tho. Ratcliffe, for Tho. Underhill at the Blue
Anchor in Paul's Churchyard. 1659.

To the Honorable Sir Arthur Hesilrig, Knight, and Baronet. Sir Henry Mildmay,
Knight, and Colonel George Thompson,Esquire
Noble Gentlemen,
I Know that time is very precious with you by reason of the multipliplicity of
affairs that lie upon your hands: you are come to the Helm of a much shaken,
and almost sinking ship, and the winds, and waves are still boisterous: there
are dangerous rocks, and shelves to be avoided, and therefore the greater Art,
and Industry is required of those that are the steersmen. Yet my humble request
to you is, that you will be pleased to spare so much time as to peruse this
little Treatise: It will discover to you one of the must dangerous Rocks, which
if not carefully shuned will certainly split our ship, and endanger all the
passengers that are embarked in it. You cannot but be sensible of the many
Divisions, and subdivisions that are amongst us; and our Lord Christ has told
us in his Word of Truth, That a Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand,
Mar. 3.24. You cannot but see what an inundation of Errors, Heresies, and
Blasphemies is broken in upon us, and truly it is as evident, that Romes
Emissaries are both the Fathers, and Nurses of most of these Bastards, and that
which they now hope for, and expect from you is, a Boundless Tolleration of
them, that so they may live, and prosper under the shadow of your wings: But if
you please to cast your eyes over this book, you shall see how inconsistent
such a Tolleration would be with the word of God: how destructive both to our
Church and State: How dangerous to those that grant it, and pernicious to those
that desire it. You are Political Shepherds, and will you not drive away those
wolves that devour the Flock? Magistrates are not only Custodes, but Vindices
utriusque Tabulae, and should they not then take care of the Honor, and
Concernments of God, as well as of their own? Is it not their duty to take
those Foxes that destroy the vines of Christ? Can. 2.15. Does not Paul tell us,
That they bear not the sword in vain, but are the Ministers of God, and
Revengers to execute wrath upon them that do evil? Romans 13.4. And that Schisms,
and Heresies are evil: The same Apostle makes it as clear, when he reckons them
up amongst the works of the flesh, and joines them with Idolatry, Witchcraft,
etc. Gal. 5.20.

I know that Politicians give many Rules, and Directions for uphoulding^, and
conserving Kingdoms and Commonwealths: but that of Solomon's is beyond all,
Prove. 16.12. The Throne is established by Righteousness: and to take care of
Religion, as well as of Righteousness, conduces much to the prosperity, and
Peace of a Nation. Very memorable is that of Asa: 2 Chronicles. 14.2. etc. He did
that which was right in the eyes of the Lord: for he took away the Altars of
the strange gods, and the high places, and brake down the Images, and cut down
the groves; and commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of their Fathers, and to
do the Law, and the Commandment, etc. and then the Kingdom was quiet before
him. And chap. 15.3, 5. Israel had been for a long season without the true God,
and without a teaching Priest, and without Law; and in those times there was no
peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in, but great vexations were
upon all the Inhabitants of the Countries, and Nation was destroyed of Nation,
and City of City: for God did vex them with all adversity. The like we see:
Judge 5.8. They chose new gods (says Deborah) then was War in their Gates. It
is said also of Jehosaphat; 2 Chronicles. 17.6, 10. That his heart was lift up in
the ways of the Lord, and that he took away the high places, and groves out of
Judah, and then the fear of the Lord fell upon all the Kingdoms of the Lands
that were round about Judah, so that they made no war against Jehosaphat. I
know that common exception against these Scriptures is, that these are Old
Testament Examples, and therefore not binding, or imitable under the Gospel;
which you shall see fully answered, and ref^ted, if you please to peruse this
Book. Neither indeed is the New Testament any more favorable to a Tolleration
of Errors, Schisms, and Heresies, then the Old, God being as jealous of his
honor now, as he was then, and corruptions in Religion being as detestable to
him now, as they were then: Hence it is that our Savior Christ, and his
Apostles give so many Caveats to take heed of, and to shun false Doctrines, and
Teachers of them: As Mat. 7.14. Beware of false Prophets which come to you in
sheeps clothing, etc. Mat. 16.6. Take heed and beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees, and of the Saduces. Mat. 24.4, 5. Take heed that no man deceive you:
For many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many.
And verse 11. Many false Prophets shall arise, and shall deceive many. So verse
23, 24. and Romans 16.17, 18. I beseech you brethren, mark them which cause
divisions, and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine that ye have learned, and
avoid them; For such serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and
by good words, and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. And, 1 Cor.
1.10. etc. how does he reprove them for their Schisms, and exhorts them to
Unity? And, 1 Cor. 5.7. Purge out the old leaven that you may be a new lump. 2
Cor. 6.14, 15.16. What communion has light with darkness? What concord has
Christ with Belial? etc. And what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols?
etc. Gal. 1.8, 9. If an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel, then that
which we have preached, let him be accursed, etc. Gal. 5.12. I would they were
even cut off that trouble you. Phil. 3.2. Beware of Dogs, beware of
evilworkers, beware of the concision. 2 These. 3.6. We command you brethren, in
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every
brother that walks disorderly, and not after the traditions which he received
of us. 2 Timothy 2, 16, 17. Shun profane, and vain bablings; for they will
increase to more ungodliness, and their word will eat as does a Canker, etc. 2 Timothy 4.14, 15. Alexander the Copper-smith did me much evil, etc. of whom be
thou ware also, etc. Tit. 3.10, 11. An Heretic after the first, and second
admonition reject, knowing that he that is such is subverted, and sins,
being condemned of himself. 2 Pet. 3.17. Seeing ye know these things before,
beware, lest being led aside with the Errors of the wicked, you fall from your
own stedfastness. 2 Epist. of John 10.11. If there come any unto you, and bring
not this Doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him God-speed:
for he that bids him God-speed, is partaker of his evil deeds. Rev. 2.2. The
Angel of the Church of Ephesus is commended, for that he could not bear with
them which were evil: and had tried them which said they were Apostles, when
they were not, and had found them liars: As also for that verse 6. He hated the
deeds of the Nicholaitans. Rev. 2.14, 15. The Angel of the Church of Pergamos
is reproved, and threatened for suffering them that held the Doctrine of Balaam,
and of the Nicholaitans: And verse 20. The Angel of the Church of Thyatira is
reproved, and threatened for permitting the woman Jesabel to teach, and to
seduce gods servants, etc. Rev. 3.15, 16. The Angel of Laodicea is reproved for
being lukewarm, and neither hot, nor cold: and such are they, (says ar^verend
Divine) who grant a Tolleration of diverse Religions, whom God will spue out of
his mouth. Mr. Gabri. Powel.


It were easy to bring Arguments against such a Tolleration out of the Canons
of the first, and best Councils, and Writings of the Fathers, as Tertullian,
Athanasius, Augustine, Jerome, Gregory Nazianzene, Ambrose, Chrysostom,
Irenaeus, Cyprian, etc. As also from the Laws, Constitutions, Decrees, and
Edicts of the best Christian Emperors, as Constantine the great, Valentinian,
Gratian, Theodosius Mayor, Arcadius and Honorius, Theodosius Minor, Martian,
Justinian, etc. unto which might be added the Judgment of many foreign
Divines that were godly, learned and judicious, besides our English Divines
mentioned in this Book, and many others that concur with them therein, but that
it would swell to too great a volumn, and prove tedious to the Readers.

Let me only add this, That such Rulers as impro^e their power against such
enemies of God, and his Church, shall (besides the Euge of a good conscience,
which is far better then the worlds Plaudite) delight themselves in the Lord,
and reign in the hearts, and affections of all good men. As they do worthily in
Ephraca, so they shall be famous in Bethlehem, Ruth 4.11.

Honorable Sirs, May I not say to the same purpose to you, as Mordecai did to
Hester, Who can tell but that God has reserved you for such a time as this? I
hope you will improve all your abilities, and interests for the decrying of
such an intolerable Tolleration, and for the countenancing, and encouraging of
the truth, and the Assertors of it, which will be your joy, and the rejoicing
in that great, and approaching day, when you must give up your account to him
that is no Respecter of persons, but will render unto every one according to
his works. My prayer for you is, That ye may be blameless, and harmeless, the
sons of God, without Rebuke, in the midst of a crooked, and perverse Nation,
amongst whom ye may shine as lights in the world; desiring to be esteemed, as I
am

Devouted to the service of your Faith, From my Study in Thridneedle-street;
May 25. 1659. SA. CLARK.

A Table Of the Questions, and Cases of Conscience that are resolved in this
Book.
Quest. WHence do Discords and Divisions arise? page 1. Quest. What does the
word Schism signify? 3 Quest. What is Schism? ib. Quest. Whence does Schism
proceed? 4 Quest. How many sorts of contentions are there? p. 5 Quest. What are
the causes of contentions? 6 Qu. What are the sinful effects of contentions
about worldly things, and how are they discovered? 8 Qu. What are the effects
of contentions about religious matters? 9 Quest. What are the aggravations of
the sin of discord? 10 Q. How may Schisms be divided? 11 Quest. What makes
Divisions? 13 Quest. Whence else proceed Divisions? 16 Quest. What are the
effects of Church- divisions, especially in the Ministry? 17 Quest. What should
people do when Ministers and Professors are divided? 18 Quest. Why is unity
amongst them so necessary? 19 Quest. Seeing God has promised his people one
heart, and one way, and Christ has prayed for it, how comes it that there are
so many breaches amongst the godly? 22 Q. What means may prevent and heal
divisions in the Church? 24 Qu. What are the remedies of Divisions? 27 Qu. What
will preserve unity in the Church and prevent Schism? 32 Q. How may Divisions
amongst the godly be prevented or healed? 34 Qu. Why are Divisions in Church or
State so dangerous? 35 Qu. Why are they destructive to States, Cities and
Families? 37 Qu. What other mischief proceeds from Church-divisions? 40 Q. What
sorts of discontented persons nourish our divisions? 42 Qu. What may provoke us
to endeavor after unity? 44 Qu. What means may be used to procure unity and
peace? 46 Q. Whether Magistrates may meddle with men's consciences? 49 Qu. How
may Schisms be distinguished? 50 Quest. What conclusions may be laid down about
separation? 51 Qu. If wicked persons continue in Church-society, is that not a
sufficient ground of separation? 52 Q. Does not fellowship with wicked men in
the Ordinances make them ineffectual? ib. Obj. But a little leaven, leaveneth
the whole lump? 53 Obj. But Paul says, being many we are one bread? ibid. Obj.
But we cannot do the duties commanded, Mat. 18.15, etc. if we continue in such
a Church? may we not then separate? 54 Qu. Should we not desire communion with
the purest Churches? 55 Qu. How else may Schism be defined? 56 Qu. May we not
separate from a Church for corruptions in it, though they be not in
fundamentals? 58 Qu. How may this be proved? 59 Qu. How may we prevent
seduction by Schismatics? 60 Qu. How does the common enemy instill poison into
the people to make, and foment our divisions? 61 Qu. How may these be
prevented? 62 Qu. These are Old Testament examples? and those Kings were types
of Christ: but now Gods people are a willing people therefore not under any
Coertion? 64 Q. Does it not abridg, and anul that liberty which should be
indulged to the consciences of men? 68 Qu. What are the best means to be used
by Magistrates in these seducing and seduced times? 71 Qu. Is not persecution
for the cause of conscience against the doctrine of Christ? 73 Qu. Christ
commands to let the tares grow with the wheat till the harvest? 75 Obj. Christ
would have the blind let alone till they fall into the ditch? 76 Obj. Christ
blames his Disciples that would have fire from heaven to consume the
Samaritans, etc. ib. Obj. But the Prophets foretold that carnal weapons should
cease in the times of the Gospel, etc. 77 Obj. Famous Princes have spoken
against constraint in matters of Religion? 79 Obj. Many ancient Writers have
written against it? 80 Obj. But its no prejudice to the Commonwealth, if
liberty of conscience be granted to them that truly fear God? 84 Qu. What other
remedies may we use against infection by seducers? ib. Qu. How do Seducers
bring in and disperse their errors? 85 Qu. Why does Christ suffer such
deceivers in the Church? 86 Qu. What motives do seducers usually make use of?
ib. Qu. How else may it appear that Magistrates may punish an obstinate
Heretic with de th? 87 Qu. What danger is there in tollerating heresy, and
heretics. 88 Qu. What rules are Magistrates to observe in tollerating smaller
errors? 90 Obj. But we see that the States of the united Provinces allow
diversity of Religions? 91 Qu. How else will it appear that Schisms, Heresies,
and errors are so dangerous? 92 Obj. But a Tolleration of all Religions would
be a means to cure all dissentions? 95 Qu. Whence is it that Heresies and
Schisms eat up the power of godliness? 98 Q. Whence is it that heresies and
errors are of so spreading a nature? 99 Qu. How then may we prevent being
ensnared by them? 107 Qu. Seeing the Angel of the Church of Ephesus is
commended for not bearing with them which are evil, who are those evil ones
that must not be tolerated? 110 Qu. What does not bearing with them import?
111 Qu. Why should such persons be so severely dealt with? 112 Obj. But love
bears all things? 116 Obj. But Christ says, let both grow together till the
harvest? 118 Qu. Upon what account may a man be accounted a false prophet, or a
false Teacher? 119 Qu. What may be considered about Heresies? 122 Qu. How
manifold is Heresy? 123 Qu. What is simple Heresy? ib. Qu. What is complicate
Heresy? ib. Qu. Whether may any of these be capitally punished by the Civil
Magistrate? 124 Qu. How will it further appear that there is so much danger in
tollerating Heretics? 126 Qu. What then is incumbent upon Magistrates to do
against them? 129 Obj. But would you have us punish them when many of them are
godly persons? 131 Qu. How come Heresies that are so destructive to be so
prevalent? ib. Qu. How will it further appear that errors, and Heresies are so
dangerous? 137 Qu. What dangerous errors, and Heresies are now divulged? 146
Qu. What must Magistrates do in such cases? 149 Qu. What must private
Christians do to prevent infection in such times? 151 Qu. Whether are
Anabaptists Heretics? 153 Qu. Whether are Arminians Heretics? ib. Qu. Whether
are Lutherans Heretics? 154 Qu. Whether are Heretics to be punished by the
Civil Magistrate? ib. Qu. Why are heretics and false teachers called the tail?
Isa. 9.15. 156 Qu. What is Mr. Jer. Buroughs his judgment about tolleration?
157 Quest. Why is Tolleration a dangerous principle? ib. Obj. This is Old
Testament, and we find it not in the Gospel? 158 Obj. Christ has left
spiritual means to prevent Heresies infection? 159 Obj. Magistrates have
nothing to do in matters of Religion? ib. Quest. Are they not excluded from
exercising any power in matters of Religion? 160 Quest. Indeed Magistrates
under the Old Testament had power, but were they not therein types of Christ's
Kingly power. 161 Quest. Why is the Magistrates power needful? 162 Quest. Does
the holy Ghost justify this power of the Magistrate in the times of the
Gospel? 164 Obj. But matters of Religion belong not to his cognizance? 165 Obj.
Such Scriptures speak only of his power in civil things? ib. Qu. How will it
appear that Magistracy is appointed for our spiritual good, as well as for our
civil? 166 Qu. How can natural and external things be helps to things spiritual
and Divine? ib. Obj. Conscience is a tender thing, and therefore must not be
meddled with? 168 Qu. What may be done to a man that pleads conscience? ib. Qu.
How shall we know whether the devil be in the conscience? 169 Qu. What may be
done to such as persist in errors under pretense of conscience? 170 Qu. What if
men's errors be of less moment, can nothing be done to restrain such? 172 Qu.
Suppose a man does what he can to inform his conscience, and yet cannot yield,
what may be done to him? 173 Qu. But by fomenting Divisions such as are in
power may rule the people best? ib. Qu. How else may the wickedness of
Tollerating heresies, blasphemies, etc. be made out? 174 Obj. But Idolatry was
the adequate object of the coercive power of Judahs Kings, etc. but it extended
not to heretics? 177 Obj. But still these are Old Testament examples? 180 Qu.
How else may it appear that corruptions in Religion may be punished by the
Civil Magistrate? 182 Obj. Christ punished such as God, or Messiah, therefore
its not imitable by Magistrates? 183 Obj. It was an extraordinary act in
Christ, therefore not imitable? 184 Quest. What corruptions in Religion are
thus to be punished? 185 Quest. What conclusions may be laid down upon these
premises? 187 Quest. How may it be proved to be the Magistrates duty to punish
heresies? 190 Obj. Still these are Old Testament examples? 191 Quest. What need
the Church any such helps, etc? 196 Obj. But this will make men to dissemble,
or to sin against conscience; 200 Obj. It may bring in persecution for
conscience sake? 201 Obj, Its cross to the meek Spirit of Christ, etc? ib.
Quest. Why may not a Tolleration be granted? 202
The names of such English Divines whose judgments are here produced to show
the danger of Divisions, Schisms, and Heresies, and the tolleration of them.
Mr. Anthony Burges. Mr. Edm. Calamy. Dr. Tho. Hill. Mr. Richard Vines. Mr.
Richard Stock. Dr. Thomas Tailor. Dr. Edw. Reynolds. Mr. Joh. Cotton of Boston
in N. Eng. Dr. Sibs. Mr. Tho. Thorowgood. Mr. John Mainard. Mr. Robert Bailies.
Mr. Ja. Cranford. Mr. Joseph Caryl. Mr. Tho. Hodges. Dr. Amesius. Mr. Obad.
Sedgwick. Mr. Jer. Buroughs. Mr. Tho. Edwards. Mr. Tho: Cobbet of New Eng.
ERRATA.
Page 27. Line 30. put out, has. p. 55. l. 3. put out, he. p. 71. l. 7. for
Minister, r. Ministry. p. 120. l. 7. for Divisions, r. visions, p. 128. l. 4.
for earthquake, r. earthquakes. p. 115. l. 29. put out, not. p. 123. l. 5. for
which, r. with.

QUESTIONS, AND Cases of CONSCIENCE About Divisions, Schisms, Heresies, and a
Toleration of them.
Qu. WHence do Discords, and Divisions arise?

They are the fruits of the flesh, whereas love, etc. are the fruits of the
Spirit: so that a man cannot more demonstrate himself to be in the flesh, and
devoide of Gods Spirit, then by a contentious dividing spirit. Some,
Salamander-like, cannot live but only in the fire of contention. These like
Marcion, with great boldness will cry out, We will cast fire into the Church,
and divide it, But hereby they show of what temper they are, and who is their
father, even the envious one, the devil, who delights to sow tares amongst the
wheat. Gal. 6.20, etc. there are two Principles of all men's actions, the Flesh,
the works whereof are, Hatred, Strife, Emulations, etc. all tending to break
Unity: And the Spirit, whose works are, Love, Peace, Gentleness, etc. all
uniting. If thou would then know who is a godly man, judge of the Tree by its
fruits. Hence, 1 Cor. 3.3. If there be Envyings, and Divisions amongst you, are
you not carnal? etc. So James 3.13, 14. Who is a wis^man? Let him show it by a
good conversation with meekness: And he devides Wisdom into that which is
earthly and devilish, the mother of Envyings, and Strife; and the Wisdom which
is from above, which is pure, peaceable, etc. therefore if any be given to
Division, Let not such glory, says the Apostle, nor lie against the truth. So
then, though a man pretend to never such singular gifts, such extraordinary
Teachings of Gods Spirit, if he be contentious, he is not to glory, yea, He
lies against the truth, Such will say, Its for the Truth they have made these
Divisions: But its false, the Truths of Christ are to be maintained by the
Spirit of Christ: For the wrath of man works not the Righteousness of God; nor
the perverseness of man, the Truth of God.

Quest. What does the word Schism signisie?

Answ. First, A Rent, Division, Breach,

Secondly, A Rent in the Church, Cor. 1.10, 11, 12. That there be no
Dissentions amongst you; The Original word, is Schism.

Quest. What is Schism?

Answ. Its a Dissension, Heresy is a departing from the Communion of the
Church in respect of Doctrine. So Schism is a cutting off ones self for
external things. This St. Paul complains of, 1 Cor. 1.10. etc. Every one of you
says, I am Paul's, etc.

Schism is affirmed also of Division in Doctrine, John 7.43.

Quest. Whence does Schism proceed?

Answ. First, Satan, that first Schismatic, Jude 6. who by his Tentations often
prevails with men to depart from God, as he did with Adam in Paradise.

Secondly, From the members of Satan, who love to fish in troubled waters,
though all proceed not from the same cause. For some make Rents in the Church
through hatred, as the Donatists did. Some through Ambition, and desire of
Rule: Thus the Papacy increased by great Schisms. Others separate out of
ignorance, as the multitude did, John 7.43, 52. Others out of a vain admiration
of their own worth, and holiness, as the Anabaptists, Separatists, etc. of old.

Thirdly, to another. Hence its called, Love in Faith, Tit. 3.15. And in the
Spirit, Col. 1.8. Therefore if Gods people quarrel one with another, it shows
that their love was not, because they were godly, but for other ends: And as
for the wicked, the very Heathen could say, Amicitia nisi inter bonos esse non
potest, Friendship can only be upon grounds of goodness, and Honesty: Therefore
if you see men to agree upon evil grounds, because others are like themselves,
or for matter of profit, or pleasure, here is no sure concord. Herod and Pilate
cannot agree, unless it be against Christ. Wicked men never agree long
together, except it be to oppose Godliness.

Quest. How many sorts of striving, or Contentions are there?

Answ. First, Good, and laudable: contend for the faith: To be in an Agony for
it, Ju^e 4. And we must in our places ever zealously quarrel with wicked men,
for the honor and glory of God. This some call quarrelling, and making tumults;
as Jer. 15.10. Woe is me, b cause I am a man of Contention: Why so? because he
reproved them for their sins.

Secondly, striving; and that about a twofold Object.

1. In Civil, Worldly things, Quarrelling, and Wrangling about them.

2. In religious matters. Thus some desire to be cavelling against the truth,
and to gainsay the Duties that are commanded: or needlessly striving about idle
Disputes that make not for godliness, Tit. 3.7. A great disease of our times.

Quest. What are the causes of these Contentions?

Answ. First, works of the flesh, Gal. 5.20. They come from the lusts in our
members, Jam. 4.1.

Secondly,

1. Pride. Where Pride is, there is Contention, Prove. 13.10. A proud man cannot
but strive, as fire cannot but set all on a flame. All our Divisions, whether
public or private, come from Pride. Every man would have his Will to be done,
whereas lowliness of mind keeps all in peace.

2. Ambition, and vainglory, which comes near to Pride. When men are ambitious
for earthly Power, or High places in the Church: This makes many quarrels. As
did Absolons ambition for the Kingdom. This like a great Whale Toon swallows up
all the good, and welfare of others.

3. Malicious froward Dispositions: Some are of such turbulent natures, that
they cannot be quiet but in disturbing others: and have not only their tongues,
but their hearts set on fire by hell, Jam. 3.6. These are dangerous persons in
a Kingdom; For they do to it, as the devil did to the possessed body, sometimes
throw it into the water; sometimes into the fire: so they are also in Cities
and Families. If Peacemakers are blessed, then strife-makers are cursed.

4. Covetous and sinful love to the things of the world: As its said, Those
two Pronouns, Meum and Tuum, make all the strife in the world. An unjust desire
to have more then our own, or lusting after other men's, or discontent with our
own present condition, fills the world with strife.

5. Impatience, when we cannot with godly wisdom and patience pass by wrongs
and injuries. The Scripture bids us To requite evil with good: and if one
strike us on one cheek, to turn the other, Luke 6.29. And to prya for those
that persecute us, Luke 6.27,28.

Quest. What are the sinful effects of striving about worldly things, and how
ar^ they discovered?

Answ. First, Ephesians. 4 31. Mat. 5.22. Michael did not give the devil railing
language, Jude 9. These foul mouths argue a foul heart: such black tongues will
be punished with blackness of darkness in hell, if they repent not.

Secondly, Back-biter is an Heathenish sin, Romans 1.30. Its the Character of one
that shall not ascend into Gods holy hill, Psalm. 15.3. Such have a devil in
their tongue, and they which hear with approbation, have a devil in their ear.
Such tongues are compared to coals of fire, Psalm 120.5. Fire is their sin, and
fire will be their punishment.

Thirdly, In a delight to go to Law: Corinthians strifes break out, 1 Cor. 6.1.
etc. Thou will go to Law whatever it cost thee; but it may cost thee thy soul,
and salvation for thy malice.

Fourthly,

Quest. What are the effects of sinful strifes about religious matters?

Answ. They are seen two ways.

First, When men cavil against, and contradict the truth, though never so
evidently discovered, especially because of the purity of it; because it
convinces and arraigneth their lusts, and greatly condemns them. Thus the
Pharisees were frowardly bent to oppose Christ, so that when they were
silenced, they did as the Devil to him, left him for a season, and afterward
returned to tempt him again; Whereas Christ's sheep hear his voice, and follow
him.

Secondly, profit, or if profit, yet they attend not to them in their places:
condemned by St. Paul, Tit. 3.9. Such are like a field that bears nothing but
briars and thorns; when one asked Christ, whether Many should be saved? He
answareth him not directly, but bids him, strive to enter in at the straight
gate, Luke 13.23. thereby rebuking his curiosity.

Quest. What are the aggravations of this sin of Discord and Contention?

Answ. Romans 12.18. 1 Pet. 3.8. We should imitate Christ, who did not strive,
nor lift up his voice in the street, but lived meekly and peaceably.

Secondly, We pray to him to forgive us our sins as we forgive others. Hence
Mat. 5.24. We must leave our gift at the Altar, and go, and be reconciled? etc.

Thirdly, God, one Christ, one Spirit, one Baptism. Ephe. 4.5. Why fall ye out?
ye are Brethren. Christianity is reproached, when ye seek to devour one
another. Its an Argument that the faith of Christ never had any power over such.

Quest. How may Schisms be divided?

Answ.

First, Jeroboam rent ten Tribes from the other two, and made a distinct
Kingdom of them, which breach was never made up again: These Civil Divisions
are sad Prognostics of the destruction of those places where they are.
Aristotle gives several differences between Monarchy and Tyranny; whereof this
is one, that Tyranny makes, and foments Factions and divisions, that so while
people have a mutual hatred against, and diffidence one in another, the Tyrants
may reign more securely, according to that true Maxim, Divide and impera But
this is wicked Policy: Christ says, Blessed are the Peacemakers, therefore
cursed are the Division-makers. It was horrible wickedness in Achitophel to
persuade Absolon to go into his Fathers Concubins that he might make the breach
irreconcilable.

Secondly,

1. When different Doctrines and Opinions are maintained; and these are called
Heresies.

2. When there is a soundness of Doctrine, yet men break the bonds of love, and
live in malice and uncharitableness, and this is called Schism: Both these are
very dangerous. When God speaks of the destruction of a people, Za^h. 10.11,
13. he breaks his two staves, the one called Beauty, the other Bonds, that is,
their Unity and their order.

Thirdly, Divisions are either personal between godly men particularly. Pa^l
and Barnabas were at bitter dissension, Acts 15.39. about the choice of a
companion. So Paul and Peter, Gal. 2.11. Or more public between Societies and
Societies, Churches and Churches. Thus many believing Jews raised great
Dissentions about Circumcision, and retaining the customs of the Law.

We read that Epiphanius and Chrysostom were at great variance, though both
Orthodox. Several days before the famous Council of Nice met together, those
many Bishops did nothing but draw up Libels and Accusations one against
another, till Constantine took all their papers, and burnt them before their
faces. I might add that other great Council of Constantinople against
Nestorius, with what factions, carnal Policies, and sinful animosities
Nestorius and his party did strive against the Orthodox: But we need not look
so far back for Examples: our present times have produced too many amongst
ourselves, which can never be sufficiently lamented. Now all these Divisions
come from sin, and tend to confusion.

Quest. What makes Division?

Answ. First, When men promote any false, or wicked way against Truth and
Godliness. All parties use to brand one another with Division and Faction, the
Papists call the Protestants Sectaries, and say, the leaving of their Church
that had such Antiquity and Universality was a Schism: the Metrapolitan makes
all those guilty of Schism, whether Bishops or Presbyters that recede from
Obedience to him, as appears by a late Book (Hammond of Schism) But it is not
the branding of any with this name, that makes the thing so. If Elijah, and
some few with him will not bow the knee to Baal, its no sinful Schism, or
Division. When Arianism, like a Deluge overflowed the Church, the Orthodox had
their private and secret meetings, not daring to communicate in the public
worship with the Arians, yet were they not Schismatics. If Gods people come
out of Babylon, and separate from her uncleanness, this is not Schism, but a
duty commanded by God; therefore before we charge any with the crime of Schism,
we must look to the cause, and the matter, who has the truth and Gods cause,
otherwise we may judge unjustly.

Secondly, He that strives is not crowned, unless he strive lawf^lly, 2 Timothy
2.5. A good intention, even in a good matter, without good order, is not
warrantable. The Disciples that would have fire come down from Heaven, knew not
what spirit they were of. Uzzahs dreadful punishment for touching the Ark,
should make us look, not only to the Duty, but to the order of it. We must not
do evil that good may come of it, Romans 3.8. The damnation of such is just.

Thirdly, A third thing in Division is, Paul teaches every member in the body
to keep to its own office and calling: And, Oh! that our times would learn this
lesson, we should not have such woeful confusions in Church and State as of
late we have had: what a blessed Unity and comely Order would Church and State
be in, if every member would do his proper work. What have private men to do in
a Pulpit? What have soldiers to do in constituting a Civil Government, or
Governors? Where is their Warrant? How will they answer it to God or man? They
are commanded to offer violence to no man, and to be content with their wages,
Luke 3.14.

Fourthly, Is It Division, Righteousness and Truth needs not our passions.

Quest. Whence else proceed these Divisions?

Answ.

Secondly, Corah, Dathan and Abiram, Number. 16.3. They thought there was as much
in every person, as in the Priests that God had set apart for that Office: All
the Congregation is holy* Hence Paul commands us, not to mind high things, Romans
12.16. which are above our place or capacity: So was it with David, Psalm
131.1. Hence, 1 Cor. 8.2. If any think that he knows any thing, etc.

Thirdly, Judas make such a sad breach. Men that judge gain to be godliness,
soon make shipwreck of faith, and a good conscience, 1 Timothy 6.5. Many of the
Arch-Hereticks formerly made those Divisions, because they missed of that
worldly Pomp and greatness which they expected.

4. Tertullian turned a Montanist, was the loose lives of the Roman Clergy.

Q. What are the effects of Division and Disunion in the Church, especially in
the Ministry?

Answ. First, But woe to the world because of offenses in this kind: It had
been better for such that they had never been born.

Secondly, It much grieves,

Thirdly, seek the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness.

Fourthly, Protestants do exceedingly harden the Papists in their way.

Quest. What then should people do, when Ministers, and Professors are thus
divided?

Answ. distance amongst the Teachers. As John's Disciples, out of envy, did what
they could to stir up John's spirit against Christ: but he by his humility soon
quenched those sparks, John 3.30.

Secondly,

Thirdly, Samaritans believed Christ upon the woman's report at the first, but
afterward they believed him for his own sake.

Fourthly,

Quest. Why is Unity so necessary?

Answ. Ephesians. 4.1. where the Apostle having exhorted Christians to walk worthy of
their Calling, he instanceth in such graces as procure unity, as lowliness,
meekness, and forbearing one another; the end of which graces is set down,
verse 3. endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace:
then verse 4. he shows the Reason why there should be such Unity; there is one
body: Christ has not many bodies: All the people of God are one body, and its
very destructive when one member of the body conspires against the welfare of
another. Again, There is one Spirit: there is but one spirit that enlightens,
and sanctifies the whole Church of God; why then should there be so many ways,
and opinions; yet all pretended to be of the same spirit. Indeed there are
diversity of gifts, and operations, yet the same spirit: But he does not say,
Contrarieties, and the same spirit; for that is impossible. Again, There is one
hope of our Calling: we are called to one inheritance, there is but one Heaven:
why therefore should we be so different by the way, when one place of glory
must hold all; and if one Church cannot now contain us, how shall we think that
one heaven will? Again, There is one Lord, i.e. Christ, who is to be served by
us. Indeed if there were many Lords; as the Papists set up many Saints in
heaven, all which have their peculiar worship, then no wonder if there were
several faiths, and worships; But the Lord Christ is one; he is not divided. 1
Cor. 1.13. If Christ be not divided, there should be no division in the Church.
Again, There is one Faith, i.e. One Systeme of Doctrine to be believed: Though
there be many particulars, yet they make up one entire truth; Indeed, there be
many called Religions, and called Churches, but in truth, there is but one true
Church. Again, There is one Baptism, i.e. one Profession of the Doctrine of
faith: so the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is made an Argument of Unity. 1
Cor. 10.17. The Sacraments manifest one body, one Spirit: why then are there so
many Rents and Divisions about the Sacraments, which yet are the bodies, and
seals of Unity, and Communion? Lastly, There is one God, and Father of all,
therefore we ought to be at Unity. God being but one, cannot be divided in
himself; he cannot command things to be done, or believed contrary to himself:
upon all these considerations we should endeavor after Unity. I might add,
that there is Unity in hell, all the Devils agree against the Church: If there
be Unity against us, shall there not be Unity amongst us?

Quest. Seeing God has promised one heart, and one way, and Christ has prayed
so earnestly, that they may be one. John 17.21. How is it that there are so
many breaches amongst the godly?

A. That he came to send fire, and a sword in the earth, etc. Luke 12.49. which
is not from the nature of Christ's Doctrine, which is the Gospel of Peace, but
from the corrupt indisposition of the Subject, as the Sun offends soar eyes, so
then the godly, and the wicked can have no unity, Proverbs, 29.27.

Secondly, betwixt these, therefore in the Church of God, seeing there be so
many that still retain their beastly nature though they are called Christians,
hence it is that in the Church there are often such deadly oppositions. Its no
marvel though even amongst those that pretend so highly to Christ there be sad
divisions: for many of them are in the flesh still, and savor not
experimentally the things of God. Act. 20.30. 2 Pet. 2.1. There are false
Prophets; and why? because they are men of corrupt minds, and 1 John 2.19. They
went out from us, because they were not of us, etc. and 1 Cor. 11.19. There
must be Heresies, that such as are sound may be esteemed.

Thirdly, All truth, John 16.13. and the Unction that teaches them all things,
1 John 2.20. A godly man cannot live, and die in a fundamental error.

Fourthly,

Fifthly,

Sixthly,

Quest. What means may be used for preventing, and healing Divisions in the
Church?

Answ.

First, Popish party, say, that the way to prevent Division, is a rigid, and
imperious commanding of uniformity in every punctilio; so that no dissent shall
be allowed to a man, though humble, and peaceable, and earnestly desiring to
find out the truth. Thus Victor Bishop of Rome, made a great rent in the
Church about the time of keeping Easter, whom Iraeneus gravely opposed. Its
true, the least truth of Christ is precious, and we are not to deny it, yet may
we not violently obtrude it, except the contrary be damnable, Mat. 9.17. If new
wine be put into old bottles, the bottles will break: So whilst men impose
opinions, and practices of less consequence, upon a people not prepared,
instead of promoting unity, they make factions: yet this way has much infested
the Church when some have been in power: they have pressed unity, not so much
out of love to Christ, as to keep up their interest. Aut subscribe, aut
discede, was a speech of old in the Church.

Secondly, Socinians, and that is a licentious, and unbounded toleration of all
damnable Heresies, and opinions, and this Julian the Apostate promoted as the
most probable way to overthrow the Christian Religion: and as the former was
maintained by those that had power in their hands, so has this by the
oppressed party: But the Scripture prescribes a middle way between these two.
For, Rev. 2.2, 6. the Angels of the Churches are commended for not tollerating,
nor bearing with such as taught false doctrines, and such as did suffer them
are reproved, Rev. 2.14, 15, 20. and the Apostles in their Epistles do oppose
false doctrines, and false Teachers with as much earnestness, as false, and
corrupt practices, 1 Timothy 1, 20. Paul delivered up to Satan Hymenaeus, and
Alexander for their blasphemies and false doctrines: and commands, Tit. 3.10.
that we should reject an Heretic after the first and second admonition. Whence
its clear, that Church Censures should be inflicted upon obstinate offenders in
this kind. This unbounded tolleration the Remonstrants themselves, who yet
cried up a liberty of prophesying as their great Diana, did condemn, and
professed that it was better living ubi nulla licent, then ubi omnia: where
there was no latitude, then where all things were allowed; this licentiousness
then does not heal but increase breaches: for it gives way to men's corruptions
to vent themselves.

Quest. What then are the true remedies?

Answ.

First, Phil. 3.15, 16. wherein we have attained let us walk by the same rule,
etc.

Secondly, own those officers whom God has set over them, then these run
into by paths. Ephesians. 4.12, 13. One end of the Ministry is to keep men from
being carried about as children, etc. the other for our spiritual edification,
till we all come in the unity of faith, etc.

Thirdly, Of some have compassion making a difference, Jude 22. Consider how
prone we are to receive error for truth, and that we stand by Gods strength,
this will move us to pity others.

Fourthly, danger. Thus the Papists represent the Protestants, as if they were
the greatest Heretics that ever were: The end of such is not to bring
dissenters to the knowledge of the truth, but to disgrace and defame them;
therefore its necessary in all disputations to state the controversy aright,
without which, men may write volumes, and bring multititude of arguments, and
all to no purpose. To know therefore the true and proper distance is the best,
and only way at last to unity.

Fifthly, where sin abounded, there grace abounded much more, some wicked
persons forced this consequence upon the Apostles doctrine: Let us sin that
grace may abound, Romans 6.1. Thus the Papists charge this hideous calumny, and
consequence upon the Doctrine of the Protestants, that God is the Author of
sin: whereas we use but the words and expressions of the Scripture. Indeed,
what is the evident and plain consequence of a doctrine, that is to be
accounted of as the doctrine it self: As whatsoever is a clear genuine
consequence from Scripture is Scripture, but not every consequence that we are
apt to deduce.

Sixthly,

1. We should in such cases question and examine our own spirits, and not
presently believe our own hearts; we should have modest doubtings of our own
ignorance, and pronenesse to err in every thing that we are so confident of:
So we see in Paul, 1 Cor. 7.12, 25, 26, 40. Wheresoever the Spirit of God leads
into all truth, there he does likewise into all humility.

2. Before we publish it to the world, we should communicate it to some able,
wise, and learned persons in the Church of God, who have the Spirit of God, and
his unction as well as we. Paul, though immediately called by Christ, yet went
up to Jerusalem to confer with the chief pillars there, and though he was
miraculously converted, yet he must go to Ananias to be further directed. So, 1
Cor. 14.29, 32. those that had extraordinary gifts, yet were to submit to the
judgments of others.

Seventhly, we must highly prize, Paul, even after he had been wrapped up into
heaven, desired to know nothing but Christ crucified. Peter thought it not
inconvenient to write the same things they knew already. Nothing has caused
greater rents in the Church then an affectation of singular, and high things.
To bring in some unheard, and unknown truths. It shows great pride when men
affect to be accounted the authors of such new notions, as the Jesuit of his
scientia media: Ego primus inveni. But to be weary of known truths, is to be
weary of the same God, and the same Christ.

Quest. What will keep up unity in the Churches order, and prevent Schism there?

Answ.

Secondly, Plead with thy mother, as, Hosea 2.2. and if thou must needs depart,
yet do it unwillingly, being compelled to it by the enemies of all godliness,
who will not suffer thee under their power. When those in Israel, that would
not worship the Calves, departed from Jeroboam, and went to Jerusalem to
worship, they did not make the Schism, but Jeroboam, 2 Chronicles. 11.13, 14, 15.
the Papists call us Schismatics, because we withdrew from obedience to the
Pope as head of the Church, but ours was a secession from their errors, not a
Schism; they are the Schismatics, who fell from the primitive order, and the
institutions in the Church: so that the Pope is the greatest Schismatic that
ever was in the Church, and drove us from his Church by fire and faggot.

Thirdly, Austin says, do Plus perturbare infirmos bonos, quam corrigere
animosos malos. Only these two things we have to do.

1. As our Calling, and Relation is, so to oppose, and reprove the Corruptions
that do abound. Thus the Prophets of old, and Christ, and his Apostles did with
zeal rebuke the prevailing Corruption of their times, but separated not.

2. When we have thus done our duties, if corruptious are still suffered, we
must leave our Complaints with God, who has promised at last to take all
scandals out of the Church; and in the mean time we must sigh under this burden
patiently.

Fourthly, Schism in the Church, take heed of Pride, and Ambition, and seeking
after preferments in the Church: Most of those that have made the greatest
Rents in the Church were discontented, because with Diotrephes, they could not
have the pre-eminence: Even Christ's Disciples began to quarrel one with another
De primatu, who should be the chiefest, which made Christ so often to press
Humility.

Quest. How may Divisions amongst the godly in their particular, civil
deportments be prevented, or healed?

Answ. Jam. 4.1. From whence come jars, and fightings? Is it not from your
lusts? first we have warring within, and then one against another. Now any lust
unmortified, is enough to set the Church on fire: so Covetousness is a great
cause of Discord: as the Philistines, and Isaac, strove about the wels, Genesis
26.20, 21. we fall out about earthly things, because the Creature is too scant
to give content to all: so envy causes disunion, etc.

Secondly, peace of God: and God is called the God of peace: and Christ, The
Prince of Peace, and our Peace: and he has prayed for Unity, and peace amongst
his members, John 17.21.

Mr. Ant. Burgess on John 17. and 1 Cor. 3.

Quest. How may it be proved that Divisions in Church or State are so
dangerous, and destructive?

Answ. By the examples of all ages: Jews were at unity amongst themselves in
David's, and Solomon's time, they flourished exceedingly: but so soon as they
were divided into ten Tribes, and two Tribes, they presently began to war one
against another, whereby a door was opened to foreign invasions, and at last
to their utter destruction. As long as Alexander the great lived, and kept the
Grecian Empire in Unity, it greatly flourished: but after his death, when by
his Major Generals it was divided into parts, their Divisions increased till
they had destroyed one another. Whilst the Empire of Rome continued entire, it
increased, and flourished exceedingly: but so soon as it was divided into the
Eastern, and western Empire, it declined, till at last it came to utter
destruction. When Jersualem was besieged by Titus Vespasianus, there were three
great factions in it under three chief Captains; Jehochanan, Eleazar, and
Simeon, who killed more by their mutual quarrels, then the Romans without did,
and this proved the ruin of that famous City. The like may be said by
Constantinople, when it was taken by the Turks: But we need to look no further
then to England to see how destructive Divisions in a State are: When Caesar
first entered into Britain, he was called in by the faction of Mandubratius: And
Tacitus acknowledges, that the Factions, and Divisions which were amongst the
Britains, gave advantage to the Roman Victories. Afterward Vortigerne, that
had gotten the British Kingdom by a faction, called in the Saxons, who taking
advantage of those Divisions amongst the Britains, made themselves Masters of
all. So likewise when the Normans conquered England, they were called in by
Factions that were here, especially the faction of Earl Goodwin, and his son
Tostane. But I need not mention the miseries of England in the factious times
of the Barons-wars: nor in the woeful Divisions between the two houses of York,
and Lancaster. Our eyes have seen the sad effects of our late Divisions, and
our hearts ache to think of the miseries that are coming upon us by reason of
the continuance, and increase of Divisions amongst us.

Quest. But why are Divisions so destructive to Kingdoms, States, Cities, and
Families?

Answ. First,

1. Divisions destroy the peace of a Kingdom. Now there is nothing that
preserves a Kingdom more then peace: The Hebrews comprehend all blessings under
the name of Peace; Heaven it self is Tranquillitas pacis. Take away peace, and
you destroy a Kingdom. Indeed, no outward Blessing is real where peace is
wanting.

2. Divisions take away the Unity of a Kingdom. Now Unity is the great
preserver of Church and State; yea, of every thing: what preserves the Fabric
of Heaven from falling in pieces, but the Union, and Conjunction of the parts
of it. The Church of Christ at first, Calente adhuc sanguine Christi, as Jerome
speaks, whilst the blood of Christ was yet warm, was at unity in it self, and
flourished exceedingly. Acts 2.46, 47. The Church was then like a pure Virgin,
attended with all the graces of Gods Spirit, as with so many handmaids; But
when it fell into Divisions, it lost its Virginity, and all her handmaids
forsook her. Unity is the glue and soder that cements a Kingdom, or Church
together: and therefore Paul calls love the bond of perfection, Col. 3.16.

Secondly, Pandora's box, which being once opened, out-flew all kind of
Sicknesses, and Diseases; As,

1. Where are intestine Divisions, there dwells Strife, and Envy, and where
these are, there is Confusion, and every evil work, Jam. 3.16.

2. They open a door to let in a foreign enemy.

3. They so weaken a Kingdom that they make it unable to resist a foreign
enemy. Unita vis fortior, strength conjoined is much stronger; but divided, is
much weakened.

4. Divisions set a Kingdom against it self, and then it cannot stand, Mat.
12.15. they bring in Civil wars, which of all others are most uncivil: For, 1.
There are no wars so unnatural as Civil wars: The Father fights against the
Child: the Child against his Father. Friend against friend, etc. 2. There is no
war so cruel, as Civil War. The Hagarens, and Ammonites, and Moabites, and
Edomites, were the greatest enemies that Israel had, because they were nearly
related to them. Odia proximorum sunt acertima. the hatred of brethren is most
bitter when they fall out. So Jud. 20.28. 3. These wars are most treacherous:
for there will always be false brethren, that will labor to betray their
brethren into the hands of their enemis. Complain therefore as Jer. 9.2, 3, 4,
5. 4. These of all wars are most uncomfortable, therefore when Israel had
overcome Benjamin, instead of rejoicing, they all fell a weeping, Judge. 21.2.


Quest. What are the mischiefs which proceed from Church Divisions?

Answ. Julian railed against Religion in his days, because [as he said]
Christians lived together as so many dogs and bears, rending, and tearing one
another: who then (says he) would be so simple as to become a Christian.

Secondly, Babel was hindered by the confusion of Tongues: so is the building of
Zion also. For every one strives to promote his own private way of Reformation,
and to hinder all others. Fpiphanius tells a sad story of Meletius, and Peter,
both Bishops, both Confessors of the Christian Faith: both of them condemned to
the mettle mines for their Profession, who upon a small difference, fell into so
great a Schism, that they drew a partition between each other, and would not
hold Communion together in the same worship of Christ, for which
notwithstanding, they jointly suffered; which dissension of theirs caused such
a Schism in the Church, as did it greater hurt then any open persecution.

Thirdly,

4.ly, Disputations, so that they have little leisure to repent, and prosecute
the power of godliness.

Fifthly,

Sixthly, Atheism: Do not some say, we know not of what kind of Religion to be,
and therefore we will be of none.

Seventhly, John 16.2. They shall kill you, and therein think they do God good
service.

Quest. How many sorts of discontented persons are there amongst us which
nourish these Divisions?

An. Pride, and Covetousness,, because they cannot get those places of profit,
and honor that they expect; or because they have not the credit with the people
that others have; hence they dislike the public proceedings, and make parties
and factions. These, Whatsoever their pretenses are, serve not our Lord Jesus
Christ, but their own belly: and by good words, and fair speeches, deceive the
hearts of the simple, Romans 16.18.

Secondly, Heresies grow in times of distraction, and division. These desire to
fish in troubled water, because then they can catch most fish: These are like
unto Sanballat, and Tobiah, who foreseeing that if the Temple were built, their
way of worship upon Mount Geresin would be contemned, therefore they did all
they could to disgrace, and discourage that business; so do these all
settlement.

Thirdly,

Quest. What may move us to endeavor after unity?

Answ. Paul persuades us to it. As 1 Cor. 1.10. Now I beseech you brethren by
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you all speak the same thing, and that
there be no divisions amongst you, but that you be perfectly joined together in
the same mind, and the same udgements: and Again, Phil. 2.1, 2. If there be
therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship
of the Spirit, if any bowels, and mercies, fulfill you my joy, that you be like
minded, having the sa^e love, being of one accord, of one mind, etc.

Secondly, Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5, 6. of which before.

3. Consider what an horrible sin it is to divide one from another, and to live
in hatred, and variance one with another. Its a work of the flesh, Gal. 5.19,
20, 21. It excludes from the Kingdom of Heaven. So Rev, 22.15. Such are dogs
that intertear one another. It makes unfit to partake of the Sacrament, Mat.
5.23. It makes God to abhor our fasting days. Isa. 58.4. yea it turns our
prayers into curses: For we pray to be forgiven as we forgive, therefore if we
live in hatred, and variance, we pray not to be forgiven. Pejus est scindere
ecclesiam, quam sacrificare Idolo, says Cyprian; Schism in the Church is a
greater sin then idolatry. Austin says, Its a greater sin then Heresy: As
God himself declared (says he) when he punished Schismatical Corah, and his
company, with a greater punishment then ever he punished Idolaters or Heretics.

Fourthly, Jesuits in the Christian world, If all the devils in hell should
join together to conspire our ruin, they could not find out a more ready way
then this which they have practiced of late years, to keep up, and increase our
division: the woeful effects whereof are so obvious that I need not mention them.

Fifthly, way to save England from ruin, they could not find out a readier
way then by uniting us together. England is an Island divided from all the
world; and if it were not divided within it self, it need not fear all the
world.

Sixthly, Plutarch tells us that Aristides, and Themistocles from their very
child-hoods were often squabling, and could never agree together: But when a
common enemy came against them, Aristides went to Themistocles, and said to
him: Sasapiamus, omissa tandem, etc. If we be wise, let us now leave off our
former contentions, and apply our selves unanimously to promote the public
good.

Seventhly, Satan were divided against Satan, his Kingdom could not stand.

Quest. What other means may we use for procuring Unity, and Peace?

Answ. us at peace one with another. Tranquillus Deus tranquillat omnia. If God
be at peace with us, he will make the very stones in the street to be at peace
with us. If our ways please the Lord, he will make our very enemies to be at
peace with us, Prove. 16.7. But when by sin we provoke God, he has threatened to
dash us one against another, Jer. 13.13.

Secondly, Socinian opinion mentioned before, of an unbounded toleration of all
Religions, which will certainly bring confusion; and at the same door that all
Religions come in, the true Religion will go out.

Thirdly, be clothed with humility,

1. With humility of judgment to think that others may know the truth as well
as our selves, to have a low esteem of our own understanding. For he that
thinks he knows any thing, knows nothing as he ought to know, 1 Cor. 8.2.
and if any man teach otherwise, etc. he is proud, knowing nothing, etc. 1 Timothy
6.3, 9. Let us not therefore be wise in our own eyes, nor lean to our own
understanding, Prove. 3.5.

2. With humility of heart. An humble heart is a quiet peaceable heart, and it
will not distract, or destroy the peace of a Nation by unnecessary disputations.

Fourthly, Demas from Paul.

Fifthly, an angry man's stirs up strife, etc. Prove. 29.22. Hence, Mark 9.50.
Have salt in your selves, (i. e. the salt of mortification) and have peace one
with another.

Sixthly,

Seventhly,

Eighthly, Abraham, who yielded his right up to Lot for peace-sake, Genesis 13.9.

Ninthly,

Tenthly, to heal our Divisions, Romans 14.22. Have thou faith, have it to thy
self before God: Disturb not the Church with thy private faith. Indeed if it be
absolutely necessary to salvation, its charity to acquaint the Church of God
with it: but if we can be saved without it, this is not a fit time to broach
any new opinions.

Quest. Whether may Magistrates tyrannize over men's consciences?

Answ. By no means: Chron. 15.13. and 34.32. Ezra. 10.8. Deuteronomy. 13.5, 6. 2 Kings
23.1. they are Gods Ministers for this end, Romans 13.4. 1 Pet. 2.19. they are
not only keepers, but vindices utriusque tabulae, punishers of those that
transgress either of the Tables. Indeed Magistrates are wisely to distinguish
between persons, and persons, and between errors and errors. Some persons are
pious, and peaceable; others turbulent, and furious. Some errors are such as
subvert the Faith, and destroy the power of godliness: Others are of a lesser
nature which may consist with godliness, and with an unity in the Faith, and
if it be lawful for them to shut up a man that has the plague on his body that
he may not infect others: surely they may restrain a man that has the plague
of Heresy upon his soul, that he may not destroy the souls of thousands: For
such Heresies do eat as a Canker.

Mr. Calam. Parl. Ser. December. 25. 1644

Quest. How may Schism be distinguished?

A. Cameron makes a twofold Schism.

First,

Secondly, themselves for the worship, and service of God, and this will not,
so easily as some imagine, be justified to hold consistency with the peace, and
order which is so desirable in the Churches of Christ.

Quest. What conclusions may be laid down about separation?

Answ. First, his body, the fullness of him that fills all in all, Ephesians. 1.23.
It would dis-joynt that sweet harmony, which is the beauty, and strength of
that body, Ephesians. 4.16. In this our pilgrimage we must still be coming to this
Church, but never separating from it, because in coming hither we come to Jesus
the author of the New Covenant, Hebr. 12.22, 23, 24.

Secondly, Church triumphant is absolutely perfect: weeds will be springing up
in all Gods gardens here upon earth.

Quest. But what if some wicked persons continue in Church society, does not
that give occasion of separation to others?

A.

1. That tollerating may be only an error, and infirmity in the Church,
wherein we are to bear with it, and not thereupon to separate from it. So Ames
in his cases of conscience. l. 4. c. 24. Sect. 15.

2. Patience is to be used to a particular brother when he is overtaken with a
fault, Gal. 6.1. much more must we express it to a Church.

3. The sudden separating of the godly is not a likely way to cure a sick
Church; but rather puts it into a more desperate condition.

Quest. Does not fellowship with wicked men in the Ordinances make them
ineffectual?

Answ. not to such others whom the Lord inviteth, and for whom he has prepared
these Gospel dainties. Will a loving Father deny his children bread, because
some dogs are crept under the Table? Hence, 1 Corinthians. 11.28. Let a man
examine himself: He says not, Let him examine all others that come.

Object. But, 1 Cor. 5.6. the Apostle says, that a little leaven leaveneth the
whole lump?

Answ.

Obj. But the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10.17. You being many are one bread?

Answ.

Obj. But I cannot do those duties expressed, Matthew. 18.15, etc. remaining in
communion with such a particular Church; may I not then separate?

Answ. pro hic, and nunc, in such, and such circumstances: Affirmative
precepts, though they do bind semper, yet not ad emper; they do not bind me
to act in every juncture of things.

Secondly, Mat. 18. is to cast off an Offender if he hear not the Church, not
to cast off the Church if she censure not him.

Quest. But may we not desire communion with the purest Churches?

Answ. You may:

First,

Secondly, Saints do separate, let it be,

1. A prudent separation, from evil, not from good: from the vile, not from the
precious, Romans 12.9. Abhor that which is evil, and cleave to that which is good.

2. A pious separation, from evil unto good: not from one evil to another; not
from Tyranny to Anarchy, not from prelatical usurpation to popular
licentiousness.

3. A peaceable separation. Separate from the unclean without a Schism, not
rashly condemning all that come not up to your height: not as one affecting a
proud singularity: but as one necessitated to withdraw out of pure tenderness
of conscience, and as one who labors to please his neighbor for good to
edification, Romans 15.1, 2.

4. A loving separation: though thou can not concur in some opinions and
practices wherein the Scripture allows a latitude, yet continue united in
affection, though in diverse Churches, still striving together for the Faith of
the Gospel, Phil. 1.27.

Dr. Hills good separation.

Quest. What is Schism?

Answ. or division of things that were, or should be undivided: and as its
taken in the matters of Religion, it signifies a rupture in the communion, or
from the communion of the Church: upon unnecessary, and unwarrantable causes,
and grounds. Society and communion are of great importance, and the evil of
Schism is answerable to the good of communion; and if Schism be made upon a
cause not warranted by the word of God; its a sin of an high nature; the
formality of Schism consists in the rupture, or departing, though the
coalition, or joining in new bodies, which was called, setting up Altar against
Altar, may make it more pernicious. So that Schism simply, and nakedly, is a
breaking off from the communion of the Church upon such grounds as are not
warranted by Gods Word, as namely, when the same Faith and doctrine in the
substantials is held: yet through passions, or private ends, and fancies, there
is offense taken at lesser matters of fact, or order, and so a divorce is made
for such faults in the yoke fellow as are far short of adultery: As if the
members of any of those seven Asian Churches should have separated because of
some dross in those golden Candlesticks; the Donatists who separated upon that
principle, that there was no true Church where good and bad are mixed, and that
the chafe in the floor made the wheat unclean, was an open Schism: both in
breaking off from the Churches of Christ, and in assuming liberty to erect new
Churches, which they affirmed to be the only true Churches of Christ.

Mr. Ri. Vines Parl. Sermon.

Quest. May we not separate from a visible Church for the corruptions in it,
though they be not in fundamentals?

Answ. Austine observes, that Ezekiel. 9.4. they were marked that mourned for the
sins of the times, not that separated themselves from the Church. In the New
Testament neither Christ, nor his Apostles forsook the Church, but continued in
it, though mavelous corrupt, teaching, reproving, and mourning for it. The
six Asian Churches are blamed for their corruptions, but none bid to separate
for them. To this purpose is that, Heb. 10.24, 25, 38, 39.

Quest. What reasons may be rendered for this?

Answ. First,

Secondly, Separation, Austin told Petilian, that he did not well to leave
Christ's heap of corn, because some chaff was still in it, till the great
winnowing day: and that he showed himself to be lighter chaff, driven out by
the wind of tentation, that flew out before the coming of Christ, the Winnower:
Its folly to leave the Jewels, and Gold in the Gold-finers shop, because of the
iron tongues, and black coals. Noah left not the Ark, because of the unclean
beasts that were in it.

Mr. Stock on Mal.

Quest. How may we prevent seduction by Schismatics?

Answ. Jerusalem was the holy City before Nehemiah built the walls of it.

Secondly,

Thirdly,

Fourthly, which is love: By this shall all men know that you are my Disciples,
if you love one another. Study to be quiet, (says the Apostle) and follow
things that concern peace. Love will make the best, even of bad things, and
give a charitable construction of things doubtful, and pity, and pray for such
as err, especially if they do it out of Ignorance.

Dr. Thomas Tailor on the Tentations.

Quest. How does the common enemy instill poison into the people to make, and
foment our Divisions?

Answ. First, By crying up a boundless,

Secondly,

Thirdly,

Fourthly, By decrying Learning, Israel, lest the Hebrews make them swords, and
spears, 1 Samuel 13.19.

Fifthly, is taken away, no man may breed his child to a hungry, lean, starved
Profession, and so Emissaries (who have an invisible maintenance from abroad)
may the more freely spread their snares.

Sixthly, Leah may go for Rachel, and in a mantle, the Devil may be taken for
Samuel.

Quest. How may these be prevented?

Answ.

First, Exodus 22.30. Lev. 24.16. Number. 15.30, 31. Deuteronomy. 13.5, etc. 16. which
punishments could not be inflicted by any but by the Magistrate, and therefore
they ought to have a care to preserve the Church from destructive evils.

Secondly, kiss the Son, which notes their love, duty, and care of him, and his
interests, and not to suffer any to dishonor him, or profane his Worship,
Psalm 2.12. and for this reason the Law was put into the hand of the King,
Deuteronomy. 17.18. not barely in order to his private Conversation, (for so it
concerns all) but as a Keeper and Maintainer of it, that he might cause others
to keep it too.

Thirdly, That accordingly, Josh. 3.6. Joshuah commanded the Priests to take up
the Ark, and to bear it before the people, 2 Samuel 6.2. David took special order
for bringing home the Ark. And 1 Chronicles. in diverse chapters we read of his
singular care in setting in order the worship of God. Asa purged the Church
from strange Gods, high places, Images, etc. and commanded the people to seek
the Lord, and to do the Law, whereby the Kingdom was quiet, not set in an
uproar, 2 Chronicles. 14.2, 5. And afterward upon the persuasion of the Prophet, he
took courage to do the like, and put down his mother from being Queen for her
Idolatry, etc. 2 Chronicles. 11.8, 16. and presently it follows, There was no more
war, verse 19. The like Jehosaphat did, and found the same blessings, 2 Chronicles.
17.6, etc. 10. Hezekiah began his good reign with reforming the Church, and
restoring Gods Worship, 2 Chronicles. 29.3. to 11. and so continued to do, chap.
3.1, 2, 3, 12, 22. and 31.1. and 11.21. So did Manasse after his Repentance, 2
Chro. 33.15, 16. See how highly Josiah is commended, 2 King. 23.25. and that
for his care to purge the Church of God, 2 Chro. 34.35. The like care we find
in holy Nehemiah, chap. 13.9, 24.22. and in Zerubbabel to build the Temple,
Zach. 4.7, 10. And when Idolatry crept into Micha's house, and the Tribe of
Dan, its imputed to this, At that time there was no King in Israel, Judge. 17.5,
6. and 18.1.

Object. But these are the Old Testament examples, and these Kings happily were
Types of Christ herein, but now Gods people are a willing people, and therefore
not under any coertion?

Answ. First, Whatsoever is written,

Secondly, Mat. 26.41. and being subject to sin, they must be under Government
too. For wheresoever there is a body of men, who through sinful weakness are
subject to miscarriages; there is a necessity of Government to prevent, and
heal them.

Thirdly, the same remedies should be used now as then.

Fourthly, Heretics in the Church, as well as a willing people, against whom
we find severity used by Christ himself, and his Apostles. Christ scourged the
buyers, and Sellers out of the Temple, Joh. 2.15. Peter pronounced a doleful
sentence upon Ananias, and Saphira, Act. 5.4, 5, 9. which acts, though
extraordinary, yet they teach us, that an Evangelical estate has need as well
of a Rod, as of a Spirit of meekness, 1 Cor. 4.21.

Fifthly, Kings shall be nursing fathers to the Church. Isa. 49.23. and Paul
tells us, that they are for a terror to evil doers, Romans 13.3, 4. which words
respect good and evil in the first table as well as in the second. We are
taught to pray for Kings, and for all that are in Authority, that we may under
them lead quiet, and peaceable lives in all godliness, and honesty. Now that
which is the end of our prayer, is likewise the end of their Authority; and if
it be their duty to provide for quiet, peace, and honesty, it is to provide for
godliness too, 1 Timothy 2, 1, 2. Constantine, Theodosius, Valentinian, Justinian,
etc. are highly commended for making Edicts, calling Councils, prohibiting, and
punishing Heresies, as appears in all Authors.

Sixthly,

1. Because God is as much provoked by the one as by the other: yea, the great
sin alleged for the captivity of Juda was, their despising Gods Messengers, 2 Chronicles. 36.16.

2. Secondly, Because such sins do more divide, and untie the bonds of love
which Christian Truth does preserve, then other civil differences, and so
loosen the hearts of men more from one another.

Seventhly, Popish Doctors, who to maintain Papal Supremacy, and to keep all
Ecclesiastical power within themselves, have excluded the civil Magistrate from
it, whereby we may know what hands they be which sow such Doctrines amongst us,
that so they may instill corrupt Doctrines into as many as they find to be fit
tinder to catch that fire.

Object. Is not this to abridge, and anul that liberty which should be indulged
to the Consciences of men?

Answ. We are not, (says Paul) Lords over your faith, but helpers of your joy,
2 Cor. 1.24. It would be an high, and withal a vain attempt.

1. An high attempt: for no man can give Law further then he can reward, and
punish, accuse, and convince: But no man can either search, or reward, or
punish the conscience: therefore none can give Law to it.

2. A vain Attempt: For none but a divine eye can see the conscience, and
therefore none but a Divine Law can bind it. For Writings, and words, if they
be blasphemous, and subversive to Church, or State, and highly derogatory to
the honor of Christ, Civil restraint can reach them, but thoughts it cannot
reach. they are unsearchable to a humane eye, and therefore unreducible to a
humane power. Again, God forbid we should straiten liberty which Christ has
purchased for us. Let every man shand first in that liberty wherewith Christ
has made him free; and cursed be he that would entangle him in any such yoke
of bondage as is contrary to that freedom.

Secondly, Phil. 3.15.

Thirdly,

Fourthly, wicked malicious disturbers of the Doctrine of salvation, and peace
of the Church. As Paul does between the bewitched Galatians, and the Seducers
of them, whom he wishes that they were even cut off, Gal. 5.12. whom yet he
would not have wished so ill to, if they had only made use of a lawful liberty
in sowing false Doctrines.

Fifthly, reprove, rebuke, exhort them with all longsuffering and Doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.2. To admonish them once, and again, and being found unreclaimable, then
to reject them, Tit. 3.10.

Sixthly, Heretics, and would have no Communion with them: they used effectual
means to keep the leaven from the Lump: Show lenity to the persons themselves,
but be zealous for the purity, and peace of the Church, which by divisions is
weakened, distracted, and betrayed.

Quest. What are the best means to be used by Magistrates in these seducing,
and seduced times?

Answ. First, Alexander the great sent Ambassadors to Athens, requiring them to
deliver up their Orators into his hands; Demosthenes speaking to the people
about it, tells them a Fable, that the wolves being at war with the sheep, sent
a message to them, that if they desired quietness, and to have a firm peace
concluded, they should deliver up their dogs unto them, which as soon as they
had done, they were devoured by the wolves. The like cunning use our
Adversaries now: that they may make a prey of the people, they by all means
seek to pull down our Ministry, and Schools of learning, that the watchmen
being removed, the sheep may be exposed to ruin.

Secondly, not presumptuously deprive themselves of the means of grace, and
salvation, as very many do, who in these times of licentiousness have for
diverse years withdrawn themselves from Christian Assemblies where God is
worshipped, and his name made known.

Thirdly,

Fourthly,

Fifthly, Heretics of our times, that wo^ves may not privily creep in under
sheeps clothing.

Sixthly they should hinder the printing, leaven into the people.

Dr. Reynolds Peace of Jerusalem.

A certain friend having sent to Mr. Cotton of Boston in New England sundry
Arguments against persecution for cause of conscience, Mr. Cotton returned him
this answer.

Quest. whether persecution for cause of conscience be not against the Doctrine
of Christ, who is King of Kings?

Answ.

Now in points of Doctrine some are fundamental, without a right belief
whereof a man cannot be saved: others are circumstantial, and less principal,
wherein men may differ in judgment without endangering their salvation. So in
points of practice, some concern the weightier duties of the Law, so as if it
be right, fellowship with God is held: If corrupt, fellowship with him is lost.

Again, in points of doctrine, or worship less principal, they are either held
forth in a meek, and peaceable way, or in so arrogant and violent a way as
tends to the disturbance of civil peace.

Lastly, when we are persecuted for conscience sake, its either for conscience
rightly informed, or for an erroneous and blind conscience: These things
premised, the answer is laid down in these conclusions.

First, Act. 9.4. Why persecutest thou me?

Secondly, Tit. 3.10. where the Apostle gives the direction, and the reason,
viz. because in fundamental points of Doctrine and Worship; the Word of God is
so clear that he cannot but be convinced in conscience of the dangerous error
of his way, after one or two admonitions wisely and faithfully dispensed: and
then if he persist, its not out of conscience, but against his conscience, as
ver. 11. He is subverted, and sins being condemned of himself: If then such
a man be punished, he is not persecuted for his conscience, but justly punished
for sinning against his conscience.

Thirdly, in things of lesser moment, Phil. 3.17. Romans 14.1, 2, 3, 4.

Fourthly,

Obj. But Christ commands to let the tares, and wheat grow together till the
harvest? Mat. 13.30, etc.

Answ. cannot be rooted out, but the good will be rooted up with them, and in
such a case Christ calls for a tolleration, not for a penal prosecution.

Obj. But Christ, Mat. 15.14. would have the blind let alone till they fall
into the ditch, therefore he would have their punishment deferred till their
final destruction?

Answ. Pharisees, over whom they had no power: But this makes nothing to the
matter in hand.

Obj. But, Luke 19.54. Christ blames his Disciples who would have fire to come
down from heaven to consume the Samaritans, who refused to receive him?

Answ. Samaritans were, and many unconverted Christians in Creet, whose
conversion Titus was to seek: or at best with some Jews and Gentiles within the
Church, who, though carnal, yet were not convinced of the error of their way;
and so indeed it became not the spirit of the Gospel to convert aliens to the
faith of Christ by fire, and brimstome, nor to deal harshly in their Ministry,
or private conference with all contrary minded men, as either had not entered
into Church fellowship, or if they had, did yet hitherto sin of ignorance, not
against conscience: But neither of these do hinder Ministers from proceeding in
a Church Way against Church Members, when they become scandalous either in life
or doctrine; much less do they speak at all to the civil Magistrates.

Obj. But the Prophets foretold that carnal weapons should cease in the days
of the Gospel: as, Isa. 2.4. and 11.9. Micha 4.3, 4. and Paul says, our
weapons are not carnal, 2 Cor. 10.4. and Christ bids his disciples not to
persecute, but to pray for their persecutors, because they who are now
persecutors may be converted?

Answ. be of, not Lions, Leopards, etc. not biters one of another: but this
forbids not to drive ravenous wolves from the sheepfold, and to restrain them
from devouring Christ's sheep; and when Paul says, our weapons are not carnal,
he ^enies not weapons of justice to the Civil Magistrate, but only to
Church Officers, and yet he allows them such weapons as are ready to take
vengeance on all disobedience, 2 Cor. 10.6. which refers to the censures of the
Church against scandalous Offenders. 3. When Christ commands his Disciples to
bless them that cursed, and persecuted them, he gives not a rule to public
Officers, either in Church or State, to suffer gross sinners, either in life or
doctrine, to pass unpunished, but teaches private Christians to suffer
persecution patiently, and to pray for their persecutors. 4. Christ indeed
would have his Disciples far from persecuting (for that is a sinful oppression
of men) but this hinders not, but that he would have them execute upon all
disobedience the vengeance required in the word, 2 Cor. 10.6. Romans 13.4. 5.
Though wicked persons may by Gods grace become Disciples, yet we may not do
evil that good may come thereof, but it would be evil to tolerate seducing
Teachers, or scandalous Livers. Christ blames the Angel of Pergamus for
tollerating them that held the Doctrine of Balaam: and the Angel of Thiatira
for tollerating the woman Jesabel to teach and seduce, Rev. 2.14.20.

Object. But some famous Princes have spoken against it, as Steven of Poland,
the King of Bohemia, and our King James?

Answ. First,

Secondly,

Thirdly,

Fourthly, State Policy, which ought not to be tolerated in point of true
Christianity: and sometimes they do it out of necessity, when the offenders are
too many, or too mighty for them to punish. Thus David tolerated Joab in his
murders, but against his will.

Fifthly, Heretics, and Schismatics, notwithstanding their pretense of
conscience. Constantine the great, at the request of the council of Nice,
banished Arius, with some of his followers. He also made a severe Law against
the Donatists; and the like did Valentinian, Gratian, and Theodosius, as Saint
Austin reports in his Epist. 166. Only Julian the Apostate granted liberty to
Heretics, that by tollerating all weeds to grow, the vitals of Christianity
might be choked, and destroyed. This also was the practice, and sin of Valence,
the Arian Emperor.

Object. But many of the ancient Writers, yea, and the Papists themselves, have
condemned persecution for consciencesake.

Answ. Its true, Heretic, is not to persecute, but its a just punishment upon
a wicked, and damnable person, and that not for conscience, but for persisting
in an error, against conscience after conviction.

Secondly, Its true, Pagans which could not be won by the Word; yet this
hinders not; but that if they, or any other should blaspheme the true God, and
his Religion, they ought to be severely punished, and no less do they deserve
it who seduce from the truth to damnable Heresy, or Idolatry.

Thirdly, Whereas Tertullian says, Asia, Rev. 2.

Fourthly, Jerome says, that Heresy must be cut down by the sword of the
Spirit: This hinders not, but that being so cut down, if the Heretic will
still persist in his Heresy to the seducing of others, he may be cut off by
the civil sword to prevent the destruction of others: Therefore Jeroms note
upon those words, [A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump,] is, that a spark
so soon as it appears, is to be quenched: that the leaven is to be removed from
the rest of the dough: that rotten pieces of flesh are to be cut off: and that
a scabbed beast is to be driven from the sheepfold, etc.

Fifthly, Brentius, we willingly grant that no man has power to make Laws to
bind the conscience: yet this hinders not but that men may see that the Laws of
God be observed, which do bind the Conscience.

Sixthly, Austin retracted this opinion of tolleration, which he had held in
his younger years, but in his riper years he recanted, and refuted it, and
shows in his second Book of Retractations, and else where, that if the
Schismatical Donatists were punished with death, they were but justly punished?
For, (says he) They murder souls, and themselves are but afflicted in body;
they put men to everlasting death, and yet complain, when themselves are put to
suffer a temporal death.

Seventhly, Optatus in his third book justifies Macarius, who had put some
Heretics to death, saying, That he had done no more herein then Moses,
Phineas, and Elias had done before him.

Eighthly, Bernard in his sixty six Sermon on the Canticles, says, our of doubt
its better they should be restrained by the sword of him that bears it not in
vain, then that they should be suffered to draw many others into their errors;
For he is the Minister of God for wrath to every evil doer, Romans 13.4.

Ninthly. Mr. Calvin's Judgment is well known, who procured the death of
Michael Servetus for his pertinacy in Heresy, and defended the fact by a book
written upon that argument.

Tenthly, Beza also wrote a book De Haereticis morte plectendis, that Heretics
are to be punished with death. Arelius also took the same course about the
death of Valentius Gentilis, and justified the Magistrates proceeding against
him, in an history written on that Argument.

Object. Its no prejudice to the Commonwealth if liberty of Conscience be
granted to such as truly fear God.

Answ. Heresy, or turbulent Schism, when they are convinced of the sinfulness
of it. But you see it sufficiently proved that an Heretic after once, or twice
admonition, (and so after conviction) or any other scandalous heinous offender
may be excommunicated out of the Church, and so examplarily punished by the
civil Magistrate, as that others may be preserved from their dangerous, and
damnable infection.

Thus you see Mr. Cottons judgment about Tolleration.

Quest. What other remedies may we use against infection by Seducers?

Answ. Eastern Churches were given into the hands of Mahumetans; and
Antichrist prevailed over many in these western Churches, because they loved
not the truth, 2 These. 2.10. None are seduced but such as are cold in love.
Secondly, Labor to practice what we know, and then God will give us a fuller
measure of knowledge, whereby we shall learn to find out, and know Seducers.
John 7.17. If any man will do his will, he ^all know.

Thirdly, Pray to God for Wisdom, Schisms, and Heresies, and Seducers. God has
promised whatsoever is necessary for our strengthening, and bringing to heaven,
therefore he will not deny us so necessary an aid as this is.

Fourthly, Psalm 25.12. What man is he that fears the Lord, him shall he
teach in the way he shall choose.

Dr. Sibs on Phil.

Quest. How do Seducers bring in, and disperse their errors?

Answ. By creeping into houses, Tim. 3.6. They creep into houses, and imitating
Satan's subtilty, they set upon women who can least resist, and lead them
captive, who yet are cunning enough to seduce their husbands: and thus not one,
but many houses are subverted. Tit. 1.11. Such were the Pharisees, Mat. 23.14.
So 2 Pet. 2.2. They privily bring in damnable Doctrines.

Quest. Why does Christ suffer such Deceivers in his Church?

Answ.

Secondly, etc. For Error is of a very spreading, and infectious nature: hence
its compared to Leaven, Mat. 16.22. To a Gangrene, 2 Timothy 2.17. So also is
error in manners, Gal. 2.13. If Peter dissembles, a number will fall with him,
and Barnabas also will be drawn into the dissimulation.

Quest. What motive do Seducers, usually make use of?

Answ. Filthy lucre usually is that which sets them on work: whilst the
Priests, and the Prophets could bite with their teeth, i. e. while they are
well fed, all is peace to the feeders, Mich. 3, 5, 11. but if their greedy
apperites are not satisfied, they prepare war against them, as if they were
enemies to God and man. So Eze. 13.18, 19. The false Prophets polluted the Lord
amongst his people for an handful of barley, and pieces of bread, and would
sew pillows under every arm-hole, promising them ease, and prosperity, and made
vailes for every head, thereby promising Gods protection, and so preached peace
where God had not spoken it, and all to feed their covetousness. Such Merchants
the Apostle speaks of, 2 Pet. 2.3. Who through covetousness with fained words
would adulterate the truth, and make merchandise of souls; so 2 Cor. 2.17.
Phil. 3.18, 19. Their belly is their God.

Quest. How else will it appear that Magistrates may punish an obstinate Hetick
with death?

Answ. 1. There is precept for it, Deuteronomy. 13.5. Deuteronomy. 17.5.

Secondly, There is President, and Example for it, Exodus 32.35. M^ses commanded
3000 of the Levite^ to be ^ain for their Idolatry. And 1 Kin. 18.40. Elias
caused 400 of Baals Priests to be slain, when there was no Mag^^^ are ^o do it.
So of Josias, 2 Kin. 23.6. Jehu. 2 Kin. 10.25. Yea, even Nebuchadnezzar made a
Decree, That whosoever blasphemed the God of Shadrach, etc. should be cut in
pieces, etc. Dan. 3.29. Its foretold that under the Gospel false Prophets
should be punished with death, Zach. 13.3. etc.

Quest. What danger is there in tollerating Heresy, and Heretics?

Answ. Deuteronomy. 29.18.

Secondly, Rebellion, Josh. 22.17.

Thirdly,

Fourthly,

Dr. Tailor on Titus.

Fifthly, Omnis Religio, and nulla Religio: every Religion, and no Religion
will soon be the same: suppose the husband is of one opinion, the wife of
another, children and servants embracing others: what shall the Master of the
house do here? how shall he perform family duties? Dive^sity of opinions will
interrupt their prayers, 1 Pet. 3.7. New opinions suffered will devour the
old: and a tolleration of every Religion will destroy all Religion.

Sixthly,

Seventhly, Irland may shame, and silence such as plead for a general
tolleration: For when a tolleration of Popery in that Nation was proposed by
the Lord Deputy, and his adherents, they gave in their unanimous judgment in
writing, that it was a grievous sin to tolerate Popery, and would make all
that granted it, accessory to all their abominations, and guilty of the
destruction of seduced souls.

Eighthly, Turks to tolerate all religions; but though it find allowance in
the Turks Paradise, yet it should never be admitted in the Paradise of God: It
was a prodigious thing in the days of Jeremiah, chapter 2.28. According to the
number of thy Cities, so are thy gods, O Judah.

Mr. Thorowgoods Parl. Sermon. December. 25. 1644.

Quest. What rules are Magistrates to observe in tollerating smaller errors?

Answ.

Secondly,

Thirdly, French Protestants, who in one of their treaties of Peace made this
motion, that some Officer of the Kings might be deputed to be present at their
Assemblies, for preventing of State jealousies, and vulgar calumnies. For, John
3.21. He that does truth comes to the light, that his deeds may be manifest
that they are wrought in God.

Mr. Mainard in his Parl. Sermon Feb. 26. 1644.

Object. But we see that the States of the united Provinces allow diversity of
Religions?

Answ. First,

Secondly,

Thirdly,

Fourthly,

Fifthly,

Mr. Bailies Parl. Sermon. July 30. 1645.

Quest. How will it appear that Schisms, Heresies, and Errors are so dangerous?

Answ. Tim. 3.8. as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist
the truth, etc. 2 Timothy 2.18. Hymeneus, and Philetus concerning the truth have
erred, etc. Jer. 23.30. the false prophets stole away the Word of God every one
from his neighbor, 2 Cor. 4.2. False Teachers adulterate the word of God: As
in nature, darkness destroys light, and sickness removes health, so errors
destroy, and remove the truth. Hilarious observes, that the Arians made various
confessions of Faith, that they might have none. This is a sore mischief which
our Church for the present labors under; there is scarce any one truth which
by one opinion or other is not directly opposed or indirectly undermined.
Vincentius Lirinensis observes, that when any branch of Divine truth is by any
rejected, presently another, and another, and after that another, and another
will be rejected, till at last none at all will be left remaining. So we see in
the Church of Rome, whose errors at first were little, in comparison, and
almost insensible, but by degrees she became the Mistress, and mother of all
abominations, and a sink and sea of Heresies; the Anabaptists, who at first
erred but in one particular, proceeded, some of them in other parts, to forty
eight more, many of them dangerous, and racing the foundation. Hence the
ancients counted the least alterations in matters of faith, to be the
extremest blasphemy and ungodliness; and were willing to undergo all kinds
of death rather then to desert one syllable of the truth: the least error
entertained, prepares a way for greater, and disposes the heart to reject all
truth, as the pulling of one stone out of an Arch, disposes the whole to ruin.

Secondly, overthrow the faith of some, 2 Timothy 2.18. Athanatius observes in his
time, that new opinions made believers infidels, and infidels more adverse to
the faith. We see it by woeful experience amongst our selves, that multitudes
being unsettled by unsound doctrine, have changed their faith either into
Sceptichisme, to doubt of every thing, or into Atheism, to believe nothing.

Thirdly, heresies, and errors eat up peace, the Legacy of Christ, and love,
the bond of perfection; they overthrow the peace of the Church; they disturb
the peace of the Commonwealth: Hence come envy, strife, reviling, evil
surmisings, etc. and where these are, what peace can there be? Act. 15.2, 24.
when that false Doctrine was broached at Antioch, there was no small
dissension, and disputation, etc. the like befell the Churches of Galatia, Gal.
5.2, etc. and its confirmed by the Holland Arminians, the New England
Familists, besides our own woeful experience. Judge. 5.8. when they served
strange Gods then was war in their gates; and, 2 Chronicles. 15.5, 6. Nation was
destroyed of Nation, City of City, etc. and its righteous with God, that they
which will not maintain peace with heaven, shall have trouble upon earth.

Obj. But a Tolleration of all Religions would be a means to cure all
Dissentions, etc?

Answ. 1. Arians at first seemed as earnest enemies to persecution as these
men, but when they had authority on their side, they raised a more cruel
persecution against the Orthodox then any of the Heathen Emperors did against
the Christians; as may be seen in my General Martyrology: and Athanasius
describes at large the more then beastly cruelty that was used by them against
all sexes and ages, both living and dead, and concludes, that he had said less
then their inhumanity deferved, because it exceeded all expressions.

The Donatists did ordinarily plead for tolleration, and seemed implacable
enemies to all disturbances for conscience sake: yet when under Julian the
Apostate, they had gotten power, who can declare (says St. Austin) what havoc
they made of the Orthodox? All Africa was filled with blood, and desolation by
them: men were rent, mattons defiled, infants slaughtered, women with child
miscarried: none were secure in their houses, the ways were unsafe for
travelers, and the letters of them that boasted to be the captains of the
Saints, were terrible to all.

2. Would such a tolleration establish peace in the Commonwealth? has it ever
done it? Indeed the equality of powers may possibly for a while persuade each
party to suppress their discontents: but can tolleration prevent but that upon
sensible advantages they will break out? Let the experience of former and later
times determine this. What peace was the^e in the Roman Empire upon the
tolleration of the Donatists? Optatus and Austin tell us, that all places were
filled with confusion: the Circumcellions, or furious Sectaries, not waiting
for a Law to authorize them, set the world on fire, so that Macarius, and
others with the forces of the Empire, were scarce sufficient to quench the
burning: was it not so in Germany? in France? in Ir^land? will a tolleration
satisfy Heretics if they have power in their hand? Error may tolerate error:
but can darkness agree with light? or wolves with sheep?

Fourthly, Heresies, Schisms eat up the power of godliness, 2 Timothy 2.16. they
will increase to more ungodliness, 2 Pet. 2.2, etc. Jude 8. where you have the
Heretics of those times described; and Paul tells us, Romans 16.18. that they
that cause divisions, cause scandals, and serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but
their own bellies. A good conscience and true faith, like Hippocrates twins,
live and die together. Epiphanius observes concerning the Gnostics of old,
that having corrupted the judgments of their Proselites, they drew them into
fornication, uncleanness, and such like abominations, etc.

Quest. Whence comes this to pass?

Answ. 2. Usually in times of such differences, men are esteemed, not acording
to their godliness, but their Faction: men enquire not of their precise
walking, but of their opinion: not how lives? but how holds such and such a
man? Optatus declares the strange partiality of the Donatists in this kind.
All were Pagans unto them that were not of their way of separation: but if any
one embraced their way, he was presently a Christian, though he knew not what
belonged to Christianity. Athanasius concerning the Arians to their followers
tells us, that they said in effect to them, oppose Christ, and take no care to
thy manners: Thy opinion suffices to thy commendation.
Quest. Whence comes it to pass that heresies and errors are of so spreading a
nature?

Answ. First, Ephesians. 4.14. Children are carried about with every wind of
doctrine through the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness of those that lie
in wait to deceive. Where the Apostle uses three words to express
deceitfulness. First, Slight, (...); they are cunning gamsters, they know how
to cog a die, to pervert Scripture to their sinister purposes. 2. Cunning
craftiness, (...), they turn every stone, watch all advantages. 3. Lying in
wait to deceive: (...): they have all the Arts of cousenage, 2 Pet. 2.1. They
bring in damnable Heresies privily. 2 Cor. 11.3. I am afraid (says Paul) lest
as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should be
corrupted, etc. Satan arms his instruments with his own Arts of fraud, and
cousenage, and by these introduces errors, and cheats men of their faith,
peace and piety. Isidore Peleusiota compares Heretics to fishermen that convey
their deadly hooks into the most pleasing baits. For which end

1. They use sophistical arguments, knotty and crooked questions, by which they
puzzle and ensnare the simple: Therefore Paul warnes us, Take heed that no man
deceive you (or make a prey of you) through Philosophy or vain deceit.
Tertullian says, that Philosophers were the Patriarchs of Heretics, and
Sophistry their great engine.

2. They use new and strange expressions, not to be understood but by their
own Disciples. These Paul calls (...), new language, 2 Timothy 2.16. and warns
Timothy against it, 2 Timothy 1.13. Keep the form of sound words which thou have
heard, etc. Hillary tells us of the Arians, that by their indistinct and
confused expressions they eluded the truth, and ensnared their unwary auditors
by the ambiguity of their phrases, and this practice is notably described by
Calvin as the practice of the Libertines of his time, and as they use old words
in new senses, so they coin new words, and expressions of their own, which
simple ones admire, but understand not, 2 Pet. 2.18. they speak great swelling
words of vanity; and by such sublime notions bring in some old Heresy often
confuted, and which, were it in plain English expressed, would be abhorred.
This Epiphanius tells us was the Practice of the Valentinians, who introduced
old heathenish Fables as matters of faith, only shadowed under new
expressions. Thus Cyril of the Nestorians in his time.

3. They use fair pretenses, and glorious speeches, Romans 16.18. By good words
and fair speeches they deceive the hearts of the simple; and 2 Pet. 2.3. with
fained words, (...), forged, and plaistered speeches; they parget over the
nakedness, and deformity of their opinions, sometimes representing them as the
only ways of God: Sometimes representing themselves as the only men of God:
For, 1. They represent their opinions as the ways of God; the secrets and
Mysteries of Christ: but Saint John calls them, the profound depths of Satan,
Rev. 2.24. the Collosians were drawn into errors with such fair pretenses,
Col. 2.18. with 23. the whores cup is of gold, Rev. 17.4. but the porion is of
rank poison: Hence Cyril says, that as strumpets paint their faces, and adorn
their bodies to hide their filthiness, and to ensnare with their neatness: So
Heretics shadow their destructive opinions with the beautiful veil of
godliness, and their errors with the flowers of truth. 2. They represent
themselves and their followers as the most godly, holy, humble Saints, etc. the
well affected party, etc. a strong argument to draw simple, and well-meaning
people into an approbation of their opinions; but Rev. 2.2. there were some
that called themselves Apostles, who upon trial were found liars, 1 Cor. 9. and
2 Cor. 11. the Ministers of Satan boasted that they were Apostles of Christ,
that they would have no pay, but would preach freely, etc. Surely these wanted
not many followers, but Paul assures us that they were deceitful workers, and
their end would be according to their works. No age afforded Heretics, whose
ringleaders have not pretended to extraordinary godliness. Optatus of the
Donatists says, that they covered themselves in sheeps clothing, and were not
known till their fangs were felt.


4. They use vainglorious boastings, proclaiming the excellency of their
knowledge, and abilities above others, as if with them wisdom began to live,
and should die with them: the affecting of wisdom above what is written, Col.
2.18. and a bold intrusion into things they have not seen, have caused many to
fall from the truth to error; and Corah, Dathan, and Abira^ died not alone in
their transgression, they were Princes, and leaders of others.

5. They use subtilty in concealing their opinions from all but their
proselytes, to whom they discover them in part, and with a reserve of changing
upon further enquiry, or more advantage: So Basilides concealed his opinions
from such as were able to examine them, but made them known to his seduced
followers, yet charging them to conceal them amongst themselves, that they
should labor to know all things, all men, but that no man should know them,
nor what they held.

Secondly, Pharisees) will compass sea, and land to make one Proselyte. They
Creep into houses to lead captive silly women: there is a strange activity in
these men to spread their errors; nay in women

also: the woman Jesabel taught, and seduced many. Tertullian tells us, that
their women were audacious, even to admiration, they dared to preach, to
dispute, etc. Satan having long since found the usefulness of that sex for
seduction, uses their help upon all occasions. Apelles dispersed his Heresy by
the help of a woman [Philumene]. Montanus his by Maxilla, and Priscilla, etc.

Thirdly,

1. Through their Simplicity, Ignorance, and Ungroundedness: when the
foundation is not well laid, the building cannot stand long. A people
ungrounded in the principles of Religion become an easy prey to Seducers,
being like Children, etc. Ephesians. 4.14. The sin (...) believe every word, Prove.
4.15. Sitty women are led captive, that are ever learning, but come not to the
knowledge of the truth. 2 Timothy 3.6. Seducers are furnished with subtilty to
deceive, and people prepared through simplicity to be deceived.

2. Through Curiosity, men are not content with sound Doctrine, and old Truths:
but Athenian-like, spend their time to tell, and hear some new thing, Act.
17.21. They have itching ears, and therefore heap to themselves teachers after
their own lusts, etc. 2 Timothy 4.3, 4.

Fourthly,

1. As a Punishment for Luke-warmness, and want of love to the truth: when the
light is undervalued, darkness is sent in stead thereof. The Gentiles that held
the truth in unrighteousness, and delighted not to have God in their knowledge,
God gave them over to a reprobate sense, Romans 1.28. They became fools; their
foolish hearts were darkened. Ahab hated Michaiah for speaking the truth, and
therefore a lying spirit was sent into his Prophets to seduce him to his
destruction, 2 Kin. 22. So Mich. 2.7, 12. Prophecy not, say they, They shall
not prophecy, says the Lord, but if a man walk in the Spirit, and lie, he
shall be a Prophet to this people.

2. As a trial of those that are sound. 1 Cor. 11.19. There must be Heresies
amongst you, that the approved may be made manifest. If they had been of us,
they would have continued with us. The house founded on the rock, falls not.
The rising of Heresy is a great trial. Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2. etc. The Lord your God
tries you, says Moses: and the prevailing of Heresy is a greater: Its hard
to swim against the stream. If Peter dissemble, Barnabas is carried away with
it.

Quest. How then may we prevent being ensnared by them.

Answ. First, with every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14. God will bless, and make
effectual his own Ordinance. Why should we wander abroad to seek, when we have
food at home? Why should we withdraw our selves, seeing the mothers milk is
most natural for the Infant? The sheep that wanders, is in most danger of the
wolf. Change of diet is not wholesome for the body, much less for the soul.
Another man may have more gifts then thy Pastor, but he has not more love to,
nor care of thy soul, then he that must give an account of it. Children that
often change their Masters, seldom prove good Scholars, nor they solid, and
understanding Christians that often change their Ministers. How does this suit
with the Apostles Precept? Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you,
etc.

Secondly, Try all things: believe not every spirit; but try the spirits
whether they be of God or no: for many false Prophets are come into the world,
1 John 4.1. 1 These. 5.17. Shall I (says Athanasius) believe unreasonably?
Shall I not search what is possible, or profitable, or comely, or pleasing to
God, agreeable to nature, and consonant to the truth, etc. But many will not
take the pains to do it: we (say they) hear such as are honest, and godly, etc.
but will you not tell money after them, and weigh gold after them? And will you
take their Doctrine upon trust without trial? Others pretend want of skill,
they cannot do it. But the most silly Creature, from the instinct of nature,
knows wholesome food from unwholesome, and art thou a man, a Christian, a
Professor, and can thou not distinguish between light, and darkness? To what
purpose serves the anointing that we have of God, 1 John 2.27, but to inform,
and teach us about those that would seduce us? wariness is required in nothing
so much as in matters of Religion, the rather because some errors are so like
the truth that they can hardly be distinguished: bring them therefore to the
touchstone of the Scripture, and errors will be known from truth.

Thirdly, Romans 16.17. I beseech you (Brethren) mark those that cause divisions,
and offenses contrary to the Doctrine that you have received, and avoid them.
and 2 John 10, Bid not such God speed, etc. St. John would not be in the bath
with Cerinthus the Heretic. Polycarp abhored conference with Martian, as the
first born of the devil. Antonius detested communion with all such as had
corrupted the faith, and divided the Church. Can a man touch pitch, and not be
defiled? May not Satan seize upon thee, finding thee amongst his own, as he did
upon that woman in the Theater. He that would not be drawn away by the workers
of iniquity, must hate the congregation of evil doers, Psalm 26.4.

Mr. Cranfords Mischief of Heresies.

Quest. Seeing the Angel of the Church of Ephesus is commended for that he
could not bear with them which were evil, Rev 2.2. who are those evil ones that
must not be born?

Answ.

First,

Secondly,

Thirdly,

Fourthly,

Fifthly,

Now such as are public, and scandalous: such as are obstinate, and
pertinacious; such as are evil-plotters, and evil-promoters; such as are
Seducers, and Misleaders; such as are incurable, and hate to be reformed,
these, and such like ought not to be born. As for the others which are private
offenders, weak, and scrupulous, or seduced, they being willing to be reformed,
in some cases (I say in some cases) Justice may bear with them.

Quest, What does not bearing with them import?

Answ. First, Not to bear,

Secondly, Not to countenance,

Thirdly, Not to allow,

Fourthly, Not to hide,

Fifthly, Not to pity,

Affirmatively, Not to bear, is,

1. To admonish, and reprove them.

2. To oppose, and resist them.

3. To censure, and punish them.

4. To remove, and cast them out.

5. In some cases, to destroy, and cut them off, either by the sword of the
Law, or by the Law of the sword. Thus we have it in the case of Enticers to
Idolatry. Deuteronomy. 13. If thy brother, etc. entice thee secretly, saying, Let us
go, and serve other Gods, etc. thou shall not consent to him, nor hearken to
him, neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shall thou spare, or conceal
him, but thou shall surely kill him, i. e. after public judgment: Thine hand
shall be first upon him, etc. Thus David resolves, Psalm. 101.8. I will early
destroy all the wicked of the land, etc. And Solomon directs as high. Prove.
25.4.5. Take away the dross from the silver, etc. Saint Paul reproves the
Church of Corinth for holding Communion with the incestuous person, charges
them to excommunicate him. verse 13. himself could not bear false brethren;
Gal. 2.5. To whom we gave place by subjection, no not for an hour. He wishes
such were cut off, Gal. 5.12.

Quest. What reasons are there why such persons should be dealt with so
severely?

Answ. Nemo errat sibi ipsi, sed dementiam spargit in proximos: No man erreth
to himself alone, but disperseth his madness amongst others: therefore the
Apostle compares such to Leaven. 1 Cor. 5.6. and exhorts Timothy to s^un
profane, and vain bablings, i. e. profane and vain bablers, For they will
increase to more ungodliness, and their words will eat, as a Gangrene, 2 Timothy
2.16, 17. This is often urged as a reason why the Jews should not mingle with the
Canaanites: Exodus 23.32, 33. lest they should make them sin against God: and
when they did live with them, they served their Idols, and were a snare unto
them, Psalm. 106.34, 35, 36. Those opinions, and innovations which at first, are
begun by a few, and are hist at by many, grow suddenly into credit with most,
and in time invade all.

Secondly, If we bear with such, Vitia aliorum si feras, facis tua. We become
guilty of other men's sins by not stoping, and restraining them; as we see in
the case of Eli, 1 Samuel 3.13. He gave them fatherly advise, but he should have
used his Authority. When God calls his people out of Babylon, this is added as a
reason, That ye be not partakers of her sins, Rev. 18.4. which as it denotes
danger of infection, so also danger of contracting guilt by not opposing, and
protesting against the Idolatry practiced, and Heresies there maintained.

Thirdly, Babylon. Rev. 18.4. That ye receive not of her plagues: There is no
safety of being near them that are under the curse of God. Genesis 19.17. Number.
16.26. Depart from the tents of these wicked men, touch nothing of their's,
lest ye be consumed in all their sins. Prove. 13.20. A companion of fools shall
be destroyed.

Fourthly, both our burden, and our trouble. Josh. 23.11, 12, 13. If ye cleave
to the remnant of those Nations, etc. the Lord will not drive them out, but
they shall be a snare unto you, and scourges in your sides, and thorns in your
eyes, until you perish from off the land. Its better for us to take an example
by the calamities which others have suffered for this fin, then to make one.

Fifthly, Isa. 1.5. Hos. 5.11. Favors, and Compliance emboldens, and hardens
sinners, whereas reproof, and punishments may possibly reform, and heal them.
It was David's wish, Let the righteous smite me, etc. Psalm. 141.5. There is no
stop in sin; if they be let alone, they will grow worse, and when they are at
worst, its worst for themselves. Is it not then a kindness to smite them? Its
always a kindness offered, though often it be not a kindness not received. Paul
is express in a Prophetic Threat, 2 Timothy 3.16. Evil men, and Seducers (that
is, evil men who are Seducers, or amongst all evil men, Seducers especially)
shall wax worse, and worse, deceiving, and being deceived: they cozen others,
and the Devil cozens them. But if these men will not receive this kindness of
smiting to their amendment, it will be a kindness to smite them even unto
death, if they deserve it. Seeing such, as through the patience of God, so
through the patience of the Magistrate in bearing, and forbearing them, do but
treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, etc. Romans 2.5.

Object. But, 1 Cor. 13.6. Love bears all things?

Answ. Gal. 6.2. but if any thing be a breaking of the Law, it cannot bear with
that. It can bear wrongs, and injuries against it self, but it cannot bear
wrongs, and injuries done to God.

Secondly, Psalm 99.8. Thou wast a God that forgavest them, though thou tookest
vengeance on their inventions. So a Magistrate may forgive where he takes
vengeance.

Thirdly, Christ is all love, Walk in love, as Christ has loved us, Ephesians. 5.2.
Now Christ, though he came into the world to manifest his love to us by
suffering, and dying for sinners, yet could he not bear with so much as any one
sin of any one man, so as to countenance, or comply with it, much less to grant
a tolleration to it. As full of love as he was, he would not bear with the
Scribes, and Pharisees: He would not bear with Buyers, and Sellers in his
Temple, but whipped them out. He would not bear with Peter himself in his folly,
but rebukes him with, Get thee behind me Satan, Mat. 16.26. Christ in love bore
all our sins, but he will not bear with any: Let Magistrates not out-love their
rule, and then bear as much evil as they can.

Fourthly, Mat. 19.19. Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self: But no man
ought so to love himself as to bear with his own sins: Holy self-love casts the
first stone at a man's own sin, therefore it cannot be love to others to bear
them in evil: yea, indeed it is hatred in Gods account. Lev. 19.27. Thou shall
not hate thy brother in thy heart, but rebuke him, and not suffer sin upon him.

Object. But. Mat. 13.30. Christ says, Let both grow together until the
harvest.

Answ.

Secondly, Christ only forbids such a plucking up, as by which the wheat must
be rooted up also, i. e. a total extirpation. For should God in an instant
destroy all the wicked, the bands of humane society would be dissolved: but we
know that the plucking up of many sorts of wicked men, is a great advantage to
the growth of them that are good. So then such acts of justice as will not
hinder, but promote the growth of the wheat, are not at all forbidden in this
Text.

Thirdly, That evil persons, and Heretics must not be born with, as is before
explained. This, or the like Texts may not be interpreted against them, but by
them. One Scripture often expounds, but never contradicts another.

Thus you hear Mr. Caryls Judgment about tolleration in his Parliament Sermon,
upon Rev. 2.2, 3.

Quest. Upon what account may a man be judged to be a false Prophet, or a false
Teacher?

Answ.

First, As he teaches, lies, and falsehood, which is the most common
acceptance of the Word.

Secondly,

In the first notion he is a false Prophet that teaches lies, or delivers forth
the Divisions, and Deceits of his own heart, which he covers over with, Thus
says the Lord, Eze. 13.6. Jer. 28.2. and so fathers his false dreams upon God,
and his chiefest care is not to sting his hearers, but to feed his deluded
followers with pleasing things, and rather to tickle then to prick them: saying
to Ahab, Go up, and prosper, 2 Kin. 22.12. Or God has broken the yoke of
Babylon, Jer. 28.2. And this Character God gives them, Lam. 2.14. They have not
discovered thine iniquity to turn away thy captivity: and they think to cause
my people to forget my name, Jer. 22.27. Hence it is that they are applauded,
and spoken well of by all. Luke 6.26. They will not mar their own markets by a
sharp reproof. So false teachers are lying Matters, speaking perverse things to
draw Disciples after them, Act. 20.30. speaking lies in Hypocrisy, which they
palliate over, with, It is written, or the name of the spirit, and therefore
are called spirits of error, 1 Timothy 4.1. and we are forbidden to believe every
spirit, 1 John 4.1. i.e. every Doctrine, though pretended to be from the
spirit: they bait also their hook with sweet and pleasing baits: They allure,
as with a bait through the lusts of the flesh, and wantonness, 2 Pet. 2.18. and
they promise liberty, verse 19. which are taking things, and therefore its no
marvel, though they have many followers, verse 2.

In the second notion, he is a false Prophet, that runs indeed, but is not
sent, Jer. 23.22. I have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran; they say, I
have dreamed, I have dreamed, verse 25. but they have no mission, and such an
one is to be accounted a false Prophet: sive vera praedicet, sive falsa;
whether he preach true or false: These are self-called, so that we need not
question what such teach, but by what warrant; As Cyprian answered one that
enquired what Doctrine Novatian did teach; we need not (says he) be careful
to know quid ille docet, cum foris doceat, what he teaches, when he has no
warrant to teach. But of this under another head.

Quest. What may be considered about Heresies?

Answ. Heresies are damnable, 2 Pet. 2.1. called there Heresies of destruction,
by way of eminency; Judas is called the son of destruction, John 17.12. and
Antichrist, the man of sin, the son of destruction, 2 These. 2.3. because under
Christ's name he fights against him, and therefore shall fall under more eminent
destruction: so Heretics who profess Christ's name, and yet deny him, or
adulterate his truth for their own ends, and lusts, shall come under sorer
damnation: swift destruction, 2 Pet. 2.1. their damnation sleeps not, verse
3. They were of old ordained to this condemnation, Jude 4. and this mark is set
upon Heresy, that we may all hear, and fear, and do no such thing.

Secondly, Heresies are brought in privily: these tares are sown while men
sleep, in a close, and subtle way which men are not aware of, as Gal. 2.4.
False brethren at unawares privily crept in. And Jude 4. Certain are crept in
privily, meaning Heresie-Masters. Heresy is modest at the first, and
insinuates as the Serpent into Eve, by cunning fetches, and quaeries, Genesis 3.1.
or by sweet phrases, ye shall not surely die, but shall be as Gods, etc. verse
4, 5. they make merchandise of you with fine forms of speech, 2 Pet. 2.3. which
words composed for the nonce. There is a mystery in this trade of corrupting
men's minds from the simplicity that is in Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2. Ephesians. 4.14. They
draw men, as Juglers do a piece of money with a fine invisible hair, and mix
their dross with good silver, that it may pass for current.

Quest. How manifold is Heresy?

Answ. Heresy is twofold; Simple, and Complicate.

Quest. What is simple Heresy?

Answ. Its an opinion or assertion holden, and maintained contrary to, and
subersive of the faith by one that professes the Christian Religion.

Quest. What is complicate Heresy?

Answ. Schism, sedition, and blasphemy. For,

1. The Schismatic Heretic upon his opinion, breaks off from the Communion
of the Church, and runs out into separation, setting up his new light (as he
calls it) in a new candlestick.

2. The blasphemous Heretic strikes through the name of the great and glorious
God, or his Truth, with despiteful reproaches, not fit to be named.

3. The seditious Heretic troubles the peace of the Church and State, as an
Army is troubled by Mutineers.

4. The seducing Heretic enticeth to his bed all he can, and goes up and down
to vent his poison, to the infection of others, privily bringing in damnable
heresies.

Quest. Whether may any of these be capitally punished by the Civil Magistrate?

Answ. Lutherans generally do deny that simple Heresy is to be punished with
death, and Calvin says of Servetus, vel sola modestia potuisset vitam
redimere, that he might have saved his life had he been but modest: and to such
indeed we rather wish light then fire: Let the bloody Papists only have this
brand of cruelty upon them, to confute errors by fire and faggot.

Secondly, Heretics, all the Protestant Churches do agree that they may be
punished with death. Neither indeed can Magistrates answer it to God to be so
severe in punishing sedition, and treason, which is against their own name and
dignity, and stand still, and look on with their hands in their pocket, whilst
the name, honor, and truths of God are openly blasphemed, and traduced.

Thirdly, for the seducing heretic, heresies, and errors would die of
themselves, if they had not free vent. False teachers (says Calvin) sunt
Satanae lenones, are the devils Panders. Would you suffer Panders to come into
your houses to solicit the chastity of your wives, and children? Would you
suffer Mountebanks to sell poison upon a stage to destroy the bodies of your
Subjects? so you that are Christian Magistrates should not neglect the safety
of the souls of those that live under your shadow. Damnable heresies can never
be prevented, if false teachers may have liberty to bring them in, and vent
them. Thou have them that hold the Doctrine of the Nicholaitans, Rev. 2.15.
Thou suffer that Woman Jesabel, that calls her self a Prophetess, to teach,
and to seduce my people, was a sore charge laid by Christ against those
Churches.

Mr. Vines his Parl. Sermon, March 10. 1646.

Quest. How will it appear that there is so much danger in tollerating
Heretics?

Answ. First, In regard of the Church: Every one that is versed in
Ecclesiastical History, Heresies have been to the Church in every Century,
robbing her, not only of her tender grapes, but of many choice, and learned
members that might have been very serviceable to her, as Demas, Hymenaeus, and
Philetus, Phygellus, and Hermogines, Nicholus, Ebion, Cerinthus, Menander,
Saturninus, etc. yea, what Commotions, and confusions have proceeded from them;
witness that fiery contest of Alexandria between the Arians, and Orthodox,
where they fought together, and killed each other like swarms of Gnats in the
air. How have they defiled the Churches purity with foul pollutions in Doctrine
and manners? witness those filthy dreamers. Jude 8. Who defiled the flesh,
despised Dominions, etc.

Secondly, Donatists, and Circumcellions, mentioned before. How have Errors,
and Heresies overturned the very foundations of flourishing States? Some of
them in their very natures having been so opposite to the being, or binding of
love, and to the Authority of Magistrates, that where they have taken place,
the sinews of States have been so miserably broken asunder under a pretense of
liberty, that had not their extirpation been more speedy, they had certainly
buried those people where they reigned in utter desolation. They tend also to
the ruin of States, as they engage him who is the God of order, and truth, to
be their enemy: and to execute his vengeance upon them: sometimes by a more
immediate hand, as Antioch a nursery of Heresies, was first defaced by
Earthquake, and after consumed with fire from Heaven. And Nichomedia, a place
where the Arians were appointed to meet, was swallowed up of an Earthquake,
and often mediatly by the sword of the Magistrate, whom God stirs up to take
vengeance on his behalf, as we heard before in the examples of Constantine,
Theodesius, etc.

3ly. In regard of particular persons to whom they are no less pernicious
whether ringleaders, Libertines of former and later times: 2. Pet. 2.10, 12,
13.) Or by too much austerity to destroy their bodies, and bring them to Death.
But if not so, yet God is often so far provoked, especially against the
founders, and chief maintainers of Heresies, that, where man has neglected to
do it he has taken the sword into his own hand, and destroyed them by some
signal judgment or other. Thus Arius in the midest of his pomp, and pride,
voided his Guts in a Common Jakes: Nestorius his tongue was eaten with worms.
Cerinthus was slain by an house falling on his head. Montanus hanged himself.
See many more the like examples in my Mirror p. 246. etc. But how ever their
bodies speed, without doubt, they are dangerous, and destructive to their
souls, be-nighting their minds, 1 Timothy 5.6. turning their light into
darkness, and leaving them to innumerable by-ways of ruin 2 Timothy 3.8. they
are men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith. Heresies corrupt
men's minds, destroy a good Conscience, pollute their lives, rob them of beauty,
peace, piety, yea of all real, spiritual growth, and exclude from heaven, if
not repented of, Gal. 5.20, 21. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11. 2 Pet. 2.17. Jude 13.

Quest. What then is incumbent upon Magistrates to do against them.

Answ. First, Tolleration of Heresies, or that would tie their hands from
executing judgment upon Heretical seducers, or from preventing the growth, or
extirpating of so banefull, and pernicious a weed as Heresy is. Such would
engage them in the guilt of souls: the ruin of Church and State: would have
them lose their reputation, and leave their names a curse, and byword to
posterity.

Secondly they must not suffer the Church, tongue of the learned, Isa. 50.4.
are not well taught to the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 13.52. want Judgment, Mich.
3.8. and are not able to ^ivide the word aright, 1 Timothy 4.16.

Thirdly, Jeroboams Priests 1 Kin. 12.31. Or Micha's ten shekels Levite. Jud.
17.5.10.

Fourthly, to do him service in so necessary a business.

Object. But would you have us punish them, when many of them are honest, and
pious men?

Answ. First, 2 Timothy 3.5. form of godliness, and yet deny the power of it. The
wolf in the Fable, that he might the easilier deceive, and make a prey of the
sheep, put on a sheeps-skin, and did much mischief: the shepherd discovered the
guile, and hangs him up in his disguise: His fellow-shepherds blame him for
cruelty in hanging up a sheep: he to undeceive them, wishes them to open his
skin, which when they had done, they found the fraud, and justified the fact: I
need not make application.

Secondly, He is an honest, and godly man, in the abuse of Coin, Theft,
Treason, etc. why then should it be of force in this greater, and more horrid
mischief?

Quest. Seeing Heresies are so wasting, dangerous, and destructive, how come
they to be so prevalent, and to infect so many?

Answ. First, learning, and parts, as were Valentinus, Socinus, Simachus, etc.
Or such as are of Repute for piety: They have a form of godliness, and in their
words, and deportments are transformed into Angels of light, 2 Cor. 11.14. As
were Montanus, Novatus, Arius, and the Munster-Anabaptists, who at first,
exceedingly prevailed by their discourses, which were of nothing but
mortification, fasting, praying, etc. they pretended to more then ordinary
piety, which made them to be indulged in some perty differences by those that
were in Authority; pitied by the Reforming Ministers, and followed by many
pious, but inconsiderate persons, who were so gulled by their specious shows,
that they little dreamed of the mischief that some of their Ringleaders aimed
at. Or such as have been sufferers for Religion, whereby they have grown into
esteem with well meaning pious people. Thus David Georg, at first was cast into
prison, and bored through the tongue for speaking against Popish Idolatry,
which made him highly esteemed amongst the godly, yet afterward he became a
most blasphemous Heretic, affirming that the Scriptures, even those of the
Apostles, were lame, childish and, ineffectual for the understanding of the
things of God, that he was greater then Christ in the flesh, etc. and by reason
of his former sufferings he drew many Disciples after him.

Secondly, Errors, they have their guiles, and Arts to ensnare poor souls, Ephesians.
4.14. They study the persons, and wait their opportunities to deceive, Romans
16.18. They use fair speeches to beguile the hearts of the simple; they profess
Love, and Charity, to be eyes to the blind, feet to the lame, guides to the
erring, etc. and yet they are ravening wolves, Mat. 7.15. They seek to gain
credit, by laying open, and rebuking the faults of others, which they curiously
pry into, and like flesh-flies, passing over what is sound, and right, light
only upon what is sore, and putrid in them: They are vehement, bold, confident,
and resolute, being men of seared consciences, and brazen faces, that cannot
blush; like Simon Magus, they cry up themselves to be some body, yea, the
mighty power of God, Act. 8.9, 10. They use swelling words of vanity, 2 Pet.
2.18. whereby they gain upon the simple that understand them not, and have
their persons in admiration. They pretend to high Mysteries, being vainly
puffed up in their fleshly minds, intruding themselves into things they
understand not, Col. 2.18. They blasphemously father their Errors on the Spirit
of Truth, wracking, and wresting his Word to their purpose, 2 Pet. 3.16. or if
they cannot do that, then they boast that they have their direction from
immediate Revelation, etc.

Thirdly, itching ears, 2 Timothy 4.3. and Athenian-like, are greedy of new
things: they are weary of old truths, being they never saw their beauty, nor
tasted their sweetness, which if they had, they could never have slighted; yet
many times it is not so much new matter, as a new dress in hard, and
unintelligible words, which Paul counsels Timothy to shun, 1 Timothy 6.20. and
hereby they conceal their meaning, lest if it come to light, it should appear
what adulterate ware they obtrude upon the people for the truths of God.

Fourthly, of those servants whom Christ has employed about his Vineyard to
take care that the seed of Truth be sown, and every plant of the envious man's
planting be plucked up: and these are,

1. Ministers, who should preach frequently, hold forth the whole truth
clearly, confute gainsayers solidly. Tit. 1.9. If after one or two admonitions
they refuse to be gained, avoiding their perverse Disputes, and company, and
warning others to beware of them, 2 Timothy 2.16, 17. using gentleness to them
that are Seduced. 2 Timothy 2.24. etc. proving if at any time God will give them
Repentance, etc.

2. Magistrates, who ought to suppress, and punish Heresies, and Heretics; as
before was showed. But if the foundations be removed, what can the righteous do?
Psalm 11.3. O how sad was it with the Church, when Arianism had invaded the
Throne it self: for then the people conforming to the Princes Judgment, were
easily infected with it: Or, suppose Magistrates are not tainted themselves,
yet if they slight differences in Religion, as Festus did the business of
Paul, Act. 25.19, 20. Or if they be afraid to displease, of a low spirit,
backward to enact, and execute according to the de merit of the Error, or
Heresy, how can it be expected that either the truth should be righted, or the
madness of Heretics repressed?

Fifthly, For they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. Neither is this only
natural, but adventitious also, frequently, because their frozen hearts are
void of the love of the truth. But in some are the beginnings of knowledge, yet
do they hang too equally poised between Truth, and Error, being full of doubts,
which makes them a prey to Seducers: they are very credulous, like Solomon's
fool, Prove. 14.25. perhaps through sluggishness, being rather willing to take
things on trust, then to take pains to try what conformity they hold with the
truth. Sometimes they have corrupt consciences which must be boulstered, Ezekiel.
13.18, 20. corrupt affections which must be humoured, 2 Timothy 4.3. and corrupt
practices which must be concealed, which makes them (like the Elephant) to
muddy the pure waters of Truth, that their uggliness may not appear, as the
Pharisees did the Law by their foolish glosses, Mat. 5.21, etc. They love
darkness more then light, because their works are evil, John 3.19. They make
their lusts their Law, and therefore lie open to be seduced by such, who bait
their hook with what is proportionable to those lusts in them, 2 Pet. 3.18.

Sixthly, Because the time, Heresy, which finding patronage from persons of no
mean rank, and power, no marvel though it spread apace, and flourish; weeds
appear not till the Summers-Sun revive them. So errors, if they receive not
some gleams of countenance from some in a superior orb, would soon wither, and
quickly vanish.

Mr. Tho. Hodges Parl. Sermon Mar. 10. 1646.

Quest. How will Errors, and Heresies, further appear to be so dangerous?

Answ. Heresy is made a work of the flesh that excludes men from the kingdom
of Heaven, Gal. 5.20, 21. Peter calls them pernicious, and damnable, that bring
swift destruction: and says of the Authors of them, that their damnation
slumbers not, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3.

Secondly, Heresies, and Errors are compared in Scripture, by what dangerous
Creatures, Heretics, and false Teachers are expressed. As,

1. Heresies are compared to a Gangrene, or Canker, 2 Timothy 2.17. which corrupts
one part after another, till at length it eats out the very heart, and life.
Sometimes to a Shipwreck, 1 Timothy 1.19, 20. In what a miserable condition are
passengers, when their ship is split under them? Christ calls them Leaven. Paul
calls them a bewitching. Learned Writers call them a Leprosy, Poison, Fire, a
Tempest, a flood, etc.

2. Heretics are sometimes styled Foxes, Cant. 2.15. Dogs, rending Dogs, Phil.
3.2. Wolves, grievous Wolves which devour the flock, Act. 20.29. Sometimes in
effect they are called Mountebanks, Cheaters, and such as beguile unstable
souls.

3. Christ and his Apostles give special charges, and caveats against them,
which they would not have done, had they not been very dangerous. Mar. 8.15.
Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees. Mat. 7.15. Take heed that no man deceive
you; for many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive
many. Phil. 3.2. Beware of dogs, etc. 2 Pet. 3.17. Beware lest being led aside
by the error of the wicked ye fall from your own stedfastness.

Thirdly, Heresies are the greatest, and highest of dangers to the Church of
Christ, worse then the sword, prison, exile, spoiling, torments, yea, and the
cruellest death. For the Church always gained by these, grew more in Purity,
in Unity, in Zeal, and Courage: not so by Heresies: which are a flood cast out
of the mouth of the Serpent, Rev. 12.15. For,

1. They are a corrupting, and defiling flood, they defile the pure waters,
spoil the ground, leave filth, and mud behind them; and coming out of the mouth
of the Serpent, they are poisonous waters; and there are four precious things
which Heresies corrupt, and defile. 1. Souls of men, which is the noblest, and
choiest thing in man, of more value then all the world. Damnable Heresies makes
us deny the Lord that bought us, 2 Pet. 2.1. 2. The leading faculty of the
soul. It casts poison into the spring. Heresies corrupt the Judgment which
moves all the other faculties of the soul. If the light which is in you be
darkness, how great is that darkness? If the Judgment be infected, how
dangerous is that infection? In how desperate a condition is the whole soul of
such an one? If it recover not out of its Errors, it dies for it. 3. The most
active faculty of the soul: they defile, and corrupt the Conscience: Now this
is amazingly dangerous. A wicked Error is blinding when it is in the Judgment
only: but its binding also when it is in the Conscience; For whatsoever engages
Conscience, the same engages all, and the utmost of our all. If Conscience be
made a party against the Truth, now all that a man has, all that he can do,
will be made out against the truth too. Such an one (with Paul) will grow mad,
and desperate against. Christ. Paul's erroneous conscience made him consent to
Stevens death; yea, could he, in that condition, have met with Christ himself;
he would have done the like against him. 4. The Conversations of men. Heresy
is seldom, or never divided from impiety. Such make Shipwreck of a good
conscience, 1 Timothy 1.19. whom Paul calls Dogs, he calls also Evil-workers,
Phil. 3.2. and Tit. 1.15, 16. speaking of some whose minds were defiled, he
adds that they were reprobate to every good work: And Christ speaking of false
Prophets, says, You may know them by their fruits. The Doctrine of faith is a
Doctrine of Holiness; and a Doctrine of lies, is a Doctrine of profaneness too.
He that falls from truth to falsehood, will quickly fall from piety to
wickedness. Sleiden in his story of the Anabaptists, writes, that Errors began
in their Judgments, but ended with wicked practices. Cyprian writing of
Novatus, says, that he was one who itched after new notions, and was beyond
measure covetous, intolerably proud: no man so prying, no man so treacherous:
he would commend you to your face, and cut your throat behind your back: as
false a person as lived; a very firebrand; and turned the world up side down
that he might carry on his opinion, etc.


2. Heresies are a drowning, and overflowing flood: Now there are three things
that Heresies overwhelm.

1. The glory of all glories; the glorious name of God, the glorious name of
Christ, the glorious name of the Holy Spirit, the glorious name of divine
truths Heresy turns the glory into a lie; It gives God, Christ, and the Holy
Ghost the lie: Truth the lie, the Scripture the lie: and he that makes the word
of God a Liar, makes God himself a Liar. 2. The Glory of Religion. Religion is
darkened: It grows base, and beggarly when its patched with Errors. All
Religion is by so much the more excellent, by how much the more of truth it
has, but when once its adulterated, and leavened with damnable Errors, now the
silver is become dross; etc. 3. Not only the dignity, but the very vital entity
of a Church. Truth is the soul of that body, and Error is the death of it.
Schism does much hurt: but false Doctrines more. Schisms do rent the coat, but
Heresies do rent the heart: those pluck up the fence, but these pluck down the
building; those do scratch, but these do kill.
Thirdly, Here^es are a suddenly rising flood: and herein lies the greatness
of the danger unto a Church by Heresies, they are quickly conceived, and
brought forth. Though truth gets on very slowly, because of the incapacity of
man's Judgment for supernaturalls, because of that natural opposition in man to
the things of God, because of the subtle interposition of the Prince of
darkness, who blindes the minds of men, Lest the light of the Go^^el should
shine into them, yet errors break out easily, and spread swiftly. There needs
no preparation of the ground for nettles: If the seeds do but drop down, you
may soon have a full crop. How soon does a little leaven, leaven the whole
lump. Paul wondered that the Galatians were so soon turned to another Gospel.
Gal. 1.6. The good man slept but one night, and the field was sown all over
with tares. How quickly did the world turn Arian? How suddenly did the
Anabaptists endanger Germany.

Fourthly, Heresies are an increasing, and swelling flood. False Doctrines at
first, seem to be modest: they will be but scruples, and quaere's: and then
they become to be probabilityes, and then to be tolerable conclusions, and
then they rise to be unquestionable tenants: then first, to be made public
Articles; and then necessary to be held: and then the contrary not to be
mantained, and held, nay to be disdained, and reproached; yea they do not only
rise thus to be greater, and greater, but they multiply also, like circles in a
pond: one Heresy begets another: a lesser begets a greater. If you consult
Historical Antiquity, its a wonder to behold the great flames that were
kindled out of small sparks: what monstrous opinions have been built upon
errors, which seemed but little at first, etc.

Fifthly, Heresies are more dangerous then any other flood by reason of their
diverse qualities in them. Other floods are quickly up, and quickly down: these
are quickly up, but abate very slowly: they are like diseases, they come upon
us flying, but go from us creeping. For one Heretic, who has been poisoned
in his judicials, you may find a thousand converted who have been only stained
in their morals. Heresy is shored up by all the parts, arguments, shifts, and
learning of carnal reason: and its born up by an haughty, and proud spirit:
and its so fallacious that when you come to handle it, its so rammed in with
obstinatnesse, that its almost a miracle to work effectually upon an Heretic.

Quest. Why, what dangerous errors, and Heresies are now divulged amongst us?

Answ. Take a brief Catologue of some of them.

1. that God is the Author of sin, yea of the very sinfulness of the sinful
action.

2. That the Saints in this life are fully perfect: as omniscient as God.

3. That the fullness of the Godhead does dwell bodily in every Saint, in the
same measure as it did in Christ, whilst he dwelt here on earth

4. Then when the fullness of the Godhead shall be manifested in the Saints,
they shall have more power then Christ had, and do greater works then he did,
and that then they shall have Divine honor.

5. One was complained of for saying that Christ was a Bastard.

6. Others, that themselves were Jesus Christ the Messiah.

7. That Jesus Christ is not God essentially, but nominally.

8. That his humane nature was defiled with original sin as well as ours.

9. That he is not of an holier nature then men.

10. That it is as possible for Jesus Christ to sin, as it is for a Child of
God to sin.

11. That there is no such thing as a Trinity of persons.

12. That the Scriptures are but a humane invention, a mere shadow, a false
History, and ought not to be the foundation of any man's Faith, more then the
Apocrypha, and other Books.

13. That the Scriptures of the Old Testament do not bind us Christians, nor
those of the New neither, any further then the spirit for the present reveals
to us that such a place is the Word of God.

14. That God never loved one man more then another before the world; and that
the Decrees are all conditional.

15. That there is no Original sin.

16. That the will of man is still free, even to supernaturals.

17. That the Saints may fall totally, and finally from grace.

18. That Christ dyed alike for all; yea that the salvificall virtue of his
death extends to all Reprobates as well as to the Elect: yea to the very
Devils as well as unto men.

19. That Christ came into the world, not for satisfaction, but for
publication; Not to procure for us, and unto us the love of God, but only to be
a glorious publisher of the Gospel to us.

20. That God is not displeased at all, if his children do sin: and that its
no less then Blasphemy for a child of God to ask pardon for his sins.

21. That sanctification is a dirty and dungie qualification.

22. That the Doctrine of Repentance, is a soule-destroying Doctrine.

23. That fastings and humblings are Legal, and abominable.

24. That the souls of men are mortal.

25. That there is no heaven for the godly, nor hell for the ungodly.

26. That Civil Magistracy is Antichristian, and but a usurpation.

27. That the whole Ministry of the land, as to their ordination, and standing
is Antichristian.

28. That its as lawful to Baptize Dogs, and Cats, and Horses, as Infants of
Believers.

29. That there is noe true Ministry etc. This day in the world: nor was since
the general Apostasy, which (they say) began at the Death of the last Apostle.

30. That there will be none til some Apostles be raised up and sent, and when
those Apostles come, then there will be true Evangelists also, and Pastors, and
not till then.

Quest. What must Magistrates do in such cases as these?

Answ. Tiberius, that the Gods alone must remedy the jnjuries offered unto
them. O no, Magistrates are made keepers of both Tables: Are designed to be
nursiing Fathers: they receive the sword to be a terror to the evil; Learned
and pious Amesius handling the question, whether Heretics are to be punished
by the civil Magistrate? Answers, that it is his place, and duty, to repress
and restrain them, and if they be noxious, and turbulent, and if they be
manifestly blasphemous, and pertinacious, they may (says he) be punished with
death as Lev. 24.15, 16.

Now that which is required of our Magistrates at this time is?

First, maxim viz: a Catholic liberty, and tolleration of all opinions: If
men may be suffered to step from one Religion to another, they will soon fall
from all Religion to none.

Secondly, Heresies, and Blasphemies known to be spoken and printed. When
Ostorodius, and Vaidovius declared their Socinian Heterodoxies in the Low
Countries, the States General banished those seducers, and burnt their Books.

Thirdly, Heretical, and Blasphemous.

Fourthly, Church Discipline in its full power, that so it may reach these
Heresies and Blasphemies. Were this done, you should not have an Heresy, or
Blasphemy, show its head, but there would be a timely discovery of it, and a
spiritual remedy to recover erring persons, and to prevent their further
growth.

Fifthly An encouraging, the godly Orthodox, and painful Ministers of the
Gospel in their assertings, and vindicating the truths of Christ, and in their
oppugning of wicked, dangerous, and damnable opinions. Not suffering them to be
abused for opposing the adversaries of the truth. Why should the shepherd be
discouraged, because he keeps off Wolves from the sheep?

Sixthly,

Seventhly,

Quest. What must private Christians do to prevent infection in these times.

Answ. First, be not light, Proud, and Blasphemers are joined together, 2 Timothy
3.2. Its the proud man that consents not to the wholesome words of Christ, but
dotes about questions, 1 Timothy 6.3, 4.

Secondly,

Thirdly,

Fourthly,

Fifthly, Such are given up to believe lies, who receive not the truth in the
love of it. Its just with God that such should fall into real error, whose
hearts did never love real truth. The deceitful heart proves at lenth a
deceived heart.

Sixthly, Christians. Halt not between two opinions. He whose mind is but
indifferent about a truth, is more then half on his way to Error.

Seventhly, Be not venturous, Julian sipt in his Apostasy by going to hear
Libanius. Satan is ready enough to tempt you, be not forward to tempt him. Eve
lost all by hearing one Sermon from the mouth of the Serpent. That man that
will expose himself to hear new truths, does often come back with old Errors
newly dressed.

Mr. Obad. Sedgwick's Parl. Sermon, Jan. 27. 1646.

Dr. Amias in his Cases of Conscience propounds these Questions.

Quest. Whether are Anabaptists to be accounted Heretics?

Answ. Heretics which only deny Infant Baptism; yet is this such an Error as
is not to be tolerated in the Church. But those of them which deny original
sin, and the humane nature of Christ born of the blessed Virgin, etc. are
Heretics.

Quest. Whether are the Arminians Heretics?

Answ. Arminians, as they are received, and held by the common people, are not
properly Heresies, though they are grievous Errors tending to Heresy: but as
they are defended by some of them, so they are the Pelagian Heresy, because
they deny the efficacious operation of internal grace to be necessary to
Conversion, and begeting faith in us.

Quest. Whether are the Lutherans Heretics?

Answ. Ubiquity of Christ's humane nature, cannot be excused from Heresy,
because that opinion does directly overthrow the humane nature of Christ: But
because many amongst them do disown that opinion, and others of them defend it,
rather in the heat of contention, then because they believe it to be so,
therefore they are rather to be accused for stupidity, or madness, or Schism,
then for Heresy.

Quest. Whether are Heretics to be punished by the civil Magistrate?

Answ. Heretics are to be suppressed by all godly persons according to their
calling, and that power which they have received from God, and the reason is,
because all the godly are called to the Christian War-fare, that in their
several stations they should oppose themselves to the kingdom of Darkness.

Secondly, The place, and the sword, which he bears not in vain, Romans 13.4. 1 Timothy 2..2.

Thirdly, Heretics therefore that are manifest, and public disturbers of the
peace, ought to be restrained by the public Authority of the Magistrate.

Fourthly, Lev. 24.15, 16. He that curses his God, or he that blasphemeth the
name of the Lord, shall surely be put to death, etc. For though this does not
bind Christians as it was a Law given to the Jews, yet as it was the Command of
God himself, it serves for direction to Christians what to do in the like
cases. When therefore the glory of God, and the Welfare of the Church do
require that such exemplary punishments should be inflicted, the Magistrates
may, ye ought to make use of this, when other means will not prevail to amend
them. Amesii Cas. Consc. l. 4. c. 4.

Quest. Why are Heretics, and false Teachers called the tail? Isa. 9.15.

Answ.

Secondly,

Thirdly, For their inconstancy, as Dogs move their tails easily every way: so
they in their Doctrine, and Conversation are here, and there, and buzzing every
where for advantage.

Fourthly, false-Doctrine is compared to Cokatrice eggs, Isa. 59.5. which if
eaten, cause present death. Such Doctrines are pernicious Authoribus, to the
inventers of them, and Auditoribus to the hearers, and receivers of them.

Quest. What is Mr. Jer. his Judgment about Tolleration?

Answ. His Judgment is,

Quest. Why? what is the danger of this principle?

Answ. First, nothing should be done for their restraint, but ask them, why
they do so, and to persuade them to do otherwise.

Secondly, Deuteronomy. 13.16. If thy brother, or thy son, or thy daughter, etc.
shall secretly entice thee saying, Let us go and serve other gods, etc. Thou
shall not consent nor hearken to him, nor pity, nor spare, nor conceal him,
but thou shall surely kill him, etc.

Obj. This is the Old Testament, and we find no such thing in the Gospel?

Answ. Zach. 13.3. In the latter end of the 12. chap. its prophesied that those
which pierced Christ should look upon him and mourn, etc. and then chapter 13.1.
There shall now a fountain be opened for sin and for uncleanness; and ver. 3.
It shall come to pass that he that takes upon him to prophecy, his Father, and
mother that begat him shall say unto him, Thou shall not live; For thou
speak lies in the Name of the Lord, and his father, and his mother that
begat him shall thrust him through when he prophesies, the meaning is, that
though they begat him, yet they should be the means to bring him to condign
punishment, even to the taking away of his life.

Thirdly, by this principle,

Obj. But Christ has left spiritual means to prevent this?

Answ.

Object. But Magistrates have nothing to do in matters of Religion.

Answ. is not an Officer of Christ in his Mediatory Kingdom: For Christ's
Government is twofold.

First,

Secondly, As he is God, and Man, Mediator in a peculiar Kingdom of his that he
has by way of dispensation from the Father. Now the Magistrate is an Officer
of God the Father, and Son in the general government of the world: but not an
Officer of Christ, in his Mediatory Kingdom.

Quest. But does not this then exclude him from exercising any power in matters
of Religion?

Answ. Son to be King upon his holy hill, at the promoting of the Glory of him
who is God-man: And if Magistrates make not use of their Power to this end, he
will require it at their hands.

Quest. Its granted that Magistrates under the Old Testament had power: but
they in the exercise of such power were Types of the Kingly Power of Christ.

Answ. Judicials bind now as well as they did then: But,

There is common Reason, and Equity from one civil Ordinance to prove another,
though it be conversant about spiritual things: For,

1. Its the Dictate of nature that Magistrates should have some power in
matters of Religion: all people have ever thought it equal. The Heathens would
never suffer their Gods to be blasphemed, but punished such as were guilty
thereof by their Magistrates.

2. Sure there is a common equity; for there is a necessity for it as well now
as then: In natural, and civil things its a good Argument, there is need of
such an help, therefore we should seek to have it.

Quest. How will it appear that there is need of it.

Answ. Jews was far more happy then ours. For if any of theirs blasphemed God,
and sought to seduce any from him, they were to put him to death: But now if
such do seduce our nearest, and dearest relations into such ways, as we judge
will turn to the everlasting damnation of their souls, yet we must only desire
them to forbear, admonish, or reprove them, but restrain them we may not. If
our deliverance from the Pedagogy of the Law has brought us into this
condition, our burden is herein greater then any that the Law has laid upon
our Forefathers. Has Christ delivered us from one burden to lay a greater upon
us? Must we now stand, and see those which are dearest to us, drawn away into
damnable ways, and stand, and look on, but no way help them? surely then our
condition is very sad: and have we not cause to say, Lord, let any burden of
the Ceremonial Law be laid upon us rather then this? If madmen were running up
and down the streets with knives, and swords in their hands, and we might only
speak to them, but not restrain them, what a mischievous thing were this? The
case is the same, when those who are mad with damnable Heresies may run from
place to place, and draw all they can from the truth, and we may only admonish
them: surely God has not put his Children into so sad a condition, but has
provided better for them.

Thirdly, Ezra 7.26. Artaxerxes interposes his power in matters of Religion,
and Ezra blesses God for it. So Nebuchadnezzer, Dan. 3.29. I make a decree,
that whosoever speaks against the God of Shadrach, etc. shall be cut in
pieces, and his house be made a Dunghill, etc. This is recorded as a work of
the Kings Repentance. So, Jona 3. The King of Niniveh proclaims a Fast, and
commands all to observe it.

Quest. But does not the holy Ghost justify this power of the Magistrate in
the times of the Gospel?

Answ.

First, Zach. 13.3. cannot be put off: and Isa. 49.23. Kings shall be thy
nursing Fathers, etc. But their Protection of the civil peace cannot be
sufficient to give them the title of Nursing fathers. So Isa. 60.10. The sons
of the strangers shall build up thy walls, and their Kings shall minister unto
thee, to wit, by their power. So Rev. 21.24. The Kings of the earth shall bring
their glory, and honor to the Church: and surely this is more then merely to
protect their outward peace.

Secondly, Romans 13.4. He is thy Minister for thy good. And 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.
Magistrates are sent for the punishment of evildoers, etc. Now therefore why
should we distinguish where the Scripture does not. Non distinguendum ubi
Scriptura non distinguit.

Object. But the nature of the thing requires that it be restrained to those
things that belong to his cognizance.

Answ. Its true,

Object. But those forenamed Scriptures speaking of civil Magistrates, speak
only of their power in civil things?

Answ. Civil. He cannot do the works of a Church Officer, as to administer the
Sacraments, preach, etc. by all the power he has: but this hinders not the use
of his Civil power, and the doing of external acts upon the outward man, which
are subservient to a spiriual good. Though he cannot work in a spiritual way
upon man's soul by his power, yet he may by the exercise of it upon the outward
man, restrain it from the external act of evil, or bring it to an external
good. For what Commandment soever requires any duty, requires us to make use of
all helps that may further the performance of it; and if there be civil,
natural, or spiritual helps, we are bound to make use of all.

Object. Its granted that Magistracy is Gods Ordinance for our civil good, by
those Texts of Scripture: but how will it appear that he intended it for our
spiritual good?

Answ. What naturalness there is in any thing, it has it from God: For Nature
is Gods work: So then if there be a Naturalness in it, to work upon the outward
man for the furtherance of its spiritual good, this is from God.

Quest. How can natural, and external things be helps to things spiritual, and
divine?

Answ. Reason, yea, sense tells us, that the taking away of external
hindrances, and the putting men upon the external use of diverse things, may
keep from much evil, and further much spiritual good. Seeing therefore that the
New Testament sets out the power of Magistrates, and requires submission to
them in general terms; we may thence conclude, that the Lord intended to leave
Christians for their subjection to Magistrates, to the light of nature, and to
the equity of the general rules which were in the Scripture aforetime: so that
we may boldly say to God himself, Lord, We found in thy Word that once thou
did make use of the power of the Magistrate in matters of Religion, and its
no where forbidden in the new Testament, nay its there said, that they are
appointed for our good, and to be a terror to evil workers, whence we gathered
that it was thy will that we should submit to them according to those general
rules. We found also that it was thy mind that we should make use of all
natural helps for our spiritual advantage, and we found in thy Word that thou
did allow the Exercise of the Magistrates power in matters of Religion even
to those that had but the light of nature to guide them: and seeing the use
reached only to the outward man, we did not see it necessary to have a special
institution for it, and therefore we made use of it; and without question God
will accept of this plea. Consider also further.

First, That when the Apostles were convented before Magistrates about matters
of Religion, they never pleaded, You have no power in things of this nature:
they belong only to Christ, who is our King, and to the Government he has set
in his Church: but they only pleaded the justness of their cause, and that
which they preached was the truth of God, and that they did it in obedience to
him.

2. If all men are bound to improve all their gifts, and talents for the
propagation of the Gospel: then the Magistrate that has more power then
others, must improve that likewise, not only by countenancing the truth, but by
all other means according to the Dictates of reason, not forbidden by Scripture.

Object. But Conscience is a tender thing, and therefore must not be meddled
with?

Answ. Joab was from the horns of the Altar, or fallen upon there.

Quest. What then may be done to a man in such a ease?

Answ. account of his conscience, and the grounds upon which he goes. Its
against the light of nature for men that live in a society that they should do
such things whereof they need give no account to any whatsoever.

Secondly,

Quest. But how shall we know whether the devil be in the conscience, yea, or
no?

Answ. First,

Secondly,

3. Thirdly, so grossly; as is apparent he is misled.

Fourthly,

Fifthly,

Sixthly, Error, or fly from some of his own principles; he will rather deny
his principles then yield himself convinced of his Error: This is such an one
as the man spoken of. Tit. 3.11. that is self-condemned; and therefore ought to
be rejected.

Quest. But what may be done to such as persist in an Error under the pretense
of conscience.

Answ. used, if he persist in such an Error as cannot stand with the Power of
godliness, notwithstanding his conscience he is to be cast out of the society
of the Saints.

Secondly,

Thirdly,

Fourthly, Civil, and Ecclesiastical sword, not only for sins injurious to our
brother, but for sins against God, as Blasphemy, gross Idolatry, etc. Yea, the
heathens cannot by violence be compelled to profess the Christian Religion, yet
notwithstanding any plea of conscience they may be restrained, and that by
violence from blaspheming Christ, the Scriptures, or doing acts of any open
dishonor to them.

Fifthly, us, that such may be cut off as strengthen others in soul-damning
principles.

Sixthly,

Quest. But what if errors be of less moment, can there be nothing done to men
to restrain them from such?

Answ. person shall see that there is something to be suffered in that way, it
may be a means to restrain him from embracing it.

Quest. Suppose a man be not wanton, but serious, and neglects no means to
inform his Conscience, and yet he cannot yield, what may be done to such a man?

Answ.

Quest. But by fomenting Divisions, those which are in authority may rule the
people best? the divisions of the times are their advantages, and their ends
are best served when Church and State are most divided.

Answ.

1. To maintain that which is evil.

2. To aim at their own ends, not regarding what public mischiefs follow,
so their private advantages might be served.

3. Not careing what the divisions are, if so be their turn may be served,
this is abominable, and cursed is that man that wishes for, or rejoices in, or
seeks the continuance of divisions for such base ends: yea, he is not worthy to
breath in so good an air as Englands is, that would not willingly lay down his
life to cure the present divisions that are amongst us. Just it were that such
a man should be separated to evil, and that his name should be blotted out from
under Heaven.

Mr. Burroughes his Irenicum.

Quest. How else may the wickedness of a tolleration of Heresies, Blasphemies,
etc. be made out?

Answ. way, and to contend earnestly for that one Faith, to hold fast the
truth, etc. and reproves, and condems turning aside to any false way, or
halting between two, or more Religions, or Worships, So 1 King 18.21. 2 Kin.
17.33, 41. Zeph. 1.5.

Secondly, heart, and one way to his people: and that as there is but one Lord,
so his name shall be one, and that all shall call upon, and serve him with one
consent, Jer. 32.39. Ezekiel. 11.19. Zac. 14.9. And there are many exhortations to
Christians to be of one mind, and that there be no Schisms amongst them, etc. 2
Cor. 13.11. Phil. 2.2. and 4.2. 1 Cor. 1.10. Ephesians. 4.3. therefore the toleration
of all, or many ways is contrary hereunto.

Thirdly, Cor. 13.8. We can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth,
Pro. 23.23. Buy the truth, and sell it not. So, Be valiant for the truth:
Strive for the faith of the Gospel. They that keep the Law contend with the
wicked. Paul would not give place to false brethren, no not for an hour: and
many other places named before.

Fourthly, general tolleration is against all these, in that it allows a
liberty of denying the Scriptures to be the Word of God, and sets up the
conscience above the Scriptures: making every man's conscience, even the
polluted, and seared conscience the rule of faith, and holiness, before the
pure, and unerring Word of God: whilst they cry out, Men must go according to
their consciences; but never speak of going according to the Word of God.

Fifthly, Genesis 18.19. Exodus 20.28. Deuteronomy. 6.4, 5, 6, 7. Ephesians. 6.4.

Sixthly, Abraham, Jacob, Moses, Joshua, Gideon, Jehosaphat, Asa, Hezekiah,
Josia, Nehemiah. etc.

Seventhly, Yea, which was right in the sight of God, 2 Chr. 14.2, 3, 4. and
many other places.

Eighthly, Solomon, 1 King. 11.4, etc. Eli, etc.

Object. But Idolatry, and Idolaters were the adaequate Object of the coercive
power of the Kings of Judah, and that Idolatry not meant of those that
worshipped the true God in a false manner, but of such as left the God of Israel
to worship false gods, and those neither, simply as such, but as seducing
others; but this power extended not to Heretics, Schismatics, etc. though
there were amougst them Pharisees, Saduces, Herodians, etc.

Answ. First, Idolaters, only were not the adaequate object of the Magistrates
coercive power, but generally the matter of the Covenant, the whole worship,
and truth of God: For Josiah, Hezekiah, Asa, and Jehosaphat, suppressed other
evils besides Idolatry, as Will Worship, things abused to Idolatry, and
profanation of the Sabbaths, marrying of strange wives, etc. as appears, 2 Chronicles. 34.31, etc. 2 Kin. 23.8, 9. with 2 Chronicles. 14.3, 5. and 15.17. and 33.17.
Neh. 13.7, 8, 15, 16, 17, 28, 30. Ezra 10.3, 5. 2 Kings 23.24, 25.

Secondly, Golden Calf, Exodus 32.4, 5.6. and Jeroboams Calves, 1 King. 12.27,
28. they did not believe these Calves to be Gods, but worshipped Jehovah by
them. And Josh. 22.11, 12. All Israel gathered together to war against Reuben,
etc. not for making an Altar to a strange god, but for making an Altar to offer
upon to the true God, besides the Altar which was in his Tabernacle, verse
21.26, 28, 29.

Thirdly, but such as were seduced. Moses punished 3000 with death for their
Calf-worship. So 2 Chronicles. 15.13. they that would not seek the Lord, whether
small, or great were to be punished, Deuteronomy. 13. all a City that was drawn to
serve other gods, was to be slain.

Fourthly, The Pharisees, Saduces, Herodians, etc. were not punished: 1.
Because Religion was then mightily corrupted, and all things were out of order
in Church, and State, which hastened their destruction. 2. The Jews were not
then a free people, nor had the civil power absolutely in their hands. 3. God
permitted those times to abound with Sects, because he had a purpose to destroy
their Commonwealth, and the Tolleration of those Sects made way for, and
hastened their ruin, as it has done many others. 4. There is a great
agreement between the false Prophets under the Old Testament, and the
false-Teachers under the New, as is evident in many Scriptures of the New
Testament, which lively resemble these each to other, so that it cannot be
imagined that the first sort should be punished with death, and the later not
punished at all.


Ninthly, Calvin, Zanchy, Melancthon, Beza, P. Martyr, Bullinger, Musculus,
Chemnitius, Gerard, Bucanus, Bilson, Cartwright, the Leiden Professors,
Voetius, Triglandus, etc. that the care of Religion and Gods worship belongs to
the Magistrate, and that God has given him power objective, and external in
Ecclesiastical causes to look to Religion as well as to civil Justice.

Tenthly, Exodus 22.20. Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 5. and 17.2, 3, 4, 5, 12, 13. Lev. 24.16,
23. and 20.2, 3, 4, 27. Deuteronomy. 18.20, 22.

Object. But these are Old Testament examples.

Answ. these commands, as against offering their children to Molech, and
dealing with familiar spirits, deserve, and are punished now under the Gospel
as well as under the Law, why not then those other of blasphemy, false
prophets, idolatry, etc.

Secondly, Jews only, but of all strangers in the land, both Proselytes that
dwelt amongst them, and passengers that traveled through, and came into their
country for traffic. So Lev. 20.2. Lev. 24.16. He that blasphemes the Name
of the Lord shall surely be put to death, as well the stranger, as he that is
born in the land.

Thirdly, the reasons, Jews.

Fourthly, Moses his time, in other Countries Idolatry deserved punishment by
the Magistrate, as Job tells us, Job 31.26, 27, 28. and Artaxerxes,
Nebuchadnezzar, etc. made Laws for punishing those that blasphemed the Lord,
and transgressed his Laws, as we heard before. Master Prin in his Sword of the
Christian Magistrate supported, does largly and excellently show, that by the
Light of Nature in all ages, even Heathen Magistrates have made Laws against,
and punished such as they esteemed to be Atheists, Heretics, Blasphemers of
their gods, or oppugners of their established Religion.

Fifthly, Buroughs before.

Mr. Tho. Edw. against tolleration.

Quest. How may it further appear that corruption in Religion, outwardly
breaking forth, and expressed, may, yea, and must be restrained and punished by
the civil Magistrate?

Answ. John 1.13, etc. who whipped out of the Temple those that sold Oxen and
Sheep, etc.

Object. But Christ did this as God, or at lest as the Messiah, therefore its
not imitable?

Answ. First, Gods, Psalm. 82.1, 6. and said to judge for God, 2 Chronicles. 19.6.
and are called the Ministers of God, Romans 13.4. who are to take vengeance in
Gods stead; they are also Christ's vicegerents as Mediator, as one that has
all power committed to him in earth as well as in heaven, Mat. 28.18. From him
therefore as political head of his people, Magistrates power on earth must
come, Prove. 8.15, 16. Hence he is called King of Kings, 1 Timothy 1.16, 17. Rev.
19.16. yea, he makes them nursing fathers to his Church, and so commits his
Church which is his house, into their hands, as to those who by their civil
authority are every way to further its welfare; and therefore what Christ did
when on earth, to purge corruptions out of his Church, he now does by the hands
of his vicegerents.

Secondly, he that was God man, man he made the whip of cords, and smote them
therewith: his example therefore herein is imitable by men of place, and the
reason whereby Christ's act was justified, was the zeal of Gods house, John
2.17. which must needs be yielded to be an apt, and just reason suitable to the
act, and imitable by others which are called thereunto.

Object. It was an extraordinary act in Christ as man to punish abuses in
Religion in a Corporal way?

Answ.

Secondly, Phineas his act in killing Zimri, and Cozbi, Numb. 25.7, 8. and
Samuels in hewing Agag in pieces, 1 Samuel 15.33. and Elijahs slaying of Baals
Priests, 1 King. 18.40. yet it must be yielded that there must be some who by
office might and should in an ordinary way have punished such sins, the Lord
not using to stir up any in an extraordinary way to do any such acts, but in
a defect of ordinary power. So by these extraordinary acts, was a supply made
of the defect of Magistratical power, which in an ordinary way makes use of the
sword, or whip for the corporal punishment, as Romans 13.4. rather then such
abuses in Religion shall not be in an external coercive way, curbed and
punished, therefore Christ thought it fit to put forth his hand to so good and
blessed a work, when those whose duty it was to do it, would not discharge
their trust.

Quest. What corruptions in religion are thus to be punished by the Civil
Magistrate?

Answ.

First, either Dogmatical or Practical:

Secondly,

Again, restraint, and punishment of these is either that which is merely and
immediately divine: or that which is partly Divine, and partly humane, in
respect either of the agent, or manner of acting: or that which is properly in
the nature of the act, person, and manner of acting, humane; and this again
is, either Political, which is carried on in a Civil way, and by Political
means: or Ecclesiastical, which is carried on in a Church Way, and by Church
means.

Thirdly, divine, in respect of God the author, but immediately humane, in
respect of man designing and inviting.

Quest. What conclusions may be laid down upon these premises?

Answ. We shall show, 1.

First, Negatively, we say,

1. No private person in these days under any pretense whatsoever may take
upon him to restrain and punish corruptions in religion in those who are not
under their personal charge. It Is rash zeal, zeal without knowledge to do any
thing this way, without the bounds of ones particular calling, in the limits
whereof every one should abide with God, 1 Cor. 7.20, 24. It tends to
confusion, and God is no author of that, 1 Cor. 14.33.

2. No civil authority, nor persons thereunto called, may (as such) punish
abuses in Religion in any Ecclesiastical way, as excommunication, etc. Christ
never gave the power of the keys to Civil Magistrates, but to his
Church Officers, Mat. 16.18, 19. and 18.17, 18. 1 Cor. 5.4. neither may
Church Officers punish in an external way, as by imprisonment, fines, stripes,
sword, etc. Mat. 20.25, 26.

3. Neither Civil, nor Church power may punish a mere supposed corruption in
Religion, but that which does manifestly appear to be so by the Word of God,
they must not make men offenders for a word rightly uttered by the just, Isa.
29.21. that is blind zeal, as Joh. 16.2, 3.

4. Neither of them may censure, or punish corruptions in Religion till they
break forth in outward expressions: For then, and not till then they are of
legal proof, scandalous, and infectious. Hence, Deuteronomy. 13.13, 14. and 17.2, 3,
4, 5. the text says, If it be told thee, and if thou have heard it, etc.

5. Though such as are in authority should be in a holy manner jealous, and
carry a watchful eye in case of hints given of such corruptions, as the Heads
of the Tribes were, when they heard of the new Altar, Josh. 22.11, etc. and
Paul of the Church of Corinth, 2 Cor. 11.2, 3. yet they may not by external
violence, as by Oaths ex officio, imprisonment, wrack, etc. bring that under
censure, which Gods providence ripeneth not for it. The Heathen Romans would
not do so, Act. 22.30. and 23.28, etc. 35. and 24.22, 23. and 25.5, 7, 8.

6. Though the corruptions in Religion be manifest to the Civil or
Church Officers, yet they are not punishable till sufficient means of
conviction be used. So we see in the example of the heads of the Tribes, Josh.
22.11, to 20. An Heretic must not be rejected by the Church till after once,
or twice admonition.

7. Though neither Civil, nor Church Officers may impose upon Aliens from the
true Religion, any of the ways of it: yet the Civil Magistrate may not suffer
such openly to vilify, or blaspheme the true Religion, or to abuse the
Ministers and professors of it, or any ways to disturb them in the holy
exercise of it.

8. Neither powers may equally censure, or punish all sorts of corruptions in
religion which come into public view; but as the corruptions are more gross,
or the persons more turbulent in their way, so they are to punish them more
severely.

Secondly, Positively, both Church and Civil Officers, the one in a Church Way,
the other in a Political way, may, yea, must restrain, and seasonably and
sutably punish all gross corruptions in Religion, manifestly cross to the
Word, when they are outwardly, and openly expressed, to the just offense of the
Saints, and the hurt of others. We say, they may, and must do it; for its not
left to their liberty to do, or not to do it, but its their duty, which they
may not dispense with.

Quest. How can this be proved to be the Civil Magistrates duty?

Answ. Moses would call forth some to punish with the temporal sword, the open
corruptions in Religion, Exodus 42.4, etc. 26. He asks, who was on the Lords
side? or who is for the Lord? viz. to punish such corruptions in such
offenders, and ver. 29. speaking of the same work, he bids them, Consecrate
your selves to the Lord, every one upon his son, and upon his brother, that
he may bestow a blessing upon you to day. Acts of justice against the Churches
enemies, are a choice service, and sacrifice to God. Hence, when God by man's
sword punishes the Churches enemies, Isa. 34.6. he calls it his sword that is
filled with blood. So, Rev. 19.17, etc. when the overthrow of the supporters of
the Man of sin, is spoken of, its called, the Supper of the great God: so
delightful and pleasing to the great God are such acts of justice by the Civil
sword upon such as are grossly corrupt in matters of Religion. Its to him as a
sacrifice, as a Supper.

Obj. But still these are Old Testament examples?

Answ. John to communicate to his Churches. Would not underminers of the
Magistrates power, have godly Magistrates to be for the Lord, and on his side,
as well now as formerly? would they not have them do him such choice service,
which may be to him as a Sacrifice as well now as then? Again, such as are
zealous in doing acts of Civil Justice upon corrupters of Religion, they also
are said to be with the Lamb, and on his side, Rev. 17.14. and they that are
with him, are called, and chosen, and faithful; and Chap. 19.19. they are
called Armies in Heaven, i.e. persons of heavenly spirits, aims, and
conversations, arrayed in white. Neither can this be evaded by saying that they
fought against Antichrists adherents by the sword of the Spirit, the Word of
God, or by the sword of excommunication: but its meant by the temporal sword of
Christ, as he is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, by which he bids his
Magistrates from him to avenge his quarrel upon the Beast of Rome, and his
adherents: and the judgment so executed is called the Lords, Deuteronomy. 1.17. and
this punishment upon persons so corrupt in Religion, is in the days of the
Gospel set out to be a renowned, and accceptable service to the Lord, as is
foretold, Isa. 66.19, 20, 21, etc. The Lord will judge with his sword all
flesh, and his slain shall be many, ver. 16. to wit, of those as purify
themselves in gardens, eating unclean things, etc. these shall be consumed
together, even these that are corrupt in matters of Religion by Gods sword,
verse 16. not alone immediately, but mediately, even by the Civil Magistrate,
who bears Gods sword for this end, as v. 24.

Again, Cant. 2.15. Take us the Foxes, etc. they are the words of Christ; and
the word Take, in the most usual and proper sense, signifies a taking by
external force. So, 2 Samuel 1.10. David took the Amalekite, and slew him. So,
Judge. 12.6. and 16.21. and such external forcible taking is proper for Foxes
that destroy the Vines, and therefore this text must be referred to an act in
an external forcible way of taking and punishing such Foxes, which spoil the
Churches of Christ. So false prophets are compared to Foxes, Ezekiel. 13.4. so
then this is clear from that in Canticles.

1. That this is a charge of Christ, as Mediator, to all such as being in
place and office under him, are to restrain and punish, even by the temporal
sword, as our Civil Rulers, who in a Political way are herein enjoined
forcibly to take such corrupters, and disturbers of Religion; as well as of
good manners.

2. That such taking of Foxes is a service very acceptable to Christ, as
Mediator, and Political head of the Church: yea, and to the blessed Father, and
Spirit, in whose name its done, and to the Church, in whose behalf it is done.
So Number. 25.11. with 1, 2, 6, 7, 8, God says, that Phineas his act of zeal, was
for his sake, Verse 11. So Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12. The Kings, and Judges of the
earth are required to serve the Lords anointed, verse 6. which being spoken to
Kings, cannot be restrained to service which other godly persons perform, but
extends to authoritative service, as Civil Rulers: and this was no Mosaical
injunction that concerned only Judahs Kings: but the Psalm being Prophetical of
Gospel Times, shows that its a command lying upon Gentile-Rulers, to serve
Christ with their Authority in restraining, and punishing corruptions in
Religion.

Secondly,

1. In General, he is appointed for the good of his Subjects, Romans 13.4.
whether that good be natural, as safety of their bodies, life, etc. or moral,
as Temperance, Chastity, etc. or Civil, as Civil liberties, men's Lands, Goods,
etc. Or spiritual, as the free passage of the Gospel, the purity of Worship,
and of the Doctrine, and Discipline of Christ, etc. Now if God has made him a
Minister for good all these ways, then he has armed him with power in a Civil
way to promote that good of his Subjects, and to rescue them from whatsoever
breaks out to impair that good: And truly corruptions in matters of Religion do
strike at all that good, both as they provoke God in Judgment to blast all that
good to a people where they do prevail; and as they occasion breaches in a
State to the prejudice of their liberties, and peace: witness the sad fruits
of Popery, formerly amongst us. Of Anabaptisme in Germany: and of Levellisme
not long since in England, and I pray God that these may be the last, and to
divert that storm which seems to approach by reason of many turbulent, and
seditious spirits now working amongst us: and is not then the Magistrate, who
in a special manner is appointed for the spiritual good of his Subjects, to
maintain and defend them by opposing, and punishing all principles, and
practices which tend to the disturbance of the Church. So Romans 13.4. Isa.
60.10, 11, 12.

Obj. What need the Church any such helps? It carried on Church-wayes, and
worship, when the Rulers of the earth hindered it: and it has weapons of its
own to avenge all disobedience? 2 Cor. 10.6.

Ans. 1. Its true, this help of Civil authority is not of absolute necessity to
the being of a Church; but its an acumulative good, conferred by God upon the
Church to curb, and hinder whatsoever is destructive to her good.

2. When the Church has used her power against the disturbers of her purity
and peace; yet even then they may, and usually do grow more insolent, and
turbulent, and do more hurt then they did before: yea, such may go from place
to place to make proselytes; So that either the Magistrates sword, and service
is needful, or there will be left no ordinary, nor orderly power to restrain,
and punish such gross offenders.

Thirdly, which they return to God when such an end is attained.

1. For prayers, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. I exhort that prayers, etc. be made for Kings,
etc. that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness, and
honesty. Whence it follows.

1. That we come not to God to desire to be let alone by authority in any way
that is contrary to godliness or honesty; the contrary desire being that which
we are taught here to pray for. 2. That Magistrates by their office, now under
the New Testament, are to look to matters that pertain to godliness, both
Doctrinal, and Practical, appearing in outward view, as well as to matters of
honesty. 3. If this be a prayer according to the will of God, as it must needs
be, being directed by the Holy Ghost, then its Gods will that Magistrates
should by their authority see that their subjects lead a quiet and peaceable
life in all godliness, and honesty, that is free from disturbance in any such
ways of godliness, by open, and manifest disturbers thereof.
2. For praises. So in Ezra's days: they thankfully acknowledged it as put
into the hearts of their rulers by God, to take such effectual care of pure,
peaceable, and comfortably carrying on the whole work of God committed to them,
Ezra 7.25, etc. So Revel. 11.15. they praise God, for that the Kingdoms of the
earth are become the Kingdoms of Christ, and for that he takes to himself the
Kingdom. Now the Kingdoms of the earth become Christ's, not only when the
people submit to Christ's government; but when such as Rule under Christ, do
rule for him, and by their civil power, suppress such as openly oppose, or
seek to subvert, or pervert his royal Laws, and blessed institutions held forth
in his Word.

Fourthly, Zach. 13.3, 6.

Fifthly, want, or gross neglect thereof, Deuteronomy. 17.2, 3, 5, 7. when Idolaters
are commanded to be stoned, its added, so shall thou put away the evil from
amongst you: Good also is attained, and that, 1. Moral, Deuteronomy. 17.10. All Israel
shall hear, and fear, and do no more such wickedness. 2. Civil, in regard of
their outward estate; God would then bless them with peace and plenty: when the
Idolaters were punished, God sent rain, 1 King. 18.40, 41. 2 Chronicles. 14.3, 4,
5. Consider also what a deluge of evils ensue when such power is wanting, or
not executed. Thence idolatry, Jude 17.4, 5, 6. Thence corruption in Church
Discipline, v. 12. with chapter 18.1. yea, it lets in all temporal judgments: when
there is none to stand in the gap, and authoritatively to make up the hedge
which is broken down by corrupters of Gods worship, then an inundation of
ruining judgments follows, as Ezekiel. 21.25, 26. with v. 30, 31. and as it is
mischievous to the Church and State, so to the negligent rulers themselves, and
to their families: It was the ruin of Eli's house, 1 Samuel 2.22, 23, 24. with
27.28, etc.

Sixthly, to restrain, and punish Heretics, and corrupters of his Word, and
worship, God stirs up zeal in others in an extraordinary way to do it. When
Ahab would not, Elijah does it, 1 King. 18. he will have it some way done, and
therefore he likes of it.

Obj. But grant such power to Magistrates, and its the way to make men either
basely to dissemble, or to do something against their consciences?

Answ. Asa, and the State took, 2 Chronicles. 15.12, 13. when they enacted, that
whosoever would not serve the Lord should be slain, which they were encouraged
unto by the prophesying of Oded, ver. 1. and for this the Lord gav^ them rest,
v. 15. Josias also caused his Subjects to serve the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 34.33. and
you may as well say that this caused their Subjects either to dissemble, or to
sin against their conscienc^s; the like you may ob^^ct against
Church Censures, as Gal. 5.10, 12. 1 Timothy 1. ult.

Secondly, avoid, and will this make them to dissemble, etc.

Obj. Such coercive power in matters of Religion is the way to bring in
persecution for conscience sake?

Answ. 1. Teaching Magistrates their duty to punish things manifestly cross to
the Word of God, and that after due means used for conviction, is rather a way
to restrain them from persecuting the Saints for a good cause, or conscience,
and if accidentally Gods enemies take occasion hence to abuse their power, this
must not take away the due use of it. Papists, and Prelates abused
Church Censures against the godly, yet this their sin discharges not the
Church from its duty.

2. Its an absurd argument to reason thus. Men may not be persecuted for a good
cause, and conscience; therefore they may not be punished for maintaining a bad
cause, etc.

Obj. The exercise of any such power by godly Rulers is cross to the meek
Spirit of Christ, and to that merciful spirit which he requires to be in his
Saints? Romans 15.1. Gal. 6.1, 2. Ephesians. 4.32. 2 Timothy 2.25.

Answ. Zeal of God in sharp punishing of such corruptions flood well with
Christ's Dove-like spirit. None so meek as he, and yet none so zealous this way.
The zeal of Gods house even consumed him, and made him lay on so hard with his
scourge upon those who polluted the Temple, John 2.16. with 14.15, 16, 20.
Moses was the meekest of men in his own cause, Numb. 12.3. yet lion-like in
that cause of pollution of Gods worship, Exodus 32.26, 27 etc. Hezekiah was a
shadow to the Saints, Isa. 32.2. Yet a fiery flying Serpent against Gods, and
the Churches enemies, Isa. 14, 29, 30.

Quest. What other reasons may be rendered why the higher Civil powers ought not
to grant a Tolleration to their Christian subjects to hold, and profess in
matters of Religion what themselves may pretend conscience for their so doing,
when indeed grossly erring, and contemptuously, and pertinaciously holding the
same forth?

Ans. works of the flesh: But Heresies, and Schisms are works of the flesh,
Gal. 5.20. therefore not to be tolerated.

Secondly, from God is not to be granted by Christian Magistrates; but to
tolerate persons, under a pretense of Conscience, pertinaciously to hold forth
corrupt opinions, is to suffer them to draw others from God, therefore its not
to be allowed, Deuteronomy. 13.9.

Thirdly, Ezekiel. 34.5, 6, 7, 8. There was no Shepherd, neither did my Shepherds
search for my flock: but they wandered and became a prey, -- were driven away
and devoured; there were Shepherds, but they did not execute their office, but
suffered Gods flock to be seduced, and corrupted by false prophets. But the
liberty aforementioned does thus; therefore its not to be allowed.

Fourthly, Anarchy in the State, yea, and of a sad judgment of God upon that
State for the provoking sins both of rulers and people. 1. Its one brand of
Anarchy, Judge. 17.6. there was no King in Israel, every one did what was right
in his own eyes. 2. Its a sad judgment of God, as appears, Zach. 11.9. with
15, 16, 17. where the Lord threatens to leave those of his flock alone to
themselves, and to killing courses of sin: that which dies let it die: and
the judicial means he uses, is in judgment to raise up a foolish Idol
Shepherd, i.e. such Rulers in Church and State into whose hands the flock is
delivered to be spoiled, as v. 5, 6. such as care not what becomes of their
souls. So, 2 Chronicles. 20.33. where it appears that to be left by authority to
take up corruption in religion under pretense of conscience is a sad judgment
of God for the sins of a professing people.

Fifthly, to destroy the works of the devil: For a tolleration of errors is a
tollerating the works of the devil; because erroneous doctrines are forged by
the devil, and are some of those lies whereof he is the Father, John 8.44.
Those doctrinal lies are doctrines of devils, 1 Timothy 4.2. unclean frogs that
come out of the Dragons mouth, Rev. 16.13, 14. yea, lesser errors about meats,
and marriage are called doctrines of Devils, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. therefore they
ought not to be tolerated.

Sixthly,

1. Corrupt Doctrines so allowed, do mingle with, and will eat out sound
Doctrine, pure Religion, and the Covenant of God, which are the ligaments, and
bands of a Christian State, and made Jerusalem so compacted together, Psalm
122.1, 2, 3. For, 2 Timothy 2.16, 17. They will increase to more ungodliness, and
their words will eat as a Canker, or Gangrene.

2. Corrupt Doctrines tend to the breaking of the peace of such societies where
they are tolerated. Hence Gal. 5.10, 12. I would they were cut off that
trouble you. And Acts 20.30. They draw away (or rent away as members from the
body) Disciples after them: Where there are Heresies amongst Church Members,
there will be Schisms and Divisions, 1 Co^. 11.18, 19. Such filthy Dreamers,
Jude 8. are branded for sedicious persons in Commonwealths: They despise
Dominions, and speak evil of Dignities, witness the many breakings of our
Parliaments, and turning of Governments upside down. Such justly perish, as did
seditious Corah, verse 11. Hence Seducers are called, Traitors, heady,
high-minded, Truce Breakers, False-accusers, fierce, etc. 2 Timothy ^.1, 2, 3, 4,
5. and that he speaks this of Seducers appears, verse 6, 7, 8, 9, 13. And Jude
16. They are branded for Murmurers, and Complainers, quarrelling against
matters in Church, and State. All ages have declared that persons of corrupt
Principles in Religion are frequent Movers, and Abettors of civil seditions.

3. Corrupt Doctrines break the hedges, and walls of a Christian Commonwealth,
and leave it naked to become a prey to its adversaries. So was Israel, when
they had corrupted Religion, Exodus 32.25. till Moses commanded Justice to be
executed upon some, for the terror of others, ver. 26, 27. False Prophets let
alone, spoil the vines, and break the hedges, as is employed, Ezekiel. 13.4, 5. So,
Ezekiel. 22.26, 27. When such corruptions are let alone, a gap is made, verse 30.
and when none in Authority are found to make it up by punishing them, God
powers out his indignation upon them, verse 31. Solomon's connivence at Idolatry
in his wives, rent his Kingdom in pieces: but punishing such corruptions puts
away evil, Deuteronomy. 17.2, 3, 7.

7. Such a tolleration God accounts to be a kicking at Religion, and honoring
such Corruptors above God himself, as appears, 1 Samuel 2.12. to 16. with 23, 24,
25, 29. Elies sons corrupted the worship of God by snatching what came first to
hand: and the Lord says, not only to them, but to Eli too: Wherefore kick ye
at my sacrifice, and honor thy sons above me? etc. therefore it ought not
to be granted.

8. Such a Tolleration of such evils, causes those very evils to be charged on
Rulers themselves, and brings the wrath of God upon them. So Elies sons sins
were charged upon, and punished on Elie himself, and Solomon's connivence at the
Idolatry of his wives. And Nehemiah contends with the Rulers for not reforming
the prophanations of the Sabbath, Nehe. 13.10, 11, 12, 16, 17, 18. the sin of
the people in doing corruptly in the matters of God is charged upon Jotham, 2 Chronicles. 27.2. he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, yet the
people did corruptly, 2 Kin. 15.34, 35. and that is charged upon him as his sin.

9. Such a Tolleration makes men abhor Religion, and to speak evil of the way
of truth, as Elies sons corruptions being connived at, made men abhor the Lords
offerings, 1 Samuel 2.17. So, 2 Pet. 2.1.2, 3.

10. Such a Tolleration is intolerable, because it is an allowing of Foxes to
spoil Christ's vines, Can. 1.2.16. Of Wolves that spare not Christ's flock. Acts
20.30. with Ezekiel. 34.8, 10. Of Sorcerers that bewitch men. 2 Timothy 3.13. Gal.
3.1. Who has bewiched you, etc: they are also as Jesabel, whom God will
punish, if men neglect their duty in doing of it, Rev. 2.20, 21, etc.

Thus you have the Judgment of Mr. Tho. Cobbet of New England against a
General Tolleration. See more of this in Mr. Cottons answer to Mr. Williams.

FINIS.
Errata Typographica.
Page 2. lin. 6. pro Nobathaea leg. Nabathaea. p. 3. l. 21. pro Saphirus leg.
Sapphirus. p. 4. l. 1. pro phorus leg. pharus. p. 6. l. 13. pro pollysyllaba
leg. polysyllaba. l. 18. pro ped^x leg. pedis. in margin pro Harpago est faem.
leg. masc. p. 7. l. 26. post silex add et. p. 9. l. 20. pro mine leg. minae.
p. 10. l. 4. pro vendiciae leg. vindiciae. p. 11. l. 11. pro facinum leg
fascinum. p. 15. l. 10. pro Ligar leg. Ligur. p. 20. l. 8. pro areo leg. aveo.
p. 23. l. 6. add distinguo.


