A FULL DISCOVERY AND CONFUTATION Of the wicked and damnable Doctrines of the
Quakers. As also, a plain Vindication and confirmation of sundry fundamental
points of the Christian Religion, denied or corrupted by the enemies of the
Truth in these Times. Published for the benefit of such weak Christians, who
are not so able to discover and oppugn the dangerous doctrines of subtle
Seducers, when colored over with fair words and pretenses, and so are more apt
to be taken in their snares. Whereunto is annexed an excellent Discourse
proving that singing of Psalms is not only lawful, but an Ordinance of God. By
JONATHAN CLAPHAM, a servant of Christ in the work and labor of the Gospel at
Wramplingham in Norff.

2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. -- Because they received not the love of the truth, that
they might be saved; -- God shall send them strong delusions that they should
believe a lie. That they might be damned, etc.

LONDON. Printed by T. R. and E.M. for Adonirem Byfield at the Bible in
Pope's Head Alley, near Lumbard-street. 1656.

The general heads of the following TREATISE.
SEct. 1. The Quakers proved enemies to the holy Scriptures. Sect. 2. The
Quakers deny Christ come in the flesh, also his Death, Resurrection, etc. Sect.
3. The Quakers deny the doctrine of the Trinity. Sect. 4 The Quakers hold
equality with God, and the soul to be one being with God. Sect. 5. The Quakers
corrupt the doctrine of Justification. Sect. 6. The Quakers deny the
Resurrection of the body, the last Judgment, Heaven and Hell. Sect. 7. The
Quakers are enemies to all the Ordinances of Jesus Christ. Sect. 8. The Quakers
pretend to miracles. Sect. 9. The Quakers are no truly mortified persons,
notwithstanding their pretenses thereunto and how Popish Monks have
out-stripped them therein Sect. 10. The Quakers doctrine tends not to destroy
sin, though they rail against sin and how they destroy the true doctrine of
Sanctification. Sect. 11. The Quakers he common sink of all the Heresies of our
times, and a parallel betwixt them and former heretics in many particulars.
Sect. 12. The Quakers enemies to all civility and good manners. Sect. 13. The
Conclusion, by way of admonition to Christians to beware of the heresies of the
Times, and in particular to avoid the Quakers as pernicious enemies to the
Christian Religion, and to the souls of men, and to have no communion with
them.
TO HIS HIGHNESS The Lord Protector Of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the
Dominions thereof.
SIR,
IT is a question much controverted in these times, whether Jesus Christ,
besides his spiritual Kingdom in his Chrurches, and in the hearts of his
people, is to have an outward Political Kingdom in the world? and there are not
a few of godly, wise, and sober Christians that do conclude affirmatively for
the same, and that (as it seems to me) upon undeniable authorities from the
holy Scriptures. But this being granted, it will prove a matter of no less
difficulty to determine by whom this kingdom shall be administered, whether by
our Lord Jesus himself in person residing here upon earth; or by his Delegates,
or officers to whom he shall commit the rule and government under himself? The
former has yet received small entertainment in my heart, as seeing little
clear Scripture evidence for it (whatever others may see) but rather it seeming
to clash with some other weighty doctrines of the faith more clearly grounded
on the Word, and to be attended with such inconveniences, as the Authors of
this opinion know not well how to remove: But for the latter, it need not seem
so incredible; for seeing Jesus Christ has already so long exercised his
spiritual Kingdom, and regiment in his Churches, by Officers and Delegates
thereunto appointed by himself; why should it then seem strange to us, if his
outward political Kingdom should be administered in like manner? and (as I
judge) this seems to have far clearer testimony from the Scripture then the
former. But are not we in a great strait yet to find out, who are these
Officers or Delegates to whom Jesus Christ has committed the government of
this outward Political Kingdom in the world? whether to his Churches and
Saints (under that reduplication) as such, or to the Civil Magistrate? I am not
unwilling to acknowledge my own mistake, (and possibly it may be the mistake of
some honest hearts, who are zealous now against the present powers upon this
account) that I have sometimes inclined to the former, although I never had
thoughts of acting against any established Government, for to bring about my
conceptions in such things, sure it is most dangerous and unwarrantable for
private persons to do so; The ground of my mistake was an assertion received
amongst many wise and holy men, and therefore the less questioned by me; that
the Magistrate was no Officer of Jesus Christ as Mediator; whereupon I
concluded, seeing that Jesus Christ as Mediator should have an outward
Political Kingdom upon earth, and the Magistrate as such, was no Officer in
that Kingdom, that there must be some other hands, into which this power and
Dominion must be committed, and who then might lay better Scripture claim to
it, then the persons above named?

But I do retract my error in that particular (for I dare not say with the
Papists and Quakers, I am infallible and cannot err,) and do acknowledge the
Magistrate to be an Officer of Jesus Christ as Mediator, and therefore in this
external Political Kingdom of Christ, the rule does belong to him, and not to
the Saints as Saints; though withal I doubt not but the Lord Jesus will in
these last days raise up such to be Magistrates, as shall be Saints and
nursing fathers to his Churches, governing more for the honor of Christ, and
for the welfare and benefit of his Churches then formerly, and then shall the
kingdoms of the world become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Saints.

That which induced me to be of this judgment for the Magistrate to be an
Officer of Jesus Christ in this outward Political kingdom (though he is no
Officer in the spiritual Kingdom of his Church, as the Erastians contend) was
the serious consideration of such Scriptures as these, Prove. 8.15, 16. Mat.
28.18 Isa. 49.13. Psalm 2.8, 10, 11, 12. Psalm 72.10, 11. and indeed Christ
having undertaken the work of man's redemption, the Father has delivered up the
whole creation unto him in order to his managing of that work, and therefore
must Magistracy belong to him as Mediator, Romans 14.9. Luke 10.22. John 3.15.
Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22. It were a work of no great difficulty to answer the
arguments brought to the contrary, and is already done by some.

Now this being granted, as it does strongly confirm the title of the
Magistrate to his rule and government, against all that would, under any
pretext, challenge it from him: So it may seriously mind him to consider from
whom he has received his power and authority, and to whom he must one day be
acountable for it, and therefore to use it (not only for the promoting of the
civil good and benefit of men, but) especially for the advantage of the
spiritual Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the interest of his Churches; for it was
in this respect, that Christ had this power given to him by the Father, he gave
him to be head over all things to the Church; and sure Christ expects that
those to whom he commits this power, as his Vicegerents upon earth, should use
it for the same ends, the Father did first betrust it into his hands for. And
how clear is it in Scripture, that all those godly Princes and Magistrates
spoken of therein, did make it their first and chiefest care to promote
Religion, and to see that the Worship of God was maintained in purity, and that
the Church flourished in their Dominions; not that they were Officers in the
Church, and might themselves administer in the holy things, this was rebuked in
some of them; but that they had an external care about the same, as sometimes
that Christian Emperor Constantine of famous memory said, he was Episcopus
(...) not (...) ( Eusebius. lib. 4.) an overseer of things without, as those
nurse-fathers, Hezekiah, Josia, Asa, Jehoshaphat were; but not an overseer of
things within, as Uzziah would have been.

There is an opinion entertained amongst many in these days, (and some of them
good men too) that the Magistrate ought to meddle only with matters of the
second Table, not taking inspection of things appertaining to the first; that
he is only to maintain civil peace amongst men and outward righteousness, not
heeding Religion or the Worship of God at all, as he is a Magistrate; If this
once be received by Magistrates, Jesus Christ will be little beholden to them,
they must as well protect the worshippers of Mahomet, as of Christ so long as
they keep the peace, and live in civil honesty amongst men; these men believe
not the Magistrate to be Christ's Officer as he is Mediator and head of his
Church, if they did they would be of another mind. But enough is said against
this woeful assertion by Mr. Cotton bloody tenet washed; by the Elders of N.
Eng. in the Synod, Anno 1646. and by Mr. Cobbet in his book dedicated to your
Highness some few years since. And the blessing of the Lord upon the care of
the godly Magistrates in N. E. has been as a Seal to attest the Lords
acceptance of what they have done there about this particular.

The premises considered, I should humbly offer to your Highness, (may my
presumption herein be indulged) especially two particulars wherein you may
employ that great power which our Lord Jesus has betrusted you with, as his
Delegate, for the promoting that great end, for which all power was first given
to him by the Father, to wit, the spiritual good and welfare of his Church.

1. That you would please to put forth your endeavors toward the uniting of
the people of God in these Nations, who dissenting in lesser matters, do yet
maintain the fundamentals of Religion, in whose spirits the vitals of
Christianity are still preserved, and in whose lives the power and practice of
godliness does yet appear. And in order hereunto, that you would by your
authority call together a few of the most judicious godly, and peaceable of
such Dissenters, and lay your most solemn charge upon them that they would
after (their fervent invocation on the Name of the Lord for direction and
assistance in so great a work) study an holy and peaceable accommodation and
agreement (so far as may be in their principles, but especially) in such
necessary Church practices, as the Churches of Christ amongst us, may walk
together with more Christian love and unity. I should hope (notwithstanding
former disappointments) the Lord would at last give them hearts to know what
concerns their and the Churches peace, after they have had such sad experience
of the evil fruits of our divisions. And that then you would commend such a
pacificatory agreement to the Christian people of these Nations, and give some
more special encouragement to those who shall be so tender of the Churches
peace and union, as to practice according to the same. This were a work worthy
of a Christian Magistrate, who by his office is to be an healer, Isa. 3.6, 7
and would give you the honor even to many generations, to be called the
repairer of the breach, and the restorer of paths to dwell in.

II. That you would please to put some restrictions unto that (almost)
boundless Tolleration now amongst us, whereby Seducers take liberty to broach
such cursed doctrines as are a dishonor to the Name of Christ, and reproach
and infamy to the Christian Religion; such as directly tend to the undermining
of the profession and power of godliness, and to the destruction of souls.
Nothing can be more evidently contrary to the spiritual welfare of the Church,
the promoting whereof is the principal end of the Christian Magistrates power,
(and not only the procuring of a civil good, which thing I cannot but often
hint) then the free Tolleration of such pernicious and heretical doctrines. It
is not a thing unknown, That seducers have been more dangerous enemies to the
Church then bloody persecutors, where persecution has slain its thousands, the
deadly poison of false doctrine has slain its ten thousands; and when the one
has killed men's bodies, the other has murdered men's souls; the Church has
ever thriven under persecution (the blood of the Martyrs being the seed of the
Church, but it has been brought very low under Heresies. If Magistrates be the
Churches Nurs-fathers (as the Scripture speaks,) sure their Office not only
obliges them, to take care that her children have the milk of the Word
dispensed to them, but that (as much as in them lies) it be dispensed purely
and sincerely without the mixture of poison to destroy them. Magistrates are
called Shepherds. Isa 44, 28. and that with respect to the Church, and therefore
should protect her from ravenous Wolves: they are called Gods, but they should
be poor gods, if they took no care of Religion. What ample testimonies has the
Lord given to David, Solomon, Asa, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah for their care
of Religion? nor will the names of Constantine, Theodotius, Justinian cease to
be precious in and for their care of the Church of Christ. Even the Heathens,
Aristotle and Plato acknowledge (from the light within them, that the chief
care in a Commonwealth should be about Religion. But I presume not to add more
words for this, there being so much already said in those three Treatises
before mentioned for the same, and in particular against tolleration of
seducers, all contrary arguments that have been made, being therein fully
answered.

Only I crave leave to add this further, that I am not pleading now against
those lesser errors amongst us, which will be so long as we are imperfect and
know but in part; I should desire in behalf of such as so err, we might show
mutual love and forbearance, waiting, if any be otherwise minded, till the Lord
reveal the same unto them: but against such gross and damnable doctrines as
were before named. Nor do I here call for fire to consume such as be seduced by
such doctrines, but I cry earnestly for pity and compassion to be showed toward
them, to pull them as firebrands out of the fire. It cannot but move our bowels
to see some of our dear relations, friends and neighbors, to drink in greedily
such poisonous principles (through the cunning craftiness of Seducers that lie
in wait to deceive) as we know assuredly, if the Lord give them not repentance
to the acknowledgement of the truth, will damn their precious and immortal
souls; and to see other weak ones stumbled; and the efficacy of the Gospel so
much impeded in the bringing home souls to God, which has been so prevalent a
means in the hand of the Lord, till the precious and fundamental truths of
Christ have been called in question, and denied by wicked deceivers amongst us.
We cannot but cry aloud to God and man whilst we are eyewitnesses of these
things. It Is true, Jesus Christ is able without the help of men to maintain his
own truths, and to call home, and preserve his Elect ones, and we doubt not but
he will do it where means fail, even by miraculous providence and testimonies
from heaven, but this is no warrant to us to neglect Gods appointed means;
every one is to contend in their places for the truth, nor can we expect
miracles till these ordinary means fail.

May it please your Highness to look into the following Treatise, and you may
see the abominable doctrines of those people amongst us called Quakers,
faithfully presented to your veiw; although I doubt not but you have sufficient
knowledge of them already, yet I would humbly mind you of them, whilst your
other weighty employments divert your thoughts otherwise; and incite you, out
of your tenderness to the honor of Jesus Christ, whose Delegate you are; out
of your love to the Churches and people of God, for whose spiritual welfare you
have this great power committed to you; and out of compassion to the perishing
souls of seduced people; to put some stop to those seducers now in your
Dominions, that they may not have such freedom and license by word and writing
to broach such damnable doctrines; then which no duty can be more incumbent on
you, as you are an Officer of Jesus Christ in his political Kingdom, which we
hope, he is about to establish in the world more gloriously then in former ages.

The Lord of heaven and earth bless your Highness with the continuance of his
gracious presence with you; keep your heart close with himself in these
backsliding times; and enrich you with all graces, that may fit you for the
faithful discharge of your duty in so high and eminent a place; that as you
have done valiantly in the high places of the field, so you govern as
righteously and happily in the gates of the City. Which is, and shall be the
prayer of him, who is

The least and unworthiest of the servants of Christ Jonath Clapham.

TO THE Christian READER.
IT cannot but be a far more comfortable employment to any gracious spirit, to
be exercised in the contemplation of the great and precious truths of the
Gospel, and (as the Be) to be extracting sweetness and comfort from them;
then to be raking in the filthy and unsavory dung-hil of errors and heresies;
or (with the Salamander) to be living in the fire of Contention. But sometimes
we must and ought to prefer the most unpleasing duties, before the greatest
comforts. Now what can be a duty more incumbent on true Christians in these
days of Apostasy and Error, then to be contending earnestly for the faith once
delivered to the Saints? Jude 3. Seeing there is scarce any one doctrine of the
Christian faith, but is now undermined by some or other of the enemies of the
truth amongst us. But of all the enemies of Truth in this age, none are more
proud and wicked (though extremely ignorant) perverters thereof, then that
generation of men, called Quakers; who seem the most numerous and prevailing
party of all the rest, being increased by the confluence of very many unto
them, who were before unstable and deluded persons, and had forsaken the ways
of truth. These do most wickedly corrupt or destroy (almost all the fundamental
points of the Christian Religion, as is made to appear in the following
Treatise; The holy Scriptures they vilify and set at naught, the humanity or
manhood of Christ they utterly deny; the true God, who is one in essence, and
three in persons, they believe not in; the great doctrine of Justification
before God they wholly corrupt, as the Pharisees and Papists do; no better do
they deal with the doctrine of Sanctification: All the Ordinances of Jesus
Christ they abrogate; the fundamental doctrines of the Resurrection of the
dead, of the last Judgment, of Heaven and Hell, they altogether corrupt and
deny, turning them into allegories, as if they had their accomplishment wholly
in men now, and were not to be fulfilled in another world; nor can there hardly
be any one truth named, but they corrupt or destroy; their great design is to
bring men from Christianity to Paganism; to teach men, by minding the (...)
cended into heaven, etc. and yet indeed they deny all these, and have said
expressly his flesh perished, and he never had an humane soul. One of their
followers, who is very zealous in their way, and a bitter enemy to the
Ministers, lately told me before several witnesses, Jesus Christ was no real
and true man now; and his body rose not, it was dust. Now this subtle
concealing and denying their opinions, does make simple people (who cannot espy
their fraud) sooner to be deceived by them, and therefore it cannot be judged a
needless labor to lay open their damnable opinions and confute them, and these
reasons have induced me to publish this discourse.

I have only one thing more to acquaint the Reader with now, and that is this,
these people have already boasted I should be soon answered by them; and if I
reply not again to them, they will glory that I could not. I shall desire thee
to take notice, that if their replies be like the former two books they wrote
against me (as I have little ground to expect better from them) I shall not
trouble my self to give them one line by way of answer; If any will be so far
blinded and hardened, as to take the railings, nonsense, and impertinencies
for an answer, let them upon their peril do it, they shall one day be convinced
of their error and made to see, when the Lord in his wrath shall plead with
them. Now that the merciful Lord would bless those poor endeavors to the
recovery (if it may be) of some that be already gone astray; and to the
establishment of such poor, weak and staggering Christians, as belong to him,
is the fervent and hearty prayer of him, who is

Thine in Christ J. C.
Wramblingham, June 16. 1656.
To the READER.
WEre the opinions of the Quakers regarded only according to their falsenesse,
or fondness, or were their strangness to Scripture, seconded with a suitable
disowning of them by men; the Author of this judicious Treatise, might have
spared his pains in this excellent Confutation of them. Upon my perusal
thereof, it plainly appears, as the errors confuted do oppose most weakly the
evident, and most pernitiously the fundamental truths of the Word, so that this
worthy Author has most strongly with Scripture Arguments, overthrown and
dissipated those their fond, yet dangerous errors. When I consider the
weakness of their Arguments, I wonder that any have ever been so mad as to
entertain their errors formerly, and when I think of the strength and
perspicuity of this Confutation, it seems as strange; that any who shall peruse
this book, should persist in them, or be drawn off to them for the future. In
short, I am persuaded, that this judicious and dear Confutation of the errors
of the Quakers, is like to prove, by Gods blessing, a singular help to preserve
those from wandering, who as yet remain in the ways of truth, and to reduce
those, who are misled and gone astray from the same.

William Jenkyn.
Black Friars. November. 11.
SECT. I. The Quakers proved to be enemies to the holy Scriptures.
IT is not denied but the Quakers are pretended friends to the Scriptures, and
do often tell us that they own them: Nor can it be conceived that the Serpent
should so far lose his subtilty in deceiving, and become so foolish an enemy to
the truth, as to provoke seducers in downright words to deny and disclaim
them, and that especially in an age, wherein (through the mercy of God) the
Scriptures are generally entertained with so high esteem, and some Laws are in
force to punish such as shall offend in such a gross manner. His design
therefore must be to undermine them by policy, whilst he pretends some love
unto them, as Joab spoke peaceably to Abner, whilst he smote him under the
fifth rib, and Judas kissed Christ when he betrayed him.

Now that the Quakers are indeed real enemies to the Scriptures, whilst they
would seem to be friends; I shall demonstrate by several particulars.

I. They deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God (as all that have any
knowledge of them can testify) appropriating this title only to Jesus Christ,
as sometimes the Swenkfeildians and others have done, yea, in disgrace of them
have said, some part thereof is the word of the Devil.

Now that the weakest may perceive their error and enmity against the
Scriptures in this particular. 1. Let them consider these few things.

1. There is nothing more common in our ordinary speaking, then to call a
speech or a Sermon when they be Printed or Written, such a man's speech or
Sermon, or the words that were spoken by a man, such a man's words, Thus Nayler
tells Jackson p. 1. thou have printed my words.
though they be written down; this speech is so common, that there is no child
that learns to read, but if it cannot tell a word, will ask, what word is this?
and therefore to deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God, is to insinuate,
they never came from God; if we understand this according to our common manner
of speaking; as when any deny such a speech, or such words were not the words
of such a man, we understand thereby they never were uttered by him.

2. The Scriptures do frequently use the same manner of speaking with us, in
calling the Commandments, promises, threatenings, etc. recorded in the
Scriptures the Word of God. The ten Commandments that were engraven on the two
Tables of stone are called ten Words, (...). See Deuteronomy. 10.4. in the Margin of
your Bibles; and Exodus 20.1. God spoke all these word and said. The promises of
God are called his word, Romans 9.9. This is the Word of promise, at this time I
will come, and Sarah shall have a Son. So 1 King. 6.12. the promise made to
David is called the word that God spoke to David. The threatenings are called
the Words of God, Za^h. 1.6. my Words took hold upon them, that is, the
threatenings denounced by the Prophets overtook them as one enemy does another
in flight. See Lam. 2.17. 1 King. 2.27. the threatening which God spoke against
the house of Eli, is called the Word of the Lord. Yea, this is the most usual
acceptance of this title [the Word of God] for its not given to Jesus Christ
by any of the holy penmen of the Scriptures, but by the Apostle John only in
his Writings, as Grotius observes.

But for the more full convincement of the weak and ignorant, (...) shall add
a few Scriptures, where this phrase [ the word, the word of God, or the word of
the Lord] cannot possibly be applied to Jesus Christ, but must necessarily be
understood of the doctrines, precepts, promises, threatenings, etc. written in
the Scriptures, and promulged by God, or his Messengers; let these Scriptures
be considered, where for more evidence sake, it is called the word of Gods
mouth, or of Gods lips; See Jer. 9.20. Esaias 45.23. Ezekiel. 3.27. Psalm 17.4.
Sure these places speak not of Christ himself the eternal Word, but of a word
spoken in time. In other Scriptures it is called the word that God spoke, Exodus
20.1. Isa. 24.3. Luke 22.^1. Let the Reader observe this place. And Peter
remembered the word of the Lord (what word was this? It follows) how he had said
unto him, before the cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice. Observe it, this is
called the Word of the Lord, though Peter did not receive it and heed it, so as
to be kept from sin by it, further yet, Psalm 19. and Psalm 119. where the
Prophet is taken up wholly in commendation of the Word of God, he shows you
what word he speaks of by the variety of expressions that he uses, Law of God,
Precepts, Judgments, Statutes, Ordinances, Commandments. Besides, we have not
only the Word of God, but words of God mentioned in Scripture, Exodus 20.1. John
3.34. Psalm 12.6. how can they expound this of Christ, except they make many
Christ's? and we read not only of the Word Christ, but the work of Christ, Col.
3.16. Beside, we find mention in Scripture of a written word, Eccles. 12 10
Jer. 36.6. Heb. 13.22 Rev. 22.19. there might be hundreds of places more
collected if need were, to make out this thing. How vainly do these men then
cavil against us for calling the Scriptures the Word of God, seeing it is the
usual language of the holy Scriptures?

3. Had these poor people any knowledge of the original languages, wherein the
Scriptures were written (of which it is strange they should be ignorant, when
they pretend extraordinary gifts in other things, as of knowing men's spirits,
of being infallible, of working miracles, etc.) they might find that there are
several words used in Scripture that our translators render the Word of God,
there is (...) and there is (...); now though the former title be given to
Christ, yet the latter is not, and therefore such places wherein the latter is
used, can with no color be expounded of Christ (as in Rom 10.17. Ephesians. 5.26.
Ephesians. 6.17. Heb. 6.5, etc.) whatever they pretend of the former.

4. Let it be considered in what respect Jesus Christ is called the Word, and
in what respect the Scriptures be called the Word; and it will appear this
title will with greater propriety of Speech agree to the Scriptures then to
Jesus Christ, for Jesus Christ is only figuratively called the Word of God;
that he might through that similitude he has to a word, be more clearly
represented to our understandings; as the word is the image and resemblance of
ones mind, so is Jesus Christ the express image of his Fathers person, Heb.
1. (though no transient image as our words be, but co-essential, and
coeternal) or as the word makes known what is in the mind and heart, so has
Christ made known the mind of God unto us; others understand he is called the
word also, because its he of whom the Word speaks, to him give all the Prophets
witness, etc. others, because he made all things by his Word, he spoke, and
they were made. But now in none of these respects; (nor any other that can be
further named) is Christ properly the word, but figuratively. But now the
doctrines, precepts, etc. of the Scriptures, may in a more proper sense and
without figure, be called the word of God, because spoken by God; The Lord has
spoken these things by the mouth of his holy servants, which have been since
the world began, Luke 1.70.

5. Whereas they call some part of the Scriptures the word of the devil,
intending thereby that in Genesis 3.1, 4, 5. and such like places. I answer they
were the words uttered by the devil originally, but now as they be recorded by
the penmen of the holy Scriptures, and so have a truth of history in them, they
be the words of God, and therefore their malice against the Scriptures only
appears herein.

6. It would be observed how ignorantly these men do contradict themselves, in
denying the Scriptures to be the Word of God, and yet granting them to be a
declaration of Gods mind; let them tell what a word is? but a declaration of
ones mind: cannot a child know that if a man speaks words to another, he
declares his mind to him? what a simple contradiction is this to be found in
men that pretend to be infallible? but any thing shall be said or done to take
down the authority of the holy Scriptures, and to lessen the reverence due to
them.

Buroughs against Griffith, p. 19. sword drawn. p. 1.
II. They deny the Scriptures to be a rule of faith and life; and hereby seeking
to overthrown the great use and end of the Scriptures, they are clearly
manifested to be enemies to the Scriptures.

This charge will not be disowned by them, for many of their pamphlets manifest
their denial of the Scriptures to be a rule of faith and life, therefore it
rests on me to prove that they are enemies to the Scriptures herein, and this
will appear in these particulars.

1. Without some standing rule and direction given by God, we know not how to
believe in God aright, nor worship and serve him acceptably, and thereby attain
eternal life; such as have no standing rule and direction, worship they know
not what, as Christ speaks of the Samaritans, John 4. They err, not knowing
the Scriptures, as Christ says to the Sadduces, Matthew. 22.29. The Heathens
that wanted the rule of the word, what dark apprehensions and misconceivings
had they of God, and the things of God? how utterly ignorant of many mysteries
of faith? how besotted in worshipping false gods, and deceived variously in
their searching out the chief happiness of man? Man since the fall has lost
the knowledge of God; and is stricken with blindness, being able only to grope
after God as the Sodomites for Lots door, so the Apostle phraseth it, Acts 17
They feel (or grope) after him; and besides the darkness of man's mind, the
seducements of Satan are such (who can transform himself into an Angel of
light) that if we have not something to try the spirits by, we may soon be
deceived, and therefore to have a rule or direction for man's faith and
obedience is most necessary, seeing man is a reasonable creature, and is not
acted by a brute impulse, but as a free and understanding agent, must act what
he does knowingly, and with Council.

2. It Is as certain that there is no other way sufficient to direct man to
believe in God aright, and to worship and serve him acceptably, and thereby
attain happiness, but the holy Scriptures. As for traditions of men (which the
Jews formerly, and now the Papists equal with the Word of God) they lead men
further from God and happiness. And for the light in the conscience, (which
the Quakers so highly cry up) though it may convince men there is a God, as we
see by the Heathens that have no other teacher but it, yet is it unable to give
a man any clear distinct knowledge of God, only a groping knowledge (as before
was said) nor can it teach a man so much as the name of Christ; for which of
the Heathens know this by the light in the conscience? much less the great
mysteries of Christ's incarnation or taking on him flesh, of his death, and the
new Covenant founded on it, his Resurrection, Ascension, etc? And for matter of
practice, though it will witness against gross sins and impieties, Romans 2.14.
yet how unable is it to convince of original sin, (the first entrance of sin
into the world and death by Adam) and of concupiscence (or the motions of sin
in the flesh) that it is sin when not consented to, which the Papists deny to
be sin (and it is likely the Quakers also, or else they would not affirm they
are perfectly freed from the very being of sin.) Paul expressly says, he had
not known it to be sin but by the Law, Romans 7.7. (it seems then the light in
his conscience could not discover it.) How grossly such have been misled that
have given up themselves to heed that light (neglecting to use the Scriptures
for their light and rule) appears sufficiently in the printed relation of
Gilpin and Toldervy; and by the delusions, that this whole company are given up
to by God, that pretend to follow it. Further, as for such special and
immediate revelations of the spirit, that others have boasted of as their guide
and direction; the woeful miscarriages of such Enthusiasts that have pretended
thereunto, may sufficiently convince, God would have us to heed his word more,
and try the spirits by that; and the gross and palpable blindness of such as
want the direction of the Scriptures may show, God is not pleased to use this
way of immediate revelations now; nor indeed is it the work of God holy Spirit
to discover things to us now immediately, having already made a full discovery
of them in the Scriptures, but to open our eyes to see the wonderful things of
his Law, to apprehend those discoveries of God made in his word, and to
sanctify our hearts so as they may close with those truths revealed and
relish them, and to remove the natural enmity that is in as to the things of
God.

3. It has pleased the Lord of his infinite goodness to give his holy
Scriptures, the Word of God (for so now I will call them, whether the Quakers
will or no) that this may be a direction and rule to us of faith and obedience,
how we are to believe in God, and worship and serve him, and to direct us to
eternal salvation, this is a special pledge of Gods love to us, though the
enemies of truth will not acknowledge it, The Lord has not done so to all
Nations, neither have the heathen knowledge of his Laws, Psalm 147 19, 20. and
the end of writing them was, that we might be directed in our faith and
obedience, John 20, last, These things are written that ye might believe, etc.
we are to try the spirits now by them, whether they be of God, as the noble
Bereans did, Acts 17.11. we are to go to the Law and to the Testimony, Isa.
8.20. to search the Scriptures, John 5.39. or otherwise we shall be necessarily
exposed to error, Matthew. 22.29. They are now a lamp unto our feet, and a light
unto our steps, Psalm. 119.105. and through the words of Gods lips, we may be
kept from the path of the destroyer, Psalm. 17.4. in a word, they are able to
make wise to salvation, to furnish to all good works, they are profitable for
doctrine, reproof, correction, instruction in righteousness, etc. 2 Timothy 3.16,
17. The Lord accompanying them with the blessing and efficacy of his Spirit.
And let not any ignorantly pretend, it is a disgrace to the Spirit to be tried,
and regulated by an outward rule, for gold may be tried by a touchstone, why
may not any doctrine or revelation or practice now, though pretended to come
from the Spirit, be tried by the Scriptures, which we are more sure came from
the Spirit of God, they being a surer word of prophecy, then any voice we can
hear spoken from heaven, 2 Pet. 1.18, 19.

4. Now let the weakest Reader (if he be not wilfully blinded) judge, whether
these people be not extremely ungrateful to God for his goodness in giving the
Scriptures, to deny this principal use and end of the Scriptures, and whether
hereby they declare not themselves enemies thereunto. I might show other uses
and ends of the Scriptures that they subvert, but this may suffice for this
second particular, to prove the charge, that the Quakers be enemies to the holy
Scriptures.

III. They make Scriptures to be but a declaration of the Saints condition (an
expression frequently to be found in their writings) insinuating thereby as if
they belonged not to us now, Buroughs p. 30 Glory from North. p. 8, 9.
but concerned the Saints only in former times, for so much its clear they
intend by comparing this with the former particular they are the declaration of
the Saints conditions in former times, but they are no rule of faith and life
to us, what do they then concern us? what need we regard them? what benefit
have we by them? A most unworthy expression, when God has written to us the
great things of his word, and we account them a strange thing, Hosea 8.12. as
if they did not at all concern us, and the Lord had not spoken those things to
us, but to others. But as it delares their enmity against the Scriptures, so is
it a very false assertion. There be some part of the Scriptures that do more
concern us now in these last days of the world, then they did the Saints in
former times, as many Prophetic Scriptures in David and the Revelations; and
for other Scriptures the Apostle faith, what ever was written, was written for
our learning, Romans 15.4. and for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the
world be come, 1 Cor 10.6, 11. The example of Christ and his Apostles teaches
us to make use of the whole Wood of God, they frequently cited the writings of
Moses and the Prophets in the book of the Psalms, applying them to that
generation, why may not we then apply the same, as also the writings of the New
Testament for our benefit? In Heb. 13.5. The Apostle applies that promise made
to Joshuah to the believing Hebrews. I will not have thee nor forsake thee. See
1 Cor. 7.1. where the Apostle applies the promises made by the Prophet, Jer
31.1. to the Corinthians, and presses them to duty from thence; and indeed to
what end are they written down, and by the gracious providence of the Lord
preserved to this day, but for our use and benefit it is needless to add more
here, that which was spoken in the former particular will also clear this.

IV. They call the Scriptures (reproachfully) a letter, a dead letter, etc. as
may be seen in their writings frequently, which is but a piece of Popish
Rhetoric, for this has been the language of Papists before them, who have
called them a dead letter, divinity of ink and paper, with many more such
opprobrious terms, But whether we should believe Papists and Quakers in
vilifying the Scriptures, or credit the holy penmen their commendation of them,
judge ye, David says, The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul,
the testimonies of the Lord are sure, making wise the simple, the Statutes of
the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart; the Commandments of the Lord are pure,
enlightening the eyes, etc. and Psalm 119.50. Thy word has quickened me. The
Apostle James 1.18. says, he begot us with the word of truth, Paul says,
faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God, Romans 10.17. (...);
it is not said by the personal word Jesus Christ, but by the word that is
preached by men, not that we exclude the cooperation of Gods Spirit with
preaching, for we are workers together with God, 2 Cor. 6.1. but that the word
written and preached might have it is due place and commendation, being mighty
through God, the power of God to salvation, and therefore no dead letter.

It is a gross perverting of that Scripture, 2 Cor. 3.6. to allege it for to
prove the Scriptures to be a dead letter; for the Apostle there compares the
doctrine or ministration of the Law and the old Covenant, with the ministration
of the Gospel Covenant, disputing against such as commended the Law above the
Gospel, and called men from the grace of Christ to the works of the Law, etc.
now the Law was but a dead killing letter, pronouncing a curse and death; not
could it quicken spiritually, there being no promise in it of writing the Law
in our hearts; but in the same place he commends his Ministry, for the
Ministry of the Spirit and of Life; therefore this place makes nothing for
this wicked cavil of those enemies against the Scriptures.

V. They equal their books and pamphlets (though commonly stuffed with nonsense
and railing, ever with wicked errors) to the holy Scriptures, then which, what
can be more disgraceful to the Scriptures, and more abominable to all sober
spirits? This appears clearly to all that have but read their papers, for thus
they commonly write, Moved from the Lord, written from the Spirit of the Lord,
given from the Lord, etc. and they boast commonly, that they speak from God
immediately and infallibly, as the Apostles did formerly. Whether this does not
bring them under that curse, Rev. 22.18. for adding to the Scriptures, let them
look to it.

VI. They sometimes plead the Church was a long time without the Scriptures,
and therefore they are not necessary now, and if ten thousand of those books
were burnt, they might do well enough, the light in them is sufficient, etc.
This I testify has been objected to me, and there be others can witness it
with me. For the former part it is an old Popish Argument against the necessity
of the Scriptures and I shall only reply what has been answered the Papists to
this formerly. Whitaker de perfec. Script. cap. 7. tells the Papists, though of
old time, when God familiarly showed himself to the Fathers, and by himself
manifested to them his will, the Scriptures were not necessary; yet after God
did change the course of teaching his Church, and would have the Word written,
then the Scriptures began to be necessary. To the latter part I answer, such an
expression would suit the mouth of an Irish rebel, rather then of any sober
Christian, and therefore let him repent and pray, if perhaps the thought of his
heart may be forgiven him.

VII. They appear enemies to the holy Scriptures in their daily practices, as
their neglecting to use the holy Scriptures; Their speakers speak not out of
the Scriptures as did Christ, Luke 4.17. who opened the book, and took his text
out of Esaias 61.1. and in all his Sermons he opened the Scriptures, and proved
all things by the Scriptures; nor do their speakers exhort people to search the
Scriptures, to give themselves to reading, meditation, This they that have been
present testify.
etc. but to look to the light in their consciences, let them show where ever
Christ or his Apostles gave such an exhortation to look to the light within
them. And for their disciples, they follow not the example of the noble
Bereans, Acts 17.11. who searched the Scriptures daily whether those things
were so; but they take all spoken to them as given from God immediately, and
turn not to the Scriptures to try the doctrines they hear by the Law and
testimony: When they have no speakers, they sit as mutes together, looking on
the ground, or looking at the light within them (as they say) but not looking
on the Scriptures, nor conferring about them, though sometimes they will read
in their Assemblies, their quaking letters or books; besides some of them have
offered to sell their Bibles. Now the most ignorant may easily judge by all
this what friends they are to the Scriptures.

I might add hereunto (if it were requisite) to show their enmity to the
Scriptures, their perverse wresting of the Scriptures, in such a manner
sometime, as shows they have neither knowledge of the Scriptures, nor any light
of common understanding of men left in them. G. Whitehead maintaining of
perfection (as the Papists do) I brought him that place against it, Eccles.
7.10. not a just man upon earth that does good and sins not; he perverted
it, as if Solomon did speak of a man in an earthy condition. Another, when that
cripture, 1 Cor. 6.20. was used to prove that we are not only to give God
internal worship and service, but outward and bodily, he replied the Church was
he body that was to glorify God. Again, when Paul, Romans 7. cried out, ob
wretched man, etc. he had not the Spirit. And that the same Apostle in 1 Cor.
11.14. did not at all condemn long hair. And many of them have said, that the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 9.14. (saying, even so has the Lord ordained that they that
preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel,) does not plead for outward bodily
maintenance, but their living by faith, or living spiritually on the Gospel;
were ever any people more blinded in the world then these? how dreadful a
judgment is this upon them for leaving the Scriptures, and looking to the
light in them, which appears by these things to be mere darkness? I could fill
many pages with such instances of their perverse wrest of the Scriptures, but
this will appear more fully in the following Sections. Let me but sum up
these things together, and then let the Reader judge whether this first charge
is not sufficiently proved against them. The proof runs thus, if to deny the
Scriptures to be the Word of God, and thereby to insinuate, they never came
from God; if to deny the special use of the Scriptures to be a rule of faith
and obedience; and to make as if they belonged to the Saints formerly, but did
not concern us now; if to give vilifying expressions to them, and to call them
a dead letter; if to equal foolish and wicked pamphlets with them; if to plead
there is no necessity of them; if to practice to slight them and perversely to
wrest them; if any, or if all of these together will prove the Quakers to be
enemies to the holy Scriptures, then the charge stands good against them. Let
the weakest hereby discern and see, and not be deceived by them; though they
pretend in words never so fairly to the Scriptures. And thus for this first
charge.

SECT. II. The Quakers deny Christ come in the flesh, as also his Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession, and coming to Judgment.
THe Apostle John in his second Epistle, ver. 7. speaks of many deceivers and
Antichrists come into the world, who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in
the flesh, and forbids to receive such into your houses, and to bid them
God-speed, for such as do so, are partakers of their evil deeds: Let us
therefore in the next place enquire whether the Quakers may be justly charged
with this crime, that if they be found guilty thereof, all such as profess to
be Christians, may disclaim them, and take heed of them as Deceivers and
Antichrists.

I shall here first freely give Testimony for the Quakers, and do acknowledge
in their behalfs, that they have the name of Jesus Christ often in their mouths
and in their writings, and they will tell you in words they own Jesus Christ
come in the flesh; so that if this will prove them good Christians, they shall
pass free from this censure, and not be charged with it.

But withal I shall not conceal the subtilty of Satan in deceiving, in this
(as well as in the former) particular; as he will let these his instruments own
the Scriptures in words, whilst they deny them in deed and truth; and are
enemies to them as before was proved: so whilst they profess in words to own
Jesus Christ come in the flesh, and speak of his Death, Resurrection and
Ascension, etc. they do in deed and in truth deny all these things.

Nor let any wonder at this, they could not be deceivers else; they are simple
deceivers, that will in plain and evident words say, they deny Jesus Christ,
they disclaim his Incarnation, Death, Resurrection, etc. who would then be
taken in their snares? the simplest would espy what they are? I find not
amongst all the ancient heretics in the Church, since the time of Christ to
this day, any that have in express words said, Christ is not come in the
flesh; though open enemies (such as the Jews) deny it plainly, yet none that
have professed to be Christians. Some deceivers have said, Christ took on him
an imaginary (no real) body; some an aerial, some a celestial, some a body,
but no humane soul; some that his humane nature was swallowed up of his divine
nature, and several other heresies about it; and these all do in effect deny
Christ come in the flesh, because they hold forth such a Christ as is no real
and true man, but none of them have denied it in express words, and why should
we think seducers should be more foolish in deceiving in these last days of
the world, then in former times? Besides the Apostle John he calls such an one
as shall not confess Jesus Christ come in the flesh, (...), that is, a crafty
cheater or juggler, that will cozen you while you look on (so some expound the
word) and therefore you must not think they will in downright words deny
Christ, but while they look you in the face, and give you good words, and say,
we own Christ come in the flesh, and we are slandered by them that say
ootherwise of us, yet they do but cozen and cheat you, for they nothing at all
intend it.

And indeed, if you examine the Quakers thoroughly, and ask them, what Christ it
is they own now in the flesh, they will confess no other Christ but (the
Christ of the familists) Christ in their flesh; that in the conscience they own
to be Christ, but as for the man Christ now in the heavens him they own not; as
for a Christ who is a particular man, personally distinct from other men; that
Christ, that was of the seed of David, the Son of Mary, Jesus of Nazareth,
they own not him; some have said, he was the idol of the world; they will
grant, that God took that flesh for a time, but no humane soul with it, and
when that man died on the cross, he never rose again in this same individual
body; that same particular man did not ascend into heaven, is not at the right
hand of God making intercession, shall not come to judge the world, etc. but
all this by an allegory is applied to themselves; Christ in the flesh, is
Christ in their flesh, dying and rising again in them, and now Christ is come
to judge the world, while they take upon them with authority to judge and
revile the servants and ways of Christ. This is the very doctrine of the
Quakers concerning Christ's Incarnation, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, coming
to Judgment, as may appear by these few testimonies I shall hear set down; one
of them in a printed paper, called, The sword of the Lord drawn, etc. p. 5.
has these words, Your imagined God beyond the stars, and your carnal Christ
(for so they reproachfully call the man Christ Jesus now in the heavens) is
utterly denied and testified against by the light, etc. In their book called
Saul's errand to Damascus, p. 8, 9. 14. they say, That Christ in the flesh, with
all he did and suffered therein, was but a figure, and nothing but an example;
some of them in these parts have publicly before many witnesses denied the
Resurrection of the dead body (and if so, then Christ is not risen, and there is
no such man as the man Christ Jesus now in heaven) B. L. in conference with my
self, denied Jesus Christ to take to himself an humane soul, so Hubberthorn in
a letter to me, though he took flesh upon him; The same person being asked by
W. S. what became of the body of Jesus when it was not to be found in the
grave? answered, it perished. Another of them said, Thou hopest to be saved by
the Christ that died at Jerusalem, but I trust to a Christ within me, pointing
to his breast; when that testimony of Christ which he gave concerning his
Resurrection, was urged to some of them, (in Luke 24.39. The disciples
supposing they saw a spirit, and that it was not Christ himself, he said unto
them, behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my self, a spirit has not
flesh and bones as ye see me have;) they have scoffingly answered, where was
his blood? that was spilt upon the cross; they have often urged Christ's
appearing to his Disciples, the doors being shut, to argue that Christ rose not
with a corporal body of flesh and bones, though at the same time he bid
unbeleeving Thomas behold his hands, and reach his finger and thrust it into
his side. They frequently speak of a Christ in their conscience, as the only
Christ; for no other man Christ they will acknowledge. There needs no further
proof of this charge, let but any one that desires further satisfaction
concerning it, ask them (as I my self have often proved it by experience in
conference with them,) whether they acknowledge a man Christ personally
distinct from other men, now residing in the highest heavens, who is to come to
judge the world at the last day? they will tell you they own the same Christ
that ever was (for they deny not his divinity) but for his humanity they will
shufle you off, and not speak to that, and thereby prove themselves
Antichrists, because they confess not Christ in the flesh, etc.

I need not spend many words in the confutation of these things, there is no
sober Christian that has received any thing of the knowledge of Christ, but
his heart will abhor these doctrines at the very mentioning of them. I shall
only refer the Reader to some Scriptures, that may establish his faith in the
truth about these particulars. Concerning Christ's being really and truly a man.
See John 1.14. Gal. 4.4. 1 Timothy 2.5. That he was a particular, individual man,
personally distinct from all other men, (and not a man as he dwells in the
flesh of other men) appears, because he is described to be a man coming of the
seed of Abraham, of the Tribe of Judah, of the family of David, born of a
particular woman, the Virgin Mary, not of other women; and in that the great
doctrine concerning Christ to be believed (which the Scriptures speaks of) was
that Jesus of Nazareth, that particular man was the Christ, That he had a
humane or reasonable soul, besides his Godhead or divine nature. See Esaias
53.12. Matthew. 26.38. John 12.27. And that (after this man Christ was crucified,
he arose again with the same individual body that suffered on the cross,
though made more glorious, appears by the many witnesses that testified it,
Acts 2.24. and 3.15. 1 Cor. 15.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 2 Timothy 2.8. (indeed it was the
great work of the Apostles to testify it, Acts 1.22.) nor could these
witnesses be deceived; for,

(1) There were many that did see him, the eleven Apostles, and five hundred
brethren at once.

(2) They not only did see him, but heard him speak, and did eat with him, nay,
felt his prints and marks, and himself affirmed he had flesh and bones still.

(3) And he continued forty days among them; besides the Angels from heaven
testified the same thing, Luke 24.3, 5, 6. Mark 16.6. and the very soldiers
that kept watch, bare witness to it, Mat. 28.11. Further, that this same
individual person did ascend into heaven, even above the visible heavens, and
is there present making intercession for us at the right hand of God, and shall
come again to judge the quick and dead at the last day. See these Scriptures,
Mark 16.19. Luke 24.51. Act. 1.9, 10, 11. Romans 8.34. Heb. 9.24. Acts 3.21. Acts
17.31.

But some Scriptures those people do wrest to make for their purpose, which
lest they deceive weak ones by them, I shall vindicate them.

1. They speak much of that Scripture, 1 Col Christ in you the hope of glory,
and of all those Scriptures that speak of Christ's being, living, or dwelling in
his people thereby to insinuate there is no other man Christ, but Christ in us
men.

Answ. I shall not speak now of the nature of Christ's in-dwelling or in-being
in his people, till I come to the fourth Section, where I shall have occasion
to open it more distinctly; only thus much for the present; Christ's dwelling
in his people now is by his Spirit, and not according to his humane nature, for
this the heavens do contain, till he descend visibly to judge the world, as he
was seen to ascend, Acts 1.11. Acts 17.31. But it is by his spirit he dwells
now in his people, which is infinite and fills all places, (and so does not his
humane nature, being a created thing and finite) see this clear from Romans 8.10,
11. in v. 10. the Apostle speaks of Christ being in you, in v. 11. he explaines
the expression by showing the manner of it, by his Spirit dwelling in you: And
indeed we must thus have Christ in us by his Spirit, or else we can have no
assured hope of glory; though the meritorious cause of our salvation and glory
is Christ's obedience unto death performed in his own person, Ephesians. 1.7, 11, 14,
etc. yet we can have no evidence of our right to glory, but by finding Christ's
in-being in us by his Spirit now, so that these Scriptures are utterly
perverted to make for their ends.

Further, that Scripture, 2 Cor. 5.16. Wherefore henceforth know we no man
after the flesh: yea, though we have known Christ after the flesh: yet now
henceforth know we him no more; is as grossly abused, when it is made to speak
against that particular man Christ Jesus now in heaven, etc. for,

(1) This doctrine concerning the man Christ Jesus his Resurrection, etc. the
Apostle had before asserted in many places (as we showed even now, 1 Cor. 15.
the beginning, Romans 1.3, 4. etc.) and he does not now destroy what before he
built; it was the great thing the Apostles were to testify and witness to the
world, Acts 1.22. they were to be witnesses of his Resurrection; this Apostle
does in more then twenty places in his Epistles testify, how that the man
Christ indeed was risen from the dead, and ascended into heaven, etc. therefore
he does not contradict in this place what he lays down in so many other places.

(2) And therefore we must enquire after another interpretation of that
Scripture, and it will clearly appear to be this. The false apostles had
vilified the Apostles Ministry, that they might draw away the hearts of people
from him, (according to the practice of the Quakers in these days, for this is
an old trick of Satan) and one plea they had against him, was this, he had not
conversed with Christ upon earth, as had the other Apostles, and therefore he
was not so much to be accounted off: The Apostle hints we are not to look on
Christ under such outward relations, as if there were so much benefit by being
related to Christ in the flesh, or by being in his bodily presence; but we are
to consider him as having completed the work of our redemption, having
overcome death, being raised up in glory, and ascended into heaven, and thus we
should know him for the future, this is the spring of a Christians comfort;
thus he speaks not against Christ's being in the flesh still (which other
Scriptures clearly witness) but against looking upon him under these carnal
relations they stood in to him whilst he was upon earth; this will appear more
fully to be the Apostles mind, by considering the various acceptance of the
word [flesh] in Scripture, which to avoid tediousness I omit here, intending
to speak of it in Sect. 6. where in proving the resurrection of our dead
bodies, I shall further prove the truth of Christ's resurrection, and that still
he is really and truly in our natures in heaven, even in the same particular
body he had upon earth, though glorified; and indeed, if this were not so, the
Apostles were false witnesses, our faith is in vain, we are yet in our sins,
and they who are fallen asleep in Christ are perished, 1 Cor. 15.15, etc.

Thus for the clearing of this second charge, That the Quakers deny Jesus
Christ come in the flesh, overthrow his Incarnation, Death, Resurrection,
Ascension, Intercession and coming to Judgment, and thereby pull down the
maine pillars of Christianity, and overthrow the faith and comfort of
Christians, and that while they pretend to be more spiritual (but are indeed
deceivers herein) turning all into Allegories, and faining these things done in
the true Christ to be but as a shadow of what is now really done in them; From
this it is clear the Quakers-christ and Ours is not the same: they hold no
other man Christ but in their consciences; we believe our Christ is in heaven,
and do wait for him to come from heaven, who was raised up from the dead; even
Jesus which delivers us from the wrath to come, 1 These. 1.10. Let all that
profess the Name of Christ take heed of such as preach another Christ, then
whom they have received, and look upon them as Deceivers and Antichrists, as
for us we have not so learned Jesus Christ.

SECT. III. The Quakers deny the Doctrine of the Trinity.
THis charge will not be denied by the Quakers, for in this they speak out, and
do not seek to conceal their opinions, they acknowledge not one God subsisting
in three persons. (See Saul's errand to Damascus, p. 12. and the sword of the
Lord drawn, etc. p. 4. where this doctrine is called a lie by them.)

Let me therefore show this to be an abominable error contrary to the doctrine
of the Scriptures, to deny three persons subsisting in one God, and prove this
fundamental article of our faith against their cavils; This I clear from
Scripture by these gradations or steps.

1. The Scriptures speak clearly that there is in the divine nature three in
one, or a Trinity in Unity (whether these three may be called persons, we shall
discuss afterward) 1 John 5.7. There be three that bear record in heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, and these three are one. Here is in this
Scripture three numbered, and their several names set down, and yet it is said,
they are but one; (not only agree in one, as in the next verse, but they are
one.) See Mat. 3.16, 17. Mat. 28.19. 2 Cor. 13.14. John 14.16. Where are also
three counted, the Father and I: (says Christ) and the Spirit of truth, and
these are distinguished, the Spirit is called another. It might further be
showed; as, there be three numbered in Scripture, and their several names set
down; so the Scripture speak also of distinct properties and operations
peculiar to each of these three, and incommunicable to other; The Father begets
and not the Son; the Spirit proceeds and not the Father, etc. so the Son took
flesh, and not the Father, nor the Spirit.

II. It Is most evident that this Trinity in Unity, or three in one is not a
mere notional thing subsisting in the mind and apprehension of man alone, but
eternally subsisting in the divine being it self; it is a thing founded upon
Scripture, as before was showed, not a fiction of reason, it had been if there
never had been any created mind to apprehend it. Nor can it be only three
names given to one and the same personal being, for the Scripture gives more
names then three to God, there are ten several names given to God in the Old
Testament, as some observe, besides those in the New Testament, and further the
Scripture counts them as distinct in subsistence and not only in name, John
8.17, 18. Christ and his Father are counted for two witnesses, now one person
cannot be two witnesses, though he have two names. Nor does this Trinity
subsist in the divine nature only, as wisdom, justice and goodness are in
God; for these attributes of God are no otherwise distinguished then according
to man's apprehension of them, because our finite and compounded understandings
cannot comprehend the glorious perfections of a single and infinite essence,
but by distinct properties or attributes, in themselves they do not differ one
from another (the same also may be said of Gods decrees,) but now this
distinction of three in one is founded in the very divine being it self, as
before was showed. Nor yet further are we to understand this three in one to be
only three manifestations of God grounded upon some offices or external
dispensations to the creature in time, there has been more manifestations of
God to man then three since the creation, God was manifest various ways to his
people, to Moses in the bush, and in the mount; to Israel in the wilderness,
in the pillar of fire and cloud, to the Patriarchs, to the three children, to
Daniel, to John, etc. Besides, this distinction was in God from eternity,
before there was any creature made to manifest it unto; Christ is the eternal
Son of God, distinct from the Father eternally, and before he was made flesh;
the Spirit was distinguished from Father and Son from eternity, and not only
when he was manifested in descending on Christ in the likeness of a dove, or
by falling on the Apostles in fiery tongues. See Prove. 8.21. to 31. Mic. 5.2.
Joh. 1.1, 2, 3. Joh. 17.5. Col. 1.15. Genesis 1.2. 2 Pet. 1.21. Mat. 1.20 these
are all to be exploded as dangerous errors, and have been ever rejected by the
Church.

III. Hence it will follow, that this must be a Trinity of persons, or
subsistances in the same divine being, three persons subsisting in one God, nor
let any cavil at the word [person] for it is a Scripture word, Heb. 1.3. if
they will stand to the received translation, if any will plead the word is more
properly rendered there [subsistence] then person, we will not stand upon that,
so they acknowledge three subsistances in the same divine being, for this is
all we argue for; but how vainly is it to except against the word [person] so
commonly received amongst the people of God, and not scrupled at by any, but
such as have erred dangerously in other things? what is a person, if we look
upon the notation of the name, but per se una, a thing that has a subsistence
by it self? or if we respect the definition of the thing, we understand no more
by it, but an intelligent, complete, incommunicable, independent subsistence;
and according to our common custom of speech, the word person does express
more excellency then the word subsistence, singly taken, does; the former we
ever apply to a reasonable being, the other we use to apply to inferior
creatures, a beast may be said to subsist though it is no person.

IV. Yet is there no multiplication of the Godhead, for still we acknowledge
one God, one simple undivided essence, Deuteronomy. 6.4. Isa. 44.6, 8. Isa. 45.21, 22.
John 10.30 1 John 5.7.





Now let the Reader from hence see what impudence it is in these Quakers to
call this doctrine a lie, and how dangerously they err in denying the Trinity;
what is this but to deny the true God, who has manifested himself thus, to be
one in three? (as before they denied the Man Christ, and were proved enemies to
the Scriptures) this error tends to overthrow all faith and Religion, and is
pernicious to men's salvation; for, we must believe in God as he reveals himself
in his Word and no otherwise, and worship and serve him accordingly, if we will
be saved; It was hatched by the enemies of truth, it has been defended on
purpose to overthrow the personal Deity of Christ, whereby the infinite value
of his merits is taken away, and to undermine the personality of the Spirit,
which is so fully evidenced by the divine attributes appropriated to him in
Scripture; and therefore have the purest Churches of Christ ever disclaimed
communion with such as deny the doctrine of the Trinity, accounting them
subverters of the fundamentals of Religion. And thus for this third particular.

SECT. IV. The Quakers hold they are equal with God, and that the soul is one
being with God.
THere is nothing may more plainly evidence to the weakest and most ignorant
that this wicked Sect is of the Devil the Prince of darkness, what ever they
boast of the light of Christ, then this wicked Tenet, that they dare maintain
equality with God, and the soul to be one being with God, or a part of God, as
the Manichees of old, and Familists have done; This doctrine the Devil sought
to instill into our first parents at the beginning, ye shall be as Gods, knowing
good and evil, Gen 3.5. What Christian spirit that apprehends the infinite
Majesty and holiness of God, and its own baseness and vilesse, but will abhor
the very mention of this opinion? yet is this maintained and defended by this
generation of men.

In their book called, Saul's errand to Damascus, is mention made that it was
attested at a quarter Sessions at Lancaster, that some of them affirmed
themselves to be equal with God, and that afterward the same thing was
acknowledged before many witness; nor do they deny this public evidence was
given against them, though they would shuffle about it, while they covertly
plead for the same thing, p. 2, 5, 6. 10. Hubberthorn in his book against
Sherlock, p. 30. does most ignorantly and blasphemously allege that place for
this, Phil. 2.5, 6. Let this mind be in you which also was in Christ, who
being in the form of God, thought it no robery to be equal with God; where the
Reader may see how he imitates Satan in corrupting the Scriptures, both by
leaving out the following words; which must necessarily be known before the
mind of the Apostle be understood, viz. but made himself of no reputation,
took on him the form of a servant, humbled himself, etc. the sentence is not
complete without taking in these words, and also perverting the scope and drift
of the Apostle in that place, who is pressing humility, ver. 3. and urging it
from Christ's example, who though equal with God, yet humbled himself; it is far
of from the Apostles mind there to persuade us to believe we are equal with
God, he is pressing humility; they that desire to see fuller evidence for their
holding equality with God may see Sword drawn, p. 3 and also the many
testimonies which the Ministers of New Castle bring for it in their first book,
p. 3, 4.

That they hold the soul to be one being with God, or a part of God. See also
testimony for it in the book last cited, p. 6. and Sword drawn, p. 3, 4.
Hubberthorne in the book before named, p. 29. says, there is no Scripture which
speaks of an humane soul; then it seems the soul or spirit in man which the
Scripture speaks so much of, must either be God himself or the Devil. One of
them living in these parts, did in discourse with my self argue (as strongly as
he could) for the soul to be one being with God; and though he did afterward
give me the lie, in the public Assembly, for reporting it of him yet I have
now eight several witnesses of credit to prove the same thing, and manifest him
to be the liar; besides what arguments passed betwixt us which clearly evidenc
he pleaded for it. Another of them argued with me, that the soul after its
departure out of the body (which say they, rots in the grave and never rises
again) is taken up into God, and is one being with him, urging that Scripture
for it, God shall be all in all.

For confutation of these things, I need not say much, they are so gross and
horrible; Concerning the first, Equality with God; let but the Reader peruse
these Scriptures, Isa. 40. v. 12, almost to the end of the chapter, where the
Lord makes a challenge twice repeated, v. 18 25. To whom will ye liken me, or
shall I be equal, says the holy one? and in the other verses sets forth his
Greatness and Majesty, he measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and
meateth out heaven with a span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a
measure, and weighed the mountains in a balance, etc. The Nations are as the
drop of a bucket to him, etc. All Nations are before him as nothing, yea, less
then nothing and vanity. He sits upon the circle of the earth, and the
inhabitants thereof are as grasse-hoppers; He brings Princes to nothing, etc.
See much more to the same purpose there. Read also Job 38.39.40. all the three
chapters, and this opinion will be sufficiently confuted: Oh what arrogance is
this for poor worms to make comparison with the Infinite, Eternal, Almighty,
Glorious God? But perhaps they will say they equal not self, nor the flesh unto
God, that is to perish; but the spirit or soul which is one being with, or a
part of the divine essence (like some in these times which have made reason to
be God) I shall speak something therefore for the confutation of this.

1. The Scriptures speak of the soul or spirit of man to be a created thing
made in time, Isa. 57.16. Zach. 12.1. Psalm. 33.15. and can this be one being
with the eternal uncreated God?

2. Many Scriptures speak of the sinfulness of the soul, Micah 6.9. Lev. 4.2.
Ezekiel. 18.20. James 4.5. 2 Cor. 7.1. and can a sinful polluted creature be one
being with the holy God?

3. Many Scriptures speak of the destruction and death of the soul its
perishing in hell, Mar. 10.28. Mat. 16.26. Prove. 4 32. and can that soul that
perishes in hell be a part of the being of God?

4. The Scripture distinguishes betwixt Gods Spirit and ours, Romans 8.16. 1 Cor.
3.11. Zach 11.8. and affirms that some have not the Spirit of God in them, Romans
8.9) John 14.17. 1 Cor. 2.14 therefore if they have no humane soul in them, (as
Hubberthorn teaches in saying, the Scriptures speak not of an humane soul) they
must have no soul at all, for they have not the Spirit of God in them, but
enough for the confutation of this wretched doctrine.

Genesis 2.7. God is said to breath into man the breath of life, and so man become
a living soul, whence they would infer the soul to be a part of the being of
God infused into man.

Answ. The Scripture holds forth no more but this, that the soul was not
created with the body of the earth (as the souls of beasts were) and so to
perish with the body; but that it was created by God a spiritual substance and
so infused into the body, it was of a more excellent and spiritual extract then
the body was, and therefore the original of man's spirit is set forth otherwise,
then the original of the souls of beasts, it came indeed from God, but was not
of the being of God, which is spiritual and indivisible, this were to make men
to be gods. This was the heresy of the wicked Manichees, whom Augustine
sometimes confuted and vindicated this place which they had perverted.

Object. But they argue much from these Scriptures that speak of the oneness
of believers with Christ, and Gods dwelling in them, and they in him; for this
thing,

Answ. I shall therefore for the benefit of the weak open the manner of Christ's
in-being or in-dwelling in believers, lest they not understanding it, should
stumble at these Scriptures. This in-dwelling or in-being of Christ and
oneness with him is held forth in many Scriptures, John 6 56. Gal. 2.20. Col.
1.29. 2 Cor. 13.5, etc. John 17.21. now, how should we understand this? what!
God to dwell in his Saints, Christ to be and inhabit in believers, how can this
be? the heaven of heavens cannot contain him, how much less the strait heart
of man? Know,

First, Negatively, you must not understand this in-being or in-dwelling of
Christ to be either,

1. A corporeal inhabitation, as if the body of Christ or his humane nature
dwelt in us, which was the gross conceit of the Capernaites, John 6. and is to
this day the opinion of Papists and Vbiquitaries, who imagine Christ's body to
have the properties of the divine nature communicated to it, to be immense, and
to be in many places at once, (and this must be the conceit of the Quakers if
they hold any man Christ at all, for they deny any Man Christ but in us men)
This is a gross mistake, it overthrows the truth of Christ's Manhood; and the
Scriptures expressly say, The heavens must contain him; and this man Christ
comes not till he descends to judge the world; besides, the Scriptures teach
that Christ's being in us is spiritual, not bodily, Romans 8.9, 10.

2. Nor is it an essential in-dwelling of the divine nature in Gods people, as
if the very being of God were communicated to us and dwelt in us; though the
Apostle Peter speaks of the divine nature being communicated to the Saints, yet
he expresses other where what he understands thereby, namely the divine graces
and virtues of the Spirit. Indeed how can the being of God which is infinite
and boundless be in one place or person more then in another, though his
graces may?

3. Nor is it a Personal in-being as the soul lives in the body, and is one
subsistence with it, thus the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in Christ by
personal or hypostatical union; but thus God is not in his Saints, then they
should be gods, as Christ was God, this is the blasphemy of Familists, who say
they are godded and christed.

Secondly, Affirmatively, Christ dwells and is in his Saints (according to
the Scriptures) two ways;

1. By his special spiritual presence, he is more especially present with and
in the hearts of his Saints then with others, by his gracious manifestations,
by his sweet influences, and by his wonderful operatitions upon their hearts,
so God dwelt in the Temple formerly, and so he dwells in heaven now; in the
Temple, God said, This is my rest, here I will dwell; he manifested himself to
his people there, he heard their prayers, gave forth his oracles, there they
had communion with God in his Ordinances, they saw his face in the Sanctuary,
etc. and so now in heaven God is said to dwell there, because he manifests his
glorious presence there especially, in that place the Saints shall have the
vision and fruition of God eternally. Thus in the same manner God dwells in his
people now, by special spiritual presence, he makes such manifestations of
himself to them as none besides have, they see his face, know more of his
mind, have more of his love-visits then others have, John 14.21. Rev. 3.20. he
refreshes them with his flaggons of wine and his hidden Mannah, fills them with
the comfort, peace, and joy of his Spirit: He vouchsafes to them such divine
influences of grace as others have not; such quicknings and breathings of his
Spirit, as fills their hearts with spiritual vigor and life, because he lives
they live also. And he does such mighty works in them as in none else, puts
forth the same power that was put forth in raising Christ from the dead, to
mortify corruptions in them, to strengthen them to believe, and to do the
works of God, to frame them according to the image of God, etc. Esaias 26.12.
Ephesians. 1.21

2. By mystical union, and this is more then the former, one may have a
dwelling in an house but no union with it; God dwelt in the Temple, but was not
one with it; he dwells in the heavens, but has no union with them; but he so
dwells in believers, as he is one with them, 1 Cor. 6.16 1 Cor. 12.12. John
17.21. This oneness is so near, that it excels all the unions upon earth, the
Scripture uses the comparisons of husband and wife, Ephesians. 5. of head and
members. 1 Cor. 12. of soul and body, Gal. 2 20. of root and branches, John 15.
to set it forth by; and yet all these be too short, he adds the union betwixt
the Father and Son ( John 17.) to commend it further; yet must not be so
presumptuously wrested, as to plead for an essential or personal union to make
us gods All these comparisons are used in Scripture, not because they suit in all things, but that we may by these see what a comfortable relation we stand in
to God, and what blessings we may expect to be communicated to us by virtue
thereof. If any expect I should give some name to that union to express what
it is further, I shall presume to say no more but this, it is a great mystery,
and cannot be fully comprehended by the Saints here, till God wipe away this
dust of mortality from their eyes; Its safest to profess here we know but in
part; if any will profess to know more in these Mysteries, let them first tell
the nature of the union of their own souls and bodies, and how a spiritual and
corporal substance should be so knit together, to become one man? what is the
bond of this union, and how effected? when they can explicate these inferior
things, its more likely we should listen to them in explaining these higher
Mysteries about the union of Christ and believers.

By this time the Reader may see what pride and arrogance it is in these people
to hold equality with God, and to make the soul a part of God, or one being
with God: is not this greater pride then was in Adam, when he fell (and perhaps
in the devils themselves,) for he aspired to be but as God, not to be God
himself or one being with as these men do? But enough of this abominable
doctrine. And thus for the fourth general Charge.

SECT. V. The Quakers corrupt the Doctrine of Justification.
THe Doctrine of the Justification of a believing sinner before God, is one of
the most precious and comfortable doctrines of the Gospel, tending exceedingly
to set forth the riches of Gods free grace, and magnify his justice to support
and comfort wounded consciences; to take away boasting from man, that all may
glory in the Lord; and to fill the heart with joy and peace in believing: And
therefore the devil has by his instruments in all ages, labored to corrupt
the same. He stirred up false apostles in the first plantation of the Christian
faith to pervert it, against whom the Apostle Paul in the Epistles to the
Romans and Galatians disputes earnestly, teaching we are justified by faith,
and not by works; by faith receiving the righteousness of another, not by
works wrought in or by our selves. In after ages the Papists were the great
subverters of this doctrine, who had so corrupted it, that no part thereof was
left pure and undepraved by them; till the Lord of his mercy raised up Luther
and some other Worthies to vindicate it; and indeed the corruptions of this
doctrine were the great and especial cause of their first separation from Rome,
and there was nothing that the Spirit of that precious man was more drawn out
to clear, then that very doctrine, as may appear by his writings. In the steps
of those enemies of the truth the Papists, do these generation of Quakers now
so exactly walk, (as to the perverting of this doctrine of Justification) that
they scarce differ an hairs breadth from them, holding forth the old Popish
doctrine in the very same terms, as will appear in the following particulars.

1. The Papists deny Justification to be a judicial act of God whereby he
accounts us righteous (though ungodly in our selves, Romans 4.5.) through the
righteousness of Christ, performed in his own person for us, imputed to us,
and received by faith alone; but make it to consist in the infusing or putting
in righteousness into man, and so confound Justification and Sanctification,
making them one and the same thing. So Bellarm. the Jesuit, l. 1. de Justif.
cap. 1. And so the Quakers: J. Nailer love to the lost, See Saul's errond to
Dam. p. 12.
p. 3. pleads for our being made righteous by Gods putting in righteousness
into us, and by righteousness wrought in the creature; in the same page, line
4. he explaines Gods imputing righteousness to be his putting it into the
creature; his words are these, [righteousness is freely imputed or put into the
creature] where let the Reader see the gross ignorance of a man that pretends
to be infallible, making [impute, and put in] the same, whereas any Schoolboy
that has but learnt his Grammar, may see a vast difference between them; the
word [impute] not being compounded of [put in, or in put] but coming from
imputo, to reckon, account, judge, etc. and so the Hebrew word (...), and the
Greek (...) translated in the Scriptures [impute] do signify; can any believe
this man is infallible in his doctrine, when he is so grossly mistaken in a
word so commonly used in the Scriptures? See also Nailer in the same book, p.
50. where he (directly according to the manner of the Papists) confounds
Justification, Sanctification, and Mortification together, and argues for it as
they do, though in a more simple manner.

2. The Papists (as a consequent of the former opinion) hold, that they are
able to keep the Law perfectly, and to be perfectly righteous, Counc. Trent.
Sess. 6. can. 18. Nay, If any man say that the precepts and Commandments of God
unto a man justified, and in the state of grace be impossible to be kept, let
him be accursed: So the Quakers, Nailer p. 21, 22. of the book before named,
and in his book called the glory of the Lord out of the North, p. 25, 26. he
argues as hotly for it, as if some Jesuit were at his back to prompt him.

3. The papists say, by the liberty of the Gospel, they are altogether freed
from sin, so that it is thoroughly dead, and not only not imputed, but not
alive or having any being in the righteous; they are the words of Bellarmine
the Jesuit, lib. 5. de Justif. cap. 6. The same thing argues Nailer for; Glory
from the North, p. 21. Love to the lost. p. 21, etc.

4. The Papists they exclaim against the Protestants (who teach they have yet
sin in them, and are not so perfectly righteous as to stand before the
judgment seat of God without the righteousness of their Surety) and call them
painted Sepulchers, fair without, and foul within, leprous persons in fine
clothes, with many other such expressions. See Becanus the Jesuit, Tom. 2.
tract. 4. cap. 2. qu. 1, and 3. So the Quakers, J. Nailer, love to the lost, p.
4. you make (says he) Christ's righteousness a cover to your abominations,
etc. Though we doubt not but God will vindicate our uprightness, that we are
as conscientious of walking holily as any Papists or Quaker of them all, though
we dare not seek Justification thereby, this the very Papists have been forced
to confess sometimes, saying, though we had an heretical faith, yet we had
Orthodox manners.

Thus we see the Popish doctrine of Justification brought in by a generation of
men, that cry out against all others as Popish and Antichristian, when in the
mean time they are most deeply guilty of it themselves.

Now that the ignorant may not be deceived about this point, which is one of
the fundamental doctrines of Religion. I shall clear up the truth concerning
it, according to the Scriptures, in these following particulars.

1. He that will be justified before the judgment seat of Christ, and be
acquitted and pronounced righteous by the Judge of heaven and earth at the
great day of the Lord, must be perfectly righteous, he must not have the guilt
of the least sin to be charged upon him; Cursed is he that continues not in
all things written in the Law to do them; this Judge is of purer eyes then to
behold any iniquity to approve thereof; he that justifies the wicked is
abomination unto him, and therefore he will not do it himself, he is perfectly
righteous himself; his Law is perfectly righteous, he will not be bribed any
away, nor respect persons, and therefore they must have a perfect spotless
righteousness that stand before him.

2. Such is the impurity and sinfulness of the natures, hearts and lives of
the best men living, that they cannot produce such a perfect righteousness
before God, as that before mentioned; for, besides the imputation of Adams sin
and disobedience to all born of him by ordinary generation, every man has a
sinful nature in him, which, till he be regenerated and converted, does carry
him captive to sin daily, 1 Cor. 6.11. Ephesians. 2.3. Tit. 3.3. And this would
condemn him, though he should after conversion live never so perfectly,
unless the righteousness and satisfaction of a Surety and Mediator be
imputed to him; And after conversion the best of the Saints, whose hearts are
renewed, and the dominion of sin brought down in them, do not live so free
from sin, but that in many things they offend all, James 3.2. and if they
should say, they have no sin, they deceive themselves, and the truth is not in
them, 1 John 1.8. they may say with Job, how shall a man be just before God, he
cannot answer him one of a thousand, and with Solomon, Eccles. 7.20. There is
not a just man upon earth, that does good and sins not; which of all the
Saints have not some blemishes recorded, even after the Lord gave them
testimony that they were accepted of him? Noah, Genesis 7.1. has witness of God
to be a righteous man in a sinful generation, yet we read he sinned afterward,
chap. 9.21. Job had testimony of God to be a perfect man and upright, fearing
God, etc. and yet we read afterward of his impatiency, and he confesses his
sins and vileness; his perfection was in the sincerity of his heart, having
respect to all Gods Commandments, not in his perfect freedom from the being of
sin. David, after he was declared a man after Gods own heart, how sadly did he
fall? and Solomon after he had seen God twice? Paul's complaints are known, Romans
7.24. and Peter's miscarriages not only after his glorious confession of Christ,
Mat. 16 but after the spirit was so plentifully poured on him in the day of
Pentecost, for Gal. 2. Paul charges him for not walking uprightly (in a
particular thing there mentioned) and for dissimulation.



days of our life here, are the time of our warfare. Thus for the second
particular, such a perfect righteousness is not to be found in any man living
which may stand at Gods judgment bar.

3. Such is the goodness of the Lord to poor man, that he has provided that
for him in Christ, that he could not have in himself, even this perfect
righteousness; when we were found transgressors before God, and so to be
condemned; he gives his Son to fulfill all righteousness for us; he is made of
God unto us righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. he became sin for us that knew no sin,
that we might become the righteousness of God in him; we are made righteous or
justified by him, as he was made sin and guilty by us, that is, imputatively,
not inherently, for he had no sin in him, though he took guilt upon him. What
was impossible to be found in us, because of the weakness of the flesh, is now
found in Christ for us, who is the Lord our righteousness, Jer. 23.6.

Now here is a perfect righteousness, he was for his person, holy, harmless,
and separate from sinners; for his life, there was no evil found in him; he
obeyed the Law perfectly, and by his death did satisfy whatever the Law could
demand, there could not be a farthing more required of him, else he had not
risen again and been released out of prison, God gave Testimony he was well
pleased in him.

4. But now this righteousness thus wrought in the person of Christ must be
made ours before we be justified by it, and how can that be? this the Papists
scoff at, saying; can a man be beautiful by another man's beauty, or wise by his
wisdom? can a malefactor be acquitted because another man is righteous? and
Quakers mock at our trusting to be justified and saved by him that died at
Jerusalem. But this righteousness of Christ may as truly be made ours, and we
justified by it, as sometimes a debtor is discharged by his surety or friend
paying the debt for him, or a malefactor is acquitted when another undergoes
the penalty of the Law for him.

To make this clear, something must be considered as done on Gods part, and
something as done on our part.

1. On Gods part, there be these two things done to make this righteousness of
Christ ours, so as we may be justified by it.

(1) A mutual compact or agreement betwixt the Father and his Son, that all
that Christ should be, do and suffer, should not be for himself, but for us in
our stead and place, as our surety, he died for our offenses, he rose again for
our Justification. Read Isa. 53. throughout; thence is he called the surety of
a better Testament, (of the new Covenant) Heb. 7.22. Indeed what need Christ do
or suffer ought for himself? he need not have been made under the Law, he need
not have died for his own sins (being holy and without sin) but it was for
ours, 1 Pet. 3.18. Christ suffered once for sins, the just for the unjust to
bring us unto God, etc. This was a thing clearly held forth in the sacrifices
of the old Law (which were types of Christ's sacrifice) those beasts then
slain, did die in the stead of the sinner himself. This compact betwixt the
Father and Christ is one ground of his righteousness becoming ours.

2. There Is a new law of grace then made, and promulgated by Jesus Christ in
the Gospel unto sinners; that all guilty sinners who shall in the sense of
their sin and misery, being under the condemnation of the Law and wrath of God,
make out to this city of refuge, to the horns of this Altar, to the obedience
and satisfaction of this surety; and here plead for mercy, disclaiming all
confidence in any righteousness in themselves, they shall be pardoned,
accepted and justified; nay, shall be more righteous then if they had kept the
Law in their own persons, shall more abundantly please God, He that believes
in Jesus shall be justified from all those things the Law of Moses could not
justify him from, Acts 13.38, 39. He that believes shall be saved, Mark
16.16. This Law of grace was enacted by the council of heaven, and is published
in the Gospel; this righteousness is revealed therein, and freely tendered to
all that will receive it, and in thankfulness give up themselves to honor and
serve their Surety and Redeemer from the sense and apprehension of this his
love upon their hearts.

2. On man's part, there must be (through the mighty operation of the Spirit of
Jesus Christ accompanying the preaching of the Gospel) the obedience of faith
to this Law published; The sinner being convinced of his own sin and
unrighteousness, and of the sufficiency and excellency of this righteousness
of his Surety, and the free tenders thereof in the Gospel, must come in (as
with a rope about his neck, with Benhadads servants) humbly confessing his
sin and unrighteousness, accepting of Jesus Christ heartily as his Surety
and Redeemer; taking the gift of his righteousness thankfully, pleading for
pardon, justification, and life through the same, and giving up himself in
thankfulness to love and serve his Redeemer. Now these things being done, it is
most easy to understand how this righteousness of Jesus Christ may so be ours
(though not inherent in us) that we may be justified by the same: how common is
it amongst men for the debtor to be discharged of his debt, and the bond to be
cancelled, upon some friends paying the debt for him? yea, may not thus a
Malefactor be acquitted of some bodily punishment to be inflicted, if a friend
with the consent of the Magistrate shall suffer in his stead? In the way of
justification sinful man is much debased, and has nothing to glory in himself;
the grace of God is highly magnified (which is Gods great design in the work
of man's redemption) by finding out such a way to justify and save man; and we
have more full assurance and consolation, having now a perfect It is in respect
of Christ's perfect righteousness imputed, that believers are said in Scripture
sometimes to be perfect: and in respect of uprightness of heart, etc. but never
in respect of any absolute complete perfection inherent in them.
complete righteousness to present before God, which the best of men could
never have found (as before was showed) inherent in them, even after
regeneration and conversion. And thus for the clearing up of this great
doctrine of Justification.

From all this that has been said, it is most evident that the Quakers (as
they have another Man-Christ, then him the Scriptures preach, and another God
then the true God, who is one God in three persons; so they) have another
Gospel, then that which was preached by the Apostles, and has been received by
the Saints, and therefore are to be accounted accursed, though they should in
outward show and appearance, seem Angels from heaven, Gal. 1.8.

That this doctrine of justification is no enemy to Sanctification and
holiness of life, (as the Papists have formerly, and the Quakers do now charge
it) shall be showed fully in the tenth Section, where we shall speak of the
doctrine of Sanctification; and prove the Quakers to be subverters of the same.
And thus much for the fifth general charge.

SECT. VI. The Quakers deny the Resurrection of the body, the last judgment,
Heaven and Hell.
IT must be here remembered (which was before hinted) that it is not the
practice of Seducers, ever to deny in downright words the great and
fundamental truths revealed in the Scriptures; but often, whilst they pretend
to own the Scripture expressions, they pervert and deny the truths themselves;
this is the most likely way to deceive people. Now as this was manifest in many
other weighty points before named; so is it apparent in these fundamental
doctrines of our faith, the resurrection of the body, the last judgment,
heaven and hell. The Quakers have these in their mouths frequently, and will
speak of them, but they look upon them, as transacted in themselves, now in a
mystery (sure it must be a mystery of iniquity,) and hold no other
resurrection, judgment, heaven and hell, but what is now in men. As for the
resurrection of the dead body, they will not deny in words but the body shall
rise, but if it be asked what body? they will reply, the body is Christ (thus
have I been diverse times answered by them) but not our bodies of flesh, bones,
etc. these they say shall never rise again, and they ignorantly wrest that
Scripture for it, 1 Cor. 15.50. Flesh and blood shall not inherit the Kingdom
of God. It is known to most in this Town, that they have argued publicly
against the resurrection of the dead body, when they have been present at
burials; and therefore I need not add further evidence to show this is their
opinion. And as for the last judgment, Nailer to F. B. p. 10.
they have often affirmed Christ is now come in his Saints to judge the world,
and therefore they take upon them so freely to judge and censure all, even such
whose faces they have never seen before; and they scoff at others, that make
the day of judgment a thing yet to come, and to be at the last day. James
Nailer, love to the lost, p. 20. cites that Scripture, See Nailer love to the
lost, p. 44. and 46.
Heb. 6.2. (where the Apostle speaks of the resurrection of the dead, and of
eternal judgment) to defend their judging of men now, this is all the
judgment they speak of; they own not a judgment after the dead bodies of men
are raised up again. And for heaven and hell, they grant no other then what is
now in men; and indeed this will necessarily follow upon the former opinions,
for if the body shall never be raised, and if the soul be no distinct being
from God, and is after its departure out of the body, to be swallowed up into
God, and so God to be all in all; it is a vain thing to speak of judgment,
heaven and hell; thus do these wretches pervert these great and fundamental
doctrines of the Scriptures, and whilst they pretend so much light within
them, they deny that which the blindest Nations in the world have acknowledged,
for there is no Nation so barbarous, but has believed an heaven and hell; a
future state of happiness or misery after this life is done; as will appear
more fully by and by.

For the confirmation of the weak in these weighty points of Christianity, let
me add a few things.

First, for the Resurrection of our bodies, this being a fundamental doctrine
of Religion, whereon our hope and comfort does depend, Acts 24.15. 1 Cor.
15.16, 17, 18, 19. Heb. 11.36. and which has much influence into an holy life
and conversation, Acts 24 16. 1 Cor. 15.32. The devil did long since stir up
his instruments to undermine the same; the Sadduces, Acts 23.8. denied the
resurrection, Angels and Spirits; and some amongst the Corinthians, 1 Cor.
15.12. said, There is no resurrection of the dead; Hymeneus and Philetus, 2 Timothy 2.18. said, the resurrection was past already, and overthrew the faith of
some, even as this generation of men now pretend, its already accomplished and
past in them, the body or Christ is now risen in them, and hereupon deny the
future resurrection of our dead bodies. But it pleased the Lord out of his
goodness hereupon to clear up this doctrine more fully, so that there is no
doctrine in all the Scriptures has a clearer and fuller evidence for it self
then this has: It was sufficiently laid down before in the Old Testament in
many places. See these instead of many, Job 19.25. Isa. 26.19. Dan. 12.2. Ezekiel.
37.12. but in the New Testament, it is not only positively laid down and
asserted, but proved by many Arguments against them that denied it, Mat. 22.32.
Christ proves it against the Sadduces, and silences them by an Argument taken
from Gods Covenant with his people; he is their God, in Covenant with them, and
not only with their souls, but with their bodies also; therefore they shall
rise again; he proves that same resurrection which was denied by the Sadduces,
for he silenced them; now it is clear they denied the resurrection of the body
of flesh, etc. See v. 23, 24. other places might have been brought to have
proved this truth more directly (whereas this Scripture proves it but by
consequence, though clearly enough) but the Sadduces only owning the five books
of Moses, Christ brings a proof from thence for it, Exodus 3.6. But more
especially the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. does so largely prove this doctrine, that if
other Scriptures had been altogether silent about it, this one Chapter had been
sufficient confirmation thereof. Let the Reader observe there three things that
the Apostle principally treats of in that chapter. 1. He proves the
resurrection of the dead. 2. He shows with what bodies they shall arise. 3.
What shall become of them which shall be alive at the day of the Lord.

I. He proves the resurrection of the dead, and he evidences that by six
arguments.

(1) From the resurrection of Jesus Christ, from v. 3. to 19. for if there be
no resurrection of the dead; then is Christ not risen, but, says he, Christ is
risen, therefore must the dead rise, by virtue of their union with him. Now
that Christ is risen, he confirms from the Testimony of the Scriptures, ver. 4.
the Apostle names not what Scriptures, but it is clear he intends, Psalm. 16.8.
and such like places; then from those many witnesses that saw him, verse 5, 6,
7, 8. then from the evil consequences that would follow, if Christ rise not,
the Apostles should be false witnesses, and their preaching in vain; and the
Corinthians faith should be in vain, they should be yet in their sins; and
they that were fallen asleep should be perished.

(2) He proves the resurrection of the dead body, because, if it were not so,
Christians should be of all men most miserable, verse 19.

(3) He argues that all enemies must be overcome, therefore death; and if so,
we must rise again.

(4) He argues it from a practice amongst those persons that denied the
resurrection (probably the Corinthians, those ancient heretics) who were
baptized for the dead, verse 20. and therefore their own practice might confute
them.

(5) He argues it from the dangers and sufferings of the Saints, verse 30, etc.
which they would not endure, if there were no resurrection and reward after
death, Heb. 11.36.

(6) The denying the resurrection, he shows, would lead to all epicurisme and
licentiousness, then may we say, let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall
die; thus he confirms the doctrine of the resurrection of our dead bodies.

The 2d. thing in this Chapter is to show with what bodies the dead arise, II.
verse 35. He answers in the following verses, not with such vile, weak,
corruptible bodies as now we have, but with incorruptible, powerful, glorious,
and spiritual bodies; so Phil. 3.21. Our vile bodies shall be fashioned like to
the glorious body of Christ himself; and it follows as a reason of this change,
ver. 50. Flesh and blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, nor can
corruption inherit incorruption. Where observe the Apostle does not overthrow
what he before had built; that is, he does not deny the resurrection of the
dead body, that it shall not rise at all (as these deceivers would infer) but
it shall not rise in such a vile, corruptible, abject condition, it were not
capable of the glory of heaven then.

That this is the mind of the Apostle in these words, appears, in that the
Apostle does not contradict himself, and destroy what he had before built; now
having before proved the body shall arise again, he does not here deny it, only
he shows it shall not arise in such an abject and base condition as now it is
in, but in a more glorious condition, and so he fitly answers the question
propounded, v. 35. with what body the dead shall arise? It being also
considerable, that the word flesh is not in Scripture, always put for the
substance of man's body, for the substance consisting of flesh, blood and bones,
but frequently for the infirm, weak state and condition of man, as Esaias 31, 3.
1 Pet. 1.24. and thus the latter part of the verse shows it is to be taken
here, corruption shall not inherit incorruption, corrupt frail flesh cannot
inherit heaven; it must be made a glorious spiritual body for its qualities and
conditions when it is raised up again, that so it may be capable of the
happiness of heaven.

III. The third thing the Apostle does in this Chapter is, he shows what shall
become of them that shall be alive at the day of the Lord. v. 51. they shall not
fall asleep, but be changed or translated into a state of incorruption and
immortality (as it befell Enoch and Eliah in former times) this also confirms
the doctrine of the resurrection, because those bodies that shall survive at
the last day shall not be annihilated but only changed. What clearer Testimony
can be given to this truth then we have in this one chapter? Many other places
might be added as Acts 23.6. and 24.15. 1 These. 4.13, etc. Phil. 3.20.21. Rev.
12. with other more, but these may suffice.

impossible, How can the dead body, when consumed to ashes, or dust, and this
driven away by the wind, and scattered, be raised up again, the self-same body
for substance, Or when a body shall be eaten by wild beast or fishes, and they
again eaten by men or by other creatures, and their substances mingled and
confounded; how can these ever be distinguished, and the selfsame body that
died be raised up again?

Answ. Why should it seem a thing incredible to you, that God should raise the
dead, Act. 26.8? Ye err, because ye know not the Scriptures, nor the power of
God, Matthew. 22. Do not you see as great things wrought before your eyes daily?
Does not the corn that is sown in the ground dye and rot, and then spring up
afterward, and yet (Oh fools!) will ye not believe? 1 Cor. 15. have not many
dead bodies been raised up formerly that we have mention of in Scripture, to
convince men what God can do? Nay, do not we know that men are able by their
wisdom and power, when several metals are mixed together in one lump, to
sever them so as each shall be pure and unmixed by it self, and nothing lose
but the dross? And will you then say, that the infinitely wise and powerful
God, cannot do that in our bodies, that such poor worms can do in things below
here? Let such vain thoughts be laid aside, and let faith believe, though
reason cannot comprehend it.

Then for the Doctrines of the last Judgment, Heaven, and Hell. I need not
insist so much upon the proof of them, they will follow upon what is already
said; for granting the resurrection of the body, it will more easily be
yielded, there shall be rewards and punishments to which men shall be adjudged
in the world to come; That every man shall receive according to what he has
done in his body, whether it be good or evil, 2 Cor. 15.10. This may appear
one great end why God shall raise them up again. But something I shall say to
strengthen the weak in these things also.

1. Let the light in all men be but judge (which these men so much speak of)
and it will witness against them, that there is a future state of happiness
or misery, an heaven or an hell, to which men shall be adjudged after this life
is ended, according as their works have been here; and that judgment, heaven
and hell are not only in this life. There is no Nation in the world (however
barbarous) but have believed it, this the light in them has taught them. The
Heathen Poets have spoken of their Elisian fields, and of the infernal rivers
of hell. Cicero the Heathen Orator, and Lucretius have made mention of the
conflagration of the world and the future judgment; the Turks speak of
Paradise, etc these they have some dark and groping knowledge of from the light
in them, though no clear distinct knowledge. The poor Indians that go naked (as
these Quakers sometimes have done in their delusions) they have the notion of
these things; nor are there only mere notions in these Heathens of these
things, but they have many terrors and fears of conscience about them,
especially when they have been near unto death: this has been so firmly rooted
in them, that nothing could wear it out; men that have lived like Atheists,
have been overtaken with these fears sometimes. Besides, they have an obscure
knowledge of a God, and that this God is a righteous God, and will judge the
world in righteousness, and observing it is not well always here with them that
do well, nor does evil befall the wicked more then others, they hence collect
there will be a more equal dispensation of rewards and punishments in the world
to come. Add further, they have knowledge of the souls immortality, for they
see it does not depend upon the body now for its acts and operations, but can
comprehend things that never came within the outward senses, can know and
understand the nature and causes of things, can attain some knowledge of God,
and spirits can enter heaven with contemplation while the body lies grovelling
here upon earth, etc. and therefore they conclude it does not depend on the
body for its being, but is immortal, and being immortal there is an estate of
eternal happiness or misery for it. How little then do these men look to the
light within them, while they deny these manifest truths, how false are they to
their own principles; if the light that is in them be darkness, how great is
that darkness.

II. But let us appeal to the light of the Scriptures, and there we have more
clear and distinct discovery of these things, then this general light in all
has yet ever made. For the last judgment, read, Mat. 25. where we have the
process thereof set down at large by Christ, the time when it must be is
showed, ver. 31. When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the
Holy Angels with him; not when Christ comes in Spirit to his people, but when
he comes as the Son of man in a glorious condition, his Angels attending him;
and the persons then to be judged are all Nations, ver. 32. and not only a few
persons shall be judged, (as these poor wretches, affirming this judgment to
be now present, take on them to judge here and there a person) for the living
and dead both must be judged then, 2 Timothy 4.1. and Angels as well as men, Jude
6. The manner of the judgment is described in the following part of the
Chapter, Acts 17.31. God has appointed a day wherein he will judge the world
by that Man whom he has appointed, whereof be has given assurance by raising
him up from the dead, that Man-Christ, that particular Man that was raised up
from the dead is to be Judge, not these men that pretend to judge now. See also
for this, Act. 10.42. 2 Timothy 4.1. And if you would know when this appointed day
is to be, the Apostle expresses it, Heb. 9.27. It is appointed for men once to
die, but after this the judgment, after death follows the resurrection and
judgment, it is to be at the second appearance of Christ (the Son of man) in
the clouds of Heaven, 2 Timothy 4.1. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8. for this
last and great judgment see further, Jude 14, 15. Rev. 20.12. with many other
places. And for Heaven and Hell after this life is ended, that necessarily
follows upon the proof of the last judgment, these being the places of reward
and punishment to which men shall be adjudged at that great day of the Lord: So
that its not requisite to multiply places for these; Only let the Reader (for
to confirm his faith) peruse at his leisure these Scriptures, Mat. 25.34, 56.
Luke 16.22. 2 Cor. 5.1, 5, 8. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. Heb. 10.34. 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. Isa.
30.33. Psalm. 9.17. Matthew. 10.28. Mat. 25.41. Luke 16.26. Rev. 20.15. From which
places its evident, that Heaven is a place of perfect bliss and happiness,
not upon earth, but above the visible Heavens, not to be enjoyed whilst we be
in the flesh here (though we have some foretasts or earnests of it, in which
respect it may be said the Kingdom of Heaven is now within us) but into which
the souls of the righteous shall be translated, presently after their departure
out of the body; and which their bodies with their souls after the resurrection
and last judgment shall eternally possess and inherit. And hell is a place of
endless and exquisite torments to which wicked men shall be adjudged; into
which they are not now actually thrust whilst they are upon earth (though they
feel flashes of wrath upon their consciences sometimes which are the earnests
thereof) but after their departure out of the flesh, their souls shall be
tormented therein; and after the resurrection of the just and of the unjust,
their bodies shall be sentenced with their souls, to be eternally punished
therein.

Let the Reader see from hence, what wicked enemies of the truths of Christ
this generation of men are, that dare thus subvert the most fundamental truths
of the Gospel, whereon the comfort and hope of Christians depends, and which
being overthrown, a gap is opened to all wickedness, and abominations; for
what impieties will not men venture upon, when they believe no resurrection,
judgment, heaven, or hell, but what men have now in their consciences? and what
discouragement will this be to the Saints, whose only comfort and hope arises
from that invisible glory in the world to come? Thus for this sixth general
charge.

SECT. VII. The Quakers are enemies to all the Ordinances of Jesus Christ.
THe holy Ordinances of God, being instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ the King
of his Church, to the end, we might therein visibly tender up to God that
homage and worship that is due unto his Name; and that we might in them enjoy
communion with himself; as also that through them he might communicate the
influences of his grace and blessing unto our soul: it cannot but be horrid
impiety in any to attempt the violation of the same. How can it be otherwise
reputed by any gracious heart, but high treason against the crown and dignity
of our Lord Jesus, thus to trample upon his institutions and appointments? and
a sacrilegious robbing of God of that manifested glory due to him (which was
the great end of his creating the world, and redeeming mankind?) As also
extremely prejudicial to the comfort and salvation of men's souls? Such
therefore as shall attempt the undermining of the same (notwithstanding what
fair pretenses they may make) cannot be otherwise adjudged then the open
enemies of God, and the manifest confederates of Satan the Prince of darkness
for wherein can they gratify that evil spirit more, then in casting down the
holy Ordinances of Gods worship and service? This is evident, in that the devil
does enjoyne such as are his sworn servants and slaves (that is, witches) so
soon as they be admitted into that cursed society to renounce the Ordinances of
God, to deny their baptism, to turn their backs off the Ministry of the Word,
to cast off prayer to God, etc. as has been made to appear by the public
confessions of many of these miserable creatures, when they have been condemned
to die for their wickedness. If then the Quakers shall be found guilty of this
crime, to be enemies to all the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, the weakest
Christian may see ground enough to reject them and abhor their ways. This
charge I shall therefore now make good against them, by instancing in these
several Ordinances of Christ which they renounce and cast off.

First, for the ministerial teaching and preaching of the word, this is an
appointment of Jesus Christ, Mark 16.15, 16. and to continue to the end of the
world, Matthew. 28.19, 20. therefore was care taken that after the Apostles there
might be a constant succession of Ministers in the Churches or Christ in after
ages, 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1. But now this Ordinance is denied by the Quakers, they
hold forth the light in them to be a sufficient teacher, that there needs no
other to teach but that, neither the teaching of the Scriptures, nor the
Ministry of men. See Nailer, Glory soon the North, p. 2, 3. All people (says
he) cease from their outside lights, and return to the light of Christ in you.
-- And this light is not a chapter without you in a book, this is the more sure
word of prophecy, etc. G. F. in a paper to the Baptists, p. 8. You that look
out at Teachers without you, consider -- you are strangers to that Covenant by
which all come to know the Lord, and need not that one teach another. Parnel,
trial of faith, p. 7. Hearken to that in your conscience, -- thou that art
willing to follow this, and be guided by this, shall need no man to teach thee.



Their teaching is but to take people off from other Teachers, that they may be
brought to mind the light in them alone, and then they will cease teaching.
Good Reader, see what the design of these men is, to bring thee and thy
posterity into the condition poor Indians are in (to have no other teaching)
and so to leave thee. I hope thou see by this what enemies they are to thy
soul.

As for Prayer, this is also an Ordinance of God, 1 These. 5.17. public prayer
in Church Assemblies, 1 Timothy 2.1, 15. secret in our closets, Mat. 6.6. private
prayer in families Zach. 12.10, 12. Jer. 10.25. so for prayer and thanksgiving
when we receive Gods creatures, 1 Timothy 4.45. Mat. 15.36.

Now this Ordinance the Quakers are enemies to, as appears by their practices,
the chiefest of their followers have for a long time disused prayer in their
families, when they arise or go to bed, though formerly some of them have been
seemingly conscientious therein; they neglect giving thanks when they receive
the creatures, and pray not for a blessing on them; falling to, as swine
without looking up to heaven. And for their speakers (though of late they have
used it more then in former times, as they have in policy more then in honesty
reformed many other things, that they saw were an offense to people, and kept
them from following them, yet) they are not true friends to prayer, Nailer p.
3. of his Glory from the North, mocks such as pray for a sight of sin and
repentance, saying, the light in them would discover it, etc. and in many other
books of theirs this may be seen; and what then should Christians pray for, if
they may not pray for grace? besides when their teachers pray here; it is
testified by many which have heard them; They never pray to God in the Name of
Jesus Christ; (and what prayer can they make then?) but as if they were in the
very person of Christ, (as indeed they hold God to dwell as essentially in them
as in the Man Christ Jesus) they use such expressions as Christ himself used,
John 17. not praying to God through Christ, but as if Christ (personally
inhabiting in them) did himself speak to his Father, and not such sinful worms
as they are; also they never speak in the plural number, as if the people
should join with them; but ever in the singular, I pray thee, I thank thee; and
so though they should acquit themselves of this charge, yet they leave all
their followers under it, as being such Heathens as know not God, nor call upon
his Name, and so liable to that curse, Jer. 10 25.

Water-baptisme, and the Lords Supper are other standing Ordinances instituted
by our Lord Jesus Christ, Mat. 28.19. John 4.1. Acts 8.36. 1 Cor. 11.23, etc.
and these are to continue to the end of the world, till all Nations be brought
into subjection to Christ; and then must the end come; til Christ come again
(not in Spirit, for so he was already to those to whom these things were
spoken,) but in person as the Son of man in his glory, etc.

But these precious Ordinances are utterly cast off by the Quakers (as their
practice evidences it; and their books speak it plainly (see the paper against
the baptized people, p. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.) they own no baptism with water, but
that of the Spirit alone, no Lords Supper, but feeding on Christ's flesh and
blood by faith, when in the mean time they also deny Christ to have a real body
of flesh and blood, though glorified.

Singing of Psalms is another Ordinance of God, Mat. 26.30. Col. 2.16. Jam.
5.13. But this is denied utterly by them, they have written two pamphlets
formerly against my self for vindicating this Ordinance. Let the Reader know,
if they publish a hundred of such like answers to this Treatise as those two
against my vindication of singing; I shall not trouble my self to write one
line in reply to them, as judging it altogether needless.

Church Communion is another Ordinance of Christ, when Christians walk together
in the fellowship of the Gospel, and in all the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, as
appears by the Apostle planting of Churches in every place where the Gospel was
entertained, and Christ's owning of them by writing to them, Rev. 1. and this
Ordinance was to continue to the end of the world, Rev. 22.16, 1 Timothy 6.3, with
1 Timothy 3.15. but the Quakers deny there ever could true Church be found since
the Apostles time to this time. Burr. against Grif. page 26.

For the Lord's Day, it is known they are no friends to it, they make all days
alike, many have professed against it, and the known practices of their
followers evidence, they make no conscience thereof, although in the fourth
Commandment God requires the keeping holy of a seventh day, or one day in
seven; and Christ says, Matthew. 5. He that breaks one of these least
Commandments, and teachteh men to do so, shall be least in the Kingdom of
heaven; and it is evident the Apostles and primitive Saints met together every
first day of the week, and they found the Lord was with them in so doing; and
in our own Nation God has so blessed the faithful observation of this day to
the increase of piety and godliness, that no Christian can deny it; but now
the devil cannot subvert this day by games and sports, which he attempted
formerly; he tries if he can do it, by denying it to be an institution of
Christ. As for Christian conference, a duty so pleasing to God, Mal. 3.16. it
appears they are little friends thereto by their sitting mute when they meet
together.

I might instance in other appointments of God; instructing their families in
the fear of God, teaching them the knowledge of Christ, etc. this though
strictly enjoined in the Scriptures, Deuteronomy. 6.7. Ephesians. 6.4. Prove. 22.6. and
commended by the godly examples of many precious Saints recorded in Scripture,
as Abraham, Timothies mother, etc. yet has been derided by some of them; what
can we teach them, (say they) God must do all, etc. besides, to this day there
are some Masters, who suffer their families to do any thing upon the Lords
days, either sleep at home, or walk about the fields, etc taking no more care
of their souls then if they were to die as beasts (as indeed they hold as
before was showed;) thus do the Quakers appear evidently to be enemies to all
the holy Ordinances of Christ.

But because it is a common plea in these apostatizing times, that all outward
Ordinances are abolished, Christians are not bound to worship God in them now;
they were but for the first times of the Gospel, etc. I shall add a little for
the establishment of the weak that they may not by the craft of Seducers be
brought to cast of the precious Ordinances of Jesus Christ.

It was before proved that these Ordinances were instituted by Jesus Christ the
King of his Church (as we showed in each of them severally) and that with
express intimations of the continuance of them, not only for that present age,
but for all following times to the end of the world; who then dare to take upon
him to abrogate the same? The Laws and Ordinances of men are not abolished, but
by the same power that first enacted them, now what one Word of God can these
men bring for the repeal of any one Ordinance of the Gospel? may not they on
the like account make the great Commandments of believing, repenting, etc. be
temporary Commandments, and not concerning Christians in these times? and why
should not the other nine Commandments be abolished as well as the fourth,
which requires a set stinted time for Gods solemn worship and service, even
every seventh day, or as well as any other outward Ordinance commanded by Jesus
Christ in the Word? Certain we are, there be the same grounds and reasons for
continuance of these Ordinances of God now, as were at first for the
institution of them. Is not God to be visibly worshipped and adored by us as
well as formerly? and if so, it is more fit we should do it in the way of his
appointments, then in any way of our own invencieus; have not we still need of
Ordinances, wherein to enjoy communion with God? we have no such immediate
converse with God now, as to see him face to face, but only as we behold him in
the glass of his Ordinances, whilst we are present in the body, we are absent
from the Lord, (2 Cor. 5.6.) only while we are waiting on him in his Ordinances
he promises to meet us and be with us spiritually, and we find many sweet
visits and manifestations therein; we have still need of the communications of
his grace and the influences of his Spirit, some needing conversion and
illumination, others confirmation and strengthening, all further increasings of
God, that we may more and more grow up to perfection; and are not the
Ordinances given to us for these ends? and not only till one come to
perfection, but till all (even the whole body of Christ) attain thereunto,
Ephesians 4 10, 11. It Is one great difference betwixt the Ordinances of the
Law; and those of the Gospel, that the one was to be abolished, but the other
to continue, 2 Cor. 3.11. indeed legal Ordinances and observations were to be
done away, 2 Cor. 21.22. such as touch not, taste not, handle not; those carnal
Ordinances which stood in meats, and drinks, and certain washings, etc. were
but till the time of reformation, till Christ came in the flesh, Heb. 9.10. but
the Gospel institutions of Christ were to continue to the end of the world, to
the second coming of Christ, till all Nations be brought in, and the body of
Christ completed, as before was showed; and the same Apostle that speaks so
much against legal Ordinances, yet commends the Corinthians for keeping those
Gospel Ordinances, which he having received from Christ, had delivered unto
them, 1 Cor. 11.2, 23. These are to continue in the most glorious times of the
Church, Isa. last, Jer. 3. Zach. 14. Rev. 11.15, 19. And when God pours his
Spirit on his people more abundantly, it is to help them to walk in the
Ordinances and Commandments of Christ, not to lead them out of them, Ezekiel.
36.27. The Ordinances of God are reckoned among the foundations of Religion,
Heb. 6 1, 2. therefore take away them and you pull down all Religion, the
building will fall down if the foundation be once removed. But I add no more,
the experience that we have had of the blessing of the Lord upon his Ordinances
for the convincing, converting, quickening and comsorting of very many souls; as
also of the malice and rage of Satan against them, both in former times of
persecution, stirring up some to corrupt them and suppress them, and in these
present times of liberty, stirring up others to vilify and decry them, may
sufficiently confirm Christians against this temptation of casting off Gods
holy Ordinances. And it is observable, that though the devil has been
industrious to pull down the Ordinances of Gods worship; yet he has labored
to arrogate this honor to himself; though he would not have God worshipped,
yet will he have solemn worship from his confederates tendered to himself; he
has his set weekly times to be worshipped in, and solemn meetings, and
assemblies of witches to adore him; he will have them pray to him, be baptized
to the Devil, and take a new name; and he has his abominable feasts in
imitation of the holy Sacramental feasts appointed by Christ in his Churches,
and will often himself make set speeches to exhort them unto evil, as the
Ministers of Christ exhort to holiness; this is testified by many credible
persons that have been ear-witnesses of the confessions of those cursed
creatures, which have been actors in those devilish worships. Let every one
therefore fear to cast off the holy Ordinances of God, lest in the just
judgment of God, he be thus given up to worship the devil. And thus for this
seventh general charge, that the Quakers are enemies to all the Ordinances of
Jesus Christ.

SECT. VIII. The Quakers pretend to Miracles.
WE are forwarned by Christ, Matthew. 24 24. That in the last days false
prophets shall arise, that shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch, that
if it were possible, they should deceive the very Elect. And the Apostle Paul,
2 These. 2.9. says, That the coming of the man of sin should be after the
working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders. It is not
therefore to be thought strange, if Seducers do pretend to miracles, this
should be so far from persuading any to follow after them, that it should be a
greater warning to take heed of them: It is a thing known that the most
notorious imposters that ever were in the Church, have pretended to miracles,
So the Egyptian So^cerers in Moses time.
Simon Magus, Acts 8. gave out that he was some great one, even the mighty
power of God. Many wicked heretics in the primitive times boasted of great
miracles done by them, as Tertull. Augustine, and others record; and what
pretenses the Papists make hereunto, is evident by those many legends of
miracles published by them, and yet to be seen amongst us. Now that the Quakers
may in this, as well as in other things be manifest to be Seducers, I shall
show what claim they make to a power to work miracles. It Is true they have not
yet published any volumns of their miracles to the world in print, as the
Papists have done; and as some in England The Anabaptists at Whatfield in
Suffolk published a book called the Gospel way confirmed by miracles the
notorious falsehood of which was afterward by themselves confessed before Br.
Gurdon Esquire; Justice of the Peace there, and their confession published, Anno
1649.
, have done in these times; they pretend to learn modesty therein from the
example of Christ who forbad the reporting of many of his miracles to the
world, but they make no little use of them among their seduced ones to confirm
them thereby in their delusions, and it is not unlikely would make them more
public to the world, were it not they feared to be found liars, if they should
so do. I shall relate a few of those pretended miracles, that I have had from
some of them reported to my self.

One of them (now or lately in prison at Bury) being called to the Ministry
(say they) and questioning at first, whether his call was from God, desired a
sign for the confirmation thereof, that by touching or speaking to a woman,
who then lay very sick, she might be recovered and restored to health, which
doing (says the reporter) she immediately recovered. Another of them being put
into a dungeon, and there kept for some days without any meat, became very
hungry, whereupon he was bidden by the voice within him to arise and eat, and
was directed to a place near the grate, where were many ugly spiders, of which
he took and did eat till he was satisfied thereby as well as if he had eaten
of the wholesomest food in the world. Two others of them being in prison at
Chester (or some other place in the West, for the reporter could not certainly
tell me what place) were singing of Psalms together, a thing they so highly
exclaim against others for doing; and suddenly such a glorious light shone
into the prison, as made the Jailer to come trembling, and fall down before
them, whereupon he and his household were converted to them that day. One in the
North, (as it was confidently reported to me by themselves) did fast full
forty days and forty nights together, without taking any food. The wife of
Coll. Benson (says the same reporter) being with child went to York upon some
message from God to oppose the Priests, where not being known, she was cast
into Prison, and delivered of a child there, but before her delivery told
those with her, that she should feel no pain in her travel, and should have a
man-child, whose name should be Immanuel, which child was showed afterward to
the Protector for a wonder. Many aged and infirm women (say they) since they
came into this way, out of weakness have become strong and able to travel
hundreds of miles on foot.

These things being objected against by me, as being done far of, and most of
them in corners, and therefore far unlike the miracles done by Christ and the
Apostles I desired to hear of some done nearer hand, the truth of which I might
find out; whereupon I was informed of one in this Town wherein I live, and
another at Norwich. That in this Town was reported to me (as near as I can
remember) in these very words. Was it not a Miracle for T. C. that had been
brought so low by a Quartane Ague to be so suddenly recovered? I answered, it
was a merciful providence, but no miracle, and further, demanded by what means
he was cured? It was replied, that Richard Hubberthorne, did but go to his door
and speak to him, and presently he recovered; but afterward enquiring of the
man himself; what Hubberthorne said to him; he told me, he said nothing but
bade him look to the light in him, he did not rebuke his distemper, nor command
him in the Name of Christ to arise and walk; and since that time this poor man
has continued in a languishing condition.

That other pretended miracle at Norwich, was upon Thomas Symonds Weaver; one
of their speakers, a letter whereof I read, subscribed with his own hand, It
was this, that upon a Lords day (some few months agon) the hand of the Lord
was upon him from morning to evening very sore; and he was smitten with a
tormenting pain in his bowels, and nothing that his friends about him applied
could help him, insomuch that they gave him over as irrecoverable; whereupon
the voice within him bade him take a draught of cold water, which he doing in
the obedience of faith, his spirits revived, and himself presently recovered,
and sent out a letter of this to his friends that they might give glory for it
to God, and be thereby further confirmed and established in their way.

The Pawwaw do greater cures then this upon the poor Indians, to confirm them
in their worshipping of devils. Besides this is a medicine many have been
helped by, when troubled with pains upon the distillation of a salt humor
upon the inward parts and therefore is no miracle.
Concerning their quaking trances, visions, rapture, and Revelations, I have not
heard much in these parts; They knowing how prejudicial these things have been
to their way (as also their going naked) they have much left them. Only I have
one memorable story to relate about the same, which is of Atkinson that
notorious impostor, when he first came to Norwich, who pretended (and those
poor people did readily believe him,) that the dread of the Lord fell upon
him, as he was traveling on his journey, and he was smitten off from his horse
(as Saul going to Damascus) and it was told him he was going to as ignorant and
blind a City as any was in the world, and there should suffer for Christ, and
be imprisoned, but should have unspeakable comforts, etc. The notorious
wickedness of this wretch now discovered to all, may convince that it was no
hard thing for him to invent such cheats to delude poor creatures by, who are
willing to be deceived

Now least any weak ones should be stumbled at these pretenses of Miracles, and
be thereby induced to hearken to them, I shall add these few things for the
sake of such.

1. If these Miracles or wonders which those persons pretend to work, were
indeed true and real, and not feigned things; yet seeing they are wrought to
confirm lying doctrines (as the doctrines of the Quakers are before proved to
be) we are not to hearken unto them, Deuteronomy. 13., 1:2. If a Prophet shall give a
sign, or wonder, and it come to pass, of it be to tempt, to follow strange
gods, we are not to hearken to such, for the Lord permits it to try his people
and prove them. It was before showed that in these last days, this power of
working Miracles is to be in the hands of false prophets and deceivers, Math.
24. 2 Thessalonians. 2. And therefore faith Aug. tract. in Joh. 13. God has armed us
against such Miracle-mongers by warning us, that in the latter days false
prophets shall work signs and wonders, etc.

2. But how evident is it, they are but lying signs and wonders, as the
Apostle 2 Thessalonians. 2. calls them, or (as Austine speaks of the miracles of
Heretics in former times) either the juglings or mockeries of deceitful men,
or else illusions of lying spirits. For, such as were pretended to be wrought
in these parts I showed before those to be no better; and for such, as be
pretended to be done in remote parts, we have reason enough to suspect them,
when we find their deceits at home, besides it is most certain God will never
put to his seal (of true miracles, which he only can work) to confirm lies

3. The enemies of the truth in former times have wrought greater wonders by
far then these people have pretended to; what wonders were wrought by the
Egyptian Sorcerers in the time of Moses? by many Heretics in the primitive
times: but especially how many and how great miracles have been pretended to be
wrought by the Papists? these being so eminent, we are prophetically warned of
them, Rev. 13.13, 14. where we read that the second beast, or the Pope
possessing the seat of the first beast, or Roman Empire, should do great
wonders, and deceive them that dwell upon the earth by his miracles. And indeed
hardly any new doctrine that the Papists coined, or superstitious rites and
ceremonies, but that had multitudes of pretended miracles to confirm the same.
When they would bring into the Church Transubstantiation, or the Doctrine of
Christ's bodily presence in the Lords Supper, they have pretended their
wafer-cakes have been seen bleeding as they were broken and eaten by them; and
that heathens have come into their assemblies and seen the Christians put a
little pretty boy into their mouths, etc. When they would bring in the
worshipping of Images, they have pretended that those dead stocks have moved
themselves, could walk, could stir their eyes and hands, could speak, could
light their own Tapers, could heal the sick, and raise the dead; how many
wonderful cures and miracles have been wrought (as they say) by the image of
the Virgin Mary; some of her chapels have laid up in them very many crutches,
pictures of arms legs, etc. All which they pretend she has miraculously
healed and recovered; they that will not believe things done beyond sea; nay,
enquire after the great miracles done here amongst us by the Lady of Walsingham
and Ipswich, strange things for Images to do; and wherefore were all these
fained? but to draw people to worship Images and pray to Saints: When they
would bring in Purgatory, dirges, masses for the dead, they have pretended the
souls of many departed have appeared to their living friends, made dreadful
complaints to them of their punishments, exhorted them to have so many dirges
said for them, that they might the sooner come out of Purgatory; when they
would extol their holy water, crosses, etc. they have pretended devils have
been driven away thereby, etc. But there are many volumnes of these miracles
written by the Papists, and are yet defended by them as true, and believed by
their blinded followers; and therefore if such miracles will induce any to
embrace lying doctrines, then there is far more reason to embrace Popery then
Quakerisme.

4. But if any shall yet desire miracles to confirm their faith. Let them know
that we have greater miracles then the Quakers or Papists can plead; For whilst
we hold fast the Doctrine of Christ and the Apostles, all the miracles which
they wrought are ours, for they were wrought to confirm the faith which we now
profess; nor let any expect a continuance of them in all ages, for if they
should be so ordinary, they would not be esteemed miracles; who would look upon
the standing still of the Sun in the firmament, or of the waters in Jordan, and
the red sea, as a miracle, if ordinary seeing the motion of the Sun, and the
ebbing and flowing of the Sea are greater miracles if they were not so common?
let us therefore confirm our faith from all those former miracles, and not
expect lying signs and wonders now; These miracles of Christ and the Apostles
were indeed true miracles, and beyond the power of any created being to work;
they were frequently wrought in many places; and that not in corners but before
multitudes, that the enemies of Christ could not then, nor can to this day deny
them; and they continued for an age at least to be wrought, and therefore be a
sufficient confirmation of the Doctrine delivered by them; but these pretended
miracles of the Quakers are but lying signs and wonders (as the Scripture
speaks) wrought in corners, not acknowledged by any but their seduced
followers; what folly is it then for any to believe their doctrines upon the
account of such miracles? And so much for this eighth Section concerning their
pretending to miracles.

SECT. IX. The Quakers are no truly mortified persons, notwithstanding their
pretenses to mortification, and how Popish Monks and others have out-stripped
them therein.
THere is nothing more apt to deceive weak and simple hearted people, then the
fair shows and pretenses of mortification and holiness, that seducers do
sometime make; for it has been found that the greatest impostours and
deceivers have put on the vizard of godliness. The Apostle tells us, 2 Cor.
11.13, 14, 15. that the false apostles in those times, transformed themselves
into the Apostles of Christ, and into Ministers of righteousness, even as
Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of light. The Scribes and Pharisees
did make such a profession of godliness, as thereby they gained an high esteem
from the common people, who had a saying, that if there were but two saved, the
one should be a Scribe, the other a Pharisee. And (not to speak of the seeming
piety of some Heretics in the Primitive times) this was most notoriously seen
in the Popish Monks and Friars, who through their seeming sanctity, their
voluntary poverty, and contempt of the world; through their great devotion and
pretended communion with God, their extreme fastings, watchings, and
maccrations of the flesh; their pretended austerity and strictness of life,
and such like things, had insinuated themselves so far into the hearts of
people, that they had drawn away a great part of the Christian world after
them, made them easily entertain their wicked doctrines, superstitions and
idolatries, subject their consciences to the Popish Antichrist, give away
their riches and wealth to them, and many thought they might be saved, how ever
they lived, if but buried in a Friars weed. In like manner, we see some
ignorant and well-meaning people apt to be taken with the seeming mortification
and piety of the Quakers, through their despising the fashions of the world,
and contemning the honors and pleasure thereof, their abstemious use of the
creatures, and frequent fasting and neglecting of the body, their sober and
austear carriage and deportment amongst men, with their willingness to suffer
for their way; as also their pretenses of high raptures and enjoyments in a
more immediate converse with God then others have. Now, least the pretenses of
these and such like things should be a temptation to any weak ones to entertain
their doctrines, and conceive a good opinion of their ways; I shall present to
the serious consideration of such, these few ensuing particulars.

1. We are not to judge of faith by persons, but of persons by faith, according
to the saying of Tertullian de praesc. cont. haer. cap. 3. for many have been
led into error by the example of some whom they have had an high esteem of; if
men seem never so holy, yea, to be Angels from heaven, if they bring another
Gospel, they are to be held accursed, Gal. 1.8. Satan's messengers (as before
was hinted) may transform themselves into Ministers of righteousness. Christ
bade us beware of false prophets, Mat. 7.15. though they come in sheeps
clothing, pretending to be holy and harmless, for they may be ravening
wolves, Rev. 13.11. the second Beast, or Pope, had two horns like a Lamb, but
spoke like the dragon, seemed in show and appearance as a Lamb, but his
doctrine that came out of his mouth was devilish. If therefore the Quakers
were truly pious and mortified persons, this should be no ground to receive
their doctrine, but we should go to the Law and to the Testimony, and search
the Scriptures, whether the things they speak be so or no, but we have before
showed from the Scriptures their doctrines are wicked and damnable.

2. But how evident is it to all that will see, that they are no such mortified
persons as they pretend to be; (I love not to lay open their wickedness, but
would leave it to the great day of discovery; were I not compelled, because
they boast, they are perfectly free from the being of sin, and left their
pretenses of piety should draw any weak ones to entertain their doctrines.)
Where are there to be found greater railers upon earth, and revilers of the
servants of Christ, who are most eminent for grace and holiness then they? how
often do they call them Serpents, Devils, Vipers, Adders, Sorcerers, Conjurers.
Thieves, Murderers, Witches, with other like expressions, which may be seen in
their books and letters? they far transcend herein those persecuting enemies of
the people of God in former times; shall such persons ever inherit the Kingdom
of God? 1 Cor. 6.10. where can there be found such intolerable pride in any
upon earth, (except alone in the man of sin that Romish Antichrist, 2 These. 2
4.) as is in these men? who dare boast, they are equal with God, that they are
infallible, perfectly free from the being of sin; who dare write their
pamphlets ordinarily as given from the Lord, from the Spirit of God
immediately; that dare scorn all others not of their way, and judge them as
ungodly, hypocrites, blind, etc. do these things argue holy and mortified
persons? how full of lying, of false accusing, etc. are their writings? what
bitter enemies are they to the ways and servants of Christ, and in reproaching
and vilifying them, outstrip the persecuting Prelates and their party in
former times? who sees not that the devil has raised up these to act the part
of that wicked crew, who are now brought under the hatches, for their enmity is
chiefly, if not only vented against the same people and ways that were
persecuted formerly by the prelatical party?

Obj. But some will say they are no drunkards, no adulterers, etc. such ways
they hate.

Answ. 1. Suppose it be so, no more is the devil a drunkard, glutton,
adulterer, and yet his spiritual wickednesses, his pride, malice, envy, lying,
false accusing of the Saints, etc. are no less crimes then drunkenness,
gluttony, etc. and in these things the Quakers appear as eminently the children
of the devil as any do. Julian the Apostate (as it is reported of him) was a
temperate, just and strict man, but a most wicked enemy of Jesus Christ.

2. But for such fleshly lusts, we have no great experience of their
conversations, most of them being strangers here, and therefore we cannot so
well discover such things if they were guilty of them; yet for the time they
have been in these parts, we have sufficient conviction that they may be guilty
of such filthiness of the flesh, as well as of such filthiness of spirit as
was before mentioned. There has scarce been known a more vile wretch then
Christopher Atkinson (who sometimes was acknowledged by themselves, the
chiefest of their Sect) who after he had professed repentance for his
filthiness and lewdness committed with the woman, he has since married; yet
escaping out of prison, he practiced greater villainy then before, for being at
an Inn called the George in Thurton, within five or six miles of Norwich (as I
was informed by two credible persons, who were occasionally at the same Inn at
that time) he there offered ten shillings in hire of an whore, and fell in love
with a young girl, whom he suited so as he did cry and whine for her, he told
such lies concerning himself, and otherwise showed himself so vile, that it was
apparent he was no novice in such actions, for no man on a sudden arrives to
the height of wickedness: I might annex the story of those two Quakers spoken
of in the book put forth by Gilpin, and of him that being condemned to die for
incest in Yorkshire poisoned himself in prison. But these being done in more
remote parts I shall not insist upon them; Now let not any say, it is a common
thing for some wicked persons to be found amongst such as are most holy, and
therefore these few examples should not condemn the rest of them; for they are
men that pretend to be perfectly free from the being of sin, to be infallible,
etc. and therefore the fall any one shows their doctrine to be lies; besides,
what spiritual wickednesses reigns amongst them generally, was showed before,
and they are not ashamed to defend such actions as tend directly to lead men to
such filthiness, as going naked, etc. How clear is it then from all this that
these people are no truly mortified persons what ever they pretend.

3. That mortification which they profess to have, consists but in some
external things, which God never required, as voluntary humility, neglecting of
the body, (which things are called will worship, Col. 2.) in putting away
outward ornaments, not wearing ribbons, refusing titles of honor, to be called
Master, not putting off the hat, using the words of yea, nay, thou; in their
wilful sufferings for opposing and vilifying Ministers, in much fasting, and
abstemious use of the creatures, etc. Now as for these it may be said, Who has
required these things at their hands? What are those when they are enemies to
the cross of Christ and to the righteousness of faith (as was showed in the
Section of Justification) when they place righteousness in such observations,
not knowing the mortification of the corruptions of the heart, as was before
proved; when they are ignorant of, and enemies to an inward and spiritual work
of grace and regeneration upon the heart, as shall be made to appear in the
next Section; alas, how easy is it for any carnal heart to learn such outward
observances, and place their righteousness in them; and yet even in externals
they sin against their own principle of the light in them, as by wearing such
ruffian-like long hair; so Fox and Duesbury, two great and principal men
amongst them have done, that light in them might teach them its a shame to do
so, 1 Cor. 11.14.

4. And even in these external shows of mortification they been have far
out-stripped by many others; the Pharisees of old (see Montagu Acts and
Monuments of the Church, cap. 7.) have sometimes made vows of continence,
abstinence, watching and praying for ten years together, during all which time,
they would not come near any beautiful woman, and when necessity compelled them
to sleep, they would lie upon narrow planks, or upon stones, or thorns, that
they might sooner be awakened to prayer, reading, and meditation; they
pretended revelations and inspirations; their ordinary fastings were two days
in the week, the third and fifth days, wherein the wholly abstained from meat
till the stars appeared; but in their extraordinary fasts they used greater
severity over the flesh; they would show great austerity in their common
deportment, and would hazard their lives before they would recede from their
way. The Essens (another Sect amongst the Jews) did yet go beyond the
Pharisees, showing a wonderful gravity and austerity in their carriages,
detesting not only prophannesse, but lawful pleasures and delights, abstinence,
continence, and mastering their affections they esteemed a chief point of
piety; for marriage, they cared not for it, nor for the company of women;
getting of wealth, and growing rich they despised; to swear any oath was a
capital crime; they were so addicted to contemplation, that some of them did
not eat in three days time, some in six; when they did eat, brown bread and
salt was their ordinary food, and when they exceeded, they had green herbs;
their apparel was poor and simple, only to preserve from cold and heat; they
turned the Scriptures into allegories (as the Quakers do) following the example
of the Egyptian wise men, says Philo; they pretended to revelations and
prophetical inspirations; maintained community of goods; torments of body they
regard not, but endured with courage and constancy; when they enter upon their
way first, they profess to love and serve God truly and above all, to live
justly and uprightly with men, etc. and yet they professed not faith in Jesus
Christ, and (as Josephus reports) they worshipped the Sun. But especially, and
above others the Popish Monks, Friars and Hermites have excelled in these
outward observances, some of them professing poverty, have given away all they
had, and lived by begging; some go barefoot, and are badly clad; some live in
the wilderness in caves and hutts from the society of men, casting off worldly
employments and tentations, and giving up themselves only to their devotion,
prayer, watching, and contemplation, the like do others in cloisters; for their
abstinence from creature comforts, their continency, and their extraordinary
fastings, and exceeding poor diet many have been famous; some have macerated
their bodies, and killed themselves therewith; what cruel whippings of their
bodies for bringing the flesh into subjection have they used? some have put
spurs betwixt their skin and their garments, and have lien upon sharp chips;
glorious visions and raptures also some have pretended to, and immediate
communion with God and with Angels; for sufferings they have endured much; the
Jesuits boast that of their society and order alone in a few years three
hundred have suffered Martyrdom; some that might have escaped death, have
voluntarily offered themselves thereto (as sometimes the Circumcelliones
amongst the Donatists) volumnes have beeen written of these things, and no
wonder they place righteousness in these things, and seek justification
thereby. Now how far do all these excel the Quakers in external shows of
mortification, in voluntary humility, and neglecting of the body? for apparel,
the Quakers go as neat and trim as most Yeomen in the Country, though they came
hither first in very mean and poor attire most of them; for diet and lodging
they have had as good entertainment; for their sufferings they are not
comparable with those before named; for worldly profits it is observed their
followers do as little contemn the same as most others. Now, by all that has
been said, it may appear, there is but little reason for any to be induced to
think well of the Quakers way, because of their pretenses to mortification and
holiness. And thus for the ninth Section.

SECT. X. The Quakers doctrine tends not to destroy sin, although they
rail against sin; and how they destroy the true doctrine of Sanctification.
I find by experience that one great temptation, that induces weak and
ungrounded people to retain some good opinion of the Quakers, is, because they
speak against sin vehemently, condemning pride, covetousness, drunkenness,
etc. can these men be so bad (say they) and such enemies of Christ, when they
write and speak so many good things, and cry out so much against sin? These
people who thus argue, are little acquainted with the subtilties of Satan, who
can transform himself into an Angel of light; and with the craftiness of
seducers, who can pretend themselves Ministers of righteousness, 2 Cor. 11.13,
14, 15. that they may the rather deceive. If Satan and his instruments should
appear ever in their colors, as enemies of Christ and holiness, who would be
deceived by them?

I shall therefore in the next place (for the sake of such) show how little
these men's doctrine conduces to the destruction of sin, and how they subvert
the true doctrine of Sanctification. This will appear in the ensuing
particulars.

1. They deny the efficient cause of a principle of Sanctification, to wit, the
Spirit of grace and regeneration, 2 These. 2.13. Romans 15.16. Tit. 3.5. which is
given to the people of God alone, and not to all men in the world, 1 John 4.13.
1 These. 4.8. Romans 8.9. John 14.17. Jude 19. and (with the Papists and
Pelagians, those enemies of special grace; and advancers of the power and
ability in man) they make a common light or principle put into all men in the
world sufficient to conversion and sanctification, if men heed the same. This
is clear from all their writings. See Nailer, Glory from the North, p. 2, 3.
where he bids people mind the light in their consciences, and it will lead them
to perfect day (foolishly pretending this to be that the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1.19.
bade them take heed unto) this (says he) will show you all your sins, and
bring you out of them, bring you to repentance, and lead you to justification,
peace, etc. and he scoffs at those that pray for further light or grace,
saying, this being minded and heeded is sufficient, etc. See Trial of faith, p.
6, 7. where they affirm, that light in the conscience, that all men have, will
lead men to repentance, and newness of life; and if heeded, will crucify
their lusts, and bring them out of the paths of death into the way of life,
etc. If this be so, what necessity is there then of faith in Christ's blood for
Justification and life? what need of a work of regeneration, and the sending
the Spirit of Christ into our hearts for our Sanctification? it was before
showed all men have not the Spirit of Christ in them; but these men neither
regard the blood of Christ for Justification, nor the Spirit of Christ for
Sanctification, as is evident from their words before cited. But now because we
are fallen upon their great and principal doctrine, the sufficiency of the
light in the conscience to lead men to Justification, Sanctification and
Salvation; (for the sum of all they hold forth may be reduced to this, Look
to the light within you.) I shall a little discuss that point, what the light
that all men have in their consciences, is, and whether it being heeded, is
alone available to justification, Sanctification and Salvation. I shall speak
to this great question clearly and fully in these three particulars.

First, There is a light which God has enlightened every man in the world
withal, even the light of understanding and reason whereby man is distinguished
from the beasts and irrational creatures; and this light may be called the
light of Jesus Christ, because coming from him as Creator, and thus may the
light of the Sun be called the light of Christ, for he made it; and the life of
beasts be called the life of Christ, for he gave it to them; but what is this
to that sanctified saving light and life communicated from Jesus Christ to his
people as their Head and Redeemer in their regeneration, to fit them for
enjoyment of God, and communion with him in glory? it is of this common light
of understanding (which Christ as Creator gives to all men) that that
Scripture, John 1.9. speaks of; for in v. 10. mention is made of the creation,
the world was made by him, and the scope of the Evangelist in that place is to
prove Christ to be God (which the Heretics of those times denied) and what
fitter argument to prove it, then his creating the world, and giving life to
the creatures, and light of reason unto man? Now, this light of reason, though
it be an excellent gift of Christ, for by it man excels other creatures, yet to
distinguish it from that special illumination of Gods Spirit in conversion and
regeneration, we call it the light of nature, (gifts of nature as well as of
grace, being from God and in themselves good.) And the Scriptures give the same
name unto it, 1 Cor. 11.14. that light in men that condemns long hair, is
called nature; and that light and power whereby the Gentiles (who had not the
Law of Moses) did the things contained therein, is called nature, Romans 2.14.
how vainly then do these men cavil against us, for calling this the light of
nature, seeing the Scriptures style it so as well as we?

Secondly, This common light of understanding and reason with which all men in
the world be endued (called the light of nature, because connatural with man)
is not sufficient to enlighten men unto conversion and salvation, unless an
higher and supernatural light be communicated to them; this has been formerly
maintained against Papists and Pelagians, the enemies of Gods grace; and I
maintain it against the Quakers by these reasons.

(1) Constant experience shows it evidently amongst those Nations who have had
no other light but that in the conscience, and wanted the preaching of the
Gospel and saving illumination of Gods Spirit; not one amongst them was ever
known by that light in them, to have attained to the knowledge of Jesus Christ
(without which there is no salvation,) the very Name of Christ they have been
ignorant of, much more ignorant of the mysteries of his incarnation, death,
satisfaction, of the new Covenant founded in his blood, etc. but they have
worshipped false gods, devils, etc. how then is this light sufficient which
never suffices to convert and save any one to this day?

(2) The Scriptures show in many places the miserable condition of such people
as have not the preaching of the Gospel amongst them, they are in darkness and
the shadow of death, Mat. 4.16. under the power of Satan, Act. 26.18. without
God, without Christ, without Hope, Ephesians. 2.11. and they cannot believe in Christ
without hearing of him by a preacher sent, Romans 10.16. Sure then the heeding of
the light in the conscience was not sufficient to their Sanctification and
Salvation.

(3) Let it be considered what knowledge in the things of God men may attain by
the light in their consciences, and what they cannot attain without an higher
light, and hereby the insufficiency of this light will plainly appear. The
Apostle Romans 1.19. shows that there is a (...) in the heathens; that want the
preaching of the Gospel; something of God they may know, from an impression
upon their hearts, remaining after the fall; When an enemy demolishes a City,
some foundations of houses remain; so some relics of knowledge and principles
of good remain in man after the ruins of Gods image in him, and he may improve
this knowledge further by the works of God which are seen, and may know there
is a God, that this God is a powerful, wise, holy, merciful, just God; that he
is to be worshipped, feared, loved, and served by man; that gross sins are not
to be committed; so far may this light in every man guide him, as appears in
the very Heathens who had no other helps but this common light; but alas this
is far off from bringing men to conversion, and salvation; this knowledge of
God is but dark groping knowledge, they had no clear distinct knowledge of God,
to know him One in three, could not discern the least knowledge of Jesus Christ
come in the flesh, dying, rising again, etc. nor of the new Covenant, of the
benefits obtained by his blood; could not know the Ordinances of Gods worship
instituted by him, nor the duty of believing in Christ for salvation; and for
sin, they could not discern concupiscence to be sin by the light in them,
but only by the Law, Romans 7.7. how insufficient then is the light in the
conscience to lead men unto conversion and salvation?

Object. But the Quakers have objected to me, if they heed this light, God will
give them further; for, to him that has shall be given, Mat. 25.29.

Answ. This is an Objection borrowed from the Papists and other enemies of Gods
grace, who have frequently perverted this Scripture to overthrow special grace
in conversion; and therefore the answer that has been given to them may serve
the Quakers. That promise of Christ there made to the improvement of our
talents does not speak of an increase in another kind, but in the same kind
of gifts which we improve, he that shall improve Ministerial gifts (of which
Christ there speaks) shall have further Ministerial gifts given to him, not
that he which improves common and general gifts, shall have saving converting
grace given to him; the contrary we see by manifest experience in those
Heathens who have improved best that common talent in searching after the
knowledge of God, and following moral virtues, God has left them wholly
without the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and has called some more profane and
barbarous; therefore the Scriptures attribute men's effectual calling, and
conversion to Gods free grace, and good pleasure, not to man's improvement of a
common talent given to him, Mat. 11 26. Romans 9.16.

Besides, this objection is grounded upon another rotten Romish doctrine, to
wit, that men before conversion and regeneration have power to improve the
common light and grace they have, so as to obtain of God special and saving
grace; a doctrine as contrary to the Scriptures, and derogatory to Gods grace
as the former.

(4) It is clear this light in all men is not sufficient to lead men unto
salvation, because those that have been most zealous followers thereof, have
been lead thereby further from God and the way of salvation; they have indeed
been something eminent in morality and civil conversation, but further off from
Christianity then others; Saul before his conversion, following it, was
blameless in a moral conversation, but a bitter enemy to Christ; this light
leads some to think they do God good service in persecuting his servants; and
how wretchedly some have been deluded, that leaving the light of the
Scriptures, have heeded this light in them, appears sufficiently by the
relations of Gilpin, Toldervy and others.

Thirdly, we therefore maintain (besides the common light that God has given
to all) a necessity of special illumination by the Word and Spirit of God unto
conversion and salvation; Christ teaches us, John 3. Except we be regenerate
and borne again, we cannot see the Kingdom of God; therefore, sure what we have
at the first birth, as we come into the world, suffices not, Acts 26.18. Christ
sends Paul to open the eyes of the blind, and turn men from Satan to God by his
preaching, what need that, if they had before a light in them sufficient to
salvation, Psalm 119. David prays, Open mine eyes, that I may understand the
wonderful things of thy Law, give me understanding that I may keep thy
precepts, would not the Quakers correct David here, and say, why David! look to
the light within thee, and that is sufficient, what need thou pray for more?
so Paul, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. prays for a Spirit of wisdom and revelation for the
Ephesians, though they had already the light in them, and the outward preaching
of the Gospel; our doctrine therefore is more agreeable to the Scriptures then
the Quakers doctrine; we teach, besides the light in the conscience which
condemns gross sins (which we would not have men sin against, but to study to
keep a good conscience void of offense) there is a necessity of the light of
the Scriptures, and the preaching of the Word to discover such things as the
conscience cannot discover, and of the sanctifying illumination of Gods Spirit
also to open our blind eyes to see those discoveries, and his grace to heal the
enmity of our hearts that we may close with them, did the Quakers believe the
conversion and sanctification of the soul to be such a great work as we do,
they would see a necessity of an higher principle to produce it, then this
common light in all men. Reader, thou may sufficiently see what corrupters of
the truth the Quakers be, seeing in this main doctrine (which is the sum of all
their teaching) they err so grossly, and are plain Papists and Pelagians.

II. The Quakers destroy the true doctrine of Sanctification, in that they make
it to consist in a few outward observances, of casting off ribbons, not putting
off the hat, using the expressions of thou, yea, nay, etc. (as the Pharisees
formerly placed holiness in washing cups, hands, etc. and the furthest they go
is but to cry down gross sins, as pride, drunkenness, covetousness, etc.
whilst in the mean time they speak nothing of a work of regeneration and
renovation in the heart (for they teach there is enough in men as they come into
the world, if they heed that;) and as concerning inward mortification of the
seeds of evil in the heart, and a spiritual work of God upon the soul in
turning the whole frame of it to God to center in him again; how silent are
they in these great things? did they look upon these as necessary, they durst
not proudly boast they are perfect, and absolutely free from the being of sin;
but even as the Papists, who say they are free from the being of sin, and for
that end deny concupiscence in the regenerate to be sin; so must the Quakers
look upon these things as nothing, if they will defend their perfection. But we
on the contrary maintain the great work of Sanctification begins chiefly in the
heart, in creating a new heart, infusing a new spirit, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. (which
men have not as they come into the world at the first birth, but at the second
birth) in making the tree good, and then the fruit will be good afterward,
Mat. 12.33.

III. They destroy the proper end of Sanctification; the end of God in
Sanctifying his people is not, that by setting up a righteousness in them,
they might thereby be justified before God (for their justification stands in
Gods free remitting of their sins, and imputing to them the obedience and
satisfaction of Christ their Surety, wrought in his person for them, as was
before showed in the Section of Justification) but that being reconciled to God
through Christ, their natures being sanctified, and the image of God repaired
in them, they might be fit to glorify God, and to enjoy communion with him for
ever, to make them fit for glory; for, without holiness no man can see God,
Heb. 12.14. But now the Quakers make the great end of God in sanctifying his
people and infusing righteousness into them to be, that they might be
justified before God; and therefore ignorantly confound justification,
mortification, and sanctification together; (see Nailer; love to the lost, p.
50.) thus are they enemies to the doctrine of Christ crucified, and
justification by faith; they are fallen from grace, and seek to lead men from
Christ to the Law again; as the Apostle Paul shows in the Epistle to the
Gallatians.

IV. They own not any for truly sanctified persons, but such as are perfectly
freed from the being of sin, and therefore reproach us, (who say with the
Apostle, Romans 7. we have sin dwelling in us) as unsanctified persons, whereas
the Scriptures own such for Saints as are freed from the dominion of sin,
though not yet from the being thereof, and show that in the best there is flesh
as well as Spirit, Gal. 5.17.

V. They deny the grace of God infused into the Saints in Sanctification to be
a created thing (though the Scripture calls it the new creature, 2 Corinthians.
5.17. Ephesians. 2.10.) and hold it to be the uncreated being of God (so Richard
Hubberthorne, and John Lawrence in a letter sent to me, speak) a most wretched
and blasphemous doctrine; for then should we be Gods, if the uncreated being
were communicated to us; even as Christ was God, the divine essence being
eternally communicated to him; besides, this doctrine would make us merely
passive, as stocks and stones in all duties of Sanctification, the plain
doctrine of the Libertines, that being followed, overthrows all holiness;
having sometimes laid open the odiousness of this opinion to my people, the
person last named being ashamed of it, did openly deny it before the
Congregation, but has now owned it, with his hand subscribing to it.

VI. They take away many great arguments inducing to Holiness and
Sanctification, as the doctrine of the Resurrection, last Judgment, Heaven and
Hell, etc. as was before showed; now to what purpose is it to rail against
sin, when they take away those weapons that should destroy it? and to speak
of holiness, when they take away the greatest inducements thereunto? If the
dead rise not, says the Apostle, 1 Corinthians. 15.22. then let us eat and drink,
for to morrow we die; what need men be affrighted with the scar-crowes of
Heaven, Hell, etc? These evil words will more corrupt good manners, then all
their other good words will promote holiness.

VII. They destroy all those helps to Sanctification and Godliness, which God
has given us; They deny the Ordinances of God (as before was showed) which are
the means of grace and Sanctification, John 17.17. Ephesians. 5.26. Jam. 1.18, etc.
could the prelatical enemies of holiness in former times take a more crafty
course to suppress holiness, then by silencing of Preaching, Catechizing,
Praying, and restraining Christian communion, etc? how gladly the Quakers would
promote all this if they could, and leave people only to the light in them
(which is mere darkness) I showed before in the Section about Ordinances.

By this time the weakest Reader may perceive the Quakers to be but faint
enemies to sin, though they speak aloud, and give big words against it; and
but feigned friends to holiness whatever they pretend. Alexander the Great, is
said to have smitten one of his soldiers on the face for railing against his
enemy; saying to him, I hired thee to fight, and not to rail against him; as
little thanks may these men expect to receive from the Lord Jesus another day,
what ever friendship they pretend to him now, and what ever enmity against
sin they profess, seeing they do but build the things they would seem to
destroy. And thus for the tenth general charge against the Quakers.

SECT. XI. The Quakers showed to be the common sink of all the Heresies of our
times, and a parallel betwixt them and former Heretics.
IT has been observed, that after the Christian world had been infested for a
long time together with multitudes of cursed errors and heresies; at length,
Popery prevailing in the West and North, and Mahumetanisme in the East and
South, they were all swallowed up in these two, as in two great gulfes or
common sewers of all that filthy puddle of false doctrine. See Danaeus de
here is. cap. 95, 96. In like manner, we find amongst our selves, that those
filthy and abominable errors that have sprung up in these late years of
tolleration so plentifully, do most of them center in Quakerism, and this is
become the common sink of them all. And indeed there are very few, if any at
all, (besides some grossly ignorant persons that have not made any profession of
godliness) who are now lead away by the Quakers, but such as have formerly
apostatized from the truth, and been infected with the leaven of Anabaptisme,
or Antinomianisme, Arminianisme, or Socinianisme, Familisme, or Libertinisme,
etc. So that this Serpent of Quakerisme has threatened to devour up all these
other Serpents, and so to become the Dragon that persecutes the Churches in
these Nations. Now, how justly may this render the way of Quakerisme suspected
to the weakest and most simple of all, in that those that follow it have long
since left the way of truth, and been unstable, running after every new way of
error, and scarce any one that has been accounted a knowing and stable
Christian does follow after them?

It will not be unprofitable if I here annex a short parallel betwixt the
Quakers and some wicked Heretics in former times; for hereby it may appear,
that their doctrines are not such new and glorious truths as they would pretend
them to be; but old and accursed heresies, newly raked out of hell, and the
very smoke of the bottomless pit: If the reader shall see so much agreement
betwixt them and the vilest enemies of the truth that have been in former
times, he will be convinced thereby there is little reason any should be taken
with Quakerisme; I shall begin with some of those Heretics spoken of in
Scripture, and show what agreement is betwixt the Quakers and them.

One would think the Quakers should not be guilty of any great compliance with
the Pharisees, seeing they so much reproach others with the nickname of
Pharisees, but alack this is but such a trick as he played, that called his
honest neighbor theife first, that his neighbors accusation against him might
not be credited: there are many things wherein the Pharisees and Quakers
notably agree.

The Pharisees were bitter enemies of Jesus Christ, and conspired to destroy
him; and no less enemies to him are the Quakers, they quite annihilate and
destroy (as much as in them lies) his manhood. For they deny that he has an
humane created soul (so Richard Hubberthorne expressly in a letter sent to my
self) and can he be a man that has not an humane soul? and no better do they
deal with his body, for that they make never to have risen from the dead, as
was before showed; indeed sometimes they will say he arose from the grave (as
Hubberthorne in the letter aforesaid, says) but in the next words he shows it
was in the same person in which he was when the world was made: it seems this
is all the Man-Christ they now own. Further, the Pharisees were zealous for the
righteousness of the Law, but enemies to the Doctrine of Justification by
faith: So the Quakers, as was showed before in the Section of Justification.
The Pharisees placed all their Religion in outward observances: So the Quakers
as was before showed. The Pharisees pretended much seeming sanctity, gravity,
austerity, when inwardly full of wickedness: So the Quakers would seem holy,
austere, but are full of railing and bitterness. The Pharisees stood much on
trivial things, mint, commine, and annice; So the Quakers, upon clothes, hats,
thou, yea, nay, etc. The Pharisees trusted on their own righteousness, and
despised others: So the Quakers would be accounted the only holy persons, and
call others Dogs, Swine, Devils. The Pharisees used much severity over their
bodies, abstinence, fasting, which God commanded not: So the Quakers. The
Pharisees would be esteemed extraordinary for holiness, and have their sayings
received for Oracles: So the Quakers say they are perfect, and what they speak
or write all is infallible and must not be questioned. The Pharisees were
horrible corrupters of the Scriptures, Matthew. 5. So the Quakers, as has been
showed. The Pharisees were rash censurers of others, John 7.19. and 10.20. Mat.
11.19. So the Quakers. The Pharisees would compass sea and land to make a
Proselite, whereby he became twofold a child of hell more then before: So the
Quakers, what an (exact harmony is here twixt these two sects?

We read in Scripture of another Sect called Sadduces; and with them also the
Quakers have some agreement. These pretend to righteousness, taking their name
from Sedek (as Josephus shows) which signifies just; So the Quakers pretend
hereunto. The Sadduces deny the Resurrection of the body, Mat. 22.23. Act.
23.8. So the Quakers: Herein also they agree with Hymeneus and Philetus who
made it past already, acted spiritually in men here, 2 Timothy 2.18. The Sadduces
denied Heaven and Hell, rewards and punishments in the world to come, as
Josephus reports: So the Quakers, as was before proved. The Sadduces denied
Angels and Spirits: The Quakers, deny the spirit or soul of man distinct from
God; for Hubberthorne against Sherl says, the Scriptures speak not of an
humane soul. Were it necessary I could show their agreement with many ancient
Heretics in the ages succeeded the Apostles, they agree with the Arians and
Eunomians in denying Christ to have an humane soul; with the Manichees in
making the soul in a man a part of the being of God. With Adamites in going
naked. With Antitrinitarians, Jews and Turks in denying the Trinity; (yet the
Turks, though they deny the Trinity, do own the Man Jesus Christ more then
they, for in their Alkoran, they say he is a great Prophet, and shall come to
judge the world at the last day, and therefore are better Christians then the
Quakers.) They agree with Pelagians in their conceit of the sufficiency of the
common grace given to all men: With Socinians in slighting Christ's
satisfaction, and denying it to be our righteousness before God, and in making
Christ a figure: With the Anabaptists in denying the lawfulness of oaths, and
of Infant Baptism: With the Familists in turning all the Doctrines of our
faith into Allegories, and making Christ's incarnation, death, resurrection,
etc. only mysteries to be witnessed in men: They agree with the Libertines in
denying created graces in the Saints, and making Christ in a man do all whilst
we are passive. And with the Ranters who make reason to be God; for the Quakers
make the light in the conscience to be Christ himself; I have charged them
with it as their tenet, and told them, I would report that they held it, if
they would not deny it, but they durst not deny the same. I should have done
raking in this filthy puddle of false doctrine, but that I must not omit to
parallel them with the Papists, they are so ready to exclaim against others as
Popish and Antichristian, whereas none are more deeply guilty of the charge
then themselves. I shall show in twenty particulars (and I might instance in
more) that they exactly agree with them. The Papists deny the necessity of the
Scriptures; So the Quakers, I showed both in the first Section; The Papists
will not have them a rule of faith and life, a judge of controversies: So the
Quakers; The Papists revile them and call them a dead letter; So the Quakers;
The Papists equal other things with the Scriptures, and so do the Quakers, the
Papists prefer the vulgar translation, before the original copies of Greek and
Hebrew, so the Quakers. The Papists agree with the Quakers exactly in the great
Doctrine of Justification; both make Gods justifying act to stand in infusing
or putting in righteousness into men; both hold they are free from the being
of sin; that they can keep the Law perfectly; both scoff at Protestants (who
confess they have sin dwelling in them, and they need the robes of Christ's
righteousness to cover them) saying, they make Christ's righteousness a cover
to their abominations. The Papists place holiness in outward observations,
voluntary humility, neglecting of the body, casting off wordly employments; So
the Quakers. The Papists take away justification by faith, turn from the
Gospel to the Law, are fallen from grace, so the Quakers. The Papists pretend
revelations, visions, raptures, trances, so the Quakers. The Papists deny
special grace, necessary to conversion and salvation, making the common light
and power given to all, sufficient, if heeded. Papists give to man free will,
and a power to improve this common grace, So the Quakers. Both Papists, and
Quakers pretend to infallibility; to a power if working Miracles; Both are
alike in censuring, condemning, and cursing all that are not of their way. Both
deny the Protestant Churches, to be Churches of Christ: both are bitter enemies
to the Ministers, and would gladly suppress them if they could; the Popish
Prelates in England sought to silence them, and suppress preaching,
catechizing, etc. Till they were suppressed themselves; and the raging Quakers
(who rose up in their steades) never ceased disturbing them and vilifying them,
till they were themselves curbed by the civil powers. The Papists sought to
keep people in ignorance without teaching and instructing them, and the Quakers
seek to bring people from all other teachings to the light in them, that so
they may have no other teaching then the Savage Indians have. The Papists and
Quakers are both alike industrious in compassing sea and land to make
proselytes, and to render them twofold more the children of the Devil then
before. I might show the agreement of Papists and Quakers in several other
particulars if it were necessary; does not all this make it evident the Quakers
are the Popes brats, though they be so unnatural they will not own their
father? We have reason enough to believe there have been more Popish Priests in
England besides Coppinger, to instill these notions into the Quakers. This
Coppinger being a Franciscan Friar, did confess to a Citizen of Bristoll (as
was given in upon Oath before the Magistrates there) that he had spoken about
thirty times amongst the Quakers at London; and that he saw two other
Franciscan Friars at a quaking meeting, who were become chief speakers amongst
the Quakers. Now, how dreadful a thing is it, that these filthy doctrines of
Popery, that the people of God in the former age with so much detestation have
rejected, should in this apostatizing age with so much acceptance be
entertained amongst us? Sure this may be a sufficient warning to all humble and
holy Christians, and to all who are not given up to believe lies, to beware of
Quakerisme, seeing it is evidenced so clearly to be the common sink of all
those former heresies.

SECT. XII. The Quakers are enemies to Civility and good manners.
THere is scarce any Nation under the whole Heavens (even the Savage Indians
not excepted) but they have been taught by the light in them, to give some
civil honor and respect to their superiors, and to show outward tokens of
love and courtesy to their equals. Had therefore the Quakers minded the light
within them (as they pretend to do) they would not have affected so morose and
clownish a demeanor, as to deny civility and humanity toward men: Much less
had they consulted with the light of the Scriptures, where so many excellent
precepts and examples are recorded, teaching us the same. It is the
commendation of the holy Scriptures, that they are absolutely sufficient for
doctrine, reproof, correction, and instruction in righteousness, that we may
be furnished unto every good work; and therefore as they teach us duties of
Religion and Piety toward God, so do they instruct us in duties of
righteousness and civil behavior toward men. I need not prove this charge
against the Quakers that they are enemies against civility and good manners,
their daily practice does evidence it, they deny to give any titles of respect
to men, though never so deserving; they express no civil honor by any outward
gestures; use not common salutations, yea, they condemn such as do these
things; I shall therefore show how contrary they walk herein to the precepts
and presidents we find in the holy Scriptures, and vindicate some Scriptures
that they perversely wrest to make for them.

Concerning saluting of men, we have Christ's express command for it to his
disciples Matthew. 10.12. and when ye come into an house, salute it; and lest any
should take this for a duty only to near friends and acquaintance, we may see
how Christ, Mat. 5.47. teaches it to be a duty to others; Christians should
excel others, should love their enemies and salute them also, or else what do
they more then the Publicans? Romans 16. Paul spends the whole Chapter almost in
salutations to the Saints, which he would not have done if it had been so
unlawful as the Quakers would make it, Luke 1.40. we have Mary saluting
Elizabeth. See also Act. 18.22. and c. 21.7, 19

But that place is objected, Luke 10.4. Carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor
shoes, and salute no man by the way.

Answ. If this place be compared with 2 Kings 4.29. it will appear Christ
intends no more, but to excite them to speed and celerity in that present work
they went about, and not to use such salutations as might hinder or stay them
in their business, for in the next verse, when they are come to the place
where they should remain, he bids them salute there; Besides, if this command
should be ridgidly urged to bind us now, it would make it unlawful to wear
shoes or purse, etc. And further, how can it then be reconciled with the
Scriptures before named, which do not one cross the other concerning our
giving civil honor to men? see that command, Romans 12.10. In honor preferring
one another, the Apostle would not have us uncivil and barbarous, but to give
due acknowledgment and testification to the worth and goodness of others, 1
Pet. 2.17. Honor all men, Romans 13.7. Render to all men their dues, tribute to
whom tribute, honor to whom honor. So also Exodus 20.12. 1 Timothy 5.17. and the
Scriptures style many persons honorable, 2 King. 5.1. Act. 13.50. and 17.12.
some of them being Heathens and unbelievers.





For giving titles of honor to men, as calling them Lord, Master, Sir, Lady,
etc. we have many Scriptures approving thereof, 1 Pet. 3.6. Sarah is commended
by the Apostle for calling Abraham Lord, Genesis 16.9. The Angel calls Sarah,
Agars Mistress, Matthew. 10.24. says Christ, The Disciple is not above his
Master, nor the servant above his Lord. These titles are not only to be given
by servants to their Masters, but by Scholars or Disciples to their teachers;
as Christ shows. Yea, it may be given to them by others who are not in
subjection to them; as the Prophet to Elisha, 2 Kings 6.5. and the second
Epistle of Joh. 1. the Apostle calls her to whom he writes, Lady, Acts 7.26.
Moses said to the two men that strove, Sirs, why do ye wrong to one another?
Acts 14. Paul and Barnabas said to them that were ready to sacrifice to them,
Sirs, why do you those things? So Paul to the Mariners, Act. 27 10, 21, 25.
See Act. 16.31. which title signifies as much as Lord or Master, 1 Cor. 3.10.
Paul is called a Master Builder, Eccles. 12.11. Church Officers or Teachers are
called Masters of the Assemblies. Besides the title Lord or Master it not only
used, but we have Epithites of further honor given to some persons, as Most
Noble, Most Excellent, etc. Luke 1.3. Acts 26.25. How vain is it then for these
people to cavil against the use of these titles of honor, seeing the
Scriptures do warrant the same?

Object. But against all these Scriptures they bring that one; Matthew. 23.10. Be
not ye called Masters, as if it would overthrow all these titles of honor. To
which I answer.



verse 9.) this is spoken in opposition to that vain affectation of such
titles amongst the Pharisees, the Pharisees did covet to be Sect-Masters, and
to have abundance of Disciples following them, upon whom they used to impose
their traditions as unquestionable verities; and their Disciples used to call
them Rabbi, or Master, glorying in being their followers; and each sect would
so contend for the glory of their (...) or Captains (for so the word signifies
as well as master) that they would quarrel, and sometimes kill each other in
such contests. Now these Rabbi's masters, or captains were absolute Lords over
their faith, (which is prohibited, 1 Pet. 5.8.) and they questioned nothing
they received from them, even as such as follow the Quakers now receive all
they speak as unquestionable truths, because they pretend to be infallible, and
therefore they are more guilty of this crime of affecting Mastership then any
amongst us. Who sees not then how perversely this Scripture is wrested, when it
is urged to oppose giving titles of honor to men, how they make it to
contradict those Scriptures before named? Whereas the scope of it is but to
prohibit proud affecting of that title, and seeking to Lord it over men's faith.

Concerning our giving civil honor and respect to men by outward gestures of
the body, as rising up, or standing before our superiors, uncovering the head,
or bowing, etc. We have also many Scriptures to warrant these things. For
rising up, there is an express command, Lev. 19.32. Thou shall rise up before
the hoary head, and honor the face of the old man, etc. It is so foolish a
cavil which was once made against this place, by J. L. that it deserves no
confutation, when I urged this Scripture to him, he said Christ Jesus was the
ancient of days, etc. was there ever more horrible perverting of Scripture
then by these men? This is like that exposition he gave to me lately of that
place where women are forbidden to speak in the Church; saying, it was the
weaker part of man or flesh, that was called the woman, and was to keep
silence. We have enough of such trash from these men. For standing up before
superiors, refraining speech, bowing of the body, see Job 29.8, 9, 10. Genesis
23.7. Abraham stood up and bowed himself to the people of the Land, even to the
children of Heth. Jacob bowed to Esau seven times, Genesis 33.3. Joseph unto
Jacob, Genesis 48.12. David bowed to Saul, and said, My Lord the King, 1 Samuel 24.8.
and Nathan the Prophet bowed to him 1 Kings 1.23. As for the single example of
Mordecai refusing to bow to Haman (which those men urge so stiffly, when as all
other examples nothing move them) there was a special reason for that; for,
according to the custom of Persia, the bowing there used, was reputed to
favor of divine worship, Justin. Hist. Lib. 6. Relates how Canon Athen refused
to bow to King Artaxcrxes after the Persian manner upon the same account.
and therefore the good man could not yield to it; now as this is used amongst
us, its but a civil thing; Besides, Haman probably was an Amalekite of the
family of Agag, and so being of an accursed seed, appointed to destruction;
civil honor was not due to him, God had put a perpetual enmity betwixt the
Israelites and Amalekites, Deuteronomy. 25.17, 18, 19.

For putting off the Hat, these men triumph over us, and say, where do we find
any example in the Scriptures for that?

Answ. 1. Neither can they show us in Scripture where ever hats were worn,
therefore its not likely we should read of putting them off; as for that place
in Dan. 3.21. where mention is made of the three children being cast into the
fire, with their coats, hosen, hats; the word there translated hats, signifies
any kind of covering or garment, it coming from (...) to cloth or cover, and
therefore in the Margin of your books the Translatours render it turbants
(which were the garments worn upon their heads in those Eastern Countries,
for they wear no hats) but because such a word as that is not known amongst
the vulgar, they retain in the text the word hats, (which we wear on our
heads,) and not turbants. Secondly, though we find not in Scripture examples of
putting off the hat (because hats were not worn) yet we find other
testifications of honor and respect given to superiors, according to the
custom of each Country, as standing up, bowing the knee, or the body, which
are approved in Scripture, as before was showed; how ridiculous is it then to
make it unlawful to put off the hat, when those other actions be approved and
lawful?

But there are some other Scriptures which the Quakers often urge against the
giving or receiving honor of men, which must be answered as that, John 5.44.
How can ye believe which receive honor one of another; and seek not the honor
that comes from God only? To which I answer, Christ does not here condemn
all giving or receiving honor one of another (for in other places it is
commanded and commended, as was showed before, Romans 12.10. 1 Pet. 2.17, etc.)
but he forbids loving the praise and honor of men more then the praise of God,
which was the sin of those people, John 12.43. and this kept them from
believing; they knew if they believed in him, they should be reviled, cast out
of the Synagogues, and lose the honor they had amongst men; such an honor as
this we are far from pleading for, and had rather be trampled upon by men (as
we have been formerly by the Prelates, and now are by the Quakers) then lose
the praise of God; but what is this to the denying such civil honor to men, as
these Scriptures before named require?

There is another place that those people do much pervert, to make for them,
which is, James 2.9. If ye have respect to persons, ye commit sin. To which I
reply.

1. There is indeed a respecting of persons which is sinful; as when in
judgment men respect persons, not regarding the equity of the cause, but
because such a man is rich, potent, or honorable, sentence is passed on his
side, and the poor man oppressed in judgment; this is forbidden, Deuteronomy. 1.17.
Thou shall not respect persons in judgment, but shall hear the small as well
as the great. See also Levit. 19.15. So likewise out of the case of judgment,
there may be a sinful respecting of persons, as when private persons shall
highly esteem, love, and honor persons that be rich and great in the world,
though vicious and ungodly, and shall contemn the precious Saints, when poor
and low in the world, this is sinful respecting of persons. I might add also
respecting of persons in election to Magistracy, and in religious matters, for
this is also sinful; and the Apostle James does condemn respecting of persons
only in some of these cases here named.

2. But then there is a lawful respecting of persons, which is so far from
being a sin, that it is a duty to do it; namely, when we acknowledge the
dignity and excellency of others, and by some outward sign testify the same;
this was proved by those precepts and examples before named, and many more
might be added if it were needful: Thus the Prophet Elisha, 2 Kings 3. is said
to regard or respect the presence of Jehoshaphat King of Judah; Nay, God
himself is said to be a respecter of persons, Genesis 4.4, 5. The Lord had
respect to Abel, but unto Cain he had not respect; and Genesis 19.21. the like is
said of Lot; many other places might be given, but enough is said for the
clearing up of this duty.

Now, from all this it appears, that as the Quakers are fallen from
Christianity, in that they deny the true Christ, and the (Christian faith:) So
they are fallen from humanity, in thus denying all good manners; and wherein
can they come nearer to bruit beasts, then in casting off humanity and civil
demeanor? Though they would cover over such actions with the gilded show of
humility, yet does it directly tend to overthrow all government and authority
amongst men; for, take away outward honor and respect from superiors, and
what government can subsist long amongst men? Thus having showed the Quakers to
be so far degenerate, that they are no Christians, nor scarsly men; Its time
for me to put an end to my discourse concerning them, and to trouble my self,
nor the reader further with them.

SECT. XIII. The conclusion by way of Admonition to beware of the errors of
the times, and in particular of Quakerisme; with a commendation of some
antidotes, by way of preservative against the same.
WE have many predictions and frequent warnings in the holy Scriptures of the
heresies and seductions of the last times; Christ himself tells us, Mat.
24.11.24. that false christ's, and false prophets shall arise and deceive many,
and if it were possible, they should deceive the very Elect; and the Apostle
Peter, 2 Ep. 2.1. does also warn, That false prophets shall arise, and shall
bring in damnable heresies, and many shall follow their pernicious ways, by
reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of; and the like
admonitions are given by the Apostle Paul, 1 Timothy 4.1. and 2 Timothy 2 1, etc. as
also by the Apostles John and Jude.

There is no ground then that Christians should be discouraged at these
overflowing floods of errors that the Serpent now casts out of his mouth to
drown the Church; nor at the rage and violence of the enemies of the truth
amongst us; think it not strange concerning these things, as if some strange
thing had happened unto us; the Scriptures must be fulfilled, that have told us
before of those things; and the Church of God in former times have had the same
trials; heresies must be, though woe to them by whom they come, or by whom they
are countenanced. We may expect yet greater trials, and stronger seducements,
if no timely remedy be used by Christian Magistrates to restrain seducers from
spreading their seducing doctrines. The Scriptures speak of the powerful
working of Satan accompanying deceivers, and a power of working (seeming)
miracles being given to them, and of strong delusions. As the Quakers are but
simple deceivers in comparison of the Papists, and other heretics in former
ages; so we may fear they shall be much more out-vied by such seducers, as are
yet to come in following times; when Satan is to act his last part in the
world, it is likely he will use his utmost subtilty in deceiving. Our great care
therefore should be to preserve our selves from the errors of the wicked, and
to take heed of the leaven of such seducers; how many cautions has the
Scripture given to us herein? when Christ had foretold of those seducers, Mat.
24. he bids, Take heed that no man deceive you, and believe them not, this
being the end of his forewarning us, that we might be forearmed against them;
Heresies are reckoned amongst the fruits of the flesh, Gal. 5.20. and are
therefore sooner drunk in by people, then the precious truths of the Gospel,
for we cannot receive these without the special help of Gods Spirit to let them
in to our hearts; how soon did the Arian heresy overspread the world, only
one Athanasius visibly withstood it? All the world wondered after the Beast,
and worshipped the same, Rev. 13.3, 4. Popery soon overran the West and North
parts of the world, and Mahumetanisme the East and South; even there where
those famous Asian Churches sometimes were seated, are now the impure Temples
of Mahomet; no gangrene sooner over-spreads the natural body, then errors and
heresies do the Ecclesiastic body, 2 Timothy 2.17. What care then should
Christians have lest they be infected with the same? Add hereunto, these are
no less deadly to the souls of people then gangrenes or plagues are to their
bodies, such doctrines eat as does a canker or gangrene, says the Apostle;
heresies may prove as damnable to men, as moral wickedness, 2 Pet. 2.1. lesser
errors indeed men may hold, and yet be saved, whilst they build upon the
right foundation; Though they build hay or stubble, thereupon they may be
saved, yet so as by fire, 1 Cor. 3 13. their spirits may be scorched, their
peace and comfort lost; but to miscarry in the foundation is damnable; who can
reckon up the evil consequences of false doctrines? they blind the mind, and
extinguish the true knowledge of God; they harden the heart, they undermine the
comfort of Christians, and destroy the Churches peace, they mortally infect the
inward vitals of Christianity; and outwardly deprave the conversation, corrupt
principles will at length produce corrupt practices; they provoke the Lord to
have a controversy with a people where they are tolerated, Rev. 2.14, 15, 20.
and will exclude men the Kingdom of heaven, Gal. 5.20, 21. Let not any
Christian therefore look upon the errors and heresies of the times as things
of small concernment, but make it his great care to be preserved from the
infection of them as men do in the time of pestilence to be preserved from the
same

I shall for the benefit of such humble and sincere Christians, as fear the
infection of the errors amongst us, and are willing to use such preservations
against them as the Scriptures afford; collect from thence a few antidotes of
special use for that end, the blessing of the Lord accompanying them.

Directions showing, how Christians may be preserved from the errors and
hreresies of the times.

I. Labor to be rooted and grounded more in the truth, if you would not be
shaken with every wind of doctrine; Col. 1.23. 2 Pet. 2.14.
it is ungrounded and unstable Christians who commonly are seduced, who never
saw on what grounds they took up their Religion, but take it on trust from
others, and then when they meet with such arguments against the truth as they
cannot answer, they yield to error, whereas that may be nevertheless a truth,
Mat. 22.29.
though they cannot defend it; therefore search the Scriptures more, and labor
to see how the principles of the Christian faith are established upon them; and
be not ashamed to learn your Catechismes, wherein you have the fundamentals of
Christianity extracted out of the Scriptures, and plainly set down, even in the
Primitive times they had such first principles of the oracles of God, Heb.
5.12. and forms of wholesome words, 2 Timothy 1.13. for the better grounding of weak
Christians; and the greatest proficieo^^ did first begin there, and therein are
contained such truths as may exercise us in searching further into, all our
life time; Luther that eminent servant of Christ professed himself a Scholar in
the Catechism. Had the Quakers ever been well grounded in the first principles
or rudiments of Religion, how is it possible they should so soon have been
turned from the truth, and denied the doctrine of Christ's humanity, of the holy
Trinity, of Justification, of Sanctification, of the resurrection of the dead,
etc? for my part I know but few of them (if any) that I can judge, ever had any
clear distinct knowledge of these things, and could tell how they were
confirmed by the Scriptures. Let therefore weak Christians (if they would not
be seduced) use this direction, conscionably give diligence to be settled more
in the truth, and to get a clear knowledge of the great doctrines of the
Gospel; such things as be fundamental and necessary to be known unto Salvation,
are clearly set down in Scripture, that weak Christians, if they study them
with humility, prayer and diligence, may attain the understanding of them; as
for more difficult points, that they cannot yet comprehend, let them not too
much be troubled about them, but wait till God reveal the same unto them; and
in the meantime its far safer for them to adhere in such things, to what is
commonly received by the people of God, and embraced by the Saints in all ages,
Cant. 1.8.
to follow the footsteps of the flock of Christ, then to be led away by
pretenders to new-light, the Scriptures having given so many Cautions to beware
of seducers in the last times. This first direction is given by the Apostle, 2
Pet. 3.17, 18. Beware lest ye also being led away with the error of the
wicked, fall from your steadfastness, but grow in grace, and in the knowledge
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

II. Rest not in a notional embracing of the truth, but receive it with love
and obedience, and labor to find your hearts bettered thereby, and then you
shall not so soon be induced to desert the truth, and embrace errors; when men
receive not the truth with love, they are soon brought to believe lies, 2 These.
2.10. but when men taste the sweetness of the ways of God, and are in love
with Gospel truths for that goodness they find in them, they will hold them
fast; such as have experimented the efficacy of the doctrines of faith,
changing and renewing their hearts, quickening their spirits, pacifying and
comforting their consciences, and quelling their corruptions, will not be
easily induced to exchange them for errors; but it is those that never found
those benefits by the same, that so soon part therewithal; Let therefore the
truths of Christ dwell in your hearts, and season them as leaven, labor to
find your hearts molded by the same, and changed into the image of truth, the
more you grow in grace, the more you shall be established and kept from falling
into the error of the wicked, Heb. 13.9. 2 Pet. 3.17, 18. And let your
obedience to the faith appear to all, Romans 16.19. He that does the will of God
shall know more thereof, John 7.17. and shall be established therein. It is the
great evil of many professors in this age, they covet to fill their heads with
knowledge and light, letting their hearts be empty of holiness and grace, they
are much in searching after new lights, high notions and discoveries of smaller
concernment; but little in working upon their spirits the great and saving
truths of Christ, and in practicing known Commandments; it is no wonder if such
prove apostates; they whose hearts are deceitful under truth, may soon be
deceived by error. Can we judge that these persons who deny the doctrines of
Christ's humanity, of justification, of the resurrection, etc. ever lived in the
power of these truths, received down the comfort of them, and had their hearts
formed into holiness by them? if they had, they would have been hereby
fortified against such seducers as tempt them to deny these doctrines; for my
own part I must profess, whilst my faith is acting upon these great and
precious truths of the Gospel, and the comfort and sweetness of them is now
flowing into my spirit, I cannot mention these filthy and abominable errors,
but it is with highest detestation and abhorrence. Let this therefore be the
care of every Christian not to rest in a bare notional knowledge, but to get a
sanctifying, experimental, and practical knowledge of the things of God.

III. Be much in prayer that God would give you the spirit of Truth, and
thereby guide and keep you in the truth, Joh. 16.13. In times of infection you
use not to stir out of your houses, till you pray God to keep you and your
families daily; had you as sensible apprehensions of the infections and mortal
contagion of the heresies now reigning amongst us, you would be as much in
prayer to God for to keep you and yours daily from them; but all the
admonitions in the Scripture will hardly persuade people to believe their
danger herein; 2 Pet. 2 1. 1 Timothy 3.17.
are not heresies damnable and extremely infectious and contagious as gangrenes
and plagues, our own experiences in these times abundantly testifies it? if one
person in a family be infected with heresy, all the rest soon learn it of
them; even young ones commonly drink it in, (its more rarely seen that any good
is so soon learnt by them) and if one house be infected, such as live near
thereto, or converse with them, they are also endangered. What need therefore
to be much in prayer to God, to keep us in these infectious times, wherein (if
it were possible) the very elect should be deceived; we had need to commend our
selves to him who is able to keep us from falling, Jude. 24.

IV. Expose not yourselves to the tentations of Seducers, it is in vain to pray
to God to keep you from the infection, if you wilfully, against the express
Word of God, run into the company of Deceivers; you are bidden to avoid them,
Romans 16.17. to turn away from such, 2 Timothy 3.5, 6. to beware of them, Mat.
7.15. not to go after them, Luke 21.8. if they come to you, not receive them,
nor bid them God-speed, 2 John 10. What wilful disobedience to all these clear
commands is it, when people will venture to go into the company and frequent
the meetings of such seducers? if Satan take such among his own, how justly may
God give them up to him as his own; this is contrary to the example of the
primitive Saints. The Apostle John would not stay in the same has where
Cerinthus the heretic was; nor would Policarp entertain acquaintance with
Marcion, but termed him the firstborn of the Devil; Ireneus tells us, the
Apostles and their Disciples were so full of holy fear, that they would not
communicate with them in the world, who had adulterated the Word. If you say we
may go and hear whether they broach such errors or no, what hurt in this? we
must try all things, and hold fast that which is good. I answer, may you not as
well say, you will go into the pesthouse, and see whether the persons there be
infected with the plague, before you will beware of them, how many poor and
weak persons are infected with their errors before they can discern what
errors they hold? And whereas the Apostle, 1 These. 5.21. bids, prove all
things, hold that fast which is good. He intends it of the prophecyings spoken
of in the former verse; all things spoken by the Prophets in the Church, should
be proved by the Scriptures, whether they be so or no, and not received only
because they say they are of God (as the Quakers receive what their teachers
deliver to them, without trying them by the Scriptures, which they deny to be
the rule of faith and life) but this place makes nothing for the hearing of
convicted heretics, and open enemies to the Church. If thou be therefore an
humble and sincere Christian, that make conscience of the commands of the
Lord, then shun deceivers, turn away from them, go not to their meeting, if
they come to thee, receive them not into thy house, nor bid them God-speed; but
if thou will run upon tentations, thou have no promise of God to keep thee; it
was the devils deceit to persuade men, God will protect them out of his way,
Mat. 4.6.

V. Harbor not any sinful lusts in your hearts, allow not of any secret sin;
it is sin that makes God give up men to error, 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. because
they have pleasure in unrighteousness; and it is sin that makes a man like a
piece of wax, ready to receive the impression of any error; they who are not
sound in the fear of God, may easily become unsound in the faith of God.
Hymeneus and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1.19, 20. first put away a good conscience, then
made shipwreck of the faith; the women that were led captive by seducers, 2 Timothy 3. were such as were laden with diverse lusts; if the heart be corrupt and
love sin, it will strongly incline a man to entertain corrupt, principles
that will give liberty unto sin; how ready will a wicked heart be to close with
the wicked errors of the Quakers, that there is no resurrection of the flesh,
no heaven and hell, but what is now in this world; that after death nothing
remains or with the Libertines opinion, that sin is no real evil, but to him
that thinks it evil; to him it is evil, (as Jos. Salmon in his touches of good
and evil speaks) or with the Atheists opinion, that there is no God, etc. look
therefore to your hearts to keep them pure, if you would not be given up to
impure errors; love no sin if you would leave no truth.

VI. Cleave more to the Ministry of the Word and the faithful dispensers
thereof, if you would not fall into errors; let not any say, I plead more in
this for the honor and benefit of Ministers, then for the good of peoples
souls, So Heb. 13.7, 9.
for the spirit of God hints this direction, Ephesians. 4 14. in v. 11. you read God
has given to his Church Prophets, Apostles, Pastors, Teachers, and in the
following verses is showed the end thereof, for the work of the Ministry, for
the edifying the Church, and perfecting the Saints, and v. 14. to prevent being
tossed to and fro, and carried away with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness of deceivers. This is one great end of Gods
giving Ministers to his Church to prevent their being deceived by seducers; one
great part of their work, is to confute gainsayers. There is scarce any desert
the truth, but they first desert the Ministry! men first begin to have itching
ears, and seek new Teachers, and then embrace lies and fables, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4.
how diligent therefore are seducers to undermine the Ministry, and steal
peoples hearts from them; if the wolves can draw the sheep from the shepherds,
they will soon devour them. What designs have they against the office,
maintenance, and persons of Ministers to bring them down, and especially
against the most faithful and industrious in the Ministry, think not therefore
you can be long preserved from these ravening wolves, if you stragle from your
shepherds, but learn to keep close to your faithful Ministers. If it be asked,
who are those Ministers we are to adhere unto? for many lay claim to this
office now. I answer in two words; 1. Those whom God has so visibly owned, and
set his seal to by blessing their Ministry to the convincing, converting,
comforting and confirming so many thousands of his Saints in England, those
whom God has used as instruments under him to maintain the profession and
power of godliness in the Nation for many years, that have by their doctrine,
conversation and sufferings adorned the Gospel of Christ; can any but the
hardened enemies of the truth call these Antichristian? whoever is not blinded
by Satan, may see these to be the Ministers of Christ. 2. Those whom the devil
and his instruments has most opposed and maligned; whom the Popish Prelates
silenced, fined, imprisoned, banished; whom the Malignant Caveleirs hated,
cursed and plundered, whom all drunkards, swearers; and profane persons would
have suppressed; and whom apostates (the most bitter enemies of all the rest)
do now with such implacable hatred and malignity prosecute and molest. These
are the Ministers of Christ; there need no other arguments to prove it.

VII. Consider seriously the many eminent testimonies God has given from
heaven against heretics and apostates, against despisers of his Ordinances and
Ministers, and against the errors and heresies broached by them. God has in
all ages borne some signal testimony against them, which being duly observed,
might be a very effectual means to preserve from the errors of those times. It
might be showed in what age, and by what persons most of these (now supposed
new lights, but indeed) old exploded heresies newly revived and brought from
hell, were first broached, what success they had what fearful judgments befell
the Authors of them! how truth prevailed against them! and this might much
tend to establish Christians against seducements thereunto; but this would
require a volumn to do it. In the primitive times many wonderful testimonies
God gave against several enemies of his truth; Simon Magus, who was the first
arch-heretick, and by his Sorceries deceived much people, and contended with
the Apostles themselves in working miracles (as the Egyptian Sorcerers did with
Moses) he attempting to fly in the air, was by the prayers of the Apostles
brought tumbling down, and miserably perished; Cerinthus was killed by the fall
of an house; Montanus hanged himself; Manes had his skin torn off his flesh;
Arrius his bowels gushed out; Nestorius his tongue rotting and consuming in his
head, the earth opened and swallowed him up. What standing monuments are these
of Gods wrath against heretics, yet are many of their wicked errors revived
in these days, if these testimonies of Gods wrath against them were duly
considered, it might make people to this day more fearful of drinking in their
abominable doctrines. In the first times of Reformation from Popery, the devil
stirs up the Anabaptists to hinder that work, and they were more bitter and
malignant enemies to the first Reformers, and greater obstructers of the work
of God then the Papists; and what signal tokens of Gods wrath were shown
against them, by giving them up to such vile affections and practices, as
(preparing them for destruction) there were (say some Pontanus
) one hundred and fifty thousand of them slain; What a warning might this be
to people to beware of the leaven of Anabaptisme now spreading amongst us? When
the Churches of Christ in N. England were infested with Antinomians, Familists,
and Antiordinanced men (betwixt whom and the Quakers is great agreement) how
did the Lord give signal testimony against them by those prodigious births of
Mrs. Hutchinson and Mrs. Dyer? are not these landmarks to warn people to take
heed of suffering shipwreck upon such rocks of error? And amongst our selves
in England, God has many ways appeared against the raging enemies of his truth
and Ministers, risen up in these late years; some are so given up to be blinded
and infatuated, that they have lost the understanding and reason of men, and
are become brutish in their ways; others casting off the profession of
godliness, are given up to vile affections and practices; what abominable
errors and delusions have some swallowed down gredily? and what remarkable
judgments of God have befallen others? It would require a large volumne to
record the history hereof. These things, if duly considered, might be serious
admonitions to all, to take heed of deserting the truths, Ordinances, and
Ministers of Christ. I add no more, these directions if conscionably used,
might (through the blessing of the Lord) be special preservatives against the
infection and contagion of the errors of our times. Now unto him that is able
to keep you from falling, and to present you faultless before the presence of
his glory with exceeding joy, to the only wise God our Savior, Jude 24.25.
be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
A TABLE Showing some principal Doctrines of Religion cleared and confirmed in
the former Treatise, with other useful things.
B
BOwing to Superiors, and other gestures of Civil honor justified from
Scripture. page 68, 69
C
How Heretics deny Christ come in the flesh. page 11 Christ proved a true and
real man, and personally distinct from other men. page 13 Christ his death,
resurrection, and ascension proved from Scripture. page 12 Christ dwells in us
by his Spirit, not by his humane nature. page 14 What it is to know Christ
after the flesh. page 15 The Quakers Christ and ours not the same. ib.
E
To hold Equality with God, a blasphemous error. page 19 It comes from the
Devil. page 20 What care Christians should have to be preserved from errors.
page 72, 73 Directions how to be kept from errors. page 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79
H
Local Heaven and Hell proved. page 35 36, 37 Heretics often pretend to much
holiness and mortification. page 54 Parallel betwixt former Heretics and
Quakers. page 62, 63, 64 Civil honor and respect due to men, proved, and
Objections answered. page 66, 67.
I
In dwelling of Christ in believers opened. page 27 The doctrine of
Justification cleared and vindicated. page 27, 28, 29, 30 How corrupted by
Papists and Quakers. page 24, 25 26 Last Judgment proved. page 35 Dreadful
Judgments of God against Heretics to be duly considered page 78
K
An outward Political Kingdom of Christ upon earth, besides the spiritual
Kingdom in his Church. Epist Ded. Necessity of being grounded in the knowledge
of the things of God. page 74
L
Light in all men, what it is, and whether sufficient to conversion and
salvation. page 57, 58 Lust harbored in the heart will expose men to errors.
page 77
M
Magistrates Officers of Christ, as Mediator in his outward Political Kingdom.
Epis. Ded. Magistrates ^re chiefly to use their power for the spiritual benefit
of the Church, and not only for a civil good. Ep. Ded. Magistrates ought to
restrain Seducers. Ep. Ded. They are to be keepers of both Tables. Ep. Ded.
Miracles wrought by false prophets in the last days. page 44, 45 Directions
that people be not deceived by such pretended miracles. page 46, 47, 48
Mortification and holiness consists not in outside shows. page 52, 53
Ministry of the Word men must cleave to it, if they would not desert truth.
page 77
O
Gospel Ordinances instituted by Christ. page 38, 39, 40 Their continuance
proved. page 42, 43
P
Papists and Quakers agree in twenty particulars. page 64 Pharisees and Quakers
agree in many particulars. page 65 Necessity of prayer to be kept from errors.
page 76
R
Resurrection of the body proved, and the manner of it opened. page 32, 33,
etc. Righteousness of Christ, how made ours, and we justified thereby. page 24
S
Scriptures proved to be the Word of God. page 1, 2 Scriptures the rule of
faith and life. page 3, 4, 5 Scriptures concern us as much as the Saints in
former times. page 6 Scriptures no dead letter. page 6 Necessity of the
Scriptures to us. page 7, 8, 9 Sanctification, its cause, nature, arguments,
end, and helps opened page 44, 45 Soul not a part of the being of God. page 18
Meeting-places of Seducers to be shunned. page 76
T
Tolleration of all Religions more destructive to the Church then persecution.
Ep. Ded. Doctrine of the Trinity, cleared and confirmed. page 16, 17 What an
evil to deny it, showed. page 18 Truth must be entertained with love and
affection, or else men will soon desert it. page 75
V
Union of Christ and believers opened. page 24
W
Scriptures perversely wrested. page 10
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed, and are to be sold by Adoniram Byfield, at the Bible in
Pope's Head Alley, near Lumbardstreet.
A Commentary upon the three first chapters of Genesis, by that Reverend Divine
Mr John White late of Dorchester, in fol. An Exposition upon the sixth,
seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth chapters of
Ezekiel, by Mr. William Greenhill, being the second Vol. in 4. An Exposition
upon the fifteenth, sixteenth, seventeenth, eighteenth, ninteenth chapters of
Ezekiel, by Mr. William Greenhill, being the the third Vol. 4. The humbled
sinner resolved what he should do to be saved, or faith in the Lord Jesus
Christ the only way of salvation, by Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick, in 4. A short
Catechism by Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick. The Riches of grace displayed, in the offer
and tender of salvation to poor sinners, upon Rev. 3.20. by Mr, Obadiah
Sedgwick, in 12. The Reasons of the Assembly of Divines concerning Presbyterial
Government. 4. The Assemblies larger and lesser Catechism, in 4. The tenth
Muse, several Poems by Mrs. Anne Bradstreet, in 8. Hidden Manna, or the Mystery
of saving grace, by Mr. William Fenner, in 12. Safe conduct, or the Saints
guidance to glory, at the Funeral of Mrs. Thomasin Barnardiston, by Mr. Ralph
Robinson, 4. The Saints longing after their heavenly country, a Sermon by Mr.
Ralph Robinson. A Sermon at a Fast by Mr. Na. Ward.
FINIS.

